  Barry Whiteside: Promoting financial inclusion in Fiji 
Opening remarks by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the launch 
of the Financial Services Demand-Side Survey Report, Suva, 17 September 2015. 
 Salutations 
The Australian High Commissioner, Ms Margaret Twomey 
The UN Resident Representative, Ms Osnat Lubrani 
The UNCDF Executive Secretary, Ms Judith Karl 
Excellencies and Members of the Diplomatic Corps 
Distinguished guests 
Our Financial Inclusion partners and stakeholders 
Members of the Media 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Welcome and Introduction 
Bula vinaka and a very good afternoon to you all. 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  the  official  launch  of  the  Demand-Side  Survey 
Report  on  Financial  Services  in  Fiji.  Thank  you  for  taking  the  time  to  share  this  milestone 
event in our financial inclusion journey. 
After  months  of  collaboration  between  the  Reserve  Bank  and  our  partners,  the  Pacific 
Financial  Inclusion  Programme,  the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion,  the  Fiji  Bureau  of 
Statistics  and  other  key  stakeholders,  the  final  version  of  the  Report  is  now  ready  to  be 
unveiled. 
Many  of  you  present  here  will  know  that  our  financial  inclusion  journey  effectively  started 
back  in  late  2009  and  early  2010,  with  the  setting  up  of  our  National  Financial  Inclusion 
Taskforce  following  a  gathering  of  interested  stakeholders.  These  stakeholders  agreed  to 
commit to an end-goal of helping our people to improve their lives and those of their families 
by  providing  easier  access  to  financial  services  along  with  the  necessary  knowledge  and 
skills to best utilize them. 
At the time we made a joint commitment to reach 150,000 unbanked or underserved Fijians 
by  the  year  2014.  This  was  a  priority  goal  of  our  first  medium  term  National  Financial 
Inclusion  Strategy,  which  also  included  incorporating  financial  education  into  the  Fijian 
schools’ curriculum. It was extremely pleasing to note that both these targets were achieved 
well before the end of 2014. 
Collaboration and partnership with all stakeholders has clearly been the key to our success 
and this must be recognized. And as Taskforce Chairman I would like to say how grateful I 
am for the total support given to me and to the Reserve Bank by the financial institutions, 
government ministries, civil society and donor agencies – all our stakeholder partners. We 
share a common vision of making Fiji a better place for all our people. 
But  while  there  have  been  some key  achievements  in the  past few  years,  we  believe  that 
much more remains to be done to promote and facilitate financial inclusion in  Fiji. We are 
now in the process of formulating our 2nd Medium Term Financial Inclusion Strategy which 
will embrace the inclusive consultative process we have adopted. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Data initiatives and what led to demand-side survey 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  availability  and  appropriate  usage  of  data  is  paramount  in  any 
effective decision making process. We are aware that many countries are struggling to get a 
handle on their financial inclusion development because of the lack of both supply-side and 
demand-side  data.  For us  in  Fiji  a key  ingredient for  our  new  strategy  will  be  the  data  we 
have been collecting over the years and from the recent Demand Side Survey. Unlike when 
we first started out on this journey, we now have a very comprehensive data set available to 
construct a complete picture of our financial inclusion initiatives and we can see where the 
gaps exist. 
Traditionally,  as  regulators  through  our  supervision  activities,  we  receive  supplyside  data 
from  our  licenced  financial  institutions.  Data  from  the  supply-side  will  tell  us  how  many 
accounts  there  are,  the  types  of  accounts,  the  geographical  spread,  numbers  of  access 
points and network coverage, and so on. 
Demand-side  data,  however,  are  from  the  consumers  or  users  and  are  generally  gleaned 
through  household  surveys.  Such  data,  while  also  telling  us  the  numbers  of  people  with 
accounts, will provide us a bit more on the ease of access and the barriers to use of financial 
services from the public’s point of view. This data gives us a good picture of the percentage 
of adults in Fiji with a formal bank account and those that are excluded from the formal sector 
and the reasons behind exclusion. 
At this point I would like to recognise Bankable Frontier Associates, a consulting firm based 
in  the  USA,  which  we  commissioned  to  help  conduct  the  demand  side  exercise.  These 
consultants  worked  closely  with  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  the  Bureau  of  Statistics,  the 
National Financial Inclusion Taskforce’s Statistics Working Group and the Pacific Financial 
Inclusion  Programme,  to  develop  the  questionnaire,  train  the  survey  team  and  deliver  the 
final report. 
Demand-side survey 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  Demand-Side  Survey  Report  that  we  are  launching  today 
provides us with an overall view of access, usage and to some extent, the quality of financial 
services and products, both formal and informal, amongst Fiji’s adult population. This report 
is  very  helpful  for  regulators  and  the  financial  service  providers  to  better  understand  the 
situation  or  reality  on  the  ground,  particularly  the  barriers  that  are  preventing  people  from 
using the formal financial system. 
The  Survey  covered  a  national  representative  sample  of  1284  respondents  through 
15 Provinces in Fiji. All the respondents were 15 years of age and above. 
Key takeaways from the DSS 
A brief examination of the results suggest that, overall, our level of access to a formal bank 
account in Fiji is low when compared to upper-middle income1 countries surveyed as part of 
the World Bank’s Global Findex – though it compares well to middle income countries. 
Please allow me to highlight some of the key findings: 
• 
60 percent of adults have a bank account while 27 percent are completely excluded 
from any type of financial service. 
                                                
1   2014 data from World Bank: Upper middle income countries GNI per capita is $4,086 to $12,615. Fiji’s GNI 
per capita is $4302 in 2013. Using GDP 2014 is $4543. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     Financial  Inclusion  is  lower:  in  the  Eastern  and  Western  provinces  of  Fiji;  among 
women;  iTaukei  adults;  young  adults  (aged  between  15–20  years);  and  among 
agricultural and casual workers. 
71 percent of adults saved some money during the previous  year, compared  with 
63 percent of adults in upper middle-income countries in the Global Findex Survey. 
However out of the 71 percent of adults that say they saved in the past year, only 
38 percent saved with a formal financial institution and 9 percent with saving clubs. 
Additionally, 27 percent of the respondents have retirement savings; but these were 
found to be more with the urban dwellers. 
Use of credit in Fiji is lower, at 32 percent, in comparison to upper-middle income 
countries at 38 percent. The report highlights that those in the informal strand use 
shop credit; hire purchases and borrowing from family and friends more than those 
that are banked. 
Moving forward 
• 
Overall, the demand-side survey report presents some interesting findings and good baseline 
data for us all on access, usage and the quality of financial services and products offered in 
Fiji. This data, apart from serving as a benchmark for future reference, will now assist us in 
developing evidence-based polices and charting the way forward for financial inclusion in Fiji. 
Ladies and gentlemen, a national workshop will be convened soon to invite stakeholders to 
participate in reviewing the findings and the achievements of the past five years and to agree 
upon a new financial inclusion strategy for Fiji for the next five years. 
Before I conclude, I would like to acknowledge the work of the Fiji Bureau of Statistics. This 
exercise  is  precious  to  us  all  and  required  extensive  investment,  both  technically  and 
institutionally, and we are grateful to the Bureau for the unrelenting support throughout. 
I must also thank our funding partners, the Alliance for Financial Inclusion, for covering the 
consultant’s  fee  and  the  Australian  Government  which  provided  the  funding  through  the 
Pacific  Financial  Inclusion  Programme  for  the  data  collection  exercise.  These  surveys  are 
very costly and we greatly appreciate the commitment and continuous financial support from 
our partners. 
Thank you to all our other committed stakeholders and to my staff at the Reserve Bank who 
continue to push us onwards in order that we may meet our goals. 
Finally, let me share with you some great news. Fiji has just been selected to host the 2016 
Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  Global  Policy  Forum.  At  the  last  count,  the  Alliance  had  a 
membership  of  around  95  emerging  and  developing  countries  represented  by  123 
institutions, including many central banks and finance ministries. 
We have been told that we can expect more than 600 delegates to fly into Nadi in September 
next  year.  This  will  be  a  tremendous  challenge  for  us  as  hosts  but  a  great  opportunity  to 
showcase,  not  only  our  beautiful  country,  but  also  our  collaborative  effort  and  growing 
footprint in financial inclusion. 
I look forward to all your continued commitment to giving our people in Fiji that lift or hand-up 
towards a better life. 
Vinaka vaka levu. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
