  Salvatore Rossi: Towards a European Banking Union – a euro-area 
central bank supervisor as a first step 
Lecture by Mr Salvatore Rossi, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Central 
Bank of Russia, Moscow, 2 April 2015. 
 Should there be one or more financial supervisors? 
The  financial  sector  needs  much  closer  supervision  and  stricter  regulation  than  other 
economic sectors, because financial institutions are critical to the operation of the economy, 
and finance is based on public trust. Financial regulation addresses negative externalities by 
modifying  private  agents’  incentives,  constraining  their  action,  and  putting  mechanisms  in 
place to prevent the most damaging effects of failures, particularly those of banks. Financial 
supervision is needed to monitor agents’ behaviour and to enforce the rules. 
Supervision can be grouped into three broad categories: 
(i) 
microprudential  supervision:  surveillance  of  the  safety  and  soundness  of 
individual institutions; 
macroprudential supervision: monitoring the exposure to systemic risk, identifying 
potential  threats  to  stability  arising  from  macroeconomic  or  financial  market 
developments, and from market infrastructures; 
customer protection: monitoring business conduct and the disclosure of information 
to customers and other stakeholders. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Designing the “optimal model” of a regulatory and supervisory architecture is a daunting task. 
The  empirical  evidence  does  not  prove  the  dominance  of  any  particular  model  over  the 
others,  although  several  studies  have  pointed  out  that  weaknesses  in  regulation  and 
supervision  might  be  factors  leading  to  a  financial  crisis  (Cihák,  Demirgüç-Kunt,  Martinez 
Peria and Mohseni-Cheraghlou, 2013). 
In principle, in any given jurisdiction these functions can be assigned to different authorities 
on the basis of two different (orthogonal) criteria: either by sector or by function. Or one could 
choose a “hybrid” model. 
In  addition  to  this,  the  authorities,  whatever  their  scope,  can  be  placed  within  the  national 
central bank or outside it. 
The  financial  regulatory  and  supervisory  architecture  varies  considerably  across  countries. 
Tables 1 and 2 show the models chosen by a selection of countries outside and inside the 
euro  area,  otherwise  referred  to  as  the  Euro  Zone  (EZ).  The  models  are  based  on  data 
provided in Oreski and Pavcovic (2014) and classified as follows: 
In the “sectorial” (“vertical”) model there is a regulator/supervisor for each main sector within 
the  financial  system  –  banks,  insurance  companies,  non-bank  financial  intermediaries, 
securities  markets,  etc.  –  which  is  in  charge  of  all  functions:  micro,  macro,  and  customer 
protection. 
In  the  “twin-peaks”  model,  there  is  one  authority  for  prudential  supervision  and  another 
responsible  for  market  conduct  and  customer  protection.  Each  of  them  extends  its 
competence over all sectors of the financial system. 
The  “integrated”  model  combines  the  preceding  two  in  a  sort  of  universal  authority 
responsible  for  both  prudential  and  business  conduct  regulation/supervision  for  the  entire 
financial industry. 
Any other solution is dubbed “hybrid” when it has elements of more than one model in it. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
Finally,  Tables  1  and  2  distinguish,  but  only  for  the  “integrated”  and  “hybrid”  frameworks, 
whether the authorities are, totally or mostly, part of the central bank (CB) or not. 
The evolution over the last 15 years is also shown for all countries. 
Outside the EZ we find two twin-peaks models (Australia and the UK), one sectorial (USA), 
and one hybrid (Canada). The four remaining frameworks (Japan, the Russian Federation, 
Sweden,  and  Switzerland)  are  integrated,  and  only  in  the  case  of  Russia  is  the  single 
authority part of the central bank. In the sectorial and twin-peaks cases, the central bank is 
involved at least partially. 
In  the  EZ,  we  see  two  twin-peaks  models  (Belgium  and  the  Netherlands),  one  sectorial 
(Spain), two hybrid (France and Italy, in both cases with a heavy involvement of the central 
bank), and three integrated (Austria, Finland, and Germany). 
Theoretically,  all  these  models  have  advantages  and  disadvantages.1  The  merits  of  one 
model are always the demerits of another, and vice versa. The main arguments in favour of 
greater integration are: i) economies of scope, ii) better assessment of risks, iii) effectiveness 
(better cooperation within one organization than between many agencies), iv) less regulatory 
arbitrage or supervisory gaps, and v) increased accountability. 
The main drawbacks of integration cited in the literature are: i) dominance of one goal over 
the others, ii) misalignment of incentives (for example, focus on a particular objective only 
because  it  is  more  easily  monitored  by  public  opinion),  iii)  excessive  bureaucracy,  iv)  a 
tendency  to  assign  an  ever-increasing  range  of  functions  to  a  unified  agency,  and  v)  an 
excessive concentration of power. 
The relative weights attributed to the advantages and disadvantages in each country explain 
the variety of models adopted. They in turn depend on political economy factors, and may 
change over time. Figure 1 shows how the distribution of the four main institutional models 
– twin-peaks, sectorial, integrated, and hybrid – has changed since the late 1990s in a wide 
sample of 80 countries. We see a decline of the sectorial model and a growing diffusion of 
the  others,  especially  the  integrated  model.  The  increasing  integration  between  financial 
intermediaries  and  activities,  coupled  with  the  consequences  of  the  global  financial  crisis, 
has pushed more and more countries towards some consolidation of agencies.2 
In Italy, as I said before when commenting on Table 2, a hybrid model applies. The various 
authorities involved in regulating and supervising the financial system have mostly sectorial 
dividing  lines:  the  Bank  of  Italy  for  the  banking  sector,  Ivass  for  the  insurance  sector,  and 
Covip for pension funds, all of them involved in both prudential supervision and consumer 
protection. But there is also an element of the twin-peaks model, with Consob in charge of 
market conduct and transparency for all listed intermediaries, and the Antitrust authority in 
charge  of  protecting  competition  in  all  markets,  including  the  credit  and  financial  ones. 
Furthermore, Ivass, the insurance regulator, was recently placed under the umbrella of the 
Bank  of  Italy,  while  remaining  a  separate  legal  entity.  Furthermore,  borders  between  the 
sectorial  authorities  are  somewhat  blurred,  and  conflicts  of  competence  arise  from  time  to 
time. 
                                                 
1   See for example Abrams and Taylor (2000). 
2   Borio and Filosa (1994) discuss the implications for supervision of the transformation of the financial industry. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Monetary policy and supervision under one roof? Effects on the independence of a 
central bank 
Part  of  the  academic  and  political  debate  about  the  best  financial  supervisory  architecture 
has  been  devoted  to  whether  the  central  bank  should  be  involved  in  the  prudential 
supervision of banks.3 
Supervision  within  the  central  bank?  –  This  specific  debate  on  the  benefits  and  risks  of 
entrusting  a  central  bank  with  banking  supervision  is  a  long  standing  one.4  The  literature 
generally concludes that no single pattern of division of supervisory responsibilities between 
the central bank and other authorities is unquestionably superior. 
Goodhart  (1988)  argues  that  central  banks  have  been  historically  involved  in  supervisory 
functions  because  of  their  role  in  stabilizing  the  financial  system,  acting  as  lenders  of  last 
resort (LOLR). In the late 1990s in many countries financial supervision was moved outside 
central banks, into cross-sectorial or specialized authorities. According to Eichengreen and 
Dincer (2011) this process was related to the strengthening of the independence of central 
banks, in light of their narrow mandate to achieve price stability. However, the global financial 
crisis  has  shown  that  central  banks  cannot  disregard  financial  stability  considerations, 
whether they are part of their explicit mandate or not. 
The  most  widely  cited  benefits  of  having  monetary  policy  and  bank  supervision  residing 
under one roof are related to: i) the exchange of information, ii) shared concern for financial 
stability.5 
The first benefit may be well illustrated by the UK experience: the failure of supervisors to 
head off problems in Northern Rock and prevent the first bank run in more than a century is 
an  outcome  widely  attributed  to  imperfect  coordination  and  inadequate  information-sharing 
between the FSA and the Bank of England (Eichengreen and Dincer, 2011). Bank-specific 
information is very important for central banks when they act as lenders of last resort. The 
central  bank  is  the  ultimate  guarantor  of  financial  stability  during  a  crisis.  In  performing  its 
LOLR function, the central bank has to assess the liquidity and solvency of its counterparts. 
More  generally,  central  bank  risk  management  would  benefit  from  better  access  to 
information on the financial health of banks to assess the quality of the collateral that these 
banks provide. Especially in times of tensions, having such information in house increases 
the timeliness of the information flow. 
Bernanke (2007) underlines that supervisory responsibilities give the central bank access to 
a wealth of granular on each bank’s organization, management structure, lines of business, 
financial  condition, 
risk-management  practices,  and  operational 
vulnerabilities.  This  is  beneficial  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  because  banks  play  a 
central  role  in  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  impulses.  For  example,  supervisory 
information on bank capital is useful to assess the contribution of capital constraints to credit 
developments  (Bernanke  and  Lown,  1991).  Similarly,  monitoring  the  portfolio  choices  of 
banks is useful to assess the consequences of monetary policy on the accumulation of risks. 
This information improves the ability of central banks to prevent financial instability. 
Symmetrically,  supervision  benefits  from  information  that  central  banks  acquire  from  their 
frequent contacts with banks for monetary policy purposes. Also the role that central banks 
traditionally play in payment and settlement systems provides them with additional sources of 
internal  controls, 
                                                 
3   For an updated and systematic discussion of the relationship between central banks, financial regulation and 
supervision after the global financial crisis, see Eijffinger and Masciandaro (2011). 
4   See, among others, Pisani-Ferry, Sapir, Veron and Wolff (2012). 
5   See for example Goodhart (2000) and Mishkin (2001). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
information on linkages between intermediaries. Rapidly changing financial flows can affect 
the stability of intermediaries.6 
The  second  benefit  is  related  to  the  common  concern  for  financial  stability.  Historically 
financial stability has been a main task for central banks, even without an explicit mandate. In 
many countries it has been a fundamental factor for their establishment. 
Central banks conduct monetary policy to achieve price stability – in most cases their primary 
goal – and this in turn fosters broader macroeconomic stability and contributes to financial 
stability. But often central banks have specific responsibilities in the financial stability sphere, 
as this is a key precondition for price stability. 
Central banks with prudential supervisory powers can pursue the objectives of price stability 
and financial stability with a wider set of instruments, whereas a central bank with monetary 
policy powers only might end up being overburdened. 
A common roof and the effects on independence – The independence of central banks is a 
topic  deeply  debated  almost  from  the  time  of  their  inception.7  In  an  essay  of  1824  David 
Ricardo identified the three pillars of central bank independence: institutional separation of 
the power to create money from the power to spend it; a ban on the monetary funding of the 
State budget; and the central bank’s obligation to give an account of its monetary policy. 
Ricardo’s suggestions were taken up by the Brussels Conference of 1920. Price stability was 
indicated  as  the  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy  but  –  as  the  Final  Report  of  the 
conference maintained – if it was to be achieved, it had to be entrusted to central banks that 
were independent of their governments.8 
These  principles  were  forgotten  for  many  years  after  the  Second  World  War  (WW2).  The 
conviction  that  a  certain  degree  of  inflation  was  necessary  to  support  employment  and 
growth  came  to  the  fore  in  economic  thought  and  in  the  minds  of  policy  makers.  In  many 
countries monetary policy was dominated by budgetary requirements (fiscal dominance) and 
central banks acted as buyers of last resort of government securities when they came onto 
the primary market.9 The independence of central banks enjoyed little institutional protection. 
The stagflation of the 1970s suddenly brought to light what farsighted economists, such as 
Edmund Phelps, had already foreseen in the previous decade: in the short term there may 
be a trade-off between inflation and unemployment, but not in the long term.10 This radical 
rethinking  of  the  theory  was  accompanied  by  profound  changes  in  the  organization  and 
behaviour of central banks. 
Economic literature once again looked at price stability as a supreme value and pointed to 
two  prerequisites:  the  independence  of  the  institutions  called  to  guarantee  it,  i.e.  central 
banks, and the adoption on their part of explicit objectives. 
Here  it  comes  a  third  benefit  from  having  monetary  policy  and  supervision  under  the 
common  roof  of  the  central  bank:  it  mutually  reinforces  independence.  As  recalled  by  the 
IMF’s  principles,  independence  is  a  requirement  not  only  for  monetary  policy  but  also  for 
                                                 
6   A  number  of  theoretical  papers  analyse  how  illiquidity  can  turn  into  insolvency  for  intermediaries  (e.g. 
Diamond and Rajan, 2011, 2012). 
7   This section is based in part on Rossi (2013). 
8   See Spinelli and Trecroci (2006).  
9   For the Bank of Italy, see Gaiotti and Secchi (2013).  
10   See Phelps (1967, 1968).  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
effective supervision.11 Italy’s historical experience suggests that attributing the supervision of 
banks  to  the  central  bank  can  not  only  strengthen  the  independence  of  the  supervisor: 
credibility  as  a  tough  supervisor  can  in  turn  reinforce  its  reputation  and  standing  in  the 
enactment of monetary policy. 
However, we must be aware that the common roof entails the risk of a conflict of interest. 
The  central  bank  may  have  an  incentive  to  keep  monetary  policy  too  loose  to  avoid  the 
adverse effects of tighter money conditions on bank earnings and credit quality12 and provide 
liquidity to weak banks to avoid triggering losses.13 A supervisor that is also a central bank 
may be tempted to forbearance during a downturn, delaying the closure of problem banks in 
the hope that macroeconomic conditions improve and the problems in the financial system 
disappear on their own. 
The potential for conflicts of interest between monetary policy and prudential supervision is 
debatable. In many instances, such as during the global financial crisis, financial instability 
can generate deflationary pressures. 
There  is  no  clear  evidence  that  central  banks  with  supervisory  powers  were  more  or  less 
prone to forbearance than other supervisory agencies. 
Situations of conflicts of interest between supervisory objectives and monetary policy goals 
may  exist,  but  these  conflicts  would  not  be  resolved  by  simply  attributing  the  functions  to 
separate  authorities.  Having  separate  authorities  would  make  coordination  even  more 
burdensome. 
Towards a European Banking Union: the new regulatory and supervisory framework 
Origin  and  motives  of  the  European  Banking  Union  project  –  The  construction  of  Europe 
since the end of WW2 has followed a long and winding road.14. The Banking Union (BU) is 
the most recent step. It is still an ongoing process; it has been designed to solve what can be 
considered the worst crisis ever of the European edifice: the sovereign debt crisis. 
We know where the crisis came from. The triggers were local financial crises in two small 
economies of the EZ, Greece and Cyprus. The response by the European governments and 
institutions  was  flawed,  and  fuelled  markets’  suspicion  that  the  euro  was  not  in  fact 
irreversible, as the European rhetoric had claimed until then: a sort of disaffection towards 
the euro was apparently spreading in important founding countries, particularly in the North 
of Europe. 
Market  turmoil  receded  after  the  announcement  of  the  Outright  Monetary  Transactions 
programme  (OMT)  by  the  ECB  (“Whatever  it  takes”),  but  meanwhile  banks  in  high-public-
debt countries had become the main target of the markets’ concern: they held a considerable 
amount of public bonds of their respective sovereigns in their balance sheets; the riskiness 
now attached to the sovereigns was being transmitted to the domestic banks’ balance sheets 
and  back  to  the  sovereigns,  perceived  as  the  ultimate  support  to  their  domestic  banking 
systems, in a vicious circle. 
How  to  sever  the  sovereign-bank  link?  The  safest  way  to  do  it  was  straightforward:  we 
needed to convince the markets that the EZ banks belong to a common system, so that if 
                                                 
11   The  IMF  FSAP  principles  state  that  “The  supervisor  possesses  operational  independence,  transparent 
processes,  sound  governance,  budgetary  processes  that  do  not  undermine  autonomy  and  adequate 
resources, and is accountable for the discharge of its duties and use of its resources.” 
12   This point has been made, among others, by Goodhart and Schoenmaker (1995). 
13   See for example Brunnermeier and Gersbach (2012). 
14   See Rossi (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  
 
one of them fails, or is likely to fail, bailing it out is no more the responsibility of one country, 
but of all. However, if we wanted all the EZ countries, in particular the low-public-debt ones, 
to  share  such  a  financial  responsibility,  we  had  to  allow  them  also  to  share  the  ex  ante 
supervision on all banks, not only on the domestic banks of each country. In other terms, we 
needed to create a Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). 
The BU project was launched in 2012, and it was conceived as an institutional framework 
with  three  pillars:  an  SSM,  a  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM),  and  a  Single  Deposit 
Insurance  Scheme  (SDIS).  The  three  pillars  were  originally  meant  to  be  concurrent, 
symmetric and logically connected. The outcome has been different. 
The SDIS has been postponed to an indefinite future. On the crucial issue of bank resolution, 
a  long  and  tiresome  negotiation  took  place,  which  eventually  brought  about  a  reverse 
approach: it was decided that sharing the cost of a banking crisis among all the EZ countries 
was not for now; it is foreseen as the final step of a many-year-long process, and in any case 
it will involve private funds only (the Single Resolution Fund, financed by all the EZ banks). In 
particular, the use of money from the taxpayers of countries other than the one where the 
bank’s head office is located has been ruled out – contrary to the original intention. 
During the negotiations Italy offered a view consistent with the very motives behind the BU 
project:  the  SSM  was  supposed  to  be  the  prerequisite  of  a  common  public  backstop  for 
distressed banks, with the aims of removing the “tail risk” from the EZ banking system and 
cutting the link between sovereigns and banks; any moral hazard could be prevented by an 
effective  common  supervision.  This  view,  also  shared  by  several  other  countries,  was 
eventually rejected by the majority. 
Meanwhile the SSM was created. The new system has been in place since last November. It 
is centered on the European Central Bank (ECB) and comprises all the national competent 
authorities (NCAs) of the euro-area countries. 
The Single Supervisory Board (SSB), which includes 6 members appointed by the ECB and 
19  representatives  of  the  NCAs,  is  directly  responsible  for  supervision  of  around 
120 “significant”  banks.  In  practice,  supervision  of  each  of  those  banks  is  conducted  by  a 
Joint Supervisory Team (JST) comprising experts from the SSM staff and from the NCAs of 
the countries where that bank is located. 
We now have in Europe a very complicated regulatory and supervisory framework for banks. 
Regulation is provided by the EBA, an EU-wide entity, while supervision is the responsibility 
of the SSM, but only for EZ banks. Bank resolution is disciplined by a specific EU Directive 
and  governed  by  the  SRM.  The  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  is  in  charge  of 
macroprudential monitoring.15 This is the European layer. The domestic layer, the NCAs, is 
also  fully  involved  in  both  regulation  and  supervision,  to  various  degrees.  The  two  layers 
coexist,  although  with  different  responsibilities:  the  multinational  nature  of  the  Mechanism 
implies a multiplication of resources dedicated to the various tasks, also because of the need 
for coordination. It is a costly exercise. 
The “common roof” choice – A crucial decision was to place the SSM within the ECB. It came 
after a prolonged discussion, where different lines of thought were confronting. The risk of a 
conflict  of  interest  between  monetary  policy  and  supervisory  action  was  meant  to  be 
mitigated by separating the analysis aimed at supervision from the one aimed at monetary 
policy, and analysis from decision-making. 
The  SSM  Regulation  actually  establishes  the  separation  between  the  monetary  policy 
function and supervision.16 Recital 65 of the Regulation states that the ECB is responsible for 
                                                 
15   Although some macroprudential supervision tasks have also been assigned to the SSM. 
16   Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013 of 15 October 2013 conferring specific tasks on the European Central 
Bank concerning policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
carrying out monetary policy functions with a view to maintaining price stability in accordance 
with  Article  127(1)  TFEU,  while  the  exercise  of  supervisory  tasks  has  the  objective  of 
protecting  the  safety  and  soundness  of  credit  institutions  and  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system.  The  Regulation  thus  establishes  that  monetary  policy  and  supervision  should  be 
carried out in full separation, in order to avoid conflicts of interest. 
The road ahead – Is there a risk that markets will see the BU as a fragile, lopsided creature; 
that  financial  market  fragmentation  will  remain  untamed;  that  the  BU  objectives  will  be 
missed? 
Not necessarily. What we have achieved so far may be not the first best, but it is something. 
The SSM, the starting point, is valuable per se. The Bank of Italy has supported it from the 
outset, and will continue to cooperate to make it a success. 
What the NCAs have to do is to build a real single house. We have to bring to this common 
endeavour the best practices and the most useful experiences. 
In order to exploit the potential of the SSM, it is essential to harmonize supervisory practices 
so that the resulting single standard be the highest possible, in terms of both prudence and 
effectiveness in financing the real economy. 
In  the  years  preceding  the  global  financial  crisis,  harshly  competing  and  gigantic 
intermediaries,  mostly  in  the  US,  pushed  the  authorities  to  lower  their  regulatory  and 
supervisory standards; on the other hand, shadow banking activities were developed, totally 
hidden  from  regulators  and  supervisors.  This  latter  phenomenon  still  poses  a  risk: 
overburdening banks with ever increasing requests for more capital may be pro-cyclical and 
counterproductive from the point of view of systemic stability, in that it incentivizes finance to 
go further into the shadow. 
We must let our banks do their job better than they did before the crisis. They must be more 
stable,  more  efficient,  more  competitive,  to  the  benefit  of  the  whole  economy.  We  must 
dissipate every remaining uncertainty in the markets regarding the irreversibility of the euro, 
so that the common EZ monetary policy can work fully and correctly. 
References 
Abrams,  R.  K.,  and  Taylor,  M.  W.,  2000.  Issues  in  the  Unification  of  Financial  Sector 
Supervision, IMF Working Paper 213. 
Bernanke, B. S., 2007. Central Banking and Bank Supervision in the United States, speech 
at the Allied Social Science Association Annual Meeting, Chicago, Illinois – January 5. 
Bernanke, B. S., and Lown, C. S., 1991. The Credit Crunch, Brookings Papers on Economic 
Activity, pp. 205–39. 
Borio, C., and Filosa, R., 1994. The Changing Borders of Banking: Trends and Implications, 
BIS Economic Paper, No. 43. 
Brunnermeier,  M.,  and  Gersbach,  H.,  2012.  True  independence  for  the  ECB:  Triggering 
power – no more, no less, VoxEU, 20 December. 
Cihák,  M.,  Demirgüç-Kunt,  A.,  Martinez  Peria,  M.  S.,  and  Mohseni-Cheraghlou,  A.,  2013. 
“Bank  regulation  and  supervision  in  the  context  of  the  global  crisis”.  Journal  of  Financial 
Stability, 9(4), 733–746. 
Diamond, D. W., and Rajan, R. G., 2011. “Fear of Fire Sales, Illiquidity Seeking, and Credit 
Freezes”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2), pp. 557–91. 
Diamond, D. W., and Rajan, R. G., 2012. “Illiquid Banks, Financial Stability, and Interest Rate 
Policy”. Journal of Political Economy, 120(3), pp. 552–91. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  
 
Eichengreen,  B.,  and  Dincer,  N.,  2011.  Who  should  supervise?  The  structure  of  bank 
supervision and the performance of the financial system. NBER WP 17401. 
Eijffinger, S., and Masciandaro, D., 2011. Handbook of Central Banking, Financial Regulation 
and Supervision. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham. 
Feldman, R. J., Kim, J., Miller, P., and Schmidt, J. E., 2003. “Are Banking Supervisory Data 
Useful  for  Macroeconomic  Forecasts?”  The  B.E.  Journal  of  Macroeconomics,  vol.  3 
(Contributions). 
Gaiotti, E., and Secchi, A., 2013. Monetary policy and fiscal dominance in Italy from the early 
1970s to the adoption of the euro: a review, Banca d’Italia Occasional Paper No. 141. 
Goodhart, C., 1988. The evolution of central banks. MIT Press, Cambridge. 
Goodhart,  C.,  2000.  The  Organizational  Structure  of  Banking  Supervision,  Occasional 
Papers, no.1, Basel: Financial Stability Institute, November. 
Goodhart,  C.,  and  Shoenmaker,  D.,  1995.  Should  the  Functions  of  Monetary  Policy  and 
Banking  Supervision  Be  Separated?  Oxford  Economic  Papers,  vol.  47  (October),  
pp. 539–560. 
Mishkin, F., 2001. “Prudential Supervision: Why Is It Important and What Are the Issues?” in 
Frederic  Mishkin,  ed.,  Prudential  Supervision:  What  Works  and  What  Doesn’t,  Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Oreski,  T.,  and  Pavkovic,  A.,  2014.  “Global  trends  in  financial  sector  supervisory 
architectures”,  in  Proceedings  of  the  5th  International  Conference  on  Design  and  Product 
Development. 
Phelps, E. S., 1967. “Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation and Optimal Unemployment 
over Time”, Economica, Vol. 34, pp. 254–281. 
Phelps,  E.  S.,  1968.  “Money-Wage  Dynamics  and  Labor-Market  equilibrium”,  Journal  of 
Political Economy, Vol. 76, pp. 678–711. 
Pisani-Ferry, J., Sapir, A., Veron, N., and Wolff, G. B., 2012. What kind of European Banking 
Union, Bruegel Policy Contributions, n. 12, June 2012. 
Rossi, S., 2013.  Post-crisis challenges to central bank independence, speech given at the 
LBMA/LPPM Precious Metals Conference. 
Rossi, S., 2014.  Verso l’unione bancaria europea: in fondo a una strada lunga e tortuosa, 
speech  given  at  the  conference  “Banking  union  and  the  European  financial  system” 
Università degli Studi di Modena e Reggio Emilia. 
Spinelli,  F.,  and  Trecroci,  C.,  2006.  “Maastricht:  New  and  Old  Rules”,  Open  Economies 
Review, Vol. 17, pp. 477–492. 
 
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
