  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: The “Islamic Finance Country Report for 
Malaysia 2015” 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the launch of the “Islamic Finance Country Report for 
Malaysia 2015”, Kuala Lumpur, 30 June 2015. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  today  to  officiate  the  launch  of  the  “Islamic  Finance  Country 
Report for  Malaysia  2015”  published  by  IRTI, the  research  and  training arm  of the  Islamic 
Development Bank. This country report is the fifth in its series and features Malaysia’s on-
going  initiatives  and  prospects  in  transforming  into  a  high  income  economy  and  the 
contribution of Islamic finance in this endeavour. Islamic finance in Malaysia has undergone 
three  decades  of  progress  and  its  current  state  of  development  is  the  reflection  of  the 
collaborative effort between the industry and the government. While Malaysia has achieved a 
number  of successes,  a  lot  needs to  be  done  still.  Islamic finance  needs  to  advance from 
domestic-centric  growth  and  expand  beyond  our  borders.  The  next  phase  of  achievement 
would very likely hinges on our ability to collaborate successfully with others and harness our 
capabilities  to  ensure  that  Islamic  finance  will  progress  and  expand  transactional  activities 
across borders to remain competitive and dynamic. 
Progressive development of Islamic finance in Malaysia 
As part of the strategy to sustain balanced economic growth, Malaysia has developed Islamic 
finance  as  one  of  the  sectors  that  not  only  adds  value  to  the  economy  but  offers  an 
alternative  to  businesses  and  the  public.  Our  approach  has  been  holistic,  yet  focused  on 
specific outcomes. The focused approach has led to the exponential growth of the industry 
and contributed towards the diversification of the Malaysian economy. 
The future and continued progress of Islamic finance in Malaysia would very much depend 
on  the  industry  resourcefulness  to  build  and  maintain  an  innovative,  competitive  and 
inclusive Islamic financial industry. Empirical evidence shows the importance of an enabling 
environment for Islamic finance to fluorish, with tax incentives, business-friendly policies and 
initiatives, as well as an appropriate and robust regulatory and supervisory framework. It is 
these  ingredients  that  enable  Islamic  banking  assets  to  consistently  record  double-digit 
annual growth rate since year 2000 and now representing 25% of domestic banking assets. 
In terms of customer base, it is estimated that non-Muslims make up over 50 percent of the 
customer base of Islamic banks in Malaysia. Growth numbers are also most evident for the 
Islamic capital market, with the sukuk market commanding a 57 percent market share and 
attracting global issuers and investors. From 2006 to end-2014, foreign issuers have issued 
sukuk  amounting  to  an  estimated  RM28  billion  in  various  currencies  –  US  dollar,  Yen, 
Renminbi and Singapore dollar – in the Malaysian marketplace. These indications show that 
businesses are seeing the economic and business merit of Shariah-compliant products and 
services and that its appeal extend beyond the traditional captive market. However, growth of 
the  magnitude  that  Islamic  finance  experienced  over  the  last  decade  would  increasingly 
become more difficult if the industry does not continue to be nimble and agile in its approach. 
Innovation is therefore a key priority for Islamic finance players to keep expanding and gain 
market  share.  As  indicated  by  the  results  of  the  retail  consumer  banking  and  insurance 
survey  in  the  country  report,  the  demand  for  Islamic  banking  by  survey  respondents  far 
exceeds that for its conventional counterpart. This should be an encouragement for Islamic 
banks  to  boost  its  innovativeness  in  meeting  customers’  needs.  The  Islamic  Financial 
Services Act 2013 is already paving the way for the development of Islamic banking solutions 
that  are  differentiated  from  conventional  products  by  allowing  funds  to  be  mobilised  either 
through  deposits  or  investment  accounts.  This  classification  brings  greater  options  for  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  through 
innovation 
in  driving 
public and reflects an enhanced risk-sharing approach to Islamic banking. It also gives the 
industry additional options to create creative solutions for its customers. 
Greater  engagement  and  collaboration  between  industry  and  academia  would  also  ensure 
mutually-reinforcing  efforts 
the  development  and 
implementation  of  new  research  findings  and  breakthroughs.  Towards  this  end,  the 
upcoming  inaugural  Islamic  Finance  Innovation  Symposium  aims  to  build  the  necessary 
linkage  for  a  stronger  partnership  between  industry  and  academia,  of  which  may  be  of 
interest to IRTI. The symposium seeks to promote applied research that would spark industry 
innovation and act as a testbed for breakthrough ideas. Another designed takeaway from the 
symposium is the creation of a network for more effective business matching between the 
industry  and  academia  to  explore  and  implement  specific  innovative  ideas.  As  Islamic 
finance  has  gained  a  strong  foundation,  competitive  pressure  would  demand  us  to  further 
strategise and refine the offerings of Islamic finance to ensure that the products and services 
needed  by  the  customers  are  met  and  deliver  the  unique  value  propositions  of  Islamic 
finance. 
As we look ahead, future Islamic banking growth will be very much driven by the industry’s 
ability  to  continuously  tap  the  opportunities  to  finance  the  activities  of  the  real  economy. 
Judging by the data to date there is positive indication that we are on track to meet the 40 
percent  target  of  total  financing  by  the  year  2020.  Futhermore,  our  continuous  efforts  to 
initiate cross-border dialogues and interactions between regulators and industry, as well as 
between  regulators  and  international  bodies  would  further  expand  cross-border  activities 
given a steady and strong regulatory and supervisory framework already put in place. 
The launch of The Islamic Finance Country Report for Malaysia 2015 is a much welcomed 
initiative. The report aims to provide insights to our stakeholders, namely investors, analysts 
and the business community on the current state and future potential of the Islamic financial 
sector in Malaysia. In documenting our journey, the report also seeks to present the lessons 
learned.  Its  in-depth  information,  featuring  Islamic  banking,  takaful,  Islamic  capital  market 
and education; and independent due diligence position the report as a potential beacon for 
interested investors. 
While  we  hope  that  the  strong  value  propositions  of  Islamic  finance  in  Malaysia  are  self-
evident, today’s global markets would require accurate, timely and objective information that 
would enhance the confidence of businesses to use the services offered by this sector. 
The publication of the five Islamic finance country reports by IRTI would certainly add greater 
depth  to  the  wealth  of  information  available  for  the  global  community.  In  highlighting  the 
Islamic  finance  prospects  and  opportunities  across  regions,  it  is  my  hope  that  trade  and 
business linkages would further expand in the future. 
I would  like to highlight a specific issue in my remarks today. The need to elevate Islamic 
finance to another notch; intensifying cross-border linkages among jurisdictions that practise 
and  promote  Shariah  compliant  financial  services.  An  ambitious  undertaking;  but  a 
necessary  initiative  that  I  thought  would  spearhead  the  next  exponential  growth  of  the 
industry. There are many prerequisites, but I would like to touch on four of them. Firstly, the 
global  supply  of  a  wide  range  of  high-quality,  competitive  and  innovative  Islamic  financial 
products and services that meet the requirements of international businesses. These include 
environmentally friendly and ethical product offerings. While international transactions are on 
the  rise,  Islamic  finance  players  also  need  to  introduce  mutually  acceptable  and 
comprehensive  Shariah  compliant  financial  solutions  that  can  serve  differentiated  market 
needs.  The  availability  of  diversified  offerings  can  be  tailored  to  the  financial  needs  on  a 
regional scale and serves as an important stimulus for expanding cross-border investments. 
Secondly,  the  need  to  have  diverse  and  dynamic  intermediaries  and  market  participants 
including  auxiliary  service  providers  with  a  global  focus.  As  the  phase  of  globalisation 
expands, industry players from various sectors including Islamic banking, takaful and capital 
market  including  service  providers  need  to  further  widen  their  outreach  internationally  in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial 
transactions.  Given 
the  prominence  of  Shariah 
capitalising market opportunities. Towards meeting this prerequisite, businesses should forge 
partnership and strategic alliance to penetrate markets. 
Also of importance is the offering of multidisciplinary practices under one roof. For instance a 
consortium  of  service  providers  from  legal  and  accounting  disciplines  with  global  linkages 
that enable seamless offering of clients’ services. To do so, a culture of knowledge sharing 
across borders and greater collaboration between the industry, regulators and the academia; 
including  Shariah  scholars  need  to  be  intensified  to  provide  the  linkages  for  effective 
knowledge building and informational flow. 
Thirdly, the need for business enablers, particularly in the areas of legislation, taxation and 
regulation that facilitate effective linkages and connections between global financial markets. 
The new global landscape of growing cross-border financial flows between regions that have 
national  and  cultural  differences  also  underscores  the  need  for  enhanced  recognition  and 
understanding of practices in the different jurisdictions. This imperative translates into high 
demands on the use of standardised documents and agreements among Shariah compliant 
financial  market  players.  Standardised  documents  and  agreements  increase  market 
efficiency,  transparency  and  uniformity,  as  well  as  reduce  the  cost  of  transactions  as  we 
strive towards seamless global interlinkages. 
The  fourth  prerequisite  is  the  catalytic  role  of  Shariah  scholars  in  expanding  cross-border 
Islamic 
industry’s 
advancement, greater internationalisation will require the capacity and capability of Shariah 
scholars in offering practical solutions to Shariah issues faced by various global participants. 
Equally  important  is  the  efficiency  and  agility  of  Shariah  scholars  in  responding  to  these 
matters. This calls for continuous discussions and active dialogues involving scholars across 
the  globe.  Of  importance  is  also  the  need  for  mutual  respect  and  common  understanding 
within the international Shariah fraternity to enable productive and effective deliberations that 
will facilitate cross-border businesses. 
Many  can  indeed  benefit from  learning  and  leveraging  on these  country  reports. To  better 
disseminate the information, an idea is for the IDB Regional Office here in Kuala Lumpur to 
act as a focal point for member countries seeking further information or clarification on the 
reports.  As  a  measure  to  further  develop  Islamic  finance,  the  Regional  Office  can  also 
expand its scope to include capacity building programmes for member countries. An example 
is  a  structured  programme  with  the  opportunities  for  other  countries  to  have  a  one-to-one 
engagement  with  the  countries  featured  in  the  reports.  In  this  spirit,  IRTI,  can  explore  the 
opportunity through the Regional Office to jointly collaborate with the International Shari’ah 
Research  Academy  for  Islamic  Finance  (ISRA),  Islamic  Banking  and  Finance  Institute 
Malaysia  (IBFIM)  and  International  Centre  for  Education  in  Islamic  Finance  (INCEIF)  for 
greater synergy in international research and training, as well as capacity building. 
In  concluding,  I  wish  to  congratulate  the  IRTI  team,  that  has  worked  diligently  with  the 
Council  of  Islamic  Banks  and  Financial  Institutions  (CIBAFI)  and  Thomson-Reuters  in 
producing this report. It is my hope that there is further continuity in developing such country 
references that can showcase the offerings of Islamic finance to the global community. With 
this,  more  jurisdictions  can  contribute  towards  advancing  Islamic  finance  as  an  alternative 
financial system that adds diversity and vibrancy to the economy. 
Thank you. 
the 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
