  James McAndrews: Negative nominal central bank policy rates – where 
is the lower bound? 
Remarks  by  Mr  James McAndrews,  Executive  Vice  President  and  Director  of  Research of 
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  University  of  Wisconsin,  Madison,  8  May 
2015. 
 The views expressed in this speech are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York or of the Federal Reserve System. 
The Swiss National Bank (SNB), the European Central Bank (ECB), Danmarks Nationalbank 
(DNB), and the Swedish Riksbank recently have pushed short-term interest rates to levels 
below  the  “zero  lower  bound.”  The  current  extent  and  depth  of  negative  policy  rates  is 
unprecedented;  previously  only  Denmark  had  a  modestly  negative  policy  rate  in  2012 
through 2014. The actions of the four central banks have led a number of commentators to 
ask, Is the concept of a zero lower bound on interest rates valid? If not, what might be the 
lower  bound,  if  any,  on  nominal  interest  rates?  Indeed,  some  economists  have  suggested 
that  with  changes  to  the  monetary  system,  we  could  in  fact  eliminate  the  lower  bound  to 
interest rates altogether. 
I’ll first review the reasons given by the central banks for setting negative policy rates – in all 
cases, the negative rates were seen as a means of advancing the banks’ macroeconomic 
objectives  in  the  current  environment.  But  much  of  my  talk  will  focus  on  the  unique 
complications associated with negative nominal interest rates and the extent to which these 
complications constrain how low the rates can be set. 
After outlining these challenges, I’ll suggest that the zero lower bound on policy interest rates 
is much like the low tide mark on a beach: Standing at that border between the land and the 
ocean,  you  can  continue  to  lower  your  elevation  by  walking  into  the  water,  but  with  each 
additional step, you will need to push against the increasing resistance of the water. There is 
a distinct qualitative difference between positive and negative nominal interest rates, just as 
there is a distinct qualitative difference between the beach and the ocean. The zero lower 
bound  is  marked  by  this  same  qualitative  difference:  zero  is  a  rate  below  which  a  central 
bank encounters the distinctive and increasing costs of a negative nominal rate, relative to a 
nonnegative rate of interest. 
Purpose 
In  September  2014,  the  ECB  lowered  its  deposit  rate  to  its  current  level  of  negative 
0.2 percent.  More  recently,  in  late  2014  and  early  2015,  the  SNB,  DNB,  and  Riksbank 
reduced their policy rates to levels below zero, with the SNB and DNB setting their rates at 
negative  0.75  percent.1  These  central  banks  established  their  negative  rates  for  various 
reasons. Both the SNB and DNB established negative policy rates primarily to deter capital 
inflows and reduce the appreciation pressure on their currencies. In the case of the ECB and 
the  Riksbank,  negative  policy  rates  were 
intended  to  provide  additional  monetary 
accommodation to ensure price stability over the medium term and a return of inflation to the 
central  bank  objective.  Money  market  rates  in  the  jurisdictions  adopting  negative  deposit 
                                                
1  The press releases announcing the interest rate decisions by the SNB, the ECB, and the Riksbank can be 
found at the links that follow: http://www.snb.ch/en/mmr/reference/pre_20150115/source/pre_20150115.en.pdf, 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2014/html/pr140904.en.html, 
http://www.riksbank.se/en/Press-and-
published/Press-Releases/2015/Riksbank-cuts-repo-rate-to-025-per-cent-and-buys-government-bonds-for-
SEK-30-billion/. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  rates have also moved into negative territory, suggesting that the transmission of policy rates 
into market rates has continued. 
The central banks implement their negative rate regimes in different ways, but in each case 
some of the bank reserves on deposit at the central bank are subject to negative rates. In 
other words, some commercial banks are charged periodically for (some of) their deposits at 
the central bank. In addition, some central banks conduct both overnight and term repo and 
reverse repo transactions at negative rates. 
In  addition  to  implementing  the  negative  policy  rates,  each  of  these  central  banks  has 
employed a variety of other tools to support its policy objectives, such as significant foreign 
exchange intervention for both the SNB and Danmarks Nationalbank and programs of asset 
purchases,  or  quantitative  easing,  for  the  ECB  and,  in  a  smaller-scale  program,  the 
Riksbank. 
In an important sense, lowering interest rates to reduce capital inflows into a currency or to 
provide more accommodative financial conditions is a standard practice of central banking. 
Lower interest rates reduce the return to saving for households and reduce the “hurdle rate” 
to  investment  for  businesses.  Consequently,  lower  interest  rates  tend  to  support  both 
consumption  and  investment,  and  thereby  increased  aggregate  demand.  If  a  central  bank 
judges that demand is insufficient, and if the interest rate is already at zero, then lowering the 
interest rate necessarily means setting a negative rate. 
A key dimension of these issues is the distinction between the nominal interest rate and the 
real interest rate. The nominal interest rate measures the gross interest rate at which debtors 
remunerate creditors. The real interest rate measures the net interest rate at which debtors 
remunerate creditors – that is, after subtracting the inflation that is expected to occur over the 
period during which the debt is outstanding. It is the real interest rate that is more important 
in  stimulating  or  throttling  consumption  and  investment  decisions,  as  economic  agents’ 
income and expenses are affected by inflation more or less equally. 
The relationship between the nominal interest rate (rN), the real interest rate (rr) and the rate 
of expected inflation (Πe) is concisely expressed in the Fisher equation, or r_N=π_ϵ+r_r. This 
relationship reveals that a negative real interest rate does not necessarily require fixing the 
nominal interest rate at negative levels. Instead, if expected inflation is positive, then for a 
sufficiently low but positive nominal interest rate, the real rate of interest will be negative. 
One way to think of this is to liken prices and interest rates to the speed of travel for a person 
attempting  to  ascend  a  downward-moving  escalator.  The  nominal  interest  rate  can  be 
thought of as the person’s own effort to climb the steps; the rate of inflation can be thought of 
as the rate of speed of the escalator itself, descending against the stair climber. If the climber 
is  ascending  as  fast  as  the  escalator  descends,  she  makes  no  vertical  progress.  This 
outcome  can  be  likened  to  a  real  interest  rate  of  zero  –  the  nominal  rate  of  interest  just 
offsets the inflation eroding the value of money. If the climber ascends more slowly than the 
escalator descends, the outcome is analogous to a negative real interest rate. If the escalator 
stops  for  some  reason,  then  the  only  way  to  have  a  negative  real  interest  rate  is  for  the 
climber to descend by climbing down the escalator – a negative nominal rate of interest. 
It  is  not  uncommon for countries to  experience negative  real  interest rates. When  nominal 
interest rates  are  positive,  but  real  rates  are  negative,  conditions  are  “conventional”  in  the 
sense  that  the  debtor  still  pays  positive  gross  amounts  of  interest  to  creditors.  So  the 
innovation in the negative nominal policy rates we see at Danmarks Nationalbank, the ECB, 
the  Riksbank  and  the  SNB  is  in  the  “nominal”  aspect  of  their  policy.  It  is  unusual  to  set 
nominal  policy  rates  at  negative  levels.  When  nominal  rates  are  negative,  creditors  pay 
debtors  interest,  and  debtors  earn  interest  on  their  debt.  That  is,  instead  of  your  money 
working for you, you have to work for your money. 
To  explain  why  we  are  seeing  these  negative  nominal  rates,  we  can  invoke  the  Fisher 
equation.  In  Denmark,  Sweden,  Switzerland  and  the  euro  area,  rates  of  inflation,  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  expected inflation, had been falling and were near zero. Other things equal, the resulting real 
interest  rates  were  too  high  for  comfort.  In  an  environment  of  low  inflation,  one  policy  to 
reduce real interest rates would be to boost expected inflation. However, there may be few or 
no easy ways to raise those expectations quickly; policies such as quantitative easing may 
take  time  to  implement  and  have  complications  of  their  own.  An  alternative  approach  to 
reducing the real interest rate, the Fisher equation suggests, is for the central bank to set a 
negative nominal rate. 
In  addition to this  straightforward  influence  of  negative  nominal  rates  on  real rates,  setting 
negative nominal rates may stimulate the economy in less predictable and clear ways. For 
example, setting a negative nominal policy rate – a move that is, by nature, unconventional – 
may surprise people and thereby send a strong signal of the central bank’s intent to pursue 
its  policy  objective.  Such  a  signaling  channel  may  reinforce the  effect  of the  negative  rate 
and have an independent effect on boosting inflation expectations. 
Lowering the policy rate into negative territory can also be useful in reducing the pressure on 
an appreciating currency. If a country’s currency is facing such appreciation pressures at a 
time when “substitute” currencies have policy rates at or near zero, then the country’s central 
bank may choose to move its policy rates into negative territory to reduce the yields available 
to market participants who are holding the currency in anticipation of a gain on sale. 
Complications 
I’ll  now  outline  seven  categories  of  complications  associated  with  negative  nominal  policy 
rates. While some of these complications are already relevant in an environment of low real 
rates of interest, most arise only when nominal rates turn negative. 
Avoidance 
1. 
Why do people say there is a lower bound on interest rates at zero? Our simple proposition 
is that people would not invest a dollar in an account or bond from which they could expect to 
recoup only an amount less than a dollar so long as they could alternatively and costlessly 
put their money in currency – an investment in which a dollar remains a dollar. If everyone 
could costlessly invest in currency rather than in activities bearing negative rates, then there 
wouldn’t  be  any  negative  rate  activity  in  which  people  would  invest.  Consequently,  the 
negative  interest  rates  in  many  European  countries  indicate  that  it  is  costly  to  invest  in 
currency to earn a zero nominal rate of interest. 
Why  is  this  the  case?  First,  currency  is  bulky  and  weighty.  For  example,  a  million  U.S. 
dollars, made up solely of $100 bills, would form a stack measuring approximately 43 inches 
or  109  centimeters  in  height  and  weighing  22  pounds  or  about  10  kilos.  Consequently, 
currency is inconvenient to use, especially for those who seek to make large investments or 
payments.  Second,  currency  is  subject  to  theft,  requiring  a  big  investment  in  security  and 
insurance. Third, recounting currency every time it is moved or transferred between people 
entails  time  and  expense.  Finally,  currency  is  subject  to  degradation,  accident,  fire, 
counterfeiting, and other mishaps. 
Because currency is costly to invest in, then we could refine the proposition we stated earlier 
to say that a person would invest a dollar in an account or bond that promises to pay back 
less than a dollar so long as the person could not preserve more of his or her initial wealth by 
investing in currency, net of its costs. So one might suggest that it is the negative net return 
on  currency  that  establishes  the  lower  bound  to  interest  rates  –  zero  is  only  a  rough 
approximation.  This  formulation  is  sharper,  certainly,  but  it  may  also  be  too  blunt  for  the 
following  reason.  Notice  that  the  costs  of  handling  currency  vary  by  the  size  of  the 
investment  one  is  considering.  An  ordinary  person,  with  a few  hundred or  a few  thousand 
dollars to invest, may find it perfectly convenient to invest in currency, and to store most of it 
in a safety-deposit box, one that the person may well have already rented to store important 
papers  or  other  valuables.  A  large  corporation,  in  contrast,  likely  would  find  dealing  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  currency  extremely  costly.  So  the  proposition  may  be  refined  further  to  state  that  different 
economic  agents  will  be  more  or  less  willing  to  invest  in  negative  rate  investments  to  the 
extent that diseconomies of scale make their costs of handling currency higher or lower than 
others’. 
Vaults  introduce  some  additional  considerations  affecting  the  costs  of  holding  currency. 
Often, the costs of holding currency securely, by having a safety deposit box or a vault, are 
fixed costs. Once one has a vault, or has rented a safety deposit box, the costs of storing 
additional  currency  in  it,  up  to  its  capacity,  is  nil.  This  suggests  that  there  is  a  dynamic 
element to the economics of avoiding negative interest rates: the longer the negative rates 
are  expected  to  persist,  and  the  lower  they  are,  the  more  favorable  are  the  returns  to 
investing in a vault. Once the vault investment has been made, maintaining negative rates 
would likely become more difficult. 
An  even  more  far-reaching  change  that  many  have  suggested  would  be  the  creation  of  a 
new  institution  to  handle  and  store  currency  on  behalf  of  others;  this  could  dramatically 
reduce  the  costs  of  holding  currency.  The  institution  contemplated  would  have  a  single, 
highly trusted, party start a currency warehouse, which would consist of a large secure vault 
and excellent record-keeping and shipping facilities. Individuals could then deposit currency 
in the currency warehouse, receive receipts for their deposit, and then make payments with 
the  warehouse  receipts.  Such  an  innovation  could  conceivably  lower  the  cost  of  holding 
currency  as  an  investment,  and  yield  investors  a  return  close  to  zero,  but  still  slightly 
negative. 
Because  of  these  dynamic  considerations  involving  innovative  actions  to  avoid  negative 
rates,  we  could  add  a  corollary  to  our  proposition.  Specifically,  we  posit  that  different 
economic agents will be less willing to invest in negative rate investments over time to the 
extent that innovations reduce the costs of handling currency or make available other zero, 
or near-zero, interest rate economic arrangements. 
Some  economists  since  Silvio  Gesell  –  notably,  Willem  Buiter,  Marvin  Goodfriend,  Miles 
Kimball, and Ken Rogoff – have suggested that currency be eliminated, taxed, made non-
redeemable for deposits in banks, or made redeemable only in units that reflect an exchange 
rate  that  varies  over  time.2  These  are  all  other  ways  of  imposing  negative  nominal  rates 
universally  across  the  alternative  means  of  payment  people  use.  If  such  steps  were 
implemented and widely adopted, these proponents claim, there would no longer be a zero 
bound  on  interest  rates,  primarily  because  currency  would  not  offer  a  zero  interest  rate 
alternative investment as a way to avoid negative rates on electronic bank balances. 
These  ideas  are  clever,  but  complicated  and  permanent  in  their  effects.  Without  going 
through  the  details  of  each  proposal,  let  me  discuss  two  of  them:  first,  the  proposal  to 
eliminate  currency,  and  second,  the  proposal  to  have  currency  taxed  or  to  have  interest 
collected from currency  holders.  By  eliminating currency, the  problem  of  avoiding  the  zero 
lower bound would be greatly diminished. In his paper, Ken Rogoff suggests that the use of 
currency, by allowing anonymity in trading, facilitates tax evasion and other criminal activity. 
He points out many benefits of currency, including seignorage, lack of reliance on electronic 
networks,  transaction  cost  savings,  and  expanded  civil  liberties  associated  with  additional 
                                                
2  Willem H. Buiter and Nikolaos Panigirtzoglou, “Overcoming the Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates with 
Negative Interest  on  Currency:  Gesell’s  Solution,”  Economic Journal  113,  no. 490  (October  2003):  723–46; 
Kenneth  Rogoff,  “Costs  and  Benefits  of  Phasing  Out  Paper  Currency,”  paper  presented  at  NBER 
Macroeconomics  Annual  Conference,  April  11,  2014,  Harvard  University;  Silvio  Gesell,  Die  Natuerliche 
Wirtschaftsordnung  (Rudolf  Zitzman  Verlag,  1916),  available  in  English  as  The  Natural  Economic  Order 
(London: Peter Owen Ltd., 1958); Marvin Goodfriend, “Overcoming the Zero Bound on Interest Rate Policy,” 
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32, no. 4, part 2 (November 2000): 1007–35; Miles Kimball, “How and 
Why  to  Eliminate  the  Zero  Lower  Bound:  A  Reader’s  Guide,”  Confessions  of  a  Supply-Side  Liberal  blog, 
September 20, 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  privacy.  If these  aren’t  enough  however,  let  me suggest  another,  very  important  benefit of 
currency that I explored in a paper with Charles Kahn and William Roberds.3  
The anonymity afforded by currency transactions prevents a buyer from suffering from any 
actions taken after the transactions that could exploit the knowledge gained by the seller of 
the buyer’s identity. For example, identity theft, or theft of credit or debit card information, is 
avoided through the use of currency. This is an economic benefit that is distinct from valuing 
privacy from a civil liberties point of view. If currency cannot be used in transactions, buyers 
are  at  a  disadvantage,  and  many  otherwise  beneficial  transactions  (not  related  to  buyers 
seeking to engage in tax evasion or otherwise illicit activity) would not take place. 
It is important to consider whether the move to eliminate currency, or to alter radically how 
currency works, represents a degradation or an improvement in technology. Should society 
voluntarily abandon a widely used technology that has enormous benefits and features that 
are currently irreplaceable, such as the privacy that comes with an untraceable transaction? 
While some of those features are used by criminals to facilitate socially destructive activities, 
the vast majority of currency uses are legal and productive. Until there  are equally secure 
electronic means of providing that anonymity, eliminating currency is not warranted. 
Economists  have  proposed  many  clever  ways  to  implement  the  taxation  of  currency,  or, 
equivalently,  the  payment  of  interest  on  currency  holdings.  Some  of  the  proposals  entail 
decreasing  the  value  of  the  currency  by  imposing  a  negative  rate  of  interest.  This  can  be 
likened to making currency out of ice. As you can imagine, such cold currency would slowly 
disappear as the ice turns into liquid water. (Other proposals would, in effect, attempt to raise 
or lower the temperature of the air surrounding the ice money.) 
One  might  conjecture  that  the  loss  of  purchasing  power  is  the  same  whether  a  person 
holding a dollar for a period of a year sees the value of that dollar decline owing to inflation of 
1 percent, or because he had to pay a penny of interest in an environment of stable prices. 
However,  there  is  a  subtle  difference  between  a  negative  rate  of  interest  charged  on 
currency,  and  inflation  decreasing  the  value  of  currency. With  inflation,  a  dollar  remains  a 
dollar, but its purchasing power declines. In contrast, with negative interest rates, the dollar 
of  currency  is  slowly  whittled  away  as  one  makes  interest  payments,  even  though  its 
purchasing power can remain unchanged (this would be the case if prices fell by the same 
rate  as  the  negative  interest  rate).  In  other  words,  the  value  of  the  unit  of  account  is 
unchanged when a negative interest rate is charged on currency. In addition, dollars would 
no longer be fungible, because each dollar would have a different amount of interest accrued 
on it. 
The  difference  in  those  two  situations  is  the  subject  of  money  illusion  –  the  behavioral 
tendency of people to think in nominal terms.4 To the extent that money illusion is operative, 
then imposing negative nominal interest rates will be perceived as more costly to people than 
engineering an increase in inflation of the same amount – in both cases, the real wealth of 
the person’s money holdings is the same, but in the case of inflation, the person holds the 
same  number  of  dollars  at  the  end  of  the  period,  whereas  with  negative  nominal  interest 
rates, some of the person’s money holdings have been paid out as interest. Money illusion 
causes  the  payment  of  interest  to  be  perceived  as  more  costly,  much  as  people  resist 
nominal decreases in wages which manifests itself as downward wage rigidity. 
                                                
3  Charles  M.  Kahn,  James  McAndrews,  and  William  Roberds,  “Money  Is  Privacy,”  International  Economic 
Review 46, no. 2 (May 2005): 377–99. 
4  See Eldar Shafir, Peter Diamond, and Amos Tversky, “Money Illusion,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 
no. 2 (1997): 341–74, for evidence on money illusion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Legal and operational frictions 
2. 
Legal  and  operational  challenges  will  also  arise  as  money  and  capital  markets  adjust  to 
negative rates. Many debt contracts feature floating interest rates; that is, the interest rate on 
the  debt  is  modified  periodically  to  reflect  prevailing  market  interest  rates.  But  when  the 
contractual  language  does  not  contemplate  the  possibility  of  negative  rates,  complications 
will ensue. In that event, the parties must renegotiate, which is difficult when the parties are 
highly dispersed, and adjust the contractual language to address what happens when market 
rates  are  negative.  Another  first-order  operational  problem  is  how  to  collect  interest  from 
creditors: often debtors have few means of calculating interest payments due from creditors, 
few  easy  ways  to  collect  the  payment,  and  a  limited  ability  to  enforce  negative  interest 
payments  from  creditors.  Given  these  realities,  designing  interest-bearing  securities  at 
negative yields will require careful planning. 
This topic alone is worthy of a longer treatment. In fact, my colleague Ken Garbade and I 
wrote a piece on this topic, and I won’t repeat the many considerations that enter into the 
design  of  securities  at  negative  rates.5  I  will  point  out  that  because  it  is  so  challenging  to 
develop  a  practical  way  to  collect  periodic  interest  payments  directly  from  holders,  one 
possible  work-around  is  for  the  issuer  of  a fixed-rate  bond  to  set the  coupon  rate  to  zero, 
making the bond a single-payment security, and to sell the bond at a premium to its principal 
value. Alternatively, an issuer could sell a bond with a negative coupon rate by providing that, 
in the absence of timely payment of interest, the omitted interest payment will be deducted 
from the principal due at maturity. In this case the bond would be redeemed for less than par, 
depending  on the  number  of  unpaid  coupons  and  the  magnitude  of the  (negative)  coupon 
rate. These alternatives have different tax implications, as discussed in a recent report by the 
Danish mortgage bankers.6  
As one can imagine, these alternatives require a great deal of coordination and legal work to 
implement. One legal issue is whether, in the case in which bonds are to be redeemed for 
less  than  par, the  bonds qualify to  be  used  as collateral  in  various  central  bank  or  private 
arrangements that require collateral; another is whether the decrease in the par value of the 
bond might trigger a default that would require a writer of credit default swap protection to 
make payment to the holder of the swap. These and similar operational problems (including 
the  difficulty  of  modifying  security  depositories  and  clearing  and  settlement  systems  to 
manage  the  calculations  and  transfers  associated  with  negative  rates)  can  presumably  be 
solved  in  time.  However,  they  represent  expensive  transition  costs  for  those  people  and 
institutions that must deal with them as rates move from positive to negative. 
Economic frictions 
3. 
There  are  many  zero  interest  rate  conventions  in  society:  negative  nominal  rates,  but  not 
negative real rates, reverse the incentives to exploit these conventions. The problem is that 
the conventions evolved for a positive interest rate environment, and efforts to reverse the 
direction of these incentives can lead to bad economic outcomes for society. Furthermore, it 
is costly to change these conventions. 
In many economic arrangements, including debt and tax payments, people can prepay debts 
or tax obligations, or make excessive payments on them, and earn a zero return during the 
prepayment period. For example, suppose that one holds a credit card under existing U.S. 
rules: one can withdraw funds from an account that is earning a negative rate, and pay one’s 
                                                
5  Kenneth Garbade and Jamie McAndrews, “Interest-Bearing Securities When Interest Rates are Below Zero,” 
Liberty Street Economics blog, May 4, 2015. 
“NEGATIVE INTEREST RATES ON MORTGAGES” Working Group on negative interest rates on mortgages, 
Business  and  Growth  Ministry,  Denmark  https://www.evm.dk/~/media/oem/pdf/2015/15–04–28-negative-
renter.ashx. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
6 
6 
   debt to the credit card company in advance of when it is due, earning a zero return during the 
prepayment period. Similarly, one can make excessive tax payments to the taxing authority, 
and earn nothing during the period before one receives a refund, thereby avoiding negative 
deposit  rates  at  banks.  Such  “zero  nominal  rate”  conventions  abound  in  society,  and  the 
lower  the  negative  rate,  the  more  people  will  search  for  such  ways  to  avoid  the  negative 
rates  that  might  prevail  elsewhere.7  Consequently,  our  proposition  could  now  include  this 
consideration: Different economic agents will be more or less willing to invest in negative rate 
investments  to  the  extent  that  their  costs  of  handling  currency  are  lower  or  higher  than 
others’,  and  to  the  extent  they  have  available  to  them  zero  interest  rate  economic 
arrangements.  In  addition,  having  talented  individuals  looking  for  these  opportunities  is  a 
dead-weight loss to society. We would rather have them use their talents for more socially 
productive purposes. 
In addition to the convention that all prepayments of debt carry a zero interest rate, creditors 
often have the option of deciding  when to settle a debt, for example by choosing when to 
deposit  a  check  once  it  is  received.  In  an  environment  in  which  negative  nominal  rates 
prevail, one would want to collect debts slowly (at least from creditworthy counterparties).8 
For example, if one were to receive a check from the U.S. government for a tax refund, one 
could  simply  put  it  in  a  safe  place  and  earn  zero  interest  on  it  during  the  time  the  check 
remained undeposited. (These practices could trigger further innovations, such  as a check 
with a “deposit-by” date embedded in it.) How strong these incentives are depends on the 
level of the negative rates. The lower the negative rate and the more persistent it is expected 
to be, the more attractive these practices would be. Consequently, these zero rate economic 
arrangements  form  another  constraint  that  would  prevent  rates  from  going  too  far  into 
negative territory. 
Notice that leaving the check undeposited, much like the hoarding of currency, is a negative 
outcome for society.  In this  case,  the receiver  of  the  check  is  able  to  impose  the  costs  of 
earning negative deposit rates on the check writer. But this outcome turns on its head the 
reason  that  the  convention  of  allowing  the  check  receiver  the  option  of  deciding  when  to 
deposit  a  check  was  adopted  in  the  first  place.  Under  positive  interest  rates,  the  check 
receiver  has  an  incentive  to  deposit  the  check  at  his  or  her  earliest  convenience.  In  other 
words, these conventions are incentive-compatible ways society has devised to enforce the 
payment of debt, taxes, and other obligations. By reversing those incentives, negative rates 
encourage  the  check  receiver  to  deposit  a  check  from  a  creditworthy  source  at  his  or  her 
latest  convenience.  This  may  impose  unexpected  costs  on  the  check  writer,  triggering 
unplanned  overdrafts  and  associated  charges,  and,  in  this  case,  just  as  in  the  case  of 
currency,  encouraging  investment  in  undeposited  checks,  rather  than  in  some  productive 
investment. 
Once  again,  in  these  situations  we  should  consider  how  innovations  might  alter  the 
possibilities  to  avoid  negative  rates  over  time.  For  example,  faced  with  potentially  large 
                                                
7  Many of these were reviewed in Kenneth Garbade and Jamie McAndrews, “If Interest Rates Go Negative . . . 
Or, Be Careful What You Wish For,” Liberty Street Economics blog, August 29, 2012, and in John Cochrane, 
“Cancel Currency?” The Grumpy Economist blog, December 30, 2014. A particularly interesting case is given 
in one of the models discussed in the Danish working group on mortgages referenced above. In one of the 
models for dealing with negative interest rates, a borrower  who  would be due, for example, $20 in interest 
payments today, has his principal balance reduced by $20, reducing the need for a later repayment of $20. 
But that presumes a 0 interest rate between now and the repayment date; an alternative would be to calculate 
the future value of $20 today compounded at the negative rate of interest. 
8  Because  the  strength  of  this  incentive  depends  on  creditworthiness,  it  is  unlikely  that  the  business  of  loan-
sharking would change very much in a negative interest rate world. However, among trusted loan-sharks and 
their customers, one could imagine the comic possibilities of seeing loan-sharks’ goons roughing up borrowers 
when the borrowers attempt to prepay their loans. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  repayments, many private contracts, such of those that allow prepayment or delayed deposit, 
might be renegotiated, introducing additional legal and operational frictions. 
Pass-through to market rates, and retail v. wholesale 
4. 
Another  practical  challenge  is  that  most  if  not  all  parties  involved  in  negative  interest  rate 
policies – central banks and commercial banks alike – may wish to immunize ordinary retail 
bank depositors against experiencing negative interest rates. This is, in large part, a practical 
concern. As I pointed out earlier, the costs of avoiding negative interest rates by substituting 
currency  for  deposits  is  probably  lower  for  retail  depositors  than  for  larger,  business  and 
institutional,  depositors.  Because  retail  depositors  can  avoid  negative  rates  on  deposits 
relatively easily, it makes sense not to impose negative rates on their deposits. In addition, 
many  retail  depositors  may  have  a  visceral  negative  reaction  to  being  charged  negative 
rates, and may lack a clear understanding of whether their bank is minimizing the costs of 
storing their deposits. 
Recognizing  these  difficulties,  the  central  banks  that  have  negative  policy  rates  offer  zero 
rates  on  many  of  their  deposits  from  banks,  imposing  negative  rates  on  the  “marginal” 
deposits. In this way, commercial banks can, in general, charge their retail depositors deposit 
rates of zero and earn zero at the central bank on at least a large portion of their reserve 
holdings. 
Observers  report  that  retail  depositors  in  Switzerland,  Denmark,  and  Sweden  do  not  face 
negative deposit rates. At the same time, many large business and institutional depositors do 
earn negative rates on their bank deposits. This state of affairs opens up new avenues, at 
least  in  theory,  by  which  some  can  avoid  negative  rates:  large  business  depositors  could 
attempt to impersonate a host of retail depositors. While generally unrealistic, the possibility 
of such a ploy requires that some effort be expended to prevent that avoidance activity. One 
such  effort  might  include  frequent  adjustments  of  the  institutions  or  deposits  subject  to 
negative rates (as we have seen recently in Denmark and Switzerland). The complications of 
the  negative  rate  policy  only  become  greater  once  one  realizes  that  it  is  a  policy  that  is 
intended  to  be  passed  through  to  most  deposit  and  market  interest  rates,  but  not  to  retail 
depositors. 
Effects of negative rates on the health of financial intermediaries 
5. 
A  robust  financial  sector  is  important  for  many  reasons:  to  direct  savings  into  productive 
uses; to  assist  households  to  smooth consumption;  to facilitate trading, payment,  clearing, 
and  settlement  of  financial  assets;  and  to  deliver  insurance  and  pensions  to  people.  The 
health of banks and many other financial institutions depends on earning a spread between 
what the institutions earn on their assets and what they pay on their liabilities. Negative rates 
can squeeze bank profits. If banks are earning negative rates on their loans while charging a 
zero  rate  to  retail  depositors,  they  lose  money.  If  the  goal  of  negative  rates  is  to  ease 
financial conditions and provide stimulus to the economy, then the effects of the policy on the 
health of financial intermediaries must be carefully assessed. Pension and insurance funds 
too  have  potential  difficulties  in  operating  successfully  in  a  negative  interest  rate 
environment. They often provide liabilities – that is, promises of future pension payments or 
insurance  payments  –  at  nominally  fixed  rates.  If  they  can  only  invest  in  negative  yield 
instruments, their profits could be imperiled. Such possible profit squeezes could also prompt 
financial  institutions  to  take  on  inappropriately  risky  assets  to  earn  an  apparently  positive 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  return. These concerns are present to some extent at very low rates, but they are magnified 
at negative rates of interest, a point made by Ben Bernanke in his 2004 speech on the topic.9  
A special case in the United States concerns the 2a-7 money market mutual funds, which are 
more  prevalent  in  the  United  States  than  in  Europe.  Money  market  mutual  funds  are 
institutions that offer a floating rate of interest to shareholders that is intended to maintain the 
value  of  a  share  in  the fund  equal  to  par,  or  very  close  to  par,  at  all  times. With  negative 
interest rates, and in the absence of a sponsor that is willing to subsidize shareholders in the 
fund,  such  a  financial  institution  would  not  be  able  to  return  a  dollar  invested  today  to  a 
shareholder the next day. In such circumstances, the fund must disband, as it has “broken 
the buck.” Recent SEC reforms specify that prime institutional funds be offered only shares 
expressed as floating Net Asset Values in 2016, but retail and Treasury-only money funds 
will retain a fixed NAV share structure, and therefore will still be subject to this complication 
in an environment of negative nominal rates.10  
Signal of deflation 
the  signaling  effects 
6. 
Another  complication  centers  on 
I  mentioned  earlier.  When 
implementing negative rates, central banks recognize that the signaling effects of their action 
may be unpredictable. The inference drawn by people could be a negative one. For instance, 
people  could  infer  that  the  central  bank  itself  has  low  expectations  for  inflation  and  is 
lowering nominal rates into negative territory as a way to “ratify” the low expected inflation 
environment.  Such  an  inference  would  complicate  the  central  bank’s  effort  to  achieve  its 
objective because it could encourage and entrench the public’s expectations for deflation.11 
That could complicate the potential exit from the negative rate regime. 
Public acceptance 
7. 
As with all public policies, negative nominal rates must be acceptable to the public if they are 
to be a useful tool for central banks. Certainly, avoiding severely negative rates, especially 
for retail depositors, would tend to reduce perceived adverse effects on households. There is 
some  anecdotal  evidence  that  people  in  Switzerland,  for  example,  on  balance  are  not  in 
favor  of  negative  rates.12  But  businesses  and  households  may  feel  that  they  have  been 
treated unfairly as they see others take advantage of various avoidance activities to which 
they  don’t  have  access.  Others  may  suffer  the  theft  or  loss  of  a  currency  hoard,  possibly 
resulting in feelings of regret after the fact, and place the blame on the negative rates. The 
hoarding of cash itself is an unproductive investment that drains resources from the financial 
sector of the economy, and consequently, may result in less efficient payments, difficulties in 
obtaining loans, and other problems. 
                                                
9  Ben  S.  Bernanke  and  Vincent  R.  Reinhart,  “Conducting  Monetary  Policy  at  Very  Low  Short-Term  Interest 
Rates,”  paper  presented  at  the  International  Center  for  Monetary  and  Banking  Studies  Lecture,  Geneva, 
Switzerland. January 14, 2004. 
10  See  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  “SEC  Adopts  Money  Market  Fund  Reform  Rules:  Rules 
Provide  Structural  and  Operational  Reform  to  Address  Run  Risks  in  Money  Market  Funds”  July  23,  2014 
http://www.sec.gov/News/PressRelease/Detail/PressRelease/1370542347679 for a discussion of reforms that 
limited fixed NAV designs for money market mutual funds to retail and Treasury-only funds. 
11  A  theoretical  model  that  captures  this  idea  is  described  in  Jess  Benhabib,  Stephanie  Schmitt-Grohe,  and 
Martin Uribe, “The Perils of Taylor Rules,” Journal of Economic Theory 96, (January/February 2001): 40–69. 
12  There have been a couple of informal polls by Swiss newspapers. For instance, in December 2014, after the 
SNB  first  announced  negative  rates  (25  bps),  the  Tagesanzeiger  (one  of  the  biggest  Swiss  newspapers) 
asked  readers  whether  the  decision  was  a  good  one.  Of  the  respondents,  47.7  percent  said,  “Yes,  it’s 
necessary to maintain the exchange rate” [the floor was still in place then], while 52.3 percent said, “No, this 
policy 
http://www.tagesanzeiger.ch/wirtschaft/geld/Geldpolitik-Nationalbank-fuehrt-
Negativzinsen-ein/story/26525077). 
punishes 
savers.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Conclusion 
Even though nominal rates can become negative, zero is still an important benchmark: below 
that level of rates, society faces a distinctive set of complications and costs that can blunt the 
intended good effects of a negative nominal rate policy. 
So given that, once one has waded into the ocean and implemented a negative nominal rate, 
how low can rates realistically go? Unfortunately, there is no simple answer. As I have noted 
in this talk, negative nominal rates introduce a number of legal, operational, and economic 
frictions  associated  with.  These  complications  limit  the  pass-through  of  negative  nominal 
policy rates to households and businesses. In addition, because the negative rates are costly 
in  terms  of  resources,  they  limit  the  potential  stimulus  to  aggregate  demand.  Negative 
nominal rates may also adversely affect the profitability of financial institutions and thus make 
financial conditions less accommodative than they would be otherwise. 
Addressing  the  complications  of  negative  nominal  interest  rates  includes  redesigning  debt 
securities; in some cases, redesigning financial institutions; adopting new social conventions 
for the timeliness of repayment of debt and payment of taxes; and adapting existing financial 
institutions  for  the  calculation  and  payment  of  interest,  the  transfer  and  valuation  of  debt 
securities,  and  many  other  operations.  These  innovations  will  require  considerable  time, 
resources,  and  effort.  A  benefit-cost  analysis  thus  must  weigh  the  potential  advantages  of 
negative  rates  against  the  costs  of  pushing  back  the  tide  of  all  of  these  conventions  and 
institutions  that  have  proven  useful  under  positive  nominal  interest  rates.  That  calculation 
likely will differ across countries, across institutional environments, and across the expected 
levels and duration of negative rates. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
