  Peter Praet: Interview in der Standard 
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in  der  Standard,  conducted  by  Mr  Andras  Szigètvari  on  10  June  2015  and  published  on 
13 June 2015. 
 Standard: Mr Praet, the role of the ECB has changed since the outbreak of the crisis. 
You are now engaging in political debate, telling countries what reforms to implement. 
Hasn’t the ECB stretched its mandate in order to maintain price stability? 
Praet:  As  you  know,  the  ECB  takes  monetary  policy  decisions  to  achieve  its  objective  of 
maintaining  price  stability.  We  make  our  voice  heard  on  structural  reforms  when  it  is 
considered necessary in the context of our mandate under the Treaty. And, as Mario Draghi 
indicated  in  Sintra,  for  members  of  a  monetary  union,  resilience  is  crucial  to  avoid  that 
shocks  lead  to  permanent  economic  divergence  over  time  ‒  it  therefore  has  direct 
implications for price stability. In this sense, we are different from, for example, the Federal 
Reserve in the United States, which would never engage in such a debate. 
We  frequently  get  the  advice  that  we  should  just  concentrate  on  our  core  business  ‒ 
monetary policy. But, in a currency union like the euro area, individual countries have lost the 
flexibility provided by an exchange rate of their own. They must thus become more resilient 
to  crises  and  external  shocks.  Sound  governance  and  effective  institutions  are  of  key 
importance. That applies, among other things, to labour and product markets, or courts and 
administration. They are needed for a more efficient monetary policy in a currency union and 
therefore we tell governments that structural reforms are important. Here, our interest is not 
in how countries implement these reforms, that is up to them. What interests us is if they are 
successful,  as  this  impacts  the  monetary  union  as  a  whole.  However,  I  would  also  like  to 
make the self-critical comment that, in the past, our messages have sounded too much like a 
mantra. 
Standard: What do you mean? 
Praet: In several respects, countries are similar as they are part of a monetary union, but in 
many  respects  they  differ  as  a  result  of  their  national  conditions.  So  there  are  various 
combinations of structural reforms that work – there is no “one-size-fits-all” model. We must 
make this clear, otherwise there may be the impression that our citizens don’t have much of 
a choice. We must convey to them the fact that reforms also allow for diversity. 
For  example,  it  is  not  enough  to  merely  say  publicly  that  a  country’s  labour  market  must 
become more flexible. Otherwise, people take this as meaning that it should become easier 
to  fire  people.  That  is  wrong.  In  Germany,  for  example,  after  the  dramatic  contraction  in 
demand as a result of the 2008 crisis, firms did not get rid of workers. Unions accepted wage 
reductions  or  shorter  working  hours  and  that  prevented  a  worse  decline.  Thus,  despite 
apparent rigidities, the labour market responded in a very flexible way. Also, countries can be 
wealthy and stable without all having to implement the same policies. The United States and 
Sweden are two good examples: labour markets are very different there, but people in these 
countries still have a good standard of living. 
Standard: What you’re saying sounds good in theory. But within the Troika, the ECB 
has  always  demanded  of  Portugal  and  Greece  that  they  weaken  protection  against 
layoffs  and  soften  collective  wage  agreements.  There  hasn’t  really  been  that  much 
room for manoeuvre. 
Praet: Our job in the Troika is to support the EU Commission in its work. That is technical 
work  and,  at the  end  of  the  day,  it’s the  Eurogroup  that  makes the  political  decision  as  to 
which  direction  should  be  followed,  since  it  represents  the  elected  governments  and 
therefore  European  taxpayers.  It  must  also  be  clear  that  not  every  political  solution  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  feasible, as social systems must remain fundable. Still, I hope that, in the future, there will be 
a greater focus on giving countries more ownership of their reform programmes; they should 
act on their own initiative and take responsibility. 
Standard:  But  is  it  possible  to  really  change  a  country,  when  it’s  trying  to  make 
savings? 
Praet: As the crisis took effect, investors’ trust in the sustainability of several countries’ debt 
was eroded. The ensuing adjustment of public finances was therefore implemented looking 
mainly  at  the  short-term  effects.  Frequently,  public  investments  were  cut  and  value-added 
taxes  were  raised  in  order  to  obtain  quick  debt  reduction,  even  if  this  weighed  on  growth 
prospects. At the same time, however, certain countries have reformed successfully ‒ their 
labour markets have become more flexible and banks have been restructured. That wasn’t 
easy and it was also painful, but they are growing again. 
Standard: But even your colleagues are saying that a radical course of austerity isn’t 
the right medicine, for example, in the case of Greece. 
Praet: Allow me to make a general point: institutional standards in many countries that faced 
challenges were particularly low. The World Bank, and also the IMF, issue some well-known 
rankings  on  good  governance  and  solid  institutions.  These  show  that  there  is  a  clear 
correlation between the per capita GDP of a country and its position in such rankings. Some 
countries rank very low in terms of all criteria related to good governance. Competitiveness 
can be regained by making it cheaper to produce goods. However, so long as the business 
environment  remains  unchanged,  the  results  will  not  be  satisfactory.  This  problem  was 
already touched upon in the first reform programmes. But too little importance was attached 
to the problem of governance standards. 
Standard:  Earlier  on,  you  talked  about  “ownership”.  But  this  implies  that  a 
government which does not believe in reform measures shouldn’t implement them. 
Praet: At the end of the 1970s, I worked as an economist for the IMF. At that time, requests 
for aid from states, the so-called “letter of intent”, were pre-written by IMF staff, but then sent 
by these countries to the IMF as their own letters. Even though the content was the outcome 
of  discussions,  that  was,  of  course,  somewhat  strange.  But  the IMF  gave  that  money  and 
imposed the conditions, so that was the understanding of “ownership” then. I believe that we 
have learnt from this. 
Standard:  But  in  the  case  of  Greece,  this  means  that,  no  matter  what  the  left-wing 
Syriza government signs, it can’t work as long as they don’t believe in it themselves. 
Praet:  Because  of  the  ongoing  negotiations,  I  won’t  comment  on  Greece.  Fundamentally, 
mutual trust and credibility are of critical importance in such situations. This means that when 
a country agrees to do something, it has to implement the agreement. The more credible a 
country is, the more patient creditors can be and the more trust they can show. That goes for 
all countries: if a government is trusted, it doesn’t mean so much if an agreed figure is not 
reached  exactly  in  a  year.  The  problem  is  that  if  you  lose  this  confidence,  the  situation 
becomes messy and creditors then immediately press for results. 
Standard: Jean-Claude Trichet, the former President of the ECB, was an active letter-
writer:  he  wrote  a  letter  to  Ireland,  threatening  to  cut  aid  to  the  country  if  it  didn’t 
accept  an  aid  programme  and  agree  to  reforms.  He  later  exerted  pressure  on  the 
Berlusconi government in Rome and the Socialists in Spain. Did that not go beyond 
the ECB’s mandate? 
Praet: I won’t comment on those letters. However, I would say that, before the outbreak of 
the financial crisis, we in the euro area invested too little in institutions that would’ve been 
available  for  emergencies.  Consequently,  institutions  dealing  with  banking  crises  were  too 
weak. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Standard: Independence is very important for central banks. Does the question also 
have to be put differently in public now: to what extent is a central bank allowed to get 
involved in politics? 
Praet: I would put it this way: because there were no sufficiently effective crisis management 
institutions  when  the  crisis  erupted,  the  ECB  could  not  have  simply  ignored  the  potential 
consequences  of  the  banking  crisis  for  price  stability.  In  the  light  of  its  mandate,  the  ECB 
couldn’t accept that. 
Standard: The Greek Prime Minister, Alexis Tsipras, said this week that it would be a 
disaster if his country left the euro because the whole world would see that the euro is 
reversible. How do you see it? 
Praet: Let me reiterate what Mario Draghi said in the ECB press conference a week ago: the 
Governing Council of the ECB wants Greece to remain a member of the euro. 
Standard: Mr Praet, what does it feel like to be a thief? 
Praet: A thief? 
Standard: Yes. That’s how many people in Austria would describe you. After all, you 
and your colleagues at the ECB have, de facto, abolished interest rates. Anybody who 
puts their money in a savings account hardly receives anything now. 
Praet: I’m sure that most Austrians feel confident that our monetary policy is the appropriate 
and necessary reaction to the weak economic conditions and the extraordinarily low inflation 
rates, which are far below our monetary policy objective of below, but close to, 2%. The low 
interest rates were an issue for some savers. However, for them, it is not the nominal interest 
rates which we influence directly that are decisive, but rather the real interest rates – after 
inflation has been deducted – that count. In the past, there were very long periods in which 
real interest rates were significantly lower than today, simply because inflation was so high. 
Also, in the longer run, what is crucial for the real income of the savers is the state of the 
economy. A central bank has no influence on factors which determine the structural strength 
of an economy and thus the real, or inflation-adjusted, interest rates. 
Standard: That’s not much help to savers today. 
Praet: In the  medium  to  longer  term,  our  monetary  policy  will  certainly  help  savers. We’re 
doing our part to help the economy recover. This will bring the rate of inflation back to our 
objective and subsequently bring the level of interest rates back to normal. Therefore, the low 
interest rates may be a short-term pain for some, but a long-term gain for all. Everybody in 
Europe  has  an  interest  in  us  getting  out  of  the  current  situation,  which  is  marked  by  low 
inflation and low growth. We will succeed in doing so. But the crisis was so severe that this 
process is taking a number of years. 
Standard: Some economists say that it’ll be years before interest rates are higher. 
Praet: There are always Cassandras who speak badly about everything… 
Standard: Cassandra was right about her warnings. 
Praet:  Yes,  but  prophecies  that  make  people  scared  and  become  self-fulfilling  can  be 
dangerous. 
Standard: The ECB started buying government bonds on a massive scale in January 
2016. Have you got any proof that the quantitative easing programme is taking effect? 
Praet: Yes. The first effect is that we have given a clear signal. When we lowered interest 
rates,  credit  conditions  for  companies  in  some  countries  rapidly  improved.  Now,  with 
quantitative  easing  in  the  background,  loans  for  firms  and  the  government  sector  have 
become significantly cheaper overall. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Standard: Austria is the first country in Europe to have initiated a bail-in, namely in the 
case  of  Hypo  Alpe  Adria.  Why  don’t  EU  institutions  give  more  support  to  [this 
measure]? After all, it’s something that’s been fought for years. 
Praet: We support the bail-in  clause  in  the  EU’s  Bank  Resolution  and Recovery  Directive. 
However,  I  cannot  comment  on  specific  cases,  which  come  under  the  supervision  of  the 
Single Supervisory Mechanism. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
