  Andrew G Haldane: Growing, fast and slow 
Speech by  Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director and Chief Economist of the Bank of 
England, at the University of East Anglia, Norwich, 17 February 2015. 
 The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee. I would like to 
thank Sandra Batten, Rebecca Burnham, Edward Hall, Nicholas Fawcett, Jeremy Franklin, Lukasz Rachel, Scott 
Simmons,  Thomas  Smith,  Rhiannon  Sowerbutts,  Ryland  Thomas,  Greg  Thwaites  and  Martin  Weale  for  their 
comments and contributions. I am also grateful to Gregory Clark for making available the historical data from his 
book, A Farewell to Alms. 
Tonight, I want to discuss economic growth. This may sound like standard fare. In the media, 
economists spend much of their time discussing growth and its statistical counterpart, Gross 
Domestic  Product  or  GDP.  At  least  for  some,  this  focus  is  misplaced.  For  example,  it  is 
increasingly well-recognised that GDP is a partial, and often imperfect, measure of societal 
well-being.1 As Einstein said, not all that can be counted counts. 
But  even  if  it  is  not  all  that  counts,  sustained  economic  growth  remains  the  single  most 
important determinant of rising societal living standards. To bring that point to life, consider 
two economies – China and Italy. As recently as 1990, the aggregate annual income of these 
two  economies  was  roughly  equal.2  Now  let’s  run  these  economies  forward,  with  China 
growing at more than 10% per year, Italy by less than 1% per year. 
By 2014, what do we find? Due to the magic of compound interest, China is now almost eight 
times  the  size  of  Italy.  Indeed,  China  creates  a  new  economy  the  size  of  Italy  every 
18 months; an economy the size of Portugal every quarter; an economy the size of Greece 
every  month;  and  an  economy  the  size  of  Cyprus  every  week.  Those  things  that  can  be 
counted sometimes really do count. 
Today’s policy debates bear testimony to that. Since the financial crisis, global growth has 
under-performed. In the decade prior to it, advanced economy growth averaged 3% per year. 
In the period since, it has averaged just 1%. The world has grown fast, then slow. That has 
led some to fear “secular stagnation” – a lengthy period of sub-par growth.3 The self-same 
concerns were voiced at the time of the Great Depression in the 1930s.4 
The economic jury is still out on whether recent rates of growth are a temporary post-crisis 
dip or a longer-lasting valley in our economic fortunes. Pessimists point to high levels of debt 
and  inequality,  worsening  demographics  and  stagnating  levels  of  educational  attainment.5 
Optimists appeal to a new industrial revolution in digital technology.6 Given its importance to 
living standards, this debate is one of the key issues of our time. 
Some insight into that debate can be provided by looking at patterns of growth through a long 
lens. Over long runs of history, it is possible to detect distinct phase shifts in growth. Some 
growth epochs have seen secular stagnation, others secular innovation. Understanding the 
                                                
1   Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi (2009).  
2    Measured at purchasing power parity exchange rates and, for the moment, not on a per capita basis.  
3    Summers (2014), Vox-EU (2014). 
4    Hansen (1938). 
5    For example, Gordon (2012, 2014), Summers (2014), Cowan (2014). 
6    For example, Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014), Mokyr (2014), Arthur (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  determinants of these growth phases – sociological and technological – provides insight into 
the forces of secular stagnation and innovation operating today.7 
What  follows  is  a  cocktail  of  economics,  history,  sociology  and  psychology.  For  those 
seeking  a  common  denominator,  it  is  sitting  between  your  ears.  Psychologist  Daniel 
Kahneman says the brain has two ways of thinking (fast and slow).8 The same may be true, 
and for many of the same reasons, when understanding growth (fast and slow). 
The short history of growth 
Let me start with the short history of growth. This is shown in Chart 1 which plots (log) world 
GDP  per  capita  back  to  1750,  the  dawn  of  the  Industrial  Revolution.  Save  for  wars,  it 
suggests a straight-line growth path over the past 250 years or so, averaging 1.5% per year. 
That means each generation has been around a third better off than its predecessor. Growth 
has driven secular rises in living standards, generation by generation. 
While  steady,  growth  has  not  been  constant. Wars,  depressions  and  financial  crises  have 
pock-marked  history,  causing  growth  to  stall  or  fall.  And  phases  of  innovation  have  lifted 
economic  fortunes,  caused  living  standards  to  leap.  But  whereas  the  growth  lapses  have 
been  temporary,  the  leaps  have  been  permanent. Over  the  past two  and  a  half  centuries, 
secular innovation has dwarfed secular stagnation. 
In  explaining  rising  living  standards  since  1750,  economists  have  typically  identified  three 
distinct  innovation  phases.  Each  was  associated  with  a  great  leap  forward  in  society’s 
production possibility frontier.9 The first is the Industrial Revolution commencing in the middle 
of the 18th century; the second, the era of mass industrialisation, starting in the second half 
of the 19th century; and the third is the IT revolution, which began life in the second half of 
the 20th century. 
What distinguished these three innovation phases is that they gave birth to a sequence of so-
called  General  Purchase  Technologies  (GPTs).10  These  technologies  had  applicability  well 
beyond  the  sector  for  which  they  were  originally  designed,  thereby  transforming  the 
efficiency of business practices generally. During the first industrial revolution, these GPTs 
included the steam engine, cotton spinning and railways; during the second, electricity, the 
internal  combustion  engine  and  internal  water  supply  and  sanitation;  and  in  the  third,  the 
personal computer and the internet. 
Interest  in  innovation-led  growth  has  re-intensified  over  recent  years  as  growth  prospects 
have dimmed. One strand of the secular stagnation debate asks – wither innovation? Among 
some there is a concern the well of innovation may be running dry.11 For others, the well of 
innovation generated by the digital revolution is poised to gush.12 Will secular stagnation or 
secular innovation dominate? 
                                                
7    Some have focussed on demand-side deficiencies as a source of secular stagnation (for example, Summers 
(2014)). My focus here is on structural, supply-side factors. To the extent Say’s Law operates – with supply 
creating its own demand, or lack of it – this distinction may not be that great over the medium-term. 
8   Kahneman (2012). 
9   Gordon (2012).  
10   Bresnahan and Trajtenberg (1996).  
11   Gordon (2012, 2014), Cowen (2011). 
12   Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The long history of growth 
To begin to address that question, let’s start by taking a longer look at the past. One reason 
for doing so is that the long history of growth looks rather different than the short. Secularly 
rising living standards have become the social and economic norm. No-one can recall a time 
when the growth escalator has moved anything other than upwards. 
Yet  viewed  through  a  long  lens  telescope,  ‘twas  not  ever  thus.  Chart  2  plots  estimates  of 
global  GDP  per  capita  back  to  1000  BC.  This  suggests  a  very  different  growth  story.  For 
three millennia prior to the Industrial Revolution, growth per head averaged only 0.01% per 
year. Global living standards were essentially flat. Since 1750, it has taken around 50 years 
for living standards to double. Prior to 1750, it would have taken 6000 years. 
This  suggests  very  different  economic  and  social  norms  before  the  Industrial  Revolution. 
Generational  improvements  in  well-being  would  have  been  imperceptible.  The  growth 
escalator was permanently out-of-service. Steadily and secularly rising living standards have 
not been the historical norm. Rather, they are a latter-day exception. Over the long sweep, 
secular stagnation has been far more common than secular innovation. 
It  could  be  argued  that  GDP  is  too  narrow  to  capture  improvements  in  societal  living 
standards  that  far  back  in  history.  Non-material  measures  of  well-being  might  provide  a 
better  guide.  Is  it  plausible  to  believe  the  welfare  of  the  average  citizen  in  1800  was  no 
different than at the dawn of the second Millennium? 
Sociological  evidence  suggests  yes,  as  Gregory  Clark’s  excellent  book  makes  clear.13 
Average  years  of  life  expectancy  were  essentially  unchanged for  several  millennia  prior  to 
1800. For an adult surviving to age 20, life expectancy hovered between 30–40 years.14 Over 
the  same  period,  birth  and  death  rates  were  likewise  constant.  That  meant  the  global 
population scarcely budged prior to 1750, growing at an annual rate of less than 0.1%. 
Measures  of  well-being  during  life  (rather  than  death)  tell  a  similar  tale.  Adult  heights, 
measured from skeletal records, averaged around 160–170 cm for many centuries prior to 
1800  (Chart  3).  Levels  of  calorific  intake  were  also  flat.  Scholars  have  constructed  “social 
development indices”, using these and other indicators.15 These follow a remarkably similar 
path to GDP, with well-being unchanged (Chart 4). 
These well-being measures suggest global living standards plateaued for the majority of the 
past  3000  years,  before  rocketing  over  the  past  300.  Prior  to  the  Industrial  Revolution, 
income was locked at close to subsistence levels. In line with Thomas Malthus’s predictions, 
they  were  sufficient  to  sustain  the  population,  but  no  more.16  For  that  reason,  some  have 
called this the Malthusian era.17 
If you think that’s sounds grim, the picture further back in history is, if anything, even less 
optimistic.  Rather  remarkably,  estimates  of  global  GDP  have  been  constructed  back  to 
1 million BC, the dawn of man.18 Statistical agencies were thinly staffed back then, so these 
statistics need to be treated with an even greater than usual pinch of salt. 
Table 1 considers growth rates in per capita GDP and population over that longer sample. 
For much of the history of mankind, there was effectively no rise in either living standards or 
                                                
13   Clark (2009). 
14   For example, Clark (2009). 
15   For example, Morris (2011). 
16   Malthus (1798). 
17   For example, Clark (2009). 
18   DeLong (1998). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  population.  It  is  possible  the  most  gradual  of  advances  in  living  standards  began  tens  of 
thousands  of  years  ago,  around  the  time  modern  man  (homo  sapiens)  emerged  and 
Neanderthal man (homo Neanderthalensis) disappeared. 
So  the  short  history  (the  Golden  era)  and  the  long  history  (the  Malthusian  era)  of  growth 
could  not  be  more  different.  Secular  innovation  followed  a  lengthy  period  of  secular 
stagnation. Discernible rises in living standards are a very recent phenomenon. If the history 
of growth were a 24-hour clock, 99% would have come in the last 20 seconds. 
Technological roots of industrial revolution 
So what caused this phase shift in growth? Explaining even historical growth patterns is far 
from easy. Even now, there remains an active debate among economic and social historians 
about  the  deep  sources  of  growth.  Without  doing  it  justice,  let  me  offer  some  reflections 
based on that literature. Linking them is a common theme: patience. 
Neo-Classical economics explains why patience matters for growth. It supports saving which 
in  turn  finances  investment,  the  accumulation  of  capital.  That  capital  accumulation,  in 
combination with great leaps forward the efficiency of its use, is what Neo-Classical growth 
theory tells us drives growth. Today’s investment is tomorrow’s growth.19 
Growth in the Neo-Classical model is “exogenous” – determined by external forces. The two 
key such forces are, first, the patience of individuals which is assumed to be fixed over time 
and across states of nature. And, second, by technological progress, which is assumed to 
vary  over  time  but  in  unpredictable  ways.  Innovation  arrives  as  manna  from  heaven,  a 
surprise gift that keeps on giving. 
On the face of it, this simple story does a decent job of explaining the phase shift in growth 
after  the  Industrial  Revolution.  The  second  half  of  the  18th  century  saw  a  sequence  of 
closely-clustered innovations in England: Hargreaves’ spinning jenny was invented in 1764, 
Arkwright’s water frame in 1769, Watt’s steam engine in 1775. These arrived as manna from 
heaven,  shifting  outwards  society’s  production  possibility  frontier  just  as  Neo-Classical 
growth theory would predict. 
It took time for these fledgling GPTs to broaden their application and influence, measured in 
decades.20 Growth and productivity only began picking up well into the 19th century. As they 
did, this generated a wave of physical investment – in factories, machines, locomotives. This 
combination of rapid investment, and technological transformation, lit the fuse on a Golden 
era of sustained rises in living standards, the first in human history. 
This  Neo-Classical  account  of  growth  dynamics  is  lent  support  by  Table  2  which  shows 
estimates of growth in technological efficiency either side of the Industrial Revolution.21 Prior 
to  it,  technological  gains  were  fractions  of  a  percent  each  year.  Outward  shifts  in  the 
production possibility frontier, like rises in living standards, would have been imperceptible. 
After  1750,  a  technological  light  switch  was  flicked.  Growth  in  technological  efficiency  has 
averaged around 1% per year in the period since. 
Technological advance, in turn, fed physical capital accumulation. Chart 5 shows the path of 
the physical capital stock per head in the UK after 1850. It has risen, on average, by 1.75% 
per year. It has also shown a striking positive relationship with growth in GDP per head: for 
                                                
19   For  example,  the  models  of  Solow-Swann  model  (Solow  (1956)  and  Swann  (1956))  and  Ramsey-Cass-
Koopmans (Ramsey (1929), Cass (1965), Koopmans (1965)). 
20   See, for example, Eichengreen (2014). 
21   These  are  taken  from  Clark  (2009)  for  the  period  up  until  1750  and  based  on  Bank  estimates  in  the 
subsequent period. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  every £1000 rise in the capital stock per head since 1850, GDP per head has risen by £400 
per head. This, too, is just as Neo-Classical growth theory would predict. 
That same pattern is replicated across countries. Chart 6 plots the relationship between the 
capital stock and GDP per head since 1980 in a cross-section of countries. Clearly, countries 
are on different steps on the growth escalator. But in each case this escalator has moved 
relentlessly upward, with sustained rises in the capital stock associated with secular rises in 
per capita incomes. Yesterday’s investment has been today’s growth. 
Sociological roots of industrial revolution 
If this were the whole story of three industrial revolutions, the growth recipe would be simple. 
Growth, like surfing, would mean simply waiting for the next big innovation wave to break. 
Rising living standards would be not so much natural as preternatural, “suspended between 
the mundane and the miraculous”.22 Because policymakers cannot part the waves or perform 
other miracles, public policy would have a minimal role. 
One problem with this story, if experience prior to the Industrial Revolution is anything to go 
by, is that it could be a long wait for that next big wave. A second is that this story is far from 
the  only  possible  reading  of  the  historical  runes.  There  is  an  alternative  set  of  economic 
theories, and empirical facts, which paint a different picture of the genesis of growth either 
side of the Industrial Revolution. 
This alternative account might loosely be called “endogenous” growth theory.23 The factors 
driving growth are multiple, not singular. They are as much sociological as technological – 
skills  and  education,  culture  and  cooperation,  institutions  and  infrastructure.  These  factors 
are  mutually-supporting,  not  exogenous  and  idiosyncratic.  And  they  build  in  a  cumulative, 
evolutionary fashion, rather than spontaneously combusting. 
One  way  of  accommodating  these  broader  factors  is  to  widen  the  definition  of  “capital”: 
physical capital (such as plant and machinery); human capital (such as skills and expertise); 
social  capital  (such  as  cooperation  and  trust);  intellectual  capital  (such  as  ideas  and 
technologies);  and  infrastructural  capital  (such as  transport  networks  and  legal  systems).24 
Growth results from the cumulative accretion of multiple sources of capital. 
To take a simple example, the success of the railways relied not just on the invention of the 
steam engine (intellectual capital), but on the materials (physical capital) and skills (human 
capital) to build locomotives and track. And to become a GPT, railways needed in addition a 
network  (infrastructure  capital)  and  the  cooperation  and  trust  of  the  general  public  (social 
capital). 
Looking  at  these  multiple  sources  of  capital,  in  turn,  provides  an  account  of  the  Industrial 
Revolution  whose  genesis  differs  significantly  from  the  Neo-Classical  one.25  Take  human 
capital  accumulation.  One  measure  of  that  is  literacy  and  numeracy  in  the  population  at 
large. Chart 7 plots the level of adult literacy in a selection of Western Europe countries from 
the late 15th century. 
At that time, less than 10% of the population were literate. Measured levels of human capital 
were miserably low, consistent with subsistence living standards. But in the following three 
                                                
22   Douglas  Allchin  describes  preternatural  phenomena  as  being  “suspended  between  the  mundane  and  the 
miraculous”.  
23   For example, Romer (1986), Aghion and Howitt (1998) and Acemoglu (2009).  
24   Sachs  (2014).  Sachs  also  discusses  environmental  capital.  Also  see  Solow  (1956),  Becker  (1965),  Rebelo 
(1991), Putnam (2000), Romer (1986). 
25   For example, Acemoglu and Robinson (2013), Clark (2009). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  this 
interpretation,  sociological 
centuries,  a  transformation  took  place.  Literacy  rates  in  the  adult  population  shot  up  to 
around  50%  in  Western  Europe,  in  some  countries  higher.  In  other  words,  human  capital 
accumulated at real pace prior to the Industrial Revolution. 
This  skills-deepening  provided  one  foundation  on  which  other  sources  of  growth-enriching 
capital were built – for example intellectual capital, the generation of ideas and innovation. 
On 
transformation  supported,  perhaps  preceded, 
technological transformation. Innovation was an earthly creation, not manna from heaven. 
Since the Industrial Revolution, levels of educational attainment have continued to rise. Since 
the Second World War, the number of years of schooling has risen rapidly (Chart 8), more 
than trebling in emerging markets and almost doubling in advanced economies. Latterly, that 
rise  has  been  driven  by  increasing  numbers  of  adults  with  degree-level  (tertiary) 
qualifications. Human capital has widened and deepened. 
Empirical studies suggest higher educational standards may have accounted for as much as 
a fifth of US growth since 1950.26 Given the much larger scale of improvement in educational 
standards  between  the  16th  and  18th  centuries  –  the  shift  from  an  illiterate  to  a  largely 
literate workforce – human capital accumulation seems likely to have played an even larger 
catalytic role in driving the Industrial Revolution. 
The picture is similar if we move from human to social capital. This is a more difficult concept 
to capture quantitatively. It embraces properties such as co-operation, reciprocity and trust 
within society. Although more elusive, these sources of social capital have been crucial to the 
success of nation states – for example, in supporting growth of trade.27 
One  measure  of  social  capital  used  by  sociologists  is  the  incidence  of  violence  or  war  in 
society. This is the limiting case of a lack of cooperation or trust within or across societies; it 
is  the  sociological  equivalent  of  financial  crisis.28  Chart  9  plots  the  incidence  of  murder 
(homicide) in Western European countries since 1300. It, too, tells a striking story. 
Violent  crime  fell  dramatically  between  the  15th  and  18th  centuries,  by  a  factor  of  around 
five.  By  the  time  of  the  Industrial  Revolution,  it  had  levelled-off.  Rapid  social  capital 
accumulation provided a foundation for growth. Sociology nurtured technology. 
With  some  interruptions,  notably  the  two  World  Wars  of  the  20th  century,  those  trends 
towards lower levels of violence in society have continued to the present day. For example, 
war deaths have been falling secularly since the 1940s (Chart 10). This is consistent with a 
continuing  accretion  of  social  capital.29  Although  hard  to  quantify,  this  too  is  likely  to  have 
provided a tailwind to growth in the modern era. 
Infrastructural  and  institutional  capital  are  widely  believed  to  have  supported  the  growth 
process.30  England  was  the  birth  place  of  the  Industrial  Revolution.  Its  parents,  arguably, 
were  English  institutions  well  into  adolescence  at  the  dawn  of  the  Industrial  Revolution:  a 
parliamentary system from the 11th and 12th centuries; a legal and judicial system from the 
12th and 13th centuries; a central bank, the Bank of England, from the end of 17th century. 
The  government’s  role,  as  an  institution  in  society,  also  rose  rapidly  prior  to  the  Industrial 
Revolution. Chart 11 plots government spending as a fraction of national income in the UK 
since 1200. Until around 1600, government accounted for only 1–2% of national income. In 
the  subsequent  two  centuries  government  came  of  age:  its  share  of  spending  rose  10  or 
                                                
26   For example, Fernald and Jones (2014). 
27   Hall and Jones (1999). 
28   For example, Pinker (2012). 
29   Pinker (2012). 
30   For example, Tabellini (2010). Acemoglu and Robinson (2013). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  20-fold.  Prior  to  the  Industrial  Revolution,  institutions  in  general,  and  government  in 
particular, became an increasingly important growth-enabler. 
Institutional and infrastructural capital has continued to accumulate in the period since. Since 
1950, the number of countries operating with democratic institutions has risen from around 
25 to almost 90.31 Legal systems globally have continued to improve in quality, and central 
bank numbers have continued to swell. Cross-country studies have found that the quality of 
these institutions and infrastructures is often key to driving growth.32 
In what is perhaps the most comprehensive study of historical experience, Daron Acemoglu 
and James Robinson have taken the institutional argument one step further. For them, the 
lack of good institutions is the defining reason “Why Nations Fail”.33 You do not need to go 
that far to think they have really mattered historically for living standards. 
The  final  ingredient  in  the  growth  recipe  is  intellectual  capital,  for  some  the  source  of  the 
Industrial  Revolution,  Hargreaves,  Arkwright,  Watt  and  all.  Yet  it  would  be  wrong  to  think 
innovation somehow began in the 18th century. From the windmill in the 12th century, the 
mechanical clock in the 13th, the cannon in the 14th, the printing press in the 15th, the postal 
service in the 16th and the telescope and microscope in the 17th, the innovation escalator 
was in service well before the Industrial Revolution, albeit stepped and sticky.34 
Moreover, empirical evidence suggests a high degree of history-dependence, or hysteresis, 
in technology transfer. Patterns of technology adoption in 1500 AD are a remarkably good 
predictor  of  growth  in  1800  AD.35  This  suggests  the  technological  seeds  of  the  Industrial 
Revolution  were  sown  well  before  Hargreaves,  Arkwright  and  Watt  arrived  on  the  scene. 
Innovation is more earthly endeavour than heavenly intervention. 
Taken together, this suggests a much broader and richer set of foundations for growth. The 
seeds of the Industrial Revolution were sown much earlier, and scattered more widely, than a 
Neo-Classical  account  would  suggest.  And  sociological  transformation  was  at  least  as 
important as technological transformation in catalysing the lift-off in growth. 
that 
initial 
investment 
in  skills,  co-operation, 
Patience as a virtue 
Even  if  you  accept  this  multi-faceted  explanation  of  growth  –  part  sociological,  part 
technological – why did societies suddenly begin accumulating capital at particular points in 
history?  What  prompted 
institutions, 
infrastructure?  One  answer  may  lie  inside  our  own  heads.  For  those  technological  and 
sociological trends may, in turn, have caused a re-wiring of our brains. 
Underlying all investment decisions are what economists call “rates of time preference” – and 
what non-economists call patience: the willingness to defer gratification today for the benefit 
of tomorrow, to save rather than spend, stick rather than twist. One simple, economy-wide, 
measure of societal patience is found in the pattern of interest rates. 
Interest rates proxy society’s willingness to save or stick. The less willing they are to do so – 
the greater their impatience – the higher the compensation they require. That compensation 
takes the form of a higher interest rate. So, for a given level of saving, an impatient society 
will have higher interest rates than a patient one. 
                                                
31   See http://ourworldindata.org/data/political-regimes/democratisation/  
32   Levine and Renelt (1992). 
33   Acemoglu and Robinson (2013). 
34   Clark (2009). 
35   Comin, Easterly and Gong (2010). The same is found to be true of technological advances in 1000 BC and 
1 AD, although the effects on subsequent patterns of growth are less strong. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Chart 12 plots a measure of short and long-term interest rates back to 3000 BC. Though the 
data  are  patchy,  they  suggest  interest  rates  fell  secularly  in  the  run-up  to  the  Industrial 
Revolution, from double-digits to around 3%. Alternative interest rates, such as the rate of 
return on physical assets such as land, show a similar pattern.36 
One interpretation of these trends is that they reflect society’s evolving time preferences. In 
the run-up to the Industrial Revolution, society became more willing to wait than in the past. 
That, in turn, enabled saving, investment and ultimately growth. Patience was a virtue. But if 
society’s time preferences were indeed shifting, that still begs the question why? 
Here,  we  can  enlist  some  outside  help.  Experimental  research  over  the  past  50  years,  by 
psychologists and neurologists, has taught us a great deal both about the determinants of 
patience  and  how  it  affects  behaviour. This  can perhaps  provide  insights  into  some  of the 
historical drivers of a more patient, and hence higher growth, society. 
One important driver of patience is income and wealth. The lower income, the more impatient 
is  human  decision-making.37  Why?  Because  surviving  on  limited  means  absorbs  huge 
amounts of cognitive energy.38 It causes a neurological focus on the near-term. This myopic 
thinking  has  been  found  in  everything  from  under-saving  for  retirement  to  over-borrowing 
from pay-day lenders. In developing countries, it may help explain poverty traps.39 
During the Malthusian era, much of the population operated at close to subsistence income 
levels. If experimental evidence is any guide, that is likely to have generated an acute sense 
of societal short-termism. This may have manifested itself in, for example, a failure to invest 
in physical and human capital, retarding growth. Poverty and impatience would have been 
self-reinforcing, in a Malthusian poverty trap. 
The  raising  of  incomes  above  subsistence  levels  which  occurred  after  1800  will  have 
reversed that cycle. It will have boosted patience and laid the foundations for higher saving 
and  investment  and,  ultimately,  growth.  In  other  words,  after  the  Industrial  Revolution 
patience may have created its own virtuous reward, endogenous growth style. 
Technological innovation has also been found to influence patience.40 The invention of the 
printing  press  by  Guttenberg  in  around  1450  led  to  an  explosion  in  book  production.  It  is 
estimated that there were more books produced in the 50 years after Guttenberg than in the 
preceding 1000 years. What followed was much more than a technological transformation. 
Books  contributed  to  a  great  leap  forward  in  literacy  levels,  boosting  human  capital.  More 
speculatively, they may also have re-wired our brains. Nicholas Carr argues that the changes 
brought about by the printing press, and other information media, may have re-shaped our 
minds.41 Books laid the foundations for “deep reading” and, through that, deeper and wider 
thinking. Technology was, quite literally, mind-bending. 
It has been argued that this re-wiring stimulated the slow-thinking, reflective, patient part of 
the brain identified by psychologists such as Daniel Kahneman. If so, it will have supported 
the accumulation of intellectual capital – creativity, ideas, innovation. Technology  will have 
first shaped neurology and then neurology technology, in a virtuous loop. Slow thought will 
have made for fast growth. 
                                                
36   For example, Clark (2009). 
37   Wang et al (2011). 
38   Mullainathan and Shafir (2014). 
39   Bannerjee and Duflo (2012). 
40   Carr (2011). 
41   Carr (2011). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It is possible to construct a quasi-neurological explanation of much-earlier shifts in growth. 
The  world’s  growth  journey  appears  to  have  commenced,  in  earnest,  around  the  time 
modern homo sapiens replaced Neanderthal man. Maybe that was no accident. Behind the 
physiological shift from the ridge brows of Neanderthal man to the flat foreheads of modern 
man may have been a more important neurological one. 
Flat foreheads allowed growth in the pre-frontal cortex region of the brain. Modern-day MRI 
scans tell us this region is responsible, among other things, for patience. What we may have 
seen,  tens  of  thousands  of  years  ago,  was  Darwinian  natural  selection  of  patient  homo 
sapiens over impatient Neanderthals.42 And with that came rising living standards. 
The secular struggle – innovation or stagnation? 
From the distant past, then, to the present and future. Today’s great debate is where next for 
growth. The sunny uplands of innovation-led growth, as after the Industrial Revolution? Or 
the foggy lowlands of stagnant growth, as before it? Which of the secular forces – innovation 
versus stagnation – will dominate? And if growth is going back to the future, on which side of 
the Industrial Revolution will it land? 
The  balance  of  these  arguments  matters  greatly  for  future  well-being  and  public  policy. 
Indeed, it is hard to think of anything that matters much more. More parochially, for central 
banks setting monetary policy one of the key judgements is the appropriate “neutral” level of 
interest rates. You can think of this as the interest rate that would align desired saving and 
investment over the medium term. 
But what is the “neutral” level of interest rates today? Secular innovation might imply a level 
at  or  above  its  historical  average  of  2–3%,  in  line  with  historical  growth  rates.  But  secular 
stagnation  may  imply  a  level  much  lower  than  in  the  past,  possibly  even  negative.  In 
monetary policy, this is the difference between chalk and cheese, success and failure. 
In  this  respect,  the  behaviour  of  global  real  interest  rates  over  the  past  30  years  is 
remarkable.  Chart  13  plots  a  measure  of  real  interest  rates  since  1990,  in  advanced  and 
emerging  economies.  Both  have  exhibited  the  same  secular  downward  trend,  falling  by 
around two percentage points per decade. Today, they are around zero. 
For  some  advanced  countries,  the  pattern  is  even  more  striking.  Chart  14  plots  the  real 
interest rates expected over the next 30 years in the UK and euro-area. For both, real rates 
are  expected  to  remain  negative  for  the  next  three  decades.  Investors  are  willing  to  pay 
governments for the privilege of lending to them for the next 30 years – a negative rate of 
time preference. This pattern has no historical precedent. 
One interpretation is society having become significantly more patient, as in the lead up to 
the Industrial Revolution: higher global saving relative to investment would lower global real 
interest rates. If that is the cause, bring out the bunting. By lowering the cost, and raising the 
return to innovation, investment and growth would be stimulated.43 Falls in real rates would 
signal secular innovation. The optimists would have it. 
But  an  alternative  reading  is  possible.  Low  real  rates  may  instead  reflect  a  dearth  of 
profitable investment opportunities relative to desired savings. If that is the cause, bring out 
the bodies. For this would imply low returns to innovation and low future growth. Falling real 
rates would instead signal secular stagnation. The pessimists would have it. 
                                                
42   Hansson and Stuart (1990). 
43   There are less optimistic interpretations of this rise in savings, including that it reflects a “savings glut” among 
in  particular  emerging  market  economies  (Bernanke  (2011),  or  that  is  reflects  a  shortage  of  supply  of  safe 
assets for investors (Caballero (2013)).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  I want to argue, in a typically two-handed economist way, that both sides of this argument 
are  right.  There  are  good  grounds  for  believing  technological  forces  are  driving  innovation 
and hence growth, in a classic Neo-Classical cycle. But there are equally-good grounds for 
believing sociological forces are retarding growth, in an endogenous-growth pattern. 
Let me start with the secular innovation side of the argument, the Neo-Classical account. It 
contends that future growth will be forged in the white heat of a digital revolution. All GPTs 
take time to reach their melting point.44 Even very rapid, or exponential, rates of technological 
growth take time to become truly transformative at an economy-wide level.45 
Given past trends, it could take 30–40 years or longer for GPTs to reach critical velocity. That 
was the case with earlier GPTs, including the steam engine and electricity. Growth rates in 
digital  efficiency  are  higher  than  in  earlier  episodes,  with  Moore’s  Law  –  the  doubling  of 
computer processing capacity every 18 months or so – typically taken as the yardstick for 
this time being different. 
Nonetheless, even with Moore’s Law operating, it is only recently that the digital revolution 
may have reached critical velocity. Perhaps consistent with that, a number of transformative 
technologies have arrived on the scene recently, including in the fields of robotics, genetics, 
3D printing, Big Data and the “internet of things”.46 These are not new. What is new is their 
widening application, as they have moved from inventions to GPTs. 
Economist Brian Arthur has a beautiful metaphor for describing this transition – the transition 
from  a  physical  (or  “first”)  economy  to  a  digital  (or  “second”)  economy.47  He  likens  earlier 
industrial  revolutions  to  the  body  developing  its  physiological  or  muscular  system.  By 
analogy,  the  economic  system  was  defining  and  refining  its  motor  skills,  largely  through 
investment in physical capital. 
The digital revolution is different. It is akin to the economic body developing its neurological 
or sensory system, defining and refining its cognitive skills through investment in intellectual 
capital.  The  success  of  the  recent  wave  of  transformative  technologies  is  built  on  them 
creating a neural – brain-like – network of connections. The “internet of things” uses multiple 
sensors (like the brain’s neurons) connected through the web (like the brain’s synapses) to 
create, in effect, a machine-brain. 
It is that brain-like wiring which has given rise to thinking, as well as doing, machines – the 
move from Artificial Intelligence (AI) to Artificial General Intelligence (AGI). In the words of 
Brynjolfsson and McAfee, we are entering a second machine age.48 Moreover, Moore’s Law 
means  that  the  processing  power  of  the  machine  brain  is  ever-rising.  That  leads  to  the 
intriguing possibility that, at some point in the future, the processing power of the machine 
brain could exceed the human brain. 
Back in 1958, John von Neumann – perhaps the father of modern computing – called such 
an  event  the  “singularity”.49  There  has  since  been  considerable  speculation  about  its 
likelihood.  Computer  processing  speeds  have  reached  around  10^16  calculations  per 
                                                
44   Syverson (2013). 
45   McAfee and Brynjolfsson (2014). 
46   For example, Chui et al (2010), Mokyr (2014). 
47   Arthur (2011). 
48   Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014). 
49   See Stanislaw (1958). 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
second.50 That still falls well short of the brain’s computational capacity. But if Moore’s Law 
continues, the machine brain could match the human brain within decades.51 
Were  the  singularity  to  be  reached,  the  sky  becomes  the  limit  innovation-wise.  Machine, 
rather  than  man,  then  becomes  the  mother  of  all  invention.  With  exponential  rises  in 
processing  power,  the  economy  could  become  “super-intelligent”.  And  with  close  to  zero 
marginal costs to expanding processing capacity, it may also become “super-efficient”. 
This would indeed be a fourth industrial revolution. But unlike its predecessors, and almost 
by definition, it would be near-impossible for the human brain to imagine where the machine 
brain  would  take  innovation,  and  hence  growth,  next.  The  world  would  be  one  of  blissful 
ignorance. The excitement of the optimists would be fully warranted. 
Let me now take the other side of the argument. What secular forces could retard growth? 
Technology, by itself, was arguably insufficient to explain growth in the past. It may also be 
insufficient to secure growth in the future. The sociological roots of growth also matter. Some 
of  those  sociological  roots  are  less  well  planted  than  in  the  past.  Indeed,  in  some  cases 
technology may have contributed to an uprooting. 
Take  social  capital.  While  violent  crime  and  war  are  hopefully  in  secular  decline,  other 
measures  of  social  capital  are  depreciating.  One  diagnostic  is  rising  levels  of  social 
inequality.52 The income share of the top 1% of earners has doubled in the UK and US since 
1980. Patterns of wealth inequality are, if anything, even more striking.53 
Recent  evidence  suggests  such  a  depreciation  of  social  capital,  through  rising  inequality, 
slows  growth.  Cross-country  studies  by  the  IMF  and  OECD  have  found  a  significant  and 
sustained drag from inequality on growth.54 The IMF study estimates that a one percentage 
point rise in a country’s Gini coefficient – a measure income distribution – lowers growth by 
around 0.1 percentage point. 
Let’s  apply  that  to  some  real  data.  The  Gini  coefficient  in  the  US  has  risen  by  eight 
percentage points since 1980. That suggests inequality could have been a drag on past US 
growth of almost one percentage point each year. In an era of low growth, that is a strikingly 
strong headwind from lower levels of social capital. 
And  looking  ahead,  it  is  possible  that  sociological  headwind  could  strengthen.  One  of  the 
causes of rising inequality in advanced economies is believed to be the loss of middle-skill 
jobs,  at  least  relative  to  high  and  low-skill  jobs.  There  has  been  a  “hollowing  out”  in 
employment.55 Technological advance – the mechanisation of middle-skill tasks – is believed 
to have contributed importantly to these trends. 
The second machine age could intensify, possibly broaden, these trends.56 Intelligent robots 
could substitute for lower-skilled tasks. If the capacity of the machine brain approached, or 
surpassed,  the  human  brain,  higher-skilled  jobs  could  also  be  at  risk.  Where  this  leaves 
trends in employment, inequality and social capital is unclear. But, most likely, this would be 
far from blissful ignorance. 
                                                
50   Nordhaus  (2014).  Note  the  world’s  fastest  super  computer  is  currently  NUDT  in  China,  which  is  able  to 
process 3x10^16 floating operations per second (or 30 Petaflops).  
51   Berglas (2012), Nordhaus (2014).  
52   Gordon (2012). 
53   For example, Piketty (2014). 
54   IMF (2014), OECD (2014). 
55   Haldane (2014), Frey and Osbourne (2013). 
56   Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  A  second  secular  headwind,  closely  related  to  rising  inequality,  concerns  human  capital. 
Inequality  may  retard  growth  because  it  damps  investment  in  education,  in  particular  by 
poorer  households.57  Studies  show  parental  income  is  crucial  in  determining  children’s 
educational performance.58 If inequality is generational and self-perpetuating, so too will be 
its impact on growth. 
US  evidence  suggests  striking,  and  rising,  differences  in  educational  attainment  across 
different  socio-economic  groups.  Prior  to  1970,  rising  high  school  completion  rates 
permanently raised the productivity of US workers. Latterly, those improvements have stalled 
and,  for  some,  have  reversed.  The  US  is  slipping  down  the  international  league  tables  of 
educational attainment.59 
There  is  evidence  the  UK  could  be  following  suit.  The  UK  is  currently  below  average  for 
literacy and numeracy skills across OECD countries.60 Between 2003 and 2011, although the 
proportion  of  adults  with  literacy  skills  increased  from  44%  to  57%,  those  with  numeracy 
skills decreased from 26% to 22%.61 To put that in perspective, 17 million adults in England 
have numerical skills only equal to those of a primary school child. 
Even without these headwinds, human capital may be set to grow less rapidly in future for 
demographic reasons. In the second half of the 20th century, population growth added two 
percentage  points  to  global  growth  each  year  (Chart  15).  Since  1980,  that  has  fallen  to 
around  1%  per  year.  By  2050,  it  is  predicted  to  have  halved  again.  That  would  translate, 
pretty much one-for-one, into lower trend growth rates.62 
A third secular, sociological headwind concerns short-termism. That sits oddly with historical 
trends,  which  points  towards  secular  rises  in  societal  levels  of  patience,  in  part  driven  by 
technological trends. But those trends may themselves be on the turn. Just as the printing 
press  may  have  caused  a  neurological  re-wiring  after  the  15th  century,  so  too  may  the 
Internet in the 21st. But this time technology’s impact may be less benign.63 
We are clearly in the midst of an information revolution, with close to 99% of the entire stock 
of information ever created having been generated this century.64 This has had real benefits. 
But  it may  also  have  had  cognitive  costs. One of  those  potential  costs is  shorter  attention 
spans.  As  information  theorist  Herbert  Simon  said,  an  information-rich  society  may  be 
attention-poor.65 The information revolution could lead to patience wearing thin. 
Some  societal  trends  are  consistent  with  that.  The  tenure  of  jobs  and  relationships  is 
declining. The average tenure of Premiership football managers has fallen by one month per 
year since 1994.66 On those trends, it will fall below one season by 2020. And what is true of 
football is true of finance. Average holding periods of assets have fallen tenfold since 1950. 
                                                
57   For example, OECD (2014). 
58   For example, Attanasio and Blundell (2014), Summers and Balls (2015). 
59   Gordon (2012). 
60  See  OECD 
International 
Programme 
Student 
for 
(http://www.oecd.org/pisa/keyfindings/pisa-2012-results.htm). 
Assessment 
(PISA) 
2012 
results 
61   See  http://www.nationalnumeracy.org.uk/what-the-research-says/index.html.  Literacy  and  numeracy  skills 
defined as GCSE grade “C” or above.  
62   Depending on what happens, for example, to retirement rates. 
63   Carr (2008). 
64   See http://www.economist.com/node/15557443  
65   Simon (1971). 
66   See http://footballperspectives.org/end-season-football-manager-statistics-2013–14.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The rising incidence of attention deficit disorders, and the rising prominence of Twitter, may 
be further evidence of shortening attention spans. 
If so, that would tend to make for shorter-term decision-making. Using Daniel Kahneman’s 
classification, it may cause the fast-thinking, reflexive, impatient part of the brain to expand 
its  influence.  If  so,  that  would  tend  to  raise  societal  levels  of  impatience  and  slow  the 
accumulation of all types of capital. This could harm medium-term growth. Fast thought could 
make for slow growth. 
Psychological  studies  have  shown  that  impatience  in  children  can  significantly  impair 
educational attainment and thus future income prospects.67 Impatience has also been found 
to  reduce  creativity  among  individuals,  thereby  putting  a  brake  on  intellectual  capital 
accumulation.68 Innovation and research are potential casualties from short-termism. 
There is evidence suggesting just that. Investment by public companies is often found to be 
deferred  or  ignored  to  meet  the  short-term  needs  of  shareholders.69  Research  and 
development spending by UK companies has been falling for a decade. They are towards 
the bottom of the international research and development league table (Chart 16). If short-
termism is on the rise, this puts at risk skills-building, innovation and future growth.70 
A final ingredient is infrastructure capital. Here again, investment trends are not encouraging. 
In  advanced  economies,  public  investment  has  been  on  a  gently  downwards  path  for  the 
past three decades (Chart 17). In the UK, public investment relative to GDP is a third of its 
level in 1970. There has been no deepening in the global capital stock for a generation, if 
anything  the  opposite.  Given  the  role  public  investment  has  often  played  in  the  past  in 
supporting private innovation, this is not an entirely comforting picture.71 
In  sum,  if  history  and  empirical  evidence  is  any  guide,  this  cocktail  of  sociological  factors, 
individually and in combination, could restrain growth. They could jeopardise the promise of 
the fourth industrial revolution. Pessimists’ concerns would be warranted. 
Conclusion 
Growth is a gift. Yet contrary to popular perceptions, it has not always kept on giving. Despite 
centuries  of  experience,  the  raw  ingredients  of growth  remain  something  of  a  mystery.  As 
best  we  can  tell  historically,  they  have  been  a  complex  mix  of  the  sociological  and  the 
technological,  typically  acting  in  harmony.  All  three  of the  industrial  revolutions  since  1750 
bear these hallmarks. 
Today, the growth picture is foggier. We have fear about secular stagnation at the same time 
as cheer about secular innovation. The technological tailwinds to growth are strong, but so 
too  are  the  sociological  headwinds.  Buffeted  by  these  cross-winds,  future  growth  risks 
becoming suspended between the mundane and the miraculous. 
 
                                                 
67   Mischel (2014). 
68   Urminsky and Zauberman (2014). 
69   For example, Davies, Haldane, Nielson and Pezzini (2014). 
70   Hutton (2015) discusses the need to repurpose companies better to reflect longer-term objectives. 
71   See Mazzucato (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  in 
on 
19 
at: 
“The 
2014. 
Slides 
(2011), 
(2014), 
second 
England 
available 
December 
“Human  Capital 
economy”,  McKinsey  Quarterly, 
References 
Acemoglu, D (2009), “Introduction to Modern Economic Growth”, ISBN: 9780691132921. 
Acemoglu, D and Robinson, J (2013), “Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity 
and Poverty”, ISBN: 978–1846684302. 
Aghion, P and Howitt, P (1997), “Endogenous Growth Theory”, ISBN: 9780262011662. 
Arthur 
available 
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/strategy/the_second_economy. 
Arthur (2014), “Complexity and the Economy”, ISBN: 978–0199334292. 
Attanasio,  O  and  Blundell,  R 
the  21st  Century”,  
presentation  at  the  “Capital  in  the  21st  Century”  conference  hosted  at  the  Bank  
of 
here:  
http://www.cepr.org/sites/default/files/bank%20of%20england.pdf 
Bannerjee, A, and Duflo, E (2012), “Poor Economics: Barefoot Hedge-fund Managers, DIY 
Doctors and the Surprising Truth about Life on less than $1 a Day”, ISBN: 978–0718193669. 
Barro,  R  and  Lee,  J  (2013),  “A  new  data  set  of  educational  attainment  in  the  world, 
1950–2010”, Journal of Development Economics Vol 104 Pages 184–198. 
Becker,  G  (1965),  “A  Theory  of  the  Allocation  of  Time”,  Economic  Journal  Vol  75  
Pages 493–517. 
Berglas, A (2012), “Artificial Intelligence Will Kill  Our Grandchildren (Singularity)”, available 
at: http://berglas.org/Articles/AIKillGrandchildren/AIKillGrandchildren.html. 
Bernanke, B (2011), “Global Imbalances: Links to Economic and Financial Stability”, speech 
given at the Banque de France Financial Stability Review Launch Event, Paris, France. 
Bresnahan, T, Stern, S, and Trajtenberg, M (1995), “Market Segmentation and the Sources 
of  Rents  from  Innovation:  Personal  Computers  in  the  Late  1980’s”,  NBER  Working 
Paper 5726. 
Broadberry,  S  and  O’Rourke,  K  (2010),  “The  Cambridge  Economic  History  of  Modern 
Europe: Volume 1, 1700–1870”, ISBN: 978–0521708388. 
Brynjolfsson,  E  and  McAfee,  A  (2014),  “The  Second  Machine  Age:  Work,  Progress,  and 
Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies”, ISBN: 978–1480577473. 
Buringh,  E  and  Van  Zanden,  J  (2009),  “Charting  the  “Rise  of  the  West”:  Manuscripts  and 
Printed  Books  in  Europe,  A  Long-Term  Perspective  from  the  Sixth  through  Eighteenth 
Centuries”, The Journal of Economic History Vol 69 Issue 2. 
given  
Caballero,  R 
at 
at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Documents/ccbs/cew2013/presentation_caballero.
pdf. 
Carr,  N  (2008),  “Is  Google  Making  Us  Stupid?”,  Atlantic  Magazine,  available  at: 
http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2008/07/is-google-making-us-stupid/306868/. 
Carr, N (2011), “The Shallows: How the Internet is Changing the Way We Think, Read and 
Remember”, ISBN: 978–1848872271. 
Cass, D (1965), “Growth in an Aggregative Model of Capital Accumulation”, The Review of 
Economic Studies, Vol 32, No 3. 
Chui,  M,  Löffler,  M  and  Roberts,  R  (2010),  “The  internet  of  things”,  McKinsey  Quarterly, 
available at:  
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/high_tech_telecoms_internet/the_internet_of_things. 
presentation 
available 
shortage 
England 
assets”, 
(2013), 
2013, 
Bank 
of 
in 
“The 
safe 
May 
the 
of 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  to  Alms:  A  Brief  Economic  History  of  the  World”,  
Clark,  G  (2009),  “A  Farewell 
ISBN: 978–0691141282. 
Comin,  D,  Easterly,  W,  and  Gong,  E  (2010),  “Was  the  Wealth  of  Nations  Determined  in 
1000 BC?”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics: Vol 2 No 3. 
Cowen,  T  (2011),  “The  Great  Stagnation:  How  America  Ate  All  The  Low-Hanging  Fruit  of 
Modern History, Got Sick, and Will (Eventually) Feel Better”, Penguin eSpecial from Dutton. 
Davies,  R,  Haldane,  A,  Nielsen,  M,  and  Pezzini,  S  (2014),  “Measuring  the  costs  of  short-
termism”, Journal of Financial Stability Vol 12 Pages 16–25. 
DeLong,  B  (1998),  “Estimates  of  World  GDP,  One  Million  BC  to  Present”,  available  at: 
http://delong.typepad.com/print/20061012_LRWGDP.pdf. 
Eichengreen, B (2014), “Secular stagnation: A review of the issues”, in VoxEU (2014). 
Eisner, M (2003), “Long-Term Historical Trends in Violent Crime”, Crime and Justice Vol 30 
Pages 83–142. 
Fernald, J and Jones, C (2014), “The future of US economic growth”, Federal Reserve Bank 
of  San  Francisco  Working  Paper  Series,  available  at:  http://www.frbsf.org/economic-
research/files/wp2014–02.pdf. 
Frey,  C  and  Osbourne, M  (2013),  “The future  of  employment:  how  susceptible  are  jobs  to 
computerisation?”, Oxford Martin, available at:  
http://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/academic/The_Future_of_Employment.pdf. 
Gordon,  R  (2012),  “Is  US  Economic  Growth  Over?  Faltering  innovation  confronts  the  six 
headwinds”, NBER Working Paper 18315, available at: 
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18315.pdf. 
Gordon,  R  (2014),  “The  turtle’s  progress:  secular  stagnation  meets  the  headwinds”,  in 
VoxEU (2014). 
Haldane,  A  (2014),  “Twin  Peaks”,  Speech  given  at  the  Kenilworth  Chamber  of  Trade 
Business Breakfast, available at:  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech764.pdf. 
Hansen,  A  (1939),  “Progress  and  Declining  Population  Growth”,  The  American  Economic 
Review Vol XXIX No 1. 
Hansson,  I  and  Stuart,  C  (1990),  “Malthusian  Selection  of  Preferences”,  The  American 
Economic Review Vol 80 No 3. 
Heim, C and Mirowski, P (1987), “Interest rates and crowding-out during Britain’s industrial 
revolution”, Journal of Economic History Vol 47 Pages 117–139. 
Hills, S, Thomas, R and Dimsdale, N (2010), “The UK recession in context – what do three 
centuries of data tell us?”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 2010 Q4. 
Hills, Thomas and Dimsdale (2015 forthcoming), Bank of England. 
Homer, S and Sylla, R (1991), “A history of interest rates”, ISBN: 978–0471732839. 
Hutton, W  (2015),  “How  Good We  Can  Be:  Ending  the  Mercenary  Society  and  Building  a 
Great Country”, ISBN: 978–1408705315. 
IMF (2014), “Redistribution, Inequality, and Growth”, IMF Staff Discussion Note, available at: 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2014/sdn1402.pdf. 
Hall,  R  and  Jones,  C  (1999),  “Why  do  some  countries  produce  so  much  more  output  per 
worker than others?”, Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol 114. 
Kahneman, D (2012), “Thinking, Fast and Slow”, ISBN: 978–0141033570. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
  in 
and 
global 
saving”, 
available 
investment 
ISBN:  978–
King, M and Low, D (2014), “Measuring the ‘world’ real interest rate”, NBER Working Paper 
19887. 
Koopmans,  T  (1965),  “On  the  Concept  of  Optimal  Economic  Growth”,  Volume  28  of 
Pontificiae Academiae Scientiarum scripta varia. 
Kremer (1993), “Population growth and technological change: One Million BC to 1990”, The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol 108 No 3. 
Levine, R and Renelt, D (1992), “A sensitivity analysis of cross-country growth regressions”, 
The American Economic Review Vol 82 Issue 4. 
Malthus,  T  (1798),  “An  Essay  on  the  Principle  of  Population”,  reprinted  in  2010  as  
ISBN: 978–1450535540. 
Mazzucato, M (2013), “The entrepreneurial state”, ISBN: 978–0857282521. 
McKinsey  Global  Institute  (2010),  “Farewell  to  cheap  capital:  the  implications  of  long-term 
shifts 
at: 
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/global_capital_markets/farewell_cheap_capital. 
Mischel,  W  (2014),  “The  Marshmallow  Test:  Mastering  Self-Control”, 
1469249087. 
Mokyr, J (2014), “Secular stagnation? Not in your life”, in VoxEU (2014). 
Morris, I (2010), “Social Development”, available at: http://www.ianmorris.org. 
Morris,  I  (2011),  “Why  the West  Rules  –  For  Now:  The  Patterns  of  History  and  what  they 
reveal about the Future”, ISBN: 978–1846682087. 
Mullanaithan, S, and Shafir, E (2014), “Scarcity: The New Science of Having Less and How It 
Defines Our Lives”, ISBN: 978–1250056115. 
Nordhaus,  W  (2015),  comments  made  as  discussant  in  “The  Economics  of  Secular 
Stagnation”  session  at  the  annual  AEA  meeting  on  3  January  2015,  available  at: 
https://www.aeaweb.org/webcasts/2015/index.php. 
OECD  (2014)  ,  “Trends  in  Income  Inequality  and  its  Impact  on  Economic  Growth”,  OECD 
Social,  Employment  and  Migration  Working  Papers  No.  163,  available  at: 
http://www.oecd.org/els/soc/trends-in-income-inequality-and-its-impact-on-economic-growth-
SEM-WP163.pdf. 
Piketty, T (2014), “Capital in the Twenty-First Century”, ISBN: 978–0674430006. 
Pinker,  S  (2012),  “The Better  Angels  of Our  Nature:  A  History  of  Violence  and  Humanity”, 
ISBN: 978–0141034645. 
Putnam,  R  (2000),  “Bowling  Alone:  The  Collapse  and  Revival  of  American  Community”, 
ISBN: 978–0743203043. 
Ramsey, F (1928), “A Mathematical Theory of Saving”, Economic Journal Vol 38 No 152. 
Rebelo,  S  (1991),  “Long-run  policy  analysis  and  long-run  growth”,  The  Journal  of  Political 
Economy Vol 99 No 3. 
Romer, P (1986), “Increasing Returns and Long-run Growth”, Journal of Political Economy 
Vol 94 Pages 1002–37. 
Sachs,  J  (2014),  “Sustainable  Development  Economics”,  available  at:  http://www.project-
syndicate.org/commentary/promote-sustainable-development-economics-by-jeffrey-d-sachs-
2014–11. 
Simon,  H  (1971),  “Designing  organizations  for  an  information-rich  world”,  in:  Martin 
Greenberger, “Computers, Communication, and the Public Interest”, pp 38–52, John Hopkins 
Press. 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  by 
for 
the 
Center 
American 
Solow, R (1956), “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth”, The Quarterly Journal 
of Economics Vol 70 No 1. 
Stanislaw, U (1958), “Tribute to John von Neumann”, Bulletin of the American Mathematical 
Society. 
Stiglitz, J, Sen, A and Fitoussi, JP (2009), “Report by the Commission on the Measurement 
of  Economic  Performance  and  Social  Progress”,  available  at:  http://www.stiglitz-sen-
fitoussi.fr/en/index.htm. 
Summers,  L  (2014),  “U.S.  Economic  Prospects:  Secular  Stagnation,  Hysteresis,  and  the 
Zero Lower Bound”, Business Economics Vol 49 No 2. 
Summers,  L  and  Balls,  E  (2015),  “Report  of  the  Commission  on  Inclusive  Prosperity”, 
at: 
Convened 
https://cdn.americanprogress.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/IPC-PDF-full.pdf. 
Swann,  T  (1956),  “Economic  Growth  and  Capital  Accumulation”,  Economic  Record 
Volume 32, Issue 2. 
Syverson, C (2013), “Will history repeat itself? Comments on “Is the information technology 
revolution over?”, International Productivity Monitor Pages 37–40. 
Tabellini,  G  (2010),  “Culture  and  institutions:  economic  development  in  the  regions  of 
Europe”, Journal of the European Economic Association Vol 8 Issue 4. 
Urminsky, Oleg and Zauberman, Gal (2014), “The psychology of intertemporal preferences”, 
To appear in the “Wiley-Blackwell Handbook of Judgment and Decision Making”. 
VoxEU 
http://www.voxeu.org/sites/default/files/Vox_secular_stagnation.pdf. 
Wang,  Mei,  Marc  Oliver  Rieger  and  Thorsten  Hens  (2011),  “How  time  preferences  differ: 
Evidence from 45 countries”, NHH Discussion paper, FOR 18. 
Weiller, K and Mirowski, P (1990), “Rates of interest in 18th century England”, Explorations in 
Economic History Vol 27 Issue 1. 
 
“Secular  Stagnation:  Facts,  Causes  and  Cures”,  available  at: 
Progress, 
available 
(2014), 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
 10
9
8
7
6
5
  Appendix 
Chart 1: GDP per capita since 1750 
log GDP per head,  
1990 International $ 
 
 
l
a
i
r
t
s
u
d
n
I
 n
o
i
t
l
u
o
v
e
r
 
 
s
s
a
M
 n
o
i
t
a
s
i
l
a
i
r
t
s
u
d
n
 i
 n
o
i
t
l
u
o
v
e
r
 
T
I
1750
1800
1850
1900
1950
2000
Source: DeLong (1998). 
 
 
 
 
 
Chart 2: GDP per capita since 1000 BC 
GDP per head, 
1990 International $ 
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
 -1000 -750
-500
-250
0
250
500
750
1000 1250 1500 1750 2000
Source: DeLong (1998). 
 
 
 18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 3: Male heights from skeletons in Europe, 1–2000 AD 
Male height, centimetres 
Skeletal remains, Europe
Sweden
USA, native born
0
500
1000
1500
Source: Clark (2009). 
 
 
 
 
Chart 4: Social development index 
 180
178
176
174
172
170
168
166
164
162
160
2000
 Social development points, 
log linear scale 
1000 
100 
10 
 -1000 -800 -600 -400 -200
1
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
Year 
Source: Morris (2010, 2011). Notes: This chart shows the average of “Western” and “Eastern” social development 
scores reported in Morris (2010, 2011). These scores include energy capture, organisation, war-making capacity 
and information technology. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
 Table 1: Population and GDP per capita growth since 1million BC 
 
  Year 
-1m to –10000 BC 
-10000 to –1000 BC 
-1000 BC to 1 AD 
1 to 1000 AD 
1000 to 1500 AD 
1500 to 1750 AD 
1750 to 2000 AD 
GDP per capita 
Annual % change 
Population 
Annual % change 
0.000 
0.003 
-0.015 
0.020 
0.007 
0.102 
1.452 
0.000 
0.028 
0.122 
0.044 
0.095 
0.211 
0.870 
 
Source: DeLong (1998) and Kremer (1993). 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2: Technology growth since 1 AD 
 
 Year 
1 to 1000 AD 
1000 to 1500 AD 
1500 to 1750 AD 
1750 to present(a) 
Technology growth rate 
Annual % change 
0.001 
0.025 
0.045 
1.034 
 
Source:  Clark  (2009);  Hills,  Thomas  and  Dimsdale  (2010).  Notes:  Technology  growth  prior  to  1750  here  is 
estimated  by  Clark  (2009),  assuming  that  the  population  stabilizes  at  a  level  at  which  the  land  per  person 
produces just subsistence income. (a) Growth rate based on average annual TFP growth in the UK between 1850 
and 2009 in Hills, Thomas and Dimsdale (2010). 
 
 20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 5: Capital accumulation in the UK since 1850 
Capital per head, 2006 prices (£) 
 50,000
45,000
40,000
35,000
30,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
0
25,000
GDP per head, 2006 prices (£) 
Source: Hills, Thomas and Dimsdale (2010). 
 
 
 
Chart 6: Capital accumulation across countries since 1980 
Capital per head, 2005 prices ($) 
Japan 
Italy 
Germany 
US 
UK 
140,000
120,000
100,000
80,000
60,000
40,000
20,000
South Korea 
India 
China 
Urban China 
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
40,000
0
45,000
GDP per head, 2005 prices ($) 
Source: McKinsey Global Institute (2010). 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
 Chart 7: Literacy rates in Western Europe 
Netherlands
Germany
Great Britain
France
Sweden
Italy
Literacy rate, 
percent 
1400
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
2000
 100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
  
Source: OurWorldinData.org, based on Buringh and Van Zanden (2009) and Broadberry and O’Rourke (2010). 
 
 
 
Chart 8: Average years of schooling of the population aged 15+ 
Developing economies
World
Advanced economies
Percent 
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
Source: Barro and Lee (2013). 
 
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
 22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 9: Violent crime in Western Europe 
 80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
England
Scandinavia
Italy
Netherlands and Belgium
Germany and Switzerland
Homicides per  
100,000 per year 
1300
1400
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
2000
Source: OurWorldinData.org, based on Eisner (2003). 
 
 
 
 
 
Chart 10: Death rate associated with state-based conflicts 
Deaths per milion people 
Extrastate
Intrastate
Interstate
Internationalized Intrastate
Deaths per million people
1946
1956
1966
1976
1986
1996
2006
 250
200
150
100
50
0
 Source:  Human  Security  Report  Project,  available  at:  http://www.hsrgroup.org/our-work/security-stats/Deaths-
from-Organized-Violence.aspx 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 23 
  Chart 11: Government command of output as a percentage of GNP in England, 1285–2000 
Government spending as a 
share of output, percent 
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2000
 25
20
15
10
5
0
 1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
1700
1800
1900
Source: Clark (2009). 
 
 
Chart 12: Short and long-term interest rates 
Short-term rates
Long-term rates
Percent 
3000
BC 
1
1575
1735
1775
1815
1855
1895
1935
1975
AD 
Sources:  Homer  and  Sylla  (1991),  Heim  and  Mirowski  (1987),Weiller  and  Mirowski  (1990),  Hills,  Thomas  and 
Dimsdale (2015 forthcoming), Bank of England, Historical Statistics of the United States Millenial Edition , Volume 
3 and Federal Reserve Economic Database. Notes: the intervals on the x-axis change through time up to 1715. 
From 1715 onwards the intervals are every twenty years. Prior to the C18th the rates reflect the country with the 
lowest rate reported for each type of credit: 3000BC to 6th century BC – Babylonian empire; 6th century BC to 
2nd century BC – Greece; 2nd century BC to 5th century AD – Roman Empire; 6th century BC to 10th century AD 
– Byzantium (legal limit); 12th century AD to 13th century AD – Netherlands ;13th century AD to 16th century AD 
–  Italian  states.  From  the  C18th  the  interest  rates  are  of  an  annual  frequency  and  reflect  those  of  the  most 
dominant money market: 1694 to 1918 this is assumed to be the UK; from 1919–2015 this is assumed to be the 
US.  Rates  used  are  as  follows:  Short  rates:  1694–1717  –  Bank  of  England  Discount  rate;1717–1823  rate  on 
6 month East India bonds; 1824–1919 rate on 3 month prime or first class bills; 1919–1996 rate on 4–6 month 
prime US commercial paper ; 1997–2014 rate on 3month AA US commercial paper to non-financials. Long rates: 
1702–1919  –  rate  on  long-term  government  UK  annuities  and  consols;  1919–1953,  yield  on  long-term  US 
government bond yields; 1954–2014 yield on 10 year US treasuries. 
24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 13: Long run real rates in Advanced and Emerging Economies 
 Percent 
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
 1990
1993
1996
1999
2002
2005
2008
2011
2014
Emerging Economies
Advanced Economies
'World' Real Rate
Source: King and Low (2014); Bank Calculations. Notes: The “World” real rate (black line) is taken from King and 
Low  (2014) and  is  based  on the  average  10-year  yield  of  inflation-linked  bonds  in  the  G7  countries  (excluding 
Italy). UK rates have been adjusted to take account of the RPI-CPI wedge. Data availability means that US yields 
are only included from 1997 so the UK provides most of the historical back-run. 
 
 
 
Chart 14: Forward real interest rate yield curves 
Percent 
United Kingdom
Germany / Euro area
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Horizon (years) 
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
-2.5
 Sources:  Bloomberg  and  Bank  calculations.  Notes:  Data  for  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States  are 
derived from nominal bond yields deflated using inflation swaps. The Germany/EA figures are based on nominal 
Bund yield deflated using euro-area inflation swaps (as a proxy for the euro-area risk free rate). The measure of 
inflation used is RPI for the United Kingdom and CPI for the United States and the euro area. Data are to close of 
business 9 February 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 25 
 Chart 15: Population growth 
 Annual percentage change 
3
2
1
0
 0
3
8
1
0
4
8
1
0
5
8
1
0
6
8
1
0
7
8
1
0
8
8
1
0
9
8
1
0
0
9
1
0
1
9
1
0
2
9
1
0
3
9
1
0
4
9
1
0
5
9
1
0
6
9
1
0
7
9
1
0
8
9
1
0
9
9
1
0
0
0
2
0
1
0
2
0
2
0
2
0
3
0
2
0
4
0
2
0
5
0
2
Source: United Nations population projections (http://esa.un.org/wpp/) for 1950 onwards; The  Maddison-Project 
(http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/maddison-project/home.htm) prior to 1950. 
 
 
 
 
 
Chart 16: Business expenditure on Research & Development 
South Korea
China
United Kingdom
Germany
Japan
United States
France
R&D Expenditure as 
a % of GDP 
1981
1985
1989
1993
1997
2001
2005
2009
2013
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
 Source: OECD. 
 
26 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 17: Public investment 
UK
Advanced Economies
Percent of GDP 
1970 1973 1976 1979 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003 2006 2009
 7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
 Source:  IMF  World  Economic  Outlook  October  2014;  ONS.  Notes:  The  Advanced  Economies  line  show  real 
public investment as a share of PPP weighted GDP. The UK line shows nominal net investment as a share of 
nominal GDP. This series follows a similar pattern to real general Government investment, but is available over a 
longer time horizon. The definition of what is classified as “public” has changed over time and at different speeds 
in  different  places,  which  may  account  for  some  of  the  differences  between  the  UK  and  other  Advanced 
Economies. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 27 
