  Benoît Cœuré: Ensuring an adequate loss-absorbing capacity of central 
counterparties 
Special invited lecture by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago  2015  Symposium  on  Central 
Clearing, Chicago, 10 April 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen1 
This  Symposium  organised  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago  is  a  major  event  for 
discussions on key themes regarding central clearing, and it is a privilege for me to deliver 
this lecture in front of such a distinguished audience. 
I would like to make some comments on a topic which has been steadily going up the central 
clearing  agenda,  namely  the  need  to  increase  the  loss-absorbing  capacity  of  central 
counterparties (CCPs) beyond their current levels. 
Because of their growing systemic importance, CCPs need to be exceptionally robust, and 
that means being able to cope with even extreme losses. And to achieve this, it may well be 
necessary  to  increase  their  existing  loss-absorbing  capacity.  But  what  is  less  clear  at  the 
moment  is  whether  this  can  be  done  by  having  CCPs  observe  the  existing,  tough 
international  standards,  which  have  been  introduced  only  relatively  recently.  Or  whether 
there is a need for new requirements that are more demanding or more specific. And if so, 
how can we best do that in a way that preserves the benefits of central clearing, provides the 
right incentives to CCPs and to their clearing members, and strengthens the financial system 
as a whole? 
These questions go to the heart of the current work by the two international standard-setting 
bodies  most  directly  involved,  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures 
(CPMI) and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), as well as by 
the  Basel  Committee  for  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board 
(FSB). Today I will cover some of the issues authorities are tackling. 
The global regulatory agenda implemented since the crisis has made CCPs 
considerably safer. 
As a result of the G20’s commitment to introduce clearing obligations, CCPs have become 
“super-systemically  important”,  and  ensuring  their  safety  is  thus  critical.  Over  the  past  few 
years, the global regulators (CPMI-IOSCO, FSB and BCBS) have offered guidance in many 
areas  to  increase  the  resilience  of  CCPs  and  their  participants.  Let  me  give  you  four 
examples: 
First,  rigorous  risk-management  standards  via 
financial  market 
infrastructures:  the  PFMI  were  adopted  by  CPMI-IOSCO  in  2012,  implementing  ambitious 
standards covering every aspect of a CCP’s risk management framework. These Principles 
are significantly tougher than those they replace and their consistent implementation across 
jurisdictions is currently being monitored.2 
the  Principles 
for 
                                                 
1  
I  wish  to  thank  Pierre  Marmara  for  contributing  to  this  speech.  I  remain  solely  responsible  for  the  views 
expressed here. 
2   See CPMI-IOSCO, Implementation monitoring of PFMIs – Level 1 assessment, August 2013; CPMI-IOSCO, 
First update to Level 1 assessment report, May 2014; CPMI-IOSCO, Implementation monitoring of the PFMIs: 
Level  2  assessment  report  for  central  counterparties  and  trade  repositories  (European  Union,  Japan, 
United States), February 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
Second, guidance on CCP recovery and resolution: in 2014, as a supplement to the PFMI, 
CPMI-IOSCO  published  comprehensive  guidance  on  financial  market  infrastructure  (FMI) 
recovery.3 It considered the types of tools that CCPs and other FMIs can use to deal with 
severe financial problems that could threaten their existence. In addition, the FSB adopted a 
framework on FMI resolution.4 
Third, specific treatment of banks’ exposures to CCPs: the  BCBS has revised its previous 
Basel II capital framework, which applied a zero capital charge to banks’ exposures to CCPs, 
in order to better capture the risks stemming from the financial system’s increasing reliance 
on CCPs. One of the main features of this revised framework is the preferential treatment 
given to exposures to qualifying CCPs, i.e. CCPs supervised in a manner consistent with the 
PFMI. 
Finally,  enhancing  the  understanding  of  CCP  risks  via  increased  transparency:  in  order  to 
ensure CCPs are providing participants with the necessary information to evaluate the risks 
linked  to  clearing,  CPMI  and  IOSCO  have  published  two  disclosure  frameworks.  The 
Disclosure Framework and Assessment Methodology,5 released in December 2012, and The 
Public  Quantitative  Disclosure  Framework6  for  CCPs,  released  in  February  2015,  which 
require CCPs to disclose information on topics such as the size of their credit risk, liquidity 
risk, collateral, margins, business risk, custody and investment risks. Let me add that public 
disclosure  requirements  are  particularly  important  for  indirect  members  who,  unlike  direct 
members, do not play a direct role in the CCP’s risk governance. 
Should authorities be doing more to address potential weaknesses in CCP risk 
management? 
As I just mentioned, the regulatory standards have been significantly strengthened since the 
financial crisis. However, catastrophic losses beyond those already covered by the regulatory 
requirements could still occur. Given the critical role of CCPs in financial markets, regulators 
need to think the unthinkable. Indeed, stress events concerning CCPs are – thankfully – rare: 
the  most  recent  example  of  a  CCP  failure  was  the  collapse  of  the  Hong  Kong  Futures 
Exchange clearing house in 1987. A more recent – albeit less dramatic – stress event was 
the uncertainty caused by the default of a clearing member at KRX, the South Korean CCP, 
which caused it to tap its mutualised default fund, and revealed that clearing members were 
not always aware of their potential liabilities towards the CCP. When such events occur, they 
have  the  potential  to  shut  down  the  markets  they  serve.  With  the  emergence  of  super-
systemic  CCPs  serving  global  derivatives  markets,  a  CCP  failure  could  be  a  catastrophic 
event of global proportions. 
In September 2014, the gross notional outstanding amount of centrally cleared positions was 
estimated  at  USD  169  trillion  for  OTC  interest  rate  derivatives,  and  at  USD  14  trillion  for 
credit derivatives.7 The sheer magnitude of these figures (around ten times the GDP of the 
United  States  or  European  Union)  gives  us  an  idea  of  the  severity  of  the  potential 
consequences from a stress event at a major global CCP. 
Authorities  see  the  distinct  benefits  of  central  clearing  and  wish  to  set  proper  market 
incentives for participants to move away from bilateral trading and into the centrally cleared 
world.  Mandatory  central  clearing  allows  risks  to  be  pooled,  monitored  and  properly 
                                                 
3   See CPMI-IOSCO, Recovery of Financial Market Infrastructures, October 2014. 
4   See FSB, Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions, FMI Annex, October 2014. 
5   See CPMI-IOSCO, Disclosure Framework and Assessment Methodology, December 2012. 
6   See CPMI-IOSCO, Public Quantitative Disclosure Standards for Central Counterparties, February 2015. 
7   See FSB, Eighth Progress Report on Implementation of OTC Derivatives Market Reforms, November 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 the  existing 
impact  and  coverage  of 
 
 
managed.  However,  pushing  more  complex  products  towards  mandatory  central  clearing 
makes  risk  management  more  challenging,  and  therefore  may  increase  the  risks  to  which 
CCPs and clearing members are exposed. Authorities may need to assess whether overly 
complex products should really be submitted to central clearing, so as to ensure CCPs can 
continue pooling risks in a safe and efficient way. 
In recent months, concerns have been expressed regarding the adequacy and consistency 
of the level of risk management across the CCP landscape. At this stage, it is too early to say 
whether current regulations are insufficient. New requirements may well prove necessary but 
the 
first  be 
comprehensively assessed. 
Authorities  have  started  exploring  and  analysing  potential  issues  with  the  granularity  and 
consistency  of  global  standards,  and  will  continue  to  do  so  in  the  coming  months.  For 
instance, CPMI-IOSCO has put in place a substantial implementation monitoring programme 
of  the  PFMI  across  jurisdictions:8  the  monitoring  work  so  far  has  shown  that  many 
jurisdictions  have  made  good  progress  in  adopting  the  PFMI  in  their  domestic  regulatory 
frameworks.  A  more  detailed  analysis  of  whether  the  content  and  the  outcome  of 
implementing  legislation,  regulations  and  policies  are  complete  and  consistent  is  currently 
under way. 
Furthermore, the granularity of margin practices is being reviewed, and CPMI-IOSCO is now 
assessing  –  in  cooperation  with  the  industry  –  the  consistency  of  CCP  stress  testing 
practices.9 Consistency does not need to be achieved by imposing standardised models on 
all CCPs – a “one size fits all” approach may not be appropriate, and regulators may be more 
effective  by  relying  instead  on  minimum  standards,  which  all  CCPs  would  be  required  to 
apply  to  their  models.  The  outcome  of  these  exercises  will  be  of  crucial  importance  in 
identifying and calibrating the need for further regulatory action. 
framework  should 
regulatory 
Staying clear of pitfalls and misconceptions. 
If gaps were to be identified in CCP risk management standards, requiring the adoption of 
new  global  requirements,  we  would  need  to  make  sure  the  debate  is  being  framed  in  an 
appropriate manner. 
First  of  all,  there  may  be  no  single  best  solution  for  addressing  concerns  related  to  CCP 
safety. Optimal solutions may vary according to the business model of the CCP (including its 
ownership  structure),  according  to  the  CCP’s  risk  profile  (including  the  types  of  products 
cleared – i.e. cash products or derivatives), and according to the size and concentration of 
exposures within clearing members (including the extent of indirect clearing). Regulators may 
wish to keep a certain degree of flexibility when they make their final recommendations. 
We also need to be cautious when drawing analogies between CCPs and banks. CCPs have 
in  fact  a  fundamentally  different  business  model  and  liability  structure.  CCPs  are  not 
leveraged  and  they  do  not  actively  take  risk:  barring  the  default  of  a  member  or  an 
operational  incident,  their  net  risk  exposure  at  any  point  in  time  is  always  equal  to  zero. 
Another  major  difference  is  the  limited  extent  to  which  CCPs  are  expected  to  cover  their 
exposures  via  their  own  funds,  as  the  concept  of  “bail-in”  is  directly  built  into  their  risk 
management. Indeed, coverage is achieved to a very large extent via pre-funded resources 
provided by the clearing members themselves. Bail-in is a new concept for banks, but not for 
CCPs.  In  addition,  CCPs  can  rely  on  contractual  arrangements  to  allocate  losses  among 
their  members.  The  statutory  tools  implemented  by  banking  supervisors  for  ensuring  the 
                                                 
8   See footnote 2 above. 
9   http://www.bis.org/press/p150311.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
resilience of banks may therefore not be appropriate for CCPs, and we should be cautious 
about any comparisons we make. They could be misleading. 
Furthermore,  taxpayers  should  obviously  not  be  liable  for  any  losses  incurred  by  CCPs. 
Losses  should  be  entirely  borne  by  the  CCPs  themselves  and  their  participants,  in  an 
appropriate  and  proportional  manner,  and  in  line  with  prudent  incentives.  In  particular,  the 
involvement of indirect participants should be carefully considered: their contribution to the 
loss  allocation  process  should  take  into  account  the  fact  that  they  have  no  contractual 
agreements  with  the  CCP,  and,  unlike  direct  members,  have  no  part  in  the  CCP’s  risk 
governance process (and therefore have no say in the CCP’s risk management). 
Lastly, the issue of compensating clearing members for losses incurred during a recovery or 
resolution process remains comparatively unexplored and deserves careful attention.10 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  various  tools  that  authorities  could  use  to  address  potential 
shortcomings in CCP risk management and loss-absorption capacities. These options have 
very different implications, namely in terms of sharing the funding needs between CCPs and 
participants, and in terms of providing the right incentives to CCPs’ stakeholders. 
Increasing the level of pre-funded resources held by CCPs to cover default losses 
beyond the current standards. 
One  possible  conclusion  from  the  current  review  of  the  international  implementation  of 
regulatory  requirements,  and  the  analysis  and  assessments  being  carried  out  in  parallel, 
could  be  that  standards  regarding  margins  and  stress  testing  are  sufficiently  stringent,  but 
are not implemented consistently across CCPs and jurisdictions. 
Authorities could also conclude that the standards themselves are not sufficiently strict and 
that there is a need for CCPs to bolster the arrangements that may be used in a pre-recovery 
stage.  This  might  require  CCPs  to  cover  their  exposures  beyond  the  “cover  2”  standard 
currently set by the PFMI for systemically important CCPs. 
Bear  in  mind  that  prudent  margins  and  an  adequately  sized  default  fund  are  the  very 
foundations  of  a  CCP’s  risk  management.  If  CCPs  appropriately  cover  credit  and  market 
risks  via  their  initial  margins,  and  adequately  stress  test  their  exposures  under  extreme 
conditions,  there  will  be  only  a  residual  chance  that  they  will  not  be  able  to  cover  default 
losses.11 We should remember that cover 2 is already a very stringent criterion, which has 
never  been  observed  in  a  real  crisis.  However,  as  I  stated  earlier,  the  unthinkable  may 
happen. 
The next question is how this increase in resources should be funded. Recently, there have 
been some calls to increase the contributions made by CCPs themselves to the total amount 
of  financial  resources  posted  –  the  so-called  “skin  in  the  game”.  In  the  European  Union, 
CCPs  already  have  to  contribute  25%  of  their  required  regulatory  capital  to  the  default 
waterfall,  which  would  be  used  before  tapping  the  mutualised  default  fund.  Should  we  go 
further, and demand a larger contribution from CCPs? 
                                                 
10   On  the  one  hand,  participants  may  be  more  willing  to  share  losses  if  the  CCP  provides  some  form  of 
compensation instrument proportionate to the size of the losses they incur. Such instruments could include, for 
example, senior claims on profits of the future CCP or on the defaulted clearing member’s estate, or a share of 
the  CCP’s  equity.  On  the  other  hand,  we  need  to  ensure  that  any  compensation  to  clearing  members  is 
delivered in a proportional way and is appropriately timed, so as to leave the CCP with sufficient resources to 
absorb all residual losses and to safeguard or re-launch its viable activities. 
11   For an illustration based on actual derivative positions, see Heath, A., Kelly, G., and Manning, M., “Central 
counterparties  loss  allocation  and  transmission  of  financial  shocks”,  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  Research 
Discussion Paper, 2015–02, March 2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
Such  a  step  would  raise  many  challenges.  “Skin  in  the  game”  should  primarily  serve  to 
provide  incentives  for  the  CCP’s  management  and  shareholders  to  ensure  their  risk 
management  framework  is  sufficiently  prudent,  and  limits  excessive  risk  taking  by clearing 
members.  It  should  not  be  seen  as  a  significant  financial  resource  to  cover  a  CCP’s 
exposures: indeed, the purpose of CCPs is to mutualise counterparty risk, not to remove it 
from  clearing  members  altogether  and  bear  it  themselves.  CCPs  are  risk  poolers,  not 
insurance providers. 
In fact, a substantial increase of “skin in the game” could provide clearing members with a 
false  sense  of  security,  by  reducing  their  potential  contribution  to  the  loss-allocation 
process.12 This could lead them to be less vigilant in monitoring risks, which may have severe 
consequences for the safety of CCPs. Furthermore, in order to represent any meaningful part 
of  the  default  waterfall,  “skin  in  the  game”  would  need  to  increase  dramatically,  thus 
completely changing the size of CCP balance sheets and their business models. This could 
even  defeat  the  purpose  of  mandatory  central  clearing  by  pushing  CCPs  to  dramatically 
increase the cost of clearing, or to compromise on their risk management in order to retain 
profitability. 
In  sum,  it  seems  reasonable  that  an  increase  in  prefunded  resources,  should  it  become 
necessary, should be mainly borne by clearing members. 
Strengthening CCP recovery capabilities via specific recovery tools. 
An alternative conclusion to our current discussions could be that cover 2 is an appropriate 
standard for ensuring CCP resilience in a pre-recovery phase, but that more reassurances 
are needed to ensure CCPs can adequately cope with a recovery situation if they face tail 
losses. 
Let  me  stress  that,  here  too,  it  is  too  early  to  state  whether  and,  if  so,  what  additional 
guidance regarding recovery capacities will be needed. However, let us think about the ways 
in which authorities could improve CCP recovery tools if the need did arise.13 
In a recovery situation, a significant amount of additional funding could come from ex post 
cash calls on non-defaulting clearing members, also referred to as “default fund top-ups” or 
“emergency  assessments”.  This  could  provide  CCPs  with  ample  resources  to  avoid  a 
complete  depletion  of  their  capital,  and  would  share  the  funding  burden  across  the  whole 
clearing membership. Such assessments are usually allocated according to each member’s 
contribution  to  the  CCP’s  default  fund.  This  way  of  allocating  assessments,  provided  it  is 
transparent, gives members a degree of predictability about what will happen. Nevertheless, 
they could expose surviving clearing members to sudden and very large liquidity demands 
which  they  would  have  to  source  in  the  market,  and  could  thus  have  strong  contagion 
effects14 – even pushing members to close out their contracts and leave the CCP, rather than 
face the spiralling costs of remaining a member. For these reasons, such tools may prove 
problematic for bank supervisors. 
Another  tool  which  is  frequently  mentioned  in  discussions  on  CCP  recovery  is  variation 
margin gains haircutting (VMGH). In my view, this tool may have a certain advantage over ex 
post  cash  calls,  in  the  sense  that  it  would  alleviate  the  need  for  members  to  raise  extra 
                                                 
12   While  central  clearing  protects  banks  against  idiosyncratic  risk,  it  can  reduce  their  incentives  to  protect 
themselves  from  non-diversifiable  shocks,  hence  the  need  for  regulation  to  provide  a  strong  incentive 
framework. For a theoretical discussion, see Biais, B., Heider, F., and Hoerova, M., “Clearing, counterparty 
risk and aggregate risk”, European Central Bank, October 2011. 
13   For a discussion of loss-allocation rules, see also Elliott, D., “Central counterparty loss-allocation rules”, Bank 
of England, Financial Stability Paper, No. 20, April 2013. 
14   See Heath, A., et al. (2015, op. cit.) for a simulation of the impact of different loss allocation mechanisms. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  
 
liquidity to meet their obligations: the CCP would simply perform a write-down of its outgoing 
payment obligations to clearing members with  “in the money” positions. To the extent that 
this tool would hit members which are not liquidity- constrained, it is more reliable and the 
systemic impact could be less. So although it could lead to unequal loss allocation among 
clearing  members  and  create  ex  ante  uncertainty  on  the  burden  sharing  of  the  cost  of 
default,15 it could also mitigate pro-cyclicality concerns to a certain extent. 
Another  series  of  measures  to  be  considered  by  authorities  are  the  voluntary  or  forced 
allocation of open positions among clearing members. These measures would help CCPs re-
establish a matched book following a participant default. In my view, if authorities choose to 
promote  these  tools,  we  should  take  care  to  encourage  voluntary  measures  to  the  extent 
possible.  Indeed,  forced  allocations  could  lead  to  effects  which  are  difficult  to  control,  for 
example by requiring participants to take on positions which are not closely related to their 
clearing activities, and for which they cannot adequately measure risks, particularly in volatile 
market  conditions.  A  last-resort  option  could  be  a  partial  or  complete  tear-up  of  open 
positions,  but  this  could  cause  significant  disruption  to  the  products  and  markets  where 
contracts are terminated, and therefore should be avoided to the extent practicable. 
A  solution  which  seems  to  be  supported  by  parts  of  the  industry  would  be  to  dedicate  an 
additional  tranche  of  the  CCP’s  capital  for  recovery  needs.  While  increases  could  be 
discussed, I believe it may not be advisable – for the reasons already outlined above – to 
place the entire burden of extra loss-absorption on CCPs. 
For the sake of completeness, I would also like to mention alternative recovery tools such as 
the proposal by a consortium of insurers to provide coverage for extreme tail losses, or the 
idea  that  CCPs  should  issue  bail-in-able  debt  instruments.  Such  solutions  deserve 
consideration as they can enhance market discipline, but they require further analysis before 
being  truly  considered  as  viable  options  by  authorities.  For  example,  it  is  unclear  whether 
there would be a deep enough market for CCP bail-in-able debt, given the tail nature of the 
risk being priced, and the risk that demand will be exhausted once the total loss-absorbing 
capacity proposal for banks is calibrated and implemented. 
You will note that I have not made any mention of emergency liquidity provision to CCPs by 
central banks. A fundamental principle is that it is up to the CCP to maintain adequate and 
robust liquidity arrangements, both in normal and crisis times. If a clearing house believed 
that it could easily and readily access central bank liquidity, this would weaken its incentives 
to make the necessary arrangements. Of course, there can be cases where all the necessary 
arrangements have been made but the CCP is facing losses beyond what was predicted and 
needs  temporary  liquidity  support  while  remaining  solvent.  In  that  case,  this  option  will  be 
available  and  there  should  be  no  technical  obstacles  to  using  it.  But  there  can  be  no 
commitment from the central bank to provide liquidity, and that’s a basic principle of central 
banks in general, not only for CCPs but for banks as well.16  
In  sum,  while  some  of  these  tools  appear  more  appropriate  than  others,  all  of  them  imply 
drawbacks, and authorities will need to proceed cautiously if they favour one over another. 
CPMI-IOSCO  is  currently  reviewing  existing  CCP  recovery  mechanisms,  including  loss 
allocation  tools,  and  will  consider  developing  more  granular  standards  for  CCP  recovery 
planning if that is needed. 
                                                 
15   See  Duffie,  D.,  “Resolution  of  Failing  Central  Counterparties”,  Graduate  School  of  Business,  Stanford 
University, 17 December 2014. 
16   The recent agreement between the ECB and the Bank of England is no exception to this rule. We’ll extend the 
scope of our standing swap line in order to facilitate the provision of multi-currency liquidity support to CCPs 
established  in  the  UK  and  euro  area,  but  again,  there  is  no  pre-commitment  and  the  provision  of  liquidity 
remains at the full discretion of the central bank issuing the respective currency. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
However, even enhanced recovery tools may not be enough to prevent the CCP from being 
resolved,  first  of  all  because  it  is  impossible  to  estimate  ex  ante  the  size  of  potential 
uncovered exposures, secondly because under certain circumstances it might be preferable 
to  resolve  a  CCP  –  especially  if  the  market  has  lost  confidence  in  this  CCP  as  a  going 
concern. 
Effective CCP resolution as an ultimate tool. 
Lastly,  we  need  to  assess  whether  more  assurances  are  needed  so  that  a  CCP  can  be 
effectively  resolved  and  can  re-launch  its  viable  operations,  and  whether  the  measures 
discussed before are either ineffective or out of line with market preferences. 
Much  like  recovery  frameworks,  CCP  resolution  frameworks  are  currently  being  designed 
and  implemented  across  jurisdictions.  The  FSB  is  reviewing  CCP  resolution  regimes  and 
resolution planning arrangements. Based on this review, it may develop minimum standards 
for CCP resolution planning, strategies and tools without resorting to a government bailout, 
and  without  resulting  in  contagion  to  other  parts  of  the  financial  system.  Meanwhile,  the 
European Commission is preparing specific EU legislation. 
If, after an in-depth assessment, authorities come to the conclusion that an additional source 
of financial resources is needed, what form should these extra funds take? 
Let  me  first  reiterate  that  any  bailout  of  CCPs  with  public  money  should  be  categorically 
excluded. Resolution plans should fully allocate losses to CCPs and their participants. 
Having  clarified  this  point,  I  can  potentially  see  four  main  ways  of  increasing  resolution 
capacity: 
The first would be to increase the amount of regulatory capital held by CCPs, and explicitly 
ring-fence  a  share  of  this  capital  as  a  means  to  recapitalise  a  new  entity  in  a  resolution 
scenario. In the EU, CCPs are required to hold sufficient own resources to cover operating 
costs over a six-month period – this requirement could be strengthened, not only in order to 
cover for a potential wind-down, but also to meet the funding costs of a new entity. For the 
reasons described above, I believe there would be important drawbacks in relying only on 
CCPs to increase their regulatory capital. CCPs should provide a proportional contribution to 
the resolution process, but should not bear all the costs. 
A second policy option could be to make use of initial margin haircutting as a means to fund 
the  resolution  process  and  establish  a  new  CCP.  While  this  would  provide  CCPs  with 
significant resources, mutualised across the entire clearing membership, and could provide a 
base for re-launching a viable CCP with some degree of certainty over the sharing of losses, 
it  would  also  imply  a  significant  change  in  the  way  clearing  members  understand  their 
liabilities towards the CCP – indeed, in certain jurisdictions, initial margin currently has to be 
bankruptcy-remote. It would be difficult to predict the potential pro-cyclical effects resulting 
from  this  tool,  as  well  as  the  effects  on  incentives  for  members  to  take  part  in  central 
clearing.  As  a  result,  this  tool  should  be  carefully  considered  for  resolution  scenarios,  and 
should perhaps be ruled out of the recovery toolkit altogether. 
A third option would be to set up a cross-CCP resolution fund, much like the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation or the Single Resolution Mechanism recently established for banks in 
Europe.  This  fund  would  be  financed  by  risk-based  contributions  from  CCPs  and  clearing 
members,  but  could  also  be  financed  by  other  stakeholders  who  may  benefit  (directly  and 
indirectly)  from  the  risk-management  services  provided  by  CCPs.  While  this  idea  is 
conceptually  appealing,  it  may  be  very  demanding  to  implement.  Such  a  resolution  fund 
would  need  to  be  established  on  a  cross-jurisdictional  basis,  which  implies  significant 
coordination challenges, and it would have to be phased in over a large number of years. I 
frankly don’t see the political momentum for such a solution. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  
 
A fourth option would be for each CCP to establish its own dedicated recapitalisation fund, 
funded mainly by clearing members, with a proportional contribution from the CCP itself. The 
recourse to this recapitalisation fund would certainly create many challenges. The resolution 
authority must be able to identify certain clearing services which are still viable, and these 
must be insulated from the losses affecting the non-viable clearing services. However, if we 
are to go in the direction of new requirements for CCP resolution, I believe this could be a 
promising avenue to explore. 
Should additional pre-funded capital or liquidity resources be needed for cases of resolution, 
this will have to be shared in a fair way among all relevant stakeholders. Global coordination 
and consistency is therefore important in order to ensure a level playing field. 
Looking beyond the debate on CCP loss-absorbing resources, we should keep in mind that 
there are other key questions regarding resolution. 
Indeed, the success of a resolution process will not only depend on whether the CCP has 
adequate resources, but also on whether it is actually resolvable (for instance, whether its 
viable activities can be separated from its non-viable ones and transferred to another CCP). 
This will depend to a large extent on the operation and design of the CCP being resolved – 
e.g. whether its viable clearing activities are insulated from losses from the non-viable ones 
through separated default management silos. It will also depend on whether or not positions 
from the CCP which undergo resolution can be successfully transferred to another entity in a 
safe and timely manner, via an interoperability link or some other means. Further analysis 
will  probably  be  required  regarding  the  means  to  facilitate  the  porting  of  positions  in  a 
resolution scenario, in order to guarantee substitutability across CCPs. 
Another  issue  to  consider  is  the  extent  to  which  resolution  authorities  should  be  able  to 
impose  a  temporary  stay  on  early  termination  rights  for  CCP  participants,  which  may  be 
normally triggered upon the entry of the CCP into resolution.17 This topic will surely feature 
prominently in the discussions on the implementation of CCP resolution regimes. 
In  sum,  debates  regarding  the  appropriate  level  of  CCP  resources  should  not  prevent  us 
from addressing other crucial issues linked to resolvability. 
Keeping the systemic perspective in sight 
I have repeatedly made the point that increasing the level of financial resources available to 
CCPs  requires  careful  consideration,  in  view  of  the  potential  costs  for  all  relevant 
stakeholders.  I  believe  it  may  also  be  necessary  to  examine  the  effects  of  any  additional 
CCP requirements on the financial system as a whole. 
First and foremost, it will be important to ensure that incentives for central clearing are not 
negatively affected. Efforts by authorities to strengthen the robustness of the financial system 
would be compromised if additional funding costs were to push participants away from CCPs 
and back into the bilateral world. It will therefore be crucial to ensure consistency between 
new rules affecting CCP loss absorption and the collateral regime for bilateral trades, and the 
capital regime for banks’ exposures to CCPs. 
                                                 
17   The  exercise  of  early  termination  rights  by  a  large  number  of  participants  could  place  further  strain  on  the 
failing  CCP  and  prevent  it  from  continuing  critical  operations  and  services.  According  to  the  FSB  Key 
Attributes,  a  resolution  authority  should  not  impose  a  moratorium  on  payments,  settlement  and  deliveries 
related  to  the  core  functions  or  other  critical  services  of  the  CCP  (Key  Attributes,  Appendix  II,  II-Annex  1, 
paragraph  4.17).  A  short  stay  could  however  give  the  resolution  authority  time  to  assess  the  situation, 
determine  how  best  to  exercise  its  resolution  powers  and  limit  systemic  disruption.  See  Duffie,  D.,  and 
Skeel, D.,  “A  Dialogue  on  the  Costs  and  Benefits  of  Automatic  Stays  for  Derivatives  and  Repurchase 
Agreements”, University of Pennsylvania Law School, January 2012. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
More generally, in recent months, market participants have expressed concerns that, due to 
the significant amount of new regulation being discussed and implemented worldwide, it is 
sometimes  hard to get  a full picture of the regulatory architecture currently being set up. I 
therefore  believe  it  is  important  for  authorities  to  continue  to  work  together,  as  they  have 
done since the crisis, and to assess the combined effects of global regulation on the market 
and on incentives to mitigate risks. An example of this type of cooperation is the work carried 
out  by  the  OTC  Derivatives  Assessment  Team,  which  brings  together  representatives  of 
several  regulatory  committees,  and  which  published  a  report  in  2014  examining  the 
incentives for central clearing in the current regulatory landscape.18 
Part of this work will involve looking at how regulations applied to CCPs interact with those 
applied  to  other  entities  in  the  financial  system,  namely  banks.  Thanks  to  the  work  being 
carried out by CPMI-IOSCO on stress testing and margins, we are beginning to get a better 
picture of how risks are being managed across the whole CCP landscape. In my view, an 
important step for the future will be to put together CCP stress testing and the stress testing 
carried  out  by  big  global  banks  (one  way  of  doing  this  could  be  to  define  common  stress 
scenarios,  and  see  how  the  entire  system  performs).  Authorities,  CCPs  and  market 
participants need to assess the extent to which banks will be able to absorb losses passed 
on  to  them  by  a  CCP,  and  how  a  recovery  or  resolution  process  will  affect  the  banking 
system.19 
In this respect, authorities will need to pay particular attention to pro-cyclicality. As already 
mentioned, many of the proposed instruments to increase CCP loss absorption will have a 
significant cost for clearing members. We need to be aware that, very often, these costs will 
arise  during  a  stressed  market  situation,  when  clearing  members  may  already  be  facing 
significant  liquidity  pressure.  Authorities  responsible  for  CCPs  and  those  responsible  for 
banks should try and work towards a common understanding on pro-cyclicality, in order to 
ensure consistency in their regulatory actions. 
Lastly, I believe we also need to move towards a more systemic view of the interconnections 
between CCPs and clearing members, namely via the channel of indirect participation. The 
PFMI already require CCPs to identify, monitor and manage material risks arising from tiered 
participation arrangements. Here too, the CCP authorities and banking authorities should join 
forces  and  get  a  broader  picture  of  this  issue,  making  use  of  the  available  data  and 
developing  network  analyses.20  CPMI-IOSCO  together  with  the  BCBS  and  FSB  will  soon 
launch joint analytical work in this field. 
Conclusion 
I  have  made  the  case  that  the  global  regulatory  agenda  implemented  since  the  crisis  has 
made  CCPs  considerably  safer.  If  these  requirements  are  applied  consistently,  significant 
improvements to CCP loss-absorbing capacities may not be required. CPMI and IOSCO are 
currently reviewing CCP risk-management practices on a global scale and will identify any 
areas where greater consistency or granularity is needed. 
If the need did arise for further loss-absorption capacities, we will have to make sure any new 
requirements  provide  the  right  incentives  for  CCPs  and  their  members,  offer  authorities  a 
                                                 
18   See OTC Derivatives Assessment Team, Regulatory reform of over-the-counter derivatives: an assessment of 
incentives to clear centrally, October 2014. 
19   See also Bailey, D., “The Bank of England’s perspective on CCP risk management, recovery and resolution 
arrangements”,  Speech  at  the  Deutsche  Börse  Group  and  Eurex  Exchange  of  Ideas  conference,  London, 
24 November 2014. 
20   On the interconnectedness of CCPs, see Wendt, F., “Central counterparties: Addressing their Too Important 
to Fail Nature”, IMF Working Paper, WP/15/21, January 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  
 
certain degree of flexibility and do not create disincentives for central clearing. Whether we 
choose to bolster the tools for CCP resilience, CCP recovery or CCP resolution, we will need 
to be aware of potential trade-offs in the way losses are allocated, and remember that there 
may be no ideal approach. I have provided an overview of the pros and cons of these various 
approaches. 
It will be crucial not to lose sight of the systemic view when discussing CCP loss absorption, 
and  to  pay  close  attention  to  the  interconnections  between  CCP  exposures  and  bank 
exposures,  and  to  the  impact  of  CCP  risk-management  on  pro-cyclicality  in  the  global 
financial system. 
I look forward to learning from our discussions today and I hope they will shed new light on 
some of the trade-offs I have identified. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
