  Arjuna Mahendran: Role of the Central Bank in the Sri Lankan context 
Speech  by  Mr  Arjuna  Mahendran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  the  Sri 
Lanka Legal Summit 2015 “Governance, Regulation and Investment – The Way Forward“, 
Colombo, 5 March 2015. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am greatly privileged to address your distinguished audience on this topic with which I am 
reasonably conversant. 
The Central Bank of Sri Lanka today is a talking point among the public. Further, world over, 
central banks are in the public eye due to their specific role in staring off the global financial 
crisis, which caused a mini depression in 2009. 
The Central Bank of Sri Lanka is probably the single state authority with enormous influence 
in the economy and economic welfare of the general public. This influence comes from the 
powers and functions conferred upon the Central Bank from a number of statutes led by the 
Monetary  Law  Act  (MLA)  of  1949.  In  my  view,  when  compared  with  statutes  governing 
Central Banks in other countries, MLA is the single piece of legislation that provides for time 
invariant  powers  and  functions  of  the  Central  Bank.  The  law  has  worked  reasonably  well 
during  last  65  years  without  any  major  amendments.  The  drafting  of  the  law  in  1949  has 
been supervised by the renowned economist Mr. John Exter from the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York who also in recognition of his stellar efforts was the first Governor of the Central 
Bank. In his report submitted to the Government on establishment of the Central Bank, he 
stated as follows. 
I quote “the broad powers given to the Central Bank of Ceylon under the draft bill in Part II of 
this report are commensurate with the magnitude of this responsibility. The Bank should not 
be  hampered  by  rigid  limitations  which  might  prevent  it  from  fulfilling  its  purpose.  When  a 
new  central  bank  is  being  established  it  is  impossible  to  predict  the  course  of  its 
development. This will depend upon the environment within which it works and upon those 
who,  determine  its  policies.  Many  of  its  powers  may  go  unused  for  long  periods,  because 
they  are  designed  for  particular  situations,  some  of  which  may  never  arise.  Others  are 
intended  for  use  only  in  crises  or  to  forestall  a  crisis,  but  prudence  dictates  that  they  be 
included now, so that they will be at hand in case of need. It would be foolhardy to assume, 
with the record of the war – and depression – induced economic crises of the last 30 years 
plainly before us, that the Ceylon economy will somehow escape such crises in the future. 
The safer assumption is the one underlying the drafting of the present bill: it is better in an 
uncertain economic world to be prepared for any eventuality. 
Many features of the draft bill have been developed in the Western Hemisphere. Others are 
found  in  one  form  or  another  in  central  banking  legislation  within  the  Commonwealth.  The 
basic pattern is suited for countries which are introducing central banking systems for the first 
time because it contains certain signposts and warning signals which should prove useful to 
administrators who do not have long established traditions and years of personal experience 
upon  which  to  rely.  It  also  provides  a  legal  structure  which  is  flexible  and  adaptable  to 
changing economic conditions. Within the structure there is ample room for the development 
of policies that are appropriate to the times. 
Good central banking is less good law than good practice. The Central Bank of Ceylon may 
make  its  influence  felt  more  effectively  through  the  development  of  day-to-day  relations  of 
confidence  and  understanding  between  itself  and  the  various  banking  institutions  than 
through the exercise of all of the powers given it under this bill. Such influence is known in 
the textbooks as “moral suasion” and should be especially important in a small country where 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  it should be possible to develop close relations between the Central Bank and each of the 
fairly limited number of banking institutions…..” 
Having worked as an economist in the Central Bank and banker and investment banker in 
global financial environment, I perfectly understand what Mr. Exter meant. I invite you all to 
read  the  Exter  Report  if  you  are  interested  in  knowing  what  type  of  institution  the  Central 
Bank is? I would pray that you, after reading the Exter Report, may not complain that Central 
Bank  has  not  done  enough  to  Sri  Lanka  economy  and  economic  welfare  of  the  public  in 
terms of the mandate given to it by the public. 
The  Central  Bank’s  all  powers  and  functions  center  around  two  objectives.  Those  are  the 
securing  of  economic  and  price  stability  and  financial  system  stability  with  a  view  to 
encouraging and promoting the development of the productive resources of Sri Lanka. This 
is not the forum for me to define technically each objective as there is no single accepted 
definition.  However,  those  objectives  in  nutshell  mean  securing  stability  of  the  economy. 
Economic and price stability means the economy running on a sustainable growth path with 
a  supportive  low  rate  inflation.  Financial  system  stability  means  financial  institutions  and 
markets operate without bubbles or contagious failures where the trust of the public in the 
financial system is maintained, stability of the Economy, prices and the financial system are 
inter-dependent. The stability of the Economy helps the public to make and keep their plans 
for  the  future  which  ultimately  encourages  and  promotes  development  of  productive 
resources of Sri Lanka. This is what will promote living standard of the public by increasing 
production, employment and real income. This is what the MLA has empowered the Central 
Bank  to  do.  Thus,  you  may  understand  the  enormous  national  interest  entrusted  to  the 
Central Bank. 
For  securing  these  objectives,  the  Central  Bank  has  been  granted  the  authority  for 
administration, supervision and regulation of the monetary, financial and payment system of 
Sri Lanka through actions authorized by the MLA. Therefore, we must clearly understand the 
scope  of  our  mandate.  The  Central  Bank  cannot  directly  undertake  business  to  provide 
employment or create income or construct buildings to promote financial or business centers. 
The Central Bank’s scope of mandate for the stability of Sri Lanka economy is essentially the 
regulation and supervision of monetary, financial and payment system of Sri Lanka. 
Accordingly, the functions or activities the Central Bank carries out in its normal operations 
are the issue of the currency or legal tender, implementation of monetary policy, supervision 
of  banks  and  financial  institutions,  management  of  an  international  reserve,  operation  of 
payment  systems  and  financial  related  services  to  the  Government  as  the  Government 
agent. How the Central Bank carries out these functions with the help of nearly 1,500 staff is 
a complex and technical subject. The judiciary and legal community present today here may 
recall  a  number  of  court  cases  being  heard  now  and  judgments  delivered  in  the  past 
connected  with  certain  operations  of  the  Central  Bank,  because  either  Central  Bank 
procedures are not prudent for safeguarding the public trust or the public ignored the scope 
of  the  mandate  of  the  Central  Bank  to  get  involved  in  financial  sector  developments.  For 
example, the Central Bank is a respondent in all court cases recently filed in connection with 
unauthorized  and  failed  investment  schemes  as  the  petitioners  are  of  the  view  that  the 
Central Bank is responsible for the loss of investors’ money. Let me therefore elaborate on 
Central Bank functions. 
First, the issue of currency 
Central banking is a concept originated from the issue of currency. In the evolution of money, 
private banks started issuing their own bank notes, initially based on their gold holding and 
later  as  their  own  liabilities.  The  bank  in  which  the  public  placed  the  highest  trust  started 
operating  as  a  central  bank  in  the  market.  Later  in  the  history,  legislation  was  brought  to 
empower the Central Bank to print bank notes or currency which function as the intermediary 
between  all  economic  transactions.  Currency  in  issue  at  present  in  Sri  Lanka  is  about 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Rs. 422 billion and is a liability of the Central Bank, even as it is an asset to the rest of us. 
The Central Bank is prepared to pay against any currency note in any other value of legal 
tender preferred by the public. The Central Bank maintains a cash counter for this. In order to 
protect the public trust in currency, the Central Bank primarily undertakes two actions. First, it 
attempts  to  issue  currency  notes  with  intrinsic  material  security  making  it  difficult  for 
counterfeiting  and  designs  are  chosen  to  facilitate  easy  recognition  of  different  currency 
notes by people including the blind. Still, the world over currency counterfeiting and design 
concerns prevail irrespective of modern technology. Second, it attempts to protect the real 
value of currency by maintaining inflation at low levels through monetary policy. If prices or 
inflation rise day by day, the value of currency in terms of goods and services it can buy gets 
less and less and people will tend to dispense with currency as money and tend to use other 
international currencies as their preferred media of exchange. In such events, the currency 
system will collapse and the existence of the Central Bank will be questioned. This happened 
in Germany in 1920 and Zimbabwe in recent years. 
Second, the conduct of monetary policy 
Monetary Policy contains measures to regulate the supply, availability, cost and international 
exchange  of  the  country’s  money.  Accordingly,  levels  of  interest  rates,  exchange  rate  and 
credit in the economy are under the control of the Central Bank. These economic variables 
determine  almost  all  economic  activities  of  the  public  such  as  investments,  savings, 
international  transactions,  production  and  employment.  Their  changes  first  affect  our 
expenditure  (what  is  called  aggregate  demand)  its  impact  on  production,  income  and 
employment. This course of effects is termed the monetary policy transmission mechanism. 
As these variables are part and parcel of our day-to-day life and their effects vary on different 
segments of people, the world over Central Banks get their fair share of praise or blame for 
whatever  ensues  in  the  economy.  Savers  criticize  the  Central  Bank  for  low  interest  rates 
whereas  producers  who  fund  their  production  activities  from  bank  loans  appreciate  low 
interest  regime.  The  Central  Bank  is  also  routinely  criticized  by  various  segments  for  its 
policy  for  managing  the  exchange  rate.  Ultimately,  the  Central  Bank  manages  monetary 
policy to suit its mandate to secure the objectives it priorities, given the economic knowledge 
of the authorized officers and the Monetary Board Members. 
It is the monetary policy that determines how much money the Central Bank should print to 
facilitate the economy. Under the MLA, the Central Bank has the powers to print money by 
acquiring  several  kinds  of  assets.  Those  assets  are  provisional  advances  to  Government, 
purchase of Government securities, purchase of foreign exchange and lending to banks. In 
conducting  monetary  policy,  the  Central  Bank  determines  the  annual  growth  of  money 
desirable for the economy taking into consideration price inflation and production growth. In 
line  with  the  desirable  growth  of  money,  the  Central  Bank  maintains  its  asset  growth  to 
facilitate  new  money  required.  In  the  US  and  Euro  area  during  the  last  six  years,  central 
banks have been expanding their assets many times to print money so that the economy is 
flooded  with  money  to  be  invested  in  production  and  creating  employment  while  keeping 
interest rates at rear zero levels. 
Third, regulation and supervision of banks and financial institutions 
Banking, finance and leasing businesses fall within the purview of the Central Bank under the 
MLA  and  relevant  statutes.  State  supervision  according  to  the  global  literature  has  three 
specific  dimensions.  i.e.,  the  prudential  aspect,  conduct  of  sound  business  and  consumer 
protection. Prudential supervision promotes the safety and soundness of institutions through 
their  risk  management.  Conduct  of  sound  business  supervision  covers  fair  and  orderly 
conduct of businesses. Consumer protection covers safeguarding interest of consumers. The 
Central Bank’s supervision mainly covers prudential supervision in three areas, i.e., issues of 
regulations,  examinations  and  problem  resolution.  Issues  of  regulations  covers  maximum 
limits on business to limit risks, minimum requirements on risk mitigation instruments such as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  minimum  capital,  liquidity,  loan  loss  provisions  and  governance.  Periodical  examinations 
cover  the  assessment  of  risk  management  capacity  and  early  warnings  of  impending 
problems to take early remedial actions. Problem resolution covers solution to institutions in 
crisis or distress such as restructuring, bailing out and liquidation. This supervision has two 
perspectives at the Micro and Macro levels. Micro supervision means dealing with individual 
institutions.  Macro  supervision  means  actions  to  protect  the  system  stability.  Although  the 
differentiation between the two is barely understood by many, the central banks’ supervisory 
actions are clearly understood from how central banks have acted in crisis times. The best 
example  is  permitting  the  failure  of  small  ailing  institutions  and  bailing  out  of  systemically 
important  institutions.  However,  the  customers  of  each  ailing  institution  want  the  Central 
Bank to bail them out, despite risky behaviour of both customers and institutions. The Central 
Bank has no mandate to bail out each such institution and repay their investments. Similarly, 
the  Central  Bank  cannot  reasonably  be  held  responsible  for  institutions  and  persons 
engaged  in  banking,  finance  and  leasing  businesses  without  authority.  Such  unauthorized 
institutions  attract  investments  by  offering  unusual  products.  The  persons  associated  with 
such  institutions  are  usually  preying  on  greed,  bypassing  many  licensed  institutions  in  the 
country. They oppose the Central Bank when they are investigated, but they start blaming 
the Central Bank when they start failing. The Central Bank has traditionally strived away from 
intervening  such  failed  unauthorized  institutions.  However,  in  response  to  public  pressure, 
the bank may take a more interventionist approach, henceforth. 
Fourth, maintenance of a foreign reserve 
This is a responsibility of the Monetary Board. International reserve as authorized under MLA 
should  consists  of gold and  liquid foreign  currency  assets  such  as foreign  currency  notes, 
foreign  government  securities,  deposits  with  international  banks  and  international  fund 
transfer instruments Greek bonds. Such reserve has been about 70% – 80% of assets of the 
Central  Bank. There  is a  misunderstanding  even  among  staff  of  the  Central  Bank that the 
foreign reserve should be managed like assets portfolio with a preferred risk- return balance 
for business and profit. This is wrong. International reserve under MLA is a reserve, not a 
trading  portfolio,  held  for  the  purpose  of  meeting  foreseeable  deficit  in  the  international 
balance of payment of the country and thereby to support greater exchange rate stability and 
free  use  of  Sri  Lanka  rupee  for  current  international  transactions.  Therefore,  international 
reserves should comprise a highly liquid reserve without any known or estimated risk-taking. 
These days, some people are concerned about the fall of this international reserve. Some 
complain  that  the  reserve  contains  funds  mobilized  by  the  Government  through  foreign 
borrowing and not from net receipts from trade. Those views are subject to various technical 
arguments. What the Central Bank does is; it buys excess foreign exchange in the market 
and sells out of its reserve to meet the deficit in the market in order to maintain the exchange 
rate at a desirable level, given the relevant economic circumstances. If the reserve falls short 
of desired level, the Central Bank has the standard arrangements to replenish it. This reserve 
at  US$  7  billion  at  present  is  adequate  to  pay  for  four  months  of  imports  or  70%  of  the 
country’s short-term foreign borrowing if the necessity arises. The reserve is there for use in 
rainy days, not for showing off imaginary visits of a country living within its means. 
Fifth, Supply of payments and settlements services 
Economic  transactions  are  essentially  the  receipts  and  payments  made  through  cash  and 
non-cash methods. Non-cash payments such as cheques and fund transfers need systems 
to  ensure  that  the  payment  is  received  by  the  due  receivers.  The  Central  Bank  maintains 
cheque clearing through LankaClear system. That is why you get your cheque realized on 
the same day, if deposited before 12.00 noon. Further, all fund transfers among the banks 
are cleared and settled through the Central Bank’s RTGS system. In the RTGS, the Central 
Bank provides intra-day funding to deficit banks to settle payments. Such payments services 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  make the payments safer and faster. Payments are the circulation of money which is the life 
blood of the economy. 
Sixth, agent of the government 
This is the function that leads to a lot of criticism on the independence of the Central Bank. 
Six most important agency functions are the management of public debt, fiscal agent, official 
depository, financial adviser, management of Employees’ Provident Fund and Administration 
of Exchange Control Act. 
The most important agency function of the Central Bank is the financial/economic adviser to 
the Government. In this regard, as the Central Bank is responsible for the monetary policy in 
its entire scope and escalation. Conventionally central banks have had the responsibility to 
advise the Government on fiscal and other operations to the extent that they impinge on the 
economy and advise as to what should be the best course of policy action for the economy. 
Given  the  nature  of  the  central  banks’  functions,  advance  access  to  macroeconomic  and 
financial information and their expertise, central banks are the closest economic advisers to 
the  Government.  The  Central  Bank  statutorily  submits  a  number  of  reports  such  as  the 
Central  Bank  Annual  Report  as  part  of  this  advice.  In  addition,  the  Central  Bank  provides 
advice on various policy matters on an on-going basis to the Government. However, central 
banks world over are blamed for not providing constructive and impartial advice because of 
the independence issue. I will talk on central bank independence in a moment. 
As  the  Manager  of  Public  Debt,  the  Central  Bank  raises  local  and  foreign  debt  to  meet 
expenditures  approved  through  the  Consolidated  Fund,  maintains  such  loan  records  and 
service such loans out of funds at Government Account with the Central Bank. The popular 
criticism  here  is  the  monetization  of  the  budget  deficit  through  Central  Bank  funds.  The 
Central  Bank’s  purchase  of  Treasury  bills  is  the  cause  of  this  criticism.  The  Central  Bank 
purchases Treasury bills in order to use them for regulation of the domestic market liquidity 
(Open  Market  Operations)  as  permitted  in  the  MLA  and  not  for  lending  to  Government. 
Further, under the MLA, the Central Bank is authorized to provide provisional advances to 
the  Government  up  to  10%  of  the  estimated  Government  revenue  of  the  current  financial 
year, subject to recovery of each advance within 6 months, and such advances are only to 
meet the expenditures authorized under the Consolidated Fund. Managing public debt by the 
Central Bank is beneficial for the country since the Central Bank can raise public debt in line 
with  interest  rate  structure  envisaged  in  its  monetary  policy.  If  the  debt  management  is 
undertaken by a separate Government office, it may attempt to raise debts without regard to 
market  interest  rates  and  monetary  policy  and  that  will  cause  immense  conflicts  with  the 
current monetary policy. The opposite view is that as the Central Bank manages public debt, 
its monetary policy is constrained by the need to attempt to raise and maintain public debt at 
low cost. 
The  Central  Bank  as  the  banker  to  the  Government  maintains  accounts  of  the  General 
Treasury and Government institutions and agencies. The Treasury Account, known as DST 
Account, is the main transaction account to handle public debt flows. In terms of the MLA, 
Government or Government institutions and agencies must obtain the advice of the Monetary 
Board on the implications if any borrowing on the monetary conditions before raising such 
debts.  This  is  to  ensure  that  Government  borrowing  is  made  with  the  concurrence  of  the 
Monetary Board in line with the monetary policy. 
Two other important agency functions are the management of Employees’ Provident Fund 
and administration of Exchange Control Act, both of which have evolved controversy. In the 
case of Employees’ Provident Fund, the Monetary Board is empowered to manage the fund 
including investment of surplus funds in securities the Monetary Board considers fit. I know 
you have heard enough on some of the EPF investments made in the recent past. Given the 
nature  of  the  EPF  and  responsibilities  of  the  Government,  EPF  funds  are,  I  would  submit 
meant only for safer investments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The Exchange Control Act is to regulate and manage foreign exchange flows of the country 
which is essentially a part of macroeconomic management. In economics, exchange controls 
are  about  the  regulation  of  the  quantity  or  volume  in  the  foreign  exchange  market. 
Conversely, the Central Bank regulates the price or exchange rate in the market under the 
MLA.  Therefore,  provisions  of  the  Exchange  Control  Act  strengthen  the  macro-economic 
policy hand of the Central Bank. In nutshell, implementation of the Exchange Control Act is 
focused  nowadays  to  facilitate  financing  investment  –  savings  gap  of  the  country  through 
foreign resources which is essential for the development of the country. At present, foreign 
exchange transactions involving trade, services, travel and most of foreigners’ investments 
are largely free capital transactions of residents are subject to controls. You will appreciate 
that,  if  not  for  the  exchange  control  liberalization  since  1977,  the  country’s  economic 
development and living standard would not have achieved at present level. 
Consequences from previous regulatory interventions 
There are both success stories and consequences from previous regulatory interventions in 
the  market.  This  is  common  to  any  central  bank.  I  wish  to  brief  you  few  issues  and 
challenges confronted in the past and the way forward. 
The Central Bank’s intervention in 1988/89 finance companies crisis could bailout depositors 
to  some  extent  and  get  new  laws  passed  to  regulate  finance  companies.  However,  the 
Central Bank lost public funds amounting to Rs. 6 billion (need to check.) and the COPE is 
still  complaining  about  the  Central  Bank  not  being  able  to  recover  money.  Again  after 
10 years, finance company crisis hit in another form where depositors have lost their savings 
in the failed companies and the Central Bank has been unable to resolve the crisis even after 
six years. In line with the new Government’s announced policy, the Central Bank now gives 
the priority to it to have due justice to the depositors. We need to fix the finance companies 
sector  and  their  risky  business  models  through  strong  regulation  and  market  discipline. 
Otherwise, this sector will pose risk to the financial system stability in next 10 years. 
Another  regulatory  intervention  that  created  immense  macro  economic  consequences  was 
the  attempt  to  appreciate  and  maintain  the  currency  highly  over-valued  during  the  period 
2009 – 2012 at around Rs. 109 – 110 per US Dollar. For this purpose, the Central Bank lost 
about US$ 3.5 billion of foreign reserves leading to a foreign exchange crisis. Finally, crisis 
was managed by raising a loan of US$ 2.6 billion from the IMF to restore the international 
reserve and allowing a sharp depreciation of the currency to around Rs. 134 per US$ in June 
2012. This intervention led to raise interest rate, control credit and raise fuel prices which had 
dampening impact on the growth of the economy reducing to 6.3% in 2012. In this regard, 
although  some  raise  concerns  over  current  intervention  in  the  exchange  rate,  we  are 
comfortable  with  current  level  of  international  reserve,  pending  already  arranged  inflow  of 
foreign resources to strengthen the reserve. 
Another  case  in  point  is  the  Pramuka  Bank  failure  in  2002  –  2004.  The  Central  Bank’s 
decision  to  liquidate  the  bank  was  challenged  in  the  Court  of  Appeal  which  quashed  the 
Central  Bank  decision  on  the  ground  that  the  Central  Bank  had  not  followed  the  due 
procedure given in the Banking Act. Finally, the Government as a part of political decision in 
the interest of depositors bailed out the bank by vesting the bank with a new state bank set 
up  for  the  purpose.  If the  Central  Bank  was  conscious  of  its responsibilities,  it  could  have 
resorted to a different path to resolve the bank at the very early stage. World over, central 
banks  are  blamed  for  delayed  action,  not  effective  to  resolve  problems.  World  over, 
regulators  fall  behind  the  market  although  they  are  expected  to  correct  the  market. 
Regulators are burdened with laws, procedures and bureaucracy and lack of latest market 
information. They work for office hours. However, market participants work 24 hours and are 
innovative  for  regulatory  arbitrage.  The  human  greed  supported  with  moral  hazard  of 
regulation  creates  bubbles  cyclically  leading  to  financial  and  economic  crises  from  time  to 
time. The regulators and politicians create new laws, but they fail to prevent the next bubble. 
As  a  person  being  in  both  regulator  and  markets,  I  will  do  a  lot  of  work  to  address  this 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  universal issue hopefully. However, as financial regulators cannot control the greed, financial 
bubbles and crises are to happen. 
Finally,  the  Central  Bank  independence  is  the  confusing  and  very  technical  subject.  No 
Central Bank is divine. Central banks are also state institutions, but with greater functional 
independence provided for in the respective statutes due to its specific nature of operations 
involving  printing  of  money  and  conducting  monetary  policies.  The  simple  reason  for  the 
central bank independence is that a Government cannot have one hand to spend through the 
fiscal  policy  and  other  hand  to  print  money  to  finance  expenditure  through  the  monetary 
policy. Therefore, the clear separation between the Treasury and Central Bank is necessary, 
otherwise,  economies  and  monetary  systems  will  collapse  sooner  or  later.  Therefore,  the 
Central Bank independence and the close co-operation between the Central Bank and the 
Treasury are highly recognized. 
I wish to quote from the Exter Report on this matter as the best piece of literature. I quote 
“….There  are,  however,  many  important  problems  of  monetary  policy,  especially  those 
relating to fiscal policy, on which a central bank must necessarily work in close harmony with 
the government. On such problems, experience in many countries has shown that a central 
bank with a degree of independence of the government proper can make economic analyses 
and  hold  views  which  are  more  detached  and  objective  than  those  of  a  government 
department.  Many  governments  have  learned  to  value  and  to  use  the  sort  of  independent 
and objective advice on monetary and other aspects of economic policy which central banks 
have  been  able  to  give.  On  matters  of  vital  interest  to  the  state,  however,  it  must  be 
recognized that even in the absence of some such formula as the British or the Australian, it 
would  be  impossible  for  the  Central  Bank  to  adopt  a  policy  or  pursue  a  course  of  action 
contrary to the policy of the Government of the day. No agency which is a creature of the 
Government can be entirely independent of the Government. While the Government may be 
prepared to give an independent regulatory agency rather wide discretion in a field such as 
that of money, there is no gain-saying that in the last analysis the Government must assume 
responsibility  for  monetary  policy  as  for  other  policies.  The  Governor  and  the  appointed 
member of the Monetary Board cannot help being acutely conscious of the fact that, since no 
Parliament  can  bind  its  successors,  their  independence  and  tenure  in  office  under  the 
proposed legislation is limited by the ultimate power of the Government to change the law. 
The exact degree and independence of the Central Bank is likely to vary from time to time. 
For  example,  central  banks  can  ordinarily  act  more  independently  in  stable,  peace-time 
economic conditions than in time of war or other national emergency. They also tend to take 
stronger stands on issues which are primarily monetary in character than on related issues 
which may simply have monetary repercussions. 
The ideal which it is hoped that the proposed law will achieve is one in which there will be 
continuous and constructive co-operation between the Monetary Board and the Government. 
The principal instrument for achieving this co-operation should be the Permanent Secretary 
to the Ministry of Finance whose membership on the Board will ensure at all times that his 
Minister’s views will be made known to the other members of the Board. The effectiveness of 
this  co-operation  and  co-ordination  between  the  Board  and  the  Government  will  depend 
more  upon  the  men  occupying  the  key  positions  at  particular  times  than  upon  any  legal 
formula,  no  matter  how  carefully  or  elaborately  it  might  be  worked  out.  A  relationship  as 
complex, and sometimes as delicate, as this one is certain to be, cannot be established full-
blown  by  a  piece  of  legislation.  It  must  be  the  result,  as  in  other  countries,  of  years  of 
experience  and  the  slow  growth  of  political  conventions.  One  further  point  is  well  worth 
making. There is a clear need in Ceylon for some sort of economic council at Cabinet level to 
achieve improved co-ordination of Government economic policies. If in future such a council 
is  set  up  it  is  suggested  that  the  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank should have  a  place  upon 
it……” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Finally, officers of the central banks are not gods to know all problems in advance and give 
100% solutions. We are all human beings and make mistakes. But we need to do things in 
an accountable manner and use our statutory discretion credibly to protect the public trust in 
us. For that we need to maintain credible procedures for decision-making where the public 
and  courts  can  scrutinize  to  judge  whether  we  have  made  decisions  in  fair  manner 
considering all available information. In that regard, the Central Bank has long way to go. My 
initial days of office are spent to put in place these procedures in line with the mandate and 
nature of public interest. I know it is not easy to change things that have been there for long 
time. A lot of sacrifices are necessary. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I know what I have stated here are confusing you enough. However, I am sure you had some 
technical insight into the Central Bank. I have no doubt you now appreciate that the Central 
Bank is the heart of the economy as many state so. 
Thank you very much for listening to me. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
