  Gent Sejko: The economy and banks, present and future challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  round  table  on  “The 
economy and banks, present and future challenges”, organised by the Bank of Albania and 
Government of Albania with the banking system, Tirana, 16 September 2015. 
 Your Excellency Prime Minister, 
Honoured representatives of international institutions, 
Dear bank executives and representatives, 
This meeting seeks to once again draw the attention on non-performing loans, an issue that 
has been discussed extensively over the recent years. It aims at fostering the shared and 
concrete  commitment  to  reduce  the  stock  of  non-performing  loans,  increase  the  financial 
intermediation by the banking sector and underpin Albania’s economic growth. 
Following, I would like to list some facts. 
The  high  level  of  non-performing  loans  has  not  affected  the  banking  sector’s  stability. 
Liquidity  and  capitalisation  indicators  remain  adequate  and  the  financial  performance  has 
been positive and improving. 
But, the still-high percentage of non-performing loans has contributed to a higher perception 
of risk by banks; in turn, they have adopted a more conservative approach to lending. 
Our survey data point to tightened lending standards; meanwhile, the lending volume, albeit 
positive, is still considered as low. 
The  credit  quality  has  improved  during  this  year.  The  non-performing  loans  ratio,  after 
peaking  25%,  fell  to  around  21%  in  July  2015.  We  believe  this  improvement  reflects  the 
measures taken in the last 2–3 years, of which I would like to single out: 
a) 
Amendments to the law  “On income tax” at the end of 2013, to facilitate the loan 
loss write off from the balance sheet; 
Amendments to  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedures  in  September  2013,  to  improve  the 
collateral execution process; 
Entry into force of a regulation of the Bank of Albania, which renders obligatory the 
write off of loans classified by banks as “loss” for a period longer than 3 years; 
the  work  accomplished  in  cooperation  with  the  commercial  banks  to  restructure 
loans when the borrowers are exposed to more than one bank; 
b) 
c) 
d) 
Albeit  the  number  of  non-performing  loans  subject  to  the  execution  process  has  been 
significantly up, the improvement of the credit quality reflects mainly the loan loss write offs 
from banks’ balance sheet. 
For  the  first  half  of  2015,  its  value  amounted  to  around  ALL  11  billion.  The  write  off  from 
bank’s balance sheet is both healthy for the bank and useful for the economy, as it: 
– 
provides a more realistic picture of the banks’ loan portfolio, releases the capital and 
improves their financial balance; 
improves  bank  processes,  thanks to  a  more  efficient  use  of  human, financial  and 
technical resources, and redirects the focus of the bank toward new loans; 
improves  the  overall  functioning  of  the  financial  market,  as  it  contributes  to  the 
market “exit” of non-competitive businesses. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    
 
contributes positively to the market participants’ assessment of the banking sector 
(ratings) and, subsequently, to the assessment of Albania’s economy; 
provides  conditions  to  better  manage  debt  collection,  but  always  accompanied 
with the necessary message that this does not imply forgiving the borrowers 
debt. 
In our case, the process of loan loss write off from banks’ balance sheet is not a detached 
process from real developments. On the contrary, it reflects the gradual improvement in non-
performing loans. 
In  concrete  terms,  over  the  last  two  years,  the  growth  rate  of  non-performing  loans  has 
decelerated at extraordinary rates, banks’ annual spending for provisions has fallen, and new 
loans, especially those denominated in lek, have been stable. 
On their side, banks have been increasingly committed to this process. Usually, it happens 
when  the  effectiveness  of  the  process  improves  and/or  banks  expectations  for  lending 
improve. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  would  like  to  point  out  that  although  the  credit  quality  has  improved,  the  level  of  non-
performing loans is considered as still high, and it should be lowered at a faster pace. This is 
a  complex  process  that  puts  to  test  the  adequacy  of  the  legal  framework,  as  well  as  the 
coordination and consistent implementation of institutional policies. 
These  challenges  were  identified  in  the  Annual  Forum  organised  in  June.  Some  of  them 
acknowledge the need for improving the legal framework. Others point to unifying, in a single 
law,  important  stipulations  about  the  execution  of  executive  title,  which  are  currently 
envisaged across several laws. 
We should be aware that a part of the difficulties arise from the dimensions of this problem; 
also, until a while ago, the justice system lacked the experience and specialised expertise on 
these  matters  and  is  still  facing  inadequate  capacities  to  handle  such  practices.  However, 
inadequate  legal  provisions  and  their  inconsistent  implementation  in  practice  render  the 
collateral execution process tedious, uncertain and costly for the parties involved. 
The  coordination  of  institutional  policies  is  another  key  process  to  respond  to  various 
problems  in  a timely  and  appropriate fashion.  For  example, the  recent Action  Plan for the 
resolution  of  non-performing 
level  of  communication  and 
commitment of public institutions and the Bank of Albania to find a sustainable solution. 
Many of the issues concerning the banking industry, which the Bank of Albania considers as 
crucial, have been incorporated in this Plan. For example, the preparation of the draft law 
“On  bankruptcy”,  a  commendable  effort  by  the  Ministry  of  Justice  represents  a  significant 
development and unique opportunity to render the resolution of a financial obligation as an 
enforceable, predictable, and efficient process. 
Concluding,  I  would  like  to  underline  that  reducing  the  level  of  non-performing  loans  is 
closely related to the magnitude of financial intermediation by the banking sector. 
The  need  to  redirect  private  investments  towards  new  sectors  in  the  economy,  the  small 
market size, problems related to the low quality of financial reporting by private entities, and 
slowdown of economic growth rates in Albania have dictated an unstable private demand for 
loans . 
Therefore, it is important to find, in addition to macroeconomic policies, new alternatives to 
boost  domestic  demand,  promote  optimism  in  the  economy  and  contribute  positively  to 
businesses and consumer expectations. The acceleration of economic growth would provide 
the conditions for faster and steadier improvement in the level of non-performing loans. 
Thank you! 
loans  represents  a  new 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
