  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Developments in Malaysia’s banking sector 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Official Launch of the Asian Banking School, Kuala 
Lumpur, 17 August 2015. 
 Thank you for inviting me to deliver my remarks at this official launch of the Asian Banking 
School (ABS). It is my great pleasure to be a part of this momentous occasion. Today is the 
culmination  of  the  vision  to  take  professional  development  and  continuous  learning  in  the 
Malaysian banking sector to new heights. It also marks the beginning of another important 
and exciting journey in our overall effort to enhance the standards, quality, productivity and 
competitiveness of the workforce of the financial services industry. It’s an important first step 
in professionalising the industry. 
The banking sector in Malaysia has come a long way to grow both in strength and stature, 
steadily  advancing  and  maturing  as  it  seeks  to  become  more  effective  and  efficient  in 
performing its intermediation function. In the last decade alone, the industry has undergone 
some fundamental changes following a period of transformation facilitated by the Financial 
Sector Masterplan (FSMP). Today, our banking system is placed on a solid footing on the 
back  of  strong  capitalisation,  strengthened  by  improved  risk management  and  governance 
practices. We are also seeing increased sophistication and a wide spectrum of products and 
services being offered by diverse players in the marketplace. 
And  the  more  competitive  environment  has  led  to  continuous  performance  improvements, 
with pervasive use of new technologies for operational efficiencies from back to front office 
and  new  means  of  interface  with  consumers.  Owing  to  our  combined  efforts,  these 
developments have positioned the banking sector well to take the next leap forward to take 
advantage of new business opportunities, both onshore and abroad. 
In  charting  the  transformation  journey  of  our  financial  services  sector,  we  have  long  been 
aware that the quality of our workforce is fundamental to its success. Much focus therefore 
has  been given  since  the  last  decade  to  talent development,  with  significant  investment  in 
capacity  building  and  infrastructural  ecosystem  dedicated  to  raise  the  standards  on 
education  in  financial  services.  As  we  progress  into  the  new  era  of  growth,  our  continued 
success in the ever-changing environment will very much depend on our ability to harness 
the  industry’s  intellectual  capital  more  productively.  As  envisioned  in  the  new  Financial 
Sector Blueprint that succeeded the FSMP, the financial sector is being positioned to play a 
key role in realising Malaysia’s vision to become a developed economy. This design thinking 
for the industry necessitates the banking sector to further enhance its dynamism in the face 
of competition for innovation and quality in the offering of financial products and services. It 
also demands greater agility, astuteness and foresight on our part to go beyond and able to 
ride  on  the  next  wave  of  growth  –  either  at  the  higher  end  of  the  spectrum  of  financial 
services  that  focus  on  sophisticated  and  high  value  added  activities  or  the  lower  end  that 
cater for the traditionally underserved, as well as opportunity to fully realise the benefits from 
the greater regional and international integration. 
At the same time, a myriad of challenges including global regulatory reform, transformational 
technology and changing generational expectations will continue to drive change in the years 
to come. This would also mean that financial institutions will need to meet higher standards 
of how they manage risks and govern their operations. 
Against  this  background,  the  professionalism,  productivity  and  capability  of  our  talents 
become  more  important  now  than  ever  before.  Future  success  will  hinge  on  our  ability  to 
constantly  remould  the  workforce  in  the  banking  industry  for  a  new  marketplace,  with 
emphasis on a corresponding increase in the levels of knowledge, skills, competencies and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the 
industry, 
to  be  achieved  via 
overall quality of our talents. We clearly have an urgent and important task ahead of us. The 
critical questions  therefore  need to  be  asked  here  –  Have  we  done  enough to sustain the 
competitiveness  of  our  workforce  to  meet  the  current  and  future  industry  needs  and  what 
more can be done to propel the industry to new heights? 
With these questions in mind, allow me to now share two strategies in the context of human 
capital development that, to my mind, are key catalysts toward a new era of development of 
the banking sector, as well as the broader financial services industry, with a particular focus 
on our aspiration with regard to the role of ABS towards the attainment of these strategies. 
First, is the strategic imperative toward professionalising the banking profession to create a 
banking workforce committed to highest standards of professional conduct, knowledge and 
competence. 
Our  motivation  in  pursuing  this  imperative  is  many-pronged  –  firstly,  the  move  to 
professionalize 
the  development  of  professional 
qualifications and specialised certification track, that can play a vital role in ensuring that the 
banking  workforce  consistently  achieves  high  levels  of  capability  through  continuing 
professional development (CPD) and learning. 
Secondly,  by  adhering 
to  professional  standards,  professional  conduct  and  CPD 
requirements  of  professional  bodies,  a  higher  level  of  professionalism  and  behaviour 
demonstrated  by  the  banking  workforce  will  generate  increased  public  confidence  and 
trustworthiness  in  the  banking  sector.  Also  vitally  important,  is  the  objective  of  creating 
structured career pathways for banking professionals through qualification and certification, 
thereby increasing the professional image, stature and attractiveness of the banking sector 
as a profession. Consequently we should be able to attract the best minds and talents into 
our mist. 
The ABS, together with the Asian Institute of Chartered Bankers (AICB), is envisioned to be 
the  catalysts  in  driving  this  important  agenda  of  professionalising  the  industry.  The 
transformation of Institut Bank-Bank Malaysia (IBBM) – the industry’s former training outfit, 
into AICB – the new professional body for the banking sector, in 2013 was an important step 
in this direction. The AICB champions the vision of professionalising bankers and advocates 
for high standards of professionalism via the introduction of its new membership framework, 
subjecting its members to a strict code of conduct, professionalism and ethics. 
Every effort now needs to be made to build on, and elevate further, the quality and value of 
AICB’s award of the Chartered Banker qualification so that it can be truly regarded as a gold 
standard  for  the  banking  professionals.  In  this  regard,  the  banking  industry  ought  to  give 
appropriate  recognition  to  individuals  and  staff  who  attain  this  prestigious  qualification.  Of 
equal  importance  is  the  demand  for  higher  and  specialist  skills  for  high  value  added  jobs, 
there are also merits in introducing more specialised qualification and certification according 
to functional  areas  or  business  lines,  beyond  the  current  certification  offerings for treasury 
traders and credit officers. The suite of qualifications and certifications would then allow the 
banking profession to raise the bar of competence higher across sector. 
In  taking  on  its  mandate  as  the  training  and  educational  institution  for  the  industry,  we 
envisage the ABS to play a central role in supporting AICB as its premium learning partner in 
the  move  toward  professionalising  the  banking  sector.  This  will  involve  curriculum  design 
towards the attainment of professional qualifications and the provision of high quality learning 
solutions that fulfils the AICB’s CPD requirement for its members. A key focus area for ABS 
in the near to medium term is in acquiring the necessary capabilities and resources to enable 
it to carry out its objectives effectively. Central to this would be in developing strong in-house 
faculty  and  resources  which  may  include  visiting  professors  and  industry  subject  matter 
experts. ABS is also expected to anticipate and spearhead cutting edge programs tailored to 
the evolving needs of the banking industry. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  We have high hopes that in the next 5 years, ABS will distinguish itself in the quality of its 
programs,  developing  a  particular  strength  in  delivering  integrative  and  practice-oriented 
education  and  learning  in  banking  and  business  that  combine  intellectual  know-how  with 
practical  applications.  In  an  increasingly  interconnected  world,  our  workforce  must  be 
empowered with the right knowledge, the tools, the skills and the mind-set to deliver world-
class performance. 
The value proposition of ABS in adopting contemporary approach to business and banking 
education  that  equip  students  for  the  real  world  will  be  demanded  as  any  expertise  in  a 
particular  discipline.  Ultimately,  the  aim  is  to  integrate  the  multidisciplinary  nature  of  the 
banking industry  with modern management and professionalism, in turn developing talents 
with  abilities  to  combine  traditional  disciplines  as  they  tackle  the  challenges  of  uncertainty 
and complexity. 
A monumental task is upon ABS. Its challenging and exciting. But I have every confidence 
that  collectively,  the  combined  effort  of  AICB  and  ABS  together  with  the  industry  would 
transform  the  landscape  of  the  Malaysian  banking  workforce  in  the  coming  years  into  one 
which is highly skilled and highly qualified. 
This brings me to the second strategy toward sustaining the competitiveness of talents for 
the  banking  sector,  which  relates  to  the  imperative  to  increase  state  of  readiness  for 
graduates at entry-level into employability, to bridge gaps and allow for a smooth transfer of 
academic skills to the work environment. What we should strive towards is a more structured 
and coordinated approach to training that reduces time to competence for graduates. 
We need to consider a framework for structured industry-wide internship or apprenticeship 
programs  for  new  entrants  to  the  industry.  The  structured  internship  program  for  the 
accounting  fraternity  can  perhaps  be  a  good  reference  point  for  the  banking  sector  to 
consider and emulate. 
ABS can lead the pack in this initiative by playing a bigger role in the review of FSTEP by 
making  it  more  relevant  and  forward  working  to  industry  requirements.  To  achieve  these 
objectives we need to collaborate and work collectively as an industry to work more closely 
and in partnership with ABS and AICB. Clearly, there is scope for stronger collaboration in 
workforce development that delivers high value proposition between the banking institutions 
and the industry’s talent development entities. Strong support and inputs from the banking 
institutions to systematically analyse skills requirements and training needs of their talents on 
an on-going basis is much needed and should serve as important feedback mechanism for 
ABS so that academic curriculum is tuned to the changing needs of the industry. 
In closing, I would like to congratulate ABS for its launch today which opens an exciting new 
chapter as it seeks to contribute to the new era of growth for the banking sector. 
Whilst its raison d’être is to serve the Malaysian banking sector, I have every confidence that 
Asian Banking School as the name suggests, will in no time start to expand its reach and 
relevance beyond national boundaries to evolve its role in meeting learning and development 
needs of the banking workforce in the region. 
Last but not least, let me also thank everyone involved in the process that has brought us to 
this  momentous  occasion  today.  Without  their  vision  and  commitment,  today’s  occasion 
would not be possible. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
