  S S Mundra: Indian payments system kaleidoscope 
Valedictory address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  International  Conference  on  National  Payment  Schemes,  organised  by  the  National 
Payments Corporation of India (NPCI), Mumbai, 22 May 2015. 
 1. 
Shri. M. Balachandran, Chairman, National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI); 
Shri A.P.Hota, MD & CEO, NPCI; members of the NPCI Board, other distinguished guests, 
delegates to the Conference from India and abroad ; ladies and gentlemen! It is a privilege to 
be  in  the  midst  of  this  distinguished  gathering  to  deliver  the  valedictory  address  at  the 
“International  Conference  on  National  Payment  Schemes”  this  afternoon.  Indeed,  this  is  a 
unique initiative by NPCI, the first of its kind to be held in India, which has provided a forum 
for  interaction  amongst  the  market  participants  and  institutions  from  various  jurisdictions 
engaged in various payment system related activities. 
2. 
I observe that over the past day and a half of the conference, representatives from 
various  countries-  both  developed  and  developing-  have  made  presentations  about 
innovative ways in which they have been making a difference to the payment systems in their 
respective  countries  through  diverse  product  and  service  offerings.  I  understand  that 
evolution  and  growth  of  card  payment  mechanism  and  mobile  payments  have  been 
deliberated upon and so also, the issues of cyber security, innovation in payment systems, 
challenges/  opportunities  faced  by  the  global  payment  systems,  etc.  I  am  sure  all  of  you 
present here must have immensely benefitted from this experience sharing exercise and I 
believe  that  you  have  a  better  appreciation  of the  national  payment  schemes  operating  in 
different economies across the globe. What I propose to do in my address is to briefly trace 
the  recent  developments  in  the  area  of  payment  systems  in  India,  highlight  some  of  the 
issues and challenges that are likely to assume importance in the foreseeable future and the 
way forward in dealing with these challenges. Let me, however, begin with emphasising the 
importance of the payment system for the economy. 
Importance of payment systems 
3. 
We  all  know  that  safe,  secure  and  efficient  payment  systems  are  vital  for  the 
working of financial markets and more generally for the economy itself. Any disruption to the 
payment system has the potential to disrupt the functioning of the financial markets and lead 
to systemic instability. When we talk about such large scale disruption probably we have in 
mind  the  bigger  and  systemically  important  payment  infrastructure  and  larger  payment 
system members, viz. Financial Institutions, Exchange Settlement System, Central Counter 
Parties and so on. At the other end of the spectrum, the payment system has to also serve 
the retail customers. In that sense, the payment systems also have an inclusion mandate so 
that the day to day needs of the people like remittance of funds and small value payments 
are met. It is also important to emphasize here that the Central Bank and the Government 
are  also  interested  in  weaning  people  away  from  cash  and  induce  them  to  use  cashless 
mode of payments like card, mobile, direct debit etc. 
Role of payment system in promoting financial inclusion 
4. 
Let  me  briefly  touch  upon  the  role  of  payment  system  in  promoting  financial 
inclusion.  There  is  a  strong  linkage  between financial  inclusion  and  the  payment  systems. 
The financial inclusion in its simplest form refers to banking inclusion where the endeavour is 
to  link  the  unbanked  population  with  the  formal  banking  system  by  opening  their  bank 
accounts. To inculcate the banking and savings habit amongst the people, it is important that 
all  individuals  have  bank  accounts  where  funds  could  be  held  –  which  initially  could  be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
through remittances in form of direct benefit transfers under the Central /State Government 
schemes. 
5. 
The  PMJDY  scheme  launched  by  the  Government  of  India  has  achieved 
stupendous success in linking the unbanked with the banking system. Bank accounts have 
been  opened  for  nearly  99.99  per  cent  of  the  households  in  India  which  has  brought  in 
150 mn  new  customers  coming  into  the  banking  system  fold  while  nearly  135  mn  RuPay 
debit cards have also been issued. These are huge numbers on a standalone basis and the 
payment system must be geared to handle this multi-fold increase in transaction volume. The 
payment system would need to be robust enough to process, settle and reconcile millions of 
new  transactions  day  in  and  day  out.  I  am  sure  that  the  Indian  participants  present  here 
would leverage upon the intricacies of a wide variety of payment system infrastructure learnt 
during  the  course  of  the  conference  to  improve  the  payment  system  infrastructure  in  the 
country to be able to cater to the needs of a billion people. 
    I now turn to some of the important developments that have taken place in the area 
Evolution of payment systems in India 
6. 
of payment system in India under the guidance and oversight of Reserve Bank of India. 
• 
Introduction  of  MICR  clearing  to  mechanise  the  cheque  clearing  system  in  early 
1980s 
Setting  up  of  the  Institute  for  Development  and  Research  in  Banking  Technology 
(IDRBT)  in  1996  with  an  aim  of  technological  upgradation  and  development  of  a 
reliable communication network 
Introduction  of  Electronic  Clearing  Service  and  Electronic  Funds  Transfer  in  the 
1990s 
Permitting issuance of Credit and Debit cards by the banks in 1990s 
Interconnectivity of ATMs across the country by introducing the National Financial 
Switch in 2003 
Following the improvement in the Information Technology and introduction of CBS 
by banks, RTGS and NEFT introduced by RBI in 2004 
Introduction  of  Cheque  Truncation  System  (February  2008)  and  new  RTGS  with 
enhanced features (October 2013). 
The second factor authentication for the ‘card not present’ transaction, the first of its 
kind in the world, introduced by RBI (February 2009.) 
Launch of RuPay – a domestic card payment network (March 2012) 
• 
7. 
Let  me  also  give  you  a  sense  of  the  manner  in  which  the  volume  and  value  of 
payment  system  transactions  have  gone  up  in  recent  years.  In  volume  terms,  the  no.  of 
transactions handled in the RTGS has gone up to 92.77 mn as at the end of March 2015 
from 68.51 mn as at the end of March 2013. During the same period, in value terms, these 
transactions have gone up from Rs.677 tn to Rs.754 tn. Under the retail payments (including 
paper clearing and retail electronic clearing), the volume handled more than doubled from 
694 mn as at the end of March 2013 to 1687 mn as at the end of March 2015. Similarly, in 
value terms also, this has more than doubled to Rs.65 tn from about Rs.32 tn. Further, the 
volume and value of card payments have also more than doubled in both volume and value 
terms  during  this  period. The  volume  handled  as  at  the  end  of  March  2015  was  1737 mn 
transactions with a value of Rs.3.3 tn. These numbers are mighty impressive considering the 
level of economic development in the country but as I mentioned earlier, there is much more 
work needed to be done going forward. We need to develop the capabilities to handle more 
  2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
and more number of transactions in a safe, secure and efficient manner, if our objective of 
weaning consumers away from cash has to be achieved. 
8. 
Several  initiatives  for  infrastructure  enhancements  are  currently  on  which  include 
implementation of Trade Receivables and Discounting System and the Bharat Bill Payment 
System.  RBI  had  come  out  with  a  Vision  Document  for  2012–15  earlier  and  most  of  the 
objectives set out therein have been accomplished. The vision of RBI is to ensure that all 
‘Payments  and  Settlement  Systems  in  the  country  are  safe,  efficient,  interoperable, 
authorised, accessible, inclusive and compliant with international standards”. As I mentioned 
earlier, a sound and efficient payment system is a pre-requisite for a stable financial system 
and  with  the  increasing  volume  and  value  of  transactions,  Central  Banks  can  ill-afford  to 
ignore payment systems. RBI has also initiated the process of setting up of Payment Banks 
to further financial inclusion. 
  Role of NPCI 
9. 
You would have gone into the details of the role of NPCI in the sessions during the 
course of this conference. Since, I had the distinction of serving on the Board of NPCI for 
some time, I would briefly say a few words on the role and achievements of NPCI. It was set 
up  with  an  objective  of  ensuring  pan-India  payment  systems  with  uniform  business 
processes  and  standards  and  has  already  created  an  enabling  eco  system  necessary  for 
handling this huge task. Some of the achievements of NPCI which have significantly altered 
the retail payments landscape in the country are as under: 
• 
The  National  Financial  Switch  (NFS),  a  vast  network  of  ATMs,  has  enhanced 
accessibility  to  cash  withdrawal  and  other  basic  banking  facilities  for  customers, 
besides facilitating value added services such as bill payments. 
Cheque Truncation System (CTS) – It has been rolled out successfully in three grid 
locations across the country covering over 85% of cheque volume processed. NPCI 
has now begun to facilitate the repository of images of cheques processed in CTS. 
Immediate Payment Service (IMPS) which started in October 2010 as an inter-bank 
mobile  payment  system  has,  over  the  years,  transformed  into  a  multi-channel 
24x7 remittance  platform  in  the  country,  accessible  through  net  banking,  mobile 
banking, at BC point, at branches as well as at ATMs. 
RuPay – the domestic card system which was launched in 2011 has slowly gained 
popularity and with its linkage under the Jan DhanYojana has become a household 
name. 
Aadhaar based payments, through linkage of biometric identifier with bank accounts, 
is facilitating the benefit payments to bank accounts of millions of beneficiaries, and 
will have significant on financial inclusion efforts in the country. 
National Unified USSD Platform (NUUP) – The setting up of National Unified USSD 
Platform for providing an interoperable USSD based mobile banking system is an 
unparalled feat in itself as it links all telcos and all major banks, and offers services 
in over 11 languages. It has a lot of expectations as well as its potential for enabling 
financial inclusion is enormous. 
The above are some of the milestones in the journey of NPCI thus far. I fervently 
10. 
hope  NPCI  is  geared  up  to  handle  the  huge  volume  of  payments  arising  out  of  recent 
initiatives  of  the  Government  to  distribute  social  benefits  to  the  citizens  in  the  electronic 
mode. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Replicating global success stories 
11. 
There are many success stories within different geographies across the globe in the 
arena of payment systems. To mention a few – the m-pesa system of Kenya, the ‘tap and go’ 
card  scheme  at  Singapore,  the  union  pay  card  scheme  of  China.  If  these  models  have 
worked so well and have been so successful in their respective countries, can we not simply 
replicate the model in our jurisdictions? The answer, I am afraid, is a big NO. Let me say why 
with the example of India. 
12. 
India  is  diverse  –  in  the  sense  of  social  customs,  culture,  religious  beliefs.  The 
diversity and multitude of population and geographic spread of the country- are some factors 
which make our task extremely complex. The ease with which people can handle technology 
also differs across people of different age groups, income levels, literacy levels etc. Hence, it 
is difficult to design product which can  work seamlessly across all sections of the society. 
Thus, while it is true that no scheme or model can work seamlessly across all economies; 
what might indeed be best is learn from the other successful delivery models and customise 
the product and service offerings to suit the DNA of the respective economy and society. 
Technology and the payment systems 
13. 
Growing mobile and internet penetration has opened new avenues for the payment 
systems services. This is reflected in the way the new age customer transacts her business. 
To quote Brett King, the author of ‘Bank 3.0’: 
“Customers don’t use channel or products in isolation of one another. Everyday 
customers would interact with banks in various ways. They might wire money to a 
third party, visit ATM to withdraw cash, go online to check salary credit, pay an 
utility bill , use their credit card to purchase some goods from a retailer , fill out a 
personal loan application online, ring up the call centre to see what their credit 
card balance is or report a lost card. More sophisticated they are, they may also 
trade some stocks, transfer some cash from their Euro A/c to USD a/c put up a 
lump sum in a Mutual Fund or sign up a home insurance policy online”. 
14. 
The  above  statement  denotes  the  diverse  set  of  banking  applications  which 
technology  can  support.  In  fact,  there  is  a  need  of  a  single  channel  solution  to  multiple 
product  offerings.  It  must,  however,  be  remembered  that  technology  is  just  an  enabler. 
Almost  all  banks  in  India  have  invested  heavily  in  web-based  and  mobile-based  delivery 
banking  and  payment  solutions.  Very  often,  these  channels  are  supported  by  different 
vendors and also one use different technology which increases complexity and involves cost. 
Technology is ever evolving and adoption of new technology for staying contemporaneous is 
a  costly  proposition.  It  is  pertinent,  therefore,  that  all  the  capabilities  of  the  technology 
enabled  delivery  solutions  are  optimally  exploited,  so  that  we  are  not  saddled  with 
unproductive investments. 
15. 
While there is a lot of euphoria around the adoption of mobile banking and mobile 
payments, the model has been relatively less successful barring a few countries where the 
right  environmental  factors  existed.  I  am  talking  here  about  the  delivery  of  financial  and 
payment services by using the mobile device rather than its use as an access channel for 
internet  banking  etc.  In  the  Indian  context,  an  objective  analysis  would  reveal  various 
reasons  for  slow  adoption.  There  are  technical  issues  like  type  of  handsets,  variety  of 
operating  systems,  encryption  requirements,  inter-operable  platforms  or  the  lack  of  it, 
absence of standardised communication structures, difficulty in downloading application, time 
lag  in  activation  etc.  These  get  accentuated  by  the  operational  difficulties  in  on-boarding 
merchants and customers and customer ownership issues. The interplay of these factors has 
stymied the deployment and adoption of mobile banking as an effective and widely accepted 
delivery  channel.  Issues  of  coordination  and  cooperation  between  banks  and  telcos,  is 
another aspect which acts as either a driver or a barrier to the adoption of mobile banking. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
These  issues  need  to  be  quickly  resolved  if  the  mobile  payments  have  succeed  in  our 
country. 
Emerging scenario 
16.
•
    It would be interesting here to visualize few scenarios which may emerge in future:
Simultaneous impact of playing out of Reed’s law and Moore’s law where both “the
payment space” and “the pinpoints” within the space would grow exponentially.
Whether  some  of  the  technology  companies  and  retail  banks  can  undergo
transformation to such an extent that the technology firm would appear more like a
retail bank and vice-a-versa.
More and more collaboration between a bank and non-bank.
The  gradual  shifting  of  micro  payments  to  mobiles  leading  to  reduction  in
requirements of physical currency notes and coins.
Salaries  and  payments  distributed  directly  on  the  mobile  wallet  akin  to  currency
distribution.
With  the  reduction  in  cash  transaction,  ATMs  might  have  to  offer  other  services
rather than only dispensing cash in order to remain relevant.
Ease of credit through KYC, Mass Market Credit Rating at the click of a button.
Whether cross-border transactions can also happen on mobiles in future?
•
•
The  payment  system  players  would  have  to  gear  up  to  accommodate  and  leverage  upon 
such possibilities going ahead. 
Regulatory challenges 
17.
The innovations in the payment system space and introduction of new products are
already posing challenges for the regulators and these challenges are likely to intensify going 
forward. Some of the possible dilemmas/challenges that the regulators would be faced with 
in future are: 
•
Whether payment and settlement would remain banks’ preserve? If not, what would
be regulatory stance?
What would be the way forward in regulating virtual currencies?
Cloud computing and Cyber Security
Striking the right balance between ease of doing business and ensuring security
Challenges from mobile transactions becoming more user centric than transaction
centric
Monitoring of cross-currency / cross-border mobile transactions, not if but when they
happen.
  The  most  important  challenge  for  the  regulator  would  be  to  do  a  tight  rope  walk  between 
providing the “Right Guidance but not at the cost of stifling innovation”. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude by once again congratulating NPCI for organising this international
18.
Conference.  The  institution  has  so  far  overcome  difficult  challenges  and  made  significant 
achievements in different spheres of retail payment arena. However, it is just the beginning. 
It  would  need  to  be  nimble-footed  and  innovate  continuously  to  meet  the  challenges 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
5 
  
 
emanating from a dynamic world. As I said before, such conferences serve as an important 
forum to exchange ideas. I do hope that there are significant takeaways for the participants, 
which  would  help  shape  the  design  of  robust  and  efficient  payment  systems  to  handle 
multitude  of  transactions  and  contribute  to  the  economic  growth  in  the  respective 
jurisdictions. 
Thank you! 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
