  Juyeol Lee: Bank of Korea’s 65th anniversary 
Speech by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the commemorating ceremony 
of the Bank of Korea’s 65th anniversary, Bank of Korea, Seoul, 12 June 2015. 
 Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea family, 
Today marks the 65th anniversary of the Bank of Korea’s foundation as Korea’s central bank. 
On this happy occasion I would like to express my sincere gratitude to all those who have 
served  before  us  in  the  Bank  of  Korea,  devoting  themselves  throughout  the  years  to  the 
development of the Bank and the national economy, and to those who have given us support 
and  encouragement  as  well.  Let  me  also  express  my  compliments  to  each  and  every 
member  of  our  staff,  for  faithfully  carrying  out  the  duties  entrusted  to  you  under  difficult 
conditions. 
Since the beginning of this year our economy has shown signs of a modest recovery even 
though exports have been sluggish, as domestic demand has improved. The Bank of Korea 
has  been  cutting  its  Base  Rate  and  expanded  its  Bank  Intermediated  Lending  Support 
Facility since the second half of last year. I think that this large-scale monetary policy easing 
has underpinned the recovery of economic activities. 
In  the  latter  half  of  this  year  the  Korean  economy  is  expected  to  sustain  its  trend  of 
improvement, thanks to the economic recoveries in major advanced economies including the 
US and to the effects of our expansionary macroeconomic policies. There are still downside 
risks to its growth path, however, such as the slowdowns in emerging market economies, the 
weakening  of  our  export  momentum,  and  heightened  volatility  in  the  international financial 
markets.  There  are  also  concerns  about  domestic  demand  turning  sluggish  as  the 
sentiments  of  economic  agents  contract  and  consumption  slows  due  to  the  effects  of  the 
MERS (Middle East Respiratory Syndrome) outbreak. 
Dear fellow BOK members, 
There are not a few challenges remaining that have to be overcome in order for the Korean 
economy to maintain sound economic growth in the future. 
First, looking at the domestic situation, there is a possibility of our growth engines continually 
weakening due to structural factors not easily resolved within a short space of time. Sectoral 
imbalances, labor market rigidity and excessive regulation are holding back virtuous cycles 
between  growth  and  employment  and  between  production  and  income  distribution.  In 
particular,  the  unemployment  problem  faced  by  today’s  youth,  the  future  leaders  of  our 
society, is deeply troubling because it can even weaken our growth potential in the future. It 
goes  without  saying  that  household  debt,  which  has  increased  greatly  in  the  course  of 
accommodative  macroeconomic  policy  operation  to  support  the  recovery  of  economic 
growth, is a major risk factor in the economy. 
Externally, there are also various latent factors in existence that could negatively affect the 
Korean economy. It is not easy to rule out the possibility that the sluggishness of our exports 
could continue into the second half of this year, in line with China’s economic slowdown and 
import  substitution  strategy  and  with  the  weakened  price  competitiveness  of  Korean 
companies due to the depreciations of the Japanese yen and the euro. We also need to be 
mindful  that  the  uncertainties  surrounding  the  US  Federal  Reserve’s  monetary  policy 
normalization and the renegotiation of Greek debt could heighten financial market volatilities 
at home and abroad. 
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea family, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Given  these  conditions,  there  are  numerous  issues  that  the  Korean  economy  needs  to 
address. Among them, I would like to talk briefly now about the tasks that the Bank of Korea 
needs to focus on as we move into the second half of this year. 
First,  since  it  is  difficult to  be  sanguine  about the  domestic  economic  recovery  continuing, 
monetary  policy  should  be  operated  in  such  a  way  as  to  keep  our  accommodative  policy 
stance in place. Even though the policy environment may change rapidly after the interest 
rate hikes by the US Fed going forward, I believe we need to be cautious when adjusting our 
monetary policy stance should the economic recovery prove to be inadequate. 
Meanwhile,  since  there  are  massive  uncertainties  surrounding  conditions  at  home  and 
abroad, we need to work to heighten the effectiveness of our monetary policy by striving to 
increase  the  accuracy  of  our  assessments  of  the  economic  situation  and  our  economic 
forecasting, and send consistent policy signals to economic agents. We should in addition 
strive to more effectively operate our Bank Intermediated Lending Support Facility, which has 
been greatly expanded to support the economic recovery and boost the growth potential. 
Inflation is expected to gradually rise in the second half of this year. However, with consumer 
price inflation still low, due largely to the effects of the low oil prices, there is a possibility of 
concerns about deflation being continually raised for some time to come. And so we should 
work  to  prevent  the  spread  of these  concerns by  accurately  checking  and  analyzing  price 
conditions, and adequately explaining them to the general public. 
In the second half we will meanwhile also have to set our new inflation target, which will be 
applied  from  next  year. Taking  into full  account the  possibility  of  structural  changes  in the 
inflation environment since the global financial crisis, we will need to strive to find the optimal 
solutions for the target level, the period of application, and the target indicators. 
We will also need to pay particular attention to financial stability. In view of the various latent 
external  risk  factors,  such  as  the  possibilities  of  huge  surges  in  international  capital 
movements and of financial turbulence in vulnerable emerging market economies triggered 
by the US Fed’s hiking of interest rates, and the uncertainties related to the Greek economy, 
we  must  keep  a  close  watch  on  international  financial  market  conditions,  and  if  any 
destabilizing factors are detected put into place measures to tackle them before it becomes 
too late. 
We  need  to  heighten  our  caution  concerning  the  rapidly  growing  household  debt.  The 
general  consensus  is  that  the  probability  of  household  debt  threatening  our  economy’s 
stability is not high for now, but if its current rapid growth persists it could work to constrain 
household consumption and destabilize the financial system. We should therefore respond 
actively to the household debt problem, in closely cooperation with the government and the 
supervisory authorities. 
Efforts to support structural reform are also crucial. Structural reform should in principle be 
led by the government, but there will be some tasks that the Bank of Korea should carry out. 
We should bear in mind that it is essential above all to maintain our monetary policy stance 
at  an  appropriate  level,  in  order  to  ensure  not  only  macroeconomic  stability  but  also  the 
smooth implementation of structural reform. This is because, if the degree of monetary policy 
accommodatingness is inadequate, economic recovery will be delayed and make it difficult 
for the economy to withstand the shocks from structural reform. If on the other hand easing is 
excessive, then this could weaken economic agents’ incentives for reform. 
There could be a need to strengthen our research studies related to structural reform and put 
forward  feasible  policy  alternatives.  As  we  have  witnessed  in  the  process  of  public  sector 
reform,  even  if  the  policy  directions  for  structural  reforms  have  been  properly  established, 
their implementation remains difficult unless they are supported by social consensus. In this 
context, the Bank of Korea’s research findings related to structural reform should contribute 
to the understanding and participation of economic agents in structural reform. 
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
In  situations  characterized  by  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty  like  that  of  today,  we  must 
reevaluate our mind-sets and accustomed patterns of behaviour so that the Bank of Korea 
can  fulfill  the  role  entrusted  to  it  and,  going  one  step  further,  suggest  appropriate  policy 
options for completing the national policy tasks. 
I have been emphasizing this at every opportunity since taking office last year, and wish to 
urge all of you once again to be both more flexible and more positive in your thinking when 
carrying out your duties. When the policy environment is complex and changes rapidly, it is 
difficult  to  develop  effective  policy  measures  if  we  rely  on  past  practices  and  experience 
alone.  We  must  therefore  have  the  open-mindedness  to  listen  to  demands  from  various 
segments  of  the  society,  as  well  as  to  new  opinions  from  within  our  own  organization. 
Creative  ideas  should  not  be  rejected  just  because  they  do  not  fit  in  with  the  existing 
framework of policy operation or methods of conducting our duties. 
Next, we also need to adopt more proactive attitudes when carrying out our duties. If we just 
carry them out by following our superiors’ orders or following precedents, without making any 
efforts on our own to actively seek out current pending issues and present solutions, then we 
cannot develop either as individuals or as an organization. 
In terms of management administration, we will  make every effort so that these mind-sets 
and patterns of behavior can take hold. To heighten the diversity and dynamism of staff, we 
will  broaden  our  methods  of  staff recruitment  insofar  as  this  does  not  harm  organizational 
stability. In relation to human resource management, as major criteria in our evaluations we 
will take into account not just performance and reputation, but also the spirit of enterprise and 
creativity. I also want to urge you to redouble your efforts to create a dignified organizational 
culture befitting the character of a central bank, based upon mutual respect and confidence 
and consideration for others. 
In commemorating our 65th anniversary we have chosen the public interest, independence, 
accountability, open communication and professionalism as the Bank of Korea’s core values. 
As  these  values  have  been  decided  upon  by  all  members  of the  Bank, we  should  do  our 
utmost to ensure that they do not remain mere empty words, but are fully incorporated into 
the operation of this organization and the exercise of our duties. 
Successfully settling into place the soon to be implemented retirement age extension and the 
peak wage system are other tasks that we cannot neglect. We must gather our wisdom, so 
as  to  harness  effectively  the  experience  and  wisdom  of  our  senior  staff  members,  and  to 
ensure  that  the  peak  wage  system  makes  a  real  contribution  to  increasing  youth 
employment. 
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea, 
As you have always done until now, I would like to urge each of you to continue devoting 
your best efforts to carrying out the duties entrusted to you, imbued with a sense of mission 
as a central banker. If we all possess passionate but non-self-interested attitudes of public 
servants, we can make great contributions to overcoming the difficulties faced by the Korean 
economy. 
In  drawing  my  remarks  to  a  close,  I  should  like  to  express  my  gratitude  to  all  of  those 
participated in the preparation of this commemorative event, and wish you all and all of those 
whom you hold dear the very best of good health and the greatest of happiness. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
