  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: National Strategy for Financial Inclusion – our 
platform to provide better lives 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Launch  of  the  National  Strategy  for  Financial 
Inclusion, Manila, 1 July 2015. 
 Welcome  to  the  beginning  of  our  collective  journey  to  change  Filipino  lives  for  the  better 
through  financial  inclusion.  In  this  journey,  the  National  Strategy  for  Financial  Inclusion 
(NSFI) which we are launching today, shall serve as our road map. 
About the NSFI: Overview 
For the Philippine government, financial inclusion is an enduring vision – financial inclusion 
that  supports  inclusive  growth,  one  that  promotes  shared  economic  development,  upholds 
social cohesion and reduces income inequality. This is explicit in the Philippine Development 
Plan. 
Indeed,  inclusive  growth  is  the  ultimate  goal.  This  is  the  reason  why  many  agencies  are 
engaged in development activities. With the NSFI, we focus on achieving financial inclusion 
that  promotes  inclusive  growth,  consolidate  our efforts  to  avoid  overlaps,  and together set 
priorities to maximize use of our resources. 
The  NSFI  covers  three  fundamental  points:  (1)  Why  we  are  pursuing  financial  inclusion, 
(2) Who we are targeting to include, and (3) What we should do to translate the vision into 
reality. Let me expound on these more fully. 
Why pursue financial inclusion 
(1) 
We are pursuing financial inclusion because we want Filipinos to have better lives – similar to 
those whose inspiring stories highlight our Exhibit. 
Indeed, with a small loan, or some savings, a microinsurance cover, steady remittance from 
abroad sent through formal channels and access to other financial services, more and more 
Filipinos are lifting themselves and their families out of poverty toward higher incomes, risk-
protected assets, and brighter futures. 
Surveys  indicate  that  roughly  25  percent  of  Filipinos  still  live  in  poverty.  One  can  say 
therefore, that we have millions of “reasons” to do our best in building an inclusive financial 
system. 
The timing is right. The Philippines is in a bright spot, with GDP growth averaging 6.6 percent 
in  the  last  three  years,  one  of  the  highest  growths  in  Asia  and  the  world.  This  has  been 
achieved in an environment of within-target inflation, a desirable combination indeed. 
At  the  same  time,  the  Philippine  financial  system  is  in  a  position  of  strength,  with  steady 
growth  in  resources,  healthy  balance  sheets,  and  capitalization  that  is  well-above  national 
and international requirements. 
In other words, economic opportunities abound across the country today at a time when the 
financial system is sound, stable and liquid. This is fertile ground indeed for proactive work 
on financial inclusion. 
Who should be financially included 
(2) 
Our  goal  is  to  mainstream  Filipinos  across  the  country  as  regular  clients  of  our  financial 
system, particularly (1) MSMEs, (2) overseas Filipinos and their beneficiaries, (3) agriculture 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
and  agrarian  reform  sectors,  (4)  indigenous  peoples  and  cultural  minorities,  (4)  women, 
(5) the  youth,  (6)  and  persons  with  disabilities.  These  sectors  are  typically  unserved  or 
underserved by conventional financial service providers. 
We want to provide effective access to a wide range of financial products and services. This 
broadly encompasses a multitude of target sectors and inclusion issues. It also indicates the 
multi-dimensional  financial  needs  of  these  sectors  –  needs  that  can  be  addressed  by  a 
variety of financial service providers and support institutions. 
What should we do to achieve financial inclusion 
(3) 
Given a clear vision and target market, the next step is to implement the National Strategy for 
Financial  Inclusion.  The  NSFI  spells  out  high-level  principles  and  systematic  strategies; 
guides  coordination  across  government  and  private  sectors;  ensures  policy  and  program 
cohesion; and promotes multi-sectoral synergies. 
In particular, the NSFI lays down precise objectives: (1) Financial products that are diverse, 
well-designed,  suitable  and  relevant  to  different  market  segments;  (2)  Providers  and 
business models that are diverse, responsible, responsive and innovative; and (3) A citizenry 
that is financially-learned and adequately protected. 
The NSFI strategic statements and clear objectives serve as guide to all stakeholders when 
designing and implementing financial inclusion policies and programs. 
the  agencies 
that  will  spearhead 
Department of Finance (DOF) 
Department of Education (Dep-Ed) 
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) 
Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) 
Department of Budget and Management (DBM) 
National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA) 
Insurance Commission (IC) 
Commission on Filipinos Overseas (CFO) 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) 
Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation (PDIC) 
Cooperative Development Authority (CDA) and 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas 
Moving Forward to Implementation and Progress Measurement 
Later  in  the  program,  the  government  agencies  that  crafted  the  NSFI  will  sign  a 
Memorandum  of  Understanding.  These  are 
the 
implementation of our NSFI: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
At  the  same  time,  we  have  invited  multi-sectoral  representatives  here  today  because  we 
believe  that  you  can  play  a  significant  role  in  the  successful  implementation  of  our  NSFI. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  need  your  cooperation,  collaboration  and  overall  support  to 
ensure that financial inclusion becomes a reality throughout the Philippines. 
Equally important, we hope that you will help us in measuring and monitoring the progress of 
our financial inclusion initiatives. Moving forward, we need data to guide and inform us if we 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
are on the right track; to evaluate if we need to refine our tactical plans; to help us prioritize 
our resources; and to help us calibrate our policies and programs accordingly. 
Indeed,  the  importance  we  ascribe  to  data  and  measurement  is  underscored  by  the 
simultaneous launch today of the result of our maiden National Baseline Survey on Financial 
Inclusion. The survey, completed this year, showed the following results: 
• 
25%  of  Filipino  adults  have  never  saved,  32%  used  to  save,  and  only  43  % 
presently have savings. 
Of those  with  savings,  only  32%  save  in  banks  while  68  %  keep  their savings  at 
home. 
65 % of unbanked adults cited lack of money as the main reason for not having a 
bank account. 
About  47  %  of  adults  have  outstanding  loans.  The  main  source  of  borrowing  is 
informal  –  62%  borrow  from  family,  relatives  or  friends  while  10%  borrow  from 
informal lenders. 
In the past six months, about 44 % of adults sent or received money  while 42 % 
made payments. 
Only 3.2 percent of adults have microinsurance coverage. 
Clients  rated  themselves  as  only  “somewhat  satisfied”  with  how  issues  were 
resolved in most financial service access points. 
     The survey results tell us we have a long way to go to achieve financial inclusion. The survey 
also tells us that there are plenty of opportunities for those looking to expand their business 
or to introduce game-changing innovations. 
Clearly,  we  will  need  broad-based  cooperation  from  local  and  international  institutions  to 
address  these  gaps.  Together,  I  believe  we  can  make  substantial  gains  on  our  financial 
inclusion targets. 
Conclusion 
We look forward therefore to work with you in our journey to achieve inclusive finance that 
supports inclusive growth. We want to ensure that Filipinos across the country are able to 
identify, gain and prosper from the fruits of economic progress. 
In  particular,  we  want  our  people  to  be  part  of  the  financial  mainstream  where  they  can 
access  financial  services  and  to  have  options  other  than  informal  lenders  with  prohibitive 
rates  and  onerous  conditions.  And  we  want  our  people  to  be  able  to  protect  themselves 
against scams and to know their rights as financial consumers. 
Let  us  therefore forge  partnerships  that  will  empower  more  Filipinos  to  improve  their  lives 
through access to responsive, responsible and fair financial services. 
Finally, we thank Her Majesty Queen Maxima, for making a special visit to the Philippines to 
express  her  support  for  our  financial  inclusion  initiatives  and  our  National  Strategy  for 
Financial  Inclusion.  We  take  inspiration  from  your  work  in  countries  like  ours.  Indeed,  we 
support your efforts to promote financial inclusion in the global arena as a means to achieve 
development goals. 
With your support, and the commitment of everybody in this hall as co-implementers of the 
National Strategy for Financial Inclusion, I believe that we are on our way to a meaningful 
and fruitful journey toward financial inclusion for all Filipinos. 
Thank you all for joining us on this auspicious day. Maraming salamat at Mabuhay! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
