  Erkki Liikanen: Economic research and economic policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  Yrjö  Jahnsson 
Foundation’s 60th Anniversary Gala. Helsinki, 16 December 2014. 
 The esteemed Honorary Chairmen of the Foundation, Mr Chairman, ladies and gentlemen, 
The work of the Yrjö Jahnsson Foundation in promoting economic research and in educating 
economists  in  Finland  is  truly  invaluable.  The  inauguration  of  the  Foundation,  and  its 
activities, have been guided by the belief that economic education and research can make a 
valuable contribution to society. 
 The importance of research as an aid to political decision-making is a subject that is always 
interesting  and  controversial.  But  there  are  times  when  it  seems  to  be  particularly  topical. 
One such time was around the founding of the Yrjö Jahnsson Foundation. During the late 
1950s and early 1960s, there was a strong positivistic current in Finnish economics. At the 
centre  of  this  movement  was  the  so-called  O  group,  which  was  made  up  of  young 
economists who set out to modernise Finnish economics, that is, to free it from the remnants 
of the historical school of thought and to adopt the Western analytical tradition. 
The aim of the group was to put economics on a more scientific footing and make it a tool for 
rational  policy-making.  The  Bank  of  Finland’s  Research  Institute  and  the  Yrjö  Jahnsson 
Foundation both supported the group’s activities. 
The role model for the economists of the time was Jan Tinbergen who later received the first 
Nobel  Prize  in  economics.  According  to  his  economic-policy  philosophy,  the  politician 
determines the objectives and the limits within which the various tools can be used. The role 
of the economist, on the other hand, is to show how the tools, as allowed, can be used to 
achieve  the  objectives  set  by  the  politician.  Policy  analysis  and  quantitative  planning  were 
the  lingo  of  the  day.  To  this  end,  economics  as  a  science  had  to  become  objective  and 
quantitative. 
Many of the young researchers of the time were quite fixed on their mission. One of the hard-
liners  of  the  O  group, Olavi  Niitamo,  wrote  in  the  Finnish  Economic  Journal  in  1960  that 
“there does not appear to exist a fundamental difference between economic models and, for 
example, models used in physics. Both are models based on probabilities and the difference 
is merely in the accuracy of model.”1 
For many of us, Niitamo was later to become a conversational companion and teacher with 
original ideas. His areas of expertise were wide and varied, from economics and statistics to 
boxing. 
Niitamo’s view was disputed by Jouko Paunio, a leading expert used by the Yrjö Jahnsson 
Foundation  over  many  years.  Paunio  said  he  saw  economics  essentially  as  part  of  the 
humanities  even  though  he  was  himself  a  member  of  the  O  group.  An  economist  should 
strive for  objectivity  in  his  research  but  economic  science  is  not  a  natural  science.  Paunio 
wrote that, as representatives of a science that studies human behaviour, economists need 
to be highly tolerant as regards different approaches.2 
Jouko Paunio had wide-ranging interests. He was also an important figure as the Foundation 
initiated its far-sighted emphasis on the economics of health. This was launched with fanfare 
                                                
1   Niitamo, O.: Selitysmalleista ja todellisuudesta. Kansantaloudellinen Aikakauskirja, 1960:2. 
2   Paunio, J. Kansantaloustieteen näköaloista. Kansantaloudellinen Aikakauskirja, 1961:3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  at the international conference in Helsinki in the summer of 1975, where Paunio was the first 
speaker. 
Paunio’s presentation, which dealt with the efficiency of health services and their allocation 
mechanisms, made a profound impression on the thinking of many.3 I was one of them. As 
we know, this subject is even more topical today, four decades later, and the longstanding 
work of the Foundation, also in this regard, deserves our gratitude. 
 Many things have happened in the field of economic policy since those times and there have 
been recurrent disappointments in the most idealistic breeds of economics. 
Losing  its  credibility  already  in  the  1970s  was  the  planning  optimism  that  assumed  that 
economists  as the “engineers  of the  economy” could  provide  politicians  with  the  means to 
rapid and stable economic growth. 
The  current  that  has  most  recently  suffered  such  a  loss  of  credibility  is  one  according  to 
which  “government  is  not  the  solution  to  our  problems,  government  is  the  problem”,  to 
paraphrase Ronald Reagan. The  debate  again  is  about  the  value  of  economic  science  in 
political decision-making. Since the financial crisis, economic science has become the target 
of  growing  criticism.  The  most  common  criticism  condemns  mainstream  economics  for 
economic  policies  that  led  to  the  crisis;  for  its  inability  to  predict  the  crisis,  and  also  for 
advocating economic policies which would only worsen the effects of the economic crisis. 
Particular criticism has been directed at the content of economic science education, which 
has been accused of being ahistorical, even dogmatic. 
Some of this criticism has been to the point, some of it unwarranted. There is pertinence in 
the concern about the overly narrow focus of economics education. Economic policy-making 
needs high quality economists, capable of trustworthy analysis. This is why the question is 
important. 
But what makes a good economist? Keynes wrote in 1924: 
“…the  master-economist  must  possess  a  rare  combination  of  gifts.  He  must  reach  a  high 
standard in several different directions and must combine talents not often found together. 
He  must  be  mathematician,  historian,  statesman,  philosopher  –  in  some  degree.  He  must 
understand symbols and speak in words. He must contemplate the particular in terms of the 
general, and touch abstract and concrete in the same flight of thought. He must study the 
present in the light of the past for the purposes of the future. No part of man’s nature or his 
institutions must lie entirely outside his regard. He must be purposeful and disinterested in a 
simultaneous mood; as aloof and incorruptible as an artist, yet sometimes as near the earth 
as a politician.”4 
That is quite a list of requirements. This passage is from Alfred Marshall’s obituary. It is well 
known that Keynes was not the most humble of men. He might have even been describing 
himself  here.  But  he  was  right  in  saying  that  an  economist  should  have  wide-ranging 
competences, especially if he is working outside of basic research. 
 In the light of Keynes’s characterisation, it is interesting to read the manifesto published last 
spring  by  students  at  Manchester  University,  which  garnered  a  lot  of  attention.  In  the 
manifesto,  the  students  complain  about  the  narrowness  of  contemporary  economics 
education. 
                                                
3   Paunio, J.: Alustavia näkökohtia terveydenhuollon taloudesta. Kansantaloudellinen Aikakauskirja, 1975:4. 
4  Keynes, J.M.: Alfred Marshall. Collected Works of John Maynard Keynes, Vol. II, p. 26. Macmillan, 1971. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  At Manchester, the history of economics was taught in an elective course that was avoided 
by students – because it required essay-writing skills, skills that were not developed in the 
rest of the programme. The teaching of economic history was equally inadequate. According 
to  the  manifesto,  students  graduated  with  an  economics  degree  without  knowing  anything 
about such upheavals as the 1930s Great Depression or the breakdown of Bretton Woods in 
the 1970s.5 
This type of narrow focus sounds alarming, especially from the point of view of practical work 
assignments.  The  chief  economist  at  the  Bank  of  England,  Andy  Haldane,  read  the 
manifesto  and  commented  that  employers  of  economists,  such  as  the  Bank  of  England, 
would  benefit  from  a  diversification  of  the  course  requirements  for  economics  majors.  In 
order  to  give  workable  answers  to  the  future  questions  of  economic  policy,  one  must 
understand the past. It would also be helpful to have a knowledge of political economy, to 
take into account the institutions and to understand money and banking. Haldane stated that 
the kind of reform of education that would achieve these objectives, would also well serve the 
requirements of economic policy.6 
There might also be room for improvement in the contents of Finnish university degrees as 
well.  Fortunately,  it  seems  that  there  has  been  an  upswing  of  interest  in  applied 
macroeconomics in recent years, compared to the low point reached before the crisis. This 
rise in interest is also reflected in the fact that student activists have recently sought to revive 
some traditions of economic science that seem to have been pushed aside from the study 
programmes. 
When discussing alternative approaches to economics, one should keep in mind that the aim 
of learning cannot be the compartmentalisation into “-isms”. Instead, it is the comparison and 
competition  between  theories  and  approaches,  which  will  lead  to  synthesis  and  progress. 
From the point of view of a practical economic policy-maker, the worst outcome would be a 
polarisation of economic research and debate into camps unable or unwilling to talk to each 
other. 
Some  criticism  has  suggested  that  economic  policy  is  slave  to  some  abstract  theory  that 
blindly believes in perfect markets. Fortunately, this is not the case. Economic science, as it 
is  best  used  in  support  of  decision-making,  is  a  controversial  and  developing  science  that 
has  few  absolute  certainties.  For  this  very  reason,  careful  research  and  debate  are  of 
paramount importance. 
If we look at the very active monetary policies of recent years in particular, and the thorough 
reform  of  financial  regulation,  it  cannot  be  claimed  that  decision-making  has  been 
characterised by a blind faith in the infallibility of the markets. Monetary and economic policy 
has, on the contrary, centred on real world problems and taken a pragmatic approach. At the 
same time, it has tried to make extensive use of research-based knowledge. 
 Current monetary policy leans heavily on economic research in at least in two respects. 
Firstly,  the  current  objective  of  price  stability,  and  a  monetary  policy  system  based  on  an 
independent central bank that implements it, is the result of monetary policy research of the 
1980s  and  1990s.  This  research  emphasised  the  importance  of  expectations,  policy 
credibility and price stability. This research is also the basis of the status of the Eurosystem, 
its structure and its monetary policy, although another highly influential factor here was the 
example provided by the successful monetary policy of Germany. 
                                                
5   Economics, Education and Unlearning. Post-Crash Economics Society, University of Manchester, 2014. 
6   Haldane, A: Foreword. Economics, Education and Unlearning. Post-Crash Economics Society, University of 
Manchester, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Secondly, the monetary policy pursued during the crisis and after it, which even globally has 
had to adopt many brave and unconventional methods, is also based on research. 
It  is  interesting  that,  from  the  viewpoint  of  economic  policy  during  the  crisis,  research  into 
economic  history  has  had  a  particularly  profound  influence.  Of  note,  the  research  on  the 
causes of the Great Depression of the 1930s has in recent years come to be held in high 
regard, and it has played a crucial role in monetary-policy decisions. 
The Chairman of the United States Federal Reserve at the time the crisis came to a head, 
Ben Bernanke,  has  been  a key  figure  here.  He  is  known  specifically  as  an  expert  on the 
Great  Depression  of  the  1930s.  It  has  been  Bernanke’s  view  that  the  protraction  of  that 
depression was caused by misguided monetary policy. 
This, in itself, was not a new discovery. Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz had already 
blamed the Federal Reserve for turning the crisis into a depression by allowing the quantity 
of money to decline. In Finland, Yrjö Jahnsson expressed similar views in his own time. 
Bernanke’s contribution to the debate was his emphasis on the importance of the banking 
system.  According  to  Bernanke,  the  drying  up  of  bank  liquidity  and  the  collapse  of  their 
lending  capacity  were  the  factors  that  turned  a  recession  into  the  Great  Depression.  He 
further argued that the global monetary system based on the gold standard transformed the 
depression into a global one that spread even to countries that were not suffering from their 
own banking crises.7 
The Parliamentary Supervisory Council of the Bank of Finland met Ben Bernanke during the 
last week of his term of office in Washington last January. We asked him what lessons we 
might take from the research on the depression of the 1930s in the current crisis, and if there 
had been any new developments in the field. 
He  emphasised  that  the  essential  lessons  learned  from  the  1930s  depression  were  the 
securing of banks’ liquidity during the crisis and aggressive reductions in interest rates, so as 
to avert a deepening of the crisis and a slide into deflation. 
But one thing about the current crisis had surprised Bernanke: the complexity of international 
financial institutions and their multi-level connections within the global financial system. The 
demand for  international  cooperation  was  thus  even  more  important  now  than  it  had  been 
during the Great Depression. 
The influence of these lessons of the 1930s can be clearly seen in the monetary policy of 
recent  years.  The  escalation  of  the  financial  crisis  in  September  2008  as  the  Lehman 
Brothers  investment  bank  fell,  and  the  severe  disruption  to  the  financial  markets  that 
followed, compelled central banks to act swiftly. The dry-up of liquidity in the banking system 
and onset of a general banking crisis had to be prevented. 
The securing of the banks’ liquidity was carried  out in broad international cooperation. For 
instance,  European  banks  at  that  point  needed  large  amounts  of  short-term  dollar  credit, 
which  the  ECB  was  able  to  arrange  with  the  help  of  the  US  central  bank.  International 
cooperation was achieved with unprecedented speed and scope. 
As economic growth stalled in 2009 after the money-market crisis, inflation also came to a 
halt  and  turned  negative  for  a  while  in  all  of  the  key  currency  areas.  Monetary  policy  was 
eased  around  the  world,  to  support  activity  and  prevent  a  destructive  spiral  of  deflation. 
Policy rates were pushed to record lows, to 1 per cent in the euro area, and already then 
close to zero in many countries. 
                                                
7   Bernanke,  B:  Nonmonetary  Effects  of  the  Financial  Crisis  in  the  Propagation  of  the  Great  Depression. 
American Economic Review, vol.73, no. 3 (1983). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Since that time, interest rates have remained exceptionally low everywhere and the spiral of 
deflation has been avoided. In the current circumstances, the securing of price stability and 
the  supporting  of  economic  growth  have  not  been  in  conflict;  rather,  monetary  policy  has 
been able to pursue both of these goals. 
 In assessing the success of monetary policy, it should be kept in mind that, for example, in 
the euro area and in Finland, many of the problems of the real economy are structural and 
could not be solved by monetary policy, which can only buy time for solving them. 
In terms of price stability, monetary policy has  not met our expectations in recent months. 
The inflation rate in the euro area is currently clearly below the ECB’s target rate of close to, 
but below, 2 percent. 
The  decline  of  interest  rates  to  their  theoretical  minimum,  or  close  to  it,  has  raised  new 
questions.  How  can  monetary  policy  sustain  price  stability  if  the  situation  requires  new 
actions to get back to price stability when the main instrument of traditional monetary policy, 
the interest rate, is already at its minimum? 
Different central banks have had to confront this question at different points in time. In the 
case  of  the  ECB  this  happened  last  summer  when  the  policy  rate  was  lowered  to  the 
minimum and still the rate of inflation has remained well below the target. 
In  this  situation,  the  ECB  has  adopted  some  new  monetary  policy  programmes  based  on 
securities purchases: a covered bond purchase programme and an asset backed securities 
purchase  programme.  At  the  same time,  banks have  been  offered  collateralised  long-term 
credit in order to speed up lending to businesses. 
The intention is that the balance sheet of the Eurosystem should grow to the level where it 
was at the start of 2012. The ECB’s Governing Council has unanimously stated that should 
the  need  arise,  even  new  monetary-policy  instruments  will  be  utilised  if  the  period  of  low 
inflation threatens to last too long. 
As the modes of operation of monetary policy are changing, at least temporarily, research 
has much to offer to decision-makers. I will just mention here the three most central areas of 
research connected with the current situation: 
The use of anticipatory communication of monetary policy, the so-called forward guidance, 
as  a  stabiliser  of  inflation  expectations;  the  effect  on  inflation  and  growth  of  securities 
purchases  by  central  banks;  and  the  question  of  a  neutral  interest  rate  level  in  the  post-
financial-crisis world. 
All of these areas have been subject to much useful research, which is monitored by central 
banks and in which they also take part.8 
The seriousness and determination with which central banks have in recent years acted to 
secure  banks’  liquidity,  support  economic  growth  and  prevent  a  deflationary  spiral,  is 
indicative of the influence of economic research. 
The third problem mentioned by Bernanke as having been brought to light by the crisis, the 
complexity  of  financial  institutions  and  the  connections  between  them,  has  also  been  the 
focus of wide-ranging work. The regulation of banks has been reformed with the intention of 
making  the  banking  system  “safer,  simpler  and  fairer”.  I  will  mention  some  of  the  most 
significant actions in this regard. 
                                                
8   Ks. esimerkiksi Reifschneider, D. and Williams, J.: Three lessons for monetary policy in a low-inflation era. 
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol. 32, No.4 (2000).: Gambacorta, L., Hofmann, B. ja Peersman, G.: 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 46, No. 4 (2014) Barsky, R., Justiniano, A.ja Melosi, L:.The Natural 
Rate of Interest and Its Usefulness for Monetary Policy. “American Economic Review, vol. 104, no. 5 (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The  international  solvency  criteria  required  by  the  so-called  Basel  Accords  have  been 
strengthened.9 The supervision of banks has been made more efficient, and in the euro area 
it has been centralised as a task of the ECB. The mechanisms for crisis resolution have been 
updated in a way that should avoid the taxpayer having to bear the burden of banks’ risk-
taking. 
The structures of banks have come under regulation both in the United States and in many 
EU  countries,  with  the  aim  of  reducing  speculative  securities  trading  by  deposit  banks.  I 
myself led the working group set up by the Commission to prepare the pan-European norms 
for this. The support we received from researchers – as well as their criticisms – are proof of 
the close links between research and decision-making in the development of regulation also. 
A Commission proposal for regulation has been made on this matter, and it is currently being 
deliberated in the Council of the European Union and the European Parliament. 
 Science and research are of course global phenomena in today’s world, but they also have a 
national dimension. It cannot be in the interest of any country to free-ride on the research 
front and rely only on foreign research. This is clear especially in a field such as economics, 
which has such strong links to policy. The influence of Finns in the Eurosystem, the EU, the 
IMF or the BIS can only be based on our capability to offer our own and unique contribution. 
Having experts with skills that measure up to international standards has been a prerequisite 
to ensuring that Finland is not a passive participant in the European community but is instead 
capable of interacting on an equal basis with the other EU countries. 
The  work  of  the  Yrjö  Jahnsson  Foundation  in  raising  the  level  of  Finnish  economics 
education and research up to international standards has helped to ensure that Finland can 
be an influential and constructive participant in any forum where we have earned our status. 
I  would  like  to  extend  my  warmest  congratulations  to  the  Foundation  for  its  most 
commendable work over these 60 years. 
                                                 
9   Carney, M.: The Future of Financial Reform. Monetary Authority of Singapore Lecture, Singapore, 17.11.2014. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
