  Jens Weidmann: Turning points in history – how crises have changed 
the tasks and practice of central banks 
Welcome  remarks  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
Bundesbank Conference “Turning points in history: How crises have changed the tasks and 
practice of central banks”, Frankfurt am Main, 9 July 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Let  me  warmly  welcome  you  all  to  the  Bundesbank  Conference  entitled  "Turning  points  in 
history:  How  crises  have  changed  the  tasks  and  practice  of  central  banks".  It  is  the 
Bundesbank’s  first  historical  conference,  and  I  am  delighted  it  has  met  with  such  great 
interest. 
“History will teach us nothing”. 
I usually quite like the songs written by the English musician Sting, but I think he’s definitely 
barking  up  the  wrong  tree  with  this  provocative  song  title.  My  view  is  that  we  can  indeed 
learn a great deal from history. So I’m rather more inclined to see things like Confucius, who 
said: "Study the past if you would define the future."  
The  history  of  central  banking  is  highly  instructive  when  it  comes  to  defining  the  future  of 
central  banking.  That  is  why  some  of  the  most  renowned  and  influential  economists  have 
delved  into  monetary  history.  Drawing  lessons  from  the  past,  however,  requires  both  a 
profound knowledge of central bank history and a thorough understanding of the challenges 
that currently face central banking. 
That’s why we are proud that this conference has brought together some of the most eminent 
experts in both economic history and macroeconomics, as well as active and former central 
bankers, and – last but not least – two acting finance ministers. Let me therefore cordially 
thank all the speakers, panellists and moderators who are involved in today’s event. 
My special thanks go to Harold James, who helped to develop the idea for this conference, 
and who provided valuable input during the planning phase. 
I would also like to thank the organisers of the conference and, particularly, Heinz Herrmann, 
who  arranged  the  programme.  Heinz  Herrmann  was  the  Bundesbank’s  Head  of  Research 
until he retired at the end of last year.  
As we today entered the quiet period before the next monetary policy meeting of the ECB 
Governing Council, my remarks should not be construed as containing any comments on the 
current monetary policy stance. 
Instead,  I  would  like  to  share  my  thoughts  on  the  current  and  future  challenges  faced  by 
central banking against the backdrop of central bank history, taking the pre-crisis consensus 
on monetary policy as a starting point. 
The global consensus on monetary policy ... 
2. 
The recent global financial crisis has sparked intense debate among economists and central 
bankers over the future shape and role of monetary policy. Just like previous crisis episodes 
did,  which  likewise  sometimes  marked  turning  points  in  the  role  and  functioning  of  central 
banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Before  the  financial  crisis  erupted,  there  was  a  consensus  of  a  sort  regarding  the  core 
principles of monetary policy.1  
1. 
Central  banks  should  primarily  aim  to  maintain  price  stability,  that  is  to  say, 
consumer price stability. 
Central banks should be independent from their governments.2  
The credibility of central banks’ commitment to low inflation – by anchoring inflation 
expectations – is key to their ability to deliver on their price stability objective. 
2. 
3. 
This  consensus  shaped  the  statute  of  many  central  banks,  not  least  that  of  the  European 
Central Bank, which was agreed upon in 1991. 
But this view was fundamentally challenged when the crisis struck. Central banks around the 
world  intervened  on  a  massive  scale:  interest  rates  were  slashed  to  all-time  lows,  and 
unprecedented non-standard measures were rolled out. 
In the euro area, where the financial and economic crisis evolved into a sovereign debt crisis 
in 2010, monetary policymakers repeatedly came under pressure to prevent the crisis from 
escalating. Sometimes they went to the very limits of their mandate, and some believe even 
beyond. 
Now that the worst of the crisis appears to be over, questions are being asked about what 
lessons  central  banks  should  learn  and  whether  the  pre-crisis  consensus  is  still  valid. 
Therefore, I would like to use the remainder of my speech to look in greater detail at three 
lead questions: 
1. 
What  role  should  monetary  policy  play  with  regard  to  financial  stability?  Put 
differently, have central banks been too negligent about financial imbalances? 
Should  monetary  policy  set  a  higher  inflation  target  to reinvigorate  an  ailing  world 
economy  and,  more  generally,  to  create  greater  leeway  for  interest  rate  policy  in 
times of severe economic distress? 
Have  central  banks  become  too  powerful  a  political  player  for  an  independent 
institution outside democratic control? 
... and how the financial crisis challenged it 
Monetary policy and financial stability 
3.1 
Let  me  start  with  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability:  Should 
monetary policy lean against the wind in the case of an asset price bubble, or should it stand 
aside and clean up the mess afterwards when the bubble has burst? Or, as William White 
put it more succinctly: “Should monetary policy ‘lean or clean’?”3  
According  to  the  pre-crisis  consensus,  monetary  policy  should  not  even  attempt  to  deflate 
asset  price  bubbles.  In  this  vein,  Alan  Greenspan  said  in  2002  at  the  Jackson  Hole 
symposium: “The notion that a well-timed incremental tightening could have been calibrated 
to prevent the late 1990s bubble is almost surely an illusion.” 
                                                
1  See M Goodfriend (2007), How the World Achieved Consensus on Monetary Policy, in Journal of Economic 
Perspectives, Vol 21, No 4, pp 47-68. 
2  See  A  Alesina  and  L  H  Summers  (1993),  Central  Bank  Independence  and  Macroeconomic  Performance: 
Some Comparative Evidence, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol 25, No 2, pp 151-162. 
3  See  W  R  White  (2009),  Should  Monetary  Policy  "Lean  or  Clean"?,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas, 
Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute, Working Paper No 34. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
2. 
3. 
3. 
  ”5  
"4  
However, if we look back in time, we see that traditionally, central banks had their minds on 
financial stability issues. 
When,  in the  19th  century,  bank  deposits  began  to  emerge  alongside  banknotes, financial 
soundness  became  an  issue  for  central  banks,  because  banks  operating  in  a  fractional 
reserve system are susceptible to a bank run. This is why the function of the central bank as 
a "lender of last resort" gained importance at the time. 
Financial panics and bank runs were reoccurring events, particularly during the second half 
of the 19th century and the early years of the 20th century. Indeed, the lessons learned from 
financial panics, notably the crisis of 1907, were a major catalyst in the establishment of the 
Federal Reserve in 1913. 
The original goal of the Fed, then, was to preserve financial stability. According to one of the 
authors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act,  Robert  Latham  Owen,  the  Fed  was  established  to 
"provide  a  means  by  which  periodic  panics  which  shake  the  American  Republic  and  do  it 
enormous injury shall be stopped.
As  Carmen  Reinhart  and  Kenneth  Rogoff  note,  “there  is  no  mention  of  a  price  stability 
mandate in the original version of the legislation. Indeed, the word inflation does not appear 
at all in the document. A full employment macroeconomic goal is not even remotely alluded 
to.
However, the tight focus on financial stability turned out to be problematic. 
When  in  the  late  1920s  speculative  lending  ballooned,  the  Fed  in  pursuit  of  its  mandate 
tightened monetary conditions in a situation when inflation rates were slightly negative. 
While the Fed could not stop asset prices from soaring, its interest rate moves contributed to 
an  economic  downturn.  This  disconnect  threw  into  sharp  relief  the  mispricing  in  the  asset 
markets. The crash of October 1929 was then followed by waves of bank failures. 
On  the  occasion  of  Milton  Friedman’s  90th  birthday,  the  then  Governor  Ben  Bernanke 
conceded:  "Regarding  the  Great  Depression.  You’re  right,  we  did  it. We’re  very  sorry.  But 
[…] we won’t do it again.
Having  seen  the  impact  of  the  Great  Depression,  central  banks  increasingly  shifted  their 
focus  towards  macroeconomic  objectives:  price  stability  and  –  in  the  case  of  the  Fed  – 
employment.  Financial  stability,  in  contrast,  dropped  off  monetary  policymakers’  radar  –  I 
already mentioned the consensus achieved among central bankers. 
The  latest financial  crisis,  however,  has  cast  serious  doubts  –  not  least  from  the  Bank for 
International Settlements (BIS) – on this "benign neglect" approach to financial imbalances – 
all the more so as the ‘mopping up afterwards’ approach has proven to be costly: 
This approach set incentives to incur excessive risks that played an important part in fuelling 
the  crisis,  and  once  the  bubble  burst,  the  economic  fallout  was  so  severe  that  monetary 
policy was overwhelmed. 
In  contrast  to  the  pre-crisis  consensus,  some  have  therefore  argued  that  financial  stability 
should  be  adopted  as  a  monetary  policy  objective  on  a  par  with,  or  even  ahead  of,  price 
stability.  However,  such  a  dual  mandate  creates  difficult  trade-offs,  especially  as  financial 
stability is a much more complex concept than price stability and hard to operationalise. I fear 
"6  
                                                
4  As quoted by B S Bernanke (2013), A Century of US Central Banking: Goals, Frameworks, Accountability, in 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol 27, No 4, pp 3-16. 
5  C M Reinhart, K S Rogoff (2013), Shifting Mandates: The Federal Reserve’s First Centennial, presented at the 
American Economic Association Meetings, San Diego, January 5, 2013. 
6  B S Bernanke (2002), On Milton Friedman's Ninetieth Birthday. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  that  in  the  end,  this  might  undermine  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  to  maintain  price 
stability. 
Moreover, monetary policy is not the best instrument for addressing financial stability risks. 
Macroprudential  policy  uses  more  targeted  instruments,  which  makes  it  better  suited  to 
addressing growing imbalances in financial markets. 
The  question  is  whether  or  not  a  clear  separation  of  responsibilities  –  in  terms  of 
"macroprudential  policy  takes  care  of  financial  stability"  while  "monetary  policy  only  pays 
7 In other words, is monetary policy out of 
attention to price stability" – actually makes sense.
the woods? 
I don’t think so. While I am not in favour of a dual monetary policy mandate, I am convinced 
that monetary policy cannot stand on the sidelines when financial imbalances build up. 
First, we cannot be sure that macroprudential policies will eliminate financial imbalances. The 
experience with macroprudential instruments is still limited, and the toolkit is still incomplete. 
Second,  the  crisis  has  vividly  demonstrated  how  financial  instability  affects  inflation 
developments and the capacity of the central bank to safeguard price stability. 
Therefore, monetary policy would be wise to take the implications of financial imbalances for 
price stability into account. As the financial cycle is longer than the business cycle this comes 
down to extending the policy horizon. To quote from the latest BIS annual report, "Shifting 
the focus from the short to the longer term is more important than ever." 
In any case, a more symmetrical monetary policy stance over the financial cycle seems to be 
warranted.  On  the  one  hand,  the  monetary  policy  stance  should  be  eased  aggressively 
during  a  marked  downturn.  On  the  other  hand,  monetary  policy  should  be  aware  of  its 
implications for financial stability, and so it should tend, in upswings, to be stricter than short-
term inflationary developments would suggest. 
Claudio Borio, the current chief economist of the BIS, said: "The more you concentrate on 
the  long-term  perspective,  the  more  price  stability  and  financial  stability  complement  each 
other and the less they contradict each other". 
Monetary policy and price stability 
3.2 
This brings me to the second lead question: Should the monetary policy target be changed? 
Some  academics8  have  suggested  higher  inflation  targets,  given  that  central  banks  have 
reached  the  zero  lower  bound  (ZLB)  in  response  to  the  crisis,  and  they  see  the  need  for 
further expansionary impulses, and more generally the need for a greater distance from the 
ZLB. 
As The Economist once wrote, "Asking a central banker to accept higher inflation may seem 
like asking a cardinal to accept more sin". But on a more serious note, the issue is about the 
relative merits of low inflation versus having more monetary policy leeway in times of crisis. 
I  believe  that  increasing  central  banks’  inflation  targets  would  be  to  draw  the  wrong 
conclusion. 
                                                
7  See V Constâncio (2015), Financial stability risks, monetary policy and the need for macro-prudential policy, 
speech at the Warwick Economics Summit, 13 February 2015; Deutsche Bundesbank (2015), The importance 
of macroprudential policy for monetary policy, Monthly Report, March, pp 39-71. 
8  See  eg  O  Blanchard,  G  Dell’Ariccia,  P  Mauro  (2010),  Rethinking  Macroeconomic  Policy,  IMF  staff  position 
note, SPN/10/03. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  First of all, it has to be noted that the ZLB is not hard and fast. Several central banks have 
set  negative  deposit  rates  without  immediately  spurring  a  flight  to  cash,  because  holding 
cash in large volumes is not free of charge, either. 
Moreover, central banks have shown during the crisis that they can choose from a repertoire 
of unconventional measures to further loosen the monetary policy stance when interest rates 
are  already  close  to  zero  –  although  some  of  the  unconventional  measures  are  more 
problematic than others. 
What is more, results from macroeconomic models advise against inflation targets of more 
than 2%. The optimal inflation rate derived from such models is around 2% – if the ZLB is 
explicitly taken into account. 
What is the underlying intuition for this result? Higher inflation targets reduce the risk of being 
restricted by the ZLB. But while these events are rather rare, higher inflation targets actually 
increase the welfare costs of inflation – period by period! To quote a paper by Coibion and 
co-authors: "(…) raising the inflation target is too blunt an instrument to efficiently reduce the 
severe costs of zero bound episodes."9  
A  key  point  from  an  economic  policy  perspective,  though,  is  this:  Behind  the  low  interest 
rates are the low inflation pressure and the modest growth outlook – not only in the euro area 
but worldwide. What is needed, therefore, are strategies for boosting trend growth. And these 
strategies should not rely on ultra-loose monetary policy or more debt-financed expansionary 
fiscal policy, but first and foremost on structural reforms that enhance productivity. 
In  this  respect,  I  share  the  view  of  the  BIS,  which,  in  its  current  annual  report,  calls  for  a 
rebalancing of economic policy. "The aim is to replace the debt-fuelled growth model that has 
acted as a political and social substitute for productivity-enhancing reforms." 
Hence, there are good economic arguments against higher inflation targets – and not the oft-
cited German Angst when it comes to inflation. This is not to deny that, for Germans, price 
stability is of particular importance. 
In this regard, it is also instructive to look back to Germany one century ago. 
When the First World War was over, the German state was heavily indebted, and to finance 
the  mounting  debt  service,  the  Reichsbank  printed  more  and  more  money.  Hyperinflation 
was the outcome. 
At the start of the First World War, the US dollar was worth 4.20 marks. From then on, the 
German currency steadily depreciated, and in the summer of 1922, it went into free fall. 
We can be sure that most Germans, unlike Bavarian comedian Karl Valentin, did not see the 
funny  side  of  this.  When  the  dollar  rose  to  40  billion  marks  in  autumn  1923,  he  quipped: 
"Well, it certainly isn’t worth more than that." 
Seen from this perspective, Valentin was in fact wrong. By mid-November 1923, when a new 
currency was introduced, the dollar stood at 4.2 trillion marks. 
It is often argued that the travails of hyperinflation have been burnt into the collective memory 
of the German people, just as the experience of the Great Depression has become etched 
into  the  collective  memory  of  Americans.  This,  and  the  suppressed  inflation  during  the 
Second World War which led to a second currency reform in 1948, certainly go a long way 
towards explaining why Germans appreciate monetary stability so much. 
                                                
9  O Coibion, Y Gorodnichenko, J Wieland (2012), The Optimal Inflation Rate in New Keynesian Models: Should 
Central Banks Raise Their Inflation Targets in Light of the Zero Lower Bound? Review of Economic Studies 
79, pp 1371-1406. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Perhaps a factor at least as important, though, is the positive experience Germans had with 
the D-Mark and its stability-oriented central bank. The young Bundesbank was successful in 
gaining credibility as a guardian of the currency, even in difficult times. 
Later  on,  during  the  inflation-ridden  1970s,  Germany  kept  inflation  rates  at  comparatively 
modest  levels. While  the  average  rate  of  5%  was quite  high,  other  industrialised  countries 
with  the  exception  of  Switzerland  had  to  cope  with  significantly  higher  inflation  rates:  for 
instance,  the  United  States  8%;  Japan  9%;  France  10%;  United  Kingdom  and  Italy  14%; 
Spain 15% on average. 
Central banks’ more prominent role 
3.3 
The final issue I would like to briefly touch upon is what many see as the increasing powers 
of central banks, which also has a bearing on their independence. 
According  to  Harold  James,  “the  pendulum  is  (...)  swinging  back”  towards  more  politically 
controlled central banks. “The new post-crisis vision of the central bank,” he continues, “is 
often  a  very  different  sort  of  institution  from  the  1990s  vision  of  a  mechanism  for 
guaranteeing price stability.”10  
As a result of the most recent crisis central banks have assumed a much broader role and 
been assigned new functions. The far reaching implications of central bank decisions have 
prompted a debate about the limits of their mandates and the legitimacy of their actions. 
With  respect  to  the  euro  area,  some  have  even  dubbed  the  ECB  the  only  game  in  town. 
These days the ECB’s role in Greece’s fate has spurred an intense debate. 
Greece is certainly the focal and dominating topic at the moment. And no one can seriously 
say  right  now  if  these  days  will  mark  a  turning  point  in  European  monetary  history, 
challenging the irreversibility of euro membership or heralding the move towards a transfer 
union. 
Greece is a topic that shows us in no uncertain terms that, despite the deeper integration that 
the  crisis  brought  about  in  Europe,  the  euro-area  member  states  are  ultimately  still 
responsible for their own affairs. They can decide for themselves not to service their debts, to 
collect taxes inadequately, and – this is something I particularly fear in the case of Greece – 
to lead their country’s economy into deep trouble. 
The Greek government has not only walked out on the previous agreements, but has been 
widely criticised as an unreliable negotiating partner. A little over a week ago, the assistance 
programme  finally  came  to  an  end,  and  the  Greek  government  has  stopped  honouring  its 
payment obligations towards public creditors such as the IMF. 
In  addition,  a  clear  majority  of  the Greek general  public  have  spoken  out  in  a  referendum 
against  contributing  any  further  to  the  solvency  of  their  country  through  additional 
consolidation measures and reforms. 
What is the role of central banks in this situation? 
Central banks – although they have the means – have no mandate, in my view, to safeguard 
the  solvency  of  banks  and  governments.  That  kind  of  implicit  redistribution  is  a  matter  for 
governments or parliaments, if at all. 
Despite  the  practical  difficulties  involved  in  telling  illiquidity  from  insolvency  in  real  time, 
central  banks  need  to  show  where  their  limits  lie.  Besides,  in  Greece  doubts  about  the 
solvency  of  banks  are  legitimate  and  rising  by  the  day.  It  needs  to  be  crystal  clear  that 
responsibility  for  further  developments  in  Greece  and  for  any  decisions  on  transferring 
                                                
10  H  James  (2012),  Making  the  European  Monetary  Union  –  the  role  of  the  Committee  of  Central  Bank 
Governors and the origins of the European Central Bank, Cambridge, Mass. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial resources lies with the Greek government and the countries providing assistance – 
not the ECB Governing Council. 
The Governing Council recently ensured that the provision of emergency liquidity assistance 
(ELA) was frozen, and I welcome the fact that further deposit outflows have been stemmed 
by the capital controls. ELA is no longer being used to finance capital flight caused by the 
Greek government. This certainly represents a step forward, and shifts the responsibility to 
where it belongs: with the governments and parliaments. 
In any case, the Eurosystem should not increase the liquidity provision, and capital controls 
need to stay in force until an appropriate support package has been agreed by all parties and 
the  solvency  of  both  the  Greek  government  and  the  Greek  banking  system  has  been 
ensured. 
In the event that further short-term assistance is thought to be desirable or necessary, it is up 
to fiscal policymakers to provide ad hoc financial support. 
Ever growing expectations with regard to the contribution of central banks and the increased 
role  they  actually  play  are  more  a  curse  than  a  blessing.  Undoubtedly  central  banks  are 
powerful  institutions,  but  they  are  well  advised  to  stick  to  a  narrow  interpretation  of  their 
mandate if they wish to preserve their credibility and independence. 
Conclusion 
4. 
On that note I would like to conclude. 
In my view, it is plain to see that the core principles of monetary policy I mentioned earlier are 
still  valid.  However,  one  important  lesson  to  be  learned,  is  that  we  need  to  pay  greater 
attention to the long-run implications of financial imbalances on price stability. 
I am confident that this conference will deal with a lot of the aspects I have mentioned in my 
speech. I firmly believe  that this conference will prove that history  will teach us more than 
nothing. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
