  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Creating a sustainable pool of talent for Malaysia 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia), at the Kijang Emas Scholarship Award Ceremony, Kuala Lumpur, 30 April 2015. 
 is 
rapidly  changing  and 
In preparing for the future, a future that is going to be fundamentally different from the current 
environment,  talent  development  has  become  more  important  than  ever  before.  The 
environment  before  us 
is  continuously  becoming  more 
interconnected,  more  complex  and  certainly  more  competitive.  It  is  also  becoming  more 
uncertain  and  unstable.  Malaysia  has,  however  over  several  decades,  demonstrated  time 
and  again  our  ability  to  face  the  challenges  arising  from  these  transformative  changes, 
supported  by  our  resilience  and  strong  foundations.  Human  capital  makes  up  a  critical 
component  of  these  foundations.  Developing  the  talent  that  we  have  and  making  greater 
investments in our talent pipeline will contribute to generating the development of our future 
leaders  that  will  be  able  to  effectively  operate  in  this  new  environment.  Education  and 
capacity building to generate the new talent with the right skills, mindsets and values, as well 
as effective talent development strategies and their implementation, have now become key 
priorities of the nation. 
The  Kijang  Emas  Scholarship  Award  is  an  eminent  scholarship  award  that  is  part  of  the 
Bank’s  commitment  to  creating  a  sustainable  talent  pool  for  the  nation.  The  Kijang  Emas 
Scholarship  is  distinct  from  the  Kijang  Scholarship  in  that  the  recipients  are  given  the 
freedom to pursue any field of study at top universities in any country of their choice. The 
Bank also does not impose any bond on the recipients except that they return, contribute and 
partake in the development of our nation. 
To  date,  44  high  potential  talent  have  been  awarded  the  Kijang  Emas  Scholarship.  The 
recipients  have  graduated  or  are  currently  pursuing  their  studies  in  diverse  fields  of  study 
including Medicine, Engineering, Law, Economics, Dietetics, Actuarial Science, Accounting, 
Dentistry,  Biochemistry,  Genetics,  Architecture,  Psychology  and  Geophysics 
top 
universities around the world such as MIT, University of Pennsylvania and the University of 
Cambridge. Thus far, 11 Kijang Emas scholars have completed their undergraduate studies 
and  have  returned  to  serve  the  nation,  while  another  seven  scholars  are  expected  to 
complete their studies in the next six months. 
For the 2015 Kijang Emas Scholarship, we received a total of 212 applications from top SPM 
students  scoring  straight  A+  for  their  2014  SPM.  From  this,  the  Bank  shortlisted  the  top 
24 students based on their SPM results and also on their level of involvement in co-curricular 
and sports activities. The students then underwent a rigorous evaluation process under the 
Bank’s “Kijang Academy” which assessed their technical and leadership competencies, as 
well as their values. 
We are pleased to award four outstanding students the Kijang Emas Scholarship this year. 
Having  just  completed  their  SPM,  they  will  be  enrolled  into  the  respective  pre-university 
programmes. Following their pre-university programmes, Imran aspires to be a Mechanical 
Engineer, Hajar is keen to read Chemistry while both Ying Xin and Nur Shazlin aspire to be 
Doctors. I am confident that all of you will do your best and will contribute for the future of the 
nation. 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
In  addition  to  the  Kijang  Emas  Scholarship  award,  every  year  the  Bank  also  awards 
scholarships  to  50  high  achieving  SPM  students  for  them  to  pursue  their  undergraduate 
studies  abroad  with  the  objective  of  them  being  part  of  the  Bank’s  future  talent  pool.  The 
Bank  has  put  in  place  a  structured,  holistic  and  collaborative  Scholar’s  Development 
Programme to support all of our scholars throughout their studies. The programme aims to 
develop  high-quality  and  well-rounded  scholars  with  leadership  qualities  as  the  next 
generation of young talent who will be the leaders of tomorrow for the Bank and our nation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
