  Haruhiko Kuroda: Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing – theory 
and practice 
Speech  by  Mr  Haruhiko  Kuroda,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Foreign 
Correspondents’ Club of Japan, Tokyo, 20 March 2015. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
It is my great honor to have the opportunity to speak today at the Foreign Correspondents’ 
Club of Japan. 
With the European Central Bank (ECB) having started its asset purchase program, most of 
the major central banks, including the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England (BOE), now 
have adopted quantitative easing (QE). If I may borrow the words of Professor Takatoshi Ito, 
a  friend  and  someone  I  greatly  respect,  “we  are  all  QE-sians  now.”  That  being  said,  the 
economic and price situation against which QE has been introduced, as well as the policy 
transmission mechanism assumed, differ among countries and regions. Today, I would like 
to  clarify  the  characteristics  of  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  current  quantitative  and  qualitative 
monetary easing (QQE) by focusing on similarities to and differences with the QE introduced 
by  other  central  banks.  I  will  further  explain  how  QQE  has  been  producing  the  intended 
effects. 
I. 
The theory behind QQE 
Similarities and Differences between QE and QQE 
I just mentioned that “we are all QE-sians now.” What brought us into this situation is the 
global financial crisis in 2008. The U.S. and European economies deteriorated considerably 
due to the global financial crisis and unemployment increased substantially, so that central 
banks  had  to  stimulate  the  economy  through  monetary  easing.  Initially,  central  banks  in 
Europe and the United States responded to the crisis by using the traditional policy tool of 
lowering  short-term  interest  rates,  but  since  the economies  deteriorated quite  significantly, 
those rates soon approached the zero lower bound (Chart 1). Facing the zero lower bound 
on  short-term  nominal  interest  rates,  central  banks  were  therefore  confronted  with  the 
question  of  how  to  proceed  with  further  monetary  easing.  The  Federal  Reserve’s  and  the 
BOE’s answer was to introduce QE. QE mainly aims at stimulating the economy by lowering 
long-term  interest  rates,  which  still  had  room  to  fall,  through  massive  purchases  of 
government and other bonds by the central bank. 
The  Bank’s  QQE  is  similar  to  QE  in  that  it  aims  to  encourage  long-term  interest  rates  to 
decline  through  massive  purchases  of  government  bonds.  QQE,  however,  has  another 
element:  to  drastically  change  the  deflationary  mindset  that  had  taken  hold  amid  the 
prolonged deflation. In order to understand this point, it is necessary to correctly diagnose 
the problems ailing Japan’s economy and identify appropriate remedies. 
Japan’s economy had been suffering from deflation since the mid-1990s, with the year-on-
year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) being about zero or slightly negative. 
A key feature of deflation in Japan was that it was mild but  persistent: the average  of the 
year-on-year  rates  of  change  in  the  CPI  from  fiscal  1998  to  fiscal  2012  was  only  minus 
0.3 percent, but the deflationary situation lasted for a decade and a half (Chart 2). Japan got 
mired in deflation due to a variety of factors, including balance sheet adjustments by firms 
and financial institutions following the bursting of the asset price bubble, the inflow of low-
priced  goods  from  emerging  economies,  and  the  excessive  appreciation  of  the  yen. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Whatever the reasons may be, a key problem that arose is that, as prices continued to fall 
due  to  these  factors  for  a  prolonged  period,  a  deflationary  mindset  took  hold  among  the 
public – that is, the belief became entrenched that prices would not increase but continue to 
steadily decline. Once this deflationary mindset had taken hold, people engaged in economic 
activity assuming that deflation would continue. As a result, the economy fell into a vicious 
cycle of a decline in prices, a decline in sales and profits, stagnant wages and consumption, 
and a further decline in prices. Moreover, under deflation, the real value of cash and deposits 
increases  with  the  decline  in  prices.  Therefore,  hoarding  cash  and  deposits  becomes  a 
relatively better investment strategy than actual investment,  discouraging firms from taking 
risks  and  investing  in  business  facilities  and  in  research  and  development  to  launch  new 
businesses. In this way, deflation in Japan perpetuated itself in a self-fulfilling manner and 
the growth potential continued to decline. 
In order to overcome this situation, it is necessary to change the entrenched view that “prices 
will not rise” and achieve a state in which firms and households act based on the assumption 
that “prices will rise moderately every year.” In the economic jargon, people’s view on how 
prices will develop in the future is called inflation expectations. And although inflation rates 
tend to fluctuate – reflecting not only the business cycle but also temporary factors such as 
changes  in  commodity  prices  –  they  are  likely  to  do  so  at  around  the  level  of  inflation 
expectations  on  average,  if  medium- to  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  anchored  at  a 
certain level. 
A numerical definition of what central banks consider as price stability based on a specific 
price index is about 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI; this has 
become  the  global  standard  in  recent  years.  While  I  will  not  go  into  detail  due  to  time 
constraints, this figure – 2 percent – takes into account the upward bias in the CPI, that is, 
the tendency of the index to overstate inflation, and provides a buffer allowing to sufficiently 
lower real interest rates should the economy deteriorate. 
For  Japan’s  economy  to  overcome  deflation,  it  was  necessary  to  dispel  the  deflationary 
mindset and raise inflation expectations – which had declined to about 0 percent – to about 
2 percent  and  re-anchor  expectations  at  that  level.  Changing  people’s  expectations  is  the 
main aim of QQE. 
The theory behind QQE 
Attempting  to  change  people’s  mindset  and  perceptions  through  monetary  policy  is  not 
without  historical  precedent.  For  example,  while  the  direction  of  desired  change  was  the 
opposite of that in Japan, the Federal Reserve under Chairman Paul Volcker was successful 
in the late 1970s to early 1980s  in substantially lowering inflation expectations, which had 
been  ratcheting  upward,  through  powerful  monetary  tightening  (Chart  3).  Since  both 
unemployment  and  inflation  were  surging  at  the  time,  such  stringent  monetary  tightening 
created both political and social challenges. Despite such difficulties, however, it was quite 
clear to Chairman Volcker what policy steps he had to take to lower inflation expectations: he 
had to pursue strong monetary tightening by substantially raising short-term interest rates to 
contain inflation. On the other hand, while QQE would not aggravate unemployment, it faced 
another problem, namely that the tools for monetary easing were limited, given that short-
term interest rates were close to the zero lower bound. 
The thinking behind QQE is as follows. First of all, as I discussed earlier, given that short-
term interest rates had declined to zero, the Bank, like the Federal Reserve and the BOE, 
decided to put downward pressure on long-term interest rates through massive purchases of 
government bonds. 
The Bank then focused on the fact that what influences economic activity is not nominal but 
real interest rates, that is, the interest rate level obtained by subtracting inflation expectations 
from nominal interest rates. In this regard, the fact that inflation expectations in Japan were 
well  below  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  provided  a  way  to  break  through  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
deflationary mindset: if the Bank could raise inflation expectations, real interest rates would 
fall,  stimulating  economic  activity  by  firms  and  households.  In  this  sense,  raising  inflation 
expectations is both an objective of QQE and, at the same time, the key to implementing the 
QQE transmission mechanism to overcome deflation. 
This raises the question of how people’s deflationary mindset can be changed and inflation 
expectations  can  be  raised.  For  firms  and  households  with  a  deflationary  mindset  to  start 
thinking that “from now, we will act based on the assumption that prices will rise by about 
2 percent every year,” it is necessary above all that the central bank fully commits itself to 
achieving  2  percent  inflation.  Based  on  these  considerations, the  Bank  committed  itself  to 
achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  at  the  earliest  possible  time,  with  a  time 
horizon  of  about  two  years,  and  to  maintaining  the  target  in  a  stable  manner.  And  as  a 
means to this end, the Bank introduced large-scale monetary easing in the form of QQE. 
A  decline  in  real  interest  rates  can  be  expected  to  stimulate  private  demand  such  as 
business fixed investment, private consumption, and housing investment. Such an increase 
in private demand in turn reduces the output gap, that is, the amount of slack in the economy 
as a whole, thereby putting upward pressure on prices. And once people actually experience 
inflation, this will boost their confidence in the Bank’s commitment, leading to a further rise in 
inflation  expectations  and  reinforcing  the  aforementioned  processes,  forming  a  virtuous 
cycle.  This  is  the  mechanism  through  which  QQE  aims  at  raising  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations to 2 percent. 
II. 
The practice of QQE 
Effects of QQE 
So far, I have talked about the theory of QQE, but to what extent has this policy actually been 
exerting any effects? 
First  of  all,  as  a  result  of  the  Bank’s  massive  purchases  of  Japanese  government  bonds 
(JGBs),  long-term  interest  rates  have  further  declined.  Ten-year  JGB  yields  have  recently 
been around 0.4 percent (Chart 4). Moreover, the average interest rate on new loans has 
declined to historic lows of about 0.9 percent. 
In  addition,  people’s  perception  of  inflation  has  clearly  changed.  Various  indicators  of 
medium- to  long-term  inflation  expectations  show  clear  increases  since  the  introduction of 
QQE.  For  example,  the  figure  presented  in  the  Consensus  Forecast  was  0.8  percent  in 
October  2012  but  has  risen  to  1.5  percent  of  late. Therefore,  real  interest  rates,  including 
longer-term ones, have become clearly negative. 
Also, people and businesses feel that, in their daily life, the inflation environment has been 
changing substantially. Let me cite two noteworthy examples. First, the year-on-year rate of 
change in the CPI has been positive for 20 months since June 2013. This is the first time 
since 1998 that people have experienced inflation for such a long period. It means that this is 
the  first  time  ever  for  people  in  their  20s  or  younger  to  experience  rising  prices.  Second, 
since last year, nominal wages have been rising. Of particular note is that during the annual 
wage negotiations last spring, the so-called spring offensive, base pay rose for the first time 
in about 20 years, and rising base pay is likely to be seen in  increasingly  many firms this 
year. 
Both examples represent landmark changes for Japan, which has experienced deflation for 
such a long period. While the word “deflation” – defure in Japanese – had become part of 
everyday conversation, recently the term can rarely be heard. 
Furthermore,  this  momentum  toward  overcoming  the  deflationary  mindset  has  continued 
even amid the decline in CPI inflation reflecting the effects of falling crude oil prices. Looking 
at indicators of inflation expectations, while market-based indicators such as the break-even 
inflation  rate  –  as  in  Europe  and  the  United  States  –  have  declined,  various  surveys  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
economists  and  households  suggest  that  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations 
continue to be on an upward trend. We believe this is because the Bank’s expansion of QQE 
last October – undertaken as a preemptive response to the risk that falling crude oil prices 
could  affect  wage  negotiations  and  price-setting  by  lowering  inflation  expectations  –  has 
been effective. 
As I have explained, QQE has been exerting its intended effects and it seems safe to say 
that QQE works both in theory and practice. The Bank believes that it can achieve the price 
stability target of 2 percent by continuing to steadily pursue QQE going forward. 
In the following, I will offer my view on the economic and price situation in more detail, and 
explain  why  I  think  that  QQE  will  lead  to  the  realization  of  the  price  stability  target  of 
2 percent. 
to 
is  close 
tight  and  Japan 
full  employment.  Specifically, 
Economic and price situation 
Let me start with economic activity. The corporate sector is buoyant. Profits have continued 
to improve and have reached new peaks (Chart 5). The decline in crude oil prices will further 
benefit the sector by reducing costs. In addition, exports and production have been picking 
up. In this situation, firms have maintained their positive investment stance and their demand 
for labor has remained strong. 
Against the backdrop of the strong demand for labor in the corporate sector, labor market 
conditions  remain 
the 
unemployment rate has declined to around 3.5 percent, which is roughly the same level as 
the  structural  unemployment  rate  (Chart  6).  The  tightness  in  labor  market  conditions  has 
been  exerting  upward  pressure  on  nominal  wages,  which  are  expected  to  continue  rising. 
Against the backdrop of this steady improvement in the employment and income situation, 
private  consumption  as  a  whole  has  been  firm.  In  this  situation,  downward  pressure 
stemming from the decline in demand following the consumption tax hike has been waning. 
The decline in crude oil prices will also have a favorable effect on private consumption. 
Given the various tailwinds to economic activity, the Bank expects Japan’s real GDP growth 
in  fiscal  2015  to  be  about  2  percent.  In  the  Bank’s  January  interim  assessment  of  the 
October  2014  Outlook  Report  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices,  the  real  GDP  growth  rate 
was projected to be 2.1 percent in fiscal 2015 and 1.6 percent in fiscal 2016 (Chart 7). 
In  the  current  improving  economic  situation,  the  output  gap  has  improved  substantially 
mainly due to the tightening of the labor market. It has become about 0 percent, that is, close 
to the long-term average. Going forward, with Japan’s economy continuing to grow above its 
potential growth rate, which is estimated to be around 0.5 percent or lower, the output gap is 
expected to further improve. In addition, as mentioned earlier, medium- to long-term inflation 
expectations  have  remained  on  an  uptrend.  The  underlying  trend  in  inflation  has  been 
increasing  as  its  two  determinants,  namely,  the  output  gap  and  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation expectations, are improving. 
However,  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  excluding  fresh  food 
stripping  out the  direct effects  of the consumption  tax  hike,  inflation  has  slowed  since  last 
summer due mainly to the substantial decline in crude oil prices and registered 0.2 percent in 
January (Chart 8). Going forward, the rate of increase is expected to be about 0 percent due 
to the effects of the decline in energy prices and is likely to remain at that level for the time 
being. However, the underlying trend in inflation is expected to continue to steadily increase 
in the future. Therefore, as the effects of falling crude oil prices on the year-on-year rate of 
change,  that  is,  the  base  effect,  dissipate,  CPI  inflation  will  accelerate  and  achieving 
2 percent CPI inflation will come in sight. Based on the assumption that crude oil prices will 
rise  moderately from their  recent  levels,  CPI  inflation  is  expected  to reach  2  percent  in  or 
around  fiscal  2015  (Chart  7).  The  timing  of  this  could  be  somewhat  sooner  or  later  than 
envisaged  depending  on  developments  in  crude  oil  prices.  However,  if  it  is  clear  that  the 
timing  in  which  the  2  percent  target  will  be  achieved  depends  mainly  on  fluctuations  in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
energy prices, market participants will not draw any unwarranted conclusions with regard to 
monetary policy, as they know that the base effect caused by changes in energy prices will 
eventually disappear. 
Needless  to  say,  the  Bank  maintains  its  policy  stance  that  it  will  make  adjustments  as 
necessary  without  hesitation,  when  there  are  changes  in  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation, 
especially  in  developments  in  inflation  expectations,  in  order  to  achieve  the  price  stability 
target at the earliest possible time. 
factors 
The government’s growth strategy and the bank’s monetary policy 
III. 
To  conclude  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  strengthening  the  growth  potential  of 
Japan’s  economy.  Japan’s  potential  growth  rate  has  been  on  a  declining  trend  since  the 
1990s (Chart 9). Reasons include demographic trends such as the decline in the working-
age  population  as  well  as  regulatory  and  institutional factors  that  have hindered  corporate 
activities and impeded competition. In order to raise the growth potential, it is necessary to 
remove  such 
that  hamper  private  entities’  proactive  economic  activities. 
Consequently, it is encouraging that various regulatory and institutional reforms have steadily 
been implemented through the government’s growth strategy. 
In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  highlight  that  overcoming  deflation  itself  will  contribute  to 
raising Japan’s growth potential. Investment and innovation in the private sector are key to 
economic  growth,  and  the  role  of  the  government’s  growth  strategy  is  to  create  an 
environment  in  which  firms  can  thoroughly  pursue  business  opportunities.  In  addition, 
overcoming deflation and achieving an economy and society in which economic entities take 
action  on  the  assumption  of  2  percent  inflation  will  revive  firms’  and  households’  animal 
spirits. If that happens, people will start to take more risks and invest in new ventures, which 
in  turn  is  likely  to  give  rise  to  innovations.  With  firms  and  households  becoming  more 
proactive,  it  will  become  even  clearer  which  regulatory  and  institutional  aspects  have 
hampered  growth.  I  think  one  of  the  reasons  why  only  some  progress  has  been  made  in 
regulatory  and  institutional  reforms  is  that  the  momentum  toward  reforms  was  lacking  as 
private entities were not sufficiently proactive. The emergence of real needs for reforms will 
be a major driving force to push ahead with regulatory and institutional reforms. 
Under QQE, the deflationary mindset is steadily being dispelled. The Bank aims to contribute 
to  strengthening  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy  through  its  continued  efforts 
through QQE and by achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible 
time. 
Concluding remarks 
Today, I have talked about the challenges facing Japan’s economy and the characteristics of 
QQE as a remedy for those challenges. The greatest lesson from Japan’s experience is that 
the best is not to fall into deflation in the first place, since there is the danger that, once the 
economy has fallen into it, deflation becomes protracted. If there is a risk of deflation, policy 
authorities should make every effort to prevent the economy from falling into it. 
Having  said  that,  even  if  the  economy  becomes  trapped  in  deflation,  it  is  possible  to 
overcome  deflation  through  innovative  monetary  policy.  By  succeeding  in  getting  the 
economy out of deflation through QQE, the Bank hopes to provide a case in point. 
If the Bank can show that even if the economy falls into deflation, there are policy measures 
to escape from it, this will strengthen confidence in central banks’ ability to achieve their price 
stability targets, which reinforces their ability to anchor inflation expectations. Well-anchored 
inflation expectations, in turn, help to prevent the economy from falling into and becoming 
trapped in deflation in the first place. In this regard, success of the Bank’s QQE has important 
implications not only for Japan’s economy but also for monetary policy around the globe. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
    6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
