  Peter Praet: The ECB’s asset purchase programme – the impact so far 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the Eurofi conference, Luxembourg, 9 September 2015. 
 The ECB’s expanded asset purchase programme has met with our initial expectations. First 
of  all,  it  has  strongly  signalled  the  ECB’s  commitment  to  deliver  its  medium-term  price 
stability objective, which has in turn been reflected in an upward shift in inflation expectations 
at all horizons. In keeping with this, any second round effects on inflation from the steep drop 
in oil prices last year appear to have been forestalled, and the tightening of medium-term real 
rates we saw towards the end of last year has been reversed (though the path of real rates 
implied by markets has recently steepened noticeably). More generally, the signalling effect 
of the APP has been visible in solidifying business and consumer confidence underpinning a 
broadening economic recovery. 
The expanded APP, together with our credit easing package launched in summer 2014, has 
also  had  a  positive  impact  on  both market and  bank  credit  dynamics. The cost  of market-
based debt fell to historically low levels in the early part of 2015, and though it has risen in 
recent months, financing flows have remained robust. This implies a “first order” monetary 
policy effect from our interventions. The credit easing package and expanded APP has been 
effective too in reducing wholesale funding costs for banks, allowing banks to pass on better 
funding conditions to their customers. Since summer last year the average cost of borrowing 
for  euro  area  non-financial  corporations  has  fallen  by  around  70  bps,  and  by  90  bps  and 
110 bps for NFCs in Spain and Italy, respectively. The latest evidence from the July Bank 
Lending Survey confirms the improvement in credit conditions. During the second quarter of 
2015  credit  standards  continued  to  ease  for  firms,  and  even  more  so  for  households. 
Reflecting the endogenous relationship between credit supply and demand, credit demand 
also increased among both groups driven mostly by the low level of interest rates. 
The impact of the expanded APP on bank funding costs has been partially reversed by the 
recent  market  repricing.  Here,  however,  the  credit  easing  package  and  our  broader  asset 
purchases  could  act  as  complements,  in  particular  the  Targeted  Long-Term  Refinancing 
Operations. For the APP, the ECB defines the volume of liquidity it would like to inject, but 
cannot  determine  the  price;  for  TLTROs,  we  define  the  price  of  the  liquidity,  but  banks 
determine  the  volume.  One  tool  can  therefore  act  as  an  automatic  stabiliser  for  the  other. 
Indeed,  as  wholesale  funding  costs  for  banks  have  risen,  so  has  the  attractiveness  of  the 
TLTRO. This substitution effect accounts in particular for the higher participation in the fourth 
operation by banks in less vulnerable countries. 
Some  observers  have  voiced  concerns  that  the  APP  could  in  fact  negatively  affect  bank 
lending by squeezing margins and hence banks’ profitability. I do not share this view. ECB 
staff estimates of the impact of the APP show the overall effect on bank capital to be positive. 
Capital  gains  on  securities  held,  lower  funding  costs,  improved  credit  quality  and  higher 
intermediation volumes outweigh the negative impact of the flattening of the term structure 
on net interest income. Though structural problems certainly remain in the euro area banking 
sector, banks’ weak profitability is to a large extent linked to the macroeconomic environment 
– something that the successful implementation of our programme will help address. 
In  sum,  the  expanded  APP,  combined  with  our  other  credit  easing  measures,  is  largely 
producing its desired effects. We judge that the recent volatility in financial markets has not 
materially  affected  this  picture,  although  close  monitoring  and  continuous  assessment  are 
warranted from a monetary policy perspective. It is nonetheless clear that the effectiveness 
of  the  APP  would  be  enhanced  by  complementary  measures  from  other  policymakers.  In 
particular,  the  improving  economic  and  financial  environment  provides  the  ideal  conditions 
for governments to press ahead with structural reforms, which are in turn necessary to make 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the  recovery  lasting.  Raising  expectations  of  future  growth  is  vital  to  lift  animal  spirits  and 
encourage  a  stronger rebound  in  investment,  which  is  the  cornerstone of  a  self-sustaining 
economic recovery. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
