  Gent Sejko: Fifth review of the arrangement with the IMF concluded 
Speech by  Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the joint press conference 
with  the  IMF  mission,  Albanian  MoF  (Ministry  of  Finance)  and  MEDTTE  (the  Albanian 
Ministry of Economic Development, Tourism, Trade, and Entrepreneurship), Tirana, 30 June 
2015. 
 Dear media representatives, 
In line with the already established practice, in the past two weeks, we have constantly met 
and  exchanged  views  and  opinions  with  International  Monetary  Fund  representatives.  As 
always, these meetings serve to make a comprehensive analysis of economic and financial 
developments, with a view to identifying the necessary measures for a steady development. 
Following, I will present a summary of Bank of Albania’s opinion. 
The  Albanian  economy  is  on  a  positive  development  trajectory,  irrespective  of  the 
shocks  we  have  been  facing  in  the  first  half  of  the  year.  Economic  and  financial 
balances in Albania are sound. The Banking system is liquid and well capitalised; Albania’s 
public debt is in control; and, the financial situation of Albanian businesses and households is 
improving. Long-term development resources for the country remain stable. 
This situation is an outcome of economic policies oriented towards stability, which we 
have undertaken. In view of the latest developments in Greece, I would like to emphasize 
that  the  external  environment  appears  challenging,  but  Albania’s  economy  and  financial 
system are capable to withstand even extreme shocks. The short-term costs that we have 
paid  due  to  structural  reforms  and  fiscal  consolidation  show  their  benefits  exactly  in  such 
moments. 
Under the current circumstances, it is necessary for economic and financial policies 
to continue to be guided by the philosophy of prudence. We are able and ready to take 
additional  measures,  if  necessary.  I  would  like  to  assure  the  private  sector  that  the 
development  perspectives  for  the  Albanian  economy  remain  positive.  Albanian  businesses 
and  households  should  continue,  uninfluenced,  with  their  consumption,  investment  and 
development plans. 
Let me be more concrete with regard to the above. 
Economic  and  financial  developments  have  been  overall  in  line  with  our  year-start 
projections,  but  incoming  information  has  resulted  on  the  down  side  of  our 
expectations.  Therefore,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  revised  down  the  expected  economic 
growth for 2015. Yet, in our judgment, shocks are expected to have only a transitory effect on 
economic activity indicators and not affect the medium and long-term trends of development. 
Economic growth is expected to improve in the second half of the current year and in the two 
years ahead, which would enable the return of inflation to equilibrium. 
Notwithstanding the above said, the Albanian economy continues to operate below its 
potential  and  inflation remains  below  Bank  of  Albania’s target.  These  developments 
require  maintaining  simulating  macroeconomic  policies  for  at  least  some  quarters 
ahead. 
The Bank of Albania has urged and supported the fiscal consolidation trend, pursued 
by public finances. Fiscal data, overall, are in line with this target, albeit work should still be 
done with regard to the rigorous implementation of public borrowing and spending plan. 
The  monetary  policy  implemented  by  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  at  very  simulating 
parameters.  Interest  rates  and  financing  costs  are  at  historical  low  levels.  The  Bank  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Albania  has  ensured  that  the  market  is  fully  supplied  with  liquidity  and  has  provided  long-
term guidance on the monetary policy direction. 
In accordance with the monetary policy direction, the Bank of Albania has continued 
to  implement  easing  supervisory  and  regulatory  measures.  Also,  we  will  announce  a 
major project very soon, aimed at addressing definitely the issues related with the treatment 
and  reduction  of  non-performing  loans.  All  these  measures  have  contributed  to  and  are 
expected to better support the Albanian economy with funds. 
As  I  said  above,  the  economic  and  financial  equilibriums  of  Albania  are  solid.  The 
current  account  deficit  improved  in  the  first  quarter  and  the  Albanian  foreign  exchange 
position is quite positive. Banking system’s liquidity and capitalization indicators have been 
improving.  The  growth  of  non-performing  loans  decelerated  and  the  Albanian  banking 
system is profitable. 
Taking into account the international setting, I would like to guarantee the public that 
the banking system has no direct exposure to the Greek crisis. Our analyses, both at 
individual  bank  and  system  level,  confirm  that  that  it  would  maintain  the  soundness  and 
normal operations even in extreme adverse scenarios. Lastly, the implementation of the IMF 
arrangement not only guarantees the stability of the public debt, but also provides us with the 
possibility for additional funds to withstand any unexpected and unwanted development. The 
arrangement  is  an  insurance  policy,  which  should  assure  all  the  economic  actors  for  the 
country’s financial soundness. 
I  would 
Dear media representatives, 
Concluding, 
like  to  re-emphasize  Bank  of  Albania’s  commitment  to 
safeguarding  the  country’s  economic  and  monetary  stability.  In  our  judgment,  the 
adopted policy framework provides a sound and coordinated development platform. 
Pursuant  to  our  legal  requirements  and  the  development  programme,  the  Bank  of  Albania 
will continue to work on: 
• 
Maintaining  price  stability  and  sustaining  the  country’s  development.  Under 
the  current  scenarios,  the  monetary  policy  stance  will  remain  accommodative  for 
several quarters ahead. We are, however, willing to take any additional measures 
necessary  to  maintain  price  stability  and  the  purchasing  power  of  Albanian 
households. 
Safeguarding  the  country’s  financial  stability,  in  cooperation  with  all  the 
stakeholders. We are in on-going contact with our international partners and other 
public  agencies.  Our  analyses  show  that  the  banking  system  is  stable.  However, 
even  under  shocks,  we  have  detailed  measure  plans  available  to  avoid  financial 
constraints. 
Developing the financial system further through the implementation of measures 
agreed upon under the FSAP arrangement and provided for in cooperation with the 
continued IMF assistance. 
Continuous improvement of the Bank of Albania,  with  a  view  to  enhancing  its 
professionalism, reputation and independence. In this context, the Bank of Albania 
will continue to work on improving the control and management systems, to reduce 
operational risks and improve communication and transparency. 
   In addition, the Bank of Albania emphasizes the need to continue structural reforms, 
which will allow faster, more sustainable and more inclusive growth for different social levels 
of the society. 
Thank you! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
