  Gent Sejko: Fourth review of the arrangement with the IMF concluded 
Speech by  Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the joint press conference 
with the IMF mission, Albanian MoF and MEDTTE, Tirana, 17 March 2015. 
 Dear media representatives, 
During  the  last  two  weeks,  an  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  team  visited  Tirana,  to 
conduct, together with Albanian authorities, the fourth review of the arrangement. In Bank of 
Albania’s  perspective,  the  economic  and  financial  developments  have  been  relatively 
positive.  Notwithstanding  the  problems  the  Albanian  economy  has  encountered,  it  has 
recorded  growth  and  a  range  of  economic  and  financial  balances  of  the  country  have 
improved.  The  economic  policies  and  the  legal,  regulatory  and  institutional  reforms  by  the 
Albanian authorities have played a significant role in this regard. These development policies 
are anchored in the arrangement that Albania has with the IMF and have benefited from the 
credibility and financial assistance of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank. The 
Bank of Albania deems that the reforms that Albania has started should continue, to provide 
sustainable and long-term growth. 
I would like now to outline Bank of Albania’s opinion on the country’s economic and financial 
situation, and to list the priorities of our work in the framework of this arrangement. 
The  Albanian  economy  posted  growth  in  2014,  which  is  expected  to  further  accelerate  in 
2015.  Increase  in  consumption  and  private  investments,  owing  to  the  improved  financing 
terms, confidence and private sector balance sheets, was, and is expected to continue to be, 
the main driver of the economy’s performance. On the other hand, the public sector has been 
and remains committed in the path to fiscal consolidation, whereas the external environment 
continues to face problems and pose challenges to the increase of Albanian exports. In the 
short run, the increase in consumption and private investments is sufficient to generate initial 
triggers for economic growth, but the long-term growth of the Albanian economy should rely 
more  on  the  improvement  of  its  competitive  profile  and  growth  of  exports.  Therefore,  we 
deem  that  the  acceleration  of  structural  reforms has  a  unique role  in  supporting  economic 
growth. 
Inflation  continued  to  stand  below  our  target.  Internal  inflationary  pressures  have  been 
upward, but the fall in prices in global markets decelerated the return of inflation to target at 
home.  The  monetary  policy  stance  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  become  strongly 
accommodative. This policy stance aims at reducing the financing costs of the private sector, 
in order to sustain the return of the economy to equilibrium and of inflation to target, in the 
medium-term horizon. 
In  our  view,  the  indicators  of  economic  activity  and  inflation  are  performing  in  the  right 
direction; however, the sustainable accomplishment of targets will need time and will imply 
keeping low interest rates for some quarters ahead. Overall, the main indicators in banking 
system  activity  improved.  Liquidity,  profitability  and  capitalisation  indicators  are  at  good 
levels, while the ratio of non-performing loans has trended down. The Bank of Albania has 
continued to work for the regulation and prudent supervision of the banking system, pursuant 
to the legal obligations, as well as to sustain its steady development. 
Also, we have cooperated with: 
(i) 
other  public  agencies,  to  improve  the  legal  framework,  align  regulatory  practices, 
and identify measures for withstanding systemic shocks; 
international financial institutions, to develop loan restructuring programmes; and, 
(ii) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 (iii) 
foreign  regulatory  institutions  and  parent  banking  groups  operating  in  Albania,  to 
exchange information. 
 I  would  like  to  reiterate  that  the  banking  system  is  solid,  liquid  and  well  capitalised  for 
conducting  its  intermediary  function.  However,  credit  growth  continues  to  appear  sluggish, 
due to tight bank lending policies. Maintaining and strengthening banking system soundness 
is to everyone’s benefit, as this is the only system that, with its funds, may sustain long-term 
economic growth. Lending is expected to improve slightly during 2015. The Bank of Albania, 
however, expects an increasingly active role of the banking system in lending and will also 
take all the needed measures to encourage it. 
At the conclusion of discussions, the Bank of Albania shares the view that economic policies 
are performing overall in the right direction. 
In  compliance  with  its  legal  duties,  and  pursuant  to  its  institutional  commitments  in  the 
framework of the arrangement, the Bank of Albania will continue to work on: 
• 
Maintaining price stability, in accordance with its 3.0 % inflation target. The Bank of 
Albania  will  continue  to  implement  its  monetary  policy  in  accordance  with  the 
targeted  inflation  regime  and  free-floating  exchange  rate  regime.  The  monetary 
policy  will  remain  on  the  easing  side,  aiming  at  enhancing  transparency  of 
communication and its effectiveness. 
Maintaining adequate foreign currency reserves. 
Supporting  banking  system  stability,  by  exercising  its  duties  as  the  regulator  and 
supervisor of the banking system. Special attention, in this regard, will be given to 
addressing factors determining non-performing loans. For this purpose, the Bank of 
Albania  will  cooperate  with  the  banking  industry  and  other  national  authorities  to 
swiftly  address  this  issue.  Moreover,  the  Bank of  Albania  will  continue  to  work  on 
improving  the  infrastructure  that  assesses  and  addresses  risks  facing  the  overall 
financial system, in the framework of recommendations left by the Financial Sector 
Assessment Progam. 
Completing the project for adopting the new IFRS standards on compiling financial 
statements. 
  Thank You! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
