  Vítor Constâncio: Strengthening macroprudential policy in Europe 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Conference on “The macroprudential toolkit in Europe and credit flow restrictions”, organised 
by the Bank of Lithuania, Vilnius, 3 July 2015. 
 The  current  euro  area  environment,  with  policy  rates  required  to  stay  low  for  a  prolonged 
period of time and an apparent disconnect between the business and financial cycle, clearly 
points to a situation where monetary policy cannot deviate from price stability objectives to 
influence the financial cycle. This is the task of macroprudential policy. While acknowledged 
in principle, this fact has not yet been fully reflected in our policy frameworks. 
Two major moves are required. First, macroprudential policy must place greater emphasis on 
preventing large fluctuations in the financial cycle, rather than simply increasing resilience to 
shocks  when  they  occur.  In  addition  to  the  bank-side  capital  based  measures  enhancing 
banks’ resilience, borrower-based instruments (such as LTVs or DSTIs), which have proved 
to be more effective in curtailing excessive credit growth, and are also applicable in a time-
varying  fashion,  should  gain  more  prominence.  In  particular,  borrower-based  measures 
should  be  properly  embedded  in  European  legislation,  which  is  not  the  case  at  present. 
Second,  a  broader  macroprudential  toolkit  is  needed  to  address  risks  stemming  from  the 
shadow banking sector due to its increasing role in credit intermediation. This could involve 
measures  such  as  redemption  gates  and  loading  fees  to  provide  additional  safeguards. 
Guided  stress  tests  can  provide  comparable  assessments  of  the  health  of  individual 
institutions  and  of  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  Appropriate  policy 
responses  to  mitigate  growing  risks  need  however  to  be  calibrated,  in  order  to  ensure  a 
contained impact on credit supply to the real economy. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
For seven  years now, policy interest rates around the world have been at historic lows as 
central  banks  have  responded  to  the  debilitating  effects  of  a  major  financial  crisis.  While 
some major central banks are now signalling their intention to begin a tightening cycle, there 
remains some uncertainty about how much interest rates can be expected to normalise. This 
is related to the so-called “secular stagnation” hypothesis and the possibility that long-term 
real  equilibrium  interest  rates  have  fallen  to  very  low  levels,  exerting  continued  downward 
pressure on interest rates even as the recovery strengthens. All this implies that, insofar as 
disconnections  emerge  between  business  and  financial  cycles  in  advanced  economies, 
monetary policy is not available to address financial stability concerns. 
This also applies to the euro area. In our case, however, the issue is made more acute by 
the fact that cyclical conditions are also diverging across countries. We have signalled clearly 
that our monetary policy is continuing its easing phase. Our main policy rates will stay low for 
a prolonged period of time, as indicated by our forward guidance, and our balance sheet will 
keep expanding until we see a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation. Managing the 
business cycle and ensuring price stability will be the central focus of monetary policy over 
the medium-term, as our mandate demands. 
In  this  environment,  monetary  policy  needs  a  complement,  and  that  complement  is 
macroprudential policy. This is hardly a new statement, but in my view it is still not receiving 
sufficient  international  attention.  Developing  the  macroprudential  toolkit  is  a  real  need  for 
advanced economies. Moreover, some key aspects of the situation we face today are yet to 
be fully reflected in our policy frameworks. There are two points in particular that I would like 
to underline. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  first  is  that  macroprudential  policy  must  place  greater  emphasis  on  preventing  large 
fluctuations  in  the  financial  cycle,  rather  than  simply  increasing  resilience  to  shocks  when 
they occur. This means making full use of instruments that can effectively restrain excessive 
leverage  and  credit  growth,  and  deploying  them  in  a  time-varying  way  that  is  sensitive  to 
movements in the financial cycle. In my view, this can only be achieved by broadening the 
toolkit available to policymakers at the European level to include borrower-based measures, 
which  are  the  measures  thought  to  have  the  strongest  impact  on  credit  and  real  estate 
developments. 
The second point is the need for this broader toolkit to also cover the shadow banking sector. 
The CRR/CRDIV legal framework covers mainly the banking sector, yet financial activity and 
the financing of the euro area economy have increasingly shifted to non-banks.1 Since 2009, 
shadow banking entities have increased their share in total assets of the financial sector from 
33% to 37%, while credit institutions have seen their share of intermediation shrink from 55% 
to 49%. In this context, a macroprudential framework focused solely on banks will be “blind in 
one eye” – it will have  only a partial perspective on intermediation patterns and the forces 
driving the financial cycle. It will also be highly prone to regulatory leakages. 
In the remainder of my remarks I will expand on these two points in some more detail. 
The macroprudential toolkit and credit flow restrictions 
Starting  with  the  issue  of  tempering  the  financial  cycle,  the  first  challenge  is  of  course  to 
identify  more  accurately  which  variables  policy  should  aim  to  lean  against.  In  this  context 
quite some conceptual work has been done by the BIS, and also taken up at the ECB.2 At 
the  ECB  we  include  equity,  interest  rate,  housing  and  credit  markets  in  our  preferred 
measure of the financial cycle, and aim to account for correlations between sectors.3 The key 
finding from our work, however, is in line with that of other studies: the most important driver 
of the financial cycle is credit flows into real estate. The correlation between mortgage credit 
flows and house prices is strongly self-reinforcing.4 
Therefore, if macroprudential policy is to effectively curb the financial cycle having the tools 
to address this credit-real estate nexus is fundamental. In principle, there are two ways this 
can be achieved. The first is on the bank side by imposing restrictions on lending institutions 
– so-called capital-based measures. In this context the toolkit at the European level based on 
CRR/CRDIV  already  includes  such  measures  as  the  Countercyclical  Capital  Buffer,  the 
Systemic  Risk  Buffer  and  capital  add-ons  for  systemically  important  institutions.  It  also 
includes  large  exposure  limits  and  sectoral  risk  weights  which  can  be  applied  to  banks’ 
exposures to the residential and commercial property sectors.5 
In  the  euro  area, the  Netherlands  was  one  of the frontrunners  in  introducing  systemic  risk 
buffers in July 20146. Since then similar measures have been adopted in Estonia, Denmark 
                                                
1  For  a  description  of  the  shadow  banking  activities  see  Pozsar,  Z.,  T.  Adrian,  A.  Ashcraft  and  H.  Boesky 
(2013): “Shadow Banking”, FRBNY Economic Policy Review, December. 
2  The early work by Drehmann, M., C. Borio and K. Tsatsaronis (2012), “Characterising the financial cycle: don’t 
lose sight of the medium term!” BIS Working Papers No. 380, has been updated by Hanno Stremmel (2015): 
“Capturing the financial cycle in Europe”, ECB Working Paper No. 1811. 
3  Schüler, Y., P. Hiebert, and T. Peltonen (2015), “Characterizing Financial Cycles Across Europe: One Size 
Does Not Fit All”, ECB Working Paper (forthcoming). 
4  Favara, G., and J. Imbs, (2015), “Credit supply and the price of housing,” The American Economic Review, 
105(3), pp. 958–992. 
5   For  a  full  overview  of  the  macroprudential  toolkit  in  Europe  see  ESRB  (2014)  “The  ESRB  Handbook  on 
Operationalising Macroprudential Policy in the Banking Sector”. 
6  Phasing  in  the  SRB  between  January  2016  and  January  2019  http://www.esrb.europa.eu/pub/html/ 
index.en.html?skey=29/04/2014%20Notification. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and Sweden. The latest country to announce measures was Austria, applying the systemic 
risk buffer to a total of 12 banks. Since then similar measures have been adopted in Estonia, 
Denmark and Sweden. The latest country to announce measures was Austria, applying the 
systemic risk buffer to a total of 12 banks.7 
There are however several well-known problems with relying on such instruments to smooth 
the  financial  cycle.  For  one,  aside  from  the  counter-cyclical  capital  buffer,  capital-based 
measures tend to be focused on building resilience and are hence applied in a static way. 
This is the case for the implementation of the systemic risk buffers in various countries that I 
just described. Moreover, the evidence suggests that, even if applied in a more time-varying 
way, such measures have more indirect and possibly limited effects on cyclical adjustments 
and the costs of loans.8  This may make them less effective in restraining excessive credit 
demand in an environment of exuberant expectations of house price appreciation.9 
The second way in which the boom-bust cycles can be tempered is on the borrower side – 
that  is,  by  limiting  households’  or  non-financial  corporations’  leverage.  Borrower-based 
instruments,  such  as  loan-to-value  (LTV),  loan-to-income  (LTI)  or  debt  service-to-income 
(DSTI)  limits,  are  on  the  whole  thought  to  be  among  the  most  effective  macroprudential 
instruments  in  curtailing  excessive  credit  growth.10  It  should  be  highlighted  that  using 
indicators related to income is preferable to taking housing values in the denominator of such 
indicators. In an undesirable boom, the value of houses goes up and the Loan-to-Value may 
provide a misleading indication of what is happening. In any case, an increasing number of 
euro  area  countries  are  introducing  such  measures  to  address  the  impact  of  low  interest 
rates on housing market developments. 
For  example,  Estonia  has  introduced  limits  on  LTV,  DSTI  and  maturity  restriction 
requirements for commercial banks issuing housing loans. Ireland has taken the decision to 
place  ceilings  on  the  proportion  of  mortgage  lending  with  a  high  LTV  and  LTI  ratios.  The 
Netherlands has introduced a gradual tightening of its LTV caps, decreasing by 1 percentage 
point  each  year  until  the  LTV  reaches  90%  in  2028.  Slovakia  has  progressively  tightened 
share  of  loans  with  LTV  ratios  and  introduced recommendation  on  maximum  maturity  and 
requirement for income verification and internal borrower repayment assessment for banks. 
And  Lithuania,  as  you  know,  has  been  implementing  its  Responsible  Lending  Regulation 
since autumn 2011. 
To effectively temper the financial cycle, however, a time-varying dimension is crucial in the 
design of such instruments – that is, the relevant ratios must be able to be adjusted over the 
cycle. Otherwise, especially in the case of LTV, there is a risk of pro-cyclicality due to the fact 
that leverage constraints decrease as asset prices rise. In order to adjust the LTV or DSTI 
ratios in this way, borrower stress tests either against future changes in interest rates or in 
house prices should, in my view, become a common standard. 
In this context I note that Lithuania has recently made its DSTI legislation more sensitive to 
the  financial  cycle  by  requiring  credit  institutions  to  check  whether  customers  would  be 
financially  able  to  withstand  future  increases  in  interest  rates,  while  also  reducing  the 
maximum  maturity  of  credit.  This  is  a  good  example  of  using  macroprudential  policy  in  a 
preventive  way.  However,  not  all  countries  in  Europe  can  follow  this  rule  in  similar 
                                                
7  http://www.fmsg.at/en/publications/press-releases/forth-meeting.html. 
8  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (2010),  “An  assessment  of  the  long-term  economic  impact  of 
stronger capital and liquidity requirements”. 
9  See Constâncio, V. (2014), “The ECB and Macroprudential policy: from research to implementation”, speech 
at the Third Conference of the Macroprudential Research Network, Frankfurt am Main, 23 June 2014. 
10   Cerutti, E. S Claessens, and L. Laeven (2015), “The Use and Effectiveness of Macroprudential Policies: New 
Evidence”, IMF Working paper 15/61. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  circumstances, given more limited legal possibilities. It also relies wholly on the foresight of 
the  national  competent  authorities.  The  fact  that  borrower-based  instruments  do  not  fall 
under European legislation means that there is little coordination in how and when they are 
used  across  countries.  This  in  turn  means  that  their  implementation  mode  varies  strongly 
across individual countries.11 
For  example,  in  some  countries,  such  as  here  in  Lithuania,  borrower-based  measures  are 
codified in the context of financial stability, while in others they fall under consumer protection 
law,  as  for  the  Netherlands  and  Latvia.  The  range  of  lending  institutions  covered  by 
borrower-based  measures  also  varies  according  to  the  national  legal  basis.  Hungary,  for 
example,  is  one  of  the  few  countries  where  loan-to-value  limits  are  implemented  by  the 
central bank for financial stability purposes with coverage by activity, which implies that any 
institution  extending  credit  for  house  purchases  needs  to  comply  with  the  imposed  LTV 
limit.12 
Heterogeneity also extends to the competent authorities for implementing the measures. In 
some countries it is the central government, in others it is the central bank, and in still others 
authority  is  in  the  hands  of  a  committee  that  involves  different  national  bodies  (cross-
institutional committee). This requires coordination among different types of institutions with 
different  mandates  and  time  horizons,  and  given  the  high  political  and  social  sensitivity  of 
implementing borrower-based measures, can lead to an inaction bias. We see this today in 
several European countries. The result is that, insofar as such measures are deployed, the 
crucial time-varying dimension is often lost. 
These implementation issues have clear area-wide consequences. First, they raise the risk 
of  regulatory  leakages  –  be  they  between  countries  or  between  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions, especially relevant also for the commercial real estate sector. Second, they blunt 
the effectiveness of what is one of the key instruments to address the systemic risks for the 
Union as a whole emanating from excessive credit flows and house price bubbles. Indeed, 
what we confront in the euro area is a somewhat paradoxical situation where the instruments 
that could most effectively address the risks of a low interest rate environment are the ones 
governed by the weakest common framework. 
There is some capacity to use the current framework more effectively, but it is limited within 
the  existing 
implementation  of  borrower-based 
instruments  across  the  EU,  the  ESRB  can  issue  recommendations  that  are  to  operate 
through a comply-or-explain mechanism. Up until today, no such recommendation exists for 
the real estate market. When it comes to the implementation of borrower-based instruments 
in  euro  area/SSM  countries,  the  ECB  can  play  a  key  coordinating  role  for  SSM  countries. 
Interaction  between  national  authorities,  represented  by  national  central  banks  and 
supervisors, takes place within the Financial Stability Committee (FSC). It is our duty to make 
best use of this forum to encourage a consistent application of instruments. Yet it may not be 
sufficient given that the competent institution for deciding on borrower-based instruments is 
not always represented in the FSC. 
In my view, therefore, we have to give serious consideration to strengthening the legal basis 
of the macroprudential framework for borrow-based instruments, especially within the SSM 
area. The potential risks from the housing market are too important, and play too pivotal a 
role for a number of financial markets and for the European financial cycle, to be addressed 
in such an uncoordinated way. We need the relevant instruments to be based on European 
legal  setup.  To  promote  consistent 
                                                
11  Hartmann, P. (2015), “Real Estate Markets and Macroprudential Policy in Europe”, Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking. 
12  See  Box 
2  Magyar  Nemzeti  Bank 
stability”,  November. 
http://english.mnb.hu/Root/Dokumentumtar/ENMNB/Kiadvanyok/mnben_stabil/stabilmnben_stab_jel_201411/
Financial_Stability_Report_November_2014.pdf. 
financial 
“Report 
(2014), 
on 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  law. I therefore strongly support initiatives to establish a consistent minimum set of borrower-
based  instruments  in  the  European  macroprudential  framework.  Indeed,  the  review  of  the 
CRR/CRDIV legal framework should be seen as an opportunity to achieve this. 
Systemic risks in the shadow banking sector 
This  discussion  so  far  has  dealt  predominantly  with  bank  credit.  As  I  indicated  earlier, 
however,  financial  activity  and  the  financing  of  the  economy  in  the  euro  area  has  been 
shifting to non-banks. We are seeing an ever greater involvement of insurance companies 
and  pension  funds  in  mortgage  and  private  placement  markets  and  investment  funds  in 
equity  markets.  To  give  just  one  figure,  non-money  market  investment  funds’  holdings  of 
non-financial  corporate  bonds  have  risen  from  14%  of  the  outstanding  volume  in  2008  to 
27% by the first quarter of this year.13 This shift has undoubtedly been beneficial by acting as 
a buffer for the real economy while bank credit has been contracting. 
However,  as  the  sector  continues  to  expand  and  increase  its  role  in  lending  to  the  real 
economy, as its interlinkages with the wider financial sector deepen, and as the footprint of 
large institutions grows, non-banks will only gain in systemic importance. Moreover, the more 
policymakers  are  effective  in  using  macroprudential  tools  to  constrain  excessive  credit 
growth  in  the  banking  sector,  the  more  likely  it  becomes  that  there  will  be  excessive 
adjustments  in  the  non-bank  sector through  leakages.  For these  reasons,  the  coverage of 
the macroprudential framework needs to start being extended to the shadow banking sector. 
In this context there are four issues in particular that I would like to highlight. 
First, there is the need to improve the information available to policymakers on the build-up 
of leverage within the shadow banking sector. Typically the issue of leverage has been seen 
as less relevant for shadow banks than for banks, as they receive the bulk of their funding by 
issuing shares. As a result, the aggregate ratio of assets to equity for euro area investment 
funds is only 1.1, over ten times smaller than that of euro area credit institutions. However, 
this figure is misleading as most of the equity in investment funds is demandable, meaning it 
can be withdrawn at any time by investors. 
In  addition,  derivatives  positions  in  particular  can  embed  sizeable  leverage,  potentially 
adding to deleveraging pressures when financial stress emerges.14 Such “synthetic leverage” 
can  stem  from  derivative  instruments  or  securities  financing  transactions  that  create 
exposures contingent on the future value of an underlying asset.15 For example, taking the 
financial reporting of a large alternative fund, and calculating leverage using a gross measure 
that  includes  the  above  underlying  exposures,  it  can  be  found  that  leverage  goes  up  to  a 
level of 700% of NAV. At the same time, the fund’s prospectus indicates that it could go up to 
900%. When using the commitment approach, however – i.e. taking into account netting and 
hedges – leverage could be expected to reach a maximum level of 170% of NAV. In other 
words,  “synthetic  leverage”  can  be  many  multiples  higher  than  the  leverage  suggested  by 
headline ratios. 
Data availability however still limits the ability of authorities to monitor synthetic leverage from 
a  financial  stability  perspective,  i.e.  taking  into  account  both  on-balance-sheet  and  off-
balance-sheet exposures. The European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA), which is 
tasked  with  harmonising  reporting  practices,  can  request  access  to  supervisory  data  from 
national  authorities.  But  for  various  reasons  statistical  data  on  synthetic  leverage  are  not 
                                                
13  See “Euro area non-bank entities” in Financial Stability Review, ECB, May 2015. 
14  See “Synthetic leverage in the investment fund sector” ECB Financial Stability Review, May 2015. 
15  The  methodology  for  measuring  synthetic  leverage  builds  on  cash-equivalent  portfolios,  see  Breuer,  P., 
“Measuring off-balance-sheet leverage”, Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 26 (2-3), 2002, pp. 223–242. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  systematically  collected  at  the  European  level.  In  my  view  this  needs  to  be  addressed.  In 
time, I also see a need to develop dedicated instruments to address leverage in the shadow 
banking sector that adequately account for derivative positions. 
Second,  our  framework  for  managing  non-bank  leverage  needs  to  encompass  not  only 
intermediaries,  but  also  securities  financing  transactions  through  haircuts  or  margins.16 
Important work is being done here at the international level. For repurchase agreements, for 
example,  the  FSB  has  developed  minimum  haircuts  for  OTC  transactions  for  not  centrally 
settled transactions.17 I see scope however for further reflection in this  area. For instance, 
these minima do not yet apply across the board. And as has been shown in the past, market 
imposed  haircuts  during  crisis  times  are many  times  higher  than  any  of  the  static  haircuts 
that are currently discussed, which could mean that margining practices remain procyclical if 
they cannot be changed in a time-varying way. I see scope however for further reflection in 
this area. For instance, these minima do not yet apply across the board. And as has been 
shown in the past, market imposed haircuts during crisis times are many times higher than 
any  of  the  static  haircuts  that  are  currently  discussed,  which  could  mean  that  margining 
practices remain procyclical if they cannot be changed in a time-varying way. 
Third,  liquidity  stress  poses  an  equally  important  source  of  systemic  risk  for  the  non-bank 
financial  system  and  requires  appropriate  macroprudential  tools.  Liquidity  spirals  can  be 
triggered if funds are confronted with strong redemptions or increased margin requirements 
which force them to sell into markets with low liquidity. This amplifies asset price adjustments 
and triggers further redemptions and margin calls. Key to countering such liquidity risks is to 
develop and apply liquidity buffers to the shadow banking sector, in the spirit of the Liquidity 
Coverage Ratio for the banking system. This would serve as a first backstop should liquidity 
shocks curtail funding liquidity temporarily. 
However, liquidity risk is a somewhat more complicated phenomenon for non-banks than for 
banks,  as  simply  comparing  the  maturity  of  the  asset  side  with  the  term  funding  on  the 
liability  side  does  not  give  an  accurate  picture  of  maturity  mismatch.  That  is  because,  as 
already mentioned, their larger share of equity funding is itself redeemable, which gives non-
bank  equity  a  fire-sale  property.  Therefore,  addressing  liquidity  risk  would  also  have  to 
involve countering such risks from capital. This could involve measures such as redemption 
gates and loading fees to provide additional safeguards. 
Fourth,  if  we  are  to  deploy  macroprudential  tools  more  effectively  in  the  shadow  banking 
sector,  regulators  need  a  clearer  picture  of  the  resilience  of  individual  institutions  and  the 
system as a whole to shocks. In this context I would support developing guided stress-tests 
designed by regulators themselves, which can shed light on the true loss absorption capacity 
of  non-bank  institutions.  Such  stress-tests  –  which  would  need  to  fully  incorporate  the 
derivative positions of institutions and their exposure to liquidity shocks – would offer a more 
comparable  assessment  of  the  health  of  individual  institutions  and,  when  considering 
feedback loops within the financial system and the economy, of the resilience of the system 
as a whole. 
Remember that the risk of spillovers from non-banks to the real economy is not only via their 
direct  role  in  credit  intermediation  and  capital  markets.  Since  almost  all  large  asset 
management companies in the euro area are owned by banks or bank holding companies, 
                                                
16  The risks arising from pro-cyclicality in margining and haircut practices are described in detail in “The role of 
margin requirements and haircuts in procyclicality”, CGFS Papers, No. 36, Committee on the Global Financial 
System, March 2010. 
17  See  “Strengthening  Oversight  and  Regulation  of  Shadow  Banking  –  Regulatory  framework  for  haircuts  on 
non-centrally  cleared  securities  financing  transactions”,  Financial  Stability  Board,  14  October  2014. 
http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/r_141013a.pdf. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  reputational problems in the asset management arm could spill over to the parent company, 
or vice versa. 
New macroprudential tools, be they leverage limits, guided stress tests, or redemption gates, 
would need to be placed in the hands of the regulators to be effectively deployed. And just as 
for the banking sector, to be successful in countering the build-up of systemic risks over the 
cycle  they  would  need  to  be  applied  in  a  time-varying  fashion.  However,  it  is  important  to 
stress that, when determining the appropriate policy responses to mitigate growing risks in 
the sector, consideration should be given to its growing role in credit intermediation. We need 
to ensure that the impact on supply of credit to the real economy is limited. 
There is of course much we still have to learn about the design and implementation of such 
instruments; indeed, we are still only beginning to discover the mechanisms through which 
macroprudential policy works in the banking sector. Still, I am convinced that these additional 
instruments are essential – and starting work on them is urgent – if we are to have a holistic 
view on systemic risk and financial stability. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
What I have argued today is that we are entering into an environment where monetary policy 
cannot be responsible for managing the financial cycle. And this fact, while acknowledged in 
principle, has not yet been fully reflected in our policy frameworks in practice. 
A comprehensive approach to macroprudential policy means two things. 
First, making efficient use of macroprudential tools that can constrain excessive credit growth 
towards the real estate sector, which is the main driver of the financial cycle. Borrower-based 
measures  therefore  come  to  the  forefront.  Given  their  importance,  they  deserve  to  be 
properly  embedded  in  European  legislation  and  effectively  coordinated  within  European 
institutions. 
Second, broadening the coverage of the macroprudential toolkit to reflect changing patterns 
of intermediation – i.e. to the shadow banking sector. It may be the case, as Jeremy Stein 
famously argued, that monetary policy is the best tool to “get in all the cracks” of the financial 
system.  But  as  that  option  may  not  be  available  to  us  for  some  time,  it  is  incumbent  on 
policymakers  to  put  more  attention  into  developing  instruments  that  can  reach  into  all  the 
corners of the financial system. 
I trust that our conference today will provide many useful insights on how we can proceed 
with this agenda. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
