  Jon Cunliffe: Financial stability, the single market and Capital Markets 
Union 
Speech by Sir Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability of the Bank of England, 
at the City of London Corporation and Open Europe conference, London, 20 January 2015. 
 The Treaty of Rome, signed in 1957, established the basic four freedoms of what has now 
become the European Union – freedom of goods, services, people and capital. I want to talk 
a  little  today  about  the  last  of  these  and  about  the  development  of  the  single  market  in 
financial  services  –  its  history,  how  it  has  dealt  with  the  twin  objectives  of  stability  and 
openness and its future development, particularly the capital markets union. 
The freedom of capital movement agreed in 1957 was for many years only an aspiration. In 
that post war world, free movement of capital must have seemed a dream. To many, with not 
so distant memories of the inter war years, of the collapse of an earlier period of financial 
globalisation and with continuous strain on the balance of payments, it might have seemed a 
bad dream. The risks to economic and financial stability may well have seemed too great to 
allow open capital markets. Open capital markets have, through history tossed and turned 
between  being  seen  as  an  opportunity  for  additional  trade  and  growth,  and  a  potentially 
destabilising force. 
The path to open capital markets in Europe was slow – as it was in the rest of the world. It 
was not fully completed until the Maastricht Treaty of 1992 when free movement of capital 
became a directly applicable Treaty right. And throughout this process, in recognition of the 
potentially  destablising  effect, safeguards  were  included  to  allow  member  states to  defend 
their stability, including in relation to prudential supervision. 
The real push for free movement of capital came in the mid 80’s when European growth was 
sluggish,  especially  compared  to  the  US  and  Japan.  There  was  a  search  for  policies  to 
generate economic dynamism, which led to the birth of the single market. But, of course, until 
capital could flow freely between member states it was not really possible to have a single 
market  in  financial  services  or,  in  the  financial  sector,  to  give  effect  to  that  other  founding 
freedom – the freedom to provide services across the EU. 
The liberalisation of capital markets in the EU was rooted in two beliefs. First and foremost 
that open capital markets, cross border investment and cross border financial services would 
create a more efficient allocation of capital through better intermediation between savers and 
borrowers across the EU as a whole. And, second, that the risks to economic and financial 
stability of an open capital account and cross border financial services could be managed by 
sound economic and financial policies to prevent destabilising volatility of capital flows and 
by good financial services regulation at the EU level. 
In the EU, the regulatory framework for openness and for managing the financial stability risk 
around  the  single  market  in  financial  services  was  built  very  clearly  on  the  principles  of 
common rules – with force of law – commonly applied and on mutual recognition. It is worth 
dwelling a little on what lies behind these principles. 
First is the need for the so-called ‘level playing field’. To have an effective single market it is 
necessary to align regulation to ensure that it does not act to prevent cross-border activity or 
to  distort  competition.  In  this  respect  it  is  worth  recalling  that  the  Treaty  talks  of  the 
“approximation” of laws and of “harmonisation”. Without common rules, commonly applied, 
national regulation can be used to block entry and to protect national players. And, equally, it 
can be used to give domestic players an advantage in their cross border activities. 
This is, of course, important in other areas of the single market. But it is particularly important 
in the single market for financial services because the risks of regulatory arbitrage are very 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  large and have consequences that go wider than the distortion of competition. We have seen 
in recent years how damaging those consequences can be in terms of financial stability. To 
be confident of maintaining financial stability in a single market with free movement of capital, 
each member state needs to be confident in the strength and in the application of prudential 
regulation in other member states. 
This is especially important for the UK, which has the largest most internationally active and 
most complex financial sector in the EU. We are host to more foreign institutions than any 
other member state. As the Bank of England Deputy Governor with specific responsibility for 
Financial Stability, I can say that it is crucial that the single market for financial services is 
supported by a framework of common prudential rules that are fit for purpose and that are 
consistently applied. This is intrinsic to the ability of the Bank to deliver financial stability in 
the UK. The importance of this has been very powerfully and painfully underscored by the 
experience of recent years. 
Of course, this is true internationally, outside of the EU as well as inside. One of the clear 
lessons of the crisis is that we did not have strong enough global standards on prudential 
regulation to support the integration that had taken place in international capital markets and 
financial services. It is not my subject for today, but there has been a sea change since the 
crisis with a massive international reform programme to develop and  implement prudential 
standards and regulatory co-operation. 
At the same time, however, we must not forget that while there can be very material spillover 
costs to other countries when things go badly wrong, the buck at the very end stops at the 
national level. We have strengthened the resilience of the financial system. We have made 
great progress towards ending “too big to fail” and towards ensuring that the risks taken by 
financial  sector  firms  are  truly  borne  by  their  shareholders  and  creditors  and  not  by 
taxpayers. The EU and international reforms in progress mean that financial firms are much 
less likely to fail and, if and when they do, the real economy is much less likely to suffer the 
collapse of the critical economic functions that the financial system provides. 
We need EU rules to enable and support the single market in financial services. And, though 
they are not as effective as a framework for open capital markets because they do not have 
force  of  law,  we  need  global  prudential  standards  properly  and  consistently  applied  to 
support a global capital market. We need the rules and standards and cooperation between 
regulators  to  prevent  adverse  spillovers  between  countries  and  to  manage  them  if  they 
occur. But we should be clear that while we have reduced the risks and consequences, were 
we to see a major system wide shock that led to a systemic crisis, it is only governments and 
national authorities that can ultimately provide the confidence to ensure there is not systemic 
failure.  In  the  EU  context,  it  is  worth  noting  that  there  is  only  a  fleeting  reference  in  the 
Treaties to financial stability; it is the references and powers relating to the single market that 
have been the basis for the EU rules on prudential regulation. 
To be clear. The point here is not that there is some irreconcilable conflict between the rules 
of the single market and financial stability. They can and generally do reinforce each other. 
As I have said, it is important to financial stability in general – and the UK’s financial stability 
in particular – that the single market is supported by strong prudential rules that have force of 
law. The point is rather that the ultimate responsibility for financial stability – with one major 
exception to which I will return – lies with the governments, supervisors, central banks – who 
are accountable to national legislatures. 
To  a  large  extent  this  necessary  balance  between  the  rules  for  the  single  market  and 
financial stability is automatically achieved by the fact that the rules themselves have to be 
negotiated and agreed between the authorities of member states. But given the very different 
circumstances and risks faced by different member states, it is also important that the rules 
allow sufficient flexibility to recognise national financial stability responsibilities. And that they 
are applied by national authorities that have responsibility for financial stability. For the UK, 
stability depends on the working together of EU rules and well-aligned national authorities. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The important and recent exception, of course, is the euro area that through the creation of 
the Banking Union – the single supervisor and the single resolution authority – has brought 
financial  stability  responsibility  to  the  euro  level  to  sit  alongside  the  monetary  stability 
responsibilities of the ECB. The rationale for this was brutally underlined in the euro crisis. 
The  members  of  the  euro  share  more  than  a  single  market.  They  share  a  currency,  they 
share risk of the break up of that currency and they share a lender of last resort. With the 
creation  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  they  have  begun  to  share  a  common 
backstop.  At  that  level  of  integration,  it  is  right  to  ask  to  what  extent  financial  stability  is 
ultimately  primarily  a  national  responsibility  and  where  the  buck  should  stop.  The  creation 
and  full  implementation  of  the  Banking  Union  should  in  my  view  increase  the  financial 
stability  of  the  currency  union,  thereby  improving  stability  for  everyone  in  the  EU.  It  is, 
however,  impossible  to  ignore  the  fact  that  to  do  so,  the  Banking  Union  must  continue  to 
develop the necessary backstops – painful though that may sometimes be. There are agreed 
plans to move further in this direction. It is important that they are implemented. 
To  return  to  the  history  for  a  moment,  one  sees  the  need  to  find  a  balance  between  the 
single  market  and  financial  stability  in  the  way  in  which  Europe  ultimately  came  to  free 
movement  of  capital,  with  strong  Treaty  prohibitions  on  restrictions  but  within  that  –  and 
within  constraints  –  a  recognition  of  the  need  for  member  states  to  be  able  to  take  the 
necessary action to defend stability including in relation to prudential supervision. 
We have moved on a great deal since then in the EU and in our understanding of the benefit 
of  open  capital  markets  and  how  to  manage  the  risk. We  have  learned  some  very  painful 
lessons. But I think we continue to see that balance in the EU’s recent major reform of the 
regulatory framework that underpins the single market in financial services. I will give three 
examples. 
First, CRD4, the EU’s prudential capital standard for banks, includes a number of important 
areas  in  which  member states’  prudential  authorities  can  act  to  increase  the  capital  of  the 
banks for which they are responsible to deal with specific risks they face at the national level. 
The negotiations around this were not easy. But it was particularly important for the Bank of 
England  which,  through  the  Financial  Policy  Committee,  is  the  UK’s  macroprudential 
authority to have this flexibility to raise capital above the levels in the EU rules to address 
risks  to  UK  financial  stability.  I  would  highlight  two  other  points  from  CRD4.  First,  the 
legislation  also  provides  that  when  national  authorities  take  action  of  this  sort  within  their 
jurisdiction,  it  is  reciprocated,  with  regard  to  that  jurisdiction,  by  the  authorities  of  other 
member states. Second, there are proportionate protections in the legislation to ensure these 
flexibilities are used truly for prudential purposes and not abused by member states. 
Second,  the  recently  agreed  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD),  which  sets 
common EU rules including on state support for banks in resolution but allows for national 
flexibility  in  their  application,  aligned  to  national  insolvency  regimes,  by  national  resolution 
authorities or in the Banking Union’s case, the new Single Resolution Board. Like CRD4, the 
BRRD  reinforces  financial  stability  by  ensuring  that  the  actions  of  national  resolution 
authorities are recognised in other member states. 
I  would  single  out  another  aspect  of  the  BRRD.  It  follows  the  international  standard  for 
resolution  developed  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  –  the  “Key  Attributes  of  Effective 
Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions”. There is a more general point here. The EU 
capital market and financial sector exists in a globally integrated market. It is in our economic 
interest for the EU to be as integrated as possible with that global market. As I have said, 
that market needs to be supported by properly implemented international standards. The EU 
and  its  member  states  need  to  play  an  active  role  in  shaping  those  standards.  And  once 
international standards have been agreed, it is in the EU’s interest that it implements them – 
as in the BRRD. 
This is of crucial importance to the UK and to the UK’s financial stability. The UK is the home 
to financial firms and infrastructure that are truly global in their reach and activity. While much 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  of  this  activity  involves  the  EU,  a  very  large  amount  does  not.  If  EU  regulation  and 
internationally agreed standards diverge materially, it will both create barriers to that activity 
and  opportunities  for  regulatory  arbitrage  making  it  more  difficult  to  ensure  UK  financial 
stability. 
My third example is the European Supervisory Authorities – the European Banking Authority 
(EBA),  European  Securities  and  Markets  Authority  (ESMA)  and  European  Insurance  and 
Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA). These were established to provide more detailed 
common rule making so that the EU Single Market in financial services could be supported 
by a common rule-book underneath the framework of high-level legislation. This search for 
more detailed alignment of regulation and standards has I think been a general feature of the 
post  crisis  reforms  in  the  EU  and  more  widely.  The  ESAs  are  governed  by  their  boards, 
comprising  national  supervisory  authorities,  which  are  also  responsible  for  the  majority  of 
their financing. They set and advise the Commission on the rules and standards – they do 
not engage directly in the prudential supervision of firms. 
The  European  Supervisory  Authorities  perform  another  important  function.  I  have  talked 
about  common rules,  commonly  applied.  There are  of  course  enforcement  mechanisms  in 
the Treaties to ensure member States properly observe the EU legislation. But the need for 
this in financial services has been especially recognised with the ESAs having the capability 
to  conduct  peer  reviews  and  for  binding  arbitration  when  one  national  authority  believes 
another has not properly implemented or applied the rules. This is a powerful mechanism to 
prevent regulatory arbitrage and the risk of adverse spillovers between member states. It is 
one that does not generally exist elsewhere within the single market. 
There  are  other  examples.  The  general  point  however  is  that  it  is  possible  to  find  where 
necessary the balance between financial stability and the single market and the EU has, by 
and large, been able to do so. I hope and expect this will continue as we move into the next 
phase of the development of the single market – what has now become known as the Capital 
Markets Union and to which I now want to turn. 
Capital Markets Union 
The motivation to create a single, integrated, capital market in the EU is not new. As I have 
noted, the potential benefits to economic growth and “dynamism” at a time when growth in 
Europe was sluggish drove the efforts in the 1980s to liberalise capital accounts and create 
the single market in financial services. The reforms inspired in the 1990s by the Giovannini 
report  aimed  to  create  an  integrated,  well-functioning  financial  market  to  “help  the  EU 
economy  by  encouraging  the  right  investments  to  be  made  in  the  right  places”  and  so  to 
“contribute to higher economic growth and employment.” 
And  we  should  not  under-estimate  what  has  been  achieved.  To  take  one  example,  the 
UCITS  regime  launched  then  and  refined  over  the  years  has  enabled  the  growth  of  EU 
investment funds, operating with a passport across member states, with nearly €8 trillion of 
assets. It has become a gold standard for institutional and retail investors – so much so that 
it has been adopted by jurisdictions outside the EU. 
But for all the progress, market as opposed to bank-based financing is still very undeveloped 
in the EU compared to the US. We should of course be a little careful about the comparison; 
the EU is not a federal country but a single market of member states with different histories, 
cultures and languages. It may not be possible to attain the level of cross-border investment 
across  EU  members  as  exists  across  US  states.  But  the  relative  size  of  market-based 
financing  in  the  US  compared  to  the  EU  illustrates  graphically  the  scope  in  the  EU  to  go 
much further. 
Looked at from the savers perspective, as a percentage of GDP, savings held in EU mutual 
funds  are  around  50%  of  the  US  level.  For  pension  funds,  it’s  35%.  Looked  at  from  the 
borrower  end,  in  the  EU  equity  markets  are  only  60%  of  their  US  counterparts,  corporate 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  bond markets 35% and securitisation 20%. As a result, bank loans account for just over 10% 
of non-financial company borrowing in the US against 30% in the EU. Banking system assets 
are over 300% of GDP in the EU, against around 70% in the US. 
Europe is not short of savings. Far from it. Europe saves €2.7 trillion a year – 20% of EU 
GDP.  In  the  US  by  contrast  saving  is  $2.8  trillion  –  about  17%  of  GDP.  The  question  is 
whether  those  savings  are  being  used  most  productively.  For  example,  in  the  case  of 
households, they remain compartmentalised in member states and predominantly locked up 
in the banking system, which is still healing. Bank deposits, as a share of household financial 
assets, are three times the US level. And they are heavily concentrated in financial assets 
like debt instruments that do not encourage risk capital. 
The objectives of Capital Market Union should be threefold. First to put European savings to 
better  use  by  deepening  and  diversifying  the  sources  of finance  available  to business  and 
offering more investment choices and portfolio diversification to savers. As was recognised in 
the Giovannini report 20 years ago, there is very good reason to believe that improving the 
efficiency with which savers are matched to borrowers increases economic performance. 
The  second  objective  should  be  to  enable  greater  risk  sharing  across  the  EU  by  creating 
deeper cross border markets. Cross border investment allows economic risks – upside and 
downside – to be shared across individual countries. Done in the right way, this can help to 
smooth  out  the  impact  of  the  economic  shocks  that  hit  individual  countries  –  reducing  the 
danger of economies sliding into very deep recessions that can permanently damage their 
ability to grow. While this smoothing through risk sharing is of benefit to all EU members, as 
the recent crisis has shown it is particularly important for the euro area given the relative lack 
of  adjustment  mechanisms  available  to  individual  euro  members  when  they  are  hit  by 
shocks. 
And, the third objective should be to create resilience by ensuring that if the banking system 
is damaged there is an effective alternative channel of finance to the real economy. It is very 
probable that one of the reasons the US has recovered faster from its financial crisis than 
Europe is that in the US banks do not dominate the provision of finance to anything like the 
same  degree  as  in  the  EU.  When  the  banking  system  was  damaged  in  the  US,  a  well-
developed alternative existed to help meet the financing needs of the real economy. 
To achieve these three objectives, reforms will be needed on both the supply and demand 
side of the equation. 
The  supply  side  of  the  equation  has  two  dimensions.  First,  enabling  more  household  and 
corporate  savings  to  flow  to  vehicles  that  will  invest  in  capital  markets.  And  second, 
encouraging more investors to allocate capital across the borders of EU members – or, to 
give it its technical name, to reduce “home bias”. 
As  I  have  noted,  assets  under  management  in  Europe  outside  the  banking  system  are 
typically around half the size of the US. Creating large pools of market-based private capital 
is in part about creating the right investment vehicles. 
It will also require a more fundamental look at the way Europeans save and the way those 
savings  are  invested,  including  for  their  pensions  which  in  many  member  states  are 
concentrated in public sector schemes. In practice, this will mean examining whether there 
are  obstacles  and  competitive  distortions  that  restrict  savings  being  invested  in  financial 
markets; ensuring investors have the information they need including about the landscape of 
investment options; and reducing any barriers that restrict market access or encourage any 
home-bias  in  portfolios.  The  result  of  these  examinations  could  well  entail  greater 
standardisation of investment products. UCITS could be a model here. 
The demand side of the equation involves enabling borrowers to access funds from market-
based  sources.  Creating  more  diverse  forms  of  borrowings  will  be  part  of  the  story.  This 
could include forms of finance in which investors directly acquire assets, such as equity and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  corporate  bonds,  and  indirect  forms  of  finance  in  which  banks  and  markets  work  together 
through securitisation markets to lend to the real economy. 
The US example is again useful here. Despite the US having an equity market that is nearly 
twice  as  large  as  that  of  the  EU  as  a  proportion  of  GDP,  the  leverage  of  non-financial 
companies  is  only  marginally  higher  in  the  US  than  in  the  EU.  The  reason  is  that  the 
companies in the euro area, particularly smaller ones, have equity but issue a much smaller 
proportion  of  marketable  quoted  equities,  instead  relying  heavily  on  non-marketable, 
unquoted shares. A more integrated capital market would provide deeper, more liquid equity 
markets in which a wide range of corporates could issue equity and risks could be shared 
more widely. 
More  broadly,  areas  where  reforms  could  improve  borrowers  access  to  market-based 
financing could include: public platforms, such as, “mini-bond” markets for SMEs, which have 
enjoyed some success in Italy in particular; pan-European private placement markets which 
channel  funds  directly  from  non-bank  investors,  such  as,  insurers  and  pension  funds  to 
mainly  medium-sized  companies  (currently  only  Germany  and  France  have  private 
placement  markets  of  any  notable  size)  and  encouraging  the  emergence  of  simple, 
transparent and robust securitisation markets.1 
Increasing the scale of cross border capital flows across Europe brings benefits. But it is not 
without risks. One does not have to go back to where I started today – in the late 1950s – to 
find examples of the power of cross border flows to amplify crises when it all goes wrong. 
That is why they have to be built on the foundation of sustainable economic policies, good 
regulation and robust institutional structures. 
The nature of capital flows matters too. Europe was not short of cross border flows before 
the crisis. But they were concentrated in interbank lending and in debt often held by highly 
leveraged investors. Inter-bank lending can of course be a very dangerous way to share risks 
between economies, particularly if the banking system is highly leveraged. If losses have to 
be shared on a large scale this can put the core of the financial system in peril. Corporate 
bonds and securitised assets can have similar risks, especially if they are effectively held in 
the banking system. Debt instruments generally can be destabilising if they cannot easily be 
restructured  when  losses  occur.  Equity  provides  the  most  efficient  form  of  risk  sharing, 
suggesting perhaps that this area should be a priority for CMU. The nature of investors also 
matters in ensuring that an increase in cross border market-based financing in the EU does 
not increase financial stability risks. In general, sources of market-based financing are more 
likely to be resilient if the investor base is diverse, not excessively reliant on leverage and 
“sticky”. 
It  is  abundantly  clear  from  all  of  the  above  that  achieving  the  necessary  step  change  in 
market-based  financing  in  the  EU  means  a  marathon  not  a  sprint.  Although  it  shares  its 
nomenclature  with  Banking  Union,  Capital  Markets  Union  is  a  very  different  animal.  The 
former is essentially designed to improve stability of and between the euro members through 
institutional change and moving major financial stability responsibilities to sit at the euro level 
alongside  monetary  stability.  It  was  possible  to  make  these  institutional  changes  relatively 
quickly, though their implementation will take longer. Capital Markets Union, in contrast, aims 
to deepen and widen the single market, though it needs to have regard to financial stability. It 
does  not  require  institutional  change.  Though  there  may  be  early  wins,  it  will  involve  a 
carefully planned, detailed and sustained effort over a number of years and in a very wide 
range of areas. The benefits however could be very large indeed. 
                                                
1  For a discussion of possible policy options, see “The case for a better functioning securitisation market in the European 
Union”, Discussion Paper, May 2014, Bank of England and European Central Bank. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
