  Malcolm Edey: Card payments regulation – from Wallis to Murray 
Speech by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, at the Cards & Payments Conference, Melbourne, 21 May 2015. 
 Thank you for the invitation to speak here today. 
I have been asked to talk about the outlook for payments regulation. This is a subject that is 
very much front of mind at present, given that the Murray Inquiry only recently presented its 
findings in that area and the Reserve Bank Payments System Board (the PSB) is conducting 
its own review following on from the Murray recommendations. 
I’ll  say  a  bit  more  about  that  later,  but  I  have  to  begin  by  saying  that  the  PSB’s  review 
process is still underway, and I am not going to pre-empt any conclusions that might come 
from that. Instead, I want to address the topic in a more indirect way, by giving an overview 
of the PSB’s general approach to retail payments since it first entered the field. In doing so, I 
hope to bring out some key principles that have been consistently applied and which remain 
part of the ongoing policy framework. 
The Reserve Bank’s role as a regulator of retail payments systems was established following 
the report of the Wallis Inquiry in 1997. Like Murray, the Wallis Inquiry was about more than 
just  payments.  It  was  about  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  and  Wallis  took  a  holistic 
approach to understanding the role of payments within the wider system. 
I suggest there were four key observations that determined the overall shape of the Wallis 
recommendations. 
First,  Wallis  observed  that  the  business  model  of  traditional  banking  was  fundamentally 
changing.  In  simplified  terms,  banks  could  be  thought  of  as  suppliers  of  a  portfolio  of 
products, the three main ones being deposits, loans and transaction services. In the earlier 
highly regulated world, these were bound together in full-service banking institutions. Credit 
was  heavily  rationed  and  potential  borrowers  needed  to  demonstrate  loyalty  to  a  bank  in 
order to qualify for loans. This environment tended to produce outcomes where net interest 
margins were high, customers were immobile and banks cross-subsidised payment services 
effectively as a utility. 
This  model  broke  down  over  time  because  of  the  combined  effects  of  deregulation  and 
financial innovation. These forces enabled new players to compete separately for the most 
profitable business lines. Examples were cash management trusts on the deposit side, which 
enabled depositors to gain access to wholesale interest rates, and mortgage securitisers on 
the lending side, which competed separately for lending business at lower margins. This was 
the phenomenon of “unbundling”. It meant that cross subsidies were competed away and the 
different components of banking services had to be separately priced, including payments. 
One  of  the  manifestations  of  this,  noted  by  Wallis,  was  the  increased  incidence  of  highly 
unpopular  transaction  fees  for  bank  accounts.  But  of  course  the  implications  were  much 
broader than that and are still being seen across the financial system today. 
Second, Wallis noted the importance of technology and innovation. Today, at a conference 
like this, it is impossible not to be struck by the pace of change in payments technology. Of 
course,  the  specifics  of  that  couldn’t  have  been  foreseen  18  years  ago  when  Wallis 
presented his report. What the report did foresee was the general tendency for the system to 
innovate and the associated trends towards electronic and card-based payments, away from 
traditional  instruments  like  cash  and  cheques.  Again,  this  is  a  process  that  is  continuing 
today. 
Third, and related to the first two points, Wallis foresaw the growth of payment systems as a 
business, in contrast to the utility-based model that I described earlier. If commercial realities 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
were leading to the unbundling of payments from other financial services, then it was to be 
expected  that  this  business  would  open  up  to  innovative  and  specialist  providers.  It  also 
meant  that  existing  players  would  need  to  put  their  own  payments  services  on  a  more 
commercial footing. 
And  lastly,  Wallis  looked  at  the  regulatory  implications  of  these  developments.  Payments 
systems are networks which link service providers and their customers. That means that they 
need to have ways of ensuring adequate coordination among network members who would 
normally  be  competitors.  This  in  turn  raises  a  whole  suite  of  questions  as  to  whether 
particular  network  arrangements  are  generating  efficient  outcomes:  for  example,  is  there 
appropriate access to networks for new players, are network pricing arrangements efficient 
and are there effective coordination mechanisms to promote network innovation? 
Wallis concluded that there was a need for regulatory oversight of payment systems, and the 
recommendations  that  flowed  from  that  formed  the  basis  for  the  arrangements  we  have 
today. 
To summarise the main elements, Wallis recommended that: 
• 
• 
the Reserve Bank be given powers as payments regulator; 
those powers should be vested in a separate board with a majority of independent 
directors (the Payments System Board); 
the mandate of that board should be to promote efficiency, stability and competition 
in payments systems; and 
as a starting point, the PSB should look at credit card schemes, with particular focus 
on access arrangements, pricing and scheme rules. 
  Wallis  also  recommended  that  the  PSB  maintain  a  more  general  watching  brief  on  the 
efficiency of the system as a whole. 
Looking back on the work of the PSB since that time, it has very much followed the original 
Wallis outline and philosophy. Early work of the PSB focused on credit card systems, leading 
to a package of reforms in 2003. This was followed by reforms to debit card systems in 2006 
and to the ATM network in 2009. 
In implementing the Wallis recommendations, the government’s intention was that the policy 
approach should be co-regulatory. The explanatory memorandum to the law which set up the 
PSB’s powers in 1998 stated that: 
The philosophy of the Bill … is co-regulatory. Industry will continue to operate by 
self-regulation in so far as such regulation promotes an efficient, competitive and 
stable  payments  system.  Where  the  RBA  considers  it  in  the  public  interest  to 
intervene,  the  Bill  empowers  it  to  designate  a  payment  system  and  develop 
access  regimes  and  standards  in  close  consultation  with  industry  and  other 
interested parties.1 
The approach taken by the PSB since its inception has been consistent with that intent. The 
PSB  directly  regulates  only  five  payment  systems  (namely  ATMs,  eftpos,  MasterCard  and 
Visa credit, and Visa Debit) and only in limited areas – that is, the level of interchange fees, 
restrictions on merchants, transparency and access. In contrast to the more interventionist 
approach of some other jurisdictions, the Australian framework leaves many aspects of the 
payments system unregulated. 
This  philosophical  approach  has  also  very  much  guided  the  PSB’s  work  on  payments 
innovation. 
                                                
1   Payments Systems (Regulation) Bill 1998, Explanatory Memorandum, p 12. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
I have already mentioned the industry’s enormous capacity to innovate. In talking about this 
subject,  however,  it  is  important  to  distinguish  between  proprietary  innovations,  which  are 
carried  out  at  the  level  of  particular  payment  businesses,  and  network  innovation,  which 
occurs at the level of the system as a whole. As you would expect, the industry is very good 
at innovation in the proprietary space. Among the many examples of this are cardless ATM 
withdrawals, new authentication techniques such as fingerprint, mobile banking and payment 
apps and now digital wallets. These are areas where the incentives to innovate are clearly 
effective. 
But it is well recognised that efficient innovations can be more difficult to achieve at the level 
of  the  system  as  a  whole,  because  the  available  incentives  do  not  necessarily  support 
coordinated action. Consistent with the Wallis vision, the PSB has been active in promoting 
coordinated industry solutions where that was in the public interest. An early example was in 
encouraging faster cheque clearing – an obvious improvement in system efficiency but one 
that couldn’t have been achieved without effective coordination. 
On a larger scale, the PSB more recently undertook its Strategic Review of Innovation in the 
Payments System, the results of which were published in 2012.2 That review was conducted 
over a two year period and involved extensive consultations with both the payments industry 
and with users of payments services. It found a number of areas where there was scope for 
system improvements that could be achieved through coordinated action. 
The key areas were: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The  first  one  of  these  was  delivered  at  the  end  of  2013  and  essentially  involved  an 
acceleration of existing direct entry processes. The remaining three form a more ambitious 
agenda and are together being taken up as part of the industry’s New Payments Platform 
(the NPP project). 
The NPP is a successful example of what can be done through collaboration between the 
industry  and  its  regulator.  It  is  also  a  good  example  of  the  catalyst  role  for  the  PSB  in 
promoting system innovation that was envisaged by Wallis. While it is an industry-led project, 
it is strongly supported by the PSB, and the Board continues to encourage commitment to 
the project and to its timely completion. 
The project was launched in early 2013 and is now well advanced. On current scheduling the 
NPP will deliver a fast payments service with rich information and addressing capabilities in 
the second half of 2017. It will be linked to a fast settlement service provided by the Reserve 
Bank, which will allow transactions to be cleared and settled 24/7 in close to real time. All of 
this will amount to a world-class payments infrastructure. 
It will also be a platform for further innovation. One of the key decisions made at an early 
stage of the project was to separate the basic clearing and settlement infrastructure from the 
commercially based overlay services that would use it. The industry is committed to an initial 
overlay that is intended to provide an attractive service and drive early volume growth. But it 
is important to note that access to the overlay space has always been intended to be open 
and competitive. Over time, this structure will allow new and specialist providers to make use 
of the rich capabilities provided by the core infrastructure. 
same-day settlement of direct entry transactions; 
faster payments and out-of-hours payments to be made generally available; 
capacity for richer information with payments; and 
an easy addressing solution for electronic payments. 
                                                
2   RBA (2012), Strategic Review of Innovation in the Payments System: Conclusions, June. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Before moving on to some more detailed regulatory matters, I will mention one more initiative 
to have come out the 2012 Strategic Review, and that is the establishment of new industry 
coordination and consultation arrangements. In line with a recommendation from the 2012 
Review, a new industry coordination body, the Australian Payments Council, was launched 
last  year.  The  Council  is  a  high-level  body  representing  a  diverse  range  of  industry 
participants including banks, payment schemes and other service providers. It will have the 
capacity to give strategic direction to the industry as well as engaging in dialogue with the 
PSB. At the same time, it is important that the policy process engages with users and not just 
suppliers  of  payment  services.  To  facilitate  that,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  also  set  up  a 
Payments User Consultation Group which began meeting late last year. 
In  summary  then,  the  policy  work  of  the  PSB  has  been  very  much  consistent  with  the 
philosophy and objectives of the original Wallis reforms. A good deal of that work has been 
what  might  be  termed  “co-regulatory”  in  nature,  in  the  sense  that  it  involved  promoting 
industry-led solutions rather than using formal regulatory powers. 
But  of  course  the  PSB  does  have  a  regulatory  mandate,  and  it  has  used  its  powers  to 
regulate  a  number  of  aspects  of  card  payments  where  it  judged  that  there  was  a  public 
interest case to do so. Probably the aspects of this regulation that have attracted the most 
attention have been those related to interchange and surcharging, and I would like to make 
some general comments about each of these. 
First,  interchange.  The  commercial  function  of  interchange  fees  is  a  very  interesting  one. 
They serve as a device for shifting the benefit-cost balance between issuers and acquirers in 
a four-party scheme and therefore, indirectly, between cardholders and merchants. Payment 
schemes argue that this can be an important competitive device that can promote innovation, 
for  example  by  being  structured  to  encourage  network  growth  or  the  take-up  of  new 
products.  Typically,  interchange  flows  from  the  acquirer  to  the  issuer,  and  hence  the  fee 
structure tends to encourage issuance and use of a card, but may discourage acceptance by 
merchants if the fee is too high. For mature schemes, however, the capacity of merchants to 
refuse  acceptance  may  be  quite  limited.  As  a  result,  it  has  been  frequently  observed  that 
competition between schemes can have the effect of pushing fees up rather than down, in 
order to maximise incentives to issuers and cardholders. 
The reason that this kind of outcome is possible is that there is a misalignment between the 
incidence of these fees and the structure of decision-making power in a typical transaction. In 
a nutshell, the cardholder chooses the payment instrument but the merchant pays the fee. 
In  designing  its  card  payment  reforms,  both  for  credit  and  debit,  the  PSB  concluded  that 
competition of this nature was distorting price signals in a way that inefficiently encouraged 
the use of high cost cards and added to merchant costs. Hence, it judged that there was a 
case for interchange fees to be capped by regulation. A number of other jurisdictions have 
since taken a similar view. 
The second aspect that I want to talk about is surcharging. The PSB has consistently taken 
the view that merchants should not be prevented from surcharging for higher-cost payment 
methods. Scheme rules that prohibited surcharging had the effect of reinforcing the distortive 
effects of interchange fees by preventing costs from being passed on to cardholders. They 
also  reduced  the  flexibility  of  merchants  in  deciding  how  to  respond  to  high-cost  payment 
instruments.  The  ability  to  surcharge  improves  merchants’  bargaining  position  by  allowing 
them  a  greater  range  of  responses,  rather than  just  being faced  with  a  binary  decision  to 
accept or reject a particular card. 
Efficient surcharging should of course reflect the underlying payment cost. The PSB’s initial 
reforms to credit and debit gave merchants the right to surcharge, while effectively relying on 
competition to ensure that surcharging would not be excessive. This regulation was revised 
in 2013 in response to concerns about practices that had developed since the initial reforms, 
particularly about surcharging that appeared excessive or unrelated to costs. The amended 
regulation still prevents schemes from imposing no-surcharge rules, but it allows them to limit 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 issue  of  surcharging  remains  contentious. 
 
 
surcharging to the reasonable cost of acceptance. In doing so it strikes a balance, at least in 
principle,  between  the  rights  of  merchants  and  schemes.  Merchants  cannot  be  prevented 
from recovering reasonable acceptance costs, but they can be prevented by scheme rules 
from going beyond that. More on that in a moment. 
The PSB’s reforms to surcharging and interchange have formed part of a broader package 
that also included rules relating to access and transparency. I don’t have time to cover all of 
that today. But taken together, the effects have been beneficial. The system has continued to 
innovate, and merchants’ card payment costs have fallen.3 It is also notable that these costs 
are significantly lower in Australia than in a jurisdiction like the United States, where reforms 
to card systems have been much more limited.4 
The Murray Report last year broadly endorsed the PSB’s reform approach while flagging a 
number  of  areas  for  further  consideration,  particularly  in  relation  to  surcharging  and 
interchange. These have now been taken up as part of the PSB’s card payments review. 
The 
Instances  of  apparently  excessive 
surcharging have persisted. While they acknowledge arguments for what might be called a 
“no excessive surcharge” regime, the schemes have argued that the current formulation is 
too complicated and difficult for them to enforce. 
The  card  payments  review  is  looking  at  several  possible  mechanisms  for  addressing  this. 
One option proposed by Murray is a tiered approach that would allow tougher surcharging 
constraints  to  be  placed  on  low-cost  cards.  A  number  of  other  options  are  available  to 
strengthen  enforcement  and  disclosure  practices,  for  example  allowing  schemes  to  cap 
surcharges that are not percentage based at some low fixed amount. 
On interchange fee regulation there are a number of issues to consider. These include the 
overall  level  of  the  interchange  cap,  the  complexity  and  proliferation  of  interchange 
categories, the phenomenon of interchange “drift” with the three-year compliance cycle, and 
the wide disparity between interchange rates for preferred merchants and those applying to 
others. 
While  it  broadly  endorsed  the  PSB’s  regulatory  approach  to  date,  the  Murray  Report 
recommended  that  consideration  be  given  to  tightening  existing  interchange  regulations  in 
some  significant  respects.  These  included  lowering  the  overall  interchange  cap,  and 
broadening its coverage to include other incentive payments that serve a similar function. It 
argued  that  this  would  help  to  prevent  circumvention  and,  in  the  case  of  companion  card 
arrangements, would improve competitive neutrality. 
All  of these things  are now  being  carefully  considered.  As I  said  at  the  outset, the  review 
process is still underway and I won’t pre-empt any possible conclusions. Reserve Bank staff 
have already consulted extensively with interested parties, and I expect there will be more of 
that to come in response to the submissions received. I take the opportunity to thank industry 
participants for your constructive engagement, not just in this review but in the wider agenda 
of promoting a more efficient and innovative payments industry. 
                                                
3   Combining transactions across all card systems, average merchant service fees in Australia have fallen by 
37 basis  points  from  their  level  prior  to  the  Bank’s  reforms.  See  RBA  (2014),  Submission  to  the  Financial 
System Inquiry, Sydney, p 213. 
4   Merchant  service  fees  are  around  75  basis  points  lower  than  in  the  United  States.  See  RBA  (2014), 
Submission to the Financial System Inquiry, March, p 213. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
