  Encik Abu Hassan Alshari Yahaya: Anti-money laundering and 
combating the financing of terrorism 
Welcoming  remarks  by  Mr  Encik  Abu  Hassan  Alshari  Yahaya,  Assistant  Governor  of  the 
Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the ASEAN Regional Bank Supervision 
Workshop  on  “Anti-Money  Laundering  and  Combating  the  Financing  of  Terrorism”,  Kuala 
Lumpur, 3 March 2015. 
 Welcome to Malaysia. I hope you have had a pleasant journey travelling to KL and managed 
to have a good rest. I also hope that the facilities being offered here at our Lanai Kijang are 
adequate to meet your expectations. It is a great honour for Bank Negara Malaysia to host 
and  co-organise  the  ASEAN  Regional  Bank  Supervision  Workshop  on  Anti-Money 
Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism. I would like to take this opportunity to 
thank the World Bank for formulating the programme and organising this workshop and our 
utmost gratitude to the Government of Canada for the generous financial support that has 
made the hosting and organizing of this course possible. 
As a country that has just gone through its on-site mutual evaluation process, we have seen 
that  the  role  of  supervision  is  very  important  in  the  development  of  a  country’s  AML/CFT 
regime. There is critical need for the integration between AML/CFT, prudential and business 
conduct  supervision  as  well  as  between  those  supervisors  and  the  law  enforcement 
authorities. These inter-linkages prove to us that collective effort is key in combating ML/TF 
effectively. 
The  international  standards  require  supervisors  to  appropriately  supervise,  monitor  and 
regulate financial institutions for compliance with AML/CFT requirements commensurate with 
their  risks.  As  such,  to  effectively  implement  the  above,  a  country’s  AML/CFT  supervision 
has  to  be  embedded  in  the  broader  framework  of  prudential  and  business  conduct 
supervision. This is to leverage on and optimise the synergies, expertise and resources to 
ensure  effectiveness  of  both  overall  supervision  of  financial  institutions  and  specific 
AML/CFT supervision. Supervisors are required to ensure effective management of ML/TF 
risk  and  compliance  with  AML/CFT  requirements  by  the  financial  institutions  by  assessing 
institution’s policies, procedures and processes for identifying and managing ML/TF risk and 
in complying with regulatory requirements. 
This  integration  also  ensure  that  supervisors  are  coherent  and  apply  high  standards  in 
fulfilling their responsibilities for both AML/CFT and prudential supervision. As for AML/CFT, 
supervisors have to include AML/CFT risk in their risk based approach to supervisions and to 
be fully aware of consequences and implications of theirs supervised institutions’ failures to 
adequately identify and manage all risks including ML/TF risk. This is because the issue is no 
longer  just  about  technical  compliance  but  more  importantly,  whether  the  supervisory 
framework  has  been  effective  in  mitigating  and  in  ensuring  adequate  enforcement  against 
ML/TF. 
Therefore,  to  equip  supervisors  in  fulfilling  their  duties  to  conduct  AML/CFT  supervision, 
courses  such  as  this  is  important  to  provide  all  of  you  with  an  understanding  of  the 
importance of reviewing the operational, legal, and reputational risks associated with ML/TF 
and their impact on the overall bank assessment. This course will provide first and foremost, 
an  overview  of  the  international  standards  relating  to  AML/CFT  supervision  matters, 
operational aspects of the supervision work by incorporating publicly available case studies 
in  the  training  modules,  technical  aspects  of  anti-money  laundering  and  combating  the 
financing of terrorism, supervision of banks, conduct of on-site and off-site bank supervision, 
and sharing of real bank cases on supervision on AML/CFT. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  I do hope that aside from benefiting from the course, participants will make full use of these 
forums as a platform to network and exchange views on key AML/CFT supervisory issues, 
collaborate, compare practices and share relevant information. 
On  that  note,  I  would  like  to  once  again  thank  all  of  you  here  today  for  attending  this 
workshop and for the speakers, Mr Stuart Yikona, Ms. Pramita Moni Sengupta, Mr. Mehmet 
Kerse,  Ms.  Desiree  Ann  Chereebin  and  Ms  Leonora  Emini  who  are  willing  to  share  your 
experiences  for  the  collective  benefits  of  everyone  here  attending  the  workshop.  Our 
appreciation again to the Government of Canada for the support for this programme. I wish 
all of you a successful and productive workshop ahead and please take the time to explore 
Kuala  Lumpur  and  its  surroundings.  Thank  you  and  have  a  pleasant  and  enriching  day 
ahead. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
