  Alberto G Musalem: US macroeconomic and regulatory developments 
and emerging market economies 
Remarks  by  Mr  Alberto  G  Musalem,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Integrated  Policy 
Analysis  Group  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  International  Financial 
Conference Annual Meeting, Cartagena, Colombia, 9 March 2015. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  speak  here  today.  It  has  been  a  pleasure  to  attend  this 
conference, and to have the opportunity to exchange views with many of you. 
My  remarks  today  will  focus  on  the  potential  effects  of  the  U.S.  outlook  and  policy  for 
emerging market economies. I will make three main points. 
• 
The U.S. economy appears likely to make further progress toward the Federal Open 
Market  Committee’s  (FOMC)  objectives  of  maximum  sustainable  employment  and 
price  stability.  This  actual  and  prospective 
improvement  underlies  market 
expectations that the FOMC will begin raising the Federal Funds rate sometime later 
this year. 
Emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  have  generally  performed  well  during  U.S. 
tightening  cycles,  especially  when  such  policy  shifts  are  supported  by  effective 
communication in the context of U.S. growth. 
There  has  been  notable  progress  in  improving  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the 
international  and  U.S.  financial  systems,  to  better  support  financial  stability  and 
economic growth. 
  Before I turn to the specifics, let me remind you that what I say today reflects my own views, 
and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve 
System. 
Since  the  end  of  the  Great  Recession  almost  six  years  ago,  U.S.  growth  has  averaged  a 
somewhat disappointing 2.3 percent. But growth has picked up recently, and the latest Blue 
Chip forecast is for growth to average slightly below 3 percent over the next year. 
There are good reasons to think that a period of stronger growth can be sustained. 
• 
Household  balance  sheets  are  in  much  improved  condition,  with  total  household 
liabilities well below their 2008 peak, and debt service burdens at the lowest share 
of disposable income in more than 30 years. Moreover, consumers are benefitting 
from the positive wealth effect of higher house and equity prices. 
Labor  market  improvement  has  picked  up  pace,  with  payrolls  gains  over  the  last 
several months the strongest since the mid-1990s. Workers are finally beginning to 
see at least modest real wage gains. And the U.S. unemployment rate has fallen to 
the lowest level since mid-2008. 
The recent drop in oil prices is providing a significant boost to household spending 
power with nearly a percentage point increase to real disposable incomes. 
The  housing  sector  is  now  in  much  better  balance.  The  inventory-sales  ratio  for 
homes is near, or even slightly below, levels typically considered “normal,” and there 
has been a significant drop in the fraction of households carrying mortgage balances 
in excess of the value of their homes. 
The fiscal  restraint  that  has  held  back  growth  in  recent  years  has  given  way  to  a 
more neutral posture. 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The non-financial corporate sector remains in generally healthy condition, with high 
profit margins and a high ratio of liquid assets to current liabilities. 
 Of  course,  there  are  important  risks  to  the  growth  outlook  including:  whether  households 
behave cautiously relative to fundamentals given the experience of the Great Recession; the 
extent of the impact to the oil producing sector from lower oil prices, and the direction of the 
business cycle abroad. The FOMC’s view in its January statement was that the risks to U.S. 
growth are nearly balanced. 
There are also risks in both directions to the inflation outlook. Headline inflation has fallen 
quite low due to the drop in oil prices. These effects are likely to be transitory. Measures of 
underlying inflation such as the core PCE deflator have been running somewhat short of the 
FOMC’s 2 percent objective for some time. Moreover, market-based measures of medium-
term  inflation  compensation  have  fallen  somewhat  below  the  objective  in  recent  months, 
even if survey measures of expectations have held essentially steady. 
There  are  also  upside  risks  to  inflation.  The  unemployment  rate  has  declined  and  wage 
growth should firm as remaining slack diminishes. Moreover, the U.S. economy’s productivity 
performance has been relatively unimpressive in recent quarters. If continued, this could also 
begin to push inflation higher. 
It is in this context that the Committee has begun to consider the appropriate timing and pace 
for removing extraordinary accommodation. The Committee stated in January that “it can be 
patient in beginning to normalize the stance of monetary policy,” and that the timing of any 
policy  shift  will  be  data  dependent,  based  on  an  ongoing  careful  evaluation  of  progress 
towards the Committee’s goals of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.1 
Emerging market officials and market participants have expressed concerns that Fed liftoff 
might  spark  an  undue  tightening  in  global  financial  conditions,  creating  a  new  growth 
headwind for emerging market economies. These concerns are understandable. The Federal 
Funds rate has been near the zero lower bound for more than six years. The Taper Tantrum 
in  the  spring  and  summer  of  2013  provides  a  ready  reminder  of  the  potential  for  volatility 
around actual or perceived news concerning Fed policy. 
Like other central banks, the Fed’s monetary policy mandate is defined in domestic terms. 
Yet the Fed takes the potential international implications of its policies quite seriously. In part, 
this comes from a sense of a special responsibility given the international reserve currency 
status  of  the  dollar.  An  outward-looking  perspective  is  also  warranted  because  the 
international  effects  of  Fed  policies  can  spill  back  onto  the  U.S.  economy  and  financial 
conditions. 
It  is  of  note  that  emerging  market  economic  performance  during  previous  Fed  tightening 
cycles has generally been good. During the last three U.S. tightening cycles, EME industrial 
production growth  has  come  to  between  7½  and  10  percent  over  the  12  months from the 
start  of  Fed  tightening,  while  EME  export  volumes  have  risen  10  to  15  percent.  A  likely 
explanation for this favorable record is that Fed tightening generally occurs during periods of 
strong U.S. economic performance. Recent research from the IMF bears out this hypothesis, 
finding that higher U.S. interest rates associated with stronger U.S. growth represent a net 
positive for EMEs.2 
Financial  performance  of  EMEs  has  been  more  diverse  across  Fed  policy  cycles.  The 
strongest contrast is between the tightening cycle that began in 2004, and the one beginning 
                                                
1   See January 27–28, 2015 Federal Open Market Committee statement. 
2   See  “Spillovers  from  Unwinding  Monetary  Support  in  Advanced  Economies,”  2014  Spillover  Report, 
Chapter 2.  See  also,  “On  the  Receiving  End:  External  Financial  Conditions  and  Emerging  Market  Growth 
Before, During and After the Global Financial Crisis,” World Economic Outlook, April 2013, Chapter 4. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  a  decade  earlier,  in  1994.  EME  asset  prices  strengthened  considerably  during  the  2004 
cycle,  but  weakened  considerably  during  the  earlier  cycle.  Notably,  the  1994  cycle  was 
associated with a large increase in U.S. long-term bond yields, and appears to represent a 
case in which there was some distance between Fed policy and market expectations. Other 
IMF research suggests that anticipated Fed tightening moves have historically been followed 
by only a minor pullback in private capital inflows, while unanticipated tightening has typically 
been  followed  by  a  pullback  in  private  flows  some  four  times  as  large.3  This  evidence 
highlights the importance of transparency and clear messaging in how the Fed is evaluating 
the evolving economic landscape. 
The  FOMC  has  taken  a  number  of  steps  in  recent  years  to  increase  transparency  and 
improve communications. This includes press conferences by the Fed chair following FOMC 
meetings; the publishing of growth and inflation forecasts of FOMC participants; participants’ 
projections of the Federal Funds rate at various horizons; and a concerted attempt to lay out 
the  guideposts  that  the  FOMC  will  look  at  to  assess  progress  toward  its  mandate.  These 
steps  are  aimed  at  reducing  the  risk  that  Fed  policy  adjustment  might  be  associated  with 
undue market volatility. 
The stance of Fed policy will be far from the only thing affecting the global landscape facing 
EMEs.  As  the  FOMC  considers  the  appropriate  timing  and  pace  of  moving  to  a  less 
accommodative policy stance, central banks in the Euro area and Japan are in the process 
of  implementing  additional  easing  measures.  Other  important  factors  affecting  the  global 
terrain  include  China’s  slowing  of  credit  growth  without  derailing  economic  growth,  the 
behavior  of  oil  and  other  commodity  prices,  and  EMEs’  own  domestic  fundamentals  and 
growth dynamics. Fed policy will be only one factor. 
EME fundamentals are likely to be an important determinant of how EME financial conditions 
respond  to  Fed  policy  normalization.  This  was  one  of  the  key  lessons  from  the  Taper 
Tantrum. At first, market pressure was somewhat indiscriminant and then later became more 
discerning with respect to EME fundamentals. Financial conditions tightened, especially for 
countries  with  fundamental  vulnerabilities  including:  large  current  account  deficits,  a  heavy 
reliance  on  portfolio  inflows,  and  high  and  above-target  inflation  rates.  Markets  then 
responded  favorably  as  EME  authorities  shifted  toward  clear,  more  consistent  policies 
focused  on  inflation  objectives  and  external  sustainability,  and  away  from  policies  with 
multiple and sometimes competing objectives. 
Let  me  now  add  a  few  thoughts  about  ongoing  financial  reform  efforts.  The  complexity, 
severity  and  speed  of  the  global  financial  crisis  required  a  forceful  and  wide-ranging 
international  regulatory  response.  This  has  included  higher  capital  and  liquidity  standards, 
stronger  recovery  and  resolution  regimes 
institutions,  and  greater 
transparency and standardization in derivatives markets. These efforts will have a number of 
positive  effects,  although  they  may  lead  to  some  changes  in  bank  business  models  and 
strategy in the U.S. and internationally. 
In the U.S., these efforts have made the banking system much stronger today than before 
the crisis. In aggregate, Tier 1 risk-based capital ratios among U.S. bank holding companies 
have increased to just under 13 percent, an increase of almost 45 percent relative to pre-
crisis levels, and the quality of capital has improved. Bank holding company balance sheets 
are also significantly more liquid, with liquid assets increasing from 26 percent of total assets 
at end-2006 to 38 percent at end-2014. Core deposits now fund 44 percent of total assets, a 
10 percentage point increase from pre-crisis levels. A stronger U.S. banking system better 
protects  against  future  shocks,  provides  a  more  solid  foundation  for  growth,  and  therefore 
also enhances prospects for growth and financial stability abroad. 
for  supervised 
                                                
3   “International Capital Flows: Reliable or Fickle?” World Economic Outlook, April 2011, Chapter 4. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  for 
the 
largest 
institutions,  and 
Basel  III  implementation  has  been  proceeding  on  a  comparable  basis  in  advanced  and 
emerging  market  countries.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  has  been  monitoring  the 
unintended  effects  of  reforms  on  EME  banks  and  EMEs  report  no  significant  adverse 
effects.4  However,  potential  differences  in  reform  implementation  across  jurisdictions  could 
create challenges, particularly in countries where foreign banks are active. This underscores 
the importance of continued home and host coordination. 
I would like to briefly touch on two U.S.-specific financial regulatory issues with international 
implications, namely enhanced prudential standards for foreign banks, including intermediate 
holding  company  requirements 
issues  surrounding 
correspondent  banking,  U.S.  anti-money  laundering  rules,  and  “de-risking”.  Of  these,  the 
latter may have the most relevance for the EMEs broadly. 
The adoption of enhanced prudential standards for foreign banking organizations (FBOs) is a 
key  element  of  U.S.  regulatory  reforms,  and  a  significant  change  in  supervision  of  FBOs.5 
The largest FBOs (with U.S. non-branch assets greater than $50 billion) must hold their U.S. 
subsidiaries  under  an  intermediate  holding  company  (IHC),  and  meet  various  capital, 
leverage, liquidity, stress testing, risk management and corporate governance requirements. 
These requirements respond to a mandate in the Dodd-Frank Act for enhanced standards for 
the largest domestic and foreign banks. The most significant requirements are expected to 
fall  on  the  largest  FBOs  from  advanced  economies  –  some  of  which  have  also  adopted 
tighter local requirements for foreign banks – and should contribute importantly to a safer and 
sounder U.S. and international financial system. 
Correspondent banking relationships have also received heightened attention in the context 
of serious violations of anti-money laundering and know-your-customer standards by some 
banks, and substantial fines. It is imperative to firmly deal with illegal, unsafe and unsound 
banking  practices,  including  money  laundering  and  transactions  with  U.S.-sanctioned 
countries. 
It  is  also  important  to  be  on  the  look-out  for  potential  unintended  consequences  and 
externalities, such as widespread de-risking where correspondent bank access is shut off to 
compliant counter parties and to legal flows, economic costs are excessively increased, or 
flows migrate to avenues subject to less oversight or transparency. The scope, scale, and 
impact of de-risking need to be better understood. Dialogue between market participants and 
the official sector is ongoing, both multilaterally and bilaterally. 
Let  me  conclude.  The  U.S.  economy  and  financial  system  have  strengthened  notably  in 
recent  years  and  in  a  mutually  reinforcing  way.  U.S.  monetary  and  regulatory  policy  both 
need to be tailored to domestic conditions. The Fed is also mindful of the international effects 
of  its  policies,  given  the  central  place  of  the  U.S.  in  the  global  financial  system,  and  the 
potential for spillbacks to the U.S. economy and financial system. Effective communication 
with market participants and policymakers is important. The opportunity for dialogue is what 
makes conferences such as this one valuable. 
Thank you very much. 
 
                                                
4   “Monitoring  the  effects  of  agreed  regulatory  reforms  on  emerging  market  and  developing  economies”, 
Financial Stability Board, November 12, 2014. 
5   Enhanced  Prudential  Standards  for  Bank  Holding  Companies  and  Foreign  Banking  Organizations,  Federal 
Register, Vol. 79 No. 59, March 27, 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
