  Ignazio Visco: Overview of economic and financial developments in Italy 
Concluding  remarks  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  Ordinary 
Meeting of Shareholders 2014 – 121st Financial Year, Bank of Italy, Rome, 26 May 2015. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Last year was one of important changes: in Europe, by reason of the evolving institutional 
context  and  major  economic  and  monetary  policy  decisions;  in  Italy,  by  reason  of  the 
quickening pace of the reform effort. It was a year of difficult choices, whose early results – 
significant  but  still  fragile  –  must  be  resolutely  defended.  The  economic  recovery  that  got 
under  way  in  Italy  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year  is  likely  to  strengthen  in  the  current  and 
subsequent quarters.  
For the Bank of Italy, 2014 was a year of engagement in the euro area in formulating and 
implementing monetary policy and launching the Single Supervisory Mechanism, and in Italy 
in  enhancing  our  services  to  the  national  community  and  further  modernizing  our 
organization and operations. 
The Bank of Italy’s total assets declined by nearly €24 billion, to €530.6 billion, reflecting a 
reduction  in  Eurosystem  refinancing  operations.  This  year  the  implementation  of  the 
extraordinary securities purchase programmes will expand our balance sheet again. 
Our  gross  profit  fell  from  €6.9  billion  to  just  under  €6  billion  in  2014.  Today  the  Board  of 
Directors  proposes  that  this  meeting  allocate  €1.8  billion  to  general  risk  provisions  and 
€750 million to statutory reserves. Taking market conditions into account, it also proposes to 
distribute  dividends  of  €340  million  to  shareholders.  On  the  basis  of  the  indications  laid 
down in the Statute, €1.9 billion goes to the State, in addition to a tax liability of €1.2 billion. 
At its meeting on 30 April the Board of Directors determined that in future years dividends 
should ordinarily be in the range between last year’s and this year’s amounts, conditional on 
the  size  of  net  profit  and  on  capitalization  needs,  unless  the  general  conditions  of  the 
financial  markets  or  the  Bank’s  profitability  have  undergone  significant  changes.  The 
commencement  of  the  redistribution  of  holdings  of  the  Bank’s  shares,  as  required  by  law, 
may be facilitated by awareness of this orientation. Meanwhile the Bank is working on the 
dematerialization  of  the  shares.  Once  the  new  system  is  fully  phased  in,  transfers  will  be 
made electronically in a dedicated market segment, so as to make the investment liquid. 
The Report on Operations and Activities, which we present today together with our Annual 
Report, describes in detail the tasks carried out, organizational developments and resource 
management in 2014. 
Practically  40  per  cent  of  the  work  done  by  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  staff  relates  directly  to  our 
participation  in  the  Eurosystem  and  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism.  Our  technical 
structures are heavily and constantly engaged in the committees and working groups acting 
in support of the decisions of the ECB Governing Council. 
Designing and implementing the monetary policy for the euro area draws on a broad range of 
competences in the fields of economic analysis and market intervention. To date, nearly a 
third of the total liquidity supplied by the ECB’s targeted longer-term refinancing operations 
has been taken up by Italian banks. For the Bank of Italy, the outright purchase programmes 
of  private  and  public  securities  have  entailed  daily  market  interventions  averaging 
€450 million. 
The launch of the Single Supervisory Mechanism has required an extraordinary allocation of 
resources. We have taken part in its construction by making our knowledge and experience 
available.  The  new  European  system  of  banking  supervision  has  been  designed  as  a 
“system of authorities”. The ECB and the national authorities agree jointly on decisions and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  practices.  The  ECB  has  direct  supervisory  responsibility  for  the  123  most  important,  or 
“significant”, banks; decisions are taken by the Governing Council acting on a proposal from 
the Supervisory Board on which the national authorities sit.  
Each  of  these  banks  is  supervised  by  “joint  supervisory  teams”  consisting  mostly  of  staff 
drawn from the national authorities – chiefly but not exclusively those of the country in which 
the bank is headquartered. The Bank of Italy has assigned 58 of its analysts to the teams 
supervising Italian banks, and another 20 to 18 groups responsible for supervising non-Italian 
banks. Finally, 60 Bank of Italy inspectors are assigned to on-site inspections at significant 
banks.  The  number  of  experts  involved  in  these  activities  will  grow  further  already  in  the 
coming months.  
The new arrangement is complex; it seeks to balance an overall vision with immediate and 
effective action that makes the most of the national authorities’ accumulated knowledge and 
expertise. The result is a network architecture in which every significant bank is examined by 
many eyes of diverse nationalities. 
The Bank of Italy dedicates considerable resources to the oversight of market infrastructures 
and the provision of European-wide payment services. The migration to the new Single Euro 
Payments  Area  for  retail  payments  has  been  successfully  completed.  With  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  the  Bank  of  Italy  operates  the  TARGET2  settlement  system  for  payments 
within the euro area, and we will also operate the TARGET2-Securities platform for settling 
securities transactions. 
For  the  “less  significant”  intermediaries,  supervisory  responsibility  and  direct  supervisory 
action are left to the national authorities, within the framework of the common mechanism. In 
Italy,  this  covers  56  banking  groups,  435  non-group  banks,  and  77  branches  of  foreign 
banks, plus 456 non-bank financial intermediaries also subject to our prudential supervision. 
The  Bank  of  Italy  is  also  tasked  with  activating  macroprudential  policies  to  safeguard  the 
overall stability of the financial system. When enlarged to include two additional members, 
our  Governing  Board  also  takes  externally  relevant  decisions  concerning  insurance 
supervision prepared by the Insurance Supervisory Authority. 
As part of our action to protect the consumers of banking and financial services, inspections 
focusing  on  transparency  and  correctness  in  customer  relations  were  carried  out  at 
124 intermediaries  in  2014.  In  71  cases  shortcomings  were  detected  and  actions  taken  to 
overcome them and improve service quality. The public is increasingly sensitive to this issue. 
We received nearly 14,000 complaints last year, 2,200 more than in 2013, and we take them 
into  account  in  our  supervisory  action.  Appeals  to  the  Banking  and  Financial  Ombudsman 
increased  by  40  per  cent  to  over  11,000,  with  more  than  two  thirds  of  the  8,500  rulings 
favourable to customers. 
The  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  was  reorganized  and  its  analytical  capability  reinforced. 
Thanks  to  investment  in  skills  and  technology, together  with  the  dedication  of  its  staff,  the 
Unit  handled  the  steadily  rising  number  of  suspicious  transaction  reports,  which  has  more 
than tripled over the past five years to 72,000. It further shortened its response time last year, 
informing the law enforcement and judicial authorities more and more promptly. 
In recent months we have decided on a new rationalization of our branch network following 
that completed in 2010. By the end of 2018 the number of branches will be reduced to 39, 
down from 58 today and 97 in 2007. 
The new configuration takes account of developments in technology, concentrating activities 
and personnel in larger units endowed with specialized professional skills that are updated 
constantly;  it  will  improve  service  quality,  maintaining  a  balanced  territorial  presence.  The 
duties of the branches will be extended in the areas of consumer protection, supervision of 
non-bank intermediaries, assessment of asset eligibility for monetary policy operations, and 
inspection and control of cash circulation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Today the Bank has 7,100 employees, including nearly 170 seconded to other institutions, 
primarily the ECB. In 2009 we had a staff of over 7,500. In the past five years the Bank’s 
operating expenses have diminished by more than 14 per cent in real terms, thanks above 
all to measures to curb current expenses. 
With investment in technology, among other things, our drive for organizational improvement 
will proceed. In managing human resources we will continue to adapt to social and economic 
changes. In agreement with the trade unions we have enhanced flexibility in working hours. 
We will reinforce the areas whose workload has been made heavier by the new European 
arrangements. We will continue to invest in people, seeking out and rewarding excellence, 
fostering career-long development of skills and promoting diversity. 
On  behalf  of  the  Board  of  Directors,  the  Governing  Board,  and  myself  personally,  let  me 
voice our appreciation and gratitude to the women and men who work at the Bank of Italy, 
whose integrity and capability have always constituted the strength of this institution.  
Monetary policy and economic growth in the euro area 
The past year saw a slowdown in the emerging economies, related to the dwindling stimulus 
of commercial integration and the emerging effects of structural fragilities. Developments in 
the  advanced  countries  diverged.  Economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  remained  weak  for 
much of last year. Within the area, growth differentials narrowed but the remaining cyclical 
differences  were  reflected  in  the  labour market: the  increase  in  employment  was  robust  in 
Germany and Spain, very modest in France and Italy. Although the unemployment rate fell 
slightly it was still high, especially among young people. Inflation continued to decrease, with 
the change in consumer prices turning negative at the end of the year. 
We have emphasized on several occasions the risks stemming from a prolonged period of 
exceptionally  low  inflation,  if  not  outright  deflation.  Studies  carried  out  by  the  Bank  of Italy 
show that the price deceleration is largely due not only to the drop in energy costs, but also 
to the lack of aggregate demand. They confirm that there is a risk of disanchoring of inflation 
expectations, which have reached an historical minimum. They point to the potentially heavy 
cost of low inflation, especially in conjunction with high levels of public and private debt.  
In  view  of  these  risks  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  cut  its  policy  rates  to  the  lower 
bound, started new targeted longer-term refinancing operations, and launched covered bond 
and asset-backed securities purchases. In January of this year it decided to extend its asset 
purchases to public sector securities. 
Under  the  expanded  asset  purchase  programme  the  ECB  will  make  monthly  purchases 
amounting to €60 billion until the end of September 2016, and in any  event until it sees a 
sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with a return to price stability. This 
action will restore the Eurosystem’s balance sheet to the peak levels recorded in the first half 
of 2012. About €150 billion worth of Italian government securities will be purchased, of which 
more than €130 billion by the Bank of Italy and the remainder by the ECB.  
The  single  national  central  banks  will  bear  the  risks  associated  with  the  government 
securities they purchase. This decision takes account of the concerns of some members of 
the  Governing  Council  that  the  programme  could  lead  to  transfers  of  resources  between 
countries.  Full  risk  sharing  would  have  been  more  in  line  with  the  singleness  of  monetary 
policy  and  consistent  with  the  Treaty  on  European  Union.  However,  the  measure’s 
effectiveness  is  undiminished:  it  depends  above  all  on  the  scope  and timing  of the  action. 
The  decision  in favour  of  only  partial  risk  sharing  reflects  the  delays  and  limitations  of the 
process of European unification. 
The  asset  purchases  boost  economic  activity  and  raise  inflation  through  several  channels: 
they reduce yields on public sector securities, with effects on other segments of the financial 
market and on the conditions for credit to households and firms; they cause a depreciation of 
the  euro,  which  impacts  on  imported  inflation  and  on  exports;  they  increase  the  value  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  financial assets and hence the private sector’s spending capacity; and they improve inflation 
expectations and public confidence. 
Positive  effects  on  the  financial  and  foreign  exchange  markets  emerged  as  soon  as  the 
preparation  of  the  programme  was  announced.  From  the  beginning  of  November,  and 
despite  a  rise  in  recent  weeks  that  mainly  reflected  improved  growth  and  inflation 
expectations,  yields  on  ten-year  German  and  Italian  government  securities  have  fallen  by 
about 20 and 60 basis points respectively. The euro has depreciated by more than 10 per 
cent against the dollar and by 6 per cent in nominal effective terms. The stimulus has spread 
to  market  segments  not  directly  affected  by  the  asset  purchases  and  to  credit  supply 
conditions. Inflation expectations have begun to improve, though only slightly. 
Fears  of  deflation  have abated,  but the  positive  effects  of  the  programme  observed  so  far 
should not weaken our determination to take it forward; on the contrary, they are confirmation 
that we need to carry it through to the end. Improvement depends on the credibility of this 
commitment, and the cost of non-completion would be very high. Inflation must be brought 
permanently back to levels consistent with an annual growth in consumer prices of below but 
close to 2 per cent in the medium term.  
With the start of purchases we have entered a new, partially uncharted, territory of extremely 
low interest rates even on medium- and long-term maturities. In seven euro-area countries 
these are now negative on horizons up to three years. In the second half of April, just before 
the recent increase, German rates were negative on maturities up to nine years. Fears have 
been  voiced  that  the  programme  could  encourage  excessive  risk  taking  in  the  search  for 
higher yields, that it could generate liquidity tensions in some market segments, and harm 
some  categories  of  financial  operator  such  as  insurance  companies  and  pension  funds. 
These risks must be carefully weighed but not overestimated. 
There are no signs to date that low interest rates are provoking generalized imbalances. In 
the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  financial  asset  and  property  prices  do  not  appear  to  be  under 
speculative pressures, investors’ risk propensity is still low, and credit growth is weak. Local 
and sectoral tensions can be controlled with macroprudential measures, as happens already 
in  some  other  euro-area  countries.  Asset  purchases  are  being  made  gradually  and 
continuously  so  as  not  to  distort  price  formation;  securities  lending  by  the  ECB  and  some 
national central banks, including the Bank of Italy, is helping to keep the secondary market 
liquid. 
The potential repercussions for specific sectors are not being ignored. The EU-wide stress 
test carried out in 2014 revealed that the exposure of insurance companies to the risks of a 
prolonged  period  of  low  interest  rates  is  significant  in  some  euro-area  countries;  it  is  less 
marked in Italy, thanks to a basically balanced financial structure. Insurance companies can 
limit these risks by seeking a better match between the yields and duration of balance-sheet 
assets and liabilities, improving operating results through diversification of portfolio securities, 
increasing 
to 
policyholders to the new market scenario. The authorities should step up their supervisory 
action  and  prudential  controls  as  recommended  by 
Insurance  and 
Occupational Pensions Authority. 
The risks, both real and financial, would have been far greater had we not begun the asset 
purchases. The greatest threat to the euro area’s financial stability comes from the prospect 
of a stagnation of production and low inflation, which the programme combats.  
Signs of a recovery of economic activity in the euro area have gained strength since the end 
of 2014. According to the latest projections, output growth will acquire a solid basis this year 
and gain momentum in the next, largely thanks to the support of monetary policy. There is 
still the risk of a further weakening of productive activity in the emerging countries and of a 
sharpening of international tensions. 
technical  reserves  and,  where  necessary,  adjusting 
their  obligations 
the  European 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  flare-up  of  the  Greek  crisis  has  had  few  repercussions  to  date  on  sovereign  risk 
premiums in the rest of the area thanks to the reforms undertaken in many countries, the 
progress  made  in  European  governance  and  the  tools  available  to  the  authorities  to 
prevent contagion. Still, the difficulties that the Greek authorities are having in designing 
and implementing the necessary reforms and the uncertainty surrounding the outcome of 
their prolonged negotiations with European institutions and with the International Monetary 
Fund are fuelling grave tensions that could prove destabilizing.  
Monetary policy cannot  guarantee strong and lasting growth on its own. In the short term, 
demand  can  draw  support  from  a  reasonable  use  of  existing  flexibility  within  the  limits  of 
European budgetary rules. As the European Commission too has said, a contribution could 
come  from  the  countries  with  the  smallest  debt  and  soundest  public  finances.  The 
Investment  Plan  for  Europe  must  be  implemented  without  delay.  Broader  action  would 
require an autonomous fiscal capacity for the euro area. Going forward, this capacity could 
be achieved by introducing built-in business cycle stabilizers, a first step towards true fiscal 
union.  
In  the  medium  term  the  creation  of  new  income,  new  demand,  and  new  jobs  must  be 
supported by measures and reforms designed, as of now, to raise productivity and growth 
potential.  Technological  progress  brings  about  a  marked  expansion  in  activities  that 
require  expertise  and  new  skills,  but  it  can  reduce,  even  considerably,  the  scope  for 
employment in the sectors most susceptible to automation and to the growth of the digital 
economy. These consequences can be mitigated by developing new occupations, even in 
traditional  sectors,  that  are  less  amenable  candidates  for  automation.  But  investment  is 
needed  in  infrastructure,  education  and  training,  and  steps  must  be  taken  to  make  the 
labour  market  more  efficient  and  minimize  the  fall-out  for  individual  workers  during  the 
transition period. The support that monetary policy provides to aggregate demand is not 
an alternative to reform but it makes it possible to speed up the process and more easily 
absorb the short-term costs. 
The Italian economy: consolidating the recovery  
The recovery has now begun in Italy as well, albeit on a weaker basis than in the euro area 
as  a  whole.  The  expansion  of  exports  has  been  accompanied  by  a  recovery  in  domestic 
demand.  The  acceleration  of  household  spending  continues,  especially  on  durable  goods, 
mainly thanks to the improved outlook for disposable income. Investment returned to growth, 
and business surveys indicate that it could strengthen during the year. The increase in GDP 
in the first quarter ended a long period of unfavourable cyclical conditions; output is expected 
to continue to expand in this quarter and in those to come.  
A return to stable growth that can provide new job opportunities requires a continuing drive 
for  innovation,  which  is  necessary  to  adapt  to  new  technologies  and  global  competition. 
Progress on this front in the last few years has helped restore Italy’s balance-of-payments 
surplus on current account, which came to almost 2 per cent of GDP in 2014. Since 2010 the 
overall adjustment has exceeded 5 percentage points, reflecting cyclical effects as much as 
structural adjustments. 
Italian  firms’  renewed  capacity  to  compete  is  signalled  by  growth  in  the  volume  of  goods 
exports that is greater than that in demand on our outlet markets, in particular those outside 
the euro area. The performance of the most efficient businesses that have increased their 
sales abroad, made investments and innovated, contrasts with that of a considerable part of 
the  productive  economy,  which  is  characterized  by  a  low  propensity  to  innovate  and  more 
traditional organization and management. 
There  is  less  innovative  activity  in  Italy  than  in  the  other  major  advanced  economies, 
particularly in the private sector. The latest European survey on innovation indicates that the 
lag,  especially  marked  in  comparison  with  Germany,  is  more  noticeable  in  the  high-tech 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  industries.  Italian  firms  have  much  less  capability  for  in-house  research  and  development 
and for cooperation with universities and other advanced training institutions.  
Compared with those in other advanced countries, firms in Italy not only start out smaller but 
also struggle to expand; even when they are successful they expand their work force more 
slowly and for a shorter period. As we have often noted, apart from the financial limitations 
that I will discuss later on, the barriers to firms’ activity and growth are mainly to be found in 
the environment in which economic activity takes place. The complex regulatory system, the 
relative inefficiency of public procedures and government action, the slowness of the justice 
system, and shortcomings in education and training all hinder the reallocation of productive 
resources to the most efficient firms, which is one of the main mechanisms of productivity 
growth.  This  situation  is  aggravated  by  corruption  and,  in  several  areas,  the  presence  of 
organized crime. 
In  the  last  two  years  there  has  been  a  significant  recovery  in  foreign  capital  inflows  for 
portfolio  investment,  including  bank  and  corporate  equity  and  bonds.  Nevertheless,  the 
barriers  to  the  renewal  and  expansion  of  Italian  firms  continue  to  discourage  direct 
investment  in  Italy.  Such  investment  is  an  important factor for change  in  management, for 
innovation,  and  for  productive  and  commercial  positioning  within  international  networks. 
Despite  signs  of  vitality,  foreign  direct  investment  in  Italy  is  modest  by  international 
standards.  
Reforms  to  remove  the  barriers  to  Italy’s  development  have  been  undertaken  and  have 
gained recognition from international institutions and markets. In order not to disappoint the 
expectations  of  change,  the  spectrum  of  the  reforms  must  be  broadened  and  their 
implementation accelerated. In some cases, the benefits will not be immediate, but this is all 
the more reason to act without delay, pursuing a comprehensive design. 
The  recent  labour  market  reforms  have  extended  the  income  support  mechanisms  for  the 
unemployed  and,  for  newly  hired  workers,  reduced  the  disincentive  to  permanent  hiring 
connected  with  uncertainty  over  the  outcome  of  decisions  to  terminate  employment 
contracts.  A  full  evaluation  of  the  effects  of  these  measures  is  premature.  Trends  in 
employment still reflect weak demand and ample unutilized production capacity. The sharp 
rise in new permanent contracts at the start of 2015, partly encouraged by the substantial tax 
relief in force from January, is a positive sign, suggesting that as the recovery takes hold, 
employment may grow and be oriented towards more stable forms. 
There is still the risk, however, especially in the South, that the recovery will not be able to 
create jobs to the same extent as in the exits from past recessions. The crisis came on top of 
the  great  transformation  dictated  by  technological  progress  and  increased  integration 
between  different  economies,  with  the  large  emerging  countries  among  the  protagonists. 
Labour  demand  from  the  most  innovative  firms  may  not  be  sufficient  to  reabsorb  all  the 
unemployment  in  the  short  term.  This  would  affect  the  very  sustainability  of  the  recovery 
since domestic demand would not fuel it sufficiently. 
This risk must be countered by supporting, including with innovation, activity in sectors where 
Italy  has  important  traditions  but  also  serious  shortcomings  and  where  production  still 
depends  on  substantial  inputs  of  labour,  diversified  according  to  skills  and  knowledge. 
Greater attention and greater public and private investment in urban modernization, land and 
landscape  protection,  and  the  exploitation  of  our  cultural  heritage  can  bring  important 
benefits,  combining  innovation  and  employment,  and  not  only  in  such  directly  involved 
sectors as construction and tourism.  
In  this  delicate  phase,  special  importance  attaches  to  the  full  integration  of  the  active  and 
passive labour policies outlined in the enabling act for labour market reform. It will be easier 
to  keep  pace  with  technological  innovation  if  the  requisite  skills  can  be  acquired  through 
effective retraining and if income support allows the unemployed to undertake such retraining 
with  dignity.  As  regards young  people, schools must  provide  the  prospect  of  a  reasonable 
return,  not  exclusively  economic,  on  their  investment  in  knowledge.  For  some  time  many 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  indicators  have  shown  that  Italy  lags  behind  in  both  educational  attainment  and  skills.  To 
improve the curriculum, enhance quality and channel resources to where they are needed, 
requires first of all a systematic and in-depth assessment of the services provided and the 
knowledge and skills acquired.  
Our  Annual  Report,  with  its  new  format  and  content,  this  year  includes  an  in-depth 
examination of the public administration. Our business opinion surveys clearly show that there 
are  difficulties  stemming  from  an  excess  of  bureaucratic  requirements  and  an  unstable 
regulatory framework. International comparisons place us quite far down the rankings, even if 
in  every  part  of  Italy  backward  and  virtuous  situations  coexist.  The  renewal  of  the  public 
administration,  which  began  several  years  ago  and  is  one  of  the  Government’s  explicit 
objectives, is also the condition for carrying out a review of public spending that can preserve 
and improve the quality of services.  
In a situation that remains difficult, fiscal policy has sought to balance rigour with support 
to  the  economy,  in  accordance  with  the  margins  for  flexibility  allowed  under  the 
European  rules,  while  keeping  the  deficit  under  3  per  cent  of  GDP  in  recent  years. 
Following  the  severely  restrictive  measures  necessitated  by  the  crisis  of  confidence  in 
2011,  it  has  been  proper  to  dose  fiscal  consolidation  measures  carefully  so  as  not  to 
hinder the recovery.  
Thanks  in  part  to  the  reform  of  the  public  pension  system,  in  Italy  more  than  in  other 
European  countries  the  long-term  sustainability  of  the  public  finances  can  be  preserved. 
Nevertheless, since the onset of the financial crisis the debt-to-GDP ratio has risen by more 
than 30 percentage points to 132 per cent, owing above all to the lack of economic growth. A 
return to higher levels of growth of nominal income, together with still prudent fiscal policy, 
will make the rapid reduction of the debt ratio possible. 
Banks and the financing of the economy 
The  global  financial  crisis  and  its  repercussions  on  the  economy  have  prompted  a 
widespread  revision  of  the  rules  governing  the  financial  system  at  international  level. 
Vigorous  measures  have  been  taken  both  in  the  sphere  of  banking  supervision  and  at 
macroprudential level with a view to restoring and preserving financial stability. 
In  the  euro  area,  Banking  Union  has  been  set  in  train  rapidly  after  a  discussion  of  the 
essential  points  between  the  European  institutions  and  the  governments  of  the  member 
countries.  In  Italy,  measures  have  been  adopted  or  are  being  studied  to  strengthen  the 
banking system, debilitated by the long recession, and enable it to support the recovery of 
the real economy. 
In  the  past  months  Parliament  has  reformed  the  cooperative  banking  sector.  The  biggest 
cooperative  banks  have  long  outgrown  the  confines  of  local  markets.  Like  the  other  large 
Italian  banks,  they  are  now  facing  the  changes  imposed  by  economic  integration  and  by 
technology. The cooperative form has deterred assessment of these banks by investors and 
impeded their ability to access the capital market swiftly, a crucial factor at times for coping 
with external shocks. The reform will facilitate efficient credit intermediation in a market made 
more competitive by Banking Union. 
The need for the banking foundations to perform their role of shareholder while respecting 
the investee banks’ management autonomy and to diversify their investments is a point that 
the Bank of Italy has stressed for some time. The Memorandum of Understanding between 
the Ministry of Economy and Finance, responsible for supervising the foundations, and the 
Association  of  Banking  Foundations  and  Savings  Banks  is  a  step  in  this  direction.  The 
concentration  limit  on  investment  in  a  single  issuer  protects  the  interests  of  both  the 
foundations  and  the  banks.  The  Memorandum  safeguards  compliance  with  the  ban  on 
control, including joint or de facto control, of investee banks. It also improves the quality of 
governing bodies, increasing their degree of independence. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  For  mutual  banks  to  be  able  to  continue  to  support  their  local  markets  and  communities, 
preserving  the  spirit  of mutualism  that  is  their  hallmark,  it  is  necessary  to  pursue forms of 
integration  based  on  membership  of  banking  groups.  Scant  diversification  of  risk  and  the 
difficulty of capital strengthening are creating crisis situations in more than a few cases. The 
mutual banks’ trade association is drafting concrete proposals that will be evaluated in the 
light of their ability to remove the obstacles to recapitalization and to resolve these banks’ 
problems. Change cannot be delayed. 
Signs of improvement in the credit market are emerging. The flow of new loans has been 
growing  since  the  closing  months  of  2014;  in  March  the  twelve-month  decline  in  bank 
lending to firms was 2.2 per cent, a sharp abatement of the contraction that we have been 
witnessing  for  three  years.  Italian  banks’  ample  recourse  to  the  targeted  longer-term 
refinancing  operations  and  the  start  of  government  bond  purchases  by  the  Eurosystem 
have  permitted  a  significant  reduction  in  the  cost  of  bank  funding  and  led  to  a  gradual 
improvement in that of credit. The interest rates on new loans to firms have come down by 
more than a percentage point since the beginning of last year; the spread with respect to 
German  and  French  rates  has  more  than  halved  compared  with  the  peaks  of  two  years 
ago. In the course of 2014 the decline in interest rates, which until then had been confined 
almost  exclusively  to  exporting  firms  and  larger  companies,  began  to  involve  firms 
operating on the domestic market and smaller enterprises. 
Credit  conditions  nevertheless  continue  to  be  uneven.  In  the  sectors  of  the  economy  where 
economic prospects have already improved, lending to firms with sound finances has begun to 
grow again. In those where recovery is proceeding more slowly, and especially in construction, 
credit is still contracting.  
In  the  first  quarter  of  this  year  the  loan  quality  and  the  profitability  of  the  largest  banking 
groups showed signs of improvement, but the legacy of the recession still weighs on banks’ 
balance sheets. At the end of 2014 the stock of bad debts approached €200 billion, equal to 
10  per  cent  of  credit  outstanding;  other  non-performing  loans  amounted  to  €150  billion, 
7.7 per cent of loans. Before the crisis, in 2008, the overall ratio of non-performing loans was 
6  per cent.  Against  these  exposures  banks  have  set  aside  substantial resources; they  are 
making write-downs which absorb most of their operating profit and crimp self-financing. The 
upshot is a constraint on new lending.  
The large stock of non-performing loans also reflects the very long and variable duration of 
insolvency  and  credit  recovery  procedures,  due  in  turn  to  the  country’s  cumbersome  civil 
justice  system.  These  widespread  inefficiencies  depress  potential  buyers’  valuations  of 
impaired assets and discourage their sale on the market. The unfavourable tax treatment of 
loan  loss  provisions,  though  mitigated,  still  does  not  allow  their  immediate  deduction  from 
taxable income, as happens instead in the other main European countries; this determines 
an  accumulation  of  deferred  tax  assets.  Measures  are  being  drafted  to  eliminate  these 
competitive disadvantages, which weaken the Italian banking system. 
The development of a secondary market in non-performing loans, which is practically non-
existent at present, would contribute to fully reactivating the financing of households and 
firms. For some time we have been proposing initiatives along these lines, with scope for 
public-sector participation. We are working together with the Government to design them, 
in compliance with the European rules on state aid. A discussion that we hope will be rapid 
and constructive is now under way with the European authorities. 
In 2014 the large increase in Italian banks’ capital ratios, with the average core capital ratio 
rising  to  11.8  per  cent  from  10.5  per  cent  the  year  before,  was  achieved  mainly  with  the 
capital increases carried out, at our prompting, in the first half of the year; the contribution of 
self-financing was negative for the system as a whole. In order to recoup profitability, banks 
can curb costs further and expand their sources of income.  
More  than  a  few  banks,  especially  medium-sized  ones,  are  evaluating  mergers  and 
acquisitions, including in response to recent regulatory innovations. There are sizeable potential 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  benefits of these operations but they cannot be taken for granted; they require vigorous action 
at  the  organizational  level,  in  rationalizing  distribution  systems,  risk  management  and 
technology uptake. 
The revision of international prudential standards aims to protect the integrity of the banking 
system as a fundamental infrastructure for the functioning of a modern market economy. The 
new  rules  on  capital,  leverage  and  liquidity  and  the  establishment  of  crisis  resolution 
mechanisms will make the system more stable and lessen the possible effects of bank crises 
on the economy and the public finances. At the same time, they will result in a reduction of 
banks’ capacity  to take risks  and  a  structural reduction  in  the  return  on  capital  invested  in 
them.  The  granting  of  loans  will  become  more  selective;  the  development,  within  a  well-
defined regulatory framework, of alternative forms of financing necessary to avert a shortage 
of resources for the real economy will have to be stimulated.  
Looking ahead, the shift of a part of the intermediation process from banks to markets will 
benefit both firms and households, allowing the former to expand their sources of financing 
and  the  latter  to  diversify  their  savings  to  a  greater  extent.  Banks  will  continue  to  play  a 
central  role  in  the  financial  system  if  they  prove  able  to  accompany  this  evolution  by 
expanding their activity in the field of services and assisting firms in direct capital raising. A 
trend of this kind is under way in many countries, but here in Italy the transition will not be 
easy. The underdevelopment of the Italian capital market reflects the characteristics of the 
structure  of  the  economy  and  the  consequent  difficulties  of  assessing  the  risks  and 
opportunities of financial investments. 
Banks’ leverage, measured as the ratio of total liabilities to own funds, is declining in all the 
major countries. In the United States, that of the ten largest banks has been halved since 
2007; the effects on the overall financing of the economy have been limited, thanks to the 
contribution of the markets; bonds account for more than 40 per cent of firms’ borrowing. 
Banks’  leverage  has  also  fallen  sharply  in  the  euro  area,  as  a  result  of  both  capital 
increases  and  the  contraction  in  credit.  Since  2007  loans  to  firms  have  diminished  in 
relation to GDP by five percentage points, to 42 per cent. The compensatory possibilities 
offered  by  the financial  market  are modest:  at  the  end  of  2014  bonds accounted for  just 
over  10  per  cent  of firms’ financial  debt.  Failing  a  marked  increase  in their  self-financing 
capacity,  an  overly  rapid  deleveraging  of  banks’  balance  sheets  would  end  up  having 
procyclical  effects  on  the  economy,  threatening  to  create  a  vicious  circle  between  the 
reduction of credit and the erosion of productive activity. 
The construction of a diversified system that can offer the economy the necessary financial 
support – not in the shadows but in full transparency – cannot be deferred. The European 
Commission has put forward proposals for the creation of a Capital Markets Union by 2019. 
The  proposed  reforms  aim  at  removing  the  obstacles  to  equity  and  debt  capital  raising, 
especially  on  the  part  of  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  and  across  borders.  The 
success  of  the  initiative  requires  that  progress  also  be  made  in  the  harmonization  of 
company, bankruptcy and tax laws. 
In  Italy,  important  measures  have  been  taken  to  strengthen  the  capital  market.  Equity 
issuance  by  firms  has  been  encouraged  by  mostly  eliminating  the  tax  advantages  of  debt 
financing. Tax benefits have also been introduced for stock-exchange listing and for venture 
capital funds, along with incentives for bond issuance by unlisted companies. The possibility 
of  making  loans  has  been  extended  to  insurance  companies,  and  credit  funds  have  been 
regulated.  An  additional  contribution  will  come  from  the  reform  of  non-bank  financial 
intermediation,  implementation  of  which  is  at  an  advanced  stage.  The  results  of  these 
measures are positive, but much work remains to be done, including in the field of financial 
information and education. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Supervision and Banking Union 
The  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  became  operational  on  4  November  2014.  Its  launch 
was preceded by the comprehensive assessment of the balance sheets of the euro-area’s 
largest banking groups, which was designed to increase transparency and confidence. It was 
the  first  test  of  the  new  system,  requiring  a  close  comparison  of  national  supervisory 
practices and cultures. The results confirmed the Italian banking system’s overall resilience 
to extreme shocks, even though it had received no significant state support during the crisis. 
The  adverse  scenario  hypothesized  in  the  stress  test found  capital  shortfalls  at two  Italian 
banks under scrutiny by the Bank of Italy for some time, both of which are now carrying out 
capital strengthening plans.  
Given the institutional complexity of the new mechanism, the particularly tight deadlines for 
its construction, and the differences in national supervisory practices, the results to date are 
positive.  The  new  supervisory  system’s  operating  rules  have  been  finalized,  the  decision-
making mechanisms are being fine-tuned, and the 2015 supervisory programme, agreed in 
common for the first time, is being implemented. The pooling of experience and know-how 
will take time, requiring profitable cooperation and openness to discussion at every level.  
In recent months work has begun on several major projects; special importance attaches to 
the review of banks’ assessments of asset risk based on internal models previously validated 
by the national authorities. The aim of the exercise is to ensure consistent risk assessment 
and  the  accurate  measurement  of  RWAs.  The  Basel  Committee  is  also  taking  steps  to 
enhance the transparency and comparability of internal models. The Bank of Italy supports 
these objectives fully.  
The capital targets notified by the ECB to the area’s significant banks in February, following 
the  prudential  review  in  2014,  were  broadly  based  on  the  outcome  of  last  year’s 
comprehensive  assessment.  The  criteria  for  establishing  banks’  capital  objectives  in  the 
future  are  now  being  defined.  In  this  phase  of  still  uncertain  recovery,  the  primary 
requirement  of  guaranteeing  the  solidity  of  individual  institutions  must  be  met  without 
undermining their overall ability to supply credit to the economy. 
The  euro  area’s  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  will  become  operational  in  2016,  heralding 
important  changes  and  with  repercussions  for  the  laws  and  practices  governing  crisis 
management, which have differed markedly between countries in the past. The mechanism 
will  make  use  of  the  harmonized  tools  envisaged  under  the  EU  Bank  Recovery  and 
Resolution Directive, which implemented the international recommendations of the Financial 
Stability Board at European level.   
The  mechanism  has  been  designed  to  harmonize  bank  crisis  resolution  policies  in  the  euro 
area, guarantee centralized crisis management for cross-border groups, and mitigate the risks 
associated with the failure of systemically important banks. Once up and running, it will make 
available common resources for the necessary interventions. As with supervision, tasks will be 
divided between the area’s Single Resolution Board and the national authorities in accordance 
with  banks’  characteristics.  A number  of  institutions  will  be  involved  in  making  decisions: the 
Commission,  the  European  Council,  the  ECB,  and  national  supervisory  and  resolution 
authorities.  The  complexity  of  the  process  calls  for  smooth  and  effective  decision-making 
procedures. Any resolution of very big and complex banks will also require the preparation of an 
adequate backstop at European level that can be activated at short notice. It may also prove 
necessary to increase the resources of the Single Resolution Fund, which is financed by the 
banks. 
The  inclusion  of  a  bail-in  provision  in  the  Directive  marks  a  radically  new  approach  to 
resolving bank crises, whereby the necessary resources should be drawn first of all from the 
bank’s shareholders and creditors in order to keep costs down for the taxpayer. The aim is to 
prevent implicit state subsidies from becoming an incentive for opportunistic behaviour and to 
strengthen market discipline. Under this approach a wide range of bank liabilities could be 
bailed-in except, in particular, insured deposits and covered bonds.   
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Investors must be made aware of the risks inherent in the new crisis management system, and 
customers, especially those less able to pinpoint these risks correctly, must be properly informed 
of the fact that if they hold instruments other than deposits and guaranteed liabilities, they may 
have to contribute to the resolution of a bank. In this new context, initiatives to restrict purchases 
of the riskiest instruments to professional investors may merit consideration.  
The time limit for transposing the Directive expired at the end of 2014 and the bail-in provisions 
must be incorporated into Italian law by 1 January 2016. These deadlines must be met as a 
matter of urgency: not just to avoid sanctions by European institutions but also because their 
transposition is essential to guarantee legal certainty and to enable the authorities to perform 
their  new  tasks  using  the  tools  assigned  to  them  by  European  legislation.  In  this  transitional 
phase, in which new tools cannot yet be used and the traditional mechanisms for intervention 
are being obstructed or made inoperable by European rules, resolving bank crises caused by 
recession or malfeasance has been made more difficult. We hope for the rapid passage of the 
enabling law now before Parliament in order for the Government to issue the necessary decrees 
to adapt Italy’s legislative framework to this new phase of Banking Union. 
 Economic regulation cannot ignore market mechanisms. Experience teaches that top-down 
directives are unlikely to hit upon the best paths of growth. There are cases in which public 
intervention  does  not  work  to  the  benefit  of  the  community  and  distorts  the  allocation  of 
resources. Wealth cannot be produced by law, nor can stable jobs be created. And budget 
constraints cannot be ignored except at the cost of severe damage.  
But  where  the  market  runs  up  against  its  limitations,  regulators  can  and  indeed  must 
intervene,  helping  it  to  generate  economic  growth  and  employment.  No  market  works 
efficiently  or  equitably  without  public  institutions  that  enforce  the  rules  of  the  game  and 
guarantee legality and transparency. There can be no solid, balanced development without 
those collective works that the market, by itself, is incapable of supplying. These limits are 
perfectly well known to economic theory; the global crisis has brought them dramatically back 
to the forefront of our attention. 
In  the  financial  sector,  market  failures  are  not  infrequent.  There  are  certainly  abuses  and 
predatory  acts,  which  the  authorities,  including  banking  supervisors,  must  prevent  as 
effectively  as  possible  and  sanction  severely.  There  are  also  information  asymmetries, 
problems of coordination of agents’ expectations, mechanisms that amplify price fluctuations 
and that may trigger euphoria or panic and in certain cases sever the link between prices and 
economic reality. At times prices can lose their essential function of guiding the allocation of 
resources, helping to orient the choices of consumers, firms and investors. 
Economic  and  financial  governance  requires  accompanying  the  evolution  of  the  market 
without bridling its force. There is no foolproof formula for striking this balance. Clear rules, 
impartially applied, are essential, but so is the ability to make sound and timely decisions in 
the light of circumstances. 
In  Europe,  public  regulation  and  action  in  economic  and  financial  affairs  are  now  largely 
common  matters,  no  longer  reserved  to  single  states.  The  transfers  of  sovereignty  in  this 
field, in part owing to the shock wave of the crisis, have been very substantial indeed; shared 
responsibility  is  increasingly  the  rule,  not  the  exception.  This  applies  to  monetary  policy, 
since last year it applies to banking supervision, and starting next year it will apply to bank 
resolution. Common policies regulate commerce, agriculture and fishing. Competition policy, 
with its rules, is an essential instrument for ensuring the proper working of the single market. 
The further integration advances and the more pressing and global the challenges become, 
the more the European Union’s governance capability must be strengthened. Steps ahead 
have been taken: rules, institutions, safety nets are being progressively placed in common. 
Although the path is not always straightforward, the progress made is undeniable and must 
continue. Within the Commission in particular, a technical core, the custodian of the common 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  rules, coexists with the embryo of a politically responsible government. A synthesis must be 
found  in  the  interests  of  the  proper  functioning  of  the  internal  market  and  the  European 
economy. 
The  authorities  responsible  for  monetary  policy  and  for  banking  supervision,  whose 
independence from political institutions is sanctioned by the European rules, seek to strike a 
balance  between  rules  and  discretion:  neither  arbitrary  power  nor  blinkered,  acritical 
application  of  the  rules.  In  the  appropriate  ways  and  at  the  opportune  time,  actions  and 
decisions are made accountable. Attention is paid both to the inefficiencies of the State and 
to  those  of  the  market.  In  monetary  policy,  this  explains  recourse  to  unconventional 
measures;  in  banking  supervision,  it  explains  the  effort  to  achieve  an  equilibrium  –  which 
does  not  mean  laxity  –  between  microprudential  intervention  at  individual  institutions  and 
macroprudential considerations relating to the overall stability of the financial system. 
Substantial  observance  of  the  rules  on  market  protection  and  equal  competition  remains 
indispensable. But in assessing the public role in the prevention and resolution of crises, and 
not only financial crises, greater consideration needs to be given to the characteristics that 
distinguish  policies  designed  to  activate  market  mechanisms  from  state  aid  that  distorts 
competition. 
The  national  authorities,  technical  and  political,  are  essential  to  the  European  decision-
making process. It is up to each Member State to play its part in the common interest, not 
neglecting  national  interests  and  priorities  but  advancing  them  effectively  within  the 
European arena. In the difficult and sometimes tense debate between members, the voices 
best able to gain a hearing are those of the countries that are acting successfully at home 
and  fully  honouring  their  commitments.  Let  this  be  a  spur  to  consolidate  and  extend  the 
progress made, in Italy as in our common journey in Europe.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
