  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Facing Malaysia’s current economic challenges 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia),  at  the  Invest  Malaysia  2015  “Facing  Malaysia’s  Current  Economic  Challenges”, 
Kuala Lumpur, 23 April 2015. 
 It gives me great pleasure to be here at Invest Malaysia 2015. This event takes place at a 
time  of  major  transformative  change  in  the  world,  in  the  region  and  in  our  country.  These 
changes  include  the  world  becoming  more  inter-connected,  integrated  and  interdependent 
within  and  across  countries.  It  also  reflects  the significant  shifts  in  demographic  structures 
occurring  in  major  parts  of  the  world  and  the  marked  transformation  in  the  international 
financial  landscape  following  the  international  regulatory  reforms  prompted  by  the  recent 
Global Financial Crisis. Slower but nevertheless equally far-reaching are the changes in the 
institutional  arrangements  that  are  altering  international  and  regional  circumstances.  A 
further  fundamental  change  is  the  greater  reliance  on  unprecedented  and  unconventional 
monetary policy responses that has brought us into uncharted territory. And finally, the world 
is  also  being  transformed  by  the  more  significant  cross-border  financial,  information  and 
talent flows. 
My remarks today will touch on three key areas: the current challenges confronting the global 
and  domestic  economy  in  this  new  environment;  the  intrinsic  strengths  of  the  Malaysian 
economy that will enable us to navigate through these more challenging times; and finally on 
the  new  changing  profile  of  Malaysia’s  investment  landscape  and  what  it  means  for  the 
prospects of our economy. 
Key challenges and prospect for the world and domestic economy 
We meet today at the time when the international economic and financial environment has 
become  immensely  more  challenging.  To  a  large  extent,  this  has  been  due  to  the 
significantly  higher  degree  of  uncertainty  that  has  prevailed  on  several  fronts  in  the  world 
today. Firstly, is the uncertainty about the prospects for global growth in the aftermath of the 
Global Financial Crisis. The persistence of this uncertainty is now having its implication on 
sentiment  and  confidence.  Secondly,  are  the  conditions  in  the  commodity  and  financial 
markets  that  have  become  more  volatile.  The  massive  shifts  in  global  liquidity  are 
precipitating  volatile  capital  flows  with  its  immense  implications  on  the  asset  and  foreign 
exchange markets. 
Thirdly,  is  the  increased  uncertainty  prevailing  in  the  policy  environment  in  the  global 
economy in terms of the extent and timing of policy changes. In particular, is the uncertainty 
with  respect  to  the  timing  of  the  exit  from  the  highly  accommodative  policies  and  the 
implications  of  the  divergent  monetary  policy  stance  that  are  being  pursued  in  the  major 
economies. Fourthly, is the uncertainty related to the implementation of the structural reforms 
to address the structural rigidities and deficiencies that surfaced during the Global Financial 
Crisis. Fifth and finally, are also considerable geopolitical uncertainties prevailing in the world 
today.  Cumulatively,  these  developments  have  compounded  the  uncertainties  surrounding 
the global economy. 
In this environment of great uncertainty, a more moderate recovery of the global economy 
has been projected for 2015. The most pressing challenge, therefore for the global economy, 
is to generate an economic recovery that is balanced and sustainable. Although the growth 
momentum  has  improved  in  a  number  of  major  economies,  the  growth  has  thus  far  been 
modest.  In  addition,  weaknesses  in  several  major  economies  continue  to  point  to  a global 
economy that remains vulnerable to downside risks. While the growth performance in most 
emerging  economies  is  projected  to  moderate,  collectively  emerging  market  economies 
remain  an  important  driver  of growth  of  the  world  economy.  A  less  robust  external  sector, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  slower  domestic  demand  and  specific  domestic  factors  are  amongst  the  reasons  for  this 
growth performance. In Asia, the growth for 2015 is projected to be sustained at 6.4%, while 
growth in the ASEAN-5 is projected to be in the region of 5%. 
A further phenomenon affecting the global economic performance is the significant decline in 
global oil prices. While this has partially offset the weaker-than-expected growth momentum 
in  some  of  the  advanced  countries,  it  has,  in  different  degrees,  adversely  affected  the  oil 
exporting  economies  resulting  in  divergent  growth  performance  across  and  within  regions. 
Overall,  however,  the  global  economy  is  expected  to  benefit  from  the  lower  oil  prices.  A 
further  recent  development  is  the  consequences  of  the  unprecedented  and  divergent 
monetary  policies  being  pursued  in  the  major  economies  which  have  now  resulted  in 
significant  policy  spillovers  to  other  parts  of  the  world.  Against  this  backdrop,  the  financial 
markets are therefore expected to remain in a state of heightened volatility during this year. 
Given the degree of openness of the Malaysian economy and the financial system, we are of 
course  affected  by  these  global  developments.  These  effects,  however,  need  to  be  seen 
from  the  perspective  of  our  underlying  conditions.  Malaysia  is  affected  by  these  external 
developments through trade and capital flows. The diversified structure of our economy and 
of  our  exports  has  reduced  the  impact  of  the  effects  of  the  plummeting  oil  prices  on  the 
economy. While the current account of the balance of payments is expected to narrow, it is 
projected  to  remain  in  surplus. The global  shifts  in  liquidity  have  caused  sizeable  outflows 
from emerging economies, including Malaysia, resulting in volatility in our financial markets 
and depreciations in our currencies. Despite these developments, after a stellar performance 
in 2014, the economy is projected to remain on a steady growth trajectory with an economic 
growth  being  in  the  region  of  4.5  –  5.5%  in  2015  with  the  growth  mainly  being  driven  by 
domestic demand. 
Solid macro economic fundamentals 
Building the foundations and resilience is the best line of defense to deal with the spillovers 
from  external  developments  and  on  future  shocks.  Malaysia  has,  over  several  decades 
demonstrated  time  and  time  again,  the  ability  to  emerge  from  commodity  price  shocks, 
financial crisis and spill overs from disruptions generated from other parts of the world. While 
Malaysia  will  always  be affected  by  such  external  developments, the  strategy  has  been to 
have the flexibility to absorb and adjust and the strength to rapidly rebound. While each crisis 
or  setback  has  been  different,  there  are  several  common  features  that  have  allowed 
Malaysia to rapidly recover from such shocks. 
For  each  respective  major  shock  confronting  our  economy,  Malaysia  has  registered 
V-shaped  recoveries.  This  has  essentially  reflected  the  flexibility  of  the  economy  to  adjust 
and the early and comprehensive policy response. The ensuing periods were often marked 
by  structural  reforms  and  institutional  development  that  were  designed  to  rebuild  the 
fundamentals of the economy, address the weaknesses and vulnerabilities and to forge new 
areas of growth. This has, decade after decade, resulted in vital changes in our economic 
structure, from  being  export-led  to  now  being  predominantly  domestic  demand-driven,  and 
from being over-reliant on specific sectors to having a more diversified economic structure 
with the manufacturing and services sectors having now transitioned to higher value added 
activities. 
In essence, the structure of the economy has now become significantly more diversified in 
terms of sources of growth. While the export sector remains an integral component of our 
economy, domestic demand has now become the key driver of growth, anchored by strong 
private sector activity that now accounts for 70% of GDP. Underpinning the robust domestic 
demand is the sustained consumption spending and the revival of investment activity by the 
private  sector.  On  the  external  balance,  the  more  diversified  exports  and  markets  has 
allowed  the  balance  of  payments  position  to  remain  sound.  Thus,  despite  the  fall  in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  commodity prices, the trade and current account is expected to remain positive, sustained by 
manufactured exports while the financial account is expected to adjust in an orderly manner. 
During  this  same  period,  the  financial  sector  restructuring,  rationalisation  and  reforms,  the 
institutional  development,  the  strengthening  of  the  regulatory,  supervisory  and  legal 
framework and the development of the domestic financial markets have also diversified the 
financial  sector  and  has  enhanced  its  ability  to  disperse  external  shocks  throughout  the 
system.  In  particular,  the  financial  reforms  also  involved  the  transition  to  greater  market 
orientation and more liberalised financial system which has allowed for greater flexibility to 
adjust to the effects of shifts in global liquidity. The now deep and robust financial system is 
also  underpinned  by  high  levels  of  capitalisation  and  sufficient  levels  of  liquidity.  This  has 
ensured  that  financial  intermediation  continues  to  be  effective  in  providing  support  to 
economic activity. 
It is therefore not the recent policies nor the new measures that have placed Malaysia on a 
stronger position to manage the external challenges. Rather it is the economic restructuring 
and financial reforms and development undertaken during the recent two decades and the 
building of several layers of buffers that has allowed us to weather the current challenging 
operating environment. 
Further  solid  fundamentals  include  the  relatively  low  rate  of  inflation,  the  low  levels  of 
unemployment, the high rate of savings and the manageable levels of external debt with the 
majority of debt in medium- to long-term tenures and with more than 40% of the external debt 
being denominated in ringgit. This, together with the ample international reserves, accords 
the  economy  with  the  policy  flexibility  to  manage  external  risks.  The  combination  of  these 
factors will cumulatively enable a more effective policy response to mitigate the impact of any 
external shocks on domestic demand. While monetary policy has remained accommodative 
and  access  to  financing  has  been  enhanced,  wide-ranging  measures  including  macro 
prudential  and  tax  measures  have  been  implemented  to  rein  in  excessive  leverage  and 
excessive  risk-taking  to  ensure  growth  is  achieved  without  compromising  our  future 
prospects. 
Malaysia’s new investment landscape 
As Malaysia progresses, so has the nature and profile of our investments. Compared to the 
1990s,  the  current  investment  landscape  is  driven  by  the  private  sector,  is  geographically 
and sectorally more diverse, and is focused on high value-added activities and new growth 
areas. 
Since 2010, Malaysia has experienced an investment renaissance and continues to benefit 
from a long-standing track record of being a profit centre for large multinational companies. 
Malaysia continues to be a recipient of foreign direct investment (FDI). This is also reinforced 
by a high level of capital spending undertaken by Malaysian companies. Regional economic 
corridors  established  has  also  expanded  and  transformed  the  Malaysian  investment 
landscape  to  be  more  geographically  diverse  and  extending  the  development  throughout 
Malaysia. 
The emergence of new growth areas in Malaysia such as renewable energy (e.g. solar) and 
semiconductors  in  fast-growing  segments  such  as  automotive,  medical  devices  and 
telecommunications,  has  enabled  Malaysia  to  be  plugged  into  the  global  supply  chain. 
Investment  in  the  manufacturing  sector  has  moved  towards  higher  value-added  activities, 
shifting  from  basic  production  and  assembly  to  producing  goods  which  have  advance 
applications such as in the automotive and healthcare sectors. 
As a country which is strategically located within close radius of two of the most populous 
economies in the world, China and India, Malaysia is centrally located in Asia, more broadly, 
and in ASEAN, in particular. With the conception of the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC), 
companies  would  benefit  from  the  stronger  economic  inter  linkages  through  greater  cross 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  border liberalisation and increased intra-ASEAN trade. Firms in this region will gain greater 
market  access  to  630  million  people  that  are  generating  economic  region  that  is  worth 
USD2.4 trillion. 
The increasing importance of Asia in the global economy has raised international interest to 
better  understand  Asia  –  the  economies,  businesses  and  the  people  that  comprise  the 
region. On that note, I would like to mention that Bank Negara Malaysia has entered into a 
collaboration  agreement  with  the  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology  Sloan  School  of 
Management (MIT Sloan) to establish the Asia School of Business (ASB) in Kuala Lumpur. 
ASB  is  envisioned  to  be  a  premier  business  school  that  develops  transformative  and 
principled leaders that will contribute to a better future and the advancement of the emerging 
world. 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks. We  are  now  experiencing  a  phase  of  modest growth  in  the 
global  economy,  in  an  environment  that  is  characterised  by  heightened  uncertainty  and 
volatile  financial  markets.  The  Malaysian  economy  has  withstood  these  challenging  times, 
supported  by  our  strong  initial  conditions  and  early  and  comprehensive  policy  responses. 
The  intrinsic  strength  of  the  economy,  reinforced  with  policies  to  encourage  greater 
investments that would serve to ensure greater economic sustainability for the future. Finally, 
active  regionalisation  is  an  important  strategy  for  Asia  to  enhance  regional  economic 
prosperity.  Malaysia  actively  participates  in  the  efforts  to  strengthen  linkages  within  the 
ASEAN  community  and  to  creating  opportunities  to  foster  greater  economic  integration. 
These efforts will place ASEAN on a path to realising its economic potential and enable the 
region to collectively prosper. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
