  Carl-Ludwig Thiele: The euro − past pitfalls and future challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Carl-Ludwig  Thiele,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the People’s Bank of China School of Finance, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 
22 September 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dear Professor Li, 
Dear Professor Kang, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am delighted to have the opportunity to be here in Beijing to talk to you about Europe and 
the  euro  –  about  the  background  and  particular  features  of  European  monetary  union,  its 
pitfalls, which have placed Europe under great strain, and the challenges that we need to 
overcome if Europe is to remain a reliable player. 
European monetary union has its peculiarities, which makes it difficult to compare it with any 
other single currency area. It is only when one is aware of these particular features and the 
historical  backdrop  against  which  this  currency  area  has  emerged  that  it  is  possible  to 
understand the causes of the crisis in the euro area – and the steps needed to overcome 
them. 
In my presentation, I will attempt to view European unification, a stable European monetary 
union and a prosperous euro area through the eyes of a realist. However, Walter Hallstein, 
the first President of the European Commission, apparently had a special kind of realist in 
mind  when  he  said:  “Whoever  does  not  believe  in  miracles  in  European  matters  is  not  a 
realist.” 
I will come back to this at the end of my speech. 
European unification 
2. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
A united Europe is of major significance to Germany. This is not only because Germany is an 
integral part of Europe but also because the Germans feel a particular obligation to promote 
European unification. The reasons for this are largely historical. 
A  glance  back  in  history  shows  just  how  important  mutual  understanding  and  amicable 
relations are for the countries of Europe. 
The First World War broke out just over 100 years ago. This war has been etched into the 
memory of so many Europeans. The grim consequences of war are still fresh in our minds: a 
disturbingly high number of civilian and military victims, the wartime economy, hundreds of 
thousands impoverished or starved to death and survivors deeply traumatised. This list could 
go on and on. 
And the Second World War began only 21 years after the end of the First World War. It was 
a war in which unprecedented crimes were perpetrated, millions were left dead and Europe 
was subsequently divided into two blocs. 
After suffering so much at the hands of war, the west European countries strived for deeper 
European integration, for a united Europe. 
The reasons for this were many and varied. Securing peace within Europe was undoubtedly 
the dominant rationale. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
The relationship between European neighbours France and Germany played a key role in 
this  context.  Hostility  between  the  two  nations,  be  it  overt  or  latent,  had  persisted  for 
centuries.  This  so-called  “Franco-German  enmity”  was  surmounted  in  the  wake  of  the 
devastating Second World War and developed over time into a Franco-German friendship, 
an engine driving the process of European unification and integration. 
However,  belonging  to  a  community  of  values  was  of  particular  importance  to  Germany 
following the Hitler dictatorship and the Holocaust. 
Konrad Adenauer, the first Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, expressed this as 
follows: “The unity of Europe was the dream of a few. It became the hope of many. Today it 
has become a necessity for all of us.” 
But there was also a desire to sustainably improve Europe’s economic prosperity. 
It is not incidental that European integration began by stepping up economic integration. 
After  the  Second  World  War  ended,  progress  was  made  on  various  fronts,  culminating 
initially in the single European market. 
The  foundations  of  this  single  European  market  were  the  “four  basic  freedoms”:  the  free 
movement of people, goods, services and capital. 
But it became evident at an early stage that economic integration in Europe could only really 
take off if it was accompanied by a stable single currency. 
As far back as the start of the 1970s, there existed a plan to establish a European economic 
and monetary union that was to be fully implemented by 1980. 
Ultimately,  progress  was  not  so  rapid  after  all.  No  serious  attempt  to  establish  monetary 
union was made until Jacques Delors took over the presidency of the European Commission 
in the late 1980s. 
The Maastricht Treaty was later signed by EU member states in 1992. 
European monetary union and its regulatory framework 
3. 
In  1999,  the  long-cherished  dream  of  European  monetary  union  became  true,  marking  a 
major step towards deeper European integration. 
Introducing a single currency had tangible benefits. 
Prices of goods could be more easily compared throughout the member states. 
Exchange rate risk was eliminated and transaction costs fell. 
This in turn promoted trade, not only within the monetary union but also with the 
rest of the world. 
Money and capital markets converged further. 
And,  last  but  not  least,  the  euro  brought  with  it  a  period  of  remarkable  price 
stability for the member states. 
At this point, it is important to understand that the European monetary union is a thoroughly 
unique  single  currency  area.  While  the  19  sovereign  states  within  it  have  committed  to 
comply  with  a  single  monetary  policy,  they  remain  responsible  for  their  own  fiscal  and 
economic policies. 
This  means that  a  single  monetary  policy,  which  has  the  clear  objective  of  ensuring  price 
stability, is accompanied by 19 national fiscal policies. 
As you can see, the principle of subsidiarity is constitutive for Europe: as many decisions as 
possible should continue to be made at the national, or even the local, level. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Former United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger once highlighted the EU’s complex 
structure by asking: “Who do I call if I want to call Europe?” 
Nowadays, he would have to call 19 telephone numbers to discuss fiscal policy matters, as 
19  national  governments  make  decisions  regarding  public  spending  and  any  borrowing 
required for financing purposes. 
The universal rule that political processes can easily lead to increased spending and, as a 
result, to excessive borrowing as well applies far more to a monetary union with independent 
national fiscal policies than to central governments. 
This  is  because,  in  a  monetary  union,  the  negative  effects  of  a  sharp  rise  in  debt  in  one 
country can spill over, at least in part, to the other member states. 
Why is that the case? 
Generally speaking, the same rules that apply to a private borrower also apply to a country: 
the higher the debt burden, the lower the creditworthiness. 
So,  in  a  properly  functioning  capital  market,  a  country  that  is  more  indebted  is  generally 
required to pay higher interest on its sovereign debt. 
However, things are different in a monetary union, as capital market participants assume that 
the member states belong to an “inseparable union with a common destiny” as part of which 
they  will  help  each  other  out  financially  in  emergency  situations,  forming  a  kind  of  joint-
liability scheme. 
As a result, debt interest rises not only for the individual, more indebted country, but usually 
also  for  the  other  member  states,  which  are  expected  to  provide  solidarity  and  financial 
assistance. 
Yet, for the country creating more debt, interest rates tend to rise less strongly. 
Monetary union, therefore, holds incentives for an individual member state to run up higher 
debt as the negative effects of greater indebtedness – meaning higher borrowing rates – are 
partly borne by the other member states. 
This can be compared with the overfishing of the seas as it, too, affects both the community 
of neighbouring countries as well as the country causing the problem. 
The  architects  of  monetary  union  were  well  aware  of  the  problem  of  incentives.  Which  is 
exactly why they took precautions. 
It  was,  therefore,  laid  down  from  the  start  in  the  Treaty  of  Maastricht  that  a  country  is 
forbidden from  assuming  the  debt of  another country  or  the  community  of  states. In  other 
words, this laid down the foundation for a general no bail-out principle. 
The  Maastricht  Treaty  is,  thus,  guided  by  the  principle  of  individual  responsibility,  or  the 
balance of liability and control. 
In  the  concise  words  of  German  economist  Walter  Eucken:  “Whoever  reaps  the  benefits 
must also bear the liability.” 
Or, in very down-to-earth terms: Whoever orders, pays. 
An additional security threshold for monetary union as a stability union is the prohibition of 
monetary  financing  of  governments.  The  central  banks  of  the  Eurosystem,  that  is  the 
European  Central  Bank  and  the  19  national  central  banks,  are  forbidden  from  directly 
financing euro-area countries. 
In order for this ban on monetary financing of governments to be implemented in practice, 
the independence of the Eurosystem from political instructions was enshrined at the same 
time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Political  decision-makers  cannot,  therefore,  force  the  central  banks  of  the  Eurosystem  to 
grant  member  states  loans  or  directly  purchase  their  sovereign  paper.  Ultimately,  these 
measures could contravene the mandate of ensuring price stability, causing lasting harm to 
the Eurosystem’s credibility and thus to the very foundations of a successful monetary policy. 
Germany has, in the past, had bad experiences with central banks which were not free of 
political  lobbying.  For  example,  expenditure  on  arms  in  the  First World  War  was  financed 
directly by the central bank, which essentially catered to the needs of the government. The 
consequence was a complete devaluation of the Reichsmark. 
By contrast, the independence of the Eurosystem was firmly anchored. 
First,  institutionally,  by  prohibiting  national  and  supranational  institutions  from  issuing  the 
ECB or the national central banks with instructions. 
And  second,  functionally,  by  awarding  the  sole  prerogative  regarding  strategies  and 
measures to ensure price stability to the Eurosystem. 
The independence of the central banks is further safeguarded by specific debt ceilings, which 
are intended to prevent member states from accumulating excessive debt. 
A country’s public deficit is not supposed to exceed a maximum of 3% of its GDP 
within a one-year period. 
Moreover,  a  country’s  overall  sovereign  debt  should  not  go  beyond  60%  of  its 
annual GDP. 
These rules are designed to prevent governments from exerting pressure on monetary policy 
makers, as lower interest rates allow governments to borrow more cheaply. Or due to the 
fact that existing debt is devalued by a higher rate of inflation. So far so good. 
Crisis 
4. 
However,  things  turned  out  differently  than  expected  –  above  all  because  the  carefully 
drafted financial policy rules were not complied with. 
Most  countries  were  far  from  having  a  balanced  budget,  and  public  deficits  often  even 
exceeded the three-percent threshold. 
Debt levels in the member states were often not lowered either. The exact opposite was the 
case in some countries for that matter. 
At the same time, market participants did not trust sufficiently in the no bail-out principle I 
touched on earlier. 
Despite  the  very  large  differences  in  debt  levels  and  economic  developments  among  the 
euro-area member states, they aligned their risk premiums to a great extent, which, in turn, 
led to the already strongly indebted countries becoming more indebted. 
In the end, confidence in the capital markets vanished with regard to whether the future crisis 
countries would still be able to service their sovereign debt in accordance with the rules. This 
culminated in investors granting these countries loans only at very high interest margins or 
withholding them altogether. 
At the same time, it became clear that the countries that were later hit by crisis had failed to 
set up sound and sustainable economic structures that were beneficial for growth. 
Instead, enterprises and households often took advantage of the substantially lower interest 
rates as a result of joining the euro area and ran up great amounts of debt. 
And rather than investing this money in expanding competitiveness, it was used for private 
and government consumption. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Wages increased to a considerably larger extent than productivity, with price competitiveness 
eroding as a result. 
And  last  but  not  least,  cheap  loans  and  capital  inflows  fuelled  the  real  estate  bubbles  in 
Ireland and Spain. 
This is why this “special boom”, which was caused by low interest rates, was anything but 
sustainable  and  sparked  the  crisis  in  Europe.  Although,  to  be  precise,  “the  crisis”  was  a 
conglomerate  of  various  crises,  encompassing financial  market  crisis,  economic  crisis  and 
sovereign debt crisis. 
Above all, however, it is a crisis of confidence, the complexity of which is also reflected in the 
fact that the euro area has been battling to overcome this crisis for seven years now. 
Overcoming the crisis 
5. 
How can this finally be achieved? Or, put differently, what lessons are to be learned from the 
crisis? 
To win back the confidence lost and to return to a path of sustainable growth, we need to 
tackle the root causes of the crisis instead of treating the symptoms. 
The economic situation in the euro area may be recovering, but there are still some structural 
challenges to resolve. And until the causes of the crisis have been eliminated, we cannot be 
sure that it will not pop up again. The most recent discussions on Greece have shown this 
only too well. 
Measures in the member states 
5.1 
First of all, the crisis countries themselves must eliminate the causes of the crisis at home. 
For  one  thing,  they  have  to  ensure  that  their  public  debt  is  sustainable.  This  needs  to  be 
done before consumer and investor confidence can return. 
Indeed, as the saying goes, “you can’t borrow your way out of a debt crisis”. 
Therefore, lasting confidence can only be built on a foundation of sound public finances. 
In  addition  to  having  budgetary  rigour,  member  states  also  need  to  implement  growth-
enhancing structural reforms. 
Many of these have already been set in motion as a result of the sovereign debt crisis. As 
such, not only have structural budget deficits been significantly lowered, but the deterioration 
of international competitiveness has also been largely reversed. 
But there is still some way to go in terms of making the labour markets more flexible, further 
liberalising the goods and services markets and cutting bureaucracy. 
To begin with, these adjustment processes are a burden on the economic recovery of many 
of the crisis countries. However, the subsequent positive growth effects more than make up 
for this. 
Spain,  in  particular,  is  currently  experiencing  this  first-hand  and  is  already  reaping  the 
benefits  of  the  structural  reforms  it  has  implemented.  Since  2009,  its  structural  budget 
balance has improved by roughly seven percentage points and its labour market has been 
made  more  flexible.  Both  of  these  achievements  were  decisive  factors  in  enabling  the 
Spanish economy to lift itself out of recession quite some time ago and to exhibit its current 
strong growth. The oppressively high levels of unemployment are also gradually decreasing. 
The benefits for Spain will be all the higher in the coming years if it remains fully faithful to 
this reform process. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
There is a saying I like that practically passes as a Chinese proverb in Germany. It reads: 
“When the winds of change are blowing ... some people build walls and some people build 
windmills.” Well, the Spanish have built quite a few windmills in recent years. 
In the first half of this year, the world’s attention was focused on Greece to a much greater 
extent than on Spain and its successful reform process. In light of the refusal of the Greek 
government to accept the bail-out conditions, and due to acute financing needs, there was 
even speculation about whether the country would potentially have to leave the euro area or 
even the European Union itself. 
This  risk  has  since  vanished,  thanks  to  the  adoption  in  August  of  a  third  assistance 
programme  for  Greece,  which  is  subject  to  strict  conditions  and  temporarily  resolved  the 
country’s funding bottleneck. However, further payments are contingent on Greece fulfilling 
these conditions. 
In  addition,  the  central  challenge  facing  Greece  lies  in  implementing  structural  reform 
measures for greater competitiveness as well as achieving sound government finances in the 
long term and establishing a functioning administration. 
Only  then  will  Greece  overcome  its  current  period  of  weakness  and  embark  on  a  path  of 
growth. 
Reforming the regulatory framework 
5.2 
However, aside from the unsound developments in European periphery countries, the euro 
area’s regulatory framework also needs to be strengthened. The principle of aligning liability 
and control must once again be more rigorously enforced. 
This  is  because,  over  the  course  of  combating  the  crisis,  the  element  of  joint  liability  has 
been  increasingly  expanded.  This,  in  turn,  has  severely  disrupted  the  balance  between 
liability and control. 
The crisis countries were granted large-scale emergency loans by other member 
states and the European Stabilisation Mechanism. 
But the Eurosystem also reacted, for example by not only lowering interest rates, 
but also by loosening the requirements for monetary policy collateral. 
In addition, the Eurosystem acquired government bonds of crisis countries on the 
capital markets in order to ensure monetary policy had a more uniform impact. 
However,  this  propelled  the  Eurosystem  deep  into  uncharted  and  dangerous 
territory, blurring the boundary to prohibited monetary financing of governments. 
That being said, all parties are well aware that monetary policy is unable to resolve the crisis 
in the euro area, and is merely buying time for policy makers to implement the necessary 
measures. 
In order to permanently safeguard monetary union as a union for stability, it is important to 
bring liability and control back into a more balanced position. 
Essentially, this can be done in two ways: 
either  the  euro  area  evolves  into  a  genuine  fiscal  union,  where  fiscal  and  tax 
policies are coordinated centrally at European level ... 
...  or  a  Maastricht  Framework  2.0  is  established  in  which  the  principle  of 
individual responsibility is reinforced. 
However, I do not see a majority in any euro-area country supporting the communitisation of 
fiscal and tax policies. At the current juncture, reinforcing the existing regulatory framework 
and  strengthening  the  principle  of  individual  responsibility  therefore  seems  like  a  more 
realistic  way  of  bringing  liability  and  control  in  Europe’s  monetary  system  back  into 
equilibrium. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Europe has already taken some steps in the right direction in this regard. 
 For  example,  the  refined  fiscal  rules  require  balanced  budgets  or  even  slight 
surpluses. 
In  addition,  procedures  have  been 
macroeconomic imbalances. 
identify  and 
introduced 
rectify 
to 
However, these rules need to be enforced. 
And  this  is  where  we  have  a  clear  deficit.  “Flexibility”  is  the  European  Commission’s  new 
watchword when it comes to interpreting how the fiscal framework should be implemented. 
And the scope for flexible interpretation has actually widened over the past few years on the 
back of changes to the budgetary rules. 
However, sustained economic growth cannot be built on a foundation of resurgent expanding 
public debt. For as I already mentioned, lasting confidence and long-term growth are only 
possible through sound public finances. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thus far I have touched on two key areas where there are lessons to be learned from the 
crisis: 
first, that individual countries need to implement reforms themselves and 
second, the need to strengthen and strictly adhere to a regulatory framework in 
which liability and control at the national level are balanced – as envisaged for 
the euro area from the start. 
European banking union 
5.3 
Moreover, as the crisis unfolded, the financial system was exposed as the Achilles’ heel, not 
just in Europe but on an international scale. 
As  a  result,  steps  were  taken  at  the  G20  level  to  tighten  banks’  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements, thus giving rise to Basel III. 
Compounding this, weaknesses were identified in Europe’s banking supervision structures. 
National  supervisors  were  often  found  to  assess  their  own  country’s  banking  system  too 
favourably, with the effect that failing banks and stumbling states dragged one another down. 
Only by destroying the harmful nexus between banks and governments will we be able to 
manage these contagion effects. 
And this is where the nascent European banking union comes into play. It represents a major 
step towards deepening European integration and consists of two elements: 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), which operates under the aegis of the ECB, has 
been in place for just under 12 months. Its purpose is to ensure consistently high supervisory 
standards so as to prevent banks, at an early stage, from getting into difficulties. 
But such problems cannot be entirely ruled out, not even under a stringent regulatory regime. 
After all, the possibility of failure is a hallmark of any market economy. 
It is therefore important to be able to allow banks to fail without governments – and thus also 
taxpayers – having to foot the bill. For banks must also be subject to the liability principle, 
without which no market economy can function properly. 
This is the rationale behind the launch of the European Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) 
in 2016. The mechanism will make sure that non-viable institutions can be withdrawn from 
the market in an orderly fashion provided this does not jeopardise financial stability. And this 
will be done according to a clearly defined liability cascade. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  If a bank is wound down in future, shareholders and creditors will be first in line to 
bear the costs. 
Only  when  this  source  of  funds  proves  insufficient  will  there  be  recourse  to  a 
single resolution fund financed by the entire European banking sector. 
And only as a last resort will taxpayers in the respective country, or even in other 
member states, be called upon to help shoulder the burden. 
In other words, beginning in 2016, institutions subject to supervision at the European level 
will also be resolved at this level. This will facilitate closer European integration. 
Together, these two constructs, the SSM on the one hand and the SRM on the other, form a 
meaningful whole, in which liability and control are balanced. 
Abolishing the preferential treatment of government bonds 
5.4 
If  the  close  ties  between  governments  and  banks  are  to  be  loosened,  in  future  loans  to 
sovereigns must no longer be deemed free of risk in regulatory terms. 
It  follows  that  government  bonds  should  henceforth  be  treated  similarly  to  loans  to 
enterprises and households, meaning they should be backed by capital commensurate with 
the risk. And limits also need to be applied to such exposures, as is the case with loans to 
private  debtors.  This  would  prevent  risk  from  becoming  concentrated  on  banks’  balance 
sheets. 
These topics are now being deliberated by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and 
the  European  Economic  and  Financial  Committee,  and  rightly  so.  I  appreciate  that  capital 
requirements  and  large  exposure  limits  make  the  task  of  financing  governments  more 
complicated  and  consequently  more  expensive.  Thus,  gradual  phase-ins  are  undeniably  a 
good idea. However, this is no reason to refrain from change. 
5.5  Sovereign insolvency code 
Looking ahead, there is an additional area where new regulatory provisions are required. In 
extreme cases, sovereigns, too, must in future be able to declare themselves insolvent, as 
the liability principle should also apply to them. Otherwise, the Eurosystem could come under 
pressure to finance cash-strapped governments at knock-down terms. 
So  what happens  when a sovereign defaults? It doesn’t mean that the country concerned 
disappears off the map in the way that a company might. 
Rather,  the  government  in  question  finds  itself  no  longer  able  to  service  its  debt  as 
contractually agreed, normally meaning that this debt has to be restructured. 
The legal basis for this would have to be provided by a sovereign insolvency code. In my 
opinion, this is an essential prerequisite for an enduringly sustainable regulatory framework 
in which fiscal policy remains a national responsibility. 
Conclusion 
6. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
In my presentation, I have shone a light on the history of European integration and the crisis 
in the euro area. I have also looked towards the future, and outlined the challenges that lie 
ahead and how we might best deal with them. 
The most significant aspects are as follows. 
It is the member states who hold the key to sustainably overcoming the crisis in 
Europe. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The European banking system, the member states and the European regulatory 
framework have to be made more crisis-resistant so that the euro area can return 
to a path of sustainable growth. 
As I mentioned earlier on, there’s plenty of good news at all three of these levels. 
But that doesn’t mean we can declare the crisis over. 
The adjustment process in the crisis countries is likely to continue for quite some 
time. 
The  tightened  regulatory  framework  needs  to  be  applied  more  forcefully  in 
practice and additional measures will have to be introduced. 
Ultimately, the only way to overcome the crisis ... 
... is to gradually rebuild confidence. 
But this is only possible if the euro area consistently maintains its stability course. 
As far as the euro area is concerned, I see no reason to be overly pessimistic. What matters 
is that the member states continue to muster the will to rigorously tackle the root causes of 
the crisis. 
I  began  this  speech  with  a  reference  to  Walter  Hallstein’s  conviction  to  the  effect  that: 
“Whoever does not believe in miracles in European matters is not a realist.” But where do I 
stand with regard to this quotation now that my speech is coming to a close? 
Well, as I see things, we do not need any miracles in Europe today. 
The  foundations  for  achieving  stability  in  the  euro  area  are  already  in  place. 
However,  these  need  to  be  enhanced  in  some  important  respects  and  they 
should be rigorously enforced. 
It will not be a walk in the park. But neither is it the stuff of miracles. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
