  Ravi Menon: Smart regulation and sustainable insurance growth 
Speech by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the 
Insurance Institute of London, London, 12 May 2015. 
 Mr Stephen Riley, President of the Insurance Institute of London 
Mr John Nelson, Chairman, Lloyd’s of London 
Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
I  wish  to  thank  John  for  inviting  me  to  speak  to  you  today.  It  is  a  privilege  to  address 
members of this esteemed Institute, and a pleasure to do so in a heritage building of such 
architectural and historic interest. 
I have been to this building before. And my first thought as Lloyd’s Building came into view, 
along with its plumbing, stairways and lift shafts, was transparency. So it is apt that in the 
same spirit of transparency, I should make a couple of disclosures: 
• 
• 
But John has kindly assured me that the musings of a central banker and regulator from the 
Far East counts towards fulfilling your continuing professional development requirements. So 
for my speech today, I will offer an overview of MAS’ roles as central bank and integrated 
supervisor, our approach to regulating and developing the financial sector, and prospects for 
the insurance industry in Asia. 
one, I am not an actuary or an accountant, and 
two, I am not responsible for Solvency II. 
MAS as central bank, integrated supervisor, and financial sector promoter 
Those of you who have visited Singapore might have come across one of the highlights of 
our  architectural  heritage  –  the  black  and  white  colonial  bungalows.  Combining  British 
aesthetic  sensibilities  with  local  adaptations  to  a  tropical  climate,  these  former  colonial 
residences  exude  stately  elegance  while  offering  cool,  airy  comfort  come  monsoon rain  or 
equatorial shine. 
The  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  (MAS)  itself  operates  out  of  a  decidedly  functional 
office block. Thankfully, the work that the MAS does is rather more interesting. 
• 
MAS houses under one roof central banking, financial surveillance, and integrated 
supervision. 
MAS is also responsible for developing a sound and progressive financial centre. 
• 
MAS’ single agency model sets us apart from other financial regulators. Many jurisdictions 
operate  on  what  is  commonly  known  as  the  twin  peaks  model  of  regulation.  Under  this 
model, separate agencies have responsibilities for prudential oversight and market conduct 
respectively. Prudential oversight is concerned principally with the safety and soundness of 
institutions  while  market  conduct  is  focused  on  effective  functioning  of  markets  and 
consumer protection. Australia, Canada, and the UK are among the leading jurisdictions with 
twin peaks regulators. 
Like  the  black  and  white  bungalows,  MAS’  unique  mandate  of  central  bank,  integrated 
supervisor,  and  promoter  of  financial  sector  development,  was  born  partly  out  of 
circumstance.  For  a  small  country  like  Singapore  with  limited  human  capital,  the  single 
agency model allows MAS to more effectively utilise available expertise and exploit synergies 
to achieve our objectives for the financial sector and wider economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  And  like  the  blending  of  British  and  tropical  themes  in  the  bungalows,  bringing  together 
central  banking,  integrated  supervision,  and  developmental  functions  serves  important 
practical purposes. 
First, being an integrated supervisor gives us better insights into the full range of activities 
that a financial institution engages in and hence facilitates more holistic financial supervision. 
Integrated supervision is consistent with the broad range of services that financial institutions 
provide as well as the blurring of distinctions across financial products that we see today. 
• 
Banks  offer  their  clients  a  suite  of  financial  services,  including  investment  and 
insurance products. 
Insurance companies offer financial planning solutions that incorporate elements of 
savings deposits and investments, in addition to protection. 
 There  are  synergies  across  prudential  regulation  and  market  conduct  regulation.  Market 
conduct  issues  provide  useful  perspectives  on  the  prudential  safety  and  soundness  of 
individual  firms.  How  financial  institutions  treat  their  customers  speaks  a  great  deal  about 
their  corporate  values,  ethical  standards,  and  quality  of  risk  management  and  internal 
controls. 
Second,  being  a  central  bank  and  a  financial  regulator  allows  us  to  harness  synergies 
between macroeconomic analysis and financial stability oversight. 
During the Global Financial Crisis and subsequent Eurozone crisis, macroeconomic shocks, 
financial  market  stresses,  and  institution-specific  vulnerabilities  interacted  in  complex  ways 
with consequences for both systemic stability and the safety of individual institutions. 
The  two-way  flow  of  information  and  sharing  of  perspectives  between  the  central  banking 
and  supervisory  arms  of  MAS  proved  invaluable  in  helping  us  assess  a  rapidly  evolving 
situation and co-ordinate appropriate policy responses in a timely manner. 
Having central banking and financial supervision within one organisation is not the only way 
to  achieve  better  financial  stability  outcomes.  It  makes  sense  in  a  small  country  like 
Singapore.  Larger  jurisdictions  have  sought  the  same  outcomes  through  strengthened  co-
ordination  mechanisms  among  the  various  agencies  whose  work  contributes  to  financial 
stability.  The  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  in  the  US  and  the  Financial  Policy 
Committee in the UK are two good examples. 
Third, being a financial regulator as well as promoter of financial sector development helps 
ensure that regulation is not only robust but sensitive to the broader needs of the economy. 
Lest  there  be  any  doubt,  financial  stability  is  our  overriding  objective.  But  a  safe  financial 
sector  that  does  not  help  to  meet  the  needs  of  businesses  and  individuals  or  support 
economic growth and development misses its purpose. Sound regulation is about promoting 
a robust yet vibrant financial sector that supports the wider needs of the economy. 
Our experience has been we can achieve better stability and development outcomes within 
one  organisation  with  a  shared  purpose  rather  than  separate  agencies  with  possibly 
conflicting goals. 
Smart regulation – sound but purposeful 
I would describe our approach – or at least our goal – as smart regulation: regulation that is 
sound yet purposeful. 
MAS seeks to do this in three ways. 
• 
First,  regulation  is  aligned  with  the  best  international  standards  but  is  also 
appropriate to the risks in domestic markets. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Second,  regulation  is  complemented  with  intensive  supervision  that  calibrates 
responses according to the risk profile and impact of individual institutions. 
Third,  regulation  is  focused  on  outcomes  rather  than  prescribed  checklists  and  is 
implemented in a way that seeks to minimise compliance burden. 
 Aligned with international standards and appropriate to domestic risks 
MAS’ regulatory framework is aligned with global standards and principles. Indeed, we play 
an active role in developing many of these standards through active participation in various 
international standard setting bodies, including the IAIS. Global standards promote financial 
stability  by  providing  a  more  level  playing  field  for  financial  institutions  and  minimising 
regulatory arbitrage. 
But  financial  markets  are  not  homogeneous  in  their  risk  profiles.  It  is  necessary  to  apply 
regulatory  standards  in  a  manner  that  is  sensitive  and  appropriate  to  the  risks  associated 
with particular markets and activities. 
Take  for  example  our  risk-based  capital  (RBC)  framework  for  insurance.  Insurance 
companies  in  Singapore  have  been  subject  to  RBC  requirements  since  2005,  predating 
Solvency II. At that time, there was no international capital standard for insurers, let alone 
one that is risk-based. But we assessed that maintaining capital buffers to cushion against 
potential losses was relevant to insurance companies as it was to banks. So, we proceeded 
to  put  in  place  capital  requirements  for  insurers  operating  in  Singapore,  even  when  most 
other jurisdictions did not. 
At the same time, we were conscious of the need to apply the capital framework in a manner 
commensurate with the risks posed by different types of insurance activities. 
• 
For example, Lloyd’s Asia syndicates are not subject to the RBC framework. This is 
because  the  Lloyd’s  market  is  approved  and  regulated  by  the  UK  regulator,  and 
premiums are booked in the UK and protected by Lloyd’s central fund. 
Likewise, captives and marine mutuals are not subject to RBC. They are restricted 
to writing business principally for their parent and related corporations, and of their 
own  members  respectively.  The  risk  they  pose  to  the  broader  financial  system  is 
low. 
 Complementing regulation with supervision 
Close,  and  if  necessary  intrusive,  supervision  of  financial  institutions  is  an  important 
complement to industry-wide regulation. Frequent and in-depth monitoring of the institutions 
we supervise helps us calibrate our supervisory approach to the particular circumstances of 
each institution. 
An important aspect of supervision is surveillance, which seeks to identify and assess risks 
and  vulnerabilities  that  may  affect  the  financial  system,  including  insurance  companies.  A 
critical component of surveillance is stress testing. 
• 
Since 2005, MAS has been conducting annual stress tests to assess the insurance 
industry’s  preparedness  against  both  macroeconomic  stress  scenarios  and  more 
insurance-specific scenarios. 
The  more  we  can  rely  on  risk-focused  supervision  and  ongoing  surveillance  informed  by 
periodic stress tests, the less we need to design one-size-fits-all rules and regulations that 
seek to cover all risks. 
Outcome-focused regulation and minimising compliance burden 
The third aspect of smart regulation is to focus on desired outcomes. This means articulating 
and  communicating  clearly  the  desired  outcomes  of  regulation  and  allowing  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  institutions  the  latitude to  achieve  these  outcomes  in  ways  that  make  business  sense  and 
minimise compliance burden. 
Consultation on proposed rules and even co-creation of new rules together with industry is 
therefore an important aspect of MAS’ regulatory approach. 
• 
Consultation helps MAS better understand the likely impact of new regulation and 
how it might best be implemented. 
By  involving  industry  and  stakeholders  in  co-creating  regulatory  requirements,  we 
are  able 
industry 
understanding and support. 
to  minimise  unintended  consequences  and 
foster  better 
 Singapore as an Asian insurance hub 
Even as we strengthen and update our regulation and supervision of the insurance industry, 
MAS has been promoting Singapore’s development as an Asian insurance hub. 
Emerging Asia as an insurance growth market 
The  demand  for  insurance  services  is  growing  rapidly  in  Emerging  Asia.  For  a  long  time, 
insurance  growth  lagged  economic  growth  in  Emerging  Asia.  But  this  is  changing,  and 
changing fast. 
• 
Munich Re projects that Asia will account for 40% of the global insurance market by 
2020. 
Five of the top 10 primary growth markets will be in the Asia-Pacific; this includes 
China, India, and Indonesia. 
 There are three structural factors driving demand for insurance in Emerging Asia. 
First, Asia is getting richer. Projections by the IMF show that Emerging Asia will remain the 
fastest  growing  region  in  the  world  over  the  next  decade.  As  incomes  rise  in  Asia, 
governments,  corporates,  and  individuals  will  increasingly  seek  insurance  to  protect  their 
growing economic assets. 
• 
Burgeoning  urbanisation,  infrastructure  development,  and  cross-border  trade  will 
drive demand for commercial and specialty insurance. 
A growing middle class and rising affluence will  underpin a steady increase  in life 
and health insurance penetration rates. 
 Second, Asia is getting older. Asia is facing declining fertility rates, increasing life 
expectancy, and a rapidly ageing population. 
• 
The United Nations projects that, by 2030, Asia’s old age dependency ratio will be 
16%, up from today’s 11%. 
Against this demographic backdrop, public retirement and pension systems in Asia 
remain inadequate. The retirement gap between savings and retirement needs can 
be as high as 13 years. 
This  will  spur  greater  demand  for  private  health  insurance,  annuity  and  other 
retirement security products. 
  Third, Asia is becoming more aware of catastrophic risk. 
• 
Over  the  last  30  years,  Asia  has  borne  the  brunt  of  natural  catastrophe  losses, 
accounting  for  almost  half  of  the  world’s  estimated  economic  losses  from  natural 
disasters.  Yet  less  than  5%  of  the  losses  were  insured,  compared  to  40%  in 
advanced economies. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  At the same time, rapid urbanisation is concentrating ever higher economic wealth in 
exposed  areas.  Eight  out  of  the  ten  global  mega-cities  most  at  risk  from  natural 
perils are located in Asia. They include Jakarta, Kolkata, Manila, and Shanghai. 
 This  large  protection  gap  in  Emerging  Asia  presents  the  global  insurance  industry, 
confronting  mature  markets  and  excess  capacity,  with  a  significant  opportunity  to  deploy 
capital for better returns. 
London and Singapore as complementary insurance centres 
International financial centres in Asia, like Hong Kong and Singapore, as well as domestic 
financial  centres  in  China  and  Korea  are  well-placed  to  meet  this  growing  demand  for 
insurance in Asia. But international financial centres outside Asia – such as London – with 
the  enormous  breadth  of  their  markets,  depth  of  financial  expertise,  and  connectivity  with 
other financial centres – also stand to gain from Asia’s rise. 
On occasion one hears stories of London losing ground as an international insurance centre 
due to tightening regulatory standards and a shift in the global economic centre of gravity to 
emerging markets. But polls and expert opinion also predicted the recent UK election race 
would be neck and neck. On both counts, the numbers prove otherwise. 
• 
London is the undisputed global insurance market for specialty commercial risks – 
insuring  highly  exotic  and  bespoke  risks  from  Formula  1  drivers  to  Cristiano 
Ronaldo’s legs. 
London controls more than 60 billion pounds in premiums, which makes the London 
market twice the size of Bermuda, three times that of Switzerland, and more than 10 
times bigger than Singapore. 
 With its wealth of insurance and specialist risk capacity, London insurance is well positioned 
to ride the growth in Asian demand. But insurers will benefit from closer proximity to markets, 
information, and talents. Global insurers and brokers are responding to a growing preference 
for  local  placements  by  setting  up  local  offices  in  high  growth  markets  to  understand  their 
clients better and to be more responsive to their needs. 
This  is  where  Singapore  and  London  can  play  complementary  roles.  London  with  its 
unparalleled  insurance  expertise  and  experience,  and  Singapore,  with  its  market  proximity 
and client knowledge can collaborate on providing insurance and risk management solutions 
that are, relevant, appropriate and responsive to Asian needs. 
Conclusion 
The fascinating origins of Lloyds, over 300 years ago – in a coffee house where seafarers 
gathered to swap intelligence on their trade – illustrates the enduring power of information, 
networking and the centrality of markets. 
As with Lloyd’s coffee house, the essence of financial centres lies in connecting markets and 
people to provide innovative solutions to further economic prosperity. The rising demand for 
financial  services  in  Asia  offers  tremendous  opportunities  for  London  and  Singapore  to 
strengthen our connections for sustainable insurance growth. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
