  Manuel Sánchez: Expectations for the Mexican economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  2015 
Business Forecast, Chicago Booth Alumni Club of Mexico, Mexico City, 22 January 2015. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  participate  in  Mexico’s  2015  Business  Forecast  meeting, 
organized by the University of Chicago Booth Alumni Club of Mexico. As a fellow Chicago 
alumnus, I feel particularly privileged to speak at this event. 
While forecasts are a time-honored tradition among economists, it is well-known that none of 
us  have  crystal-ball  insight,  particularly  on  short-term  economic  developments.  The  only 
thing  I  can  promise  in this  regard  is  to  make my  best  effort  at reading the  tea  leaves  that 
could give us an idea of our near-term economic future. 
I  will  organize  my  comments  in  two  sections,  talking  first  about  the  external  scenario  and 
second, about possible domestic conditions. As usual, my opinions are entirely my own and 
do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Mexico or its Governing Board. 
The external scenario 
Three main issues will likely define the external context for the Mexican economy in the near 
term. The first, as usual, is the outlook for our country’s most important trading partner, the 
United States. The U.S. economy continues to gain steam, with GDP in the second and third 
quarters  of  last  year  posting  significant  growth,  to  4.6  and  5  percent  respectively,  in 
annualized terms. Year-on-year growth since mid-2011 has been averaging about 2 percent. 
Available data for the fourth quarter 2014 and some leading indicators suggest momentum is 
in place for improvement in 2015. 
Consensus  analysts’  forecasts  are  for  the  U.S.  economy  to  expand  around  3  percent  this 
year  and  next.  The  main  drivers  are  expected  higher  consumption  and  investment  due  to 
personal income gains and improved expectations, and a sustained recovery in the housing 
construction sector.1 
This  scenario  faces  some  potential  challenges.  The  most  significant  downside  risks  stem 
from the possibility of a greater slowdown in the world economy, particularly in the euro zone, 
Japan, and China and its impact on the United States. 
Along with continuous, moderate growth, the U.S. economy has seen a persistent decline in 
the  unemployment  rate,  which  has  fallen  from  the  10  percent  peak  of  the  financial  crisis, 
most  recently  to  5.6  percent.  FOMC-member  unemployment  forecasts  during  the  last  four 
years  have  been  revised  downward  successively.  Reality  has  persistently  surpassed  the 
improving forecasts as the variable has dropped at an even faster-than-foreseen pace. 
An extrapolation of this trend would suggest that unemployment may approach 5 percent, a 
rate consistent with long-term trends, perhaps as early as this year. The firmness of the labor 
market, however, is open to debate, especially  given a diminished labor-force participation 
rate and seemingly low growth in overall labor compensation. 
In view of progress on reduction of unemployment, it is not surprising that FOMC members 
and  markets  alike  anticipate  the  first  Fed  funds  rate  hike  also  this  year.  On  that  note,  a 
second  external  factor  for  Mexico  is  the  expectation  that  the  beginning  of  a  gradual 
normalization  of  U.S.  monetary  policy  is  close,  as  suggested  by  the  statement  and  the 
 1   See  Blue  Chip  Economic  Indicators  (2015),  Top  Analysts’  Forecasts  of  the  U.S.  Economic  Outlook  for  the 
Year Ahead, January. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  minutes from the most recent FOMC meeting. The minutes acknowledge that the economy is 
gaining force and that low inflation, affected by falling oil prices, may not be a factor against 
keeping the rate hike on the table.2 
Consistently, the majority of participants in the December FOMC meetings of 2013 and 2014 
have forecast that the first hike will occur in 2015. A similar message can be drawn from the 
futures markets, which, assuming that the first hike is 25 basis points, direct us to the second 
half  of  the  year.  Timing,  however,  still  remains  an  open  question,  especially  in  light  of 
subdued inflation. 
Superior  U.S.  economic  performance  and  expected  monetary  tightening  contribute  to 
current,  generalized  dollar  strength.  The  dollar  has  appreciated  since  last  year,  recently 
reaching its strongest level in the last eleven years according to the DXY, a measure of the 
dollar’s value relative to six major currencies. The dollar is poised to keep appreciating for 
some time, supported by a continued favorable outlook for U.S. growth this year and growing 
divergence in monetary policy among key central banks. 
A third important external factor for Mexico is the sharp drop in oil prices, which have fallen to 
levels  not  seen  in  almost  six  years.  In  contrast  to  2009,  the  oil  shock  this  time  around  is 
mainly supply-driven. Factors behind swooning  prices include a major oil production boom 
starting in the United States in 2008. 
Also,  increased  competition  among  oil  producers  since  the  middle  of  2014  has  been 
triggered by factors such as price cuts by Saudi Arabia in the U.S. market, the opening of 
Libyan oil-export terminals, and lack of an OPEC agreement to reduce production. Finally, on 
the  demand  side,  an  overall  decline  in  economic  growth  in  major  importing  countries 
preceded the oil price drop. 
Oil  prices  are  expected to  continue  low  for some  time  or fall  even  further.  Many  high-cost 
producers dedicated to nonconventional sources such as shale are highly leveraged or have 
hedged their prices to varying degrees, so that they will keep producing for some time. That 
said, the prospect of lower prices will make oil and gas firms start to cut investment projects 
and eventually slow production, allowing supply and demand to adjust and prices to recover 
to  some  extent.  However,  relatively  low  oil  prices  could  be  a  new  normal  for  the  world 
economy for some time to come.3 
The plunge was obviously a negative shock for oil-exporting countries, with implications for 
public finances that could be significant. In the meantime, low oil prices will assist the global 
economy  overall,  particularly  the  United  States  and  other  large  oil  importers,  including 
Europe, Japan, and China.4 
The Mexican economy on the mend 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  Mexican  economy,  touching  on  three  major  themes.  The  first  is 
economic  activity.  Growth  has  been  rather  disappointing.  Since  mid-2012,  it  has  been 
declining.  From  that  time,  annual  GDP  expansion  has  been  slightly  above  2  percent  on 
average, but the pace until the 2014 first quarter was slowing. 
 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, 
December. 
2   See  the  Board of  Governors of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2014),  Policy  Statement, December; and  the 
3   For an outlook of oil prices, see for example Goldman Sachs (2015), “The new oil order: Lower for longer to 
4   For an analysis of the possible economic implications of lower oil prices, see Institute of International Finance 
(2014), After the fall – Consequences of lower oil prices, December. 
keep capital sidelined.” Commodities Research, January. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Since  the  second  quarter  of  2014,  moderate  improvement  has  occurred,  but  with  some 
softening  in  the  third  quarter.  Available  data  for  the  fourth  quarter  imply  a  slightly  better 
performance. However, on a net basis, the conclusion is that the economic rebound has not 
consolidated. 
Consensus analysts’ forecasts suggest that along with the United States, Mexico will see a 
gradual economic recovery this year and next. The Bank of Mexico forecasts growth of 3 to 
4 percent for 2015, and 3.2 to 4.2 percent for 2016.5 
The  main  growth  engines  are  sustained  exports  on  the  back  of  robust  U.S.  economic 
performance  and  a  pickup  in  domestic  private  spending. Greater  manufacturing  exports to 
the United States should continue to drive an all-important sector of the Mexican economy, 
manufactured  goods,  particularly  the  automotive  industry.  Lower  gasoline  prices  in  the 
United States could provide an even greater boost to demand in this sector. 
In addition, recovery of the Mexican construction sector should continue in the wake of the 
restructuring  of  the  private-sector  housing  industry.  The  consumer  in  Mexico  is  not  overly 
indebted, another factor which should further aid housing-sector recuperation. 
As growth continues, employment and the real wage bill will likely expand, boosting domestic 
consumption.  Finally,  Mexican  banks  are  in  a  solid  position  overall,  from  which  they  are 
ready to support private-sector expansion. 
There  are  downside  risks  to  this  scenario.  First,  relatively  low  levels  of  consumer  and 
producer confidence could remain stagnant. Second, social unrest may have negative effects 
on  economic  activity.  Third,  continued  declines  in  oil  production  would  further  dampen  the 
mining  sector,  with  negative  implications  for  overall  GDP.  Lower  oil  prices  would  also  put 
stress on the public finances. 
It is worth noting that the importance of oil in the Mexican economy continues to diminish. 
The county’s oil production platform has been declining since 2004. While oil exports account 
for  a  low,  decreasing  fraction  of  total  exports,  currently  the  oil  trade  balance  is  relatively 
small.  The  direct  negative  impact  of  cheaper  oil  is  on  Mexico’s  public  finances,  since  the 
government-owned  oil  producer (Pemex)  is  a  net  oil  exporter.  For  2015,  the government’s 
exposure to price fluctuations is hedged.6 
On  the  upside,  U.S.  economic  strength  could  gain  more  force,  and  greater-than-currently 
expected benefits from Mexican structural reforms could start to kick in. 
My  second  focus  for  Mexico  is  on  the  financial  markets.  Global  volatility  has  certainly  hit 
domestic markets, but they have operated with ample liquidity and without disruption. 
In particular, the weakening of the peso since mid-2014 largely reflects global factors such as 
generalized dollar appreciation and the drop in oil prices. Foreign-exchange (FX) adjustment 
has  been  orderly,  as  reflected  by  high  trade  volumes  and  low  bid-ask  spreads.  Also,  the 
derivative markets have allowed investors to hedge FX risks, as evidenced by the short peso 
position recently seen in the Chicago peso-dollar futures markets.7 
However,  the  share  of  peso-denominated  government  bond  holdings  by  nonresidents 
remains  high  and  has  even  increased  recently  to  reach  new  records.  Also,  Mexico’s  yield 
 Year  Ahead,  January;  and  Banco  de  México  (2014),  Quarterly  Report,  July-September  2014,  Summary, 
November. 
5   See  Blue  Chip  Economic  Indicators  (2015),  Top  Analysts’  Forecasts  of  the  U.S.  Economic  Outlook  for  the 
6   For details on the Mexican government’s oil hedge, see SHCP (2014), “El Gobierno Federal cubrió la totalidad 
7   For an outlook of real and financial variables see, for example Banco de México (2014), Encuesta sobre las 
expectativas de los especialistas en economía del sector privado: diciembre 2014, December. 
de los ingresos petroleros para 2015.” Comunicado de Prensa 097/2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  curve  has  shifted  downward  and  flattened  in  the  last  year.  In  other  words,  the  peso  has 
depreciated, but interest rates remain not too far from their all-time lows. 
The relative resilience of the domestic financial markets during recent months does not mean 
that the  economy  is  immune  to future  shocks. Uncertainty  on  the  timing  and  pace  of  U.S. 
monetary normalization still looms, making it likely the ride in financial markets will be bumpy 
and  posing  challenges  for  the  management  of  long-term  fixed-income  positions,  among 
others. 
In  this  context,  authorities  must  take  a  proactive  stance,  first  by  fortifying  macroeconomic 
fundamentals in order to provide a shield against external forces. Second, they must remain 
on alert, identifying possible systemic financial risks in time to make adjustments. 
One  final  point  concerns  monetary  policy  and  inflation.  As  you  know,  from  March  2013  to 
June 2014, the Bank of Mexico cut its policy interest rate target by 150 basis points in the 
context of weak economic activity. 
During 2014, inflation tended to remain above the upper limit of the variability interval around 
the  permanent  target  of  3  percent.  Major  factors  for  these  pressures  came  from  tax  hikes 
implemented since the beginning of the year, and certain agricultural price increases. 
Inflation  will  likely  be  lower  during  2015  given  favorable  base  tax  effects,  more  moderate 
gasoline  and  electricity  price  adjustments,  and  the  elimination  of  national  long-distance 
phone charges. In fact, January first-half inflation was 3.1 percent year-over-year, compared 
to  4.6  percent  in  the  same  time  period  of  2014.  The  Bank  of  Mexico  expects  inflation  to 
approach 3 percent throughout this year.8 
However,  there  are  risks  to  this  scenario.  These  include  a  potentially  weaker  peso  for  a 
prolonged  period  of  time,  which,  despite  low  pass-through  in  recent  years,  may  have  an 
impact on inflation. Other risks are renewed substantial rises in noncore price components 
and eventual aggregate demand pressures.9 
Concluding remarks 
Three external issues will be key determinants of Mexico’s near-term economic performance. 
The first is sustainable U.S. economic strength. The second is uncertainty on the timing and 
pace of U.S. monetary policy normalization. Third, lower oil prices appear to be here to stay 
for a while, and prices could even fall further before the trend reverses. 
On  the  domestic  side,  three  issues  are  also  predominant.  Mexican  economic  growth  has 
disappointed  but  is  expected  to  pick  up  to  above  3  percent  over  the  next  two  years. 
Downside risks are still present, including a possibly fragile recovery of domestic spending. 
Financial markets are likely to continue to face volatility. Relative resilience in recent months 
is no guarantee that Mexico is immune to future shocks. Thus, the authorities need to remain 
vigilant,  as  they  have  done  to  date.  On  the  monetary  policy  front,  inflation  is  expected  to 
approach  the  Bank  of  Mexico’s  3  percent  permanent  target  throughout  this  year.  Going 
forward, risks to inflation should be carefully monitored so that attainment of the objective is 
sustainable. 
Finally, amid solid macroeconomic fundamentals, new business opportunities should begin 
to  blossom.  In  spite  of  what  could  be  adverse  external  conditions  this  year,  Mexico  could 
very well turn out to be a relatively attractive spot on the emerging-market horizon. 
 8   See Banco de México (2014), Quarterly Report, July-September 2014, Summary, November. 
9   For an analysis of FX pass-through to inflation, see Banco de México (2012), Inflation Report, July–September 
2012, November, Box 1. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
