  Andreas Dombret: Six months of European banking supervision – what 
does this mean for “less significant institutions”? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the “Verbandstag der Sparda-Banken”, Frankfurt am Main, 22 May 2015. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you very much for inviting me to speak here at the “Verbandstag der Sparda-Banken”. 
I am very pleased to be here. 
The first Sparda Bank was founded in May 1896. This means the Sparda Banks can look 
back on nearly 120 years of history, during which their regionally oriented business model 
has enabled them to more than hold their own. It is safe to assume that the Sparda Banks 
can view the rest of the world from a certain position of experience. This is certainly helpful 
since the banking world, in particular, is currently in a state of upheaval. 
A  new  age  –  that  of  banking  supervision  –  began  a  little  over  six  months  ago.  On 
4 November  2014,  we  established  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  for  banks  in 
Europe, the first pillar of a banking union. On that day, the ECB assumed responsibility for 
directly supervising the 123 largest banks in the euro area. It thus now supervises over 85% 
of the euro-area banking sector, measured by total assets. 
However,  the  situation  is  different  if  we  look  not  at  total  assets  but  at  the  number  of 
institutions. In terms of the number of institutions, only around 3½% of the European banking 
sector is being supervised directly by the ECB. National authorities continue to supervise all 
other institutions. Which means some 3,400 banks in total, including 1,600 German banks. 
Are these 1,600 banks therefore completely beyond the scope of the SSM? Is it true of these 
banks that “after 4 November” is “before 4 November”? 
Smaller institutions – limited impact? 
2. 
Indeed, not much will change at first for Germany’s 1,600 smaller banks. Their primary points 
of  contact  will  still  be  the  Bundesbank  and  BaFin.  Off-site  supervision  will  continue  to  be 
performed by the Bundesbank’s nine Regional Offices. This means we will remain your point 
of  contact  in  future.  Direct  communication  with  the  ECB  will  be  restricted  to  exceptional 
cases  –  for  instance,  relating  to  issuing  or  revoking  banking  licences,  or  examining  the 
acquisition of qualifying participating interests. But apart from all that, the ECB will receive 
information on every “less significant institution” (LSI) in annual reports produced by national 
supervisors. 
This approach upholds the principle of subsidiarity, which I believe to be the sensible and 
correct  approach.  For  instance,  most  smaller  banks  apply  regional,  relatively  low-risk 
business  models  which  do  not  necessarily  require  European  supervision.  National 
supervisors will be able to appropriately supervise and classify the special features of these 
banks in future, too. 
Nonetheless, smaller banks, too, are affected by the SSM. In future, these institutions are 
also  to  be  supervised  under  harmonised  European  standards.  In  order  to  ensure  such 
consistent supervision, the ECB can give national supervisors guidance on how to design the 
supervision of smaller institutions. For instance, it can set supervisory focal points or define 
principles for the assessment of certain issues. In individual cases, however, the ECB does 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
not have the power to order national supervisors to take specific supervisory actions or to 
issue specific decisions. 
The  ECB  and  the  national  supervisors  are  currently  setting  the  relevant  guidelines  and 
revising the Supervisory Manual. The challenge here is to strike the right balance between 
harmonising  supervisory  practice,  which  is  a  desirable  objective,  and  the  principles  of 
subsidiarity  and  proportionality.  The  harmonisation  of  supervisory  practice  in  Europe  must 
not lead to supervision of materially different issues under the same standards. 
With  regard  to  a  bank’s  risks,  size  does  indeed  matter.  Of  course,  small  banks  are  also 
capable of entering into bad deals, of taking bad decisions and failing. However, if a small 
bank  fails,  the  implications  for  the  financial  system  are  much  less  severe  than  if  a  bigger 
bank fails. In addition, they are likely for the most part to remain nationally or even regionally 
restricted. Small banks are not “too big to fail” and thus do not have an implicit guarantee by 
the state that they will be rescued; they therefore have from the outset less incentive to take 
particularly  high  risks.  Supervisors  should  address  these  differences  in  their  requirements. 
The principle of proportionality needs to be upheld. 
Indirect impacts on smaller institutions 
3. 
However,  subsidiarity  and  proportionality  notwithstanding,  smaller  banks  should  not 
complacently assume that the direct impact of the SSM on them will remain contained. It is 
quite conceivable that the change in the structure of supervision will also have indirect effects 
across  the  entire  banking  landscape.  The  road  is  clearly  leading  towards  greater 
harmonisation – across all areas of the banking sector. 
One  example  is  the  review  of  supervisory  options  and  national  discretions.  European 
supervisory legislation still offers some 150 options from which supervisors can choose. And, 
at the national level, these options are actually being exercised in a multitude of ways. Of 
course,  it  sometimes  makes  sense  to  interpret  rules  against  the  background  of  national 
special features – but sometimes it doesn’t. We therefore have to review all these options 
very  carefully  and  keep  only  those  options  which  truly  reflect  the  peculiarities  of  various 
markets and banks, while allowing all others to expire. The ECB and the national supervisors 
have just begun their review of national options and discretions. 
Even in the area of accounting standards, there are calls for further harmonisation. In mid-
March the ECB adopted a new regulation on prudential reporting requirements for financial 
data.  This  regulation  applies  to  all  institutions  not  covered  by  the  already-harmonised 
reporting requirements for IFRS institutions. 
June  2017  is  the  final  deadline,  therefore,  for  all  institutions  which  prepare  their  financial 
statements under German GAAP to submit their prudential returns on the basis of the ECB 
regulation.  The  ECB  must  generally  also  accept  national  accounting  standards  within  the 
context of the SSM. Against this background, we will do all we can to ensure that German 
accounting standards continue to apply – barring any changes to the relevant legislation. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the Single Supervisory Mechanism will have many advantages. It will 
allow  all  euro-area  banks  to  be  supervised  at  consistently  high  standards;  it  will  make  it 
easier  to  deal  with  cross-border  problems;  and  it  will  mitigate  the  influence  of  national 
interests on banking supervision. On the whole, it will create a single European supervisory 
culture which will also cover those banks that are not directly supervised by the ECB. It will 
make the entire banking sector safer, and that will be good for all banks. 
However,  all  supervisors  and  regulators  do  is  create  a  framework.  The  market  functions 
within  this  framework,  and  each  individual  bank  has  to  hold  its  own  in  a  competitive 
environment.  There  are  therefore  several  challenges:  the  persistent  phase  of  low  interest 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
rates,  which  is  putting  pressure  on  profits;  the  trend  towards  digitalisation,  which  could 
fundamentally  alter  the  structure  of  banking  business;  and  more  intense  competition  from 
new players in the market. 
In  view  of  the  low  interest  rates,  on  19  May  BaFin  and  Bundesbank  launched  a  second 
survey  on  German  credit  institutions’  earnings  and  resilience  in  a  low-interest-rate 
environment. This survey is important because it will give us an exact picture of the impact of 
various interest rate scenarios and short-term shocks. The survey will run until 28 June. 
To  sum  up:  not  only  the  big  banks,  but  also  smaller  institutions,  will  have  to  face  the 
challenges presented by the market and the challenges presented by the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism for banks in Europe. The words of William Shakespeare are apt here: “The fault 
(...) is not in our stars, But in ourselves (...).” 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
