  Cecilia Skingsley: Experience with macroprudential policies 
Summary of a speech by Ms Cecilia Skingsley, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, 
at a workshop arranged by the Committee on the Global Financial System, BIS, held at the 
Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Hong Kong, 10 August 2015. 
 Since the global financial crisis, several countries have started implementing macroprudential 
policies.  This  workshop  has  provided  us  with  the  opportunity  to  deepen  our  knowledge 
regarding  how  different  countries  choose,  calibrate  and  implement  different  kinds  of 
macroprudential instrument. We have also gained a greater understanding of the efficiency 
of  these  instruments,  as  well  as  of  how  different  countries  incorporate  macroprudential 
settings in the calibration of monetary policy. 
Although  we  have  come  a  long  way  the  past  few  years  as  regards  setting  up  institutional 
frameworks and developing tools, macroprudential policy is still a relatively new policy field in 
many countries and there are many important issues that need to be addressed. I would like 
to elaborate on three of these issues. 
The first is the challenge of determining the proper mix of policy instruments and the right 
balance  between  them,  and  deciding  how  fast  and  resolute  our  actions  should  be  when 
imbalances  are  building  up.  For  example,  on  the  one  hand,  we  know  from  international 
experience that credit growth can be difficult to curb once it starts accelerating. This would 
speak in favour of prompt and strong measures. But, on the other hand, since we only have 
limited experience of macroprudential instruments, a step-by-step approach may seem more 
attractive. Furthermore, even if the first best solution would be bold steps, it may be more 
difficult to gain consensus for these. I think it would be better and more reasonable to take a 
number  of  small  steps  in  order  to  avoid  inaction  bias  and  a  standstill  in  reforms.  Taking 
Sweden  as  an  example:  in  its  biannual  Financial  Stability  Report,  the  Riksbank  outlines 
several alternatives for how the growing risks associated with increasing household debt may 
be managed. 
The second issue that needs to be addressed is how macroprudential policy should interact 
with  other  policy  areas  when  it  comes  to  tackling  systemic  risk.  My  view  is  that  monetary 
policy  could  take  systemic  risk  into  consideration  under  the  precondition  that  this  doesn’t 
conflict with the objects of monetary policy. That is, if the object of monetary policy is inflation 
targeting, monetary policy may very well serve as a line of defence if inflation is not too far 
from the target and if inflation expectations are firmly anchored.1 
However, macroprudential policy also has links to microprudential policy and fiscal policy. All 
these  policy  areas  may  need  to  be  involved  in  order  to  curb  systemic  risks  in  the  most 
effective  way.  What  instrument  to  choose  in  a  specific  situation  should  depend  on  the 
problem at hand and the purpose of the policy action. The most effective tool may not always 
be in the hands of the macroprudential supervisor. 
Finally,  in  the  past  few  years,  macroprudential  tools  have  been  developed  to  tackle  risk 
stemming from the traditional banking sector. Macroprudential policy has thus mainly been 
implemented as a form of banking regulation. As a consequence, resilience in that sector has 
increased. But, on the other hand, the non-banking sector is increasing rapidly and so, most 
likely, is risks related to it. This being my third and final issue, I think it is most important that 
we increase our understanding of these changing trends and the risks they entail, and that 
we start developing macroprudential instruments that can counteract these risks. In order not 
to fall behind the curve, work on developing new tools should start promptly, as it will take 
years before such instruments can be in place at national levels. 
                                                 
1   See also Skingsley, C., (2015), Inflation-targeting policy after the financial crisis, speech at Almega, Stockholm 
2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
