  Cyril Roux: Reflections on the good, the bad and the ugly of Solvency II 
Address  by  Mr  Cyril  Roux,  Deputy  Governor  (Financial  Regulation)  of the  Central  Bank  of 
Ireland, at the Central Bank of Ireland Solvency II Forum, Dublin, 20 April 2015. 
 Mr Bernardino, ladies and gentlemen, it is my pleasure to welcome you this morning to the 
Central  Bank  of  Ireland  Conference  on  Solvency  II.  It  is  the  brainchild  of  Sylvia  Cronin, 
Director  for  Insurance,  and  of  her  team;  I  hope  you  will  find  it  thought-provoking  and 
informative. 
Solvency II has been long in coming, and at times seemed as if it would be abandoned or 
postponed indefinitely. Certainly in the previous decade the 2012 deadline may have been 
felt far in the distance, and even more so the postponement to 2016. But here we are, less 
than a year away from its entry into application. Internal model applications have been filed 
throughout Europe since the beginning of the month. Dry runs of Solvency II reporting are 
being  prepared  for  submission  to  the  supervisors.  Capital  injections,  here  and  there,  are 
planned or processed so that insurers are ready for the new solvency requirements. 
Maybe it is a time as good as any to reflect on the good, the bad and the ugly of Solvency II. 
Solvency II puts to the fore good governance of insurance undertakings. It delineates the role 
and responsibilities of the AMS Board. It lists a host of control functions and aims to ensure 
their independence. In doing so, Solvency II builds on the experience of several countries, 
including Ireland. We have developed here a strong body of regulations in this regard, with 
our  corporate  governance  code  and  our  Controlled  Functions  (CF)  and  Pre-Approval 
Controlled  Functions  (PCF)  roles.  The  governance  framework  that  Solvency  II  requires  of 
insurance undertakings is very familiar to Irish insurers. It is a tribute to the good work of the 
Irish  regulator  to  see  its  approach  to  good  governance  being  generalised  across  the  EU. 
However, Ireland can fain forget that in the matter of governance of banks or insurers, as in 
other matters, the issuance of regulations, however well meaning, is no guarantee that their 
spirit will be observed or that their aim will be achieved. Solvency II can be commended for 
bringing out governance requirements. It will be up to the insurance firms to live up to them. 
In this governance framework, Solvency II requires insurance undertakings to conduct their 
own  risk  and  solvency  assessment.  Such  a  requirement  will  be  familiar  to  Irish  insurers, 
through  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  insistence  that  boards  define  their  risk  appetite  and 
formulate  an  explicit  statement  around  it.  Sylvia  will  soon  tell  you  more  about  our 
expectations  as  regards  FLAOR  and  ORSA,1  a  welcome  development  brought  about  by 
Solvency II. 
Finally  Solvency  II  brings  a  common  approach  across  Europe  to  regulatory  returns  of 
insurers.  Some  countries,  such  as  France,  had  long  developed  a  strong  framework  of 
regulatory returns under Solvency I. French general insurance companies have for decades 
submitted  to  the  supervisor  detailed  templates  of  claims  and  reserves  development  by 
underwriting year and by accident year, while life companies have submitted to the French 
supervisor  the  granular  decomposition  of  their  insurance  liabilities  for  a  very  long  time  as 
well. Supervisors there are used to pouring over line by line asset templates to measure the 
rise and fall of intragroup group financing or repos, and to plot the unrealised capital gains or 
losses by asset classes. Solvency II’s greatest gift to insurance supervision in Ireland is the 
provision of detailed, standardised reporting templates. The Central Bank of Ireland calls on 
insurers to devote the resources necessary to fill them accurately, as these templates are set 
                                                 
1   Forward  Looking  Assessment  of  Own  Risks  (FLAOR)  and  Own  Risk  and  Solvency  Assessment  (ORSA), 
respectively. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
to become a central tool in our effort to better understand Irish insurance firms and challenge 
constructively their management. 
Governance, risk assessment and reporting appear to me the three manifest improvements 
brought about by Solvency II to the European regulation of insurance. 
Solvency II  also brings greater freedom for insurance undertakings to invest policyholders’ 
money in a variety of asset classes. The debate over capital charges for infrastructure assets 
and securitisation has been so fraught that it may have obscured the much greater principle 
of free investing, that supersedes the forced diversification rules of Solvency I. I will turn to 
capital requirements in a moment,  but the greater issue for supervisors should remain the 
ability  of  insurers  to  define  knowledgeably  their  investment  risk  appetite,  to  set  their  own 
diversification rules, and to invest in asset classes they understand fully. Solvency II brings to 
insurance  firms  the  potential  to  invest  where  they  couldn’t  before.  The  future  will  tell  us 
whether  the  capital  allocation  of  these  institutional  investors  will  have  led  to  greater 
sustainable growth in Europe, or more numerous failures due to investment mistakes. At the 
Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  we  will  challenge  Irish  insurance  companies  to  demonstrate  they 
have  defined  and  implemented  investment  policies  commensurate  with  their  knowledge  of 
the  investment  universe  and  their  ability  to  sustain  investment  losses.  We  expect  that  the 
prudent person principle that is introduced by Solvency II will be given the weight it needs by 
insurers in Ireland. 
One topic that was given no thought it seems in designing Solvency II is the revision of the 
conditions for authorisation. Solvency I conditions for authorisations have been maintained in 
the new regime, and so their deficiencies have not been addressed. However the matter has 
become more acute since Solvency I was a minimum harmonisation regime, which could be 
complemented by Member States, whereas Solvency II is a maximum harmonisation regime, 
which  cannot.  In  particular,  there  is  no  explicit  provision  for  supervisory  judgement  on  the 
proposed  business  model  of  applicants.  In  some  jurisdictions,  this  is  seen  by  supervisory 
authorities  as  legally  preventing  them  from  refusing  authorisations  or  putting  stringent 
conditions  on  them,  even  when  their  experience  tells  them  otherwise.  These  problematic 
applicants, once authorised, can then avail of the single market to operate everywhere in the 
EU. European legislators should revise the insurance directives to give national supervisory 
authorities  the  leeway  they  need  to  protect  European  policyholders  by  denying  or  limiting 
authorisation when this is the appropriate course of action. 
Let me now turn to the new and problematic elements of Solvency II. 
Capital  requirements  of  Solvency  II  have  come,  rightly  or  wrongly  to  define  the  new 
regulatory regime which will come into play in 2016. At least we haven’t gone to the extreme 
of  banking  regulation,  where  the  overarching  directive  is  called  a  Capital  Requirement 
Directive, or CRD. But I contend that the emphasis given in European insurance regulation to 
quantitative  requirements  has  gone  overboard,  and 
the  particular  quantitative 
requirements of Solvency II are ill conceived. 
The capital requirements set up by Solvency II are clearly too complex. Even the standard 
formula is in fact as complex as a default internal model. To what purpose, however? When 
one looks at the failures of insurance companies in Europe over the past decade, or more 
narrowly,  at  those  that  befell  Ireland,  which  of  these  failures  would  have  had  a  different 
course had the Solvency Capital Requirement (SCR) of Solvency II been in place in lieu of 
the solvency margin of Solvency I? I’m afraid the answer is plain. One might argue then that, 
even  if  the  SCR  may  not  be  a  better  tool  to  prevent  failures  than  the  simple  and  robust 
solvency  margin  of  Solvency  I  with  its  accompanying  prudent  reserving  principle  and 
compulsory  asset  diversification,  the  SCR  favours  the  proper  capital  management  of  an 
insurance undertaking. But we know that the mathematics of normal distributions, on which 
Solvency II is based, bring a veneer of science that ill fits reality. Yes, normal distributions 
are easy, or easier to handle, than other probability distributions, but they do not reflect what 
happens  in  market  crises,  nor  do  they  accommodate  non-proportional  reinsurance.  The 
that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
quirks of the SCR calculation make this requirement an unlikely, unreliable tool to manage 
capital.  Credit  rating  agencies,  large  brokers,  reinsurers  and  counterparties  are  unlikely  to 
rely  on  the  SCR,  or  on  the  SCR  alone,  to  assess  the  risk  they  take  when  dealing  with 
insurance  companies,  and  certainly  the  supervisor  will  not  be  using  it  for  more  than  it  is 
worth. 
The complicated inadequacy of capital based regulation would be less severe had Solvency 
II not dispensed with the cornerstone of Solvency I reserving, i.e. the principle of prudence. 
In its place we find an ideological construct, where technical reserves are supposed to be 
valued at exit prices, even though these exit prices aren’t observable. The worst of Solvency 
II  would  be the  distortion  of  investment  incentives  coming  from  the  zero  credit  risk  charge 
that Solvency II assigns to sovereign bonds, if pride of place wasn’t of course reserved to the 
Solvency II valuation of long dated life insurance liabilities. There, one achieves a seemingly 
impossible feat, namely to state that they are to be market consistent, and at the same time 
to use interest rates that are several hundred basis points over market rates. The end result 
is a massive prudential understatement of these liabilities and a gross misrepresentation of 
the solvency position of the firms that sell these contracts. 
Fortunately Irish firms are not among the European firms that have to contend with such a 
failing of regulation, due to the structure of their insurance liabilities. In Ireland our challenge 
will be to use the good that Solvency II offers to bring non-life insurance management and 
supervision  better  tools  and  one  hopes  better  outcomes  than  the  experience  of  the  past 
decade. 
The opportunity to share my thoughts with you on Solvency II was too good to pass, even 
under the guise of these welcome remarks. Who better to tell you what Solvency II will mean 
for the whole of Europe than Gabriel Bernardino, Chair of EIOPA, the European regulator in 
charge  of  developing  level  2  rules  on  foot  of  the  Solvency  II  directive,  together  with  the 
European Commission? Gabriel Bernardino has had an extended and distinguished career in 
insurance  regulation  in  the  Portuguese  Insurance  Authority  (Instituto  de  Seguros  de 
Portugal), where he was director for development and international affairs before he came to 
Frankfurt as Chair of CEIOPS, and then elected to chair its successor organisation, EIOPA. 
He has kindly agreed to come to Dublin to address you in that capacity, and it is with great 
pleasure and gratitude that I now hand over to him. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
