  Glenn Stevens: Issues in economic policy 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  Anika 
Foundation Luncheon, supported by Australian Business Economists and Macquarie Bank, 
Sydney, 22 July 2015. 
 I thank Elliott James for research assistance. 
Thank you for coming out once again to support the Anika Foundation.1 As a result of your 
generosity in past years, the Foundation is continuing to expand its activities, as you have 
heard from earlier presentations. 
The  very  efficient  logistics  for  today  were  again  provided  by  The  Australian  Business 
Economists. I also thank Macquarie Group for its financial support of today’s event. 
I will organise today’s remarks under four headings: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Negotiating turbulence 
Accepting adjustment 
Maintaining stability 
Securing prosperity. 
Negotiating turbulence 
Until recently, we were living, at a global level, through a period of remarkably low volatility 
and skinny pricing for risk. There was bound to be some set of events with the potential to 
change that. 
Once  again,  some  of  them  have  been  in  Europe.  After  some  months,  difficult  discussions 
between the Greek Government and its European partners reached an impasse and Greece 
was, as a result, unable to make a scheduled repayment to the IMF. The ensuing few weeks, 
during which the Greek authorities had no choice but to curtail access to the banking system, 
have been extremely difficult and surely quite damaging for the Greek economy. 
There has been progress towards a solution in recent days, though a huge amount of work 
remains  ahead to  put the  Greek  economy,  and the  whole  European  project,  onto  a  stable 
footing. 
To  date,  though,  the  financial  spillovers  from  the  Greek  situation  have  not  been  large. 
Spreads to German sovereign yields observed for debt issued by the governments of Spain, 
Portugal and Italy remain quite contained. At this stage, we do not see a market response 
that signals serious doubts about the ability of those countries to remain in the euro area. 
There  could  be  little  doubt  about the  willingness  of  their  European  partners  and  European 
institutions to support these countries in the event that market conditions took a serious turn 
for the worse – as they might have done, and still might, had/if “Grexit” occurred. The likely 
direct economic spillovers to the rest of Europe also seem fairly contained, since Greece is 
quite a small economy. 
Of  course,  things  remain  fluid.  An  unexpected  turn  of  events  –  of  which  there  have  been 
many  over  time  –  could  change  the  assessment  above.  Broader  financial  and  economic 
impacts  might  be  longer  in  coming  and  harder  to  predict.  There  are  also  important  geo-
                                                
1   See www.anikafoundation.com. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  strategic  elements  to  the  situation,  which  is  one  reason  why  nations  outside  Europe  are 
taking such an interest. For our part, all we can do is watch and see what eventuates. 
Meanwhile, and of arguably greater relevance in our part of the world, China’s economy and 
financial system are going through a period of adjustment and uncertainty. 
Recently there have been some quite spectacular developments in the equity market. A rapid 
run-up  in  share  prices  –  which  more  than  doubled  in  the  space  of  a  year, far  beyond  any 
plausible prospective improvement in company earnings – turned to a slump in mid June to 
early  July.  Share  prices  remain  well  above  their  level  of  a  year  ago,  but  the  speculative 
nature  of  the  run-up,  and  the  part  played  by  an  increase  in  leverage,  has  understandably 
made everyone a little nervous. The Chinese authorities have acted forcefully with some very 
wide-ranging interventions to stabilise the situation. 
The effect this will have on the Chinese economy is not clear, but may prove to be relatively 
small. Share prices have stabilised in recent days and authorities have been making financial 
conditions  more  accommodative.  Households’  direct  exposure  to  equity  prices  is  relatively 
small, notwithstanding their large share of turnover. In addition, the rise in share prices was 
probably too short-lived for there to have been much in the way of positive wealth effects on 
spending.  Other  leveraged  entities,  such  as  banks  and  brokers,  have  shown  little  obvious 
sign of stress resulting from the developments in equity markets. 
It seems, on the basis of information available at present, that developments in the Chinese 
property  markets  and  the  broader  financial  sector  are  likely  to  be  more  important  for  the 
outlook. The economy had been showing signs of slowing, of course, in the first part of this 
year.  But  policies  have  been  responding  to  this,  and  some  of  the  recent  economic  data 
suggest they have been having a positive effect. 
Lastly  on  the  international  front,  the  likelihood  still  seems  to  be  that  US  interest  rates  will 
begin to rise before the end of this year. This change, when it comes, will have been very 
well telegraphed. That being said, long-term yields in the United States and elsewhere are 
still  very  low,  and  risk  premia  compressed,  albeit  not  so  much  as  they  were.  Some 
turbulence may well occur as a result not of the first increase in US rates, but of investors 
trying to assess how soon subsequent increases might occur. But sooner or later we have to 
see a start to the process of adjusting these financial prices and I would expect Australian 
financial markets to be able to take all that in their stride. 
Accepting adjustment 
The  Australian  economy  has  been  growing,  but  at  a  pace  a  bit  below  what  we  have 
traditionally  thought  of  as  average,  as  it  adjusts  to  some  pretty  large  changes  in 
circumstances. 
The  story  of  the  phases  of  the  “mining  boom”  is  well  known.  Commodity  prices  rose 
massively and have since declined (though some prices remain pretty high compared with 
longer-run  history).  Investment  spending  followed  suit  –  first  it  rose  by  about  5  to 
6 percentage  points  of  GDP,  and  now  it  is  on  its  way  back  down.  Finally,  shipments  of 
resources picked up, as the new capacity created by the investment became available. As an 
aside, unlike the situation posited some years ago in the United States, and notwithstanding 
the growth of services, the physical weight of Australia’s GDP has probably increased over 
the  past  decade.  For  iron  ore  and  coal,  annual  tonnages  being  shipped  from  Australian 
mines have increased by more than half a billion tonnes since 2004. 
Growth in domestic demand, in contrast, is fairly subdued. Over the latest year for which we 
have data (to March 2015), final domestic spending rose by a bit under 1 per cent, as the fall 
in resources sector capital spending accelerated. Capital spending by other businesses has 
been weak too, while public demand was roughly unchanged over that year. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  weakness  in  those  areas  is  juxtaposed,  as  you  know,  with  changing  household 
behaviour.  After  a  lengthy  period  during  which  consumer  spending  growth  ran  ahead  of 
income  growth,  and  leverage  (measured  as  the  ratio  of  debt  to  income)  almost  trebled, 
households  changed  course  some  time  ago.  To  be  sure,  the  rate  of  saving  from  current 
income has declined a little over the past couple of years, which is what is expected at a time 
of very low interest rates and positive wealth effects resulting from rising asset values. But it 
remains significantly higher than it was a decade ago. The types of saving rates we see now 
are more likely to be “normal” than those of a decade ago. 
Moreover, while some households (such as first home buyers or, perhaps increasingly the 
same thing, first home investors) are taking on more leverage, many others are reducing it. 
They  are taking  advantage  of  lower  borrowing  costs to  repay  mortgage debt  ahead  of  the 
schedule in their debt contracts. Despite the lowest interest rates that any current borrower 
has ever seen, the pace of lending to households remains moderate. 
This is not a credit crunch – lenders are willing to lend and competition to do so is strong. 
Indeed, the prudential supervisor has been minded recently to issue some timely warnings 
about the need to maintain sound lending standards. Rather, the story is that households are 
being more prudent about debt and are holding more liquid assets. One measure of this is 
the  size  of  “offset  account”  balances –  bank  deposits  held  to  offset mortgage  debt. These 
now amount to about $90 billion. When the housing credit data are adjusted for the increase 
in offset account balances, the rate of growth over the past year is put at about 6 per cent, as 
opposed to over 7 per cent as published. 
This may mean that the effect of easy monetary policy is to be somewhat lessened, at least 
for  a  time.  Taking  a  medium-term  perspective,  though,  the  general  strengthening  of  the 
balance sheet among many formerly more-indebted households has to be seen as a good 
thing. 
In the interim, the somewhat more restrained attitude to debt and spending by households, 
combined  with  a  similar  attitude  by  the  government  sector,  has  meant  that  there  has  not 
been  quite  enough  domestic  demand  to  achieve  full  employment,  in  the  face  of the fall  in 
business investment. That is why we have felt that, on balance, a somewhat lower exchange 
rate  was  likely  to  be  a  part  of  the  necessary  adjustment.  That  adjustment  seems  to  be 
occurring,  with  relatively  little  disruption,  and  is  having  an  expansionary  effect.  Growth  in 
services trade for example is picking up. The “net export contribution” of services trade over 
the past year, of around ½ percentage point of GDP, is about the same as the contribution 
from iron ore exports over that period. 
It is worth noting that business conditions as measured in surveys have tended to improve 
overall, outside the mining sector, over the past year or so. At the same time, the state of the 
labour  market,  while  still  somewhat  subdued,  appears  to  be  better  than  we  had  expected 
three or six months ago. Employment growth has picked up noticeably, and hours worked 
have also increased. The rate of unemployment is unchanged from a year ago, whereas we 
had been thinking it might be a little higher than this by now, since growth in real GDP has 
been, according to the available statistics, below trend. 
Candidate explanations for this better-than-expected set of labour market outcomes include 
the following: 
• 
Perhaps  there  is  statistical  noise  in  the  labour  force  data  or  maybe  future 
observations  or  revisions  will  paint  a  different  picture.  It  is  worth  noting  here  that 
recent  information  on  Australian  population  growth  suggests  that  the  absolute 
growth  of  employment  will  be  revised  down  somewhat,  though  this  should  not 
significantly  affect  labour  market  ratios  like  the  unemployment  rate  or  the 
employment-to-population ratio. 
Perhaps output growth has been higher than the GDP data suggest, in which case 
upward revisions to those data would probably occur over time. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Perhaps below-trend output growth and trend employment growth can be reconciled 
in the form of the slower-than-expected growth of wages. 
Perhaps trend output growth is lower than the 3 per cent or 3¼ per cent we have 
assumed for many years. That is, perhaps the growth we have seen is in fact closer 
to trend growth than we thought. 
 Some or all of the above possibilities may be at work. Time will tell which ones, but a few 
observations may be worthwhile at this point. 
First,  the  economy  is  making  the  adjustments  required,  even  if  it  is  a  bit  slower  than  we 
would ideally have liked. 
Second, if the slow growth of wages has in fact been a significant saver of jobs, that would 
appear to indicate a degree of labour market flexibility in operation. 
Third, to the extent that the data are hinting that our assumptions about trend growth may 
need  to  be  revisited,  that  will  be  worth  some  discussion.  It  need  not  be  the  case  that  per 
capita  growth  would  be  any  lower,  if  the  lower  growth  simply  reflects  slower  population 
growth. So there may be few implications for living standards as measured by income per 
head.  But  if  there  are  assumptions  about  absolute  growth  rates  embedded  in  business  or 
fiscal strategies, or retirement income plans, they would need to be re-examined. 
I  suspect  this  will  turn  out  to  be  an  important  discussion:  what  is  Australia’s  potential 
economic growth rate, per head, and why? And what do we want it to be? And, of course, 
what do we need to do to achieve our desired outcome? I return to that theme – securing 
prosperity – shortly. 
But first, a few words about stability. 
Maintaining stability 
One  of  the  features  of  much  regular  discussion  of  macroeconomic  policy,  and  monetary 
policy in particular, is that people tend to adopt a rather short time-frame. Everyone watches 
high-frequency data and adjusts expectations about what policy should or will do accordingly. 
Policymakers are expected to respond to events and to deviations of economic performance 
from  what  had  been  anticipated.  The  number  of  surveys  and  obscure  indicators  seen  as 
conveying  information  has  continued  to  grow,  as  has  the  number  of  commentators  to  talk 
about them. 
To  some  extent  this  is  perhaps  a  natural  outworking  of  richer,  more  complex  societies 
possessing  more  information  and  analytical  resources,  the  24/7  operation  of  financial 
markets  and  a  competitive  media  searching  for  content.  And  to  a  point,  it  is  perfectly 
reasonable  to  expect  policy  to  be  adjusted  in  response  to  relevant  information  about  how 
things in the economy are tracking relative to policy objectives. 
The risk, however, is that this process can lead to a mindset in which policymakers end up 
responding to quite short-term phenomena, using instruments that take quite some time to 
have  their  full  effect,  including  effects  that  might  actually  turn  out  to  be  adverse.  This  is 
relevant  to  our  situation.  A  period  of  somewhat  disappointing,  even  if  hardly  disastrous, 
economic  growth  outcomes,  and  inflation  that  has  been  well  contained,  has  seen  interest 
rates  decline  to  very  low  levels.  The  question  of  whether  they  might  be  reduced  further 
remains, as I have said before, on the table. 
But  in  answering  that question,  it  is  not quite good  enough simply  to  say  that  evidence  of 
continuing softness should necessarily result in further cuts in rates, without considering the 
longer-term risks involved. Monetary policy works partly by prompting risk-taking behaviour. 
In  some  ways  that  is  good:  in  some  respects,  there  has  not  been  enough  risk-taking 
behaviour.  But  the  risk-taking  behaviour  most  responsive  to  monetary  policy  is  of  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial type. To a point, that is probably a pre-requisite for the “real economy” risk-taking 
that we most want. But beyond a certain point, it can be dangerous. 
Deciding when such a point has been reached is, unavoidably, a highly judgemental process. 
And that is after the event, let alone beforehand. My judgement would be that policy settings 
that fostered a return to the sort of upward trend in household leverage we saw up to 2006 
would have a high likelihood, some time down the track, of being judged to have gone too 
far. That is not the case at present, given the current rates of credit growth and so on. But the 
point is simply that in meeting the challenge of securing growth in the near term, the stability 
of future economic performance can’t be dismissed as a consideration. A balance has to be 
found. I note that the Board’s post-meeting statements routinely refer to seeking a stance of 
policy  that  will  “most  effectively  foster  sustainable  growth  and  inflation  consistent  with  the 
target”  (emphasis  added).  The  adjective  “sustainable”  is  used  deliberately  and  financial 
sustainability is very definitely one of the things we have in mind. 
Securing prosperity 
The  transition  in  growth  is  not  perfectly  smooth,  but  our  economy  has,  in  my  judgement, 
coped  remarkably  well  through  a  lengthy  period  of  very  large  shocks  in  a  difficult  world. 
Despite  the  doom  and  gloom  and  fulminations  over  the  airwaves,  in  newspapers  and  in 
cyberspace, business confidence has risen in recent months. One day last week as I was 
preparing  these  remarks,  newspapers  carried  stories  that  personal  insolvencies  are  the 
lowest for more  than  a decade. On the same  day  we  could  read that  income  inequality  in 
Australia,  as  measured  in  the  most  detailed  survey  available,  has  not,  in  fact,  increased, 
contrary to the impression so often given. Perhaps we might be allowed to conclude that we 
have been meeting some of our challenges, thus far, with outcomes that, while not perfect, 
are not too bad. 
So  there  are  reasons  to  feel  more  confidence  in  our  future  than  we  often  seem  to.  The 
question to be asking is how we build on the broadly successful record we have in order to 
secure prosperity in the future. 
In  this  context,  it  is  likely  that  questions  about  potential  growth,  in  per  head  terms,  will 
become even more prominent. This is partly because of the well-known implications of the 
lower terms of trade for income per head (i.e. it grows more slowly than output per head). It is 
partly  about  demographics,  also  a  well-known  issue.  Ageing  will  lower  the  proportion  of 
people working and hence, other things equal, output and income per head in the country. 
We all know these things at an intellectual level. But unless we think our wants, including for 
publicly provided services, will grow more slowly, which I doubt, the very practical imperative 
will increasingly be to secure sources of growth. And it is increasingly clear to people that the 
kind of sustained growth in mind here won’t be the result of the manipulation of interest rates 
or year-to-year government fiscal settings. Demand management policies play an important 
role, but they have their limitations. 
Raising the economy’s potential isn’t just some esoteric concern for economists, or at least it 
shouldn’t be. Our collective ability to deliver social policy outcomes, to enjoy the benefits of a 
“good  society”,  or  at  a  more  basic  level  to  provide  public  services  and  even  to  defend 
ourselves, ultimately rests on a productive economy. Many problems, including distributional 
ones,  are  easier  to  deal  with  if  per  capita  incomes  are  rising  steadily,  less  so  if  they  are 
stagnant. 
Let’s be clear that this is not “growth at any price”. Wealthy countries tend to have cleaner 
air, cleaner water, better health and education systems, and more demanding standards for 
environmental protection, employee safety and leave entitlements. They can afford to devote 
resources to such things because their business sector is so productive. They tend also to 
have  higher  wages  –  not  because  they  decree  wages  shall  be  high  but  because  well-
educated, skilled workforces working with a lot of capital and modern technology are more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  productive. The poorest peoples usually have far less in the way of such things. If we care 
about  wellbeing  in  the  broadest  sense,  we  should  care  about  things  that  affect  potential 
output per head. 
Our citizens certainly care about the results. They don’t frame the question as being about 
per  capita  real  GDP  or  productivity  per  hour  and  they  care  about  more  than  just  “narrow” 
outcomes  for  economic  statistics.  Many  would  be  concerned  to  reduce  our  environmental 
footprint.  They  would  not  wish  to  sacrifice  civilising  aspects  of  our  society  and  culture, 
including many that result from government intervention. But nor will they accept a future in 
which  they  are  marginalised  in  the  global  village  because  of  unwillingness  to  adapt  or  to 
invest, or because of a failure to foster a growth economy. 
There  is  a  lot  of  talk  at present  about “reform”.  I  would  suggest  that  the  case  for  “reform” 
needs  to  be  presented  as  a  positive  narrative  for  economic  growth.  We  all  know  that 
competitive markets, investment in education, skills and infrastructure, and adaptability, are 
key parts of that growth narrative. 
These  reforms  matter  because  of  the  gains  to  incomes  resulting  from  better  allocative 
efficiency.  But  they  also,  ideally,  would  support  entrepreneurship  and  innovation  –  “risk-
taking”  by  another  name  and  of  the  kind  we  want.  Measuring  “entrepreneurship”  is  not 
straightforward  and  various  studies  have  somewhat  differing  results.  At  the  risk  of 
oversimplifying, one might say that Australians hold our own in the entrepreneurship stakes, 
but  since  we  don’t  generally  score  at  the  top  in  such  surveys,  there  must  be  scope  to 
improve. That too can be part of the growth narrative – the narrative of how we build on the 
success enjoyed to date and secure an even more prosperous future. 
Conclusion 
Thank you again for your attention, and for your support of the Anika Foundation. I hope to 
see you again in another year for a new round of challenges. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
