 Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Die Welt 
 Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, in Die Welt, published on 13 January 2015. 
 How concerned are you about the election of a new parliament in Greece resulting in a 
re-emergence of the euro crisis? 
Greece is facing crucial elections, and that can, of course, lead to major changes. That is 
normal  in  a  democracy.  The  voters’  will  is  decisive,  and  we  at  the  ECB  are  not  going  to 
intervene there. In contrast to the situation that prevailed two or three years ago, however, 
the euro area is now significantly far more robust. The risks of contagion that might emanate 
from the Greek financial market are significantly lower today. 
That  sounds  pretty  unperturbed.  Even  though  debt  relief  for  Greece  is  once  again 
being much-debated. 
Our position in the respect is clear: we cannot agree to any debt relief involving Greek bonds 
held by the ECB. We will note even agree to a prolongation of maturities, because we are 
simply not allowed to do so. That is laid down in the EU Treaties, and we will not deviate 
from  the  prohibition  of  any  financing  of  governments.  On  this  issue,  there  is  no  scope 
whatsoever for concessions and interpretation. 
That you would not voluntarily agree to that happening is clear. But what would happen if the 
new Greek Government were to decide not to make any further repayments, or to leave the 
Monetary Union? 
I will not comment on such speculative scenarios. Nor do I believe it to be in the interests of 
Greece to go down that road. On the contrary, Greece has a keen interest in remaining a 
member of the euro and in pushing reforms further forwards. 
That may hold true for representatives of Greek industry, but many citizens are highly 
frustrated because the many financial sacrifices have still not bettered their lot. At the 
same time, a debate has long since re-emerged in Germany as to whether a Greek exit 
would not be the better solution. 
I regard that as nonsense. Nobody is seriously discussing the issue of Greece leaving the 
euro area nor is anybody actually seriously preparing for that option. Greece needs the euro, 
and the euro needs Greece. 
To  what  extent  are  the  parliamentary  elections  in  Athens  influencing  the  monetary 
policy decisions that the Governing Council will be taking on 22 January, i.e. shortly 
before the elections? 
They have no influence on us whatsoever. Elections there do not change monetary policy. 
Would it not be better to wait until the elections have been held – also to prevent a 
purchase  programme  for  government  bonds  from  being  interpreted  as  a  form  of 
financial aid? 
Not  at  all.  We  are  independent,  and  that  also  means  that  we  do  not  link  our  decisions 
elections that might be held here and there. We will do what we need to do, and we will do it 
at the precise time that we deem to be appropriate. 
You  emphasise  that  the  ECB  is  not  a  political  institution.  But  how  credible  is  that, 
given that the ECB has long become the crisis manager for the euro area? 
That  risk  is  indisputable:  it  is  precisely  when  other  parties  involved,  such  as  the  EU 
Commission and the national governments, do not take action, or do so only hesitantly, that 
pressure  on  monetary  policy  increases.  Prevailing  opinion  in  the  Governing  Council  is, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  however,  that  we  have  not  moved  beyond  the  limits  of  our  mandate  with  our  new 
instruments. But the longer it takes for countries to do their homework, and the longer the 
economic crisis persists in Europe, the greater is the danger that the pressure on the ECB 
will rise. 
But it is precisely the ECB’s intervention that reduces the pressure on governments to 
take action. 
I see that differently. Our policy does not change the fact that structural reforms are highly 
necessary.  The  best  incentive  for  such  reforms  should  be  the  high  level  of  structural 
unemployment,  on  which  monetary  policy  has  little  impact.  In  some  euro  area  countries, 
unemployment  rates  are  in  the  range  of  20%  to  25%.  If  that  isn’t  an  incentive  for  taking 
countermeasures, what is? It, of course, makes life easier for governments if they can take 
on  new  debt  at  a  lower  interest  rate.  That  is  why  we  advocate  a  strict  application  of  the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Irrespective  thereof,  however,  we  must  fulfil  our  mandate  of 
keeping prices stable. 
Conversely then, how dependent is the ECB on the success of governments’ reforms? 
If no way is found to overcome unemployment and indebtedness, how will the ECB 
ever be able to return to a normal monetary policy? 
Our measures can, of course, only take full effect if the economy and the financial markets 
work well. That does not change our mandate, but it explains why we occasionally address 
advice  to  the  political  domain,  for  instance,  that  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  should  be 
complied with. Unfortunately, we are seldom listened to. 
The  EU  Commission  should  thus  not  give  Italy,  France  and  Belgium  more  time  to 
reduce their high budget deficits? 
That is matter to be decided by the EU Commission. The current situation, however, is not 
exactly optimal in this respect. The EU Commission has rightly censured countries like Italy, 
France  and  Belgium  because  they  have  not  met  their  deficit  targets.  It  has,  however,  not 
taken any further measures. That increases uncertainty because nobody knows whether the 
rules are currently being applied in full or not. The EU Commission should therefore come to 
an unequivocal decision that ensures the credibility of the Stability and Growth Pact as soon 
as possible. That does not fall within the mandate of the ECB. Our task is to ensure price 
stability. 
This very aim is now thought by economists to be at risk – in December the price level 
even  fell.  Is  that  already  deflation?  The  ECB’s  definition  of  it  seems  so  far  to  have 
been vague. 
I would speak of deflation when both prices and output are falling and the problem is getting 
worse and worse – because people don’t invest or consume when they are waiting for prices 
to fall further. So far, that hasn’t been the case. However, inflation rates throughout Europe 
are  extremely  low  and  far  removed  from  2%,  from  what  central  bankers  define  as  price 
stability. We cannot ignore that. 
But prices have recently fallen simply because oil has become so much cheaper. Why 
is the ECB allowing that to put it under pressure to act? You can’t influence short-term 
fluctuations in the oil price anyway. 
A falling oil price is generally a one-off shock, but, first, this time it’s unusually large. Second, 
inflation  was  too  low  even  beforehand,  and  inflation  expectations  are  moving  further  and 
further  away  from  2%,  which  we  aim  in  our  monetary  policy  to  achieve  over  the  medium 
term. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
So you would prefer to ignore the fall in the oil price as you’ve done in the past – but 
you can’t afford to at the moment? 
We do indeed want to screen out short-term effects, but it’s becoming more and more difficult 
to keep to this. In the current environment, the continuous decline in oil prices increases the 
danger that people will lose confidence in our inflation target. 
But  will  the  ECB  be  able  to  achieve  much  in  any  case?  Even  a  €1,000  billion 
government  bond  programme  is  forecast  to  create  only  0.1  to  0.5  percentage  point 
more inflation. 
This  is  difficult  to  forecast.  In  America,  government  bond  purchases  were  unquestionably 
successful. The question is how that can be transferred to a monetary union like ours. We 
are discussing exactly that. 
How can you ensure success in Europe when there are no common bonds for the euro 
area that you could buy? 
This is not a trivial difficulty, but there are definitely solutions to it. The ECB has a mandate to 
conduct monetary policy for a monetary union with 19 different countries. That makes some 
things more complicated, but it’s no justification for doing nothing at all. 
Would it really be conceivable that the ECB buys bonds not of all 19 countries, but of 
just those with the best ratings? 
We have to weigh this up. On the one hand, the ECB has to limit the risks it takes onto its 
balance sheet. On the other hand, the bond purchases have to be spread broadly enough to 
really have an effect on prices and economic development. 
As  far  as  the  financial  markets  are  concerned,  the  ECB  decided  to  buy  government 
bonds  some  time  ago,  when  it  announced  its  intention  in  December  to  increase  its 
balance sheet to a maximum of €3 trillion. Was that a good idea? 
We  had  already  said  before  that  we  expected  such  a  development,  and  I  don’t  see  a  big 
difference between an expectation and an intention. 
So why did you vote against it? 
The Council has decided not to make any details on the votes public, and I will adhere to 
that. But there was no fundamental disagreement on the matter – at most differing views on 
individual formulations. 
How optimistic are you that the discussion will be concluded by 22 January? 
Discussions  are  well  advanced.  Last  week,  we  discussed  lots  of  technical  details.  In  any 
case, we will be able to take a decision on 22 January. Which does not mean that we have, 
in fact, already reached a decision. 
There has been struggle over government bond purchases for months. Is this dispute 
a problem for the credibility of the Governing Council? 
Not  at  all.  It  is  normal  that  there  are  different  opinions  in  a  Council  with  25  members  – 
otherwise, we wouldn’t need the body, we could decide everything in the Executive Board, 
which has six members. 
But  even  in  the  Executive  Board,  there  are  widely  divergent  opinions  on  bond 
purchases. 
If one wanted to avoid that, one person would be able to decide everything on his or her own. 
But there is good reason why that is not our system. The discussions in the Council and the 
Executive  Board  help  us  to  meticulously  evaluate  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  a 
decision, especially when it is about something as important as large-scale bond purchases. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
Mario Draghi has already made it clear that a bond programme does not have to be 
agreed unanimously. But would it really be acceptable if such a fundamental step was 
agreed with a narrow majority? 
It  would  be  possible  and  permissible,  but  not  advisable.  The  more  Council  members  that 
agree,  the  surer  I  am  that  we  have  weighed  all  the  pros  and  cons  of  a  bond  purchase 
programme properly and have minimised the risks. 
The verdict of the European Court of Justice on the earlier bond programme, the OMT 
programme,  is  still  outstanding;  this  week  the  Advocate  General  will  make  his 
recommendations. Do you not fear legal constraints for bond purchases on a larger 
scale, as are currently being considered? 
We still don’t know how the Court will decide. But the final opinion of the Advocate General 
will give us a certain indication this week. 
In  the  end,  it  might  be  confirmed  that  bond  purchases  in  the  secondary  market  are 
legal. But economically, they have an effect similar, in many respects, to a prohibited 
direct  monetary  financing  of  governments  by  means  of  the  printing  press.  If  that  is 
supposed to be unproblematic, do you then find the whole prohibition redundant? 
This prohibition might be less important if we had a fiscal union with a common fiscal policy. 
But as long as that is not the case, the ECB must be prevented from being dominated by the 
ministers of finance. That is why we need this Treaty article, to protect the independence of 
the central bank. 
Will it necessarily come to this fiscal union sooner or later? 
Of course, a fiscal union would make life easier for us as a central bank. But a fiscal union 
must have democratic legitimacy and be subject to adequate parliamentary control. 
It  doesn’t  exactly  appear  to  be  likely  at  the  moment.  Could  the  euro  survive  as  a 
“currency without a state” in the long run? 
The euro can certainly survive. But the system would always be fragile. We would have to 
get used to there can always be crises in one country with contagion in others. If we want to 
make progress, we need a common economic policy that also covers the field of structural 
reform. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
