  
 
Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Adapting to change – creating advantages from 
challenges 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  FINEX  6th  General  Membership  Meeting,  Manila, 
17 June 2015. 
 I am pleased to join you during your 6th General Membership Meeting for this year to speak 
on  the  near-term  prospects  and  challenges  of  ASEAN  integration  in  particular,  as  these 
relate to the Philippine banking system. I am sure questions about our readiness for ASEAN 
integration are in the back of your minds. And rightfully so. Serious market players must ask 
these  important  questions.  Are  we  equipped  to  take  full  advantage  of  the  benefits  of 
integration? Can our banks and our domestic markets face up to the challenges of greater 
competition? I am hoping that at the end of my remarks, you and I will  come to the same 
conclusion. 
Positive third party assessments 
In preparing for my remarks, it was tempting to simply enumerate the positive reviews that 
the country has been given in recent periods. The latest of these is from the IMF Article IV 
Mission  which  observed  in  their  concluding  report  that  the  country  “continued  to  perform 
strongly, despite weather-related disruptions to agricultural production”. In the same Mission 
report,  the  IMF  team  noted  that  “the  banking  industry  is  sound,  with  capital  ratios  well  in 
excess of prudential norms, low nonperforming loans, and abundant liquidity.” The economic 
numbers do tell a positive story. We have built buffers against external shocks through more 
than ten consecutive years of current account surpluses and our gross international reserves 
are ample by most traditional yardsticks. 
Governance of monetary policy is clear 
Moreover, the governance of our monetary policy is clear. And this, together with improved 
policy  communication  and  engagement  with  stakeholders,  has  helped  to  keep  annual 
average inflation within-target over the last six consecutive years. 
A number of central banks in the region have adjusted their policy settings in the past few 
months. Some have asked me why the BSP hasn’t yet followed suit. The answer quite simply 
is that the conditions that have compelled other central banks to ease monetary policy are 
not  exactly  present  in  the  Philippines.  First,  inflation  expectations  continue  to  be  well-
anchored. Second, while we are cognizant of expectations of global slowdown in economic 
growth  and  volatile  asset  prices  arising  from  the  asynchronous  monetary  policies  in 
advanced  economies,  our  assessment  is  that  domestic  demand  conditions  remain  robust. 
Solid  private  demand  and  buoyant  business  sentiment  support  this  view.  Moreover, 
notwithstanding the lower-than-expected Q1 GDP report, we see that in the months ahead, 
ample  domestic  liquidity  and  higher  public  spending  are  expected  to  support  domestic 
economic activity and sustain the economy’s momentum. 
We do feel some heat, however, quite literally from Mother Nature. This is not just about the 
discomfort  of  the  daily  heat  permeating  through  our  office  windows.  Rather,  there  is  the 
looming  threat  of  another  El  Niño  phenomenon.  As  temperatures  rise,  supply  chains  may 
become disrupted and create ripples through inflation. 
All  things  considered,  however,  we  see  the  balance  of  risks  still  point  to  inflation  settling 
within the target range of 3±1 percent in 2015–2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Vision for the banking industry 
In making these assessments, however, we are aware that markets are constantly evolving. 
In light of this, the BSP has repeatedly espoused “3Rs” for the banking industry. Banks must 
be Responsive to the needs of their stakeholders, act in a Responsible manner and stand 
Resilient to the volatilities that frequently come their way. 
Responsiveness requires that banks are inclusive. The market that banks serve must not be 
limited to those who can already invest. Instead, banks must reach out to those who desire 
and can be made better off by the products that they offer. Acting Responsibly stems from 
adherence to the entire spectrum of governance. While Resilience to volatilities necessitates 
effective management of risks. 
The lay of the challenges ahead 
These 3 R’s must figure prominently in our banking system if it is to continue to be welfare-
enhancing  to  its  stakeholders.  This  is  true  whether  we  consider  only  our  own  domestic 
operating environment or whether we consider the broader market of ASEAN integration. 
If  it  is  brought  to  its  expected  conclusion,  the  integration  of  the  ASEAN  financial  markets 
would reshape the global market landscape. To better appreciate how this may come about, 
it will help to step back and identify the different facets of this integration initiative. 
The  ASEAN  Economic  Community  (AEC)  is  slated  to  commence  by  year’s  end.  The 
objective  is  to  consolidate  ASEAN  into  a  single  economic  base  that  is  integrated  into  the 
global  markets.  In  short,  we  expect  to  achieve  free  movement  of  goods,  services, 
investment, skilled labour, and the freer flow of capital. 
The  parallel  initiative  is  the  integration  of  the  ASEAN  financial  markets  under  the  ASEAN 
Financial  Integration  Framework  or  AFIF.  This  has  a  very  broad  coverage  which  includes 
banking, insurance and capital markets as well as the payment systems. 
The  banking  component  of  AFIF  is  the  ASEAN  Banking  Integration  Framework  or  ABIF. 
Under  ABIF,  so-called  Qualified  ASEAN  Banks  or  QABs  will  be  allowed  to  establish 
operations within ASEAN. These QABs, as endorsed by the home jurisdiction regulator, must 
meet  established  global  standards  for  banking  supervision.  In  addition,  the  framework 
provides for bilateral agreement between the respective home and host banking authorities 
which  will  govern  the  execution  of  ABIF  and  the  operation  of  QABs  in  the  respective 
jurisdictions. 
An easy way to imagine how the ABIF will play out is this. Picture a single multi-jurisdiction 
archipelago  called  ASEAN.  Goods  and  services,  as  well  as  labour  and  capital,  can  move 
freely within the archipelago with as little friction cost as possible. QABs extend the reach of 
one jurisdiction by having “outposts” outside its own jurisdiction’s borders but still within the 
larger archipelago. 
As banks, these QABs compete with other banks in the host jurisdiction. They are covered 
by  the  same  regulations  as  a  “local”  in  a  host  jurisdiction,  subject  to  refinements  agreed 
bilaterally by the home and host regulator. This increases competition in the market of the 
host  jurisdiction  but  it  also  provides  financial  consumers  with  a  wider  array  of  financial 
products and services. 
As illustrated, ABIF provides a financial highway for the raw potential of ASEAN. Instead of 
using  US  correspondent  banks,  intra-ASEAN  trade  and  investments  can  be  cleared  and 
settled  as  inter-branch  transactions  of  QABs.  This  is  not  only  convenient  but  specifically 
highlights the nature of ASEAN itself: a regional cluster that has a record of growth, defined 
by a retail market with high disposable income and unparalleled saving potential. 
But, ASEAN integration is not just the banking side. It also covers the development of both 
the capital market and the payment systems. Achieving both the AEC and AFIF means that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Filipino  entrepreneurs  can  seamlessly  tap  the  capital  markets  in  any  of  the  10  ASEAN 
jurisdictions.  Local  investors  would  also  have  more  options  on  securities,  with  the  added 
convenience of not having to open accounts in other ASEAN jurisdictions. 
To enforce this vision, payment systems would be linked such that cross-border obligations 
will  be  settled  with  finality  in  the  investor’s  own  jurisdiction.  Central  counterparties  are 
established  to  reduce  liquidity  flows  while  central  depositories  are  in  place  in  behalf  of 
investors with all trades duly reported to designated repositories. 
Taking the changes and creating opportunities 
All these, ladies and gentlemen, represent the vision of economic integration. 
For  FINEX  members  who  are  banks,  you  will  be  faced  with  increased  competition.  It  is 
imperative  therefore  that  you  define/carve  out  your  comparative  advantage  in  our  local 
market,  which  has  one  of  the  youngest  populations  in  ASEAN  and  in  the  bigger  ASEAN 
market, which is home to over 600 million individuals. This necessitates perhaps a different 
thinking cap, given that you will be making the hard decisions on positioning yourself in the 
market  a  time  when  global  reforms  and  regional  agreements  are  reshaping  the  market 
landscape. If you have not done so, you will need to make those tough decisions now to give 
yourselves time to execute your strategic goals. 
Broker-dealers  must  now  take  an  even  broader  view  of  what  and  how  you  define  your 
“market”. I know many of you have leveraged on technology to extend your reach throughout 
our archipelago. But you may wish to also go beyond the bounds of our 7,100 islands and 
partake of ASEAN’s saving which in 2013 alone was over USD700 billion. A portion of that 
has been deployed outside ASEAN, so, re-directing this back to ASEAN is certainly going to 
have positive effects. 
And to the CFOs in FINEX, the sheer thought of transforming 10 separate jurisdictions, that 
generated about USD2.4 trillion  worth of output in 2013 alone,  into a single base of freely 
flowing economic resources ought to lead you to review the way you prioritize portfolios. 
With  ASEAN  banking  integration  on  the  horizon,  new  opportunities  arise.  But  we  also 
recognize  the  possibility  of  the  increased  volatility  of  capital  flows  and  additional  risks 
attendant to cross-border transactions. The complexity of regional bank operations highlights 
the  need  for  vigilance  among  supervisory  authorities  and  continued  focus  on  risk 
management among financial institutions. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  our  finance  executives  must  adapt  quickly  to  our  rapidly  changing 
environment. Unparalleled opportunities are unfolding and potential pitfalls as well if we do 
not  watch  out.  It  is  soon  going  to  be  a  very  different  world  out  there  for  the  financial 
executive.  The  sooner  we  take  cognizance  of  what  may  be,  the  better  we  can  prepare. 
Change is upon us. Are we ready for ASEAN banking integration? 
For  ABIF,  the  groundwork  has  been  prepared  with  the  liberalization  of  foreign  bank  entry. 
The  BSP  is  gearing  banks  up  to  “step  to  the  regional  plate”  by  adopting  higher  capital 
requirements,  enhancing  credit  risk  management  rules  and  raising  governance  standards, 
among  others.  From  a  macro  point  of  view,  the  BSP  has  continued  to  create  a  stable 
macroeconomic environment. The rest of the story lies now with each of you in how you will 
adapt and move forward. 
This  reminds  me  of  that  little  best-selling  book:  “Who  Moved  My  Cheese?”  by  Spencer 
Johnson. The book has been in print for over a decade now. But its lessons are always fresh. 
The book is a parable about 4 characters – “Sniff” and “Scurry”, and “Hem” and “Haw”. In the 
parable, these 4 characters found “cheese” in the same spot at Cheese Station “C” each day. 
Hem and Haw assumed that the cheese would always be there because so far, the cheese 
had been there without fail. They were not paying attention to the small changes that had 
been taking place. In the meantime, Sniff and Scurry noticed that each day the cheese was 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  getting  smaller.  Not  unexpectedly,  therefore,  their  reactions  were  different  when  one  day, 
there was no longer any cheese at Station C. Sniff and Scurry were prepared. My question to 
you,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  is  this  –  when  change  comes  upon  you,  would  you  be  heard 
shouting petulantly like Hem and Haw did: “Who moved my cheese”? 
While there are still parts of ASEAN integration that are being finalized, the principles have 
been set. The lessons from the book on anticipating, monitoring and being quick to adapt to 
change  are  therefore  lessons  we  would  need  to  apply  even  today.  Together,  we  have 
travelled far in re-shaping and re-energizing our financial system. Let us, further solidify that 
partnership to position our country in a more integrated ASEAN. 
Thank you very much for your attention and good afternoon. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
