   Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Economic transformation for sustainable 
economic growth in the Greater Mekong Subregion 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Euromoney 
Greater Mekong Subregion Investment Forum, Bangkok, 28 May 2015. 
 Excellencies, Honorable speakers 
Distinguished guests; Ladies and Gentlemen 
1. 
It  has  always  been  a  great  pleasure  to  be  part  of  the  Euromoney  Greater  Mekong 
Subregion  Investment  Forum.  Let  me  first  thank  the  organizers  for  inviting  me  to 
share with you my views and vision on the prospects of GMS during the last three 
consecutive events. Today, it is my last remark as the Bank of Thailand governor at 
this forum to highlight the way forward of our region, and today’s topic on “Economic 
Transformation for Sustainable Economic Growth in the Greater Mekong Subregion” 
seems to fit the current context and timing quite well. 
My  first  talk  here  three  years  ago  was  on  the  Greater  Mekong  Subregion  as  the 
“rising star” of Asia. For its rich endowments and strategic locations, the GMS is now 
well recognized as a new gem that shines through the South East Asian economic 
frontiers.  Over  the  past  decades,  I  have  witnessed  the  beautiful  glory  of  the 
GMS.  With  its  impressive  economic  growth  and  good  prospect  for  trade  and 
investment  opportunities,  the  GMS  has  gained  much  interest  from  both 
regional and global investors. 
According to the ADB, the foreign direct investment inflow to the GMS has increased 
steadily at the annual average of 8–9 percent. While the nominal GDP has climbed 
up  at  a  faster  pace  around  12  percent  per  annum  despite  the  slowdown  in  global 
economies. 
The fruits of our labors from past continuous development of the GMS have grown 
gracefully. The result of a more opened and transformed economy has led to a more 
interconnection  that  allows  the  GMS  countries  to  realize  what  used  to  be  the  far-
reaching prosperities. Our people can now commute across GMS’s countries on the 
road  network  of  over  nine  hundred  thousand  kilometers,  22  times  of  the  equator’s 
length. 
However,  it  has  been  quite  often  said  “what  get  you  here  won’t  get  you  there”. 
Despite a bright future for the GMS, there are still clouds on the horizon. To weather 
through  existing  and  imminent  challenges  from  external  turbulences  as  well  as 
domestic  structural  bottlenecks,  the  GMS  cannot  stand  still,  but  should  keep 
upgrading itself in order to continue to make progress on its economic transformation 
and achieve sustainable growth in the long term. 
At  this  juncture,  let  me  first  walk  you  through  “the  three  critical  elements”  that  I 
deem  essential  in  laying  a  strong  foundation  for  the  GMS  on  their  journey  of 
transformation. 
First, we may already be aware that while regional integration brings about promising 
growth, 
the 
toolsets.  As  a  result, 
effectiveness  of 
transformation  of  macroeconomic  framework  has  been  a  key  to  enhance  the 
effectiveness  of  market  mechanism  and  pave  ways  for  the  economies  towards  the 
desirable directions. Moreover, robust macroeconomic policy management, including 
well-tailored  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  mix,  concrete  tax  policies,  transparent 
business  laws  and  governances,  would  shore  up  public  confidence  and  create 
it  also  entails  greater  external  vulnerability  which  could  dilute 
individual  country’s  economic 
the 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 8. 
9. 
 income  distribution,  which 
 
investment-friendly  environment.  Apart  from  that,  it  would  also  allow  the  country  to 
better sustain its economic growth in the longer term despite the global headwinds. 
The  second  element  is  an  economic  and  social  transformation  to  address 
inequality  of 
is  considered  a  major  cause  of 
“development  fatigues”  in  many  emerging  countries.  In  many  cases,  countries’ 
statistics reveal high concentration of wealth in import – export sector as well as in 
FDI  enterprises.  It  is  important  to  note  that  such  distributional  bias,  if  not  taken 
seriously,  could  hinder  economic  growth  potential.  To  promote  better  distribution  of 
wealth, both public and private sectors will have pivotal roles. While tax and subsidy 
policies should be tailored, given country specific structure, to efficiently allocate fair 
share of wealth, supply-side and financial policy should also ensure equal spreading 
of economic opportunities in tandem with easily accessible financial system. In this 
context, financial institutions’ effort to provide a more efficient and easily accessible 
financial  service  is  a  necessary  condition  to  ensure  that  the  benefits  of  regional 
affluence will be shared equitably. 
On the third elements, rapid pace of globalization and change in global trade pattern 
have raised challenges to our economies and thus, shed lights on the necessity to 
improve  the  efficiency  of  regional  production  processes.  Thus  far,  many 
industries in the GMS have stepped up their efforts to move up the value chains of 
production  as  well  as  integrate  into  regional  supply  clusters  to  better  utilize  the 
abundant resources. Nowadays, the GMS has shifted its focus from primary products 
to intermediate and final goods through the employment of advanced technology and 
high-skilled  labour.  This  allows  the  GMS  to  continually  expand  the  production 
capacity and speed up innovations that would foster the long-term regional economic 
growth going forward. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
10. 
the 
in  order 
to  unlock 
This journey of transformation is not a bed of roses and it could take some times to 
bear  fruits.  Yet,  there  are  opportunities  to  be  seized  in  pursuit  of  long-term 
sustainable development. With promising prospects await, what I expect to see in a 
very fast-approaching future is the interplay between different facets of development 
to strengthen the health of the economy and keep it well in balance. These recipes 
may  sound  familiar,  if  not  already  overheard.  The  key  enablers  that  I  view 
important  to  warrant  the  GMS’s  smooth  transformation  towards  strong  
growth  foundation  mentioned  above  include  (1) infrastructure  (2) in-house 
technological advancement and (3) sound financial system. 
Firstly, 
long-run  potential  growth,  well-established 
infrastructure will be one of the crucial pillars that will sow a seed of a healthy 
investment  climate  conducive  for  growth.  Such  that,  infrastructure  upgrade 
requires  time,  yet  necessary.  Investment  in  logistic  areas  including  increasing  road 
density, better railway system, modernized airports and seaports will all lead to the 
enhancement  of  both  production  and  distribution  processes  whereby  strengthening 
connectivity  among  members.  Preeminently,  concrete 
long-term  plans  on 
infrastructure  projects  are  vital  in  order  to  attract  large  pool  of  regional  savings  to 
meet  investment  needs.  A  set-up  of  Asian  Infrastructure  Investment  Bank  or  AIIB 
comes at a right juncture to raise potential for infrastructure financing for the whole 
region.  Also,  governments’  clear  focus  on  infrastructure  upgrading  will  facilitate  the 
growing  cross-border  trading  activities.  I  am  glad  to  see  the  continued  cooperation 
between Thailand and other GMS members in linking our rail networks and roads in 
order to foster trade and investment interconnectedness among us. 
Secondly,  despite  physical  infrastructures  in  place,  lack  of  innovative  ideas  to 
leverage on existing knowledge and technology could undermine the potential of the 
region.  With  this  bottleneck,  the  economies  may  face  limitation  in  sustaining  their 
competitive  advantage,  which  currently  rely  heavily  on  the  exploitation  of  natural 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
11. 
12. 
2 
  13. 
  
endowments  and  support  from  the  government.  In  this  regard,  private  sector’s 
improvement  in  technology  and  innovations,  in  tandem  with  other  infrastructure 
development,  can  become  a  tailwind  to  support  the  GMS  to  overcome  technology 
stagnation  and  provide  a  competitive  edge  to  the  private  sector.  This  should  also 
enhance the intra- regional trade and investment capabilities. 
Last  but  not  least,  financial  system  can  act  as  a  blood-vein  that  nurtures  the 
economy. We might not realize the necessity of having a healthy blood- vein system 
in  our  body.  But  if  there  is  a  blockage,  one  could  experience  a  detrimental  mal-
function  of  the  brain,  and  stroke  may  occur.  The  same  applies  to  our  economy; 
efficient  and  accessible  financial  system  will  ensure  smooth  and  solid 
transformation of the economy. At this juncture, financial institutions are a key in 
keeping  the  efficacy  and  health  of  the  financial  system  in  check.  On  one  hand, 
financial prudence through enhanced risk supervision and management will provide a 
strong  backdrop  for  improvement  in  financial  system.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
favorable financial system should also be underpinned by financial inclusion, which is 
analogous to having the blood-vein reaches all organs in our bodies. As I previously 
pointed out, increasing access to financial services will bolster economic dynamism 
where vast financial opportunities can be better tapped by private sectors.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
14. 
To  end  my  remarks  today,  allow  me  to  reiterate  that  these  key  enablers  will  be 
necessary to support the areas of transformation for the GMS. And on the prospect of 
the GMS going forward, I would like to leave you with the vision of Mr. Lee Kuan Yew 
who  viewed  Singapore  as  computer  hard  drive,  and  the  foreign  talents  being  the 
megabytes of storage capacity added to the computer. The computer will thus never 
hang  given  its  enormous  storage  capacity.  Likewise,  the  increasing  interconnection 
among  the  GMS  countries  can  help  expand  production  potential  and  economic 
opportunities by utilizing each other’s spare capacity. I am therefore convinced that 
the conference today will also help generate more megabytes to our storage, which 
would help smooth our journey of transformation towards the sustainable growth of 
the region. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
