  Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Financial inclusion and financial literacy in Asia 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
OECD/Thailand  Seminar  on  “Financial  Inclusion  and  Financial  Literacy  in  Asia”,  Bangkok, 
16 December 2014. 
 the 
the  progress  of 
Mr.  André  Laboul,  Chair  of  the  OECD  International  Network  on  Financial  Education, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Honorable Speakers, Ladies and Gentlemen, Good morning, 
I  would  like  to  start  by  welcoming  you  all  to  Bangkok.  It  is  a  great  honor  for  the  Bank  of 
Thailand to co-host the OECD Seminar on Financial Inclusion and Financial Literacy in Asia 
with our partner, the Securities and Exchange Commission of Thailand. And, it is my great 
pleasure to deliver the keynote speech at this very important event. 
Many of you might question why the Central Bank Governor is here at this forum on financial 
inclusion and financial literacy, as the Governor should be more worried about the slowdown 
of  growth  in  major  economic  sectors  or  macro-economic  policies  aimed  at  stimulating 
Thailand’s GDP at this very challenging period in our country. The reason I am here today is 
that financial inclusion and financial literacy are the pre-requisites for solid development of 
the national economy and a sound financial system. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the ultimate goal of the Bank of Thailand, as well as of other central 
banks,  is  to  ensure  sustainable  economic  growth  which  will  enhance  the  well-being  of  our 
people.  While  assuring 
financial  system  and  well-established 
infrastructure in Thailand, we also recognize the importance of consumer empowerment in 
our financial sector. As a consequence, we established the Financial Consumer Protection 
Center or FCC in 2012 to promote consumer protection. One of the FCC’s key tasks is to 
improve financial literacy of consumers. 
Over the past few years, the FCC has continually been delivering financial education within 
its capacity through creative tools and communication channels. The FCC has been sending 
messages  that  would  help  shape  consumers’  behavior  towards  responsible  finance 
practices,  which  would  consequently  lead  to  financial  discipline  of  the  entire  nation. 
Nevertheless, the attempt to improve people’s behavior to save and spend wisely has not yet 
been fully accomplished. Household debt is still high at 70 to 80 percent of GDP for the past 
two years. Crucial financial information and knowledge provided at Point-of-sale were often 
ignored  by  customers.  Moreover,  people  still  seek  loans  from  alternative  sources  such  as 
from the informal sector where interest rates are incredibly high and debt collection practices 
are sometimes abusive and unethical. We also have to admit that the demand side evidence 
is  partially  influenced  by  supply  side  factors.  Intense  market  competition  and  countless 
innovative  products  and  services  nowadays  could  also  encourage  careless  spending 
behavior. Therefore, effective measure to prevent such situation is truly in need. 
The potential root causes or threats that influence people to make an adverse decision on 
their saving and spending manner  might consist of these three following factors. The first 
one  is  poverty,  which  has  long  been  one  of  the  most  important  issues  policy  makers  in 
developing countries strive to overcome. When there is insufficient wealth to nourish basic 
needs, indebtedness could become inevitable and it is difficult to get out of the vicious cycle 
of debt. 
The  second  factor  is  the  growing  trend  in  consumerism  which  largely  overshadows 
consumers’  self-restraint  and  eventually  entices  them  to  spend  recklessly.  In  this  well-
connected  era,  consumerism  has  rapidly  intensified  and  spread  widely  through  various 
perceptive  channels  especially  the  mass  media.  Let  me  give  you  one  example  of  this 
consumerism we have experienced. Not long ago, the Bank of Thailand invited the bank’s 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  CEOs to a meeting and we showed them their own television advertisement. The campaigns 
were  trying  to  induce  people  to  apply  for  loans  with  streamlined  process.  This  could  lead 
people to believe that applying for a loan was as simple as daily shopping at a supermarket. 
An  average  ordinary  individual  could  easily  get  the  cash  and  spend  on  vacations,  buying 
some  fashionable  outfits,  or  paying  for  a  wedding  ceremony.  Worse,  one  advertisement 
related the number of loan application to the chance of success in a lucky draw, the more 
you  borrow,  the  higher  chance  of  success  to  win  gold  necklaces.  After  watching  those 
commercials, the CEOs were surprised to learn how far their marketing campaigns had gone 
and agreed to promptly revise the concepts of their marketing messages to minimize further 
imprudent behavior. 
Lastly,  I  must  add  ignorance  as  another  essential  cause  of  improper  financial  behavior. 
Even  with  a  well-designed  financial  education  program  with  meaningful  messages  and 
effective  delivery  channels,  financial  literacy  cannot  be  achieved  if  consumers  neglect  the 
necessity and benefits of appropriate personal financial management. 
All  in  all,  desirable  financial  behavior  is  sometimes  well  known,  but  less  likely  to  be 
implemented by consumers themselves. It is similar to living a healthy lifestyle. We know that 
healthy  food  and  exercise  are  good  for  us,  but  we  don’t  do  it.  Hence,  a  solution  to  the 
improvement  in  financial  behavior  remains  a  challenging  puzzle  for  many  of  the  policy 
makers and practitioners to find the right solutions for various groups of people. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I truly believe that this seminar would allow an invaluable opportunity 
for us to learn how to solve these puzzles from honorable speakers who have come a long 
way  to  share  with  us  their  enriching  experiences  and  lessons-learnt.  The  achievement  of 
effective  financial  education  and  behavioral  change  would  eventually  drive  the  global 
community  towards  a  more  financial-  literate  and  disciplined  population  who  would  help 
ensure sustainable growth and equality in our society. 
Lastly, I wish the seminar a great success. I also wish to express my sincere appreciation for 
all of your endless efforts in promoting financial inclusion and financial literacy. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
