  Manuel Sánchez: Understanding macroprudential instruments and their 
impact 
Remarks by Mr  Manuel  Sánchez, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the seminar 
“Financial  Stability:  Designing  and  Implementing  Macroprudential  Policy”,  organized  by 
Central Banking Publications, Windsor, United Kingdom, 21 April 2015. 
 It is a pleasure to be with you in this prestigious forum devoted to the discussion of central 
banking issues. I would like to thank the organizers for their invitation to share my thoughts 
with  you  on  one  of  today’s  most  stimulating  topics  in  economics,  the  design  and  use  of 
macroprudential instruments. 
I will start by discussing what is involved in defining and measuring macroprudential policies. 
Then, I will briefly review the empirical evidence on the effectiveness of their implementation 
and  pinpoint  some  possible  unintended  consequences  and  long-term  risks.  I  will  end  by 
touching on Mexico’s experience with prudential financial measures. As always, my remarks 
are  entirely  my  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the  views  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico  or  its 
Governing Board. 
The measurement challenge 
Macroprudential  policies  are  at  the  forefront  of  current  economic  discussions.  They 
encompass  tools  aimed  at  containing  systemic  risk  and  pursuing  financial  stability.  In 
general,  systemic  risk  refers  to  the  possibility  that  the  financial  system  experiences 
significant  disruptions  which  may  impair  the  functioning  of  the  economy.  The  scope  is  the 
system  as  a  whole,  as  opposed  to  microprudential  tools  which  are  directed  at  fortifying 
individual financial institutions. 
Macroprudential  instruments  can  be  classified  according to  various  criteria.  A  useful  set  is 
that  presented  by  international  financial  organizations  on  the  basis  of  what  these 
mechanisms  are  meant  to  tackle.  Specifically,  they  can  seek  to  curb  excessive  credit 
expansion,  such  as  through  time-varying  capital  requirements;  offset  amplification  of 
systemic  risk,  as  in  the  case  of  limits  on  maturity  mismatches;  and  counteract  structural 
vulnerabilities  and  spillovers  of  stress,  such  as  with  additional  loss  absorbency  related  to 
systemic importance.1 
An  objective  evaluation  of  effectiveness  is  essential  for  coherently  implementing  economic 
policies.  In  the  case  of  macroprudential  measures,  this  exercise  should  provide  an 
assessment of how well the goals are being achieved, as well as an identification of possible 
unintended  consequences  and  long-term  risks.  Here  the  analyst  faces  several  challenges, 
among which, three stand out. 
The first is conceptual, involving the absence of widely accepted, precise, and quantifiable 
definitions  of  systemic  risk  and  financial  stability.  The  obvious  implication  is  that  without 
measureable concepts, diagnostics may end up requiring the tracking of too many variables 
and, more importantly, unambiguous evaluation becomes cumbersome. 
Furthermore,  there  is  a  lack  of  consensus  on  what  leads  to  financial  crises,  including 
prominently,  the  most  recent  global  turmoil.  One  view  is  that  financial  systems  tend  to  be 
information  asymmetries,  agency  problems  and 
inherently  unstable  due 
to  either 
 1  See Financial Stability Board, et al. (2011), Macroprudential Policy Tools and Frameworks, Progress Report to 
G20, October. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  externalities, or weaknesses in the decision making of market participants, as exemplified by 
herd behavior. 
One way of looking at this is to identify long financial cycles, which manifest themselves as 
sequences of booms and busts in credit and asset prices. Hence, macroprudential tools are 
proposed as a way to smooth the system’s intrinsic instability.2 
This view contrasts with an alternative approach, according to which crises arise largely as a 
result of ill-designed economic frameworks, including monetary, credit, and bank protection 
policies. Under this perspective, macroprudential instruments carry less weight, as the focus 
is on preventing policies from being the causes of the problems in the first place. 
A  second  evaluation  challenge  has  to  do  with  the  limited  knowledge  we  have  on  the 
transmission  mechanisms  through  which  macroprudential  tools  operate.  No  commonly 
shared model is at hand to assess these instruments comprehensively. 
A  third  difficulty  stems  from  scarce  available  data  to  test  the  tools  consistently,  especially 
those recently implemented. This panorama makes clear that further progress is needed to 
arrive  at  quantifiable  definitions  and  operational 
to  appraise 
macroprudential  policies.  For  the  time  being,  given  the  importance  of  these  factors,  it  is 
essential to take into account the limitations of any evaluation exercise.3 
frameworks 
in  order 
What we know about effectiveness 
The prescription for macroprudential measures has given rise to empirical research. While it 
is impossible to summarize all of it, I would like to highlight some recent results.4 
Work on cross-sections of countries supports effectiveness from particular macroprudential 
tools  on  credit  expansion.  For  example,  one  study  concludes  that  a  wide  range  of 
instruments are capable of reducing the procyclicality associated with loan growth. Another 
demonstrates that tighter loan-to-value and debt-to-income have greater impact when credit 
increases rapidly and housing prices are high relative to income. Looser measures, in turn, 
have smaller effects, but the difference is negligible in downturns.5 
A  second  set  of  cross-country  studies,  while  continuing  to  indicate  material  effects  from 
specific  macroprudential  tools  on  credit  growth, find  that  impacts from  others  are minor  or 
even run in the opposite direction. One of them indicates that countercyclical capital buffers 
may  have  null  or  negative  effect,  while  another  demonstrates  the  bearing  from  capital 
surcharges on systemically important financial institutions not to be significant.6 
A  third  group  of  research,  based  on  individual  countries,  indicates  immaterial  or  adverse 
influence on credit expansion from applying certain tools. In particular, one study discovers 
                                                
2  See, for example, Borio, C. (2014), “Macroprudential Policy and the Financial Cycle: Some Stylized Facts and 
Policy Suggestions,” in Akerlof, G.A., et al. (eds.), What Have We Learned? Macroeconomic Policy after the 
Crisis, IMF and MIT. 
3  For a thorough discussion of measurement issues, see Hansen, L.P. (2013), “Challenges in Identifying and 
Measuring Systemic Risk,” in Brunnermeier, M. and A. Krishnamurthy (eds.), Risk Topography: Systemic Risk 
and Macro Modeling, NBER. 
4  For a survey of recent empirical research, see Galati, G. and R. Moessner (2014), “What do we Know about 
the Effects of Macroprudential Policy,” DNB Working Paper No. 440, September, Section 4. 
5  Lim,  C.,  et  al.  (2011),  “Macroprudential  Policy:  What  Instruments  and  How  to  Use  Them?  Lessons  from 
Country Experiences,” IMF Working Paper WP/11/238; and McDonald, C. (2015), “When is Macroprudential 
Policy Effective?” BIS Working Papers No. 496, March. 
6  Claessens,  S.,  et  al.  (2014),  “Macro-Prudential  Policies  to  Mitigate  Financial  System  Vulnerabilities,”  IMF 
Working  Paper  WP/14/155,  August;  and  Cerutti,  E.,  et  al.  (2015),  “The  Use  and  Effectiveness  of 
Macroprudential Policies: New Evidence,” IMF Working Paper WP/15/61, March. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  that in the United States, bank capital and liquidity ratios have a much smaller impact than 
many  other  factors,  such  as  funding  costs,  loan  performance  and  profitability.  Another 
analysis  indicates  that  time-varying,  bank-specific  minimum  capital  requirements  in  the 
United  Kingdom  have  dampened  credit  from  regulated  banks  but  fueled  lending  by 
unregulated entities.7 
Overall,  this  research  points  to  the  conclusion  that  macroprudential  tools  may  have  some 
effect on certain variables often taken as leading indicators of problems, but this does not 
necessarily imply control over systemic risk. Furthermore, using several instruments at the 
same time may end up producing contradictory effects on targeted variables. 
An implication of the above is that one should keep expectations realistic on what these tools 
can attain. This caveat should be extended to methods aimed at gauging vulnerabilities, such 
as  macro  stress  tests  and  network  analysis,  which  may  not  be  useful  as  early  warning 
indicators, a fact made clear by the recent global crisis.8 
The  existing  evidence  also  suggests  that  well-designed  macroprudential  policies  may 
strengthen the financial system. For this to be the case, regulation should generate the right 
incentives for financial intermediaries so that the system becomes less prone to crises. 
A  commendable  basic  principle  is  to  use  few  instruments,  and  if  possible,  according  to 
simple rules. Rules are preferable to discretion, as they lessen the risk of time inconsistency 
arising from the regulator’s information limits, bank resistance, and other pressures. 
Three examples of rules follow. One is to set capital and liquidity ratios sufficiently high and 
maintain  them  permanently  without  resorting  to  tinkering;  another  is  to  intervene  only  in 
extreme circumstances, such as when previously announced high thresholds for credit and 
asset price growth are breached; and a third is to impose a strong liquid reserve requirement 
for bank deposits to prevent runs.9 
On the other hand, although not exempt from debate, a body of empirical evidence provides 
support  to  the  alternative  view  that  financial  instability  may  largely  stem  from  ill-designed 
policies. In particular, some research suggests that expansionary monetary policy, subsidies 
targeting housing and the too-big-to-fail assumption played a major role in fueling the recent 
U.S. financial crisis. 
Additional research highlights the preventive capacity of monetary policy to lean against the 
wind,  discouraging  high  levels  of  leverage  and  possibly,  asset  booms.  An  inference  from 
these  findings  is  that  remaining  faithful  to  a  sound  macroeconomic  framework  is  a  crucial 
way to foment financial stability.10 
Unintended consequences and long-term risks 
Unintended consequences from macroprudential policies bear watching. If regulators take a 
discretionary  path,  the  policies  may  increase  market  and  investor  uncertainty  on  policy 
                                                
7  Kupiec,  P.H.  et  al.  (2013),  “Macroprudential  Policies and  the  Growth  of  Bank  Credit,”  AEI  Economic  Policy 
Working Paper 2013–08, December; and Aiyar, S., et al. (2014), “Does Macro-Prudential Regulation Leak? 
Evidence from a UK Policy Experiment,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 46(1), supplement. 
8  See Borio, (2014), idem. 
9  See  Taylor,  J.B.  (2014),  “Re-Normalize,  Don’t  New-Normalize  Monetary  Policy,”  The  Hoover  Institution 
Economics Working Paper Series, No. 14109; Borio, C. (2011), “Implementing a Macroprudential Framework: 
Blending Boldness and Realism,” Capitalism and Society, 6(1); and Cochrane, J.H. (2014), “Toward a Run-
Free Financial System,” April, available at SSRN. 
10  See, for example, Taylor, J.B. (2009), Getting Off Track: How Government Actions and Interventions Caused, 
Prolonged,  and  Worsened  the  Financial  Crisis,  Hoover  Institution  Press  Publication  No.  570;  and  Adrian, 
T. and N. Liang (2014), “Monetary Policy, Financial Conditions, and Financial Stability,” Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York Staff Reports, No. 690, September. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  duration and future changes, producing errors and inhibiting financial activity. The unknown 
market  response  to  transitory  measures  complicates  the  operation  of  monetary  and  other 
policies. 
Incentives for the diversion of investor time and resources to lobbying efforts could ensue, 
making  implementation  difficult  and  potentially  leading  to  their  deferral.  Additionally, 
discretion may result in an ample range of distortions and system inefficiency. 
While  preferable,  a  rules-based  approach,  if  too  severe,  potentially  limits  the  number  of 
trades  and  transactions,  curtailing  total  financial  activity  and  making  it  too  standardized. 
Another danger is that if rules are countercyclical, in downturns, they may potentially lead to 
irresponsible behavior, and possibly, to instability.11 
These measures could also carry long-term risks to the system. For example, they can give 
rise to the interpretation that regulators will assume a large fraction of system risk, generating 
moral hazard. Such is the case of provisions for banks considered “too big to fail.” 
In addition, the tools may inhibit healthy innovation, and, as mentioned, they can boost the 
unregulated  sector,  amplifying  and  creating  new  avenues  for  shadow  banking,  at  the 
expense of the regulated sector. Finally, excessive regulation may hinder the development of 
the financial system, damaging long-term economic potential, something especially harmful 
for countries suffering from low financial penetration. 
Mexico’s experience 
Mexico has designed its financial policies on the basis of its experience with previous crises, 
which emerged from macroeconomic disequilibria and inadequate bank regulation. The focus 
has  been  on  strengthening  financial  institutions,  as  well  as  helping  to  deepen  markets.  In 
general,  measures  have  been  based  on  a  few  rules  that  are  transparent  and  predictable. 
Much use of discretion has not proved necessary. 
Mexico’s financial system is bank based, with high participation of foreign-owned institutions. 
Foreign banks can only operate in Mexico through the establishment of subsidiaries, which 
must comply with the same regulations on a stand-alone basis as domestic banks. 
Strong capital and liquidity requirements were imposed even before Basel III rules became 
effective.  Specifically,  as  of  today,  Mexico  has  been  classified  as  compliant  with  those 
internationally enacted regulations, and certain features are even stricter.12 
In fact, in terms of bank prudential policies, Mexico benefits from the following five measures. 
The  first  is  capitalization  rules  that  incorporate  high  weights  for  maturity  mismatches  in 
market risks, including the banking book in addition to the trading book. 
Second,  for  foreign  currency,  caps  govern  net  liabilities  and  net  open  position,  while  a 
minimum liquidity ratio is required. 
A third distinctive measure relates to loan-loss provisioning, based on expected losses rather 
than realized ones. Estimation of expected losses covers information from the system as a 
whole,  such  as  the  level  of  aggregate  indebtedness  and  payment  behavior  of  borrowers, 
while it also takes into account an institution’s individual performance. 
A  fourth  characteristic  is  ring-fencing  in  terms  of  bounds  on  related-party  lending,  made 
tighter in the wake of the most recent financial crisis, as well as requirements for transferring 
assets and liabilities to related entities. 
                                                
11  For the problems related to relaxing macroprudential policies, see Calomiris, C.W. (2013), “Managing the risks 
of the new macro-prudential policy regime,” Borsa Istanbul Review, 13. 
12  Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2015), Regulatory Consistency Assessment Programme – Mexico, 
Bank for International Settlements, March. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Finally,  initial  progress  has  been  made  in  addressing  some  of  the  potential  risks  in  the 
nonbank  sector,  specifically  by  imposing  limits  on  leverage  undertaken  by  real  estate 
investment trusts. 
Regarding  financial  markets,  the  capital  account  is  totally  open,  with  no  restrictions  on 
portfolio  capital  flows.  Also,  Mexico  uses  a  floating  exchange  rate  regime.  The  policy 
emphasis has been on the creation of deep spot and forward foreign exchange (FX) markets, 
as well as on enhancing the liquidity of the domestic bond market. Mexico’s currency market 
is the most liquid among those of all emerging economies.13 
Mexico  does  not  rely  on  capital  flow  management,  especially  in  light  of  its  negative 
experience with controls during the 1980s. Instead, in cases of extraordinary market volatility 
and  particularly  amid  low  liquidity,  the  country  sometimes  uses  marginal  rule-based  FX 
intervention, mostly as a way to send a signal of confidence to market participants. 
This  framework  proved  itself  sufficiently  solid  during  the  recent  global  financial  crisis.  In 
particular,  throughout  2008  and  2009,  banks  remained  resilient  to  external  shocks, 
maintaining strong balance sheets. 
This  result  reflects  the  crucial  role  of  a  sound  macroeconomic  framework,  including  a 
sustainable and disciplined fiscal position, monetary policy aimed at controlling inflation, and 
a coherent regulatory and supervisory regime for financial institutions. 
This does not mean that Mexico is free of possible dangers going forward. Thus, the need to 
buttress  macroeconomic  policy  and  closely  monitor  possible  risks  and  vulnerabilities  that 
might endanger financial stability. 
The  world  faces  an  unprecedented  situation,  given  years  of  abundant  liquidity  and  cheap 
credit. The risks might not be the same as those in the  wake of previous crises, and new 
pitfalls will certainly appear along the way. 
The global search for yield in a context of lax monetary policies in advanced nations has led 
to substantial capital flows to emerging economies, including Mexico. In the near term, U.S. 
monetary normalization could be a precursor of a sudden stop or even a reversal of external 
funds, and induce a destabilizing drop in asset prices. In the face of this and other risks, the 
authorities must remain vigilant. 
Conclusions 
Evaluation  of  macroprudential  policies  faces  significant  measurement  challenges  which 
make  methodological  progress  necessary.  Thus,  any  assessment  should  be  taken  with 
caution.  Evidence  on  their  effectiveness  is  still  cursory,  but  much  of  it  points  towards  the 
conclusion that macroprudential tools help make the system and institutions more resilient. 
However, their use is hardly a guarantee of precluding future financial crises. 
In designing macroprudential tools, rules are preferable to discretion, as they can be more 
easily  formulated  to  generate  the  right  incentives  for  making  the  financial  system  more 
stable. It is key to remain on the alert for possible unintended consequences in the form of 
distortions and inefficient resource allocation, and long-term risks of factors that may inhibit 
the development of the system. 
Until now, the prudential policies implemented in Mexico have worked well, but we need to 
continue  strengthening  financial  regulation  and  the  macroeconomic  framework  so  that 
incentives lead to a deeper, more efficient, and stable financial system. 
                                                
13  See  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (2013),  Triennial  Central  Bank  Survey  of  Foreign  Exchange  and 
Derivatives Market Activity in 2013, April. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
