  Ewald Nowotny: Long-term perspectives for economic growth 
Opening remarks by Prof Dr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic 
of Austria, at the 43rd Economics Conference of the Central Bank of the Republic of Austria, 
Vienna, 15 June 2015. 
 the 
to  welcome  you 
the  43rd  Economics  Conference  of 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  very  pleased 
to 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank here in Vienna. 
This year we are going to discuss the “Long-Term Perspectives for Economic Growth” – and 
I would like to invite all of you to take part in this important discussion. We have once again 
prepared  a  highly  interesting  program  featuring  distinguished  speakers  and  discussants 
from different backgrounds in academia and policy-making. My particular welcome goes to 
State Secretary Sonja Steßl, who will address this year’s conference as our first speaker. 
Thank you very much for joining us today. At this point, let me also take the opportunity to 
thank  the  OeNB  staff  in  charge  of  organizing  this  event  for  their  outstanding  efforts  and 
commitment. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to start my introductory remarks today with a quote that very well captures the 
recent economic policy debate: 
“We  are  suffering  just  now  from  a  bad  attack  of  economic  pessimism.  It  is 
common to hear people say that the epoch of enormous economic progress […] 
is over; that the rapid improvement in the standard of life is now going to slow 
down. […]; that a decline in prosperity is more likely than an improvement in the 
decade which lies ahead of us.” 
These  lines  are  not taken from  a  recent  editorial  or  contemporary  blog  post. They  are the 
beginning of a famous essay by John Maynard Keynes on “The Economic Possibilities 
for our Grandchildren,” written in 1930. It is quite telling that 85 years later, we – the grand- 
and great-grandchildren of Keynes’ generation – seem to find ourselves in a situation similar 
to  his.  The  ruptures  of  a  great  economic  crisis  have  again  prompted  sometimes  gloomy 
forecasts  of  our  future  growth  prospects.  At  this  year’s  Economics  Conference,  we  will 
discuss  in  more  detail  whether  these  pessimistic  outlooks  are  justified  –  or  whether  “this 
interpretation is widely mistaken,” as Keynes concluded almost a century ago.1 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Economic  growth  is  a  spectacular  phenomenon.  While  an  annual  real  growth  rate  of  2% 
might  at first  sight  seem  modest  and  inconsequential,  it generates tremendous  energy  if  it 
                                                
1  The entire quote is: “We are suffering just now from a bad attack of economic pessimism. It is common to hear 
people say that the epoch of enormous economic progress which characterised the nineteenth century is over; 
that the rapid improvement in the standard of life is now going to slow down – at any rate in Great Britain; that 
a decline in prosperity is more likely than an improvement in the decade which lies ahead of us. I believe that 
this is a wildly mistaken interpretation of what is happening to us. We are suffering, not from the rheumatics of 
old age, but from the growing-pains of over-rapid changes, from the painfulness of readjustment between one 
economic period and another. The increase of technical efficiency has been taking place faster than we can 
deal with the problem of labour absorption; the improvement in the standard of life has been a little too quick; 
the banking and monetary system of the world has been preventing the rate of interest from falling as fast as 
equilibrium requires.” (John Maynard Keynes, Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren, 1930). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
reoccurs year after year. A look at historic data reveals that national per capita income2 in 
Western European countries has grown by a factor of almost 15 since the onset of the 
industrial  revolution.  This  continuous  growth  in  the  last  two  centuries  has  fundamentally 
changed the economic environment: the range and quality of consumption goods, the means 
and possibilities of production, the available types of technology and the ways how people 
communicate, interact and conduct their lives. 
For now, I would like to somewhat confine our view and look at no more than the past 45 
years. In the chart you can see the real growth rates for Austria and (by comparison) for the 
United  States  for  the  period  from  1970  to  today.  This  chart  contains  three  interesting 
messages. First, up to 2007 growth rates followed a clear trend in both countries: 2.7% in 
Austria and 3.1% in the U.S.A. Second, there are considerable fluctuations around these 
trend  growth  rates;  the  standard  deviation  in  both  countries  is  around  2%.  Third,  it  is 
extremely  difficult  to  disentangle  the  two  elements  –  trend  growth  and  fluctuations 
around the trend – in real time. This is particularly relevant for the period after the onset of 
the Great Recession in 2007, when the strongest deviation from the trend path occurred. 
There are two ways to interpret the developments following the Great Recession. The first 
one is to consider them a dramatic example of severe and persistent underperformance. 
Returning to the old trend path would require closing an output gap of almost 15% of GDP. 
This would still be possible within a number of years if growth rates were distinctly above the 
trend. 
Unfortunately, our most recent forecasts do not indicate that such a catching-up process is 
already in the making, but rather suggest a slow recovery. 
This  gives  some  support  to  the  second  possible  reading  of  the  above  chart.  Under  this 
interpretation, it would be overly optimistic to simply extrapolate the past growth trend into 
the future. On the contrary, we should consider the possibility that the Great Recession has 
marked the beginning of a new era of lower trend growth rates. 
These are, in a nutshell, the two views that characterize the topic of this year’s Economics 
Conference: the view that we are dealing with a persistent negative output gap and the view 
that we are confronted with a lower long-term growth rate. 
The  conference  program  includes  sessions  that  are related  to  both  perspectives  and  I  am 
sure that we will be presented with evidence and arguments for both sides. In the following I 
would  like  to  briefly  talk  about  some  aspects  that  I  consider  particularly  relevant  and 
important. I  will  first focus  on  the  long-term  perspective,  then  comment  on  some  demand-
side aspects before concluding with remarks on policy implications. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Long-run economic development is influenced by many factors, ranging from technology, 
demography, political and social institutions to more recent phenomena like globalization and 
climate change. Making predictions about the next 50 or 100 years is highly speculative, but 
interesting  nonetheless.  A  look  at  the  standard  growth  model  is  probably  a  good  starting 
point  for  organizing  thoughts  along  these  lines.  In  the  standard  growth  model,  the 
determinants  of  long-run  GDP  growth  are  population  growth  on  the  one  hand  and 
productivity growth on the other hand. 
Demographic  developments  are  expected  to  have  a  considerable  impact  on  the  future 
macroeconomic outlook. Decreasing fertility rates will have a direct negative impact on the 
                                                
2  This is based on the data provided in Angus Maddison, 2001, The World Economy. A Millennial Perspective, 
OECD, tables 1–2 and 1–3. The level of GDP per capita (measured in 1990 international dollars) increased 
from 1,232 to 17,921 (i.e. by a factor of 14.5) for Western European countries, while the figures for total GDP 
are  even  more  impressive:  an  increase  from  164  billion  (measured  in  1990  international  dollars)  to 
6,961 billion (i.e. by a factor of 42.5). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  growth  rate  of  total  GDP  as  long  as  they  are  not  counteracted  by  increasing  rates  of  net 
migration.  Population  aging,  on  the  other  hand,  might  lead  to  higher  savings  and  thus  – 
ceteris paribus – to a downward pressure on real interest rates. This reaction is sometimes 
presented  as  a  direct  and  necessary  consequence  of  the  rise  in  life  expectancy.  It  is 
important,  however,  to  emphasize  that  the  strength  of  this  channel  will  depend  on  the 
reaction  of  retirement  behavior,  i.e.  on  people’s  incentives,  willingness  and  ability  to  work 
longer. While demographic developments can be forecast quite accurately for the next 20 to 
30 years, the development of retirement age is much less certain, as it will depend on the 
design  of  public  and  private  pension  systems,  on  the  economic  environment  and  on  the 
progress of medical science. 
This brings me to the second main driver of long-term economic growth: the development of 
productivity. A number of observers have argued that the technological frontier is no longer 
expanding at the previous speed, that the “low-hanging fruits” have already been picked and 
that the wider consequences of the computer/internet revolution are more modest than those 
of  the  introduction  of  equivalent  general  purpose  technologies  like  the  steam  engine  or 
electricity. 
Opposed  to  this  pessimistic  view  of  the  future  of  innovation  there  is,  however,  a  second 
camp  of  thought  that  has  a  much  rosier,  almost  enthusiastic  view  of  the  technological 
possibilities  that  lie  ahead.  The  subtitle  of  a  famous  book  captures  this  perspective  in  a 
compact  form:  “How  the  Digital  Revolution  is  Accelerating  Innovation,  Driving  Productivity, 
and Irreversibly Transforming Employment and the Economy”.3 This camp of technological 
optimists refers to scientific breakthroughs that one might expect (or rather: not even expect) 
over the next decades, especially in the realm of life sciences. These discussions are thrilling 
and there are many aspects that deserve thorough and sometimes speculative thinking. The 
second conference day is almost exclusively dedicated to these long-term topics. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Long-term  forces  are  not  the  only  possible  cause  for  the  modest  growth  performance 
recorded  over  the  past  few  years.  The  recent  debate  has  provided  many  more  potential 
explanations for the weak economic recovery, and these, too, will be discussed later today 
and tomorrow. 
Of  particular  prominence  is  the  secular  stagnation  hypothesis  dating  back  to  Harvard 
economist  Alvin  Hansen.  He  viewed  the  weak  recovery  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Great 
Depression  as  being  caused  by  excess  savings  and  a  real  interest  rate  that  could  not fall 
sufficiently such as to equate supply and demand at full employment. Today’s proponents of 
Hansen’s  hypothesis,  for  example  Harvard  economist  Larry  Summers,  consider  this 
mechanism to be the main driving force behind a secular deficiency in aggregate demand 
in  the  aftermath  of  the  Great  Recession.  According  to  this  view,  long-term  factors  can  be 
considerably  amplified  by  a  number  of  specific  characteristics  of  a  post-crisis  recovery 
process. 
The  first  characteristic  is  the  zero-lower-bound  on  nominal  interest  rates.  If  inflation 
expectations  are  well  anchored  at  the  same time,  the real  interest rate will  be  stuck  at  an 
excessive level. As a consequence, we will see low investment and high unemployment. 
A  second  characteristic  of  the  current  recovery  process  is  the  phenomenon  of  debt 
overhang,  including  household,  corporate  and  public  debt.  A  number  of  observers  have 
identified this debt overhang as also having an aggravating influence on the drag on growth. 
                                                
3  This  refers  to  Erik  Brynjolfsson  and  Andrew  McAfee,  2011,  Race  Against  The  Machine:  How  the  Digital 
Revolution is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and Irreversibly Transforming Employment and the 
Economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  They consider painful and long-lasting deleveraging both in the private and the public sector 
as a necessary prerequisite for economic recovery. 
Finally,  there  is  also  the  view  that  weak  recovery  is  at  least  in  part  due  to  the  increased 
degree  of  uncertainty  surrounding  future  economic  developments.  This  uncertainty  leads 
households to increase their precautionary savings and firms to postpone their investments, 
further  enhancing  excess  savings  and  thus  exacerbating  the  deficiency  in  aggregate 
demand. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let  me  conclude  by  discussing the policy implications  –  in  particular the  implications for 
monetary  policy  –  of  the  recent  debate. What can  and  should  central  banks  do  to  sustain 
long-run growth and support economic recovery? 
Monetary  policy  plays  a  vital  role  in  managing  demand  fluctuations,  in  stabilizing  prices, 
output and unemployment. The recent episode has shown that this is also true at the zero 
lower bound. Quantitative easing policies have contributed significantly to economic recovery 
in  the  United  States,  and  there  are  first  signs  of  success  of  these  policies  also  in  the 
European Union. The recent spring forecast of the European Commission predicts a cyclical 
upswing across basically all EU Member States, and it attributes this upswing partly to the 
stronger-than-expected effect of the ECB’s quantitative easing policy. 
On the other hand, monetary policy is less effective when it comes to improving a country’s 
long-term  growth  potential.  Structural  policies,  institutions,  research  and  development  play 
more important roles in this context. But this is not to say that monetary policy is irrelevant for 
long-term  growth.  In  fact,  economic  performance  requires  a  growth-friendly  environment. 
Monetary policy contributes to such an environment by ensuring a reliable policy framework, 
a sound financial system, a well-functioning banking system, and macro-prudential policies 
that prevent excessive price fluctuations. 
Finally, I do dare to confront this meeting of economists with a rather philosophical question 
–  a  question,  however,  that  has  already  been  asked  by  J.M.  Keynes  and  which  is  today 
being  frequently  repeated  especially  among  young  people:  What  about  the  connection 
between economic growth and human well-being? Is there not an increasing need to look not 
only  at  the  quantity  but  also  at  the  quality  of  economic  growth?  This  is  a  very  broad  field 
indeed, but questions like these may point to some aspects that also central bankers may 
have to take into immediate consideration. At the recent, highly interesting ECB Forum on 
Central  Banking  in  Sintra,  there  was  a  discussion  on  structural  reforms  –  which,  as  you 
know,  is  a  mantra  in  all  ECB  statements.  One  of  the  eminent  economists  attending  the 
conference asked what may be the human costs of certain forms of structural reform. So e.g. 
what forms of increased flexibility in the labor markets are really welfare improving and what 
forms of increased insecurity, involuntary mobility, reduced chances for family life may have 
long-lasting negative welfare – and may be also outright growth – effects? And I may add: 
Would such a perspective lead to different priorities for policies that are intended to reduce 
unemployment? What  does  this  mean for  our  standard  concepts  of  potential  output  and  a 
natural rate of unemployment, which the ECB by the way sees at 10 %, compared to 5 % in 
the U.S.A.? You may know the famous remark by George Bernard Shaw: “Economists know 
everything about prices and nothing about values.” I trust that this will not be the motto of our 
meeting! 
This brings me to the end of my introductory remarks. To conclude, I look forward to having a 
day and a half with you to discuss these important issues of economic policy from a multitude 
of  perspectives.  I  hope  you  will  find  our  Economics  Conference  a  useful  and  an  insightful 
event. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
