  Barry Whiteside: Promoting money managerial skills in Fiji 
Address  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  “be  Money 
Wi$e” Essay Competition Awards Ceremony, Suva, 20 March 2015. 
 Distinguished Guests 
Colleagues 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
and  most  importantly  our  essay  winners  –  Sakshi  Prayatna  (Lautoka  Andhra  Sangam 
College), Divneeta Devi (Tavua College) and Upasna Chand (Ahmadiyya Muslim College), 
who are present here today along with their proud school principals and parents. 
Introductory comments 
A very warm welcome to you all. 
I  am  delighted  to  be  present  here  with  you  all,  to  award  and  recognise  the  efforts  of  our 
winning  students  for  this  important  initiative  –  the  “be  Money  Wi$e”  (bMW)  Essay 
competition. I am also grateful for the support of the school principals, teachers and parents 
of these students. 
Congratulations to our winners 
Firstly, congratulations to our three winners who have travelled all the way from Lautoka and 
Tavua and from nearby Nasinu with their teachers and parents. You have come out on top of 
224 other students who are your peers and I know that this must be a proud moment for you. 
Background 
This essay competition was launched last December, as one of the activities under the “be 
Money  Wi$e”  (bMW)  Program,  with  the  theme  “be  money  wise  –  securing  your  future 
goals today”. 
The  bMW  program  is  part  of  the  Capital  Markets  Awareness  platform,  targeting  school 
students. Its objective is to promote the importance of acquiring good money management 
skills  with  a  particular  focus  on  understanding  the  concept  of  investing  and  investment 
products available in Fiji. 
The  Program  has  been  designed  to  teach  our  children  “money  smart”  principles  by  using 
creative fun-filled activities which we envision that, in time, will lead to the development of a 
culture of financial prudence in our children, preparing them well for their adult working life. 
From the essays that were submitted, it was good to note that many students appreciate the 
importance of saving towards future goals. It was also great to note that students are now 
able to identify with the capital markets, (an area still viewed as highly technical by many). I 
am  confident  that  activities  like  this  competition  will  help  create  a  culture  of  learning  and 
information  sharing  amongst  our  students,  teachers,  parents  and  will  help  enlighten  the 
nation as a whole on the products and services available in our very own Capital Markets. 
Building on the success of this activity, we in the Reserve Bank and on our National Capital 
Markets Taskforce, will continue to commit ourselves to promoting Fiji’s capital markets with 
the  relevant  stakeholders  and  more  such  activities  will  be  organised  for  the  schools  and 
students in near future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Acknowledgements 
Organising activities of such magnitude requires a concerted effort by many stakeholders. So 
please  allow  me  to  thank  our  sponsors:  the  South  Pacific  Stock  Exchange;  V  B  Holdings 
Limited;  Fijian  Holdings  Unit  Trust;  and  the  Unit  Trust  of  Fiji,  who  made  this  initiative  a 
success. 
Special thanks also to the Ministry of Education, especially the Acting Permanent Secretary, 
for  supporting  our  “be  Money  Wi$e”  Program  and  also  for  assisting  us  in  relaying  the 
awareness to all schools in a timely manner. We will continue to work closely with Ministry of 
Education and hope to receive the same support for other activities which will be organised 
as part of the “be Money Wi$e” Program. 
Special  appreciation  must  also  go  out  to  the  members  of  the  Capital  Markets  Awareness 
Working Group for helping assess the essays and choosing the winners. Your commitment 
to the BMW Program is greatly appreciated 
With  all  your  support  and  hard  work  we  received  a  total  of  224  entries  from  secondary 
schools around Fiji. I might mention that it was certainly not an easy feat to decide on the 
winners, which was proof of the high calibre of the entries 
Concluding remarks 
In  concluding,  I  would  again  like  to  congratulate  the  three  winners,  Sakshi,  Divneeta  and 
Upasna. With your research towards this essay we hope that you have learnt and now have 
a  better  feeling  of  what  the  capital  markets  are  all  about.  We  also  trust  that  with  this 
knowledge you will be great ambassadors on the subject in your schools and communities. 
We hope that your prizes will lay a foundation for your future investments and you would, 
over time, grow to be more savvy investors in Fiji’s Capital Markets. 
With this, ladies and gentlemen I thank you for your presence here today, thanks also to our 
winners and all their fellow participating students and I wish you all a great afternoon. 
VINAKA 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
