  Emsley Tromp: How can we shape a better future for the Curaçao 
tourism industry? 
Keynote  speech  by  Dr  Emsley  Tromp,  President  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Curaçao  and  Sint 
Maarten, at the annual general meeting, organised by the Curaçao Hospitality and Tourism 
Association, Willemstad, 25 March 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon, 
It was with great pleasure that I accepted the invitation to share with you my views on the 
importance of the tourism industry for the economy of Curaçao and how we can maximize its 
growth potential. I firmly believe that for small open economies like ours, tourism, which is a 
thriving industry, provides a solid foundation for growth. Suffice it to note that while Curacao’s 
economic  growth  has  averaged  a  disappointing  0.6%  over  the  past  10  years,  stay-over 
tourism  in  Curaçao  has  increased  by  an  average  of  8.1%.  Today  it  is  the  country’s  most 
important industry in terms of real value added, foreign exchange earnings, and employment. 
The question now becomes, can we shape a better future for our tourism industry and make 
it the driver for economic growth? Or put differently: do we still have room for more growth in 
the tourism sector? 
Ladies and gentlemen, I am convinced that we do. However, we need to keep in mind that 
success in this industry depends, among other things, on our ability to remain an attractive 
destination.  In  addition,  this  industry  is  very  susceptible  to  changes  in  the  external 
environment.  Conditions  can  change  in  the  blink  of  an  eye.  Consequently,  we  need  to 
continuously enhance our ability to adjust to this changing environment. At the same time, to 
achieve a higher growth path we need to address some important issues in our economy. 
The world has changed drastically in recent decades, becoming more globalized with capital, 
goods, knowledge, and especially people moving faster than ever.  As the global economy 
expands and people become wealthier, they will be spending a larger share of their income 
on  leisure  activities,  such  as  travelling.  In  1950,  for  example,  25  million  tourists  travelled 
around  the  world;  in  2014,  the  number  exceeded  1.1  billion.  This  record  number  in  2014 
represented  4.7%  growth  compared  to  2013,  and  2014  was  the  fifth  consecutive  year  of 
higher  than  average  growth  since  the  global  financial  crisis.  Tourism  has  become  a  major 
driver of socioeconomic progress for developed, emerging, and developing economies as it 
generates foreign exchange income, creates jobs and business opportunities for enterprises, 
and encourages the development of infrastructure. 
In 2014, tourism generated approximately US$ 1.4 trillion in global foreign exchange income, 
approximately  30%  of  the  export  of  services.  According  to  the  World  Travel  and  Tourism 
Council, tourism contributed 9% of global GDP and global employment. Tourism has risen 
significantly in recent years and the World Trade Organization (WTO) expects this trend to 
continue, reaching 1.8 billion tourists by the end of 2030. 
As  one  of  the  world’s  fastest  growing  industries,  tourism  has  brought  about  more 
diversification and competition among destinations. Also, due to innovation and continuous 
technological  developments,  tourists  have  become  more  hands-on,  sophisticated,  and 
demanding. This shift in tourist behavior has led to new tourist destinations in addition to the 
more traditional destinations of Europe, North America, and the Caribbean. 
Tourism is also one of the most resilient global industries. Through the years, it has proven 
capable of handling setbacks and adapting to the changing environment in which it has to 
operate.  Moreover,  tourism  helps  preserve  and  stimulate  countries’  natural  and  cultural 
heritage.  Today,  investments  in  tourism  even  take  into  account  environmental  aspects, 
particularly the prevention of environmental degradation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
Ladies and gentlemen, moving now to our region, the Caribbean is commonly referred to as 
the world’s most tourism-dependent region. Tourism constitutes the region’s most important 
economic pillar, contributing 14% of Caribbean GDP and 11% of its total employment. Also, 
the sector generates the largest share of foreign exchange income. In spite of its small scale 
and  vulnerability  to  external  shocks,  our  region  has  registered  continued  growth  in  the 
number of tourist arrivals. In 2014, for example, 26.3 million tourists traveled to the region, 
representing a 5.3% growth compared to 2013. 
Similar  to  most  Caribbean  economies,  tourism  is  the  most  important  pillar  of  the  Curaçao 
economy. This sector directly contributes 9.2% of GDP and 9.6% of employment. Moreover, 
26.5% of foreign exchange earnings from the export of goods and services are generated by 
the tourism industry. The industry also has indirect spin-off effects across all sectors of the 
economy,  particularly  the  hotels  &  restaurants,  wholesale  &  retail  trade  and  transportation 
sectors. Furthermore, the tourism sector contributes to the economy in terms of investments 
and government income. In this context, the tourism industry is highly labor intensive and, 
therefore, creates opportunities for many small and medium enterprises that provide goods 
and services to this industry.  
Since  2011,  the  sector  has  been  experiencing  continued  growth,  driven  by  both  stay-over 
and cruise tourism. For instance, in 2014, 1.1 million tourists – both stay-over visitors and 
cruise passengers – visited Curaçao, representing a 3.2% growth compared to 2013. This 
positive development in the tourism industry over the past four years is attributable to, among 
other things, an increase in our room capacity with the construction of new hotels, increased 
airlift, and more marketing efforts to promote Curaçao as a tourist destination. However, a 
comparison  of  our  growth  figures  with  those  of  other  Caribbean  destinations  suggests  we 
have  not  yet  reached  our  potential.  For  example,  while  Curaçao  recorded  a  mere  2.5% 
growth  in  2014,  stay-over  tourism  in  Aruba  grew  by  9.5%  and  Sint  Maarten  recorded  a 
growth of 7.1%. This begs the question of why we cannot sustain stronger growth in stay-
over tourism. To answer this question and increase growth, we can draw on the experiences 
in the region. 
If  we  are  to  sustain  stronger  economic  growth  overall,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  achieving 
higher  growth  in  the  tourism  sector  is  indispensable.  During  the  past  decade,  Curaçao’s 
economic  growth  averaged  a  mere  0.6%  per  year.  Meanwhile,  unemployment,  particularly 
youth unemployment, remains unacceptably high. 
In the period preceding 10–10–10, there were good reasons to think that a period of stronger 
economic  growth  could  be  sustained.  As  part  of  the  constitutional  restructuring,  Holland 
provided us with debt relief, lowering the burdensome debt-to-GDP ratio to a healthy 35%. 
The interest expenses of the public sector declined to NAf. 50 million from the towering figure 
of NAf. 350 million. Government could now issue bonds under the same modalities as the 
Dutch  government,  thereby  implicitly  achieving  a  AAA  rating  for  its  bonds.  Meanwhile,  our 
foreign exchange reserves reached historic highs of nearly NAf. 2,7 billion. The constitutional 
restructuring also meant that the wasteful duplication of the double layer of government was 
eliminated  leading  to  a  more  manageable  public  sector  and  thus  public  finance.  These 
developments led to much optimism and hence a favorable investment climate sufficient to 
withstand  the  impact  of  the  Great  Recession.  Curacao  was  among  the  very  few  countries 
that managed to record growth in the aftermath of the developments of 2008. However, as 
the old adage goes, not all that can be counted counts. 
In the years that followed, the investment climate deteriorated quickly and the much-needed 
investment  dried  up.  The  political  headwinds  that  ensued  after  10–10–10  and  the  fiscal 
restraint  required  by  the  Kingdom  government  to  bring  our  financial  household  in  order 
masked the developments I outlined above. 
The government has focused primarily on meeting the conditions stipulated in the Kingdom 
Financial Supervision Act. We have spent most of our energy on achieving and maintaining 
fiscal sustainability, while neglecting strategies to stimulate economic growth. Even though 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
lengthy discussions have been ongoing about strengthening the economic pillars of Curaçao, 
including  ship  repair  and  international  financial  services,  and  developing  new  economic 
sectors, it is again only the tourism sector that has made significant progress. 
As  I  have  mentioned  on  earlier  occasions,  people  often  believe  that  stimulating  economic 
growth  and  the  development  and  strengthening  of  specific  economic  pillars  is  the 
responsibility of the government alone. However, developments in our tourism and financial 
sectors have driven home the point that private sector-led initiatives are crucial to achieve 
the desired development and growth of an industry. Meanwhile, the role of the public sector 
is to create the right investment climate and regulatory framework for businesses to operate, 
grow,  and  invest.  This  collaborative  approach  is  the  best  recipe  for  creating  sustainable 
economic growth and progress. 
In  the  case  of  our  tourism  sector,  thanks  to  these  joint  efforts,  Curaçao  has  been  able  to 
benefit from increased airlift, which for many years was considered one of the main obstacles 
to  further  growth.  Increased  airlift,  however,  must  go  hand  in  hand  with  increased  hotel 
accommodations. Otherwise, we will face the problem of having tourists willing to come to 
the island, airlift to bring them, but no place to accommodate them. 
Curaçao needs to be able to offer a high standard of hotels and luxury villas to cater to the 
high-end market. Right now, some existing hotels need upgrading, and numerous projects 
have been announced in recent years but construction activities have yet to start. 
Ladies and gentlemen, if we want to achieve a higher growth path for tourism, we need to 
invest  more  in  the  industry.  Today’s  investment  is  tomorrow’s  growth.  Investments  are 
needed to upgrade and expand our hotel capacity and other accommodations. However, a 
major impediment remains vis-a-vis the availability of risk capital to finance large investment 
projects in this industry. Shortage of risk capital is a major obstacle for tourism development 
in many countries, and Curaçao is no exception. The main reason for the shortage of risk 
capital  is  that  hotel  and  other  major  investment  projects  in  the  tourism  sector  are  typically 
riskier  and  more  complex  than  other  investment  projects  and,  hence,  require  specially 
designed terms of financing. 
Investment projects in the tourism sector, such as the construction of hotels, have relatively 
high fixed costs and high operating expenses. In addition, hotel projects present a number of 
risks associated with the project itself, the players involved in the project, and the project’s 
financial structure. Hotel projects also must take into account adverse external risks, such as 
economic and political stability and exposure to natural disasters. 
For these reasons, commercial banks and institutional investors are reluctant to provide the 
necessary  financing  to  the  tourism  industry.  Consequently,  private  investors  who  cannot 
meet  the  requirement  of  sufficient equity  demanded  by  the  financial  institutions will  not  be 
able to realize their projects and promising investment projects remain forever in the pipeline. 
This situation has typically created certain challenges in our region and even had unintended 
consequences for the industry. Nevertheless, this growth path should be pursued. 
Ladies and gentlemen, you will not be surprised to learn that I do not share these concerns. 
On  the  contrary,  I  am  of  the  firm  view  that  the  time  for  muddling  through  is  over.  Blindly 
super-imposing on us solutions that might have worked elsewhere, is done at the expense of 
more problems in the future. To this point, I refer to the much-debated Aqualectra and the 
Sint Maarten Harbour bonds that were bought by the Bank. 
As  I  mentioned,  as  part  of  the  constitutional  restructuring  of  the  Netherlands  Antilles,  the 
Netherlands provided debt relief to the constituent parties of the former Netherlands Antilles. 
By  taking  over  the  entire  outstanding  public  debt  of  both  the  Central  government  and  the 
government of the island territory of Curacao, the market of government securities dried up 
overnight.  Even  with  this  Nafl  4  billion  market  of  government  bonds,  institutional  investors 
thought there were insufficient investment instruments available in the country. In addition, 
with the disappearance of that market, the Central Bank was also deprived of an important 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
instrument in its arsenal for Open Market Operations, thereby constraining the effectiveness 
of  monetary  policy.  To  provide  impetus  and  further  develop  this  market,  the  Central  Bank 
embarked on an asset purchase program to build its portfolio of corporate bonds. Although 
views of those operations differed, the ultimate goal was to create a new instrument for the 
conduct of monetary policy in line with our mandate – namely, to promote the stability of the 
guilder. 
The purchases of these bonds resulted in lower yields, which by no means were limited to 
the individual bonds that were purchased. These lower yields have given rise to spillovers 
that also compress the yield of bonds with a similar maturity. In addition, they also reduce the 
overall duration risk borne by the market and lower the interest rate risk borne by investors, 
accordingly  affecting  the  entire  term  structure.  The  compression  of  interest  rates  creates 
incentives for investors to rebalance their portfolio away from riskless securities. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  unconventional  times  call  for  unconventional  measures.  However, 
these little understood asset purchases, aside from their positive impact on the development 
of  the  corporate  bond  market  and  the  lowering  of  electricity  and  water  prices,  have  been 
mired  in  unintended  consequences,  which  have  constrained  their  use  to  address  our 
financing needs in the tourism industry. 
Various governments in the region have traditionally sought alternative ways to address this 
shortage of risk capital and, hence, unlock private investments in the tourism sector. These 
alternatives  include  the  provision  of  guarantees  and  public-private  partnerships.  For 
example,  in  the  case  of  Aruba,  the  provision  of  government  guarantees  resulted  in  an 
investment boom in the tourism sector in the late 1980s and early 1990s. From 1986 to 1992, 
the  number  of  hotel  rooms  there  rose  from  2,776  to  7,103,  a  growth  of  more  than 
150 percent. However, as we have witnessed, this experience is not without its risks to fiscal 
sustainability. 
Alternatively,  governments  could  stimulate  cooperation  between  the  public  and  private 
sectors to share investment costs, risks, responsibilities, and profits generated from tourism 
projects. The degree of funding and risk allocation to the public and private sectors depends 
on the asset procurement model chosen. This cooperative approach requires a high degree 
of collaboration and, therefore, generates efficiency, cost effectiveness, synergies in terms of 
knowledge, skills, and expertise, pooling of capital resources, innovation and diversity, and 
effective  utilization  of  public  assets.  On  the  other  hand,  the  approach  is  complex,  time-
consuming, and entails some difficulties with regard to the implementation of the projects. 
Government policies in the last few years have been dictated by the CFT-mandated fiscal 
consolidation. While this consolidation is a necessary condition for macroeconomic stability, 
the  disproportionate  emphasis  on  fiscal  restraint  at  the  expense  of  other  areas  of 
government,  has  held  back  growth  in  recent  years  and  given  way  to  the  view  that  this 
operation  may  have  pushed  us  into  a  longer-lasting  valley  of  economic  misfortune.  The 
economic jury is still out on whether this period of sub-par growth is temporary or not. 
If we are to reverse this trend, ladies and gentlemen – and there are good reasons to think 
that  we  can  –  and  sustain  a  period  of  stronger  growth,  tourism  is  the  key!  If  we  take,  for 
example, the much anticipated Hard Rock Hotel, the construction phase of this project will 
lead  to  an  additional  0.2%  real  GDP  growth  a  year,  assuming  a  construction  period  of 
2.5 years. Moreover, during the construction phase, 180 additional jobs will be created. Once 
operational, the additional room capacity created by the Hard Rock Hotel will host more than 
26,000 stay-over visitors per year. As a result, the hotel will contribute approximately 1.7% to 
GDP  and  an  additional  inflow  of  foreign  exchange  revenues  of  NAf.62  million  a  year.  The 
hotel also will generate 300 direct and 150 indirect jobs. However, to realize this project, a 
shortfall of risk capital in the order of NAf.172.0 million must be bridged. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the government has raised over Nafl 500 million to finance its capital 
expenditures during the last two years. If we are to compare the economic impact of these 
borrowings  with  the  potential  impact  of  the  abovementioned  hotel  project,  we  have  to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
conclude  that  the  balance  is  unequivocally  in  the  direction  of  the  hotel  project.  While  the 
government  borrowing  may  be  necessary  on  social  grounds,  it  has  not  created  a  single 
permanent job nor will it add to long-term sustainable economic activities. A fraction of this 
amount invested in hotel projects would produce an abundantly bigger sustained impact on 
our level of economic activities. 
Given  the  key  insights  we  have  drawn  from  the  past,  we  have  reason  to  be  cautious.  In 
particular, any government assistance must be designed so it does not endanger our hard-
won fiscal stability. Therefore, I argue against any direct government assistance in terms of 
participation in private sector investments. 
Investments in tourist projects in the recent past have been possible thanks to the mezzanine 
financing  structure  offered  through  the  Social  Economic  Fund.  Mezzanine  financing  is  a 
hybrid form of financing between debt and equity that gives the lender the right to convert its 
debt title in ownership through an equity interest in the company if the conditions warrant it. 
Mezzanine  financing  offers  a  solution  when  business  opportunities  are  increasing  but 
investors  lack  sufficient  equity  capital  and,  hence,  are  unable  to  obtain  the  required  debt 
financing. However, mezzanine financing is not supposed to be a permanent feature of the 
firm’s capital structure. 
Mezzanine  financing  offers  the  borrower  flexibility  in  shaping  amortization  schedules, 
including  specifying  special  conditions  for  repayment,  and  other  borrowing  conditions. 
Another advantage is that the borrower obtains financing while increasing his debt leverage, 
thereby  increasing  his  chances  to  obtain  additional  debt  financing.  From  the  provider’s 
perspective, mezzanine financing offers a higher interest rate compared to senior debt, such 
as bank loans, and it is more liquid than private equity investments. 
To meet the current needs in the tourism industry, the government could address the lack of 
risk capital in various ways. The government of Curaçao is in the process of creating a new 
development  bank  that  should  provide  more  risk  capital  for  investments.  In  anticipation  of 
that new bank’s creation, the government could encourage the OBNA to play that role and 
make  risk  capital  available  now.  Alternatively,  the  government  could  make  mezzanine 
financing fiscally attractive. 
Ladies and gentlemen, in addition to addressing the financial bottlenecks, attention should 
also be directed at other areas that can negatively impact the growth and development of the 
tourism industry. One of these areas is the qualitative mismatch between labor supply and 
demand.  The  tourism  industry  is  an  important  employer;  therefore,  it  is  vital  to  equip  our 
youth with the necessary skill set to meet the requirements of this industry. If our youth lack 
these skills, they will continue to have trouble finding jobs in this growing industry.  
Ladies and gentlemen, as I mentioned, competition between tourist destinations has become 
more intense. Consequently, tourist destinations need to address those areas where they lag 
behind vis-à-vis their competitors. In this context, the rigidities in our labor market, our high 
cost  of  doing  business,  and  the  complex  administrative  procedures  and  red  tape  in  our 
government apparatus need to be addressed. Numerous studies and reports have presented 
recommendations on how to address these weaknesses of our investment climate. If we are 
to achieve this higher growth path, we do not have time to muddle through. 
In  conclusion,  we  should  not  be  content  with  our  relatively  low  tourism  growth  rates 
compared  to  the  double-digit  growth  rates  in  other  Caribbean  countries.  We  need  more 
private  investments  to  expand  and  continually  improve  our  tourism  product  to  meet  the 
tourists’ changing needs. To increase private investments, we need to facilitate financing for 
large  investment  projects.  Moreover,  achieving  higher  tourism  growth  is  a  joint  effort,  in 
which  collaboration  between  the  public  and  private  sector  is  indispensable.  As  a  Dutch 
saying goes: “Doing everything on your own is adding up. Collaboration is multiplying.” 
However, the joint effort is not limited to collaboration between the private and public sectors. 
Each  member  of  our  community  plays  a  part  in  the  experience  of  tourists  in  our  country. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  
 
Therefore,  it  is  important  to  change  our  mindset  and  become  more  service-oriented  and 
customer driven. 
Let me finish by saying that we need to be more ambitious and aim for excellence. A wise 
man once said: “The biggest risk is not taking any risk... In a world that is changing quickly, 
the only strategy that is guaranteed to fail is not taking risks.” 
Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you for your attention and wish you a fruitful meeting. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
