  Luis M Linde: Monetary policy – current situation and challenges 
Closing remarks by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the launch of the 
yearbook  “Anuario  del  euro  2014”/Fundación  de  Estudios  Financieros-Fundación  ICO, 
Madrid, 28 January 2015. 
 Firstly,  I  would  like  to  thank  Irene  Garrido,  chairwoman  of  ICO,  Fernando  Fernández  and 
Juan  Carlos  Ureta  for  kindly  inviting  me  to  attend  the  launch  of  this  new  edition  of  the 
Anuario del Euro. 
I will begin by reviewing the current economic situation in the euro area and the measures 
adopted by the European Central Bank. Then I will go on to briefly comment on the leeway 
available to monetary policy in a context of very low inflation rates, and conclude by saying 
something  about  the  different  position  in  the  monetary  policy  cycle  of  the  main  developed 
economies. 
The economic situation in the euro area and the ECB’s monetary policy 
The euro area’s economy is in a situation of weakness, with overall expected growth of 0.8% 
for 2014. After remaining fairly dynamic in first quarter of 2014, GDP grew only modestly in 
the following two quarters, and according to available forecasts, the path of recovery, both in 
the short and medium term, will be fragile, with disparities between countries. According to 
the European Central Bank’s projections, in line with the consensus, 2015 and 2016 will see 
growth of 1% and 1.5%, respectively. These rates are not only modest, but are also subject 
to certain risks, which, on balance, point to even lower increases in economic activity. 
Turning to prices, for some months now inflation has been well short of the 2% benchmark, 
which is the ECB’s medium-term monetary policy target. The forecasts available continue to 
point to the risk of inflation remaining too low for too long. The ECB’s latest projections entail 
a further downward revision, with inflation expected to stand at 0.7% in 2015 and 1.3% in 
2016. 
In  recent  months,  against  a  background  in  which,  given  the  weakness  of  demand  and 
fierce competition, firms have limited price-setting power, the slump in the price of oil has 
exacerbated the drop in inflation. At the end of 2014, the annual rate of inflation stood at 
–0.2%  (the  average  rate  in  2014  was  +0.4%)  and  it  is  expected  to  remain  at  very  low  or 
negative levels in the early months of 2015. 
This  heightens  the  risk  of  second-round  effects  on  wages  and  prices  that  could  have  an 
adverse impact on inflation expectations in the medium term. Indeed, the latest private sector 
forecasts  have  seen  substantial  downward  revisions  for  all  terms.  Thus,  for  example, 
according  to  the  January  edition  of  Consensus  Forecasts,  the  leading  private  sector 
economic  forecast  publication,  the  average  rate  of  inflation  forecast  for  2015  is  just  0.1%, 
compared with 0.6% forecast for the same period a month earlier. 
In  a  macroeconomic  context  of  weak  demand,  these  rates,  so  far  from  2%,  not  only 
endanger the current anchoring of medium-term inflation expectations, but also heighten the 
risks to price stability and hamper the economic recovery of the area as a whole. Economic 
recovery is even more difficult for countries that are in the process of correcting imbalances 
that  built  up  in  the  past,  and  in  particular  for  those,  such  as  Spain,  that  have  suffered 
competitiveness losses and need their prices and costs to fall relative to the euro area as a 
whole. 
To address these risks the ECB has in recent months taken further measures to make its 
highly expansionary monetary policy even more expansionary. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  As  regards  standard  measures,  the  ECB  has  reduced  the  interest  rate  on  its  main 
refinancing operations to 0.05%, which is technically the lower bound for this rate. Also, the 
interest rate on the deposit facility, which is the rate at which the cash surpluses that credit 
institutions hold in their Eurosystem accounts are remunerated, stands at negative levels 
(–0.20%), which discourages the accumulation of such balances and stimulates lending. 
Recent  actions  also  include  non-standard  measures:  a  new  long-term  financing  facility 
specifically aimed at promoting greater lending to the private sector; and two asset purchase 
programmes,  one  for  asset-backed  securities  and  the  other  for  different  types  of  covered 
bonds. 
Finally, on 22 January, the ECB announced new monetary stimulus measures. The interest 
rate  applicable  to  the  long-term  financing  facility,  which  aims  to  stimulate  lending,  was 
reduced  and  an  expanded  asset  purchase  programme  was  announced.  This  programme 
includes, in addition to the purchases of asset-backed securities and covered bonds issued 
by  the  private  sector,  purchases  of  bonds  issued  by  euro  area  central  governments, 
agencies and European institutions. 
The  size  of  this  expanded  programme  is  ambitious,  with  monthly  purchases  amounting  to 
€60 billion. The purchases will commence in March and, in principle, it is intended that they 
will  be  carried  out  until  September  2016,  although  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has 
given itself the option to continue to make purchases if the path of inflation is not consistent 
with its aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
The  programme  requires  that,  to  be  eligible  for  purchase,  securities  must  be  at  least 
investment  grade,  or  if  not,  that  their  issuers  are  under  an  EU-IMF  financial  assistance 
programme. These conditions are similar to those applied in the requirements for collateral to 
be  eligible  for  monetary  policy  operations  and  those  envisaged,  in  August  2012,  in  the 
announcement  of  the  sovereign  bond  purchase  programme  known  as  Outright  Monetary 
Transactions (OMTs). 
Of  the  additional  asset  purchases,  12%  will  be  purchases  of  bonds  issued  by  European 
institutions and the other 88% will be purchases of bonds issued by central governments and 
agencies  of  countries  in  proportion  to  their  shares  in  the  ECB’s  capital  key.  The  national 
central  banks  will  purchase  the  bonds  issued  by  European  institutions  and  most  of  the 
domestic  bonds,  the  ECB  purchasing  8%  of  the  latter.  According  to  our  preliminary 
estimates, the purchases of Spanish government debt will amount to some €100 billion over 
the time horizon considered. 
The agreement reached means that, in the hypothetical event that losses arise from these 
operations,  the  national  central  banks  would  assume  the  risks  of  their  purchases  of 
government bonds, while the risk of the purchases of the bonds of European institutions and 
of sovereign bonds by the ECB would be shared by all the members of the Eurosystem. 
Monetary policy leeway in a very low inflation environment 
Let me now comment briefly on two matters of importance in the current context: the leeway 
available  to  monetary  policy  in  a  very  low  inflation  environment  and  the  different  cyclical 
moment of monetary policy in the main developed economies. 
The particularly low inflation rates and the prospect that they will remain at similar levels for a 
prolonged period reduce the scope for monetary policy to bring the financing conditions of 
the economy into line with its cyclical position when that position is characterised by notable 
weakness. 
Conventional monetary policies based on setting short-term nominal interest rates reach their 
lower bound when rates approach 0%. At that point, any additional monetary stimulus would 
require non-standard measures designed either to shape agents’ expectations as to future 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  interest rate behaviour or to change the size and composition of the central bank’s balance 
sheet. 
Balance sheet expansion through programmes to purchase public and private securities is 
unquestionably  an  exceptional  measure,  but  it  is  not  exclusive  to  the  euro  area,  and  has 
already been adopted by other central banks. Between 2010 and 2014 the Federal Reserve, 
the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan doubled the size of their balance sheets after 
running out of room to further reduce interest rates and after having resorted to announcing 
their commitment to hold official interest rates at very low levels for a sufficient time. 
The  design  and  implementation  of  programmes  to  purchase  public  and  private  debt 
securities  must  not  fail  to  take  into  account  the  institutional  characteristics  of  the  area  in 
which they are applied. Monetary policy in the United States or in the United Kingdom acts in 
a  fiscal  union,  which  makes  it  easier  to  resolve  potential  problems  associated  with  the 
allocation of any costs incurred by the central bank in its monetary policy operations. In this 
respect,  the  unique  characteristics  of  the  euro  area  meant  that  complex  technical 
adjustments had to be made when designing the announced programme. 
The  monetary  expansion  measures  taken  by  central  banks  are  unquestionably  vital  for 
achieving  the  objectives  in  terms  of  inflation  rates  and  credit  flow  stimulation  and  of  the 
financing of the economy. However, sustainably bolstering economic activity and job creation 
requires  the  monetary  stimuli  to  be  accompanied  by  measures  in  other  areas.  In  the 
European case, the reform drive has to be maintained to ensure the proper functioning of the 
markets  and  fiscal  policies  favouring  growth  while  at  the  same  time  meeting  the 
commitments assumed under the Stability and Growth Pact. 
Position in the cycle and monetary policies of the main developed economies 
To  conclude,  I  would  like  to  refer  to  the  different  position  in  the  cycle  of  the  leading 
developed countries. 
In the United States, and to a lesser extent in the United Kingdom, both of which are at a 
much more advanced stage of economic recovery than the euro area, the monetary policy 
debate  now  centres  on  when  and  how  rapidly  to  start  withdrawing  part  of  the  monetary 
stimulus,  whereas  in  the  euro  area  and  in  Japan  further  stimulus  measures  are  being 
introduced. This difference in cyclical position is affecting prices on the financial markets, and 
particularly exchange rates. 
In  this  respect,  the  exceptional  stimulus  measures  announced  by  the  ECB  and  the 
consequent easing of financial conditions in the currency area, the depreciation of the euro 
and  the  sharp  drop  in  oil  prices  provide  a  favourable  financial  backdrop  for  the  euro  area 
and, in particular, for countries like Spain that have made a tremendous effort to correct their 
imbalances. 
The  benefits  of  the  adjustments  made  under  adverse  conditions  may  now  be  further 
bolstered  by  a  favourable  financial  climate.  It  is  important  that  the  Spanish  economy 
consolidate  these  gains  and  that  it  maintain  the  pace  of  reform  and  the  improvements  in 
competitiveness in a framework of stability. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
