  DeLisle Worrell: Competing in the global market of research 
Welcome remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
Central  Bank  of  Barbados  35th  Annual  Review  Seminar,  Hastings,  Christ  Church,  27  July 
2015. 
 The Central Bank of Barbados can be proud of its research achievements over the forty plus 
years  of  its  existence.  We  have  a  rich  trove  of  economic  data  and  analysis  that  we  have 
accumulated  over  those  years,  most  of  which  is  available  for  download  from  the  internet, 
from our own website among others. Thanks to this research we understand better how our 
economy works, and how the economy has evolved over time. Understanding the economy 
is  the  key  to  the  formulation  of  good  economic  policy,  and  for  public  involvement  in  the 
execution of the economic strategy. 
This is a vitally important activity, because our economy does not behave in the same way as 
the  US  or  UK  economies,  or  the  economy  of  any  large  country  whose  currency  is  widely 
used around the globe. Our economic policies do not work well if they are modelled on those 
of large industrialised countries, countries that provided the context for the development of 
the economic models and policies that comprise the conventional policy suite reflected in the 
reports of the IMF, World Bank and other international institutions. 
We  are  by  no  means  alone  among  developing  and  emerging  market  economies  in 
recognising  that  the  conventional  policy  dictate  does  not  improve  the  condition  of  our 
economies.  However,  we  are  among  the  very  few  that  have  an  alternative  diagnosis  and 
prescription  for  curing  our  economic  ailments.  The  key  to  our  diagnosis  is  the  explicit 
recognition that size matters for economic adjustment and growth. 
Small countries do not have the possibilities that large countries have of producing at home 
to substitute for imported goods to any meaningful extent, nor can they diversify their exports 
beyond  a  narrow  compass.  The  reason  is  obvious  to  anyone  who  lives  in  a  very  small 
country:  with  limited  resources  and  skills  the  country  must  of  necessity  concentrate  on 
getting production of a limited range of products and services up to international standards of 
competitiveness. Precisely because they are small producers in a global market, only those 
products  and  services  that  are  competitive  internationally  will  survive.  Except  for  purely 
domestic  production  such  as  construction  and  personal  care,  anything  that  is  not 
internationally competitive will be driven from the market, either through formal channels, or – 
if prohibitive barriers to international trade are erected – via informal markets. 
The reality of a limited range of production of anything that can be traded, in comparison with 
the very wide range of consumption items, production inputs and capital goods that a modern 
economy needs, defines what we describe in economic terms as a “hard” foreign exchange 
constraint. In practical terms it means that you cannot grow the economy if you do not have 
an  additional  source  of  foreign  exchange,  and  you  will  not  secure  additional  foreign 
exchange by lowering your selling price – for example by devaluation. It means that a central 
tenet of the conventional wisdom, which recommends a combination of fiscal expansion and 
an exchange rate depreciation, will not result in growth of output. (Remember that we are 
talking about small producers selling on a global market, where they can sell everything they 
can  produce  at  the  ruling  price.)  Instead,  devaluation  causes  imported  inflation,  and 
depresses real income and output. 
Note  that  this  analysis  does  not  depend  on  the  country’s  level  of  development,  or  the 
sophistication of its financial markets. It is as valid for Malta, Iceland and Bermuda as it is for 
Barbados  and  Trinidad  and  Tobago. Whenever  international  institutions  admit  to  evidence 
that conventional policies are not working, they typically seek the cause in the development 
of the country’s financial system. Their argument is that underdevelopment of the financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
system is the reason that monetary and exchange policies have little traction. But financial 
underdevelopment is the wrong suspect; the fault lies with small size. Since small size is not 
“curable”, foreign-exchange-constrained economies must find an alternative policy mix which 
works around these constraints. 
Barbados’ economic policy explicitly recognises the foreign exchange constraint. In this we 
are  unique.  This  country’s  adjustment  programme  since  2013  offers  a 
textbook 
demonstration  of  an  effective  framework  for  managing  the  foreign  exchange-constrained 
economy  in  the  face  of  adverse  circumstances.  Because  foreign  exchange  is  crucial, 
economic policy makers check the balance of inflows and outflows every day, so that any 
pressure on foreign exchange may be detected immediately. In May of 2013 we noticed a 
persistent decline in foreign exchange reserves, and we understood that total spending in the 
economy would have to be cut, to reduce the demand for imports in line with the available 
foreign  inflows.  The  tool  used  to  adjust  spending  was  fiscal  tightening.  The  first  budget 
adjustment,  in  August  2013,  proved  insufficient;  the  reserves  continued  to  fall.  But  the 
December measures did the trick, by bringing the fiscal deficit down from 12 percent to under 
7 percent, and the country’s foreign reserves have since reverted to the normal pattern seen 
in the years prior to 2013. 
Barbados  also  has  lessons  to  teach  the  world  about  how  to  grow  the  foreign  exchange-
constrained economy. Such economies depend on foreign exchange for their growth, so the 
growth  strategy  must focus  on  increasing  the  productivity  of  the merchandise  exports  and 
services  in  which  the  country  has  a  demonstrated  competitive  advantage,  enhancing  the 
product and moving up the value chain, and investment in value added products. Barbados 
has  comparative  advantages  in  tourism  and  related  services,  international  business  and 
financial  services,  and  branded  export  products  such  as  rum,  and  it  has  a  potential 
comparative advantage in green energy. Overall, the economy can grow only as fast as the 
growth  of  foreign  exchange  to  finance  the  additional  imports  needed  by  the  growing 
economy. 
A third lesson has to do with the sustainability of fiscal policy. Government services do not 
produce any foreign exchange, and the expenditures associated with them create a demand 
for  imports.  The  financing  of  Government  deficits  may  also  add  to  expenditure  and  the 
demand for imports. If Government’s expansion creates a demand for imports that is larger 
than the foreign currency inflows available, and that situation is allowed to persist, the fiscal 
stance becomes unsustainable. That is the situation the fiscal contraction of 2013 managed 
to avert. Conversely, the fiscal stance may be sustained if it puts no pressure on the level of 
foreign exchange, even though fiscal adjustment may be desirable on other grounds. 
A  fourth  lesson  is  the  limitations  of  monetary  policy  in  the  foreign  exchange-constrained 
economy.  In  modern  economies  the  central  bank  cannot  actively  manage  financial  flows 
across its borders, even if all flows are transacted within the formal financial sector. This is 
true whatever the nature of the country’s exchange rate arrangements, and irrespective of 
the rigour of stipulations and reporting requirements of the central bank. The central bank’s 
role is reduced to creating the right incentives to avoid speculative or precautionary financial 
outflows. The surest way to do this is to maintain a domestic interest rate policy which follows 
the  US  Treasury  bill  rate,  with  allowance  for  a  small  risk  premium,  which  will  vary  from 
country to country. 
All of these lessons about the management of the foreign exchange-constrained economy 
are drawn from economic analysis which is available through the Central Bank of Barbados 
website, and in research papers I have worked on with many in the audience today. I want to 
suggest  that  this  theme  of  the  foreign  exchange-constrained  economy  offers  the  Central 
Bank of Barbados one way of branding our research, to give us a competitive edge in the 
global market for research. I am grateful to Professor Mamingi, who is the one who spotted 
the potential for making our research output distinctive in this way. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Over many years the Central Bank of Barbados has made its name as an institution that is 
oriented towards research and analysis. The internet and electronic media have offered us 
the  opportunity  to  get  our  message  to  a  global  audience.  However,  because  there  are  so 
many  millions  who  are  also  clamouring  for  an  internet  audience,  the  Central  Bank  has  to 
offer a product that is of interest, and differs from the others. The many ways in which foreign 
exchange availability constrains our economy, and economies of similar size, constitutes a 
research agenda that no other central bank appears to be addressing. It is a niche that we at 
CBB have begun to fill, with working papers on monetary policy, the integration of monetary 
and  fiscal  policy,  the  structure  of  the  small  open  economy,  and  several  others;  with  the 
publication of our fiscal stability book by the Caribbean Centre for Money and Finance, we 
are  leading  the  Caribbean  in  the  direction  of  analysis  that  recognises  the  FX  constraint. 
There is great potential here for us to make this our distinct contribution to the international 
debate on the diversity of economic policy and the implication for policy implementation. 
Our Bank’s Annual Review Seminar is now an established part of the Caribbean economic 
landscape, and a marketplace that many of us look forward to each year. It is an opportunity 
for  an  enlightening  interchange  of  ideas,  and  a  chance  to  our  interns  and  many  of  the 
region’s  young  economists  to  gain  their  spurs.  As  we  go  forward,  we  should  seize 
opportunities  to  develop  insights  that  will  enrich  the  global  economic  debate,  because  the 
problems  we  face  are  not  unique  to  the  Caribbean.  The  focus  on  the  foreign  exchange 
constraint to small economies like our own is a vitally important insight. There a scores of 
counties worldwide who can benefit from our analysis of the implications of this constraint. 
We must continue to explore the effects of the constraint in our research, and we should use 
the ARS and other avenues of dissemination to the maximum, to get this message out. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
