  John McDermott: The dragon slain? Near-zero inflation in New Zealand 
Speech  by  Dr  John  McDermott,  Assistant  Governor  and  Chief  Economist  of  the  Reserve 
Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  Waikato  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry  and  Waikato 
branch of the Institute of Directors, Hamilton, 23 April 2015. 
 I am very grateful to Miles Parker for his considerable help in the preparation of these remarks. I also wish to 
acknowledge the contribution of many of my colleagues whose work, much of which is cited in these remarks, has 
furthered our understanding of the evolving nature of inflation dynamics in New Zealand. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
Introduction 
It is a pleasure for me to be here today to address the Chamber. As some of you may be 
aware, today is St George’s Day, the saint famous for slaying a dragon. The subject of my 
speech  is  inflation,  which  has  in  the  past  been  likened  to  a dragon ravaging  society. With 
annual  inflation  in  the  March quarter  at  0.1  percent,  is  this  another  slain  dragon? I  do  not 
believe so; the dragon is merely sleeping. 
Inflation is currently low, and is mostly due to negative tradables inflation caused by the slow 
global  economic  recovery,  the  high  exchange  rate,  and  the  recent  sharp  falls  in  oil  prices 
(figure  1).  There  is  little  monetary  policy  can  to  do  influence  inflation  outturns  in  the  near 
term.  Our  strategy  for  returning  inflation  to  the  midpoint  of  the  target  range  is  to  maintain 
stimulatory monetary policy to help generate output growth in excess of potential growth for 
an extended period.1 This strength in aggregate demand relative to supply will help generate 
the inflation required to reach the midpoint objective. 
With the benefit of hindsight, the low inflation outturn can be explained. Tradables inflation 
has been negative for the past three years as a result of: the slow global recovery; weak or 
declining prices of capital goods manufactured products and commodities; and the strength 
of our exchange rate. In the three years to March 2015 the cost of new cars fell 9 percent, 
major household appliances 9 percent, computing equipment by 32 percent; televisions and 
other audio-visual equipment prices fell by 36 percent. 
More  recently,  a  sharp  decline  in  the  oil  price  has  driven  tradables  inflation  down  even 
further. The fall in petrol prices alone reduced the headline inflation rate in the March quarter 
by 0.8 percentage points. In the face of falling oil prices, the Bank’s focus is on the medium-
term  trend  in  inflation  since  this  is  the  horizon  at  which  monetary  policy  can  best  affect 
inflation. The Bank is unable to offset large relative price shocks and any attempt to do so by 
sharply  reducing  interest  rates  would  result  in  an  unnecessary  boom  then  slowdown  in 
activity. Unnecessary volatility in output and interest rates that our Policy Targets Agreement 
directs us to avoid. 
In my remarks today, I am not going to focus on the inflation numbers we received earlier this 
week. We will consider those, along with all the other indicators of capacity and inflationary 
                                                
1  
In setting monetary policy, we have to consider whether we have calibrated the degree of monetary stimulus 
correctly. In our framework we measure the degree of monetary policy stimulus by the gap between actual 
interest  rates  and  the  so-called  neutral  interest  rate.  Our  current  estimate  is  for  a  neutral  90-day  rate  of 
4.5 percent.  We  lowered  our  estimate  of  the  neutral  rate  following  the  global  financial  crisis  to  reflect  the 
higher debt levels of households and higher financing costs pushing up the spread between the 90-day rate 
and  the  interest  rate  on  household  mortgages.  See  McDermott,  J  (2013),  “Shifting  gear:  why  have  neutral 
interest rates fallen”, Assistant Governor, RBNZ. Speech to New Zealand Institute of Chartered Accountants 
CFO and Financial Controllers Special Interest Group in Auckland, 2 October; and Chetwin, W and A Wood 
(2013), “Neutral interest rates in the post-crisis world”, RBNZ Analytical Note, No. 2013/07. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  pressures, next week in our April OCR meeting. Instead, I will offer some perspective on low 
inflation  in  New  Zealand  over  the  past  couple  of  years.  In  particular,  I  will  outline  the 
framework we use to think about inflationary pressures in New Zealand, then consider how 
the global economy is affecting New Zealand inflation. I then discuss some factors that might 
be contributing to somewhat weaker-than-expected domestic inflationary pressures. 
Inflation and its causes 
At the horizon relevant for monetary policy, inflation is typically thought of as being influenced 
by  two  main  factors:  capacity  pressure  and  inflation  expectations.  The  changing  balance 
between aggregate demand and aggregate supply over the business cycle causes inflation 
to  rise  and  fall. While  the  long  run  path  of  output  is  determined  by  the  supply  side  of  the 
economy – labour supply, investment and technology2 – over the business cycle output can 
be above this “potential” level (a positive output gap) or below it (a negative output gap) for 
several  years.  Periods  of  strong  demand  see  inflation  rise,  while  downswings  see  inflation 
fall.  The  other  main  influence  on  inflation  is  expectations  of  future  inflation,  which  people 
build into price and wage setting. 
Economists  often  summarise  the  implications  for  inflation  of  the  output  gap  and  inflation 
expectations  in  a  “Phillips  curve”.  This  relationship  indicates  that  over  periods  of  several 
years inflation tends to be higher when demand is stronger; and that over the cycle and in 
the long run inflation will be higher when inflation expectations are higher. 
The Reserve Bank pursues its inflation target by setting the Official Cash Rate (OCR). Higher 
interest rates tend to lower inflation over the following 18 to 24 months by slowing the growth 
in aggregate demand, and reducing the output gap. In the short term, movements in interest 
rates can also cause the exchange rate to move, affecting the New Zealand dollar prices of 
imports. The long lag involved from changes to the OCR having their full effect on inflation 
requires the Reserve Bank to react to expected future inflationary pressure rather than past 
outturns.3  
International factors 
The sharp decline in global oil prices over the past year has had a large impact on headline 
inflation.  The  Dubai  price  for  crude  oil  is  now  44  percent  below  its  June  2014  peak.  This 
lower oil price affects domestic prices through several channels.4 It directly affects the price 
of petrol paid by consumers; petrol prices are 15 percent lower than a year ago, reducing 
headline CPI inflation by 0.8 percentage points. If petrol prices remain unchanged over the 
coming year, this reduction will unwind, boosting annual inflation by 0.8 percentage points. 
Falling oil prices indirectly affect consumer prices by reducing the production costs of other 
businesses.  How  much,  depends  on  the  share  of  oil  and  petrol  in  total  costs,  businesses’ 
expectations of how permanent the fall will be, and how businesses change their prices in 
relation  to  changes  in  costs.  Our  research  on  price-setting  behaviour  suggests  that  New 
                                                
2   For  a  detailed  description  of  our  modelling  framework  for  potential  output,  see:  McDermott,  J  (2014), 
“Realising  our  potential:  potential  output  and  the  monetary  policy  framework”,  Assistant  Governor,  RBNZ. 
Speech  to  the  Wellington  Chamber  of  Commerce,  9  July  and  Lienert,  A  and  D  Gillmore  (2015),  “The 
Reserve Bank’s method of estimating “potential output”, RBNZ Analytical Note, 2015/01. 
3   This is a broad, high-level summary of our framework. In carrying out a monetary policy review we take into 
consideration a wide range of factors, which I do not have time to detail today. In these remarks I am focusing 
on the key issues around the dynamics of inflation. 
4   See Chapter 6 of the March 2015 Monetary Policy Statement for a fuller description of the impact of oil prices 
on consumer prices. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Zealand  businesses  are  more  likely  to  pass  on  to  customers  an  increase  in  costs  than  a 
decrease.5  
The significance of this sharp decline in oil prices for inflation depends on whether the fall is 
caused by factors specific to the oil market, or is symptomatic of a more general fall in global 
economic activity. The Bank’s view is that this drop in oil prices is caused by a mix of factors, 
but primarily increased supply. 
When declining oil prices reflect factors specific to the oil sector, it should be viewed as a 
relative  price  shift,  rather  than  generalised  inflation.  It  is  a  positive  supply  shock  for  New 
Zealand: it lowers inflation and boosts output. Since monetary policy operates with a lag, it 
cannot  react  to  the  immediate  impact  of  oil  prices  on  inflation.  Any  such  response  would 
affect output and inflation after the initial impact on petrol prices has left the annual inflation 
rate. The Policy Targets Agreement directs the Reserve Bank to avoid unnecessary volatility 
in output and interest rates and instead focus on medium-term inflationary pressure. 
Inflation  is  low  globally  (figure  2),  and  below  target  in  16  out  of  18  inflation  targeting 
countries.6  The  low  inflation  reflects  falling  oil  prices  and  the  prolonged  period  of  excess 
capacity  in  most  advanced  economies.  But  even  accounting  for  oil  and  weak  capacity 
pressures,  inflation  is  weak  in  our  trading  partners,  and  lower  than  policymakers  had 
forecast.7  Weak  inflation  and  continued  excess  capacity  have  resulted  in  extraordinarily 
supportive monetary policy across the world. 
Global inflation affects inflation in New Zealand via two main channels.8 Low inflation in our 
trading  partner  economies  results  in  small  international  price  increases  for  New  Zealand’s 
imports.  Extremely  low,  and  in  some  cases  negative,  interest rates  overseas  have  been  a 
factor  causing  an  appreciation  of  the  New  Zealand  dollar,  which  further  depresses  import 
prices when expressed in New Zealand dollar terms. 
The pass-through of global inflation to New Zealand import prices seems to be taking place 
in  a  normal  way  (figure  3).  Similarly,  tradable  CPI  inflation  appears  consistent  with  the 
movements  in  import  prices.  Nonetheless,  the  combination  of  surprisingly  weak  inflation 
overseas and our high exchange rate are the principal reasons why we have had downside 
surprises to headline inflation. 
While  the  weakness  in  tradables  inflation  is  explainable  given  international  factors,  non-
tradables  inflation  has  also  been  weaker  than  expected.  In  part  the  weakness  in  non-
tradables  may  be  influenced  by  international  factors,  since  around  a  tenth  of  non-tradable 
prices  are  accounted  for  by  imports.9  Indeed,  looking  more  closely  at  non-tradables,  the 
sectors  that  are  relatively  more  open  to  international  competition  exhibit  lower  inflation  at 
present.10  
                                                
5   Parker, M (2014c), “Price-setting behaviour in New Zealand”, RBNZ Discussion Paper, No. 2014/04. 
6   Carney, M (2015), “Writing the path back to target”, Governor, Bank of England. Speech at the University of 
Sheffield Advanced Manufacturing Research Centre, 12 March. 
7   E.g. Bank of Canada (2014), “Box 2: Assessing the impact of excess supply on inflation”, Monetary Policy 
Report, April. Carney, M (2015) ibid., Haldane, A (2015), “Drag and drop”, Chief Economist, Bank of England. 
Speech at the Bizclub lunch, Rutland, 19 March. Sveriges Riksbank (2014), “Why is inflation low?”, Monetary 
Policy Report, July. 
8   For a more detailed description of how the international situation passes through to New Zealand consumer 
prices, see Parker, M (2014a), “Exchange-rate movements and consumer prices: some perspectives”, RBNZ 
Bulletin, 77 (1, March): 31–41. 
9   Parker, M (2014b), “How much of what New Zealanders consume is imported? Estimates from input-output 
tables”, RBNZ Analytical Note, No. 2014/05. 
10   See  Galt,  M  (2015),  “How  do  international  factors  affect  non-tradable  inflation?  Exploratory  analysis  using 
disaggregated  trans-Tasman  data”,  RBNZ  Analytical  Note.  Forthcoming.  Nonetheless,  even  accounting  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Domestic inflationary pressures 
While non-tradables account for a small part of the overall weakness in headline inflation, the 
dynamics of non-tradables inflation is central to our strategy of returning inflation to the target 
midpoint. In this context I will discuss our estimates of spare capacity in the economy, how 
that spare capacity affects price and wage-setting behaviour, and the inflation expectations 
of  wage  and  price  setters.  None  of  these  areas  are  directly  observable,  and  require 
estimation by economic models based on available indicators. 
Spare capacity in New Zealand 
Estimates of the output gap are difficult to carry out in real time, and can be heavily revised. 
To mitigate this uncertainty, we corroborate our estimates of the output gap from our main 
model with a range of other indicators of capacity pressures. These measures suggest that 
the  output  gap  was  negative  for  much  of  the  past  couple  of  years,  explaining  why  non-
tradables  inflation  has  been  weak.  The  indicators  point  to  the  current  output  gap  being 
positive, at around half a percent of potential output (figure 4). Monetary policy is currently 
supportive, which should help to drive the output gap higher in coming quarters and generate 
the additional inflation to return to the target midpoint. 
The weakest indicators, though, are consistent with a negative output gap, and hence lower 
inflationary pressure. The weakest one at present is based on the unemployment rate, which 
could be influenced by immigration and structural changes in participation. Net immigration is 
running  at  historically  high  levels,  and  has  two  offsetting  effects  on  inflationary  pressure. 
Immigrants  require  housing  and  new  capital  equipment  to  work,  increasing  aggregate 
demand. At the same time, immigrants may increase the labour force, increasing supply in 
the economy and reducing wage inflation. These offsetting forces make it hard to calibrate 
the net effect of migrants on the output gap in the short run.11  
Labour  force  participation  in  New  Zealand  is  currently  at  record  levels,  due  to  the  upward 
trend in participation of female workers and higher participation among older cohorts. Should 
that  high  rate  of  participation  prove  permanent  it  would  imply  a  greater  level  of  potential 
output  than  we  currently  estimate,  a  smaller  positive  output  gap  and  lower  non-tradable 
inflation. 
The impact of capacity pressure on inflation 
All of the various indicators of capacity pressures have one thing in common. Each indicator 
shows a gradual tightening of capacity pressure over the past couple of years, which should 
be consistent with gradually increasing inflationary pressures and higher inflation outcomes. 
The  subdued  nature  of  the  actual  increase  in  domestic  inflationary  pressure  raises  the 
question of whether the output gap is having a smaller influence on actual inflation than it has 
in the past. In other words, has the slope of the Phillips curve become flatter? 
Consider  a  stylised  version  of  the  New  Zealand  Phillips  curve,  mapping  the  outturns  for 
inflation  and  a  simple  output  gap  measure  –  the  deviation  of  unemployment  from  trend 
(figure  5).12  During  the  1970s,  there  were  large  movements  in  inflation  without  much 
                                                                                                                                                   
global inflation factors, inflation in New Zealand appears weak, see Richardson, A (2015), “The pass-through 
of global economic conditions to New Zealand inflation”, RBNZ Analytical Note. No. 2015/03. 
11   Our own research suggests that different types of immigrants to New Zealand have differing implications for 
overall inflationary pressure. See McDonald, C (2013), “Migration and the housing market”, RBNZ Analytical 
Note, No. 2013/10. 
12   The unemployment gap is calculated at the percentage point deviation of the actual unemployment rate from a 
trend  calculated  using  a  stiff  Hodrick-Prescott  filter  (lambda  =  50000).  A  positive  unemployment  gap 
represents slack in the labour marker, so would be equivalent to a negative output gap. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  corresponding movement in the unemployment gap. In part this may be a function of labour 
hoarding  by  businesses  as  the  general  shortage  of  labour  made  them  reluctant  to  lay  off 
workers even faced with large swings in output. 
During  the  1980s,  there  is  a  clear  negative  relationship,  with  higher  unemployment  gaps 
associated  with  lower  outcomes  for  inflation.  Since  the  introduction  of  inflation  targeting  in 
1990,  the  curve  is  markedly  flatter–  large  movements  in  the  unemployment  gap  have  not 
resulted  in  corresponding  changes  in  inflation.  The  flattening  of  the  Phillips  curve  is 
witnessed  in  many  countries.  Nonetheless,  experience  since  the global financial  crisis  has 
led many policymakers to question whether it has flattened further in recent years.13 During 
the depths of the global financial crisis, non-tradables inflation remained stubbornly high, in 
New Zealand and elsewhere, despite large negative output gaps. 
This  anchoring  of  inflation  at  low  levels  represents  a  success  for  the  monetary  policy 
framework,  as  shocks  hitting  New  Zealand  do  not  result  in  big  changes  to  general  price 
inflation. But it also poses a challenge. With a flat Phillips curve it becomes more difficult for 
the Reserve Bank to influence inflation by affecting the demand for resources and the size of 
the output gap. The current flatter Phillips curve could mean that the positive output gap is 
exerting less inflationary pressure than we currently believe, slowing our eventual return to 
target midpoint. 
Has pricing behaviour changed? 
Survey  measures  of  inflation  expectations  have  fallen  in  recent  quarters.  The  decline  in 
expectations is consistent with the decline in actual inflation over the period. In the decade to 
2012, CPI inflation averaged 2.6 percent and was in the upper half of the Reserve Bank’s 
target  range. The  current  Policy  Targets  Agreement (signed  in  2012)  put greater focus  on 
achieving the midpoint of the target range, so some decline in inflation expectations should 
be expected. Lower inflation expectations have been observed across the globe.14  
What matters for inflation is not the average response to a particular survey of expectations, 
but  how  general  inflation  expectations  held  by  businesses  and  households  translate  into 
price-setting  behaviour  and  wage  bargaining.  Research  on  price-setting  by  New  Zealand 
businesses  suggest  that  many  only  take  into  account  current  inflation  when  setting  prices, 
and very few businesses are purely forward looking.15 Preliminary work on wage setting in 
New Zealand also points to the importance of past inflation outturns.16  
The  evolution  of  inflation  expectations  over  coming  quarters  merits  vigilance.  If  price  and 
wage  setting  is  very  backward  looking,  the  temporarily  low  headline  inflation  from  falling 
petrol  prices  could  become  more  widely  entrenched.17  There  is  certainly  a  growing 
                                                
13   See Yellen, J (2014) “Labor market dynamics and monetary policy”, Chair, Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System. Speech given at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson 
Hole. Haldane, A (2015), op.cit. The IMF estimates that the slope of the global price Phillips curve has fallen 
from around 1 in the 1970s to 0.1–0.2 most recently. See IMF (2013), “The dog that didn’t bark: Has inflation 
been muzzled or was it just sleeping?”, World Economic Outlook, April 2013. 
14   For example, see Nechio, F (2015), “Have long-term inflation expectations declined?”, Federal Reserve Bank 
of San Francisco Economic Letter, No. 2015–11; Haldane, A (2015) op cit.; Miccoli, M  and S Neri (2015) 
“Inflation surprises and inflation expectations in the euro area”, Banca d’Italia Occasional Papers, No. 265. 
15   Parker, M (2014c), op. cit. 
16   Armstrong, J  and M Parker  (2015)  “How  wages  are  set: evidence  from  a  large survey  of  firms”,  Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand. Forthcoming. 
17   Our research suggests that when supply shocks are permanent in nature, monetary policy will need to focus 
more on inflation outturns and less on the output gap than is the case when supply shocks are temporary. The 
intuition  behind  this  result  is  that  with  supply  shocks  having  permanent  effects,  inflation  expectations  will 
eventually become unanchored unless the central bank acts to keep inflation stationary around target. See 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  discussion of low inflation captured in the media (figure 6). Recent research has pointed to 
possible  asymmetries  in  behaviour,  with  inflation  expectations  becoming  more  backward 
looking  in  periods  of  low  inflation,  and  reacting  more  to  downside  inflation  surprises  than 
upside ones.18 A certain degree of movement in expectations is to be expected, particularly 
for  short-term  measures,  but  the  more  firmly  anchored  expectations  are,  the  smaller  the 
overall inflation impact.19 
Longer-term  survey  measures  of  inflation  expectations  are  currently  consistent  with  the 
midpoint of our target (figure 7). Estimates from a range of economic models are somewhat 
lower and have declined recently. A market-based measure using the return on an inflation-
indexed bond has also fallen sharply over the past year.20 The level of these other measures 
are consistent with inflation expectations at or just below the target midpoint of 2 percent, but 
all highlight the downward direction over the past year (table 1).21  
The outlook for monetary policy 
I have talked today about the causes of recent low inflation in New Zealand. The outlook for 
inflation is also subdued, and suggests that monetary policy should remain stimulatory for a 
prolonged  period.  This  cycle  is  unusual  in  that  CPI  inflation  is  staying  very  low,  requiring 
interest  rates  to  also  remain  low.  The  timing  of  future  adjustments  in  interest  rates  will 
depend on the evolution of inflationary pressures in both the traded and non-traded sectors. 
We continue to monitor and carefully assess the emerging flow of economic data. 
The impact of some factors influencing headline inflation will prove temporary. Past declines 
in oil prices  will reduce headline inflation substantially  in 2015, but absent any further falls 
this negative contribution will drop out of the annual inflation rate by the start of next year. 
Looking ahead, we will ensure that monetary policy is stimulatory to support output growth 
above  potential.  Increasingly,  this  positive  output  gap  will  help  lift  non-tradables  inflation, 
returning  headline  inflation  gradually  to  the  target  midpoint.  Real  GDP  growth  has  been 
above  potential  growth  for  a  number  of  years  and  is  currently  underpinned  by  high  net 
immigration, strong construction activity and robust household spending. Employment growth 
is strong and the unemployment rate is low and projected to fall. 
At present, the Bank is not considering any increase in interest rates. Before considering any 
tightening  in  monetary  policy  we  would  need  to  be  confident  that  increased  capacity 
utilisation  and  labour  market tightness  was  generating,  or  about  to generate,  a  substantial 
increase in inflation. 
Evidence  of  weakening  demand  and  domestic  inflationary  pressures  would  prompt  us  to 
consider  lowering  interest  rates.  There  are  some  areas  of  uncertainty  surrounding  the 
outlook for capacity pressures, including the lingering effects of the recent drought in parts of 
the country, fiscal consolidation, lower dairy incomes and the impact of the high exchange 
rate  on  some  export  and  import  substitution  industries.  Beyond  these  factors,  we  are  also 
                                                                                                                                                   
Yao, F (2014), “Stabilising Taylor rules when the supply shock has a unit root”, Journal of Macroeconomics. 
Forthcoming. 
18   Ehrmann,  M  (2014),  “Targeting  inflation  from  below  –  how  do  inflation  expectations  behave?”,  Bank  of 
Canada Working Paper, No. 2014–52. The impact of downside surprises in inflation outturns on expectations 
has been observed recently in the euro area, see Miccoli, M and S Neri (2015) op. cit. 
19   Wong,  B  (2014),  “Inflation  expectations  and  how  it  explains  the  inflationary  impact  of  oil  price  shocks: 
evidence  from  the  Michigan survey”,  CAMA  Working  Paper,  No.  45/2014.  demonstrates these  facts  for  the 
United States following oil price shocks using the Michigan survey of household inflation expectations. 
20   Limited liquidity in this bond, and the lack of a long history suggests caution should be taken over the reliability 
of this measure, but the direction of change is indicative of lower inflation expectations. 
21   Lewis, M (2015), “Measuring inflation expectations”, RBNZ Analytical Note. Forthcoming. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  assessing the outlook for tradables inflation that is being dampened by global conditions and 
the high exchange rate. The fact that the exchange rate has appreciated while our key export 
prices, such as dairy, have been falling, is unwelcome. 
We remain vigilant in  watching wage bargaining and price-setting outcomes. Should these 
settle at levels lower than our target range for inflation, it would be appropriate to ease policy. 
Concluding comments 
Inflation has been low in New Zealand for a number of years. At present, the outlook requires 
a  period  of  supportive  monetary  policy.  Our  approach,  as  a  flexible  inflation  targeter,  is  to 
support ongoing sustainable growth in New Zealand that should help raise costs and prices 
in order to achieve our inflation target. We will not react to temporary deviations from target, 
as this will only generate unnecessary volatility in activity. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
      8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
   
9   The series for China has a shorter history, but adding it does not qualitatively affect the path for trading partner 
 
 
export prices. 
  10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
        12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
