 Guy Debelle: FX benchmarks 
 Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, to the FX Week Australia Conference, Sydney, 12 February 2015. 
 Similar remarks are also contained in an article in the Euromoney Foreign Exchange & Treasury Management 
Handbook 2015 (forthcoming). 
Today I will talk about benchmark rates in the foreign exchange (FX) market. 
FX  benchmarks  are  an  important  part  of  the  financial  market  infrastructure.  They  are 
referenced  in  many  financial  contracts  and  are  particularly  prevalent  in  global  bond  and 
equity market indices where they are used to aggregate markets into a common currency. 
The longstanding approach to do this has used a set of foreign exchange rates calculated at 
a  particular  time  of  day,  generally  4pm  London,  the  London  “fix”,  which  is  published  by 
WM/Reuters (WMR).1 
Attention on this arcane part of the financial market infrastructure has increased significantly 
over the past couple of years as concerns mounted about the integrity of benchmark rates 
and  the  possibility  of  market  misconduct  around  the  benchmark  fixing  process.  Following 
investigations  by  a  number  of  authorities,  some  of these  concerns  have  proven  to  be  well 
founded, and investigations are ongoing. 
Reflecting  the  emerging  concerns  about  the  FX  benchmark  process,  in  early  2013  the 
Financial Stability Board (FSB) tasked a group chaired by Paul Fisher of the Bank of England 
and me to formulate a set of proposals to improve the benchmark process and reduce the 
scope 
the 
investigations into allegations of FX manipulation and we did not have access to any of the 
evidence gathered by those investigations. 
The Foreign Exchange Benchmark Group (FXBG) was comprised of members from all the 
major financial centres. We talked extensively with most parts of the FX industry to get their 
views, including asset managers, index providers, FX platforms, corporates and banks. 
A  preliminary  report  was  released for  public  comment  in  July  last  year  and  we  received  a 
good amount of constructive feedback on it.2 The final report of the FXBG was presented to, 
and  approved  by,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  last  September.3  I  have  had  a  number  of 
people ask what status the report has. The answer is that it has been approved by the FSB, 
a  body  which  consists  of  heads  of  central  banks,  securities  regulators  and  ministries  of 
finance/treasuries of all the major jurisdictions. 
The report contained 15 recommendations aimed at improving the benchmark process and 
reducing  the  incentives  for  manipulation.  The  recommendations  garnered  broad  support 
across the industry. We are now several months on from the release of the report, so it is 
useful to see what has been achieved in that time. My general assessment is that there has 
been significant progress on some recommendations but little on others. 
for  manipulation.  Our  work  was  conducted  completely  separately 
from 
                                                
1   WM  publishes  reference  rates  throughout  the  course  of  the  day.  The  London  4pm  rate  is  by  far  the  most 
heavily  used.  There  are  a  number  of  other  reference  rates,  with  the  2.15pm  CET  rates  published  by  the 
European Central Bank quite widely used. 
2   FSB  (2014),  “Public  Responses  to  July  2014  Consultative  Document  Foreign  Exchange  Benchmarks”, 
20 August. Available at <http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/2014/08/c_140819/>. 
3   FSB 
(2014), 
“Final  Report  on  Foreign  Exchange  Benchmarks”,  30  September.  Available  at 
<http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/2014/09/r_140930/>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The recommendations addressed both the structure of the benchmark process as well as the 
conduct of participants in the process and can be divided into four main areas: benchmark 
methodology;  execution  infrastructure;  market  conduct;  and  guidance  on  central  bank 
reference rates (which I won’t cover today). 
The group believed that the recommendations it made would be implemented by the market 
participants concerned and indeed, as I just said, they were supported by market participants 
at  the  time  and  endorsed  by  the  FSB.  There  is  a  strong  expectation  they  will  be 
implemented. The recommendations are, however, not explicitly embodied in regulation. 
Nevertheless, the group stated that if these recommendations were not acted on, authorities 
could  conclude  that  a  regulatory  response  was  necessary  to  generate  the  desired 
improvement in market structure and conduct. Moreover, as a result of the investigations into 
the  alleged  misconduct,  a  regulatory  response  may  be  required  and  indeed,  in  the  UK, 
FX benchmarks  are  now  a  regulated  activity.  The  UK  Fair  and  Effective  Markets  Review 
(FEMR) has also actively sought feedback on such issues.4 
The calculation of the fix 
The  first  set  of  recommendations  concerned  the  calculation  of  the  London  4pm  fix.  For  a 
number of years, WM has calculated the fix over a one minute window centred on 4pm. WM 
calculated  the  fix  using  data  from  either  Thomson  Reuters  or  EBS  (depending  on  the 
currency  pair).  It  took  snapshots  of  trade  and  order  rates  at  one  second  intervals  and 
calculated the (unweighted) median rate over the minute window. That is, the fix is calculated 
based  on  executed  prices,  in  contrast  to  LIBOR  which  was  a  submission-based  process. 
Hence the issues which we needed to address in the case of FX benchmarks differed from 
those associated with the old calculation methodology for LIBOR. 
While we concluded that the WM benchmark calculation methodology was essentially sound, 
the group recommended widening the window from one minute to enhance the robustness of 
the fix calculation. The wider window should reduce the capacity for manipulation while still 
generating a replicable market price. 
The  group  also  recommended  that  rather  than  use  generally  only  one  price  feed,  WM 
incorporate feeds and transactions data from more sources into its calculation, provided the 
additional sources were of sufficient quality and representative of the market. While arbitrage 
should  ensure  that  the  single  data  sources  used  by  WM  should  be  representative  of  the 
market, we thought it relatively costless to use a wider range of sources and this would be 
beneficial in getting a “truer” picture of the market over a short time frame. 
WM  has  subsequently  announced  that  it  will  widen  the  fix  window  to  five  minutes 
commencing on 15 February.5 It will also utilise additional price feeds from that time. 
In addition, the group recommended that WM form a user group to consider future changes 
to the fix calculation methodology. In announcing its recent changes to the calculation of the 
fix, WM sought feedback from the industry and is in the process of establishing such a user 
group. Finally, WM has agreed to follow through on a number of recommendations made by 
IOSCO  which  assessed  WM’s 
for 
benchmarks.6 
fixing  processes  against 
IOSCO  principles 
the 
                                                
4   Details 
FEMR 
the 
of 
at 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Pages/fmreview.aspx>. Submissions closed at the end of January. 
available 
England 
website 
Bank 
are 
the 
on 
of 
5   See <http://wmcompany.com/wmr/index.htm>. 
6  
IOSCO 
<http://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD415.pdf>. 
“Principles 
(2013), 
for  Financial  Benchmarks:  Final  Report”, 
2 
 July.  Available 
at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Infrastructure of the fix 
The  next  set  of  the  group’s  recommendations  addressed  the  market  infrastructure  around 
fixing trades, that is, how fixing trades are executed in the market. 
The aim here was to reduce the incentives and opportunity for misbehavior generated by the 
market  structure.  The  FXBG  report  documented  the  concentration  of  activity  through  the 
fixing window. It noted that trading volume at that time was up to 10 times larger than at other 
times in the trading day. A major source of the large volume of these trades is likely to be 
asset managers seeking to rebalance their portfolios in line with the indices they track that 
incorporate  the  London  fix  in  their  calculation.  One  way  to  minimise  this  tracking  error 
between their portfolio and the foreign exchange component of the index they are tracking is 
obviously to execute at the fixing price itself. 
Orders for these trades and other fixing trades are provided by the client to the FX dealers 
ahead  of  the  fix  (often  this  time  is  quite  short).  Importantly,  the  dealer  typically  agrees  to 
execute these orders at the, as yet unknown, fix price and often does not charge either a fee 
or spread on the trade. 
These  arrangements  differ  from  standard  principal-based  risk  transfer  services  offered  by 
dealers,  where  the  risk  to  the  dealer  is  mitigated  by  using  the  current  market  price  and 
applying a spread. The arrangements for fix-related orders mean that the price risk on the 
transaction is transferred entirely from the client to the dealer without any compensation. The 
dealers then have to manage the risk associated with this flow. 
The  trades  conducted  as  a  result  of  this  process  can  generate  optics  of  dealers  trading 
ahead of the fix, even if the dealer is simply seeking to manage the risk. But these dynamics 
can also create an incentive for dealers to manipulate the fix rate to generate profit from what 
would otherwise be potentially a loss-making exercise. 
To  address  this  problem,  the  FXBG  supported  the  development  of  industry  initiatives  to 
create  independent  netting  and  execution  facilities  for  transacting  fix  orders.  A  number  of 
such products have been launched on the market in recent months. They generally have the 
feature  of  maximising  netting  opportunities  and  then  executing  the  order  in  a  way  that 
delineates  the  separation  between  the  dealer  trading  on  its  own  account  and  the  dealer 
transacting  on  behalf  of  the  customer.  It  remains  to  be  seen  how  much  traction  these 
products will get. 
In  our  preliminary  report,  the group  had  sought market feedback  on  the  development  of  a 
central netting utility to maximise netting opportunities and reduce the need for customers to 
provide orders in advance of the fix to dealers. While some of the feedback was supportive, 
others confirmed some of the potential practical problems that such a utility might confront, 
particularly around the execution of the residual positions once all netting opportunities had 
been exhausted, which would determine the fixing price. 
Market conduct 
The above recommendations address the structure of the foreign exchange market around 
the fix. The FXBG believes the recommended changes will improve outcomes but at least as 
importantly, it provided a set of recommendations about the behavior of market participants 
on all sides of the market: dealers, asset managers, index providers, to address the possible 
incentives for manipulation. 
First, the group recommended that the FX dealers charge for fixing transactions in a more 
transparent  manner  (rather  than  for  example,  relying  on  the  business  being  subsidised  by 
activities in other parts of the dealers’ institution). This charge might be implemented either 
through a fixed fee or a spread. A fixed fee would be consistent with an agency mode of fixed 
execution. A spread is consistent with compensation for the risk transfer where the bank is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  acting  as  principal.  The  shift  to  a  wider  window  for  the  fix  calculation  means  that  the  risk 
transfer is likely to be larger for the bank in being able to replicate the fixing price. 
While  a  number  of  banks  have  started  to  discuss  this  with  their  customers  and  are  in  the 
process  of  moving  to  charge  for  this  service,  this  recommendation  is  not  being  adopted 
universally  at  this  point.  Not  surprisingly,  there has  been  push  back from  some  customers 
against paying for something that had been previously offered for free (at least notionally). 
So  long  as  some  dealers  remain  willing  to  not  charge  directly  for  this  service,  competitive 
forces  mean  that  it  is  difficult  for  others  to  charge.  There  is  clearly  a  first-mover 
disadvantage. More progress is required here. When WM implements the wider window later 
this month, this may prove a focal point for a shift in pricing models. There have been various 
media reports in recent days suggesting that a number of banks are doing this. However, if 
the fixing service is not directly and transparently charged for, the incentive for inappropriate 
behaviour remains. 
Second,  the  group  recommended  that  banks  and  other  FX  dealers  separate  their  fixing 
business from their regular business. The primary aim of this recommendation was to reduce 
the likelihood of inappropriate use of the information obtained from the fixing orders. Clearly, 
such  a  separation  is  not  costless  and  it  does  reduce  risk  absorption  opportunities. 
Nevertheless, the group’s assessment was that the benefits would outweigh the costs. Some 
banks  have  implemented  this  recommendation  over  recent  months  but  adoption  has  been 
somewhat mixed. 
I  have  received  a  number  of  questions  about  what  exactly  separation  entails.  We  did  not 
intend to be too prescriptive here. The main principle is the appropriate segregation of the 
information flow. There may be a number of different ways of achieving this. An issue which 
arises  here  is  that  the  separation  of  business  is  clearly  more  complicated  in  smaller 
currencies than it is in the more heavily traded currencies. In response to these issues, I will 
consult  with  my  fellow  central  banks  and  securities  regulators  on  these  questions  and 
determine if more guidance can be given around this. 
Third,  the  group  made  a  number  of  recommendations  around  the  appropriate  sharing  of 
information.  These  recommendations  focused  on  general  principles  around  information 
sharing. The group’s assessment was that outlining a set of principles was more beneficial in 
ensuring appropriate behavior than more prescriptive statements. Detailed prescriptions run 
the  risk  of  being  incomplete  with  the  potential  for  market  participants  to  make  the 
assessment that if something was not in the prescriptions then it must be allowable. A set of 
principles require market participants to think more carefully about their general approach to 
information sharing. 
Codes of conduct 
A similar set of principles are to be embodied in a code of best market practice and shared 
global principles, which is currently in the final stage of being written jointly by the  various 
foreign  exchange  committees.  The  aim  is  to  promote  a  set  of  shared  global  principles 
common across all the FX committees, notwithstanding the fact that the various jurisdictions 
employ  different  codes  of  conduct.  A  final  version  of  the  statement  of  shared  principles 
should  be  published  following  the  next  global  meeting  of  foreign  exchange  committees  in 
Tokyo in March. 
The  FXBG  also  recommended  that  market  participants  should  demonstrate  stronger 
compliance with the various codes of conduct than has been the case in the past, as well as 
with their own internal codes. Various initiatives are under way on this recommendation at 
both the institutional level as well as with the market as a whole. Appropriate enforcement of 
these  codes  remains  a  major  challenge.  In  the  UK,  the  FEMR  highlights  this  issue  as  a 
significant opportunity for reform. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Much of this comes down to ensuring that the institution, and the FX market more generally, 
has the appropriate culture. But the same problem arises with codes of conduct as with the 
principles for information sharing I talked about a minute ago. If the codes of conduct are too 
prescriptive, they are very difficult to draft, they quickly become unreadable and they run the 
risk that if something is not explicitly prohibited, it must be okay. 
Matt Levine articulates this problem very succinctly: “If you don’t define ‘culture’, it’s hard to 
enforce it. If you do, it’s going to be gamed.”7 
Index providers 
During  its  work,  the  group  discovered  that  there  was  considerable  variation  in  the 
understanding of index providers about the way the FX rates they used in their indices were 
calculated.  Hence  the  group  recommended  that  index  providers  consider  whether  the  FX 
fixes they used in their calculation are fit for purpose. 
Asset managers 
Similarly,  in  the  course  of  our  consultation  with  the  market,  the  group  found  there  was 
considerable variation among asset managers in their understanding of the FX rates used in 
the  indices  they  were  tracking  and,  perhaps  more  importantly,  considerable  variation  in 
understanding how their FX fixing business was being executed in the market. 
While  asset  managers  should  be  able  to  assume  that  the  market  infrastructure  was 
adequately robust and that their counterparties conducted themselves with some degree of 
appropriate  behaviour,  at  the  same  time,  greater  scrutiny  and  enforcement  from  market 
participants is desirable. 
Hence  the  group  recommended  that  asset  managers  conduct  appropriate  due  diligence 
around the FX execution and be able to demonstrate that to their clients if requested. Clearly, 
such  due  diligence  would  be  consistent  with  the  asset  managers’  regular  fiduciary 
responsibility to their clients. 
While  some  asset  managers  have  done  this  for  many  years  as  part  of  their  standard 
operating  procedure,  there  remains  scope  for  further  adoption  of  this  across  the  asset 
management  industry  and,  more  generally,  a  greater  understanding  of  the  way  their 
FX business is executed in the market, as it becomes an increasingly important component 
of asset managers’ portfolios. 
The way forward 
The 15 recommendations of the group have been adopted to varying degrees, but there is 
still substantial scope for further progress in some areas. The recommendations to enhance 
WM’s calculation of the London fix are well in train. There are a number of initiatives in the 
marketplace  to  provide  independent  fix  execution  and  netting.  Codes  of  conduct  remain  a 
work  in  progress,  particularly  in  terms  of  their  enforcement,  though  the  various  foreign 
exchange committees are working with a common purpose on this currently and I expect that 
we will have something concrete to show for this very shortly. 
However, there has yet to be significant progress in terms of the pricing and execution of the 
fix business within institutions. On pricing, while there may be more than one way of charging 
for the fix business that could be adopted, there needs to be a widespread adoption across 
the industry. On the separation of the fixing business, the primary objective is separation of 
                                                
7   Levine M (2015), “Levine on Wall Street: Culture and Retaliation”, BloombergView, 2 February. Available at 
<http://www.bloombergview.com/articles/2015–02–02/levine-on-wall-street-culture-and-retaliation>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  the information flow. There are, again, a number of potential solutions to this and I accept 
there  may  be  some  scope  to  provide  more  guidance  around  this  recommendation, 
particularly in the case of less-traded currencies. 
To conclude, there is a strong expectation that these recommendations will be implemented 
to  deliver  an  improvement  in  the  execution  of  foreign  exchange  transactions  referencing 
FX benchmarks and the integrity of the benchmarks themselves. The FSB has approved the 
recommendations contained in the FX Benchmark Group’s report. If these recommendations 
are not implemented, then the likelihood of a regulatory response will increase. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
