  S S Mundra: Financing India’s growth – challenges and way ahead 
Keynote address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at a 
Summit  on  “Financing  India’s  Growth  –  Way  forward”,  organised  by  PHD  Chamber  of 
Commerce and Industry (PHDCCI), New Delhi, 9 September 2015. 
 Shri Yaduvendra Mathur, Chairman & Managing Director, Export Import Bank of India; Shri 
Sunil Srivastava, Dy Managing Director, State Bank of India; Shri Alok Shriram, President , 
PHD  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry  (PHDCCI);  Shri  Sanjeev  Gupta,  Chairman, 
Banking Committee, PHDCCI; delegates to the Summit; members of the print and electronic 
media; ladies and gentlemen! I am grateful to the PHD Chamber for inviting me to deliver the 
keynote address on a very important theme “Financing India’s Growth- Way forward”. I am 
happy to note the efforts being made by the PHD Chamber for promotion of industry, trade 
and entrepreneurship through its research-based policy advocacy role. The Summit today, I 
feel,  is  an  important  step  in  that  journey.  I  also  understand  that  the  PHD  Chamber  and 
CRISIL have combined to prepare a knowledge report highlighting key issues essential for 
financing  India’s  growth  and  I  compliment  them  for  their  efforts.  I  trust  that  the 
recommendations  made 
the  economic  growth  and 
development of the country. 
2. 
In my address today, I intend to talk about India’s growth potential, suitable model 
for India’s  growth, key  challenges  that  undermine  the  achievement  of the  potential  growth 
rate and the way forward in overcoming these challenges. Let me; however, begin with an 
overview of the global economic situation and where India stands at present. 
therein  would  positively 
impact 
Global overview 
3. 
The global economy is presently dominated by four themes- the Chinese slowdown, 
the  impending  rate  hike  by  the  US  Federal  Reserve,  the  large-scale  slump  in  global 
commodity prices, especially oil and the continued sluggishness in the economic recovery. 
Looking  at  the  Advanced  Economies  (AEs),  growth  is  virtually  stagnant  in  Japan  at  0.8% 
while the Continental Europe is slated to report only marginally higher growth at 1.5% during 
2015.  The  recovery  in  North  America,  including  in  the  USA  is  modest  and  UK  is  likely  to 
witness a modest 2.4% growth during 2015. 
4. 
The  emerging  and  developing  economies  (EMDEs)  have  also  been  witnessing 
significant slowdown in growth. China’s growth rate is likely to fall to 6.8% from 7.4%, while 
that for Russia (–3.4% from 0.6%) and Brazil (–1.5% from 0.1%) are set to go into negative 
territory  in  view  of  recessionary  pressures.  Of  the  other  BRICS  nations,  South  Africa  is 
estimated to grow higher at 2.1% up from 1.5%. Against this backdrop of negative to modest 
positive  growth  rates  for  the  large  economic  powerhouses  and  major  EMDEs,  India’s 
economy is poised to grow at 7.6% with potential for even higher growth rates. The outlook 
for growth in India is improving gradually. The business confidence remains strong and as 
the initiatives taken by the Union Government begin to find traction, it is expected that private 
investment  and  consumer  sentiment  would  revive. We  in  RBI firmly  believe  that  moderate 
inflation is essential to ensure and sustain a higher trajectory of growth. That brings us to the 
question “what is our growth potential?” 
India’s growth potential 
5. 
This  question  has  been  a  subject  of  active  debate  in  the  academic  and  policy 
research circles. Literatures / research papers have put varying estimates of the country’s 
potential growth rate notwithstanding the methodological issues surrounding the estimation 
of potential output, leading to considerable uncertainty. There is, however, a fair degree of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
unanimity that the Indian economy is currently growing below its potential and closing this 
negative output gap (i.e., actual growth minus potential growth) has to be a priority. 
6. 
What  is  holding  India  back  in  attaining  its  potential  higher  growth  rate?  Since  the 
conference theme is “Financing India’s growth – Way Forward”, I would like to start with a 
basic question: Is availability of finance constraining growth? Financial sector is meant to 
sub-serve the needs of the real economy and cannot drive growth by itself. We have seen 
the  pitfalls  of  the  financial  economy  racing  ahead  of  the  real  economy  in  the  form  of  the 
Global Financial Crisis. I would argue that availability of finance, so far, has been a much 
smaller problem and it is more on account of structural problems that the rate of growth has 
not achieved its potential levels. It is contextual to mention here that as per World Bank’s 
“Doing  Business  2015”  report,  while  as  a  country  we  languished  at  142nd  rank  amongst 
189 countries in the overall ranking; on the parameter of ease of “Getting Credit”, we faired 
comparatively much better at 36th position. 
7. 
points for further reflections and begin with talking about what should be our growth model. 
As we deliberate on ways of financing India’s growth, let me place some pertinent 
What kind of growth do we want? 
8. 
The growth model that we should pursue has also been a subject of great debate 
amongst the policy makers. Should it be a manufacturing driven, export-led growth, should it 
be infrastructure led growth or one driven by domestic consumption? In fact, all models have 
their respective pluses and minuses. We have the examples of current Chinese meltdown 
and the Asian Financial Crisis of late 90s which, in part, resulted from heavy investment in 
infrastructure creation which ceases to provide positive returns beyond a point or too much 
reliance on export-led growth. Perhaps, we might want an equitable mix of all – growth led by 
increase in domestic consumption, investment in infrastructure and manufacturing. I believe 
we are well past a period when we could focus exclusively on being a world manufacturing 
hub for driving growth. To my mind, we would do well to aspire for a growth model which 
predominantly focuses at domestic manufacturing and global service delivery, which would 
be much more sustainable. It is also essential to realize that growth can be sustainable only 
if it is inclusive in nature and outlook. The inter se disparities or skewness in development 
between regions, communities etc., is neither desirable nor good for the society. 
Key challenges to growth 
9. 
Having discussed about the potential growth rate for India and the model of growth 
that  we  would  like  to  pursue,  let me  highlight  some key  challenges  to  achievement  of the 
potential  growth  rate.  Although  there  are  also  certain  socio-political  reasons  for  slower 
growth, from an economic stand point, I feel following are some of the major challenges: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Lack of investment in infrastructure- both physical and financial 
High level of Financial Exclusion 
Skill gap, which has implications for employability 
Decline in Gross Capital Formation & dwindling domestic savings rate 
What needs to be done? 
10. 
Government as well as RBI have been mindful of these challenges and have been 
taking steps to overcome them in a sustainable manner. It is also worth emphasizing here 
that  there  needs  to  be  a  fine  balance  struck  between  promoting  investment  in  “capital 
intensive” and “labour intensive” companies, whether in industry or in service segments. This 
is necessary keeping in view the sheer number of educated workforce in the country. Over a 
period  of  time  we  have  witnessed  contribution  of  the  service  sector  go  up  significantly  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
around 57 % of the GDP. The recent growth in output in the services sector can largely be 
attributed  to  rapid  development  of  skill  intensive  services  like  Information  Technology  (IT) 
and  IT  enabled  Services  (ITeS)  sectors,  e-commerce  and  professional  service  segments, 
mostly  oriented  towards  the  external  market. There  are  questions  raised  about  the  quality 
and  sustainability  of  this  service-sector  growth  as  also  its  potential  for  future  growth. 
However, I believe that  the Government’s thrust on digital India and skill development will 
continue  to  support  expansion  of  both:  modern  services  like  e-commerce,  communication 
and finance as also more traditional services like trade, transport and storage, etc. 
Urban migration 
11. 
A crucial piece of the growth continuum would emerge from continued migration of 
people  to  urban  areas.  This  would  fuel  demand  for  housing,  transportation,  electricity, 
education,  healthcare  facilities,  etc.  Governments/  Municipal  bodies  would  also  need  to 
invest  in  creation  of  roads,  sewage  systems,  water  supply  facilities,  etc.  While  focus  on 
impending urbanization is critical, the rural economy should continue to remain an area of 
focus as more than 60% people would continue to live in rural areas. 
Focus on rural economy and financial inclusion 
12. 
Income  levels  in  the  rural  areas  could  be  improved  through  land  reforms  like 
consolidation  of  fragmented  landholdings,  which  in  turn  can  support  modern  harvesting 
methods, and training the rural people for undertaking non-farm activities. Efforts to enhance 
the  credit  absorption  capacity  must  be  supplemented  through  financial  literacy,  vocational 
training initiatives and an efficient crop insurance framework. 
13. 
RBI  has  for  long  been  focused  on  inclusive  growth  through  policies  like  selective 
credit control, priority sector lending norms, lending to weaker sections of the society, service 
area approach and through the financial inclusion drive in recent past; details of which are 
well too known to this audience. RBI’s policies on expansion of branch network in rural and 
semi-urban centers have also been part of this initiative. There is a need now to leverage 
upon these efforts to channelize savings and deploy them for productive asset creation. The 
two newly licensed full-service banks, eleven payment banks and soon to be licensed small 
finance banks, would provide further impetus to accessibility of finance and render the credit 
intermediation  process  more  efficient,  thereby  contributing  to  a  sustainable  and  inclusive 
growth. 
Focus on SME financing – a key driver for future 
14. 
While  on  the  subject  of  inclusive  growth,  it  is  pertinent  to  talk  about  the  MSME 
sector, which has the potential to foster strong growth by creating local demand and driving 
consumption. Presently, MSMEs contribute nearly 8 per cent of the country’s GDP, 45 per 
cent of the manufacturing output and 40 per cent of the exports. They provide the largest 
share of employment after agriculture and are nurseries for entrepreneurship and innovation. 
Acknowledging the importance of the sector to economic growth, both- Government of India 
as well as RBI have been taking measures to enhance flow of credit to the sector. On its 
part, RBI has launched several initiatives in this regard. To specifically address the issue of 
delayed payments to the MSME sector, TReDS has been conceptualised as an authorised 
electronic platform to facilitate discounting of invoices/bills of exchange of MSMEs. On the 
other  hand,  as  part  of  capacity  building  of  MSME  divisions  in  banks  and  to  develop 
entrepreneurial sensitivity, RBI has recently launched targeted training programmes for the 
functionaries  in  commercial  banks.  Government  of  India  has  also  recently  laid  out  a 
framework  for  revival  and  rehabilitation  of  MSM  enterprises.  The  other  initiatives  of 
Government of India i.e. “Make in India”, “Skill India Mission” and “Digital India” also ties in 
neatly to provide further push to the sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Role of banks in financing growth 
15. 
Traditionally,  like  other  emerging  markets,  Indian  economy  has  been  bank-
dominated.  So  whether  it  is  for  project  development,  or  working  capital  needs  of  the 
corporates,  banks  have  been  the  primary  source  of  credit.  Though  primarily  banks  are 
supposed  to  undertake  maturity  and  liquidity  transformations,  there  are  limitations  on  the 
extent  of  asset-liability  mismatches  they  can  run  on  their  books.  The  large  scale  distress 
being  witnessed  in  banks’  infrastructure  portfolio  also  raises  issues  about  their  ability  to 
critically  appraise  such  projects.  The  typical  role  for  the  banks  in  mature  markets  is  to 
originate loans and then distribute to other willing players in the market. They predominantly 
undertake working capital finance and provide structured financial solutions to their clients. 
They  also  act  as  market  makers  for  various  financial  sector  products.  With  the  gradual 
widening and deepening of our financial markets, it would be fair to expect our banks to also 
gradually  shift  their  focus  to  SME  and  retail  clients  while  leaving  the  long-term  resource 
contribution to other players including pension funds/ insurance companies which have long-
duration liabilities on their balance sheets. 
16. 
There is another factor relevant in this context. While the banks’ ability to dispense 
credit depends upon their capital position, they are also guided by the viability of the projects 
to be funded. Risk aversion stemming from stress in financial assets has been one of the 
reasons for restrained bank credit growth in recent times. 
Have borrowers been meeting their obligations? 
17. 
I have raised the issue of borrowers’ obligations on many occasions and at the cost 
of repeating myself, I would like to emphasise the point once more. While the quest to grow 
is  understandable,  the  borrowers  cannot  exclusively  rely  on  bank  funds  to  finance  this 
growth,  without  committing  their  own  funds.  The  labyrinthine  maze  through  which  several 
large infrastructure projects have been funded point to extremely low or negligible levels of 
equity contributions leading to extremely high levels of leverage and virtually no skin in the 
game for the promoters. There is a very visible pattern here. The last few years’ growth was 
largely on account of Infra projects. These projects were launched by a handful of promoters 
with thin equity as I alluded to earlier. I suspect that this small group has run out of even such 
thin level of equity to contribute their fair share for revival of the stalled projects, not to talk 
about commissioning of new projects. So, it should be obvious to everyone that if momentum 
has to continue then they have to either find fresh equity on their own or make way for others 
who can contribute such equity both for the existing projects and also for new ones. 
18. 
It is also pertinent to mention here that the present legal system does not facilitate 
an  easy  closure/takeover  of  unviable  firms.  In  order  to  overcome  such  problems  and  to 
salvage value in firms in distress, it is imperative to take measures for an early enactment of 
a Bankruptcy Code. Creation of a central authority for resolution of financial firms in distress 
also needs an early finalization. 
19. 
High levels of debt accumulation by corporates has been encouraged in part by the 
availability  of  low-cost,  abundant  and  flexible  debt,  facilitated  by  the  search-for-yield 
environment created by the extraordinary policy measures undertaken in the US, UK, euro 
area and Japan. Several corporates have increased leverage, by borrowing in both foreign 
and domestic currencies. As corporates, you have to be mindful of global uncertainty, which 
is  a  given.  The  interconnectedness  of  markets  lends  itself  to  volatility.  The  entities  with 
significantly higher unhedged forex borrowings are most likely to face maximum distress. 
Governance reforms 
20. 
India would continue to need external capital for growth and hence, we must create 
conducive environment for boosting investor confidence, which includes stable, efficient and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
predictable  legal,  taxation  and  audit  framework  along  with  credible  credit  rating  regimes, 
amongst others. 
Conclusion 
21. 
I  shall  conclude  by  reiterating  a  few  points  I  made  earlier.  Persistently  weak 
economic conditions in the global and domestic markets have perhaps been the single most 
important reason for moderate growth in recent times rather than availability of finance for 
productive  purposes. Going  forward  also,  availability  of finance  should  not  be  a  constraint 
considering  India’s  attractiveness  as  a  major  investment  destination  for  global  investor 
community. However, the path to a potentially higher and sustainable growth is essentially 
through higher savings and infrastructure investment, which needs to be ably supported by 
an environment of macroeconomic and financial stability. It is essential, therefore, to sustain 
the  momentum  of  gradual  economic  reforms  which  I  alluded  to  earlier.  Both,  RBI  and  the 
Government  would  have  to  collectively  work  towards  creating  the  necessary  enablers  for 
growth  like  moderate  inflation,  stable  exchange  rate,  fiscal  consolidation,  predictable 
legal/taxation  and  auditing  regime.  Early  resolution  of  the  impasse  on  land  acquisition, 
enactment  of  GST  and  bankruptcy  code  would  also  provide  strong  leg  up  to  investment 
climate in the country and drive up growth. Strengthening the pace of financial inclusion and 
financial literacy, more efficient and better-directed public spending, particularly on the social 
sector  (education  and  health)  and  skill-development  would  be  equally  significant  steps 
towards this goal. 
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
