  Simon M Potter: Challenges posed by the evolution of the treasury 
market 
Remarks  by  Mr  Simon  M  Potter,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Markets  Group  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  2015  Primary  Dealer  Meeting,  New  York  City, 
13 April 2015. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Michael  McMorrow  for  his  excellent  assistance  in  the  preparation  of  these  remarks  and 
colleagues in the Federal Reserve System for numerous insightful comments and suggestions. 
Welcome  to  this  year’s  primary  dealer  meeting,  and  thank  you  for  joining  us  today.  As 
primary  dealers,  you  play  an  integral  role  as  the  Federal  Reserve’s  counterparties  in 
operations to implement monetary policy, as participants in U.S. Treasury auctions, and as 
important providers of information on market developments to support the Desk’s monitoring 
of  financial  markets.1  Today’s  meeting  provides  us  with  a  valuable  opportunity  to 
communicate our expectations for you as our counterparties and to strengthen our important 
relationship. 
Today, I’ll discuss the market for U.S. Treasury securities, with a focus on how the market’s 
structure has changed in recent years. As you all know, the U.S. Treasury market is one of 
the  most  important  financial  markets  globally  and  is  valued  as  a  source  of  safety  and 
liquidity.  Indeed,  both  domestic  and  global  investors,  including  private  sector  institutions, 
retail investors, and foreign central banks, hold Treasury securities at least in part for these 
reasons. A deep and liquid Treasury market also helps to underpin the U.S. dollar’s status as 
the global reserve currency. 
I’ll  begin  with  an  overview  of  the  market’s  basic  structure,  including  some  historical 
perspective on how that structure has evolved over time. I’ll then turn more specifically to the 
subject of electronic and automated trading – a topic that has become increasingly important 
across many markets, including the market for U.S. Treasuries. I will then review the intraday 
volatility  witnessed  on  October  15  of  last  year.  As  you  all  know,  October  15  was  a  highly 
unusual day in the Treasury market, particularly given the very sharp round-trip in yields that 
took place mid-morning with no obvious immediate trigger. I will conclude with a few words 
on the updated best practice recommendations from the Treasury Market Practices Group 
(TMPG)  in  light  of  the  changing  market  structure,  and  some  observations  on  how  you,  as 
primary  dealers,  are  expected  to  help  promote  the  market’s  efficiency  and  integrity.  As 
always,  the  views  I  express  are  mine  alone  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. 
Background 
The Treasury market is the largest and most liquid sovereign debt market in the world. There 
are  about  $12.5  trillion  in  marketable  securities  outstanding,  and  primary  dealers  trade  an 
average of around $500 billion every day with their clients and with other parties.2 Treasury 
securities  play  a  variety  of  roles  in  the  U.S.  economy.  They  are,  of  course,  the  federal 
government’s primary vehicle for financing the federal deficit and refinancing maturing debt. 
                                                 
1   The “Desk” refers to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s trading desk, which implements monetary policy 
on behalf of the Federal Reserve System, as directed by the Federal Open Market Committee. 
2   This figure is based on recent volume trends in the Federal Reserve’s FR2004 database. This figure is not 
adjusted for double-counting issues that arise from primary dealers reporting transactions with other primary 
dealers. FR2004 also represents an incomplete picture of liquidity provision in the Treasury market, as it only 
captures activity conducted by primary dealers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
Global investors use Treasuries for investing and hedging purposes, and as benchmarks for 
pricing other types of assets. In addition, many in the public and private sectors use Treasury 
yields to glean information about expectations for the future course of the U.S. and global 
economy. 
Treasury  securities  originate  in  the  primary  market,  where  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
New York, in its capacity as fiscal agent for the U.S. Treasury, works with primary dealers to 
facilitate  the  auction  process.3  Auctions  are  open  to  primary  dealers,  their  customers,  and 
direct bidders. 
Higher  federal  deficits  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis  required  Treasury  to  increase  the 
amount  of  issuance  for  some  time,  but  the  deficit  has  now  shrunk  to  a  level  closer  to 
historical  norms,  bringing  the  required  level  of  additional  issuance,  also  known  as  “net 
issuance,”  down  in  tandem.4  However,  gross  issuance,  defined  roughly  as  the  sum  of  the 
issuance  required  to  refinance  maturing  debt  and  the  net  issuance  required  to  fund  the 
existing deficit, continues to be very high by historical standards. For example, in 2014, the 
U.S. Treasury issued just over $630 billion on a net basis, whereas there was $7 trillion in 
total gross issuance taking place over the year. 
A  deep  and  liquid  secondary  market,  where  traders  buy  and  sell  existing  securities  at  an 
agreed-upon  price,  is  a  crucial  attribute  of  the  asset  class,  and  primary  dealers  and  other 
market participants also play an important role here. Strong liquidity in the secondary market 
facilitates  smooth  price  discovery  and  ensures  that  investors  can  adjust  their  holdings  of 
Treasury securities at minimal cost. The attractiveness of Treasury securities to investors, in 
turn,  helps  minimize  the  cost  of  issuance  to  the  U.S.  Treasury  and  facilitates  the  Federal 
Reserve’s ability to implement monetary policy. 
The secondary market for Treasury securities operates on an over-the-counter basis – that 
is, not on an exchange.5 Historically, secondary market trading has fallen into two categories: 
trades  between  dealers  and  customers,  and  trades  between  dealers.  “Dealer-to-customer” 
trading consists of direct transactions between broker-dealers and end-investors, and trading 
activity tends to be dispersed across both the most recently issued securities, known as “on-
the-run”  issues,  and  seasoned  securities,  known  as  “off-the-run”  issues.  The  outright 
purchases of Treasury securities that the Desk conducts to implement monetary policy would 
fall into the dealer-to-customer category. 
Much  of  the  trading  between  dealers,  on  the  other  hand,  takes  place  on  platforms  that 
provide  opportunities  for  market  makers  to  trade  anonymously  with  each  other,  with  a 
broker sitting in the middle. Activity taking place over these platforms is often referred to 
as the “interdealer” market, since dealers have been its traditional participants. The vast 
majority of trading in the interdealer market has also tended to concentrate in on-the-run 
issues, given – and likely contributing to – their superior liquidity. This liquidity advantage is 
reflected in the tendency for on-the-run securities to trade at a slightly lower yield than might 
be  predicted  by  a  theoretical  yield  curve  –  a  concept  often  referred  to  as  the  “on-the-run 
premium.” 
                                                 
3   At  each  Treasury  auction,  primary  dealers  are  currently  required  to  submit,  at  a  minimum,  their  equally 
weighted  share  of  the  auction’s  total  offering  size  to  ensure  coverage.  This  is  known  as  the  “pro  rata 
requirement.”  In  the  past,  dealers  were  required  to  account  for  1  percent  of  secondary  trading,  but  this 
requirement no longer exists. 
4   The level of net marketable debt issuance is also affected by the Treasury’s need to borrow for student loans 
and other credit programs. The Congressional Budget Office currently projects such additional borrowing to 
average $61 billion annually over the next ten years. 
Interestingly, Treasury bonds were traded on the New York Stock Exchange during the late 1910s and early 
1920s, as the market grew with wartime financing needs. However, trading migrated to an over-the-counter 
market in the first half of the 1920s, in part because institutional investors, who were becoming an increasingly 
important part of the Treasury’s investor base, found it a more efficient means of transferring risk. 
5  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
The interdealer Treasury  market has undergone significant changes over its life and looks 
very  different  now  than  it  did  in  recent  decades.  One  obvious  change  is  technological.  As 
early  as  the  mid-1970s,  dealers  would  use  brokerage  screens  as  sources  of  aggregated 
information  on  the  best  bids  and  offers,  but  through  the  1990s  they  continued  to  conduct 
transactions through voice channels. This practice began to change around the turn of the 
twenty-first  century,  when  electronic  means  of  transacting  began  to  grow.  Now,  of  course, 
nearly  all  trades  are  conducted  electronically  in  the  interdealer  market,  with  transactions 
occurring via computer systems 
Another important change in the interdealer Treasury market relates to the issue of access. 
Until 1992, only primary dealers, as designated by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
had direct access to the interdealer brokerage platforms.6 Owing partly to the advent of direct 
bidding  in  Treasury  auctions  and  the  effects  of  the  Salomon  Brothers  bidding  scandal  the 
year before, the interdealer brokers expanded access beyond primary dealers to all entities 
who  were  netting  members  of  the  Government  Securities  Clearing  Corporation  (now  the 
Fixed Income Clearing Corporation, or FICC). Over time, other entities also gained effective 
access to the platforms through their prime brokers, who themselves had direct access. In 
more  recent  years,  interdealer  brokers  have  granted  access  to  an  even  wider  range  of 
participants, including participants outside the FICC netting membership. 
A  third  change  is  the  availability  of  close  substitutes  to  on-the-run  Treasuries,  which,  as 
noted above, account for the great majority of trading in interdealer markets. Historically, on-
the-run  Treasuries  had  a  limited  number  of  close  substitutes  as  a  highly  liquid,  credit-risk-
free,  dollar-denominated  fixed-income  instrument.  Today,  however,  dealers  and  investors 
can transact in a variety of instruments that closely resemble the risk and liquidity properties 
of  on-the-run  Treasuries,  including  Libor-based  interest  rate  swaps  and  overnight  index 
swaps. Moreover, Treasury futures, which have existed for several decades, have become 
an increasingly widely used close substitute as well. 
Throughout this history, the Treasury market has retained one of its most important attributes 
–  its  superior  liquidity.  However,  the  concept  of  financial  market  liquidity  is  a  notoriously 
difficult one to define. Many approaches to measuring liquidity seek to quantify the cost of 
transacting in a given size, and this is certainly one reasonable definition. Others, however, 
might argue that it is the ability to transact that matters most for liquidity, even if the “cost” 
goes  up  during  periods  of  heightened  volatility.  Perhaps  even  more  difficult  than  defining 
liquidity is answering the question of how an increasingly electronic, and often automated, 
market  affects  liquidity.  As  we  will  see,  this  is  a  particularly  pertinent  question  when 
examining the events that took place in the Treasury market on October 15 of last year. 
Electronic and automated trading in the treasury market 
As  I  noted  earlier,  electronic  trading  –  or  the  practice  of  executing  transactions  through 
computer systems – has become an important feature of the modern Treasury market. While 
comprehensive  data  on  the  universe  of  secondary  trading  in  the  Treasury  market  is 
somewhat  lacking,  estimates  suggest  that  electronic  trading  represents  a  greater  share  of 
activity  than  transactions  conducted  by  voice,  perhaps  by  a  substantial  margin.  As  noted 
above,  the  vast  majority  of  interdealer  market  trading  is  conducted  electronically,  but  a 
sizable proportion of trading in the dealer-to-customer market is now executed electronically 
as well. 
Automated  trading  is  a  subset  of  electronic  trading  that  relies  on  computer  algorithms  for 
trading decisions, execution, and booking. Market participants engage in automated trading 
for a variety of reasons, including cost savings and efficiency gains from the relatively faster 
                                                 
6   Although this was market practice through 1992, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York neither encouraged 
nor required this use of the primary dealer list. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
speed at which computer algorithms can make and process certain types of decisions. For 
example, a  dealer may  decide that for orders under a certain size, it is more efficient and 
cost  effective  to  have  a  system  automatically  provide  a  quote  when  a  customer  shows 
interest than to have a trader manually do so. 
High-frequency  trading  (HFT)  refers  to  a  type  of  automated  trading  that  relies  primarily  on 
speed  to  identify  and  act  upon  trading  opportunities  faster  than  other  market  participants. 
HFT is often associated with a high volume of order messages and rapid position turnover. 
Such  trading  typically  requires  a  significant  investment  in  technology  and  communications 
systems  designed  to  reduce  the  amount  of  time  necessary  to  transmit  and  process 
information. Although high-frequency trading has garnered much attention in the media, it is 
worth  pointing  out  that  distinguishing  between  “automated  trading”  and  “high-frequency 
trading” is not clear cut. In fact, many features ascribed to high-frequency trading, such as 
minimizing  the  time  between  trading  decisions  and  execution,  also  apply  to  automated 
trading more broadly. 
Automated trading is conducted by a range of different firms, including broker-dealers and 
specialized  proprietary  trading  firms  that  trade  without  client  money.  Firms  specializing  in 
automated trading generally participate in trading venues with “protocols” that allow for high-
speed  activity,  most  notably  those  operating  with  a  Central  Limit  Order  Book  (or  “CLOB”). 
CLOBs  have  long  been  a  fixture  of  the  futures,  FX,  and  equity  markets,  and  allow 
participating firms to place anonymous orders to buy or sell securities into a standing queue, 
and to rapidly execute such orders at any given moment in time.7 In the Treasury market, 
automated  trading  has  become  most  pronounced  in  the  Treasury  futures  market  and  the 
interdealer market for on-the-run securities, both of which operate with a CLOB protocol. In 
fact, proprietary automated trading firms are believed to account for over half of the volume 
transacted over the major interdealer trading platforms. 
It is helpful to think of two basic types of automated trading strategies: those whose primary 
purpose  is  to  earn  a  return  by  making  markets,  and  those  whose  primary  purpose  is  to 
generate  excess  returns  –  what  market  participants  sometimes  call  “alpha-seeking” 
strategies. A market-making algorithm might be designed to supply liquidity to a CLOB under 
a  set  of  rules  that  depend  on,  for  example,  historical  analysis  of  market  and  order  book 
dynamics.  An  alpha-seeking  strategy,  on  the  other  hand,  might  better  describe  a  set  of 
trading practices that is more likely to consume liquidity to produce excess returns. Examples 
of alpha-seeking strategies might be momentum detection, statistical arbitrage, and spread 
trading.8  
One  important  difference  between  most  automated  trading  firms  and  traditional  broker-
dealers is their balance sheet properties. Traditional broker-dealers generally carry net long 
or  short  positions  in  Treasury  securities  from  one  day  to  another,  an  activity  that  requires 
capital.  Dealers  hold  Treasuries  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  including  to  support  the  liquidity 
needs  of  their  customers,  to  hedge  exposure  in  other  fixed-income  products,  and  to  meet 
their obligations as primary dealers to participate in U.S. Treasury auctions and the Federal 
Reserve’s open market operations. Many argue that the ability and willingness of dealers to 
                                                 
7   A CLOB protocol aggregates all executable bids and offers across participating liquidity providers in a single 
order book that is available to all market participants. In a liquid market, the continuous visibility of quotes and 
the  interaction  of  multiple  bids  and  offers  are  likely  to  enhance  the  price  discovery  process  and  market 
transparency. In contrast, a request-for-quote protocol, where a request for liquidity typically is submitted to 
only a limited set of providers, by its nature imposes a degree of market segmentation that may impede the 
price discovery process as compared with a CLOB protocol, but is arguably better suited to handle large block 
trades and illiquid securities. 
8   Momentum detection is a strategy that attempts to predict short-run price changes based on patterns in real-
time market data. Statistical arbitrage is a trading strategy that typically relies on identifying mean reversion 
from historical relative pricing relationships between correlated assets. Spread trading seeks to profit from a 
simultaneous purchase and sale of two closely related fixed-income assets. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
deploy  their  balance  sheets  for  holding  Treasury  securities  and  other  fixed-income  assets 
allows them to serve as shock absorbers, particularly during times of volatility. 
Automated trading firms, on the other hand, typically do not end the day with significant long 
or short net exposure, despite the fact that they often conduct a substantial volume of gross 
transactions.9  As  a  result,  automated  trading  firms  do  not  face  the  same  level  of  capital 
constraints under the traditional way of thinking about capital requirements.10 However, for 
the same reason, they also may not be capable of serving as shock absorbers during periods 
of  heightened  volatility,  as  traditional  market  makers  are  thought  to  do.  Thus,  while  the 
market  may  have  come  to  rely  on  automated  trading  firms  as  suppliers  of  very-short-term 
intraday  liquidity,  market  participants  still  rely  on  traditional  market  makers  with  balance 
sheet capacity to supply liquidity over longer-term horizons. 
Electronic trading, including automated and high-frequency trading, has likely had a number 
of benefits. For one, technological advances have supported market efficiency by increasing 
the pace at which price discovery is disseminated across financial markets. It may also have 
reduced  transaction  costs,  both  through  the  economies  of  scale  that  large  technology 
investments produce, and perhaps through the maintenance of narrow bid-offer spreads that 
automated  market-making  arguably  makes  more  likely.  For  example,  automated  market-
making  might  allow  an  investor  to  instantaneously  transact  in  a  security  at  a  visible  price, 
with the market maker then able to immediately offset the risk by automatically hedging the 
exposure. 
Electronic and automated trading has also introduced risks to the Treasury market, as it has 
with other markets. For example, in the case of automated or high-frequency trading, firms 
must have sufficient internal controls to handle erroneous data and prevent malfunctioning 
algorithms.  Considering  that  automated  trading  firms  may  hold  limited  amounts  of  capital 
given  their  minimal  levels  of  net  long  or  short  exposure,  some  firms  may  be  particularly 
vulnerable in the event of such an error. We have already seen some of these risks manifest 
themselves in foreign exchange and equity markets, where electronic trading is even more 
common.  Further  study  is  required  to  understand  the  particular  nature  of  such  risks  in  the 
Treasury market and the implications that may exist for other institutions, particularly since 
many automated trading firms are not direct netting members of FICC. 
Automated  trading  has  also  raised  questions  on  issues  related  to  fairness  and  market 
behavior. For example, there is likely some dispersion across firms with respect to the speed 
at which they can transact, which in turn could lead to dispersion in the quality of execution 
that  market  makers  and  end-investors  are  able  to  achieve.  This  is  an  important  topic  for 
examination  and  reflection,  but  it  is  also  worth  remembering  that  a  varied  level  of 
technological access has long been a feature of competitive financial markets. For example, 
when  the  telegraph  appeared  in  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century,  traders  without 
immediate access cried foul when early users began leveraging the technology to minimize 
the time between trade decisions and execution. 
Electronic and algorithmic trading also has the potential to facilitate trading practices that are 
not  helpful  to  market  liquidity.  For  example,  submitting  a  quote  with  the  intent  to  cancel  it 
before any reasonable probability of execution is detrimental to the quality of market liquidity 
                                                 
9  
It is worth noting that the practice of trading with the intention of holding a position for a brief period of time is 
not new. For example, pit trading in the futures exchange featured traders who would look to earn spreads by 
holding  positions  for  short  periods  of  time  and  rarely  overnight  –  similar  in  many  ways  to  the  practices  of 
modern automated trading firms. 
10   This raises the question of  whether such firms are systematically capturing intraday  exposures in their risk 
management  systems.  To  the  extent  this  remains  a  vulnerability,  firms  might  consider  near-term  fixes  they 
could put in place to insulate themselves from potential intraday losses. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  
 
and to the integrity of the market. Even if such acts are not intentionally misleading, they can 
still result in a false sense of market liquidity. 
Finally,  firms  employing  high  volume  automated  trading  strategies  could  harm  market 
liquidity  if  they  do  not  manage  those  strategies  carefully,  particularly  given  the  significant 
share of market activity they represent. As I will explain later, the Treasury Market Practices 
Group  has  updated  its  best  practices  to  emphasize  the  importance  of  supporting  market 
liquidity  as  well  as  avoiding  automated  trading  strategies  that  create  a  false  impression  of 
market  price,  depth,  or  liquidity.  In  conjunction  with  those  best  practices,  the  TMPG  also 
released a white paper on automated trading that reviews several categories of associated 
risk, including operational risk, potential systemic counterparty risk, market manipulation risk, 
and transmission risk. 
October 15 
Let me now turn to the unusual events of October 15. On that day, Treasury yields exhibited 
extreme  volatility,  with  the  benchmark  ten-year  yield  trading  in  a  range  of  about  35  basis 
points between the market open and close. This included a sharp decline in yields following 
the U.S. retail sales report at 8:30 ET that morning, and a highly unusual round-trip in yields 
just after 9:33 a.m. At that time, the ten-year yield fell about 15 basis points in a five-minute 
period, before nearly fully retracing that move in roughly the same increment of time. That 
very  short  “event  window”  was  a  remarkable  occurrence  in  one  of  the  world’s  most  liquid 
markets, and likely reflected a unique dynamic on what was already an unusual day. Indeed, 
the net change on the session as a whole was less than 10 basis points – a small fraction of 
the extraordinary intraday range that we are still discussing today (see the chart). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   
 
Historical  examples  of  sharp  intraday  changes  in  U.S  interest  rates  have  tended  to  be 
associated with important economic events, such as major monetary policy announcements. 
There does not yet appear to be consensus by market participants around a single cause of 
the  volatility  on  October  15.  To  be  sure,  a  number  of  factors  likely  contributed,  including 
concerns  about  the  global  macroeconomic  outlook  and  the  unwinding  of  positions  by 
leveraged investors. Indeed, such concerns probably help explain why a modest surprise in 
U.S.  retail  sales  could  trigger  such  a  strong  reaction  around  8:30.  Publically  available 
positioning  data  in  the  futures  market  does  indicate  that  investors  who  take  positions  for 
purposes other than hedging had accumulated a large base of short positions in shorter-term 
interest rate futures contracts over the preceding months, and that that aggregate position 
unwound sharply in the weeks around October 15. 
Yet  these  factors  are  less  convincing  as  explanations  of the  round-trip  in  yields witnessed 
more  than  an  hour  after  the  data  release.  Activity  in  this  event  window  also  appears 
unconnected  to  any  other  piece  of  incoming  information.  As  a  result,  many  market 
participants and members of the official sector have questioned whether recent changes in 
the structure of the Treasury market can help explain the move, and some have focused on 
the potential role of electronic and automated trading. 
Clearly  automated  trading  likely  played  an  important  role  in  the  speed  of  transmission  of 
price movements from the Treasury market to other markets, since such technology allows 
investors to quickly identify and execute trades that are predicated on tight linkages between 
different markets. At the same time, some have suggested that firms engaging in automated 
trading  may  have  “unplugged”  their  systems  or  carried  out  strategies  that  prompted  or 
exacerbated the volatility. To be sure, the response of firms relying heavily on automated 
trading  strategies  to  market  volatility  may  be  different  than  that  of  non-automated 
participants, given the ability of automated systems to rapidly adjust their risk exposure in 
response to evolving order book and market price dynamics. However, a wholesale retreat 
on  October  15  is  inconsistent  with  the  extraordinarily  high  trading  volumes  observed 
throughout  the  day,  and  the  continuous  nature  of  trading  that  occurred  even  during  the 
most volatile periods. Indeed, some past periods of very sharp changes in financial asset 
prices have been characterized by prices “gapping” from one point to another, with little 
trading in between. But this appears not to have been the case on October 15. Even so, it 
is  possible  that  changes  in  the  participation  or  behavior  of  firms  employing  automated 
strategies  –  including  broker-dealers  and  proprietary  trading  firms  –  had  an  effect  on 
market  liquidity  and  price  movements  that  day,  even  if  there  was  no  wholesale 
disengagement. 
Others  have  suggested  that  the  event  window  on  October  15  is  a  byproduct  of  regulatory 
changes  that  have  reduced  traditional  dealers’  ability  to  serve  as  shock  absorbers  during 
periods  of  volatility  by  accommodating  large  net  order  flows.  In  particular,  some  market 
participants argue that recent regulatory changes have increased the cost that dealers face 
when expanding their balance sheets, leaving them less willing to do so for relatively low-
margin  businesses,  such  as  making  markets  in  Treasury  securities.  If  true,  it  may  help 
explain how an unwinding of large positions, as may have been observed in the sixty minutes 
after retail sales on October 15, could have had such a large impact on yields. But it is far 
from clear that such changes, on their own, can explain the round-trip in prices during the 
event window itself. 
That  said,  it  is  possible  that  the  dominance  of  electronic  and  automated  trading  and  the 
changing composition of participants in the Treasury market have interacted with changes to 
dealer behavior – whether the result of regulatory incentives or other reasons – in a manner 
that makes unusual intraday price moves more probable. While it is precisely the intention of 
many  recent  regulatory  initiatives  to  ensure  that  financial  firms  hold  sufficient  capital  to 
support the size of their balance sheets and risk taking activities, there could be unintended 
consequences of these regulatory changes, including the possibility that sharp intraday price 
moves become more common. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  
 
October 15 also raises questions about the nature of liquidity in the Treasury market today. 
As I mentioned earlier, market liquidity is a difficult concept to pin down, and if one asks how 
liquidity evolved on October 15, the answer will differ depending on the measure of market 
liquidity  you  have  in  mind.  It  is  certainly  the  case  that  some  frequently-cited  metrics  of 
liquidity, such as the quantity of orders available for execution in the CLOB at a given point in 
time, often referred to as “market depth,” showed significant signs of strain that morning. But 
volatility was also elevated, so a coincident reduction in market depth may be unsurprising. 
Indeed, an increase in volatility and reduction in depth can work in a self-reinforcing manner, 
in  which  reduced  depth  causes  trades  to  have  a  greater  price  impact,  while  the  resultant 
volatility causes market depth to shrink further. This dynamic has always existed in markets, 
but it is possible that automated trading serves to exacerbate it in certain situations. But even 
if a sharp reduction in market depth makes sense given an increase in volatility, a trade of 
reasonable  size  would  have  been  more  expensive  for  a  customer  to  execute  in  the  event 
window, and would have had a greater price impact, than in more normal conditions. In this 
sense,  liquidity  was  challenged,  and  frequent  periods  of  strained  liquidity  would  be 
undesirable for the most liquid sovereign debt market in the world. 
Others  might  argue  that  liquidity  on  October  15  was  reasonable,  because  the  ability  to 
transact,  albeit  in  smaller  than  usual  sizes,  appears  to  have  been  there,  even  in  the  most 
volatile  times.  As  previously  noted,  trading  volumes  were  many  times  their  normal  levels 
during  that  morning,  and  trading  took  place  on  a  continuous  basis.  If  liquidity  had  really 
deteriorated so significantly, it may be unlikely that such extraordinary flows would have been 
possible. That being said, the simple ability to transact does not necessarily equate to strong 
liquidity,  particularly  if  transacting  is  only  realistic  in  a  relatively  small  size,  or  if  it  is  only 
possible  to  conduct  a  trade  of  reasonable  size  by  “paying”  a  significant  spread  to  the 
midpoint of the best bid and offer. 
Regardless of one’s definition of liquidity, recurring periods of heightened and unexplained 
volatility  –  especially  if  prompted  by  little  new  information,  as  with  the  event  window  on 
October  15  –  could  prompt  end-investors  and  market  makers  to  question  the  superior 
liquidity of the Treasury market and perhaps hamper the critical roles the market serves. 
The  Treasury  market  serves  as  a  liquid  investment  option  for  global  investors,  a  ready 
source of collateral for other financial transactions, a benchmark for pricing other securities, 
an  important  component  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  framework  for  implementing  monetary 
policy,  and  a  market  for  financing  the  government  that  determines  borrowing  costs  to  the 
taxpayer.  Given  these  critical  roles  and  the  risks  posed  by  periods  of  sharp  volatility, 
understanding the manner in which the evolving market structure is affecting market liquidity, 
efficiency, and price dynamics is of the utmost importance, and something we plan to study 
further. 
Best practices in the treasury market 
The Treasury Market Practices Group (TMPG) recently released a consultative white paper 
that addresses the effects of ongoing changes in automated trading on the structure of the 
Treasury  market.  This  study  was  well  under  way  before  October  15,  but  it  includes  some 
preliminary  observations  from  the  TMPG  on  that  event  as  well.  The  TMPG  is  a  group  of 
market professionals, sponsored by the New York Fed, committed to supporting the integrity 
and  efficiency  of  the  Treasury,  agency  debt,  and  agency  mortgage-backed  securities 
markets. The group has released a wide range of best practices for these markets, including 
a fails charge that resulted in a dramatic decline in delivery fails in Treasury securities and 
agency MBS, and the recommendation to margin forward agency MBS trades, a practice that 
now covers most bi-lateral forward trades in that asset class. 
The TMPG white paper on automated trading in the Treasury market includes an updated set 
of  best  practice  recommendations  that  provide  additional  guidance  for  firms  and  trading 
venues  involved  with  electronic  and  automated  trading.  Some  of  the  changes  to  the  best 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
practices have to do with improving governance and back-office processes to keep pace with 
technological advancements. For example, the recommendations include maintaining better 
change  control  processes  for  designing,  testing,  and  introducing  trading  technologies  and 
algorithms. Additionally, they emphasize the importance of ensuring that risk management, 
clearing,  and  settlement  processes  are  robust  to  challenges  presented  by  the  speed, 
sophistication,  and  potentially  large  gross  trading  volume  associated  with  very  rapid 
execution. 
The  updated  best  practices  also  emphasize  the  importance  of  avoiding  automated  trading 
strategies  that  create  a  false  impression  of  market  price,  depth,  or  liquidity.  While  the 
possibility  of  such  trading  practices  has  always  existed,  electronic  trading  provides  more 
efficient  tools  for  this  type  of  behavior,  and  might  also  give  some  participants  the  false 
impression that it is easier to hide such behavior. 
Finally,  the  enhanced  best  practice  guidance  recommends  that  market  participants  who 
represent  a  material  share  of  daily  trading  consider  the  impact  on  market  liquidity  before 
making  abrupt  changes 
last 
recommendation  is  an  important  addition  to  an  existing  best  practice  that  calls  for  market 
participants  to  manage  large  positions  with  care.  Whether  a  firm  has  a  large  position,  or 
represents a sizeable share of market activity, it has the responsibility to help support market 
functioning  and  liquidity.  Making  significant  changes  to  either  such  a  position  or  trading 
activity  could  disrupt  market  functioning  and  liquidity  if  not  done  with  care,  and  the  TMPG 
calls for such positions and activity to be managed with particular vigilance. I would like to 
thank the TMPG for its continued excellent work in improving market practices. 
Once the consultative period has concluded and the best practices are finalized, the TMPG 
calls  for  all  participants  in  the  Treasury,  agency  debt,  and  agency  MBS  markets  to  adopt 
these business practices. As primary dealers, you are, of course, also expected to implement 
these best practices. We also expect you to be good citizens of the Treasury market more 
broadly,  and 
further 
enhancements to these best practices as the market evolves further. You play a critical and 
central role in ensuring that the Treasury market remains a robust and efficient fixture of the 
global financial landscape. 
Thank you. 
 
to  automated  systems  or 
trading  strategies.  This 
trends  or  suggesting 
identifying  worrying 
to  be  proactive 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
