  Ipumbu Shiimi: Credit information sharing in Namibia 
Welcoming remarks by Mr Ipumbu Shiimi, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the launch of 
the Namibia Data Sharing Alliance, Bank of Namibia, Windhoek, 2 March 2015. 
 Director of Ceremony 
Dr Prega Ramsamy, CEO of FinMark Trust 
Mr Phillip Shiimi, CEO of NAMFISA 
Mr Darrel Beghin, Executive Director, Credit Provider Association of SA 
Mr Grant Phillips, CEO Africa Regions, TransUnion 
Mr Frank Lenisa, Director, Compuscan 
Representatives of Lending Institutions, 
Distinguished invited Guests, 
Members of the media, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good morning and welcome to the Bank of Namibia! 
It is my singular honour and pleasure to join you this morning at this occasion to mark the 
launch  of  the  Namibia  Data  Sharing  Alliance.  As  you  may  recall,  on  19  August  2013,  I 
officiated  at  the  Credit  Information  Sharing  Workshop  held  in  Windhoek  organised  by 
FinMark  Trust.  The  purpose  of  the  Workshop  was  to  explore  potential  approaches  and 
actions that could improve the quality and flow of credit information in Namibia for the benefit 
of credit providers and, ultimately, their consumers. That Workshop paved the way for the 
establishment of Namibia Data Sharing Alliance, as a platform for credit information sharing 
among  credit  providers  in  Namibia.  What  we  are  witnessing  today  is  a  beginning  of  an 
exciting journey for Namibia in terms of credit information sharing. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the launch of the NDSA comes at a time when the Bank is in the 
process of implementing the regulatory framework for Credit Bureaus. As you may be aware, 
Namibia  did  not  previously  have  legislation  for  regulating  credit  bureaus.  That  position 
changed  in  August  2014  when  the  Credit  Bureau  Regulations  were  gazetted.  The 
Regulations are meant to regulate the operations and conduct of credit bureaus, in order to 
ensure that credit information sharing is carried out within the confines of the law. As part of 
the  provisions  of  the  Regulations,  credit  providers  in  Namibia  are  now  required  to  provide 
credit performance information to all registered credit bureaus. The purpose of this provision 
is  to  ensure  that  a  complete  picture  of  individual  borrowers  is  obtained,  to  enable 
comprehensive affordability assessments to be done with a view to curb over indebtedness 
of customers. This is in line with the Bank’s mandate of enhancing and maintaining stability 
in the financial sector. Therefore, the broader objectives of the NDSA and the Credit Bureau 
Regulations are complimentary in nature. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the rate of a country’s economic development is driven by the ease 
with which individuals and productive enterprises such as SMEs access funding. Therefore, 
the  Namibia  Financial  Sector  Strategy  (NFSS),  launched  by  the  Honourable  Minister  of 
Finance in 2012, has financial inclusion as one of its key strategic goals. Although financial 
exclusion has been reduced from baseline of 51% determined in 2007 to 31% in 2011, the 
intention is to reduce it further to 26% by 2021. In order to reach the set target, as a country, 
we need to devise various strategies such as improving credit information sharing, which is 
regarded as the catalyst to financial inclusion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  good  credit  information  sharing  plays  a  critical  role  in  enhancing 
credit to individuals and private enterprises. It enables credit providers to undertake effective 
credit risk assessments based on available credit history, whereas the borrowers are able to 
negotiate for better credit terms based on their good credit history. Therefore, initiatives such 
as the NDSA and the Credit Bureau Regulations will greatly contribute to the realisation of 
the NFSS objectives of enhancing access to finance and maintaining stability in the financial 
system. 
Director of ceremonies, ladies and gentlemen, the success of credit information sharing 
require  a  broad  range  of  credit  providers  actively  supplying  data  to  the  credit  information 
system. It is thus important for all credit providers to take up membership with the NDSA and 
be  part  of this  exciting  initiative.  I  therefore  call upon  credit  providers  to  join  the  NDSA  to 
ensure the realisation of meaningful credit information sharing in Namibia. 
In conclusion, I would like to commend FinMark Trust for initiating and facilitating this noble 
project.  This  indeed  demonstrates  that  you  always  stay  true  to  your  slogan  of  “making 
financial markets work for the poor”. All of us should be part of the solution of making credit 
cheaper  and  more  affordable,  in  a  responsible  fashion  through  credit  information  sharing. 
The Bank of Namibia is proud to be associated with this project! 
With these few remarks, Director of Ceremonies, Ladies and Gentlemen, it is my pleasure 
to declare the Namibia Data Sharing Alliance officially launched. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
