  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Towards proportionality in practice – financial 
inclusion and implementation of global standards 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Global Symposium on Proportionality in Practice, 
Kuala Lumpur, 28 May 2015. 
 Ladies  and gentlemen, thank  you for  the  opportunity  to  speak today  at the  opening  of the 
Global Symposium, with the theme “Towards Proportionality in Practice: Financial Inclusion 
& Implementation of Global Standards”. 
Financial inclusion has captured the attention of many decision makers around the globe. We 
can confidently say that we have been successful in educating the world on the importance 
of ensuring access and usage of quality financial services by all segments of society. I think it 
has dawn to the power that be that financial inclusion empowers low income households and 
SMEs to improve their livelihood and because financial inclusion provides equal opportunities 
(and hopefully, it appropriately designed, equal outcomes), it also enables the under served 
to  save  in  a  secure  manner,  invest  in  productive  activities  and  protect  against  unforeseen 
shocks. Financial inclusion, based on empirical evidence also reduces inequality1, which in 
turn supports inclusive and sustainable growth, by allowing the poor to stay healthy, stay out 
2. It is, a very worthwhile agenda 
of poverty, pay for education and accumulate human capital 
to pursue. 
The  scale  of  the  unbanked  in  term  of  numbers  is  still  significant  globally  and  financial 
inclusion  as  a  development  agenda  can  contribute  immensely  towards  resolution  of  this 
matter,  but  it  requires  collective  and  concerted  efforts  among  diverse  group  of  people. 
According  to  the  FINDEX  2014  data  by  the World  Bank,  2  billion  adults  worldwide  do  not 
have  access  to  financial  services.  The  International  Finance  Corporation  and  McKinsey 
reports that 380 million Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in developing countries do not 
have adequate access to credit. The extent of financial exclusion is still formidable. 
Recognising  the  scale  and  extent  of  financial  exclusion,  national  authorities,  regional 
groupings  and  international  organisations  have  elevated  financial  inclusion  as  a  policy 
priority. In Malaysia, we had decided to legislate this agenda into our statute as one of Bank 
Negara Malaysia’s primary functions, embedded in the Central Bank Act 2013. Recently, at 
the  regional  level,  the  ASEAN  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  agreed  to 
establish  a  Financial  Inclusion  Working  Committee  to  deliberate  and  coordinate  efforts  to 
enhance financial inclusion within its member countries. International organisations such as 
the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  (AFI),  the  World  Bank  and  the  United  Nations  Capital 
Development Fund (UNCDF) are also actively developing financial inclusion knowledge, and 
supporting countries in implementing financial inclusion strategies globally. 
Over  the  years,  we  have  since  witnessed  the  rapid  deployment  of  innovative  financial 
inclusion solutions that have changed the lives of many. Since the introduction of the MPESA 
mobile banking service in Kenya, the number of adults with access to financial services has 
increased  from  42%  in  2011  to  75%  today.  Agent  banking  in  Malaysia  has  provided 
consumers with an innovative and alternative channel to access financial services, resulting 
in the percentage of sub-districts served by financial services access point to increase from 
46% in 2011 to 96% in 2014. This has enabled 99% of Malaysians, particularly those in rural 
areas,  to  conveniently  access  and  benefit  from  financial  services.  The  microfinance 
                                                
1 
2  Discussion note “Redistribution, Inequality, and Growth”, IMF, 2014. 
“Global Financial Development Report 2014”, World Bank, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  institution Grameen Bank in Bangladesh has extended credit through its 2,500 branches to 
almost  8  million  people,  with  60%  of  them  lifted  from  poverty.  The  loan  recovery  rate  is 
higher than 98 percent. The experience in Bangladesh, in particular, dispels the myth that the 
poor is not bankable. 
Of proportionate regulation and the global standards 
The proportionate application of Global Standards for financial regulation is a critical factor in 
enabling  innovative  financial  inclusion  solutions,  ensuring  its  delivery  in  a  safe  and  sound 
manner. My remarks today will touch on the following topics: 
Recent developments in global standards and financial inclusion;  
Focus areas to advance Proportionality in Practice; and  
The importance of the Global Symposium to galvanise action. 
Recent developments in global standards and financial inclusion 
Global standards developed after the Global Financial Crisis were designed to address the 
financial stability and integrity issues that came to the fore in developed countries. Many of 
these  issues  involved  the  activities  of  Global  Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions. 
The effects of these standards on financial inclusion, such as the impact on smaller financial 
institutions in developing countries most likely were not taken into consideration. Fortunately, 
Standard-Setting Bodies have now recognised the principle of proportionality, emphasising 
on the balance between objectives of financial stability, integrity and inclusion. 
However, the real challenge lies in implementing proportionality in practice. If principles are 
not  implemented  in  a  proportionate  manner,  there  could  be  unintended  consequences  for 
financial inclusion. For example, despite the Financial Action Task Force’s guidance on the 
implementation  of  a  risk-based  approach  to  Anti  Money  Laundering/  Counter  Terrorist 
Financing  regulation,  we  have  seen  large-scale  de-risking  by  international  banks,  where 
banks  have  indiscriminately  terminated  businesses  in  certain  segments  rather  than  on  a 
case-by-case  basis,  or  based  on  proper  assessments  of  risk.  In  particular,  international 
banks  have  exited  entire  areas  of  businesses,  such  as  relationships  with  Money  Transfer 
Operators,  resulting  in  Money  Transfer  Operators  no  longer  being  able  to  provide 
remittances services for customers, mostly migrant workers remitting money to low-income 
family  members.  This  indiscriminate  de-risking  deprives  poor  families  of  vital  financial 
resources  to  live  healthily,  support  and  educate  their  children  for  a  better  future.  Such 
unintended  consequences  have  been  further  compounded  by  a  lack  of  clarity  around 
acceptable standards for applying simplified customer due diligence processes, and the fear 
of steep fines imposed by some regulators for non-compliance with anti-money laundering 
requirements. 
These problems will only increase unless the gap between principle and practice is bridged, 
or  else  the  millions  that  remain  unbanked  would  bear  the  brunt  of  this  unintended 
consequence. These developments also highlight the need for us to rethink the suitability of 
overdependence  on  foreign-owned  institutions  in  expanding  financial  inclusion  initiatives  in 
domestic markets or the strategy, to develop ‘domestic champions’ for such initiatives. 
Focus areas to advance proportionality in practice 
Allow  me  to  now  share  three  ideas  that  could  further  enhance  proportionality  in  practice. 
First,  further  coordinated  efforts  are  needed  to  develop  and  propagate  more  widely 
frameworks for measuring the impact of regulation on financial inclusion. Such frameworks 
should  be  able  to  objectively  assess,  based  on  a  well-defined  and  consistently  applied 
measures,  how  regulation  either  increases  or  reduces  barriers  to  financial  inclusion.  Such 
barriers could be in the form of reduced geographical access, exclusive criteria to qualify for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  is  key,  because 
financial  stability  and 
integrity.  Comparability 
financial  services,  prohibitive  costs  of  financial  services  or  a  concentration  of  products 
designed only for affluent customer segments. 
It  is  important  for  policymakers  to  collect  data  to  facilitate  cross  country  comparisons.  In 
particular,  the  data  should  measure  the  impact  of  proportionate  regulation  on  financial 
inclusion, 
it  allows 
policymakers  to  assess  how  different  proportionate  regulation  approaches  affect  intended 
outcomes in different jurisdictions. The goal here is to identify and disseminate tested and 
proven  proportionate  regulation  best  practices,  well  supported  by  empirical  evidence.  The 
evidence  on  proportionality  in  practice  facilitates  regulators  and  financial  institutions  in 
implementing innovative solutions because they have the confidence that there would be no 
adverse unintended consequences to financial stability and integrity. Empirical data can also 
support  Standard-Setting  Bodies  in  designing  differentiated  guidance  for  financial  services 
for  low-income  households  and  SMEs. While  the  importance  of  data  collection  is  obvious, 
there tends to be under investment and an ‘attention deficit’ among decision makers on such 
a critical matter. 
Second, it is crucial to build the capacity of regulators, supervisors and financial institutions 
so that the ecosystem has the requisite capacity to implement proportionality in practice. The 
Basel Range of Practice Survey highlights supervisors’ unmet demand for capacity building, 
as only 30% of supervisors globally had received training on supervision of banking services 
for the low income segment. The Basel Meeting with Standard-Setting Bodies on 2 October 
2014  chaired  by  Her  Majesty  Queen  Maxima,  the  United  Nations  Secretary  General’s 
Special  Advocate,  also  highlighted  the  importance  of  technical  assistance  programmes  to 
build up local knowledge and capacity of national supervisors, so that experience in applying 
proportionality can be shared. 
Third,  it  is  timely  for  financial  regulators  to  engage  non-financial  regulators  such  as 
telecommunication authorities at a global and national level, in order for regulation to keep 
abreast  with  the  latest  developments  in  financial  inclusion  solutions.  Technology  plays  a 
significant role in rapidly scaling up financial inclusion by lowering the cost of delivery as well 
as increasing convenience and quality of services for the masses. Technology enables us to 
bypass legacy systems and constraints. For example mobile banking, where banks partner 
with mobile network operators to offer banking services anywhere, any time and in real time, 
that has enable reach beyond traditional boundaries without the need for a huge investment 
in infrastructure. 
Importance of the Global Symposium to galvanise action 
This leads on to why we are gathered here at this symposium. The Global Symposium will 
discuss  and  highlight  the  detailed  next  steps  to  implement  proportionality  in  practice.  This 
Symposium uniquely brings together the relevant key stakeholders to deliberate the issues of 
proportionality in practice. The AFI’s Working Group members on Digital Financial Services, 
SME  Finance  and  Global  Standards  will  share  their  perspectives  on  regulatory  and 
supervisory matters. 
The  private  sector  banks  and  remittance  service  providers  share  practical  realities  in  the 
market to comply with international standards. In addition, we have international experts from 
the  SEACEN,  Toronto  Centre  and  World  Bank,  who  have  a  pivotal  role  in  implementing 
effective projects to advance Proportionality in Practice. 
Of  importance,  this  Symposium  will  culminate  in  an  Outcome  Statement  that  captures  the 
actionable  recommendations  from  deliberations  among  subject  matter  experts  and  key 
stakeholders over the next two days. It is my hope that the Outcome Statement will at least 
identify 5 practical and easily implementable suggestions and the statement will be adopted 
by  all  participants,  and  provide  us  with  a  clear  way  forward  to  execute  and  deliver  the 
recommendations on “Proportionality in Practice” that make it a reality and make a difference 
for the 2 billion individuals that remain unbanked. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Finally, I would like to also convey my sincere appreciation to our co-host, the Alliance for 
Financial Inclusion and Toronto Center, for all their contributions to this Symposium. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
