  Mugur Isărescu: Developments in the Romanian economy since 2008 
Speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the “Romania 
Investors Days” conference, Bucharest, 16 June 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am happy to witness the growing interest the investors’ community is showing towards the 
Romanian economy. Since this is the first reverse roadshow focused on Romania, I hope it 
will prove fruitful for all parties involved and that it will be followed by other similar events. 
In  my  address  today,  I  intend  to  briefly  touch  on  the  most  relevant  developments  in  the 
Romanian economy and I guess you will agree with me that we have come a long way since 
the beginning of the crisis. 
Probably the most synthetic assessment of the transformation is given by the fact that, at the 
onset  of  the  crisis,  Romania  fell  short  of  all  four  Maastricht  criteria  –  inflation,  long-term 
interest rates, public deficit and debt, exchange rate stability –, but now they are all fully met. 
Up  to  2008,  Romania  was  going  through  a  period  of  fast  economic  growth  (in  excess  of 
7 percent per year, on average), fuelled by large capital inflows and the strongly pro-cyclical 
stance  of  the  fiscal  policy,  especially  in  the  last  two  years  before  the  onset  of  the  crisis. 
Unfortunately, this came at the cost of significant macroeconomic imbalances: at the start of 
the crisis, Romania had a sizeable structural fiscal gap (around –8 percent of GDP in 2008), 
a current account deficit in the double-digit area and high inflation readings. 
When the crisis hit, there was no other option but to make the necessary adjustments. They 
appear  to  have  produced  the  expected  results:  with  the  current  account  deficit  below 
1 percent  of  GDP,  a  structural  fiscal  position  in  the  vicinity  of  1  percent  of  GDP,  and  an 
annual  inflation  rate  currently  at  1.2  percent,  we  can  safely  say  macroeconomic  equilibria 
have been restored. At the same time, the economy resumed its growth at rates that can be 
regarded  as  robust  when  compared  with  the  European  performance  (around  3  percent  in 
both  2013  and  2014  and  an  even  better  4.3  percent  in  the  first  quarter  of  2015).  As  a 
consequence,  the  output  lost  in  the  first  two  years  of  the  crisis  has  been  completely 
recovered. Public debt is currently below 40 percent of GDP and looks set to decrease over 
the  medium-term,  assuming  fiscal  consolidation  gains  are  maintained  and  the  economic 
growth stays at current levels. 
Positive  developments  also  occurred  in  terms  of  the  external  debt,  whose  share  in  GDP 
decreased by more than 12 percentage points since 2012, mainly due  to the cross-border 
deleveraging and the near complete repayment of the IMF loan. Nevertheless, international 
reserves, which currently stand at EUR 33.8 bn, continue to provide comfortable coverage as 
measured  by  most  available  metrics  (above  6  months  of  prospective  imports,  around 
100 percent  of  the  short-term  external  debt  at  residual  maturity,  almost  60  percent  of  the 
money supply). 
While Romania seems to have wrapped up the period of macroeconomic adjustments, the 
future  mission  of  economic  policies  is  to  keep  the  economy  on  an  upward  trend  without 
putting  at  risk  the  balances  restored  with  so  many  efforts.  As  in  many  other  European 
countries, the emphasis now falls on structural reforms meant to boost the economy’s growth 
potential in the long run, enhancing its flexibility and resilience to shocks. 
As a central banker, I am perfectly aware that one cannot talk about a sound economy and 
sustainable economic growth  without a solid financial system. Speaking about the banking 
system, the soundness of which has been entrusted to the central bank, I would first say that 
it has successfully weathered the crisis, without any resort to public money. Not only is the 
system well-capitalised, as shown by the 18.6 percent total capital ratio in March 2015, but 
good-quality capital prevails, given that the tier 1 capital ratio stands at 16.1 percent. Both 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  levels comfortably meet the new Basle III capital requirements. Moreover, banks made real 
progress in cleaning up their balance sheets over the last year, bringing the aggregate NPL 
ratio down from levels above 20 percent in 2014 Q1 to around 13 percent currently. 
As elsewhere in Central and Eastern Europe, in Romania too the vulnerabilities exposed by 
the crisis in the model of centralised fund management at the level of cross-border banking 
groups led to a new paradigm, which emphasises the local funding of credit activities. The 
cross-border deleveraging which accompanied this switch, while sizeable, has nevertheless 
unfolded in an orderly manner. 
The shift towards the domestic market in terms of financing sources was accompanied by an 
increase  in  the  relative  importance  of  local  currency-denominated  loans:  after  a  long  time, 
their share exceeded 45 percent and will possibly overtake foreign currency lending by the 
end  of  the  year.  This  is,  undoubtedly,  a  positive  development  for  both  debtors,  who  avoid 
currency risk exposure, and central banks, due to the increased effectiveness of monetary 
policy. 
Looking ahead, the constraints on both credit supply and demand are expected to continue 
to  prevail,  as  the  effects  of  a  balance-sheet  crisis,  such  as  the  one  we  have  recently 
encountered,  tend  to  be  longer-lasting.  In  such  an  environment,  the  quality  of  credit 
allocation appears more important than the volume, although the latter is not at all irrelevant 
in our case given a still low financial intermediation at 31.7 percent of GDP (not even during 
the credit boom period did it exceed 40 percent). 
In order to put the economy onto a self-sustained growth path, I believe it is necessary for 
banks  to  channel  credit  to  productive  investment,  avoiding  the  overburdening  of  good 
debtors  with  the  costs  of  past  misallocations.  Such  an  approach  should  generate  the 
productivity gains that are essential for credit, investment and productivity to fuel each other 
and place the economy onto a sustainable uptrend. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  monetary  policy.  The  countercyclical  stance  during  the  boom  years 
allowed monetary policy to turn stimulative after the outbreak of the global crisis: the policy 
rate  has  been  gradually  cut  from  10.25  percent  at  the  beginning  of  2009  to  1.75  percent 
currently, while the reserve requirement ratios have been lowered to 8 and 14 percent for lei- 
and forex-denominated liabilities respectively. While it is obvious that the NBR did not have 
to  navigate  in  the  uncharted  waters  of  quantitative  easing  and  negative  nominal  interest 
rates, there are still challenges to cope with. 
I would list first the difficulty in designing monetary policy in a context of rapidly improving 
cyclical  position  of the  economy,  while  a  perfect  storm  of favourable  supply-side  shocks  – 
namely  oil  and  food  price  drops  and  indirect  tax  cuts  –  has  been  generating  low  inflation 
readings for quite a while now, with the potential to alter inflation expectations in the medium 
term. 
Furthermore, the already mentioned constraints on credit supply and demand still impair the 
transmission mechanism of the monetary policy. Specifically, even though the interest rates 
on new loans in domestic currency have declined further in response to the policy rate cuts, 
the annual growth of credit to the private sector has leveled off in recent months. 
Aligning  the  operational  framework  of  monetary  policy  to  European  standards  is  another 
challenging  objective  the  central  bank  faces.  Obviously,  I  am  talking  about  the  still  high 
reserve  requirement  ratios  (given  the  need  to  contain  credit  expansion,  foreign  currency 
lending in particular, during the economic boom) and the relatively large width of the interest 
rate  corridor  (initially  warranted  by  the  imperative  of  cooling  off  speculative  capital  inflows 
and domestic currency appreciation). The NBR has capitalised, in the past two years, on the 
window of opportunity provided by the favourable macroeconomic and financial background 
to rectify the situation to a large extent, yet the process needs to be continued until reaching 
the prevailing levels across the EU. Looking ahead, it is essential that the NBR identify, as it 
has  until  now,  the  right timing for  the  upcoming  stages  of the  alignment  process to  unfold 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  without  impairing  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  markets  and  without  deteriorating  key 
indicators for investor sentiment or, more generally, public perception. 
I will end my brief overview on the economic state of play in Romania by expressing my hope 
that  this  event  will  turn  out  to  be  the  beginning  of  a  lucrative  and  mutually  beneficial 
partnership. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
