  
 
Andreas Dombret: Monetary union, banking union, capital markets union 
– financial integration in Europe 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the American Chamber of Commerce, Munich, 15 July 2015. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you very much for your invitation – I am delighted to be able to speak to you today. As 
some of you may well know, I was born in the United States and still have my US passport 
alongside my German one. And my international upbringing is one of the reasons why the 
efforts of the American Chamber of Commerce to promote and foster mutual dialogue are 
very close to my heart alongside the US and German passports. 
The world we live in is truly globalised – countries are no longer islands but parts of a highly 
interconnected system. And that particularly holds true, of course, for countries which have a 
common currency. The year 2010 is a case in point. That was the year in which Greece’s 
financial problems tipped the entire euro area into crisis. 
Greece – an update 
2. 
And now, five years on, Greece is still hogging the headlines. The new elections called in the 
country early this year marked the start of marathon negotiations that have been dragging on 
for more than five months now. When talks stalled a little under three weeks ago and the 
Greek government called a snap referendum, many thought that Greece’s days in the euro 
area were numbered. 
The  referendum  was  followed  last  week  by  talks  on  the  prospect  of  an  entirely  new 
assistance programme which early this week produced an agreement in principle. But that’s 
not the end of the story, because negotiations hammering out a third assistance programme 
cannot get underway before parliaments in a number of countries have been consulted – and 
one of those countries is Germany. Plus there are a raft of technical issues that need to be 
addressed. 
So although a basic accord has been reached, we should not lose sight of the challenges 
that lie ahead, especially so for Greece’s banks  – time really  is of the essence here. The 
imposition of capital controls and bank holidays placed Greek banks in an artificial coma two-
and-a-half weeks ago. But in my view, this ersatz stability does not relieve European banking 
supervisors  of  their  duty  to  come  up  with  a  diagnosis  and  identify  the  right  course  of 
treatment for the Greek banking system. I see four particularly important questions here. 
What can be said about the health of banks domiciled in a country facing colossal 
financial challenges? 
What can be said about the health of banks whose balance sheets are awash 
with debt instruments either issued or guaranteed by their sovereign? 
And  what  about  banks  whose  capital  bases  consist,  to  a  very  large  extent,  of 
deferred tax assets which will only be of value if and when the banks return to 
profitability and the sovereign is solvent? 
And  last  but  not  least:  what  can  be  said  about  the  large  proportion  of  non-
performing  loans  saddling  the  balance  sheets  of  Greek  banks,  which  is  more 
likely to have risen than declined given the bleaker economic outlook for Greece? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Even after Monday’s agreement, none of these questions can really be answered with any 
degree  of  satisfaction.  And  if  one  also  considers  that  Greek  banks  have  been  closed  for 
more than two weeks now, it’s simply impossible not to doubt their solvency. I share these 
doubts. 
So much for the sobering diagnosis. What, then, is the right course of treatment? I am of the 
opinion that at least four things need to be done. 
First,  any  new  assistance  programme  needs  to  ensure  that  Greek  banks  are 
adequately recapitalised. Estimations suggest a figure of up to €25 billion will be 
needed. That figure should be our yardstick, but it needs to be underpinned by a 
rigorous asset quality review. If, contrary to expectations, more capital is needed, 
there should be scope to top this figure up. 
Second, an ample supply of liquidity needs to be safeguarded in case depositors 
plan to withdraw more cash once the recapitalised banks reopen. 
Third, capital controls need to be gradually lifted over an extended period of time. 
And  fourth,  the  structure  of  the  Greek  banking  sector  needs  to  be  scrutinised. 
What  I’m  getting  at  is  this:  are  all  four  of  Greece’s  major  banks  viable  going 
concerns with a long-term future? 
My remark just now about the structure of the banking sector is pertinent, not least, because 
it was agreed that the Greek government would transpose the European Bank Recovery and 
Resolution  Directive  (BRRD)  into  national  law  by  22  July.  That  would  create  the  toolkit 
needed  to  resolve  banks  in  an  orderly  fashion,  first  and  foremost  the  bail-in  instrument.  I 
believe that this instrument needs to be made available in Greece as swiftly as possible – 
that is, ahead of the mandatory introduction date of 1 January 2016. Looking at the structure 
of Greece’s banking sector, the question is whether it is possible to consolidate the country’s 
banks without seriously distorting the competitive environment. This is a question that needs 
to be answered without delay. 
To sum up – time is of the essence, especially so for Greece’s banks. Everyone should be 
aware that Monday’s basic agreement marks the start of the real work. Now it is up to all the 
parties concerned to do their jobs to make sure that five months of negotiations weren’t in 
vain – and the focal point here, for me, is the Greek banking sector. 
After all, it’s not just Greece we’re talking about here but the euro area as a whole. And many 
seem to believe that the crisis in and over Greece has cast doubts over the very process of 
European integration. But I do not share that view. The proper response, in my view, is not 
less,  but  more,  integration.  And  we  took  a  major  step  towards  deeper  integration  by 
launching the European banking union. 
But we need to look beyond the banking sector and train our sights on the capital markets as 
well.  Extending  and  integrating  the  capital  markets  can  also  contribute  to  shoring  up  the 
foundations  underpinning  monetary  union.  After  all,  a  common  currency  needs  integrated 
financial markets to thrive. 
This idea of a capital markets union has increasingly taken shape in recent months. Back in 
February, the European Commission presented a green paper  outlining a framework for a 
European  capital  markets  union.  The  Bundesbank  sees  the  capital  markets  union  as  a 
sensible project that is conducive to deepening European financial integration further still – 
not only in the euro area but across the European Union. 
But  how  exactly  do  we  define  a  capital  markets  union,  and  how  can  we  make  this  idea 
reality? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Diversification – strengthening the capital markets 
3. 
The  European  capital  markets  union  essentially  sets  out  to  achieve  two  goals.  First,  to 
strengthen the role played by the capital markets in funding the real economy. Second, to 
deepen capital market integration across national borders. 
The  first  goal  sometimes  prompts  the  question  whether  a  financial  system  geared  to  the 
capital markets is superior to one built around banks. Empirical research into this question 
can be summarised quite succinctly – we’re not quite sure. But what we do know is that both 
systems  have  their  merits,  which  vary  depending  on  how  well  a  country’s  economy  is 
developed and how it is faring at a given point in time. 
The better developed an economy, the less the banking sector spurs growth and the more 
capital market financing comes into play. Also, market-based financial systems help to take 
the sting out of recessions that follow in the wake of financial crises. Bank-based financial 
systems, meanwhile, are more adept at evening out “normal” cyclical fluctuations. 
However, the latest financial crisis has opened up another vista. A system in which the real 
economy is wholly reliant on a single source of financing – be it the banking sector or the 
capital market – will run into difficulties when that well runs dry. 
So, at the end of the day, it’s not a question of choosing either one or the other. The idea 
behind the European capital markets union is not to give up on bank-based financing, but to 
harness capital market financing as an add-on. And Europe still offers plenty of potential in 
this respect. Measured in terms of economic output, the US equity market is more than one-
and-a-half times the size of its European counterpart, while the US venture capital market is 
five times the size of that in Europe, and the US securitisation market is larger still than the 
European market. 
It ultimately all comes down to the old economic adage that you shouldn’t put all your eggs in 
one  basket.  Or,  to  couch  it  in  rather  more  technical  terms,  it’s  all  about  diversifying  the 
sources  of  corporate  financing.  If  we  give  the  capital  markets  a  more  prominent  role  in 
funding the real economy, that will give businesses broader and better access to funding – to 
the notable benefit of small and medium-sized enterprises. What it will also do is create a 
more efficient financial system that can better support sustained economic growth. 
Integration – establishing a single capital market 
4. 
The second objective of the European capital markets union is to deepen the integration of 
the capital markets. What benefits do integrated capital markets have to offer? One of the 
biggest  advantages,  undoubtedly,  is  that  they  can  help  to  improve  risk  sharing.  The 
underlying technical question is this: to what degree does an economic shock impair private 
consumption? 
And this is where the capital markets perform a key buffer function. In the USA, for example, 
the integrated markets for capital cushion around 40% of total cyclical fluctuations between 
the US federal states. If a negative shock hits an industry or a specific region, then this loss 
is spread widely beyond that region. But in return, shareholders throughout the country also 
receive a share of the profits during the good times. The credit markets, meanwhile, play less 
of a role as a buffer, cushioning around 25% of cyclical fluctuations. Fiscal buffers play by far 
the least important role, with fiscal mechanisms cushioning just 10–15% of economic shocks. 
All in all, the different buffers absorb almost 80% of an economic shock before it can have an 
adverse effect on private consumption. 
The situation in Europe is slightly different: here, it is primarily the credit markets which act as 
buffers – and not particularly effectively at that. All told, just 40% of a shock is cushioned 
before  it  can  hit  private  consumption.  So  boosting  the  role  of  the  capital  markets  and 
integrating them more effectively across national borders would help to improve risk sharing 
in Europe and dampen fluctuations in consumption. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
In summary, then, a capital markets union offers two takeaways. First, strengthening the role 
of the capital markets as a source of funding for the real economy can promote economic 
growth.  Second,  integrating  the  capital  markets  more  deeply  across  national  borders  can 
improve  risk  sharing.  The  bottom  line  is  that  the  European  capital  markets  union  is  a 
worthwhile project. 
Turning the idea into reality 
5. 
Simple though the basic idea of a capital markets union may be, putting it into practice will be 
a difficult undertaking. The capital markets are a complex beast, and capital market funding 
comes in many shapes and sizes. Corporate bonds, private and listed equity capital, venture 
capital and peer-to-peer loans are just some of the instruments in the market. And integrating 
them affects not just the financial instruments themselves but also integral components of the 
respective markets, like exchanges and central counterparties. 
So  any  attempt  to  establish  a  capital  markets  union  will  automatically  involve  a  raft  of 
different  measures  in  a  wide  variety  of  areas.  It’s  no  surprise,  then,  that  the  European 
Commission’s proposals are very wide-ranging. 
The goal of boosting the role played by capital market financing can be best achieved, in my 
view, by placing the spotlight on the equity capital markets. That’s because equity capital is a 
form of capital market financing that is particularly effective at stabilising fluctuations. 
But let’s begin with the other side of the coin, so to speak, with debt financing. Debt contract 
terms don’t normally adapt to suit the borrower’s situation. The redemption amount doesn’t 
change  when  the  borrower  runs  into  difficulties.  Risk  is  only  shared  with  the  lender  if  the 
latter grants further credit to bridge the difficult spell or agrees to a haircut if the borrower 
becomes insolvent. 
The value of equity capital, by contrast, always moves in line with events. Equity capital is 
rather  like  an  insurance  policy  against  risk  and  creates  a  buffer  that  can  absorb  losses. 
Boosting the role played by equity capital financing thus curbs the incidence of insolvencies 
and  diminishes  fluctuations  in  investment  and  growth.  Let  us  not  forget  that  equity  capital 
showcased  this  stabilising  quality  during  the  course  of  the  European  debt  crisis.  Debt 
financing in Europe was seen to be more susceptible to capital flight than was equity capital 
financing. 
This  experience  would  suggest  it  is  worth  considering  doing  away  with  the  unequal  tax 
treatment of equity and debt capital. Reforming the corporate taxation regime is naturally a 
difficult task, and strong political will would be needed to push it through. But introducing a 
more neutral tax regime for equity and debt capital would not only reduce the appeal of being 
highly leveraged, but also boost efficiency levels across the board. 
As for the goal of integrating Europe’s capital markets more deeply, there are a number of 
areas offering quick wins, one of which is the market for high-quality securitisations. Although 
Europe’s securitisation markets came through the financial crisis relatively unscathed, they 
are lacklustre by comparison. 
That’s why a handful of initiatives have been launched to rekindle the continent’s markets in 
securitised  products.  These  include  the  European  Commission’s  efforts  to  establish  a 
framework  for  simple,  transparent  and  standardised  (STS)  securitisations.  Emphasising 
these  three  qualities  is  crucial,  given  the  lessons  learned  from  the  crisis.  The  securitised 
products which contributed to the crisis were neither simple, transparent nor standardised. 
Quite the opposite, in fact – there was a proliferation of complex and opaque products that 
led to the problems we are all too familiar with. So in my eyes, the Commission’s initiative is 
a sensible move to revitalise the securitisation market and promote the flow of funding to the 
real economy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Speaking  as  a  banking  regulator,  it  is  nonetheless  important,  of  course,  to  regulate 
securitisations  appropriately. What  we  should  avoid  at  all  costs  is  a  situation  in  which  we 
soften the existing financial market regulation in an effort to nurture certain market segments. 
Another quick win would be to standardise the regime for private placements. Yet another 
would be to tweak IPO prospectus requirements in a move to do away with unnecessary red 
tape. Looking into the more distant future, it would make sense to harmonise insolvency law, 
company law and tax law. 
However,  we should not focus on the institutional and legal framework to the exclusion of 
everything else. It would probably also be worthwhile to take into account soft factors such as 
cultural preferences for certain forms of financing or financial literacy levels. These are areas 
we will also need to address if we are to achieve our goal of establishing a European capital 
markets union. 
Conclusion 
6. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the road to a European capital markets union is a long and winding 
one.  The  journey  will  be  arduous  and  time-consuming.  There  will  be  challenges  and 
resistance we must overcome along the way. So we need to be realistic about what we are 
setting out to achieve. 
And yet we have travelled this road to deeper financial integration for 16 years now – since 
the year, in fact, in which we launched the euro as a common European currency. And we 
must not falter. If we want European monetary union to be a true success, we will need to 
press ahead towards ever deeper integration. 
We took a huge stride on this path in November 2014 with the launch of the banking union. 
Now the next major step is in order – the establishment of a European capital markets union. 
A  capital  markets  union  which  includes  not  just  the  member  states  of  the  euro  area  but 
embraces the entire European Union. 
On that note, I would like to bring my speech to a close with a quote that has been attributed 
to Robert F Kennedy. “There are those that look at things the way they are, and ask why? I 
dream of things that never were, and ask why not?” Looking at the capital markets union, I 
believe we should take this confident and optimistic outlook to heart. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
