  S S Mundra: Defeating poverty – issues and challenges 
Keynote address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
39th Skoch Summit, New Delhi, 20 March 2015. 
 1. 
Mr. Sameer Kochhar, Chairman, Skoch Group; other dignitaries on the dais and in 
the  audience;  delegates  to  the  Summit; members  of the  print  and  electronic  media;  ladies 
and gentlemen! It is a pleasure and privilege for me to be present here today at the inaugural 
session of the 39th Skoch Summit on the theme of “Defeating Poverty”. The theme of this 
conference is extremely relevant at the current juncture when the groundwork on linking each 
household to the banking sector in a mission mode under the PMJDY is nearing completion. 
I congratulate Skoch for choosing this particular theme for its Summit. 
2. 
The ILO Declaration of Philadelphia, 1944 states “Poverty anywhere is a threat to 
prosperity  everywhere.”  Poverty,  therefore,  has  implications  for  global  stability  which  has 
been  well  appreciated  by  the  policy  makers  the  world  over.  As  across  the  globe,  policy 
makers  in  India  i.e.  GOI  and  the  financial  sector  regulators,  particularly  RBI  have  also 
endeavored to ensure that poverty is tackled in all its forms and that the benefits of economic 
growth reaches the poor and excluded groups in the society.  
3. 
Franklin D. Roosevelt said “the test of our progress is not whether we add more to 
the abundance of those who have much; it is whether we provide enough for those who have 
too  little.”  If  we  were  to  apply  this  yardstick  for  measuring  our  progress,  we  would  be 
considered to have failed miserably. Even after nearly sixty eight years since achieving our 
independence, poverty remains one of India’s largest and most pressing problems. There is 
no gainsaying that a nation cannot become great when the lives of millions of its citizens are 
benighted by poor nutrition, limited by poor learning opportunities and shriveled by gender 
discrimination. 
What is poverty?  
4. 
The Merriam Webster Dictionary defines poverty as “the state of one who lacks a 
usual or socially acceptable amount of money or material possessions.” However, poverty is 
not  simply  characterized  by  a  lack  of  adequate  income.  It  has  far  reaching  implications. 
People  who  suffer  from  poverty  experience  a  number  of  deprivations  and  restrictions.  Its 
manifestations include hunger and malnutrition, limited access to education and other basic 
services, social discrimination and exclusion, as well as the lack of participation in decision-
making and in civil, social and cultural life. One important thing to note is that poverty cannot 
be defeated through charity. Empowering people with a means to sustaining themselves in 
the long term is the solution that can defeat poverty. 
5. 
Unemployment  is  at  the  center  of  poverty.  For  the  poor,  labour  is  often  the  only 
asset that can be used to improve the lives and wellbeing. It is crucial that we empower the 
poor who have the potential but often lack opportunities to shape their lives. 
Bidirectional cause-effect relationship between financial exclusion and poverty 
As  I  said  earlier,  poverty  is  generally  associated  with  a  low  level  of  income.  This 
6. 
income 
for 
is  primarily  directed 
saving/investment. A low level of savings obviates the need for a banking account thereby 
creating financial  exclusion  and  lack  of  investment  opportunities. This  creates  a  barrier for 
financial inclusion from the demand perspective. Conversely, financial exclusion can deprive 
people  of  the  benefits  and  the  incentives  offered  by  the  financial  system.  Poverty  can, 
therefore, be self-fuelling from generations to generations. 
towards  consumption 
leaving  very 
thereby 
little 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Extending  that  argument  further,  would  it  mean  that  there  could  be  two  ways  to 
How to break this vicious circle? 
7. 
I am not an economist. Many eminent speakers would dwell on this issue during the 
day.  However,  I  wish  to  put  forward  some  perspectives  as  I  see  them.  Let  me  begin  with 
measurement of poverty. I am not on whether those spending below Rs. 32 in rural areas or 
below  Rs.  47  in  urban  areas  (as  defined  by  the  Rangarajan  committee)  or  Rs.  27  and 
Rs. 33 respectively  as  fixed  by  Tendulkar  Panel  earlier,  are  to  be  considered  poor.  My 
question is whether such income levels across countries or states (even after adjusting for 
purchasing power parity) are comparable without taking into account the availability, quality 
and cost of such basic amenities as health care, education, transport, sanitation etc. Would 
not  a  composite  index  (if  one  can  be  devised)  of  these  two  elements  would  be  a  truer 
indicator of real poverty level? This can be elaborated with several measurable examples but 
time limit does not permit to do so.  
8. 
address the challenge of defeating poverty? 
a. 
State  ensures  availability  of  quality  amenities  I  mentioned  earlier  to  all  needy 
citizens – question is, whether it is feasible? 
Empower and facilitate all citizens to earn such levels of income that they can buy 
these services from the open market. Issue to contemplate is whether this can be 
done in a short term or even in the medium term.  
9. 
Then would it be fair to assume that a combination of above two would be a more 
realistic goal to pursue for quite some time to come considering the dimension of the work 
involved? Would it also be fair to assume that pursuing only one of the above or even both 
but with varying emphasis would not serve the purpose? 
10. 
Leaving  this  broader  issue  for  wider  discussion,  let  me  now  turn  to  the  various 
initiatives  taken  in  past  few  years  in  respect  of  poverty  alleviation  /financial  inclusion 
/employment generation etc. 
b. 
Priority Sector Lending 
11. 
Efforts are also underway to reorient the priority sector lending guidelines to serve 
today’s  growth  and  inclusion  agenda.  An  Internal  Working  Group  at  RBI  has  revisited  the 
existing guidelines and suggested revisions for ensuring channeling credit to segments that 
get  crowded  out  in  the  absence  of  specific  targets.  These  include  small  and  marginal 
farmers, micro enterprises and the weaker sections while broadening the scope to include 
other  underserved  categories  of  national  priority,  such  as  agriculture  infrastructure,  social 
infrastructure, renewable energy, exports and medium sized enterprises. 
Financial Inclusion Plan 
12. 
Let me briefly highlight what RBI has been doing for mainstreaming the marginalized 
sections  of the  society and for  ensuring  an  equitable  growth  in  the country.  RBI  has  been 
relentless in its pursuit of achieving universal financial inclusion by following a structured and 
planned  approach.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  focus  is  not  only  on  ensuring  access  to 
financial services and products but also taking efforts to address issues emanating from the 
demand side through Financial Literacy initiatives. Phase II of the Financial Inclusion Plan is 
currently under operation which seeks to connect all the 600,000 plus villages in the country 
to banks either through a brick and mortar branch or a BC agent by the end of the year.  
PMJDY 
13. 
To say that Government’s PMJDY scheme has been a success would be a massive 
understatement.  One  must  admire  the  vision  and  intent  behind  the  program.  Lot  of  efforts 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  has gone into opening the bank accounts and most households have been connected to the 
formal  financial  system.  The  need  of  the  hour  now  is  to  ensure  that  services  are  easily 
accessible to the account holders, are cost-effective and service efficient & most importantly 
the accounts remain active. For the account to remain active, the holders would need income 
and  benefits  to  flow  into  them.  Focus  should  also  be  placed  on  inculcating  savings  habit 
among the people. Once the saving habits take root, people would look for investments. Only 
then this massive exercise would be meaningful. 
Direct benefit transfer 
14. 
In order for the new bank account holders to continue to remain engaged with the 
formal financial system, Government’s DBT program is expected to play a big role. It would 
ensure that the benefits are transferred directly to the targeted population and the leakages 
are avoided. 
Licensing of payment and small finance banks 
15. 
With  the  objective  of  furthering  financial  inclusion  and  supply  of  credit  to  small 
business  units,  small  and  marginal  farmers,  micro  and  small  industries  and  other 
unorganized  sector  entities  RBI  has  decided  to  license  a  number  of  small  finance  banks. 
Also,  licensing  of  a  few  payments  banks  is  envisaged  to  provide  payments/remittance 
services  to  migrant  labour  workforce,  low  income  households,  small  businesses,  other 
unorganized sector entities and other users. 
Promoting entrepreneurship and self-employment  
16. 
Preparing the poor people for self-employment is perhaps the most lasting solution 
for poverty alleviation. The role of entrepreneurship as a key driver of economic growth and 
development  and  alleviating  poverty  and  unemployment  has  been  well  researched  and 
documented  in  both  developed  and  developing  countries.  Entrepreneurship  promotes 
innovation, creates competitive advantage and economic prosperity and helps create wealth 
and job opportunities thereby improving the standard of living of individuals, their families and 
communities.  
Empowerment through microfinance 
17. 
Microfinance  is  an  influential  means  of  empowerment  for  the  poor  and  vulnerable 
and  helps  in  extricating  them  out  of  their  poverty  and  misery.  It  basically  works  on  the 
premise  that  it  is  better  to  teach  someone  to  fish  rather  than  simply  giving  them  a  fish.  It 
gives the poor the necessary tools, skills, and resources to help them engage in productive 
activities and grow their way out of poverty.  
SHG bank linkage model 
18. 
SHG (Self Help Group) bank linkage programme piloted by NABARD in 1992 with 
500 SHGs of rural poor has now transformed into the world’s largest microfinance initiative 
with  over  7.4  million  SHGs  representing  97  million  rural  households  becoming  part  of  the 
movement. This has been the predominant form of lending to women as 84% of SHGs are 
women SHGs as on March 31, 2014. The scale of the programme is huge given savings of 
women  SHGs  in  banks stands  at  over  Rs  80  billion  as  on  March  31,  2014  and  bank  loan 
outstanding  against  women  SHGs  is  over  Rs  360  billion  as  on  March  31,  2014.  The 
emphasis  of  the  SHGF  program  is  now  to  shift  towards  livelihood  opportunities  to  SHG 
members apart from the expanding outreach across the country. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Role of MSMEs in poverty alleviation 
19. 
Promoting growth of micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) is critical from 
the  perspective  of  job  creation  which  is  recognized  as  a  prime  mover  of  the  development 
agenda in India. MSMEs sector contributes about 45% of the total industrial output, 40% of 
the export and 8% in the GDP. Also, the sector employs largest amount of workforce after 
agriculture and promotes balanced regional development. In terms of the recommendations 
of the Prime Minister’s Task Force on MSMEs, banks are advised to achieve a 20 per cent 
year-on-year growth in credit to micro and small enterprises and a 10 per cent annual growth 
in  the  number  of  micro  enterprise  accounts.  It  is  also  mandated  that  60  per  cent  of  MSE 
advances should go to the micro enterprises keeping in view large scale exclusion of micro 
enterprises from the formal banking system.  
Focus on skill development 
20. 
Globally, most students after completing their class 12th are considered to be ready 
for  a  job  as  the  education  system  prepares  them  for  a  vocation  of  their  choice.  In  India, 
however, the lack of employment opportunities after getting the basic education necessarily 
results in two outcomes – one of disillusionment with the education system and second, keep 
on pursuing higher education for want of a job.  
21. 
Dearth  of  formal  vocational  education,  high  school  dropout  rates,  inadequate  skill 
training  capacity,  negative  perception  towards  skilling,  lack  of  industry  ready  skills  even  in 
professional courses, continue to stand out as some of the major causes of poor skill levels 
and lack of entrepreneurship in India’s workforce. There is a pressing need to scale up the 
skills of the unorganized workforce within the sector as well as those of the MSME employers 
through  training  inputs.  Integrating  the  skill  development  initiatives  with  secondary  and 
intermediate level education would address the challenge of low education levels and also 
provide school dropouts with employability skills.  
22. 
It  is  heartening  to  note  that  the  Government  is  committed  to  encourage 
entrepreneurship in the country through a revision of the national skill development policy of 
2009 so that schemes of different ministries can be routed through the newly formed skills 
ministry. This would be vital considering the current Government’s thrust on “Make In India.” 
Conclusion  
Before  I  conclude,  let  me  raise  a  few  concerns  which  can  be  detrimental  to  the 
23. 
consolidation and furtherance of the significant work done in the area of financial inclusion 
and poverty alleviation in the recent past. 
• 
Is too much demand being placed on the banking system resources? The banks are 
presently almost alone expected to identify & enrol new customers, educate them, 
conduct  Aadhaar  registration,  carry  out  administration  of  linked  life/non-insurance 
schemes  &  pension  products  and  so  on.  The  issue  is  whether  it  would  encroach 
upon  their  other  obligations  of  credit  dispensation,  maintaining  asset  quality, 
maintaining service standards etc. 
Loan  waiver  schemes  or  employment  not  resulting  into  creation  of  social 
infrastructure /productive  assets raise  risk to  broader  work  culture/credit culture  in 
the country  
Non-adherence to basic economic discipline by the states eg. in fixing the Minimum 
Support Price can be counterproductive in the long run  
Weakened Governance and multiplicity of regulations in the co-operative sector- Are 
we doing enough to exploit potential of co-operative sector? 
Need we draw lessons from the history of RRBs while pursuing BC model? 
    4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   India  and  rapid  urbanization 
Then there are two larger issues- one each in respect of rural and urban poverty alleviation  
• 
Don’t we need a new model to enhance productivity & stop further fragmentation of 
already  smaller  land  holding  –  Are  DBT/interest  subvention  long-term  answers  to 
these problems?  
Migration  from  rural 
is  a  reality  with  social, 
infrastructural, employment and inclusion dimensions – are we adequately prepared 
to deal with them?  
24. 
It  must  thus  be  appreciated  that  poverty  alleviation  is  a  long  drawn  process  and 
needs support from all quarters – the Government, other policy makers, the media and the 
society at large. Each one needs to do his/her bit to ensure that the poverty is defeated so 
that prosperity thrives. An ecosystem needs to be created which can fight poverty in all its 
manifestations.  I  once  again  thank  Mr.  Kochhar  and  SKOCH  for  inviting  me  to  this 
Conference and wish the deliberations all success! 
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
