   
Luis M Linde: Brief comments on the interactions between monetary 
policy and macroeconomic adjustments 
Speech  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the XXXI  Conferencia  del 
Círculo de Economía, Sitges, 30 May 2015. 
 Let  me  first  thank  Antón  Costas,  President  of  Círculo  de  Economía,  for  his  invitation  to 
participate in this final session of the XXXI Conference, which is a classic on our schedule of 
economic  meetings  and  conferences.  Many  thanks,  too,  to  Andreu  Mas-Colell  for 
accompanying  us  in  this  session,  where  we  are  joined  by  the  Vice  President  of  the  ECB, 
Vitor Constancio, to whom it will be an honour for me to give the floor immediately after my 
address. 
First, by way of introduction, I should like to make some brief comments on the interactions 
between monetary policy and macroeconomic adjustments, one of the major matters raised 
in the euro area monetary policy framework in recent years. 
Long  periods  of  very  low  inflation  pose  risks  to  medium-term  price  stability,  to  economic 
activity and to financial stability. 
The  first  of  these  risks  is  the  de-anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  from  levels  consistent 
with price stability which, as we know, the ECB defines as an expected inflation rate below 
but  close  to  2%  in  the  medium  term.  Being  in  the  proximity  of  a  deflation  dynamic  may 
encourage  the  postponement  of  spending  decisions  by  households  and  firms.  Moreover, 
although nominal interest rates may be at very low levels, if inflation continues falling, real 
interest rates will trend upwards, contributing to reducing consumption and investment. 
Secondly, in economies posting a high level of public or private debt, or both, very high or 
rising  real  interest  rates  may  exacerbate  the  difficulties  of  bringing  about  a  reduction  in 
household, corporate and public-sector debt, the reason being that the stock of debt, though 
it holds constant in nominal terms, will rise in real terms. The macro adjustment of a highly 
indebted economy in an environment of very low inflation or, indeed, deflation, thus becomes 
difficult and complex. 
And, thirdly, in relation to financial stability, the events we have seen in recent years indicate 
that asset price bubbles and the misallocation of financial resources may coexist alongside 
low inflation. If the situation of low inflation extends over time and draws close to deflation, 
we will arrive at very low or even negative interest rates, and that will entail additional risks 
for institutional investors, for the allocation of resources and for the sound functioning of the 
financial system. 
This was what we experienced in the euro area in the second half of last year. What role can 
monetary policy play in such a scenario? In September 2014, the ECB decided to expand the 
tools available to monetary policy by adding a private asset purchase programme followed, in 
January this year, by public-sector and public debt purchases. ECB policy interest rates were 
already  then  at  their  lower  bound,  at  practically  zero,  with  negative  rates  on  the  deposit 
facility.  At  the  same  time,  liquidity  provision  by  the  ECB  through  its  regular  open  market 
operations and its longer-term operations followed an on-demand principle, granting all the 
liquidity  requested  by  banks;  indeed,  for  several  years  a  policy  has  been  pursued  under 
which, at the interest-rate marked for monetary policy operations, the ECB has not rationed 
the volume of liquidity provided to banks. 
After a few months’ experience, we can state that asset purchases have clearly contributed 
to  re-anchoring  inflation  expectations,  in  line  with  the  medium-term  objective  and,  most 
importantly, they have checked and reversed the rise in real interest rates. Their effects have 
also been manifest in portfolio re-balancing, encouraging investors to shift holdings from risk-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
1 
   
free  or  very  low-risk  securities  to  riskier  ones,  thereby  reducing  the  cost  of  financing  for 
consumers and investors. 
The second aspect I would like to mention is the role of economic policies in countries that 
have had to set about correcting the deep-seated imbalances built up in the expansion that 
ended with the onset of the crisis in 2007–2008. I would refer to policies aimed at improving 
competitiveness  in  goods  markets  and  at  reducing  labour  market  inefficiencies,  which  are 
most significant in countries with high unemployment, in particular in those cases in which 
high indebtness is a constraint on the possibility of implementing demand-boosting policies. 
Reforms are conducive to wage moderation and to the containment of the inflation rate, with 
the potential to initially dampen domestic demand owing to lower wages, the increase in the 
real  value  of  debt  and,  in  some  cases,  the  increase  in  real  interest  rates.  However,  these 
initial  adverse  effects  could  be  offset  and,  as  experience  shows,  exceeded  by  gains  in 
competitiveness,  increases  in  exports  and  gains  in  confidence  that  positively  affect 
consumption and investment decisions and generate employment and growth. 
Another  matter  to  be  highlighted  is  that  of  the  synergies  between  structural  reforms  and 
monetary policy. The Spanish economy is a good example of a positive interaction and of the 
fact that, at least occasionally, reforms and policy are mutually reinforcing. 
After  a  period  in  the  euro  area  with  considerable  stress  combined  with  very  marked 
segmentation  in  the  credit  markets,  despite  the  ECB’s  increasingly  loose  monetary  policy, 
this  interaction  between  structural  reforms  and  a  strongly  expansionary  monetary  policy 
finally  began  to  be  felt  in  late  2013  and,  naturally,  in  2014,  in  any  event  in  Spain. 
Unquestionably, some of the reforms launched in 2012–2013 contributed to relieving stress 
on the financial markets owing, above all, to their contribution to improving confidence. The 
improvement in public finances governance in the euro area no doubt played a key role in 
enhancing confidence. 
Naturally, we may well ask what happens under this scenario to those economies that have 
witnessed a loss in competitiveness compared with those countries that have implemented 
reforms, for example those affecting the labour market and those which have provided, along 
with  other  factors,  for  the  so-called  internal  devaluation.  In  this  case,  the  relative  loss  of 
competitiveness has been offset by the monetary policy stimulus and its impact on national 
demand and on the external sector. 
The depreciation of the euro accompanying this policy which has, no doubt, partly been one 
of its consequences, has improved the competitiveness of the area as a whole, stimulating 
exports and overall activity. Here we should recall that the euro area as a whole runs a most 
significant  surplus  on  its  transactions  with  non-euro  countries.  Both  excessive  deficits  and 
large surpluses entail risks and costs. Accordingly, we believe there is justification behind the 
calls from several international institutions for those euro area countries that have the leeway 
to do so to implement policies conducive to the expansion of their domestic demand. 
I  shall  sum  up  with  two  ideas.  First,  that  the  de-anchoring  of  medium-term  inflation 
expectations  entails  serious  risks  to  financial  stability  and  growth,  risks  that  may  be 
exacerbated  in  countries  that  have  to  follow  a  process  of  macroeconomic  adjustment  and 
deleveraging.  Second,  that  monetary  policy  and  structural  reforms,  when  simultaneously 
applied, may lead to highly positive synergies. 
And now a few words to make way for the address by my much-respected and dear friend 
Vitor Constancio. 
As  well  as  having  pursued  a  brilliant  academic  career,  Vitor  Constancio  has  been  at  the 
commanding heights of Portuguese politics and economic government. 
Constancio has been a Member of Parliament, Minister of Economy and Finance, Governor 
of the Banco de Portugal on two occasions, the second from 2000 to 2009, a member of the 
2 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Council of State and a professor at various Portuguese university institutions. In 2010 he was 
appointed Vice President of the ECB. 
Given  his  position,  and  also  in  light  of  his  personality  and  experience,  Constancio  plays  a 
very important role in steering and designing the ECB’s policies. He is  a representative of 
what I would define as “flexible orthodoxy”, i.e. a rigorous point of view on ECB’s tasks and 
priorities, but one which flees from rigidity and never forgets common sense when it comes 
to the complex and often difficult decisions, in both the technical and political sense, that the 
ECB has to adopt. 
I give the floor to Vitor Constancio. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
3 
