  Njuguna Ndung’u: Establishing the policy, legal and institutional 
frameworks to support the creation of a single currency area 
Remarks  by  Professor  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
18th Ordinary Monetary Affairs Committee Meeting, Arusha, 6 February 2015. 
 My Fellow EAC Central Bank Governors; 
Delegates from the EAC Central Banks; 
EAC Secretariat Officials; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Good morning. First of all, I would like to extend my sincere appreciation to the Governor and 
the entire management of the Bank of Tanzania for the excellent organization and hospitality 
extended to me and my team from Central Bank of Kenya. 
Fellow Governors, we are meeting for the first time since the ratification of the East Africa 
Monetary Union (EAMU) Protocol by all the Partner States. This not only demonstrates the 
political  will  and  commitment  of  our  respective  Governments  but  places  a  weighty 
responsibility  on  all  stakeholders  involved  in  implementation  of  the  roadmap  towards  the 
single  currency.  In  this  regard,  EAC  central  banks  are  expected  to  identify  and  deliver  on 
activities within their mandate as well as collaborate with other stakeholders to ensure all the 
critical  ingredients  for  a  monetary  union,  as  proposed  in  the  EAMU  Protocol,  are  well 
articulated and implemented. 
Fellow Governors,  the  Extra-Ordinary  MAC  meeting  held  in  Naivasha  in  November  2014 
identified  strategic  objectives  and  priority  areas  towards  operationalization  of  the  EAMU 
Protocol  that  fall  under  the  mandate  of  Central  Banks  and  developed  an  action  plan  for 
implementation. We now have the onerous task of taking this to the next level especially now 
that the EAMU Protocol has been ratified by all Partners States. 
Fellow Governors, the ratification of the EAMU Protocol set the stage for the establishment 
of the policy, legal and institutional frameworks to support the creation of a single currency 
area. EAC Central Banks are expected to play  a pivotal role  in the process leading to the 
establishment  of  the  four  institutions  responsible  for  the  implementation  of  the  EAMU 
Roadmap. These institutions include the East African Monetary Institute (EAMI) to undertake 
the preparatory work for the Monetary Union – this will fall heavily on the Central Banks; The 
East African Surveillance, Compliance and Enforcement Commission – this will require some 
input from us; The East African Statistics Bureau – we have a role to pay here; and The East 
African Financial Services Commission. S0, time management and planning is important. I 
note that the timeline for the establishment of EAMI is 2015 while the other three institutions 
are  to  be  established  by  2018.  Given  that  banks  dominate,  our  regulatory  capacity  and 
technology will be required. 
Fellow  Governors,  Central  Banks  are  also  expected  to  support  the  development  and 
integration of the financial system as well as the implementation of other priority areas of the 
EAMU  Protocol  including  the  attainment  of  Macroeconomic  Convergence  (by  2021), 
Harmonization of Monetary and Exchange rate Operations (by 2022) and Introduction of the 
Single  Currency  (by  2024).  Realization  of these milestones  takes  time  and  in  some  cases 
may  require  review  of  the  policy,  legal  and  regulatory  frameworks  governing  the  financial 
system,  payments  and  settlement  systems  as  well  as  adoption  of  common  principles  and 
rules for the  regulation and  supervision  of  the financial  system. In this  regard,  we  need to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  develop  requisite  capacity,  within  Central  Banks  and  the  region  at  large,  to  undertake 
preparatory work for the EAMU. 
I wish to commend our technical staff who have worked tirelessly over the past few days to 
produce a very comprehensive report. I also extend appreciation to the EAC Secretariat for 
their  support  in  our  activities  as  well  as  reaching  out  to  Development  Partners  who  have 
continued  to  support  the  EAMU  process.  In  particular  I  take  cognizance  of  the  IMF’s 
continued partnership with EAC countries in the modernization of our policy frameworks. 
Fellow  Governors,  I  assure  you  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya’s  commitment  to 
operationalization of the EAMU Protocol. As you very well know we have to open and close 
many  doors  of  our  working  life.  Time  has  come  for  me  to  close  the  central  banking  one, 
which was a special one for me in the sense that my engagement as Governor of the CBK 
gave me a rare opportunity to conduct monetary policy in practice. Some theories we held so 
dear have been put to the test and they were found to work even better in practice. I leave 
the Central Bank with a great sense of pride and accomplishment, which I can not do ample 
justice to highlight within the short space of time that I have now. I am sure another forum will 
open where I will share  more broadly my experience while serving at the helm of Kenya’s 
financial sector. But one important accomplishment for us all is that we have transformed our 
Central  Banks  into  strong  institutions.  They  have  promoted  operations  by  defining  the 
appropriate  rules  and  developed  the  financial  markets  using  a  combination  of  appropriate 
rules  of  the  game  and  appropriate  incentives/(penalties)  to  encourage  prudent  behavior  in 
the market. I enjoyed your trust and warm companionship, and notably your commitment in 
driving and modernizing the financial sector in the region over the last 8 years of my term. 
Let me conclude by once again, thanking the Bank of Tanzania for the warm welcome and 
hospitality. With these few remarks, I look forward to fruitful engagement in discharging our 
mandate in this meeting. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
