  Salvatore Rossi: Monetary policy in a low growth, low interest rate 
environment 
Speech  by  Mr  Salvatore  Rossi,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the 
“Roundtable on Monetary Policy in a Low Growth, Low Interest Rate Environment”, Istanbul 
Finance Summit, Istanbul, 8 September 2015. 
 The  role  of  interest  rates  –  short-  or  long-term,  nominal  or  real  –  is  pervasive  in  modern 
economies. Changes in interest rates affect: the value of wealth accumulated by savers, their 
propensity to save, the financing cost for borrowers, the evaluation of investment projects, 
the sustainability of fiscal debt, the stance of monetary policy. And the list could go on. 
We know that in many advanced economies, short- and long-term nominal interest rates are 
at historically low levels. And they have been very low for several years by now. 
This  environment  should  not  be  viewed  merely  as  a  consequence  of  the  central  banks’ 
reaction to the global financial crisis; in a longer time perspective, it is also the end point of a 
trend. Some data: since the early 1990s the 10-year nominal yields on Government bonds 
have declined by 10 percentage points in the UK, 9 in the euro area, 6 in the US and Japan; 
short-term  nominal  interest  rates  have  followed  a  similar  pattern  though  with  a  larger 
volatility. 
How come? What are the associated risks and policy changes? 
In trying to answer these questions let me first recall that the nominal interest rate can  be 
viewed as the sum of three components: 1) the real interest rate, 2) the expected inflation, 
and 3) a term premium. 
Economic theory tells us that the real interest rate is the price that equates the supply of 
savings  with  the  demand for funds  aimed  at financing  investment.  Supply  and  demand,  in 
turn, are determined by factors such the preference of households to smooth consumption 
across time and the productivity of capital. 
The expected inflation and the term premium components of the nominal interest rate are 
self-explaining: when buying a long term bond I want a return that could compensate me for 
the potential loss in my future purchasing power, and for the risk of a potential capital loss if I 
needed to sell the bond prior to maturity. 
A lot of influencing factors are involved here: expectations about future economic growth and 
inflation;  the  degree  of  risk  aversion;  financial  markets  volatility,  domestically  and  abroad, 
since capital markets have become globally integrated. 
Which of these factors can explain the current low interest rate environment? I would indicate 
two sets of factors: transitory, and structural. The latter are particularly important, since they 
may suggest that the current environment is a long-run phenomenon, bound to stay with us 
for quite some time. 
The transitory factors are evident: first of all the expansionary monetary policy stance put in 
place by many central banks in response to the global financial crisis, and, in the euro area, 
also  to  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  We  know  that  most  central  banks  in  the  advanced 
countries, as policy rates were reaching the zero lower bound, have enriched their monetary 
policy  toolbox  with  various  unconventional  measures,  the  most  important  and  visible  one 
being programs of securities purchases (QE). 
Another transitory factor  is  the  de-leveraging  by  the  private  sector.  In  part this  is  due  to  a 
financial regulation becoming much stricter than before the crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  And  here  comes  the  structural  factors.  They  can  be  summarized  as  follows:  an  excess  of 
desired saving over desired investment, leading to lower economic growth and real interest 
rates.  This  is  essentially  the  secular  stagnation  hypothesis  proposed  last  year  by  Larry 
Summers.1 
Barry Eichengreen, one of the most prominent economic historians of our times, has recently 
written an illuminating article on this topic.2. He discusses four possible explanations. 
1)  
High  savings  rates  in  emerging-market  economies.  This  is  the  well-known  global 
savings glut hypothesis put forward years ago by Ben Bernanke.3. The idea is that in some 
emerging  countries,  China  in  particular,  social  protection  systems  are so  limited  and  weak 
that households feel forced to increase their precautionary saving. 
2)  
The decline in the relative price of investment goods (machinery, equipment, ICTs), 
thanks to technological progress. For a given investment project, a fall in the relative price of 
investment reduces the demand for funds. With less investment spending chasing the same 
savings,  the  result  can  be  a  lower  real  interest  rates  and,  potentially,  a  chronic  excess  of 
desired saving over desired investment. 
3)  
A lower rate of population growth, in the advanced economies and now also in some 
emerging markets. It is reflected in a slower growth of the labor force, in turn requiring less 
investment. 
4)  
The fourth possible explanation is the more controversial one. The idea is that the 
pace of scientific and technological inventions has slowed down, since the golden XX century 
of electricity and ICTs, and will never recover, causing a corresponding permanent scarcity of 
high-return  investment  opportunities.  Robert  Gordon  is  a  supporter  of  such  a  pessimistic 
view.4 
Personally, I don’t believe in this fourth factor: the innovative capabilities of humankind have 
always  caught  philosophers  and  economists  by  surprise.  But  the  other  three  factors  are 
serious and deserve to be addressed. 
Let me now briefly touch upon some policy implications. 
Nearly  eight  years  after  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis,  global  growth  is  disappointing  on 
average,  but  with  a  high  variance  across  countries  and  regions.  The  U.S.  recovery  is 
continuing  at  a  sustained  pace,  while  growth  in  the  euro  area  and  Japan  is  currently  still 
modest,  though  expected  to  pick  up.  Emerging  economies’  growth  will  decline  for  the  fifth 
year  in  a  row  in  2015,  although  these  economies  will  continue  to  increase  their  share  of 
global GDP. 
Against  this  outlook,  monetary  policy  stance  across  major  economies  may  become 
asynchronous  in  the  coming  months,  when  the  Federal  Reserve  will  actually  start  the 
announced normalization process. 
The big question is: how much transitory are the transitory factors explaining the current low 
interest rate environment? What will happen when monetary policy normalizes? Or will the 
structural factors prevail and keep real and nominal interest rates low forever, or at least for a 
very long time? 
                                                
1   Summers,  H.  L.  (2014),  “U.S.  Economic  Prospects:  Secular  Stagnation,  Hysteresis,  and  the  Zero  Lower 
Bound.” Business Economics, 49, pp. 65–73. 
2   Eichengreen, B. (2015), “Secular Stagnation: The Long View.” American Economic Review, pp. 66–70. 
3   Bernanke,  B.  S.  (2005),  “The  Global  Saving  Glut  and  the  U.S.  Current  Account  Deficit.”  The  Sandburg 
Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, VA, March 10. 
4   Gordon,  R.  (2012),  “Is  U.S.  Economic  Growth  Over?  Faltering  Innovation  Confronts  the  Six  Headwinds.” 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 18315. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
On the first point, Reinhart and Rogoff,5 among others, have shown that in the aftermath of 
financial crises economic recessions tend to be more severe than in typical business cycle 
recessions and the recovery takes longer. Credit cycles last longer than business cycles. But 
eventually  they  come  to  an  end,  once  households’  and  corporates’  balance  sheets  have 
been repaired. And that poses the problem of how and when normalizing monetary policy. 
On  the  second  point,  a  challenge  relates  to  possible  spillover  effects  on  emerging-market 
economies  of  changes  in  the  monetary  policy  stance  in  advanced  countries.  Large  capital 
flows  went  to  emerging-market  economies  in  the  last  years,  in  search  for  yield,  putting 
upward  pressure  on  asset  prices  and  exchange  rates  in  those  economies.  They  might 
suddenly reverse when monetary conditions change in advanced economies. The risk is that 
the process becomes disorderly, with impaired liquidity in certain markets or asset classes, 
rapidly  diffusing contagion  to  other  correlated  asset  classes. These risks  call for  clear  and 
effective  communication  strategies  by  central  banks,  while  the  authorities  in  emerging 
economies should further strengthen policy buffers and further advance structural reforms. 
Another delicate policy challenge regards the relation between monetary and fiscal policies. 
The  combination  of  high  public  debt  –  accumulated  in  many  advanced  economies  in 
response  to  the  financial  crisis  –  and  very  low  interest  rates  has  strengthened  the 
interdependencies  between  the  two  policies.  Exceptionally  low  nominal  interest rates  have 
contained debt servicing costs, and that’s good news; the flip side is that fiscal positions are 
highly exposed to changes in the monetary policy stance, especially if changes are abrupt. 
Finally, what if the current low interest rates were the new long-run equilibrium? In this case I 
would see serious challenges for monetary policy management. Central banks might more 
often  encounter  the  zero  lower  bound  on  nominal  rates,  which  would  imply  less  room  to 
maneuver  the  policy  rate  to  counteract  deflationary  shocks.  The  economy  would  be  less 
resilient to negative shocks. Central banks might have to increasingly resort to what we call 
unconventional  policies.  But  we  do  not  know  how  effective  these  tools  are  as  a  normal 
business cycle stabilizer, and what macroeconomic risks they might entail. 
Let  me  conclude  signaling  another  risk.  Economic  policies  became  exceptionally 
accommodative  after  the  financial  crisis  in  order  to  save  the  world  from  another  Great 
Depression.  Financial  panic  was  destroying  households’  and  corporates’  confidence  and 
curtailing aggregate demand, so macroeconomic policies, both fiscal and monetary, had to 
fill  the  gap,  as  long  as  needed.  The  phase  of  very  low  nominal  interest  rates  has  been 
necessary, and still is necessary in many areas of the world including the euro area, in order 
to  support  growth,  fight  deflation  risks  and  sustain  employment.  But  low  growth,  and  the 
ensuing  low  interest  rates,  risk  feeding  on  themselves  if  allowed  to  linger  for  too  long: 
households  may  eventually  feel  compelled  to  save  more,  because  they  see,  for  instance, 
their  insurance  policies  and  retirement  schemes  at  risk  of  not  being  fully  honored.  At  the 
same  time,  low  growth  implies  low  return  from  real  investment,  and  this  creates  perverse 
incentives to search for yield taking risk on board; this may jeopardize financial stability. 
One  main  lesson  comes  from  these  considerations.  The  most  effective  and  long-lasting 
solution to tackle the declining trend of real interest rates is to act forcefully and preemptively 
to support growth. Support remains necessary from the demand side; but in the longer run it 
must  come  from  the  supply  side,  by  identifying  and  implementing  those  reforms  that, 
encouraging investment, may boost productivity and support job creation. We need to prove 
Robert  Gordon’s  prophecy  wrong.  The  consequent  increase  in  potential  economic  growth 
would raise the real interest rate and push nominal interest rates into a safer territory. 
                                                
5   Reinhart, C. M. and Rogoff, K. S. (2009), “This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly.” Princeton, 
New Jersey: Princeton University Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
