 Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Politis 
 Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank, in Politis, conducted by Mr Yannis Seitanidis on 8 March 2015. 
 The ECB’s Governing Council had a meeting in Nicosia, two years after the “bail-in” 
agreement on the recapitalisation of Cyprus’ banking system. Many questions about 
the role of the ECB during the crisis of March of 2013 still remain unanswered. Did the 
ECB play a constructive role or did it put pressure on the Cypriot government through 
the emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) mechanism? 
Under the rules of the Eurosystem, ELA can only be provided by national central banks to 
solvent banks. So, what was the situation in March 2013? The Central Bank of Cyprus had 
been providing ELA to the two largest banks, which the central bank, as the supervisor, had 
deemed solvent. But the negotiations on an EU/IMF programme, which had started in June 
2012, had dragged on until the situation of the banking sector had become critical, and the 
solvency  of  the  two  largest  banks  came  under  much  closer  scrutiny.  The  ECB  simply 
implemented the existing rules when it concluded on 21 March 2013 that a programme would 
need to be in place in order for the ELA provision to continue. 
The bail-in was something unexpected two years ago and now is a part of the 
resolution procedure for European banks. Was Cyprus a laboratory where the 
resolution of banks was tested? 
No. The truth is that the financial sector of Cyprus was exceptionally large – in relative terms 
– by European standards, and its capital needs were significant. The two largest banks were 
estimated to need fresh capital in excess of 40% of GDP, as an independent due diligence 
process revealed. If the sovereign were to shoulder this burden, on top of already strained 
public finances, public debt sustainability would be critically endangered. Burden-sharing with 
private investors was not only inevitable, but it also significantly reduced the financial impact 
on Cypriot taxpayers and protected the vast majority of depositors. I wouldn’t expect this to 
happen again in any other place, given that the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive now 
requires  banks  to  build  a  significant  buffer  of  so-called  “bail-in-able”  debt,  meaning  that 
investors will be hit before depositors have to pay. 
The unpleasant legacy of the banking crisis – which still causes pain in the real 
economy – is the huge number of non-performing loans. There is an ongoing debate 
in Cyprus about how the country will handle this problem, a debate which practically 
“freezes” the last review of the Cypriot economic adjustment programme. Do you see 
any signs of a derailment of the Cypriot programme? What might be the effects on the 
banking system? 
Cyprus has a remarkable track record in implementing the conditionality of the programme. 
One  of the key  objectives  of  the  programme  is  to  reduce the  high  level  of  non-performing 
loans  and  restructure  the  excessive  indebtedness  of  the  private  sector.  This  is  a  key 
condition  for  the  banking  system  to  be  in  a  position  to  finance  economic  growth  and  job 
creation. In this respect, a swift adoption of the insolvency framework and application of the 
foreclosure framework are not only key elements to guarantee compliance of Cyprus with the 
programme, but also essential to support the economic recovery. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The main political goal of the government is to conclude the programme and the 
financial assistance provided by the Troika earlier, probably before the end of this 
year. The ECB is part of the troika. As such, does it consider this goal achievable? 
Whether  or  not  there  should  be  a  follow-up  arrangement  is  for  the  Cypriot  government  to 
decide. What matters to the ECB is to establish the conditions for sustainable growth and for 
a lasting return of Cyprus to market funding when the programme ends, i.e. in the spring of 
2016. To this end, it will be essential that the banking sector has turned the corner and the 
non-performing assets have been addressed. 
The ECB is starting its programme of quantitative easing (QE). How and when can 
Cyprus benefit from that? 
Cyprus  should  and  will  benefit  from  our  asset  purchase  programme.  This  will  be  possible 
whenever the review is successfully concluded. 
Many analysts interpret QE as Europe’s first step away from austerity programmes 
and towards more growth-friendly policies. I also read that inflation is the safest way 
for European countries to reduce their debts and the ECB will help them move in that 
direction with its QE. In that respect, is QE a programme created as a result of 
economic need, of political pressure, or as a result of fear for the future of the euro? 
The ECB’s sole mandate is to maintain price stability for the euro area as a whole, which we 
define as consumer price inflation being below, but close to, 2%. The Governing Council saw 
there was a risk of inflation being too low for too long and decided to act under its mandate. 
This has nothing to do with politics, nor with the future of the euro. As all Governing Council 
members have acknowledged, QE is just an instrument of monetary policy. 
Considering the experience in other countries, such as the US, under what conditions 
will QE have an impact on the real economy? 
Purchases  of  public  securities  reduce  the  borrowing  costs  of  the  private  sector  given  that 
many financial instruments are priced with reference to the domestic sovereign yield curve. 
They  also  provide  an  incentive  for  banks  to  supply  more  credit  to  firms  and  households 
through the so-called “portfolio rebalancing” effect, which in turn supports consumption and 
investment.  And  finally,  they  signal  that  the  ECB  –  in  line  with  our  forward  guidance  –  is 
committed to maintaining an accommodative monetary policy for an extended period of time, 
which pins down interest rates at a very low level – again benefiting firms and households. 
We have  already  seen, after the  announcement,  some  positive  effects  of  our measures  in 
these directions. Lending rates to households and firms have come down since the summer 
across  the  entire  euro  area.  And  credit  growth  to  the  private  sector  turned  positive  in 
December – on a month-to-month basis – for the first time since mid-2012 and continued to 
recover in January. 
That  said,  monetary  policy  can  support  short-term  growth  but  it  cannot  lift  production  and 
living standards in a durable way. This can only happen if euro area governments use this 
window of opportunity to step up reforms in their economies. 
Last, but not least, some questions regarding Greece. The Greek government has 
declared that the Troika and the Memorandum of Understanding no longer exist. How 
would you describe the state of play? 
On  24  February,  the  European  Commission,  European  Central  Bank  and  International 
Monetary Fund considered the list of reforms presented by the Greek government as a valid 
starting point for a successful completion of the review under the current arrangement, and 
the  Eurogroup  agreed  to  extend  it  by  four  months.  In  this  context,  the  authorities  have 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  committed  to fully  cooperate  with  the  three  institutions,  in  order  to  allow  for  a  speedy  and 
successful  conclusion  of  the  review.  We  are  looking  forward  to  working  with  the  Greek 
authorities. Time is running short. 
The new government looks determined to boost reforms. Besides, this is the only way 
in which to restore trust with the European authorities. But the country has and will 
have specific financing needs over the next 18 months. Is a new programme for 
Greece a scenario that’s being considered? 
The  Eurogroup  has  outlined  a  clear  sequence.  When  the  current  review  is  concluded 
successfully, and if the Greek authorities so wish, a follow-up arrangement will be discussed 
with the Eurogroup. But it is first and foremost the responsibility of the Greek government to 
create growth and regain financial independence. This requires in my view a clear resolve to 
boost economic reforms, a prudent fiscal path and an unequivocal confirmation that Greece 
will  honour  its  international  commitments.  Doubts  about  the  country’s  creditworthiness  will 
then recede and foreign investors will return to Greece. 
The new government is negotiating with the European Commission, the ECB and the 
IMF in full awareness of the fundamental hypothesis that in the end no one would want 
a Grexit. If that is true, why didn’t Europe realise earlier that the Greek programme was 
not working effectively? The recession and unemployment in Greece cannot be 
compared with the recession and unemployment in Cyprus, Ireland, Portugal and 
Spain. My question is: would a failure of the programme eventually undermine the 
future of the euro area? 
From  a  very  difficult  starting  position,  and  through  painful  efforts,  Greece  has  made  good 
progress in restoring fiscal and external sustainability, as well as in putting banks on a sound 
footing  and  strengthening  the  basis  for  growth  and  job  creation.  By  the  end  of  2014, 
economic  indicators  were  clearly  pointing  to  positive  growth  and  better  prospects  ahead. 
Indeed, in its forecast released one month ago, the European Commission expected Greece 
to grow by 2.5% in 2015 and 3.6% in 2016, one of the highest growth rates in the euro area. 
And the arduous efforts of the Greek people need to be recognised here. But let’s not fool 
ourselves:  adjustment  was  inevitable  and,  believe  me,  it  would  have  been  much  worse 
without European and international support. 
That said, we should always learn from the past. For instance, I believe that the programme 
should  have  put  more  emphasis,  at  an  earlier  stage,  on  reducing  rents  –  in  the  economic 
sense – and fighting vested interests in the Greek economy, to allow for a fairer sharing of 
the adjustment burden. Also, in its crisis-fighting toolbox, Europe did not have at its disposal 
instruments  available  to  institutions  such  as  the  World  Bank,  which  supports  social  safety 
nets when countries undertake structural adjustment. 
According to some rumours, the ECB played a key role after the Greek election, 
accelerating the developments by exerting pressure on the Greek government through 
the ELA mechanism. Are you happy with the impression (given by various media) that 
the ECB is “manipulating” elected governments? Is this appropriate for a central 
bank? (The US President and the Chair of the Federal Reserve, for example, sit on the 
same side of the table, not on opposite sides). 
If you are referring to the decision taken by the Governing Council on 4 February to suspend 
our waiver for Greek government-related collateral, the intention was exactly the opposite: it 
was a decision to enforce our rules in a transparent and accountable way, free of political 
interference. Let me explain. Given their low credit rating, Greek government-related bonds 
should in principle not be eligible at all as collateral for our refinancing operations. In 2010, 
the  ECB  took  an  extraordinary  decision  to  suspend  the minimum rating  threshold for  such 
collateral (the so-called waiver), and allow them as collateral, on the premise that an EU/IMF 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  economic adjustment programme for Greece would be in place and implemented. After the 
election, given the intention of the new government to substantially change or even terminate 
the programme, the Governing Council could no longer assume that the programme review 
would  be  successfully  concluded,  and  the  waiver  was  lifted.  It  will  of  course  be  reinstated 
when  such  a  prospect  can  again  be  assumed,  based  on  the  outcome  of  the  discussions 
between the Greek government and the institutions. I hope this will be the case soon, when 
these discussions have made progress. 
As for your comparison with the US: indeed, the ECB is the central bank of Greece, and we 
have  shown  our  commitment  by  continuing  to  provide  liquidity,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  in 
increasing  amounts,  to  Greek  banks,  provided  that  they  use  it  to  fund  the  economy.  The 
central bank funding of Greek banks has doubled since end-2014 and today stands at more 
than 100 billion euros. But the ECB is also the central bank of 18 other countries and we are 
bound  by  the  EU  Treaties,  which  require  us  to  lend  to  solvent  banks,  against  adequate 
collateral, and to refrain from financing governments. This applies to all euro area countries; 
Greece is no exception in this respect. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
