  R Gandhi: Recent policy initiatives in credit information sharing 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  R  Gandhi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Seventh Annual CIBIL TransUnion Credit Information Conference, Mumbai, 3 March 2015. 
 Assistance provided by Shri Rajesh Jai Kanth is gratefully acknowledged. 
1.  Shri  M.V.Nair,  Chairman,  CIBIL;  Ms.  Arundhati  Bhattacharya,  Chairman,  SBI;  Shri 
T.M. Bhasin, Chairman, IBA; Shri Arun Thukral, Managing Director, CIBIL; delegates to the 
Conference; ladies and gentlemen! It is a pleasure for me to be present here this morning to 
deliver  the  keynote  address  at  the  Seventh  Annual  CIBIL  TransUnion  Credit  Information 
Conference. 
Background 
2. Consequent to the recommendations of the “Working Group to explore the possibilities of 
setting  up  a  Credit  Information  Bureau  in  India”  (Chairman:  N.H.  Siddiqui)  set  up  by  the 
Reserve  Bank  in  1999,  in  which  I  had  the  privilege  of  being  a  member,  credit  information 
companies (CIC) were established – CIBIL was the first to come on the scene and the Credit 
Information Companies (Regulation) Act (CICRA) was enacted in 2005. 
3.  By  early  2013,  Credit  Information  industry  in  India  had  seen  more  than  ten  years  of 
operation  of  CIBIL  and  more  than  three  years  of  operation  by  the  other  three  Credit 
Information Companies (CICs). There was, however, a need to strengthen the infrastructure 
for  credit  information  sharing  involving  credit  institutions  and  the  CICs.  Particular  areas 
where changes were considered necessary included increasing depth and width of the credit 
information, harmonising the reporting formats across CICs, rationalising the classification of 
accounts  and  their  nomenclature  based  on  payment  history,  and  putting  in  place  best 
practices  for  CICs  and  credit  institutions.  Against  this  backdrop,  RBI  in  March  2013 
constituted  a  Committee  under  the  chairmanship  of  Shri  Aditya  Puri,  MD,  HDFC  Bank  to 
examine reporting formats used by CICs and other related issues. The Committee submitted 
its report on January 31, 2014. 
Recent policy initiatives 
4.  Based  on  the  Aditya  Puri  Committee  recommendations,  a  number  of  policy  instructions 
have been issued by RBI. 
a)  
Major policy changes made vide the guidelines on June 27, 2014 are as follows: 
(i)  
data  formats  for  reporting  corporate,  consumer  and  MFI  data  by  all  credit 
institutions have been standardised thereby streamlining the process of data 
submission by credit institutions to CICs 
(ii)   a  Technical  Working  Group  comprising  of  representatives  from  various 
categories of banks, CICs, NBFCs, HFCs, IBA and MFIN has been constituted 
to  institutionalize  a  continuing  mechanism  for  reviewing  /  modifying  data 
formats, and 
(iii)   certain best practices for credit institutions and CICs have been prescribed to 
improve  the  working  of  the  credit  institutions  and  CICs  and  redressal  of 
consumer complaints. 
Further, the banks and All-India notified financial institutions have been instructed to 
report non-suit filed accounts in respect of wilful defaulters ( 25 lakh and above) and 
defaulters  ( 1  crore  and  above)  to  the  CICs  for  the  period  ending  December  31, 
2014. CICs will disseminate this information to all the stakeholders. 
b)  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 c)  
 In terms of Section 15 of CICRA, every credit institution has to become member of 
at least one CIC. Since four CICs are functional, there is the consequent issue of 
data existing in silos. As of now, when enquiry is made with one CIC about a certain 
borrower or prospective borrower, only the information that has been provided to the 
CIC by its own members would be available at that CIC. The information from the 
credit institutions from whom the borrower may have availed a credit facility but who 
are not members of that particular CIC may not be included in the credit information. 
To  mitigate  this  problem,  all  credit  Institutions  have  been  directed  on  January  15, 
2015 to become members of all the CICs and submit current and historical data to 
them.  CICs  and  credit  institutions  have  been  also  directed  to  keep  the  credit 
information collected and maintained by them, updated regularly on a monthly basis 
or at such shorter intervals as may be mutually agreed upon between them. To help 
credit institutions make transition from one / two bureau membership to all bureau 
membership, the one-time membership fee charged by the CICs, for CIs to become 
their  members,  shall  not  exceed  10,000  each.  The  annual  fees  charged  by  the 
CICs to CIs shall not exceed  5000 each. 
Work in progress 
5.  Though  we  have  implemented  most  of  the  recommendations  of  the  Aditya  Puri 
Committee, let me mention a few recommendations of the committee, still being examined in 
RBI: 
(a)  
Introducing a Common Credit Information Report on the lines of the tri-bureau report 
available in the USA, in consultation with all CICs and in a manner customised to 
the credit information infrastructure existing in the country. 
Including  information  relating  to  Commercial  Paper  in  the  data  format  of  CICs  for 
collecting credit information from credit institutions. 
Reporting  information  on  derivatives  of  clients  e.g.  unhedged  foreign  currency 
exposures by credit institutions in the commercial data format. 
Examining pricing related aspects of Credit Information Reports and providing on an 
annual basis a base level consumer CIR free of cost to each customer of a credit 
institution by each CIC. 
Evolving a suitable mechanism for providing a fast and cheap redressal of customer 
grievances  vis-a-vis  CICs, 
the  Banking 
Ombudsman Scheme. 
NBFCs, UCBs, RRBs, SFCs, HFCs may also report data on wilful default to all the 
CICs. 
including  expanding 
the  scope  of 
(b)  
(c)  
(d)  
(e)  
(f)  
Benefits of access to credit information 
6.  Global  Financial  Development  Report1 
inter  alia  states,  “ensuring  equitable  and 
transparent  access  to  credit  information  allows  customers  to  use  their  credit  histories  as 
reputational  collateral,  strengthens  credit  market  competition,  and  enhances  access  to 
finance”.  In  this  context,  let  me  highlight  the  major  benefits  of  credit  information  for  the 
different stake holders in the system: 
(a) 
Consumers  –  Credit  information  empowers  consumers  to  obtain  loan  products 
based  on  their  credit  history  and  promote  them  to  maintain  credit  discipline  and 
repay debts timely. Competition in the credit market is enhanced as even positive 
                                                
1   Global Financial Development Report 2014: Financial Inclusion. Washington, DC: World Bank. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 (b)  
(c)  
(d)  
 information on borrowers becomes available to other lenders thereby benefiting the 
deserving and better borrowers to obtain loans on easier terms and lower interest 
rates. 
Credit Institutions – Information sharing assists in screening of borrowers as well as 
monitoring  of  credit  risks.  This  reduces  cost  of  intermediation  and  allows  credit 
institutions  to  effectively  price,  target,  and  monitor  loans.  It  facilitates  realistic, 
transparent and judicious risk based lending. By leveraging information from CICs, 
lenders  can  obtain  a  holistic  overview  of  their  customer  relationships.  At  present, 
different product offerings of CICs viz. credit information report, credit score, watch 
lists, alerts and triggers, portfolio reviews, are increasingly being used by the lenders 
to  improve  their  portfolio  quality,  control  NPAs  and  increase  profitability.  These 
solutions  enable  risk  mitigation  and  optimize  performance  at  every  stage  of  the 
customer lifecycle- acquisition, portfolio management, collections and recoveries. 
Economy  –  Risk  based  pricing  environment  would  improve  transparency  and 
soundness  in  the  lending  process.  Borrowers  with  a  good  credit  history  will  be 
rewarded for their discipline while delinquent borrowers will no longer be subsidized 
by lower-risk consumers. In the aggregate, lending is increased, leading to greater 
economic  growth,  rising  productivity  and  greater  financial  inclusion.  Reduction  of 
default rates and average interest rates, facilitated by increased credit information 
sharing,  leads  to  increased  lending.  Research  has  shown  that  sharing  of  credit 
information  results  in  deepening  of  credit  markets.  Borrowers  are  incentivised  to 
maintain a good credit record, thus leading to a reduction of NPAs, better quality of 
credit portfolio, higher capital adequacy ratios and consequently increased lending 
by credit institutions. 
Bank  supervisors  –  By  accessing  credit  information  from  CICs,  supervisors  can 
assess and monitor build-up of systemic risks more effectively, especially regarding 
high exposure to certain sensitive sectors by highly interconnected and systemically 
important financial institutions. 
7. The scope  of “credit  information”  is really  very  vast;  much  larger  than  what  the  CICs  in 
India are actually collecting and disseminating. I would like to describe about a few initiatives 
in this area, initiatives taken by entities other than the CICs. 
Central Repository of Information on Large Credits (CRILC) 
8.  First  is  the  CRILC.  Last  year,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  set  up  a  Central  Repository  of 
Information on Large Credits (CRILC) in order to collect, store and disseminate information 
on  large  credits  ( 50  million  and  above)  of  banks,  systemically  important  non-banking 
financial  companies  (NBFC-SI)  and  NBFC-Factors.  The  avowed  objectives  of  the  CRILC 
includes  reduction  of  information  asymmetry  for  improved  credit  risk  assessment  and 
improve recovery climate. Although the CRILC has been set up essentially to help banks and 
other  financial  institutions  in  improving  their  credit  administration,  it  is  also  expected  to 
provide vital inputs in supervisory risk assessment in terms of build-up of risk concentration 
and emerging asset quality related vulnerabilities. 
9. I would like to be candid here. Ideally, the CRILC should have been thought about and 
built by the CICs. The fact that we as the regulator had to take this step indicates that the 
credit  information  industry  needs  to  develop  much  more.  It  is  also  a  pity  that  our  credit 
institutions do not feel the necessity to voluntarily share credit information among themselves 
through,  of  course,  the  CICs,  when  they  all  do  want  to  receive,  from  the  CICs,  credit 
information  about  their  constituents  –  whether  current  or  prospective. I  look forward  to the 
CICs themselves building and managing such a repository going forward. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Central Registry of Securitisation Asset Reconstruction and Security Interest of India 
(CERSAI) 
10.  Another  related  development  is  CERSAI.  Transactions  relating  to  securitization  and 
reconstruction of financial assets and those relating to mortgage by deposit of title deeds to 
secure any loan or advances granted by banks and financial institutions as defined under the 
SARFAESI  Act  are  to  be  registered  in  the  Central  Registry.  All  NBFCs  have  also  been 
advised to file and register the records of all equitable mortgages created in their favour with 
the Central Registry. Under the Factoring Act, 2011, every factor is under obligation to file 
the particulars of every transaction of assignment of receivables in his favour with the Central 
Registry. 
11. The records maintained by the Central Registry can be searched by any lender or any 
other  person  desirous  of  dealing  in  property  on  payment  of  fees  prescribed  under  the 
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest 
(Central Registry) Rules, 2011. 
12.  Availability  of  such  records  would  prevent frauds  involving  multiple  lending  against  the 
security  of  same  property  as  well  as  fraudulent  sale  of  property  without  disclosing  the 
security interest over such property. While the Central Registry addresses the encumbrance 
status of a property, at present Central Registry is not able to check the genuineness of the 
title of a property. With land being a state subject governed by respective state laws, there is 
a  need  for  the  Central  Registry  to  enter  into  arrangements  with  the  state  registries  for 
information sharing. This will be beneficial for the Central Registry, State governments and 
the lenders by way of providing information on the existence of the property and genuineness 
of the title. 
Challenges facing credit information sharing 
13.  Data  Quality:  The  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  any  credit  bureau  depends  on  the 
quality  of  data  collected  in  its  database.  We  have  time  and  again  issued  circulars  for 
submission of timely, accurate and error free data to the bureau. However, it is learnt that the 
data submitted to the CICs by member credit institutions is not regular or accurate. There are 
many instances of junk values, incorrect data and incomplete identifier field information being 
submitted to the bureaus. It becomes imperative for credit institutions to ensure the quality 
and timeliness of data submitted to the CICs. 
14.  Consumer  education  and  awareness:  It  is  vital  for  consumers  to  understand  the 
importance  of  maintaining  financial  discipline  and  paying  their  loan  EMIs  and  credit  card 
dues regularly. CICs have an important role to play in this regard. Increased awareness by 
individuals,  SMEs  and  MFI  borrowers  on  consequences  of  default  in  repayment  of  loans 
leading  to  lowering  of  their  credit  scores  and  possibly  denial  of  new  loans  would  lead  to 
better  credit  discipline  and  also  prevent  deterioration  in  the  asset  quality  of  banks.  I  am 
aware that CIBIL and other CICs are working on several consumer education programs to 
drive  awareness  amongst  consumers  on  concepts  relate  to  credit  information.  I  also 
understand that CICs have been partnering with the consumer education cells of banks and 
other credit institutions. This partnership will be highly effective in reaching out to consumers 
across  geographies  and  sensitizing  them  on  the  necessity  of  maintaining  good  credit 
discipline.  I  would  like  to  urge  the  CICs  that  such  an  awareness  campaign  needs  to  be 
specifically  focussed  on  new  generation,  even  before  they  enter  into  a  credit  relationship, 
about  the  long  lasting  effect  and  consequences  of  credit  history.  In  terms  of  developing  a 
credit  culture  amongst  the  future  generation,  the  most  important  financial  product  is  the 
education  loan.  With  an  NPA  percentage  of  over  7.54%  (for  loans  below  4  lakh)  as  on 
31st March  2014,  it  is  clear  that  the  borrowers  are  oblivious  of  the  consequences  of  non- 
repayment on their credit track record. Can the CICs and banks look at a “catch “em young” 
policy for credit counselling and developing a credit culture? Can the CICs provide a periodic 
non-chargeable credit report to the student loanees? 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
15.  Speedier  and  transparent  dispute  resolution  mechanism:  Good  customer  service 
through speedier and transparent dispute resolution mechanism has been the thrust of the 
Reserve  Bank. Of  late, we  have  been  receiving  many  disputes from  consumers  related to 
their credit information reports. I would urge CIBIL and other CICs to invest in processes and 
technologies  for  speedier  resolution  of  customer  disputes.  Another  aspect  about  these 
disputes  actually  relates  to  the  banks.  These  disputes  are  related  to  non-updation  of  data 
and/ or incorrect submission of data by member banks. In many of these cases, the CIC has 
not been able to receive timely response from the banks even after following up regularly. 
This  causes  significant  delay  in  redressing  the  customers’  disputes.  Therefore,  I  would 
remind  the  credit  institutions  to  put  in  place  a  proper  system  for  consumer  complaint 
redressal at their end as well. 
16. Reporting of data on corporates including MSME borrowers: While the CICs have a 
rich  database  in  respect  of  consumer  segment  i.e.  retail  borrowers,  they  have  largely 
neglected  the  corporates  including  MSME  borrowers.  I  have  already  stated  that  vide  our 
guidelines dated June 27, 2014 we had advised the CICs to collect and provide credit data in 
respect of this segment but the process has been rather tardy in this regard. However, I am 
happy to learn that CIBIL has made some progress on this count. I believe CIBIL today has 
20  million  records  in  respect  of  corporates. I  would  urge  the  various  lending  institutions  to 
furnish data in respect of their corporate borrowers to the CICs and start utilising the various 
solutions  such  as  commercial  triggers  that  CICs  presently  offer  to  mitigate  the  risks 
associated with changes in credit profile in commercial lending. 
17. Bridging asymmetry of information: MSME units in general, and Micro units among 
them  in  particular  lack  adequate  information  about  credit  reporting  process  and  the 
consequences  thereof.  It  is  essential  that  lending  organizations  build  structured  pre-credit 
counselling sessions to Micro borrowers educating them about the long term consequences 
of non-repayment & default. Counselling currently is provided only when the account is NPA 
or near NPA. This has to be done at the time of sanctioning the loan. This may also give the 
borrower an opportunity to review whether the quantum sought for is in excess of repayment 
capacity. 90% of the micro units have no access to organized credit. They are dependent on 
a  plethora  of  diversified  last  mile  sources  for  their  financing.  This  would  involve  MFIs, 
NBFCS,  PACs,  Money  lenders  (both  registered  and  un-  registered)  etc.  Can  the  credit 
information companies be innovative enough to bring this credit history also into the ambit of 
credit reporting? 
Further ideas 
18. While India has fallen by 2 ranks from 140 in 2014 to 142 in 2015 in the Ease of Doing 
Business Rank,2 in respect of depth of credit information, it performs quite high scoring 7 out 
of  a  total  of  8  score.  Where  we  did  not  score  was,  in  respect  of  our  Retailers  /  Utilities 
companies not distributing the data to the CICs. 
19. Potential benefits of including electric and telecom data in the database of CICs are: 
(a) 
Positive data from telecom companies and electric utilities would help in assessing 
credit  worthiness  of  small  and  medium  borrowers  in  rural,  hilly  and  tribal  areas 
presently  not  having  access  to  banking  credit  and  thereby  extend  penetration  of 
banking in India. 
Alternate data also improves the performance of analytical models that help lenders 
better predict the “ability to pay”, as a means of guarding against consumer over-
indebtedness. 
(b) 
                                                
2   Doing Business 2015, World Bank 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 (c)  
(d) 
Globally,  Electric  Utilities  and  Telecom  companies  that  report  payment  records  to 
credit bureaus have evidenced improved consumer payment behavior with regard to 
their bills. 
Would help in widening and deepening the database of CICs on individuals for the 
purpose of “Know your customers” verification by financial institutions. 
 20.  FICCI,  BCG  and  IBA  in  their  paper  on  Digital  Banking3  have  inter  alia  stated  that 
introduction  of  periodic  utility  bill  payments  (electricity,  telecom)  and  periodic  insurance 
premium  payments  information  into  information  bureau  records  would  increase  the  bureau 
coverage from current 20 per cent to almost 70 per cent and would be a major boost to credit 
eligibility of low ticket borrowers who are largely self-employed or in the unorganised sector. 
Reserve  Bank  has  introduced  positive  data  sharing  in  India  which  allows  good  repayment 
behaviour in one product to be of use in predicting behaviour of the consumer in other areas. 
Telecom  /  Utilities  positive  data  is  hence  likely  to  help  support  making  credit  worthiness 
decisions on the segment of the population that does not have access to banking credit. 
21.  The  Committee  on  Comprehensive  Financial  Services  for  Small  Businesses  and  Low 
Income  Households  (Chairman:  Dr.  Nachiket  Mor)  has  recommended  that  Reserve  Bank 
should constitute a Working Group involving the various stake holders such as TRAI, CERC 
and CICs to develop a framework for sharing of data between telecom companies, electrical 
utilities,  and  credit  information  companies.  The  underlying  acts,  rules  and  regulations 
governing credit information companies, electric and telecom sectors need to be examined to 
make suitable legislative and regulatory changes for this purpose. We, in consultation with 
various stakeholders, are examining the feasibility of incorporating alternative data sources, 
viz. electric and telecom data of consumers, within the purview of credit information. 
22. Another area which  requires attention is the need for populating member level data of 
Self Help Groups (SHGs) and Joint Liability Groups (JLGs) in the database of CICs. Aditya 
Puri Committee deliberating on this issue considered the practical problems faced by banks 
in  gathering  individual  borrower  level  information  of  SHGs  as  loans  under  the  SHG  Bank 
Linkage  Program  was  given  by  the  banks  directly  to  the  SHGs  and  not  individually  to  its 
members. The disbursement of loan funds is done at a member level only within a SHG (by 
the SHG internally) and the respective quantum / tenors of the same is decided by the group, 
from time to time. This financial flexibility provided to the group is an inherent feature of the 
SHG  structure.  However,  the  Committee  has  emphasized  that  to  assess  the  ability  of 
individual members to repay, it is necessary to consider their prior borrowings, else it might 
result  in  their  becoming  over-indebted  and  consequent  default  in  repayment  of  loans.  It 
therefore  recommended  that  banks  may  be  required  within  a  reasonable  period  of,  say, 
eighteen months, to arrange for capturing the required data from SHGs for reporting to CICs. 
23. The present regulatory framework only mandates NBFC-MFIs to share their clients’ data 
with  CICs.  NGO-MFIs  which  include  section  25  companies,  societies,  trusts,  etc.  play  a 
significant role in the micro finance sector, however they are not yet mandated to share their 
data with credit bureaus, though some NGO-MFIs are voluntarily participating. Some study 
shows  sizable  overlaps  between  SHG  Bank  linkage  and  MFI  clients.  This  indicates  the 
severity of over-indebtedness / ghost borrowing, asymmetric information, moral hazard, etc. 
24.  Another  prospective  area  where  credit  information  can  help  is  in  respect  of  those 
companies  that  supply  vehicles  and  equipment  on  operating  lease  to  users  (lessees)  on 
payment of a periodical rent by them. The lessee in case of a vehicle lease has to pay a fixed 
monthly cost and can use the vehicle for a defined period and mileage and has to return the 
vehicle  to  the  company  at  the  end  of  the  contract.  Since  the  company  providing  such  a 
                                                
3   Digital  Banking –  Opportunity  for extraordinary  gains  in  reach,  service  and  productivity  in  the  next  5  years, 
September 2014. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  facility to its clients takes a credit risk on them at the time of entering into such a contract till 
the  time  the  lease  is  in  vogue,  it  needs  to  assess  the  credit  worthiness  of  the  lessee. 
Presently  such  vehicle  leasing  companies  are  not  being  regulated  by  RBI  or  a  financial 
regulator  in  India.  We  would  examine  whether  such  leasing  companies  can  be  specified 
under  the  Credit  Information  Regulations,  2006  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  and  providing 
credit information from / to the CIC. 
25. To conclude, let me say that the credit information business has played a significant role 
in  improving  credit  offtake  and  management  of  credit  risk  by  the  credit  institutions.  An 
enormous responsibility has been cast on the four Credit Information Companies to see that 
there is qualitative improvement in credit information. RBI would take suitable regulatory and 
supervisory  measures  to  make  the  credit  information  system  safe,  efficient,  reliable  and 
customer-friendly.  I  once  again  thank  CIBIL  for  providing  me  this  opportunity  to  share  my 
thoughts with all of you. 
26. Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
