  Andreas Dombret: The euro area – where do we stand? 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at 
Istanbul, 
10 February 2015. 
the  German-Turkish  Chamber  of  Trade  and  Commerce, 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  speak  here  at  the  German-Turkish  Chamber  of  Industry  and 
Commerce in Istanbul. Isaac Newton once observed that “we build too many walls and not 
enough bridges”. Istanbul has for centuries been a bridge between two continents – Asia and 
Europe. It seems to me that Istanbul is therefore an excellent place to hold this year’s G20 
meetings.  After  all,  the  purpose  of  these  meetings  is  to  build  bridges  between  nations  by 
fostering  dialogue  and the  mutual  exchange  of  information.  And this  objective  is  of  course 
also pursued by the German-Turkish Chamber of Trade and Commerce. 
Moreover, mutual exchange is essential in a globalised world where countries are no longer 
isolated  islands  but  part  of  a  closely  interconnected  community.  The  global  financial  crisis 
has highlighted how close these connections are and how quickly a problem in one corner of 
the world can spread around the globe. 
This truth applies all the more to countries sharing a common currency such as the member 
states of the euro area. Back in 1999, eleven European countries adopted the euro as their 
common  currency.  Today,  the  single  currency  is  shared  by  19  countries  and  more  than 
300 million people, which in my eyes makes it a success story. 
That said, it has not always been plain sailing. In the wake of the global financial crisis of 
2008, the euro area slid into a financial crisis of its own. This was compounded in 2010 when 
Greece entered into a sovereign debt crisis, triggering a sudden loss of confidence in other 
member  states  which  eventually  brought  the  euro  area  to  the  brink  of  collapse.  Extensive 
rescue packages along with non-standard measures taken by the ECB helped to calm the 
markets and prevented the crisis from escalating. 
To  some  commentators,  the  present  situation  is  not  much  different.  Greece  is  again 
capturing the  headlines.  Unrelated to  Greece,  the  ECB  again gave  the  green  light to  non-
standard  measures  as  a  means  of  addressing  the  risks  associated  with  too  prolonged  a 
period of low inflation. 
To  obtain  a  clearer  picture,  let  us  take  a  tour  of  the  euro  area  to  see  where  we  stand  at 
present and where we are headed in the future. Unsurprisingly, I will begin by focussing on 
the growth prospects of the German economy, not only because this is my home country but 
also because it is the largest economy in the euro area. 
The German economy – in good shape but challenges ahead 
2. 
At  the  beginning  of  2015,  the  German  economy  remains  in  good  shape.  This  is  due  to  a 
number of factors. First, enterprises have brought their costs under control, their debt level is 
not  unreasonably  high,  and  they  have  an  attractive  range  of  products  to  offer  on  global 
markets,  including  Turkey.  Second,  the  German  economy  is  being  supported  by  domestic 
consumption,  while  investment  remains  subdued  –  I  will  come  back  to  this  issue  in  a 
moment. In addition, unemployment is low, households are not burdened by excessive debt 
and real wages are rising on account of low inflation. 
As  reported  by  the  Federal  Statistical  Office,  the  German  economy  grew  by  1.5%  in  real 
terms in 2014. When the Bundesbank published its latest economic projections for Germany, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  real gross domestic product was expected to rise by 1.0% this year and by 1.6% next year. 
However, this forecast was prepared in November and since then the price of oil has fallen 
sharply. If oil prices remain at their current low levels, economic growth could prove to be 
markedly  higher  this  year  and  next,  since  the  low  price  of  oil  has  the  effect  of  a  small 
stimulus package. 
However, despite the current strength of the German economy, major challenges lie ahead. 
In  particular,  unfavourable  demographic  trends  will  have  an  impact  on  future  growth.  The 
Bundesbank estimates that potential output is currently growing at a rate of 1% per year and 
will continue to do so until the end of the decade. Compared to the 1990s and 2000s this is a 
truly underwhelming figure. 
So, what can Germany do to improve its growth prospects in the long run? One frequently 
voiced  proposal  these  days  is  that  Germany  should  step  up  its  investment  as  a  lever  for 
increasing its own growth potential as well as that of the euro area as a whole. 
Indeed, the total real investment ratio in Germany was markedly lower in the 2000s than in 
the 1990s. And it was also lower than in the rest of the euro area. 
Nevertheless, weaker investment in the last decade was largely the result of the construction 
boom in the late 1990s which followed German reunification. If construction is excluded from 
the investment ratio, Germany’s situation is no longer any different from the rest of the euro 
area. 
In addition, the construction boom witnessed in other euro-area countries also came to an 
abrupt end during the crisis, with the result that the ratio for the euro area excluding Germany 
has now returned to levels close to the German ratio. This effectively disproves claims that 
the German private sector is investing too little, be it by historical or international standards. 
In any case, it is not possible to increase private investment by decree. When it comes to 
private  investment  decisions,  expectations  pertaining  to  growth  and  income  are  of  pivotal 
importance.  And  in  Germany,  demographic  change  has  tended  to  exert  a  dampening 
influence, the shrinking labour force being a paramount factor hindering economic growth. 
Against this backdrop, many commentators point to public investment which can be directly 
influenced by the government. With regard to public investment, Germany lags well behind 
the rest of the euro area. However, this fact alone does not justify assertions that the state 
should invest more. 
Even  so,  public  net  investment  has  been  negative  for  some  time  now,  and  there  indeed 
seems  to  be  room  for  improvement.  Infrastructure  weaknesses  can  inhibit  growth 
considerably and there are certainly regional shortcomings in Germany. Nonetheless, public 
funds  should  only  be  invested  in  projects  that  are  economically  worthwhile.  In  this  regard, 
public and private investments should be driven by the same considerations. 
At  the  end  of  the  day,  public  investment  only  represents  a  relatively  small  share  of  total 
investment. And as I already indicated: such investment cannot be steered arbitrarily. Rather, 
it should reflect demographic trends and productivity gains. 
The discussion of lack of investment shows that an economy is a complex system in which 
many factors interact in a complicated fashion. It is therefore not possible to solve all these 
problems by a single policy measure. This is true for Germany, and it is equally true for the 
euro area. 
The euro area – structural reforms needed 
3. 
Nevertheless, there are many observers who appear to believe that a single institution holds 
the fate of the euro area economy in its hands, namely the ECB. Just three weeks ago, the 
Governing Council of the ECB decided upon large-scale purchases of government bonds in 
order to address the risks arising from too prolonged a period of low inflation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  As  you  know,  the  Bundesbank  takes  a  sceptical  view  of  this  government  bond  purchase 
programme. In our opinion, monetary policymakers are not under any acute pressure to act, 
as the low inflation rate is mainly attributable to falling energy prices. For the next two years, 
we are expecting inflation to pick up gradually; certainly, the risk of deflation is very limited. 
What is more, government bond purchases are not simply a monetary policy instrument like 
any  other  where  the  euro  area  is  concerned.  They  entail  risks  which  we  believe  are  not 
outweighed by the expected effects. For instance, the low interest rates, coupled with high 
liquidity,  could  encourage  many  investors,  in  their  search  for  yield,  to  turn  to  assets  they 
previously avoided due to the associated risks. This makes the emergence of price bubbles 
more likely, which could compromise the stability of the financial system. 
In  any  case,  and  here we  are  in  line  with  the  ECB,  monetary  policy  is  not  a magic  bullet. 
Monetary policy cannot solve the crisis, nor can it put the euro area back on a solid footing. 
In order to achieve that we need structural reforms both at the national and at the European 
level. 
Let us take a short look at the national level. When the euro-area crisis began five years ago, 
many people referred to it as the “euro crisis”. However, it was not a currency crisis but a 
cocktail consisting of a debt crisis, a banking crisis and a balance of payments crisis. While 
the  underlying  problems  differ  slightly  between  individual  countries,  the  key  to  overcoming 
the crisis lies with the affected countries themselves. 
In  the  years  following  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  fiscal  and  economic  policies  in  some 
member  states  failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  a  monetary  union.  And  it  was  these 
countries  which  experienced  strong  capital  inflows.  Unfortunately,  the  lion’s  share  of  this 
capital flowed into private or public consumption or into an oversized housing sector. 
On  the  back  of  heavily  exaggerated  growth  expectations,  a  decrease  in  competitiveness 
owing to generous wage settlements and insufficient financial regulation, sizable imbalances 
accumulated which then contributed to the crisis. 
Hence, to resolve the crisis it is the countries themselves that need to adjust. And it has been 
clear from the outset that the necessary reforms and adjustment measures require patience. 
In  the  meantime,  major  progress  has  been  made  as  most  of  the  crisis  countries  have 
managed to substantially improve their public finances. 
In addition, current account deficits have largely been reduced and some countries are now 
running  a  surplus.  Price  competitiveness  in  the  crisis  countries  has  also  improved 
significantly. Measured in terms of the deflators of total sales, competitiveness has improved 
by 6% in Portugal, 9% in Spain and 14% in Greece. 
We have certainly not reached the finishing line yet but there is evidence that the efforts are 
bearing fruit. It therefore worries me that Greece might go backwards in terms of its reform 
agenda. 
Suffice to say, it is not enough to correct misalignments solely at the national level. We also 
need structural reforms at the European level. And here, a lot has been done since the crisis 
broke out. 
First,  the  rules  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  were  tightened  and  a  fiscal  compact  was 
adopted in order to restore confidence in public finances. Second, a procedure for identifying 
macroeconomic imbalances at an early stage was established. And third, a crisis mechanism 
was set up to serve as a “firewall”, safeguarding the stability of the financial system in the 
euro area. 
In  addition  to  these  measures,  the  euro  area  took  a  major  step  toward  deeper  financial 
integration.  On  4  November  2014,  the  first  pillar  of  a  European  banking  union  was  put  in 
place. On that day, the ECB assumed responsibility for supervising the 123 largest banks in 
the euro area. Together, the banks concerned account for more than 85% of the aggregate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  balance sheet of the euro area’s banking sector, making the ECB one of the biggest banking 
supervisors in the world. 
Taking banking supervision from the national level to the European level has three concrete 
benefits. 
First, European banking supervision allows banks in the entire euro area to be supervised in 
a uniform manner according to the same high standards. These harmonised standards will 
emerge  from  the  cross-border  sharing  of  experience,  noting  the  best  aspects  of  each 
national approach to banking supervision and adopting these for use at the European level. 
Second, European banking supervision makes it possible to effectively identify and manage 
cross-border problems. This is essential because large banks are usually active in more than 
one country. 
Third, taking banking supervision from the national to the European level will add a degree of 
separation between supervisors and the banks they supervise. This will prevent supervisors 
from handling their banks with kid-gloves out of national interest. 
As you can see, we have come to expect a lot from European banking supervision. And in 
2016,  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  will  be  supplemented  by  a  European  resolution 
mechanism for banks. This will be the final step on the road to banking union and a major 
step forward in designing a better framework for the European monetary union. 
4. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Looking at current events, some of you may feel reminded of what happened in 2010 and in 
2012.  Nevertheless,  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that,  in  the  past  five  years,  we  have  made 
considerable  headway  in  resolving  the  crisis  and  in  putting  the  euro  area  back  on  a  solid 
footing.  We  have  achieved  a  great  deal  but  much  still  remains  to  be  done  –  both  at  the 
national and at the European level. 
If we are to overcome the multiple challenges that lie ahead, all the member states of the 
euro  area  will  need  to  work  together  in  a  spirit  of  cooperation  and  demonstrate  a  firm 
commitment to the common currency. On that basis, I am confident that the euro area will 
remain a stable and prosperous economy. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
