 Jens Weidmann: Financial market integration from a central banking 
perspective 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of 
Eurobörsentag 2015, Frankfurt am Main, 23 July 2015. 
the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at 
  the 
Introduction 
1. 
Dear Mr Döring, ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you very much for the invitation. I am delighted to have the opportunity to speak to 
you today about financial integration from a central banking perspective. 
Around  three  weeks  ago,  on  the  first  of  July  to  be  precise,  we  commemorated  the 
25th anniversary of the signing of Treaty on Monetary, Economic and Social Union between 
the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic. 
But 1 July 1990 is also a significant date in the timeline of European integration. It was on 
this day that the first stage of European economic and monetary union began. Its purpose 
was to align the national economic and monetary policies of the members of the European 
Community  more  strongly  to  the  exigencies  of  price  stability  and  budgetary  discipline, 
thereby transforming the European Community into a community of stability. 
And, at the same time, capital movements were to be fully liberalised – one of the four basic 
freedoms of the single European market. 
It  was  hoped  that,  if  not  beforehand,  the  launch  of  the  euro  would  eliminate  not  only  the 
institutional barriers to the integration of the European financial markets but also the largest 
economic obstacle to comprehensive integration: exchange rate risk. 
Free movement of capital and the euro have indeed brought the European financial markets 
closer together. The degree of financial openness, defined as the sum of cross-border assets 
and liabilities over gross domestic product (GDP), more than doubled in Germany between 
1990 and 2000. Similar developments were observed in the other euro-area countries, too. 
But since the outbreak of the financial crisis, and especially the collapse of Lehman Brothers, 
Europe’s financial fabric has been placed under serious strain. In some places, it has proven 
resilient,  but  in  others  it  has  frayed.  Some  threads  have  even  unravelled  altogether.  As  a 
result, between the end of 2007 and the end of 2008, the degree of financial openness fell by 
16% in Germany, 18% in Italy and 21% in France. 
European  financial  market  integration  is  therefore  back  on  the  European  economic  policy 
agenda. From a central banker’s perspective, it is clear that a single monetary policy requires 
integrated financial markets. Only then can monetary policy stimuli reach all parts of the euro 
area quickly and safely. 
But it is also clear that a single monetary policy does not mean that interest rates have to be 
the  same  everywhere.  As  the  first  economist,  Aristotle,  said:  “equals  should  be  treated 
equally  and  unequals  unequally.”  Using  monetary  policy  to  equalise  the  unequal  risks 
allocative distortion. And the euro-area crisis, in particular, has highlighted the negative long-
term economic impact of capital misallocation. 
It  is  also  clear  that  central  banks  influence  the  financial  markets  with  their  instruments, 
whether through refinancing operations, securities transactions or other measures. 
But  what  does  that  mean  for  the  integration  of  the  European  financial  markets?  In  other 
words, what role do central banks play for financial market integration? And what impact will 
closer integration ultimately have on monetary policy? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  I would like to explore these questions in the next 20 minutes. In doing so, I will look at the 
different financial market segments individually: the money market, the bank loan market, the 
bond market and the capital markets. 
The money market 
2. 
Let me start with the area of the financial market that is especially relevant to monetary policy 
– the money market, and more specifically the interbank market. 
It is via this market that monetary policy stimuli are traditionally transmitted to the banks and, 
from  there,  to  the  other  areas  of  the  financial  markets,  finally  reaching  the  real  economy, 
which is how monetary policy influences price developments. 
The  introduction  of  the  euro  resulted  in  the  comprehensive  integration  of  the  European 
interbank  market.  This  was  reflected  by  a  sharp  increase  in  cross-border  interbank 
transactions,  small  differences  between  policy  rates  and  interbank  rates  as  well  as  a  lean 
central bank balance sheet. Only a small number of refinancing operations was necessary in 
order to transmit monetary policy stimuli. The interbank market made sure that central bank 
liquidity was passed on to the institutions that needed it. 
The  outbreak  of  the  financial  crisis  changed  this  in  one  fell  swoop.  Mistrust  between  the 
private money market players began to take hold and the spread between the risk premiums 
for  secured  and  unsecured  money  market  transactions  skyrocketed,  the  volume  of  money 
market transactions fell and the number of participants in monetary policy operations soared. 
The Governing Council of the ECB reacted swiftly and decisively by switching its refinancing 
operations  to  tenders  with  full  allotment.  As  long  as  banks  were  able  to  pledge  adequate 
collateral, they received unlimited amounts of liquidity from the Eurosystem. In practice, this 
allowed them to bypass the strained interbank market. The Governing Council also offered 
additional longer-term refinancing operations including, naturally, the three-year refinancing 
operations at the end of 2011 and the beginning of 2012 in particular. 
In  this  way,  the  Eurosystem  took  over  a  major  part  of  the  money  market’s  role  as  an 
intermediary. The closer involvement of the Eurosystem is, of course, associated with risks. 
However,  it  can  reduce the  danger  of  a  widespread  bank run,  which  is  good  news for  the 
economy as a whole. 
The banking system 
3. 
However,  if  the  abundant  injections  of  central  bank  money  are  used  not  only  to  bridge 
temporary  liquidity  shortfalls  but,  in  extremis,  to  keep  insolvent  banks  on  long-term  life 
support, matters could get tricky. 
The more the central bank safeguards banks against risks and promises them central bank 
funding even in dubious situations, the more incentive they  will have to  take on excessive 
risks, of course. Former IMF Chief Economist and current Governor of the Reserve Bank of 
India,  Raghuram  Rajan,  as  well  as  last  year’s  winner  of  the  Nobel  Prize  in  economic 
sciences, Jean Tirole,1,  2 amongst others, provide evidence in recent studies that the implicit 
promise  of  a  central  bank  to  step  in  by  lowering  interest  rates  and  injecting  liquidity  when 
banks default whets banks’ appetite for risk. 
                                                
1  D Diamond and R Rajan (2012), Illiquid Banks, Financial Stability, and Interest Rate Policy, Journal of Political 
Economy, Vol 120, Issue 3, pp 552–591. 
2  E  Farhi  and  J  Tirole  (2012), Collective  Moral  Hazard,  Maturity  Mismatch, and  Systemic  Bailouts,  American 
Economic Review, Vol 102, Issue 1, pp 60–93. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This  also  shows  that,  in  this  respect  too,  a  balancing  act  is  required  when  selecting  an 
appropriate strategy for liquidity provision. Being too restrictive in granting liquidity can cause 
a spark to turn into a fire. Granting liquidity too liberally, on the other hand, and propping up 
institutions  without  sustainable  business  models,  may  also  mean  that  the  water  used  to 
extinguish the fire ends up causing more damage than the fire itself. 
In  the  words  of  the  American  economist  Allan  Meltzer:  “Capitalism  without  failure  is  like 
religion without sin. It doesn’t work.” Banks also need to be able to fail – without bringing the 
entire  financial  system  to  its  knees.  Or  put  differently:  no  bank  should  ever  become  so 
entangled in the rest of the financial system that its collapse would pull the whole web apart – 
banks should not be “too big to fail”. 
It is clear that the incentive problems I’ve just described would continue to exist if bail-outs 
were simply to be transferred from the central bank to fiscal policymakers. An example would 
be rescuing banks using taxpayers’ money even though resolving them would be the wiser 
course of action. 
We  cannot  have  governments  providing  free  insurance,  as  such  an  implicit  government 
subsidy  makes  banks  too  big  and  too  risky.  Systemically  important  banks,  in  particular, 
therefore  need  to  play  a  role  in  protecting  themselves  against  default  by  increasing  their 
equity  capital  and  ensuring  a  minimum  total  loss-absorbing  capacity  (TLAC)  for  their 
liabilities. 
By having banks bear the costs of their own protection, incentives are set for risk-conscious 
activities.  Banks  simultaneously  become  more  resilient,  and  the  contagion  effects  are 
reduced should a bank run into difficulties all the same. 
We  have  seen  some  progress  already  with  regard  to  equity  capital.  Basel  III  significantly 
strengthened  the  requirements  for  both  the  quantity  and  the  quality  of  equity  capital. 
However, to date, the binding rules have been based exclusively on risk-weighted capital. 
The  risk  weighting  is  supposed  to  prevent  banks  from  investing  too  heavily  in  high-risk 
assets. During the financial crisis, however, we found out the hard way that the risk weighting 
does not always reflect the actual risk of an investment. Therefore, in my opinion, a capital 
regime that is also geared to total assets is absolutely necessary. Hence, the leverage ratio 
is to become part of Pillar 1 of Basel III and thus binding from 2018. 
Stricter capital requirements will help to increase the internal capital adequacy of banks. But 
capital does not come for free. This means that stricter requirements may also reduce the 
banks’ readiness to take on any risks at all; that is, to lend. But that would slow economic 
momentum. Ultimately, this is also a balancing act. 
However,  it  seems  clear  that  additional  efforts  to  expand  banks’  capital  base  would  be 
advisable, especially for systemically important banks and those that will just barely meet the 
Basel III requirements. 
But  even  stricter  capital  requirements  cannot  entirely  prevent  individual  banks  from 
collapsing.  And  this  is  okay.  After  all,  the  possibility  of  failure  is  essential  in  a  market 
economy. 
This  is  why  functioning  resolution  regimes  are  crucial  for  the  financial  system  reform  in 
Europe. With the introduction of the banking union and the adoption of the BRRD and the 
SRM, important steps have already been taken in the right direction. 
However, one critical step is still missing: the establishment of standards for loss-absorbing 
liabilities, ie debt that can be bailed in. The German government recently submitted a draft 
act to promote the accumulation of liabilities eligible for bail-in. While this is to be welcomed, 
more needs to happen. 
Although Europe already has a bail-in standard in the form of the minimum requirement for 
eligible liabilities (MREL), this has so far allowed banks to hold bail-in liabilities of other banks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  without  additional  conditions.  In  a  crisis  situation,  this,  of  course,  increases  the  risk  of 
contagion. Hence, a bank should, as a minimum, completely back other banks’ bail-in-able 
liabilities with equity capital. 
Government bond markets 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The  role  of  a  central  bank  in  providing  liquidity  can  prove  problematic  if  this  activity  sets 
incentives to lend recklessly and turn a blind eye to the possibility of failure. 
The problems associated with intervention in the government bond markets are even more 
diverse  and  serious,  which  is  also  why  central  banks  should  steer  clear  of  lending  to 
sovereigns. It is for this reason that Article 123 places strict constraints on the Eurosystem by 
banning the monetary financing of governments. 
A look at European history shows that, whenever monetary policymakers have signalled a 
benign willingness to rescue a country from insolvency, this has put them at risk of neglecting 
their price control mandate. Monetary policy is compromised if it tries to serve two masters 
simultaneously. 
Moreover,  a  recent  study3  indicates  that  it  is  both  difficult  and  expensive  to  restore 
confidence  in  policymakers’  ability  to  combat  inflation  once  that  confidence  has  dissolved. 
Therefore, it is important not just to consider the price-tag of inflation itself but also the costs 
associated with efforts to steer an economy back to a position where prices are stable. Put 
simply, trust is hard to gain but easy to forfeit. 
In addition, where a central bank takes on the task of lending to governments it neutralises 
the  disciplining  effect  of  the  capital  markets.  Bad  fiscal  policy  is  not  penalised  while  good 
fiscal policy is not rewarded through lower financing costs. This poses a particular problem in 
a currency union, as the price of unsound budgetary policies may to some extent be passed 
on to all the other member states. 
Conversely, there are economists like Paul de Grauwe4 who argue that there was no such 
disciplinary effect ahead of the sovereign debt crisis. Furthermore, a sovereign that is in fact 
solvent but suddenly falls prey to the sceptical gaze of the market can actually be driven into 
insolvency by the rising interest burden. Downgraded market perceptions can amount to a 
self-fulfilling  prophecy,  a  phenomenon  which  economists  refer  to  as  markets  with  multiple 
equilibria. 
They argue that in such cases it is vital for a central bank to come to a country’s aid, the 
rationale being that, just as its role in ensuring comprehensive liquidity provision or in acting 
as “lender of last resort” serves to safeguard financial stability, central bank intervention in 
the government bond market could fulfil the same purpose. 
However, I beg to differ for a number of reasons. 
First,  it  is  at  times  hard  to  determine  the  “correct”  risk  premium  ex  ante.  Hence,  it  is  not 
always evident to a central bank whether a government is merely illiquid or truly insolvent. 
Here, we need only look as far as purchases of Greek sovereign bonds under the Securities 
Markets  Programme.  The  debate  we  have  seen  over  the  past  few  days  and  weeks  bears 
witness  to  the  fact  that  market  perceptions  of  Greece’s  solvency  were  not  entirely  off  the 
                                                
3  J  Hollmayr  and  C  Matthes  (2015)  Tales  of  Transition  Paths:  Policy  Uncertainty  and  Random  Walks, 
Bundesbank Discussion Paper 14/2015. 
4  P De Grauwe and Y Ji (2012), “Mispricing of Sovereign Risk and Multiple Equilibria in the Eurozone”, CEPS 
Working Documents. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  mark. Consequently, not all developments can be attributed to self-fulfilling prophecies and 
multiple equilibria. 
Second, where a central bank steps into the breach another equilibrium may also come into 
play  as  well,  namely  the  forces  of  fiscal  dominance  which  I  alluded  to  earlier.  If  a  central 
bank’s monetary policy is subjugated to fiscal policy, market players will sooner or later grow 
accustomed  to  this  stance  and  expect  a  higher  rate  of  inflation.  This  will  then  actually 
culminate in higher inflation. 
Governments, too, are exposed to the problem of moral hazard, which  can cause them to 
become greedy and dampen their efforts to reform. The dramatic waning of enthusiasm for 
reform  on  the  part  of  the  Berlusconi  government  following  SMP  purchases  of  Italian 
government bonds shows how quickly a country’s will to reform can evaporate when budget 
constraints are eased. 
Third, the Eurosystem lacks the legitimacy to redistribute fiscal risks between member states. 
This should remain within the remit of parliaments and governments in the various euro-area 
countries. But then such redistribution is precisely what would ensue if, say, the Eurosystem 
were to grant loans to individual euro-area countries. 
To  prevent  a  de  facto  “back-door”  implementation  of  broad-based  communitisation  of 
sovereign  debts  via  the  central  bank  balance  sheet,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB 
thankfully  acted  to  broadly  rule  out  this  kind  of  risk  distribution  when  ushering  in  its  latest 
government bond-buying programme, about which I personally had my doubts. 
Besides, the euro-area countries already have a lender of last resort to which they can turn: 
the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM).  Nevertheless,  even  then  there  remains  the 
difficulty of distinguishing ex ante between illiquidity and insolvency. Experience has taught 
us that the key factor here is time. 
But this matter is also of vital importance to the ESM, as the act of granting loans to member 
states that later prove to be insolvent is unlikely to be easily reconcilable with the no-bail-out 
clause, not least when a haircut actually becomes necessary and private creditors find that 
they  have  been  substituted  by  other,  public-sector  creditors  prior  to  that  step  being  taken. 
This, too, is clear from the ongoing discussion surrounding Greece. 
So  how  exactly  can  bridging  payments  via  the  ESM  be  safeguarded  in  turbulent  times 
without absolving existing creditors from their liability? 
One suggestion put forward by the Bundesbank envisages, for example, an automatic three-
year  maturity  extension  for  all  bonds.  This  would  be  activated  the  moment  a  government 
applies for an ESM programme. Such a mechanism would dramatically reduce the level of 
funding  required  for  any  ESM  programme,  which  would  then  only  be  needed  in  order  to 
spread  the  fiscal  adjustment  over  a  longer  period,  thus  simplifying  this  procedure  while 
avoiding any repayment of legacy debt. 
However, if a sovereign has completed a three-year programme but still finds itself locked 
out  of  the  market  and  must  therefore  be  presumed  to  be  trapped  in  a  state  of  deep 
insolvency,  bonds  issued  on  the  market  would  be  restructured  so  as  to  restore  that 
government’s long-term solvency. 
The key factor here is that any resultant losses can also be borne by the bondholders without 
causing  the  financial  system  to  collapse.  In  the  Eurosystem,  these  bondholders  are 
frequently  banks.  If  the  sovereign-bank  nexus  is  to  be  broken,  the  current  preferential 
regulatory treatment of sovereign bonds should be ended at the earliest possible opportunity. 
Not until banks have begun to hold sufficient capital against government bonds and the size 
of individual exposures has been made subject to limits will banks be able to effectively cope 
with  the  process  of  restructuring  sovereign  debt.  And  only  then  is  there  likely  to  be  any 
concrete political will to take such action. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Risk sharing 
5. 
Economists  like  Peter  Kenen5  pointed  out  more  than  40  years  ago  that  a  functioning 
monetary union was predicated on risk sharing between its constituent entities. 
The calls which I discussed just now for a lender of last resort to be introduced for sovereigns 
can be seen as just as much of a manifestation of these thoughts as the notion of introducing 
in  the  euro  area  a  common  unemployment  insurance  scheme,  or,  taken  to  the  extreme, 
mutual liability in the form of euro bonds. 
But besides the problems I mentioned earlier which such a risk-sharing arrangement would 
cause  in  a  monetary  union  and  the  question  of  striking  the  necessary  balance  between 
liability and control, I believe it would also be short-sighted to confine the risk-sharing debate 
to just the fiscal dimension. 
In  the  United  States,  for  instance,  researchers6  have  found  that  fiscal  policy  absorbs  just 
10% to 20% of economic shocks and thus prevents a local income shock from sparking a 
drop in consumption on the same scale. 
Private forms of risk sharing play a much greater role. Integrated capital markets smooth out 
cyclical fluctuations between the US states to a much greater extent – especially integrated 
equity markets, which cushion something like 40% of volatility. If a business’s shareholder 
base is spread across many different states, so, too, will potential losses caused by a shock 
in that business’s home state ripple out beyond the confines of that particular region. 
Hence, economic divergence between the individual US states is kept in check. In much the 
same way, the broad group of shareholders benefit from economic developments elsewhere 
in the United States when the economy is booming because their investment portfolios are 
more diversified. So business cycle divergence is kept in check in this direction, too. 
Private risk sharing also manifests itself through loans taken out during a downturn to smooth 
out consumption. 25% of an economic shock is absorbed by the credit markets in the United 
States. 
All in all, something like 80% of an economic shock in the United States is absorbed before it 
can take its toll on consumption. Research in Canada produces similar findings.7 
Things look different in Europe, however. Here, it is mainly the credit markets which absorb 
economic  shocks  –  and  not  particularly  effectively  at  that.  All  told,  only  around  40%  of  a 
given shock is cushioned before it impacts on consumption.8 
Boosting the role played by the equity markets and their cross-border integration would thus 
contribute to improving risk sharing in Europe. And it would cushion precisely those regional 
shocks to which a single monetary policy simply has no response. 
Capital markets union 
6. 
And that, ladies and gentlemen, is why the capital markets union is so important for monetary 
policy, too. 
                                                
5  P Kenen (1969). The Theory of Optimum Currency Areas: An Eclectic View, in R Mundell and A Swoboda 
(eds), Monetary Problems of the International Economy, The University of Chicago Press. 
6  P  Asdrubali,  B  Sørensen  and  O  Yosha  (1996).  Channels  of  Interstate  Risk  Sharing:  US  1963–1990,  in: 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(4), pp 1081–1110. 
7  F  S  Balli,  S  Kalemli-Ozcan  and  B  E  Sørensen  (2012).  Risk  Sharing  Through  Capital  Gains,  in:  Canadian 
Journal of Economics, vol 45(2), pp 472–492. 
8  A Afonso and D Furceri (2007). Business Cycle Synchronization and Insurance Mechanisms in the EU, ECB 
Working Paper, No 844. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A comparison with the United States shows that Europe still has plenty of upside potential 
when  it  comes  to  capital  market  integration.  The  US  equity  market  is  50%  bigger  than  its 
European counterpart, the venture capital market is five times the size of that in Europe, and 
the US securitisation market is larger still than the European market. 
I’m not saying that Europe’s financial system will resemble its US counterpart any time soon. 
After all, the structure of the financial system reflects the corporate make-up of an economy – 
and in an economy like Europe’s, which has a relatively high share of SMEs, banks are likely 
to remain the main source of financing – and that’s something we should welcome. 
Yet there are opportunities aplenty for pushing ahead with capital market integration, and the 
European Commission touches upon a number of them in its green paper, entitled “Building 
a  Capital  Markets  Union”.  One  is  the  market  for  high-quality  securitisation;  other  priority 
areas include private placements, crowdfunding and harmonising the prospectus regime. 
Dismantling  barriers  in  these  areas  would  represent  a  step  towards  greater  prosperity  in 
Europe, so the Commission’s initiative merits our support. 
But looking further into the future, we need to go one step further. Creating a European level 
playing field in insolvency law, for instance, would also improve the integration of the capital 
markets, particularly those for venture capital. 
Unequal treatment of debt and equity capital 
7. 
Alongside the existing barriers, another factor which is generally hampering growth in equity 
capital markets is what The Economist recently called “the great distortion at the heart of the 
world’s economy” – the preferential tax treatment afforded to debt over equity capital. 
Interest  payments  can  be  deducted  from  taxable  income;  equity  costs  cannot.  Eliminating 
this distortion would encourage businesses to bolster their equity base. 
That isn’t just important for the development of equity capital markets, with all the positive 
side-effects I’ve already mentioned – it would also dampen pro-cyclicality in financial markets 
and promote risk sharing. 
A  strengthening  of  the  equity  base  would  naturally  also  have  a  positive  impact  on  those 
businesses  for  which  it  has  been  most  hotly  debated  and  called  for  in  recent  years  –  the 
banks.  Eliminating  the  debt  bias  in  the  corporate  taxation  regime  would  give  banks  a 
business  case  for  shifting  their  funding  structures  more  towards  equity  capital.  A  paper9 
drawn  up  by  a  team  of  IMF  economists  indicates  that  banks’  average  unweighted  equity 
capital would climb by between 2.2 and 4.2 percentage points – which, on average, would 
equate to no less than a doubling of the leverage ratio. 
Though the authors caution that the impact will probably be less substantial for the largest 
banks, these numbers are nonetheless remarkable, especially when one considers the 3% 
leverage ratio proposed under the Basel III regime. 
And  no  less  remarkable  would  be  the  potential  savings  that  sovereigns  could  reap  from 
having to pay less to bail out ailing banks. Economists at the European Commission10 have 
found  that  doing  away  with  the  entire  preferential  tax  treatment  of  debt  would  slash  the 
losses which the public sector would suffer if a fresh crisis were to occur on a similar scale. 
                                                
9  R A De Mooij, M Keen and M Orihara (2013), Taxation, Bank Leverage, and Financial Crises, IMF Working 
Paper No 13/48. 
10  S  Langedijk,  G  Nicodeme,  A  Pagano  and  A  Rossi  (2015)  “Debt  bias  in  corporate  income  taxation  and  the 
costs of banking crises”, CEPR Discussion Paper 10616. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Putting an end to the debt bias in the corporate taxation regime, then, could also prove to be 
a major pillar safeguarding financial stability – one that could potentially provide lasting relief 
for the public sector. 
8. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Europe’s financial fabric has become much more tightly woven over the last 25 years. And 
yet  a  single  torn  thread  can  cause  the  entire  fabric  to  unravel  –  this  is  where  the  new 
resolution  regime,  which  is  there  to  prevent  torn  threads  from  causing  greater  damage, 
comes into play. 
Other  parts  of the fabric, meanwhile,  are  still  pretty  threadbare,  if  not to  say  worn  through 
altogether.  The  capital  markets  union  addresses  this  very  issue  and  is  capable  of 
contributing to closer integration. 
And the entire fabric could be made more durable still if a stronger thread were used in the 
future – equity capital. 
So you could say that the fabric of Europe’s financial system can become both a safety net 
and  a  trampoline  for  the  continent’s  economy  –  thus  making  life  a  great  deal  easier  for 
monetary policy, too. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
