  DeLisle Worrell: The growing relationship between China and Barbados 
Welcome remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
Press Launch of the Fish and Dragon Festival, Bridgetown, 29 January 2015. 
 Ambassador Wang Ke of the Embassy of the People’s Republic of China in Barbados other 
representatives  of  the  Embassy  of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  in  Barbados,  Mr.  David 
Bulbulia, Deputy Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Kirk Ottley, President 
of  the  BCFA  and  other  representatives,  Festival  Director,  Ms.  Tonika  Sealy,  ladies  and 
gentleman, members of the media and press good morning. 
They say that the world’s centre of gravity has shifted to the east, suddenly and dramatically. 
Even someone like myself, with more than a passing knowledge of Chinese history, culture 
and policy, has been astounded by the transformation. The images I see on TV daily are of 
an utterly different country to the one I visited in 1980. The very fact that CCTV America is 
available  in  Barbados,  and  that  its  global  coverage  is  among  the  most  dispassionate, 
informative  and  sympathetic  to  my  sensibilities,  of  any  international  broadcaster,  is 
something that was inconceivable back then. 
Most Barbadians are only dimly aware of the magnitude of the change that the emergence of 
China implies, and the myriad ways our lives might be touched by that change. We do know 
of  Chinese  interest  in  direct  investment  in  the  Caribbean;  it  is  substantial,  and  it  is  to  be 
welcomed,  because  it  benefits  both  sides.  Barbados  and  the  Caribbean  benefit  from  the 
increase  of  our  capacity  to  produce  goods  and  services,  and  the  associated  employment. 
China,  for  its  part,  is  in  search  of  opportunities  to  diversify  foreign  investment  portfolios.  I 
have only recently been sensitized to the extent of online commerce with China, and the in-
built features that facilitate this commerce. The Chinese embassy, the ANNU Institute, the 
Barbados-China Friendship Association and other groups and individuals have provided us 
with  glimpses  into  China’s  rich,  ancient,  and  modernizing  culture.  We  see  more  of  it  on 
CCTV. The Confucius Institute is about to get going. We see reports of missions to China, 
and articles on the experiences of Barbadians living there. 
What all this makes us realise is that a whole new world has emerged, with China as its hub, 
and we are feeling the swells reaching us, at this far distance. This has whetted the appetite 
of  many,  and  there  is  growing  interest  and  curiosity  about  the  possibilities  for  networking, 
exchanges, travel, culture, entertainment, sports, commerce, conferences and all the many 
ways our societies might interact. 
The Barbados-China Friendship Association (BCFA) intends to provide a central node for a 
multifaceted network covering all areas that might be of interest to members and the general 
public.  There  is  an  opportunity  for  all  those  who  might  have  an  interest  in  the  China-
Barbados relationship to join the association and help us shape its agenda. The BCFA is a 
sponsor with the Chinese Embassy and the Central Bank of the Fish and Dragon Festival, 
which we are introducing to the public today. The association will have a booth at the festival, 
with information on membership, the association’s actual and future activities, information on 
resources for Mandarin language training, information on training and travel opportunities. If 
you already have an interest in interacting with China and the Chinese we need to hear from 
you. And if you are merely curious there will be plenty to pique your interest and give ideas 
and inspiration for a deepening of your involvement with the BCFA and with China. We invite 
you to visit and like the Festival’s Facebook Page entitled Fish & Dragon Festival. 
We plan an exciting, entertaining and informational festival, which is sure to be enjoyed by 
all.  And  after  the  festival  the  BCFA  will  keep  things  going,  with  the  assistance  and 
engagement of all those who share our passion for an intensification of the China-Barbados 
relationship. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
