  Mario Draghi: Euro area economic outlook, the ECB’s monetary policy 
and current policy challenges 
Statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  prepared  for  the 
thirty-first meeting of the International Monetary and Financial Committee, Washington DC, 
17 April 2015. 
 The  economic  situation  and  the  short-term  outlook  for  the  euro  area  are  currently  brighter 
than they have been for several years. Various factors are helping to boost confidence that 
the weak and uneven recovery experienced up to now will gain strength and breadth. The 
ECB has pursued its price stability mandate with determination so that inflation will return to 
a level below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. A strengthened financial sector, an 
accommodative macroeconomic policy setting, sound fiscal policies and a determination by 
euro area governments to pursue structural reforms should allow the euro area to embark on 
a sustainable growth path in a context of price stability. 
The ongoing recovery, which started almost two years ago, is now more firmly taking hold. 
Euro  area  real  GDP  rose  by  0.3%,  quarter-on-quarter,  in  the  last  quarter  of  2014,  driven 
mainly by domestic demand and especially private consumption. The latest data and survey 
evidence suggest that the euro area economy has gained further momentum since the end 
of  2014.  Looking  ahead,  the  economic  recovery  is  expected  to  broaden  and  strengthen 
gradually.  Domestic  demand  should  be  further  supported  by  the  ongoing  improvements  in 
financial conditions resulting from our monetary policy measures, as well as by the progress 
made in fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. Moreover, the lower level of the price of 
oil should continue to bolster households’ real disposable income and corporate profitability. 
Euro  area  labour  markets  are  gradually  improving.  Employment  continued  to  grow  in  the 
fourth  quarter  of  2014  and  the  level  of  unemployment  is  continuing  to  fall  gradually  from 
elevated  levels.  At  the  same  time,  the  euro  area  recovery  is  likely  to  continue  to  be 
dampened by necessary balance-sheet adjustments in a number of sectors and the sluggish 
pace at which structural reforms are being implemented. While remaining on the downside, 
the risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook have become more balanced on account 
of the recent monetary  policy decisions, the fall in oil prices and the lower euro exchange 
rate. 
HICP inflation in the euro area turned negative in December 2014 mainly on account of the 
sharp drop in oil prices observed last year. Looking ahead, inflation is expected to remain 
very low or still negative in the coming months. However, supported by the favourable impact 
of  the  recent  monetary  policy  measures  on  aggregate  demand,  and  by  the  impact  of  the 
lower euro exchange rate, the base effects that will materialise later in 2015 and somewhat 
higher oil prices in the years ahead, inflation rates are expected to increase consistently over 
the short and medium term. The ECB will continue to closely monitor the risks to the inflation 
outlook. In this context, the Governing Council will focus in particular on the pass-through of 
our monetary policy measures, as well as on geopolitical, exchange rate and energy price 
developments. 
Our  monetary  policy  continues  to  aim  at  safeguarding  price  stability.  Since  mid-2014  we 
have taken a number of both conventional and unconventional measures. Monetary policy 
measures adopted in the second half of 2014, such as the TLTRO, CBPP3 and ABSPP, had 
resulted in a material improvement in terms of financial market prices. In January 2015, the 
Governing  Council  launched  an  expanded  asset  purchase  programme  to  address  the 
heightened risks of too prolonged a period of too low inflation, encompassing purchases in 
the secondary market of euro-denominated investment-grade securities issued by euro area 
governments  and  agencies  and  European  institutions.  We  intend  to  purchase  private  and 
public securities until end-September 2016. In any case, we will continue the purchases until 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
the  Governing  Council  sees  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation  which  is 
consistent with its aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term. In its assessment, the Governing Council will follow its monetary policy strategy and 
concentrate on trends in inflation, looking beyond any unexpected movement of inflation in 
either  direction  if  it  is  regarded  as  transient  and  deemed  to  have  no  implications  for  the 
medium-term outlook for price stability. There is clear evidence that the policy measures are 
effective, as financial market conditions and the cost of external finance for the private sector 
have  eased  considerably  over  the  past  months  and  borrowing  conditions  for  firms  and 
households have improved notably, with a pick-up in the demand for credit. 
As regards fiscal policies, we concur with the IMF WEO assessment that the by and large 
neutral euro area aggregate fiscal stance in 2015 continues to appear broadly appropriate, 
although it masks significant heterogeneity across countries. Many euro area countries still 
face  significant  consolidation  challenges  in  order  to  reduce  high  debt  ratios  and  to  ensure 
fiscal sustainability. The flexibility within the Stability and Growth Pact should be used wisely 
and should not lead to increased debt sustainability risks and making countries vulnerable to 
economic shocks in the future. Full and consistent implementation of the Stability and Growth 
Pact is key for confidence in our fiscal framework. We also acknowledge the findings of the 
IMF Fiscal Monitor that good economic times prevailing before the crisis were not sufficiently 
used by advanced economies to build sufficient fiscal buffers. It is thus important that euro 
area  countries  now  make  sufficient  progress  towards  their  medium-term  budgetary 
objectives. 
Regarding structural reforms, important steps have been taken in several euro area Member 
States, while in others measures still need to be implemented. Product and labour market 
reforms  addressing  supply-side  bottlenecks,  as  well  as  policies  aimed  at  improving  the 
business  environment  for  firms,  are  crucial  to  the  economic  recovery.  Bold  and  effective 
implementation of reforms is not just in the interest of the individual countries, it is also key 
for  strengthening  the  resilience  and  ensuring  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  Economic  and 
Monetary Union and for supporting growth at the global level. 
The implementation of the banking union has been a pivotal step in the reform of Europe’s 
financial sector. The new environment for banks, reflected in the better health of the banking 
system,  supports  the  transmission  of  our  monetary  policy  and  thereby  creates  more 
favourable conditions for the real economy, which could in turn support the private sector’s 
efforts to address debt overhangs and impaired corporate and bank balance sheets. 
The Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) of the ECB has been in operation for just over six 
months  now  as  the  micro-prudential  supervisor  of  all  euro  area  banks  and  the  direct 
supervisor  of  more  than  120  significant  institutions.  The  SSM  is  committed  to  establishing 
effective  and  high-quality  supervision  across  its  jurisdictions.  While  respectful  of  vital 
business diversity among SSM banks, an even-handed approach supported by harmonised 
supervisory standards will help to halt the fragmentation and underpin the reintegration of the 
euro area banking sector. The ECB is looking closely at the scope for rolling back national 
options and discretions in order to foster regulatory harmonisation. Within the newly created 
banking union, the SSM has launched various initiatives to incentivise banks to reduce NPEs 
and  to  implement  viable  restructuring  practices,  as  well  as  to  achieve  consistency  in 
provisioning and realistic collateral valuation in line with accounting rules. 
The successful completion of the comprehensive assessment improved transparency in an 
unprecedented  way  and  boosted  the  strengthening  of  banks’  balance  sheets.  It  thereby 
increased confidence in the European banking sector. Remedial actions for shortfall banks 
have to be completed by end-July. Supervisory priorities defined for 2015 aim to scrutinise 
the sustainability of banks’ business models in a low-profitability environment, the adequacy 
of their risk cultures and governance structures, and their resilience to unexpected shocks. 
All  of  this  should  put  the  banks  in  a  better  position  to  increase  their  lending  to  the  real 
economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 the  banking  union, 
 
 
framework 
The  second  pillar  of 
complementing the SSM, has also seen substantial progress since our last IMFC meeting: as 
of 1 January 2015, the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) has been in place. The Single 
Resolution  Board  will  start  exercising  its  full  set  of  responsibilities  from  next  January 
onwards. The Single Resolution Fund is set to start operating in January 2016 and ensure 
that failing banks are resolved in an orderly fashion so that costs for taxpayers and the real 
economy are kept to a minimum. 
 
the  recovery  and  resolution 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
