Andrew Gracie: Cyber resilience – a financial stability perspective 
Speech given by Mr Andrew Gracie, Executive Director of Resolution of the Bank of England, at 
the Cyber Defence and Network Security conference, London, 23 January 2015. 
 In the last few weeks in mainstream media cyber has been to the fore. The hacking of Sony1 
and related reports of attacks on nuclear reactors in South Korea2 provide a salutary reminder 
of what we are up against. The threat is there not only to steal data but to disrupt or destroy the 
functions of a firm. Detecting threats, being ready to respond to attacks and the capability to 
recover all pose new challenges for firms in every sector. 
In  the finance  sector,  we  have  to  contemplate the  possibility  that  core functions  in firms,  the 
financial market infrastructure that links them together or the supply chains that support them, 
may be damaged in a cyber attack, either through the corruption or loss of data or outright loss 
of systems. 
These  are  issues  we  already  think  about  in  the  context  of  other  types  of  major  operational 
disruption. 
But the risks around cyber are different. Detection of a problem may be more difficult. There is 
not the same symmetry of information that there might be in the event of bomb, flood or fire. 
And the mechanisms we have put in place to manage these risks may not protect against a 
cyber  attack.  Our  current  approach  to  ensure  firms  are  able  to  continue  to  operate  core 
functions  in  a  major  operational  disruption  involves  ensuring  that  firms  have  primary  and 
secondary  sites  at  a  safe  distance  from  each  other  and  the  capacity  to  switch  operations 
between  the  two  without  any  extended  interruption  in  activity.  But  with  cyber  such  common 
systems environments between primary and secondary sites and mirroring of data between the 
two could, in the event of a successful attack, result in a complete loss of systems, disrupting a 
firm’s capacity to operate and leaving the timeframe and route to recovery uncertain. 
Unlike  most  other  forms  of  operational  disruption,  we  know  too  with  cyber  that  this  is  not  a 
game against nature. There are groups out there that are motivated to attack the sector. For 
most, the motivation is economic; that accounts for the rise in fraud. But there are actors out 
there, sometimes state-sponsored, who may be motivated to bring systems down and cause 
harm to the sector. Their capabilities vary, but it is in the nature of cyber that attack types are 
constantly evolving and readily scalable. And the threat is international. Attacks can originate 
anywhere around the globe. 
This  all  implies  a  different  disposition  for  cyber  defence.  We  should  not  expect  to  build  an 
impermeable perimeter that, through technology design, will withstand attack. Rather we should 
expect the cyber threat to be ever-present, ever-evolving and networks to be penetrated. The 
capability  to  identify  where  this  has  occurred  and  to  respond  is  key.  Part  of  this  is  active 
engagement  with  threat  intelligence  to  understand  likely  adversaries,  their  motivations  and 
ways of working. 
For all these reasons, addressing cyber risk in the financial sector is a high priority for the Bank 
of  England.  It  touches  on  most  of  our  responsibilities  –  as  prudential  supervisor  of  financial 
firms,  as  supervisor  of  financial  market  infrastructure  –  and  operator  of  financial  market 
infrastructure  (of  real  time  gross  settlement  (RTGS))  –  and  as  UK  authority  responsible  for 
financial  stability.  Financial  stability  is  the  unifying  objective  in  all  of  these  responsibilities.  It 
means that, in the spectrum of cyber attacks, we are much more concerned about those that 
have the potential to disrupt the UK system by damaging the operations of key firms or financial 
                                                
1  http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-30512032.  
2  http://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/22/south-korea-nuclear-power-cyber-attack-hack. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
market  infrastructure  and  to  understand  how  that  damage  could  transmit  through  the  sector, 
than to deal with individual cases of cyber fraud. Such cases of consumer detriment are for the 
Financial  Conduct  Authority  (FCA),  law  enforcement  agencies  such  as  the  National  Crime 
Agency, the police and the Home Office to address. 
In response to the rise in the potential threat to UK financial stability from cyber, the Financial 
Policy Committee (FPC) in June 2013 recommended that the UK authorities should work with 
firms at the core of the system to test and improve cyber resilience. I want to spend the rest of 
this speech outlining what we have done in response. The accent has been on assessing the 
vulnerability of the UK financial sector to cyber attack. We are doing that in two ways: a cross-
sector  review  of  current  risk  management  practices  with  regards  to  cyber  and  vulnerability 
testing via CBEST. Let me describe these in turn. 
As a first step in diagnosing the sector’s cyber resilience, the UK financial authorities3 issued a 
questionnaire  to  thirty  six  firms  that  make  up  the  “core”  of  the  UK  financial  system.  This 
included  the  largest  UK  and  foreign  banks  active  in  London  and  the  key  payment  and 
settlement systems, clearing houses and exchanges that together are critical for delivery of the 
financial services that the wider economy depends on. 
The questionnaire provided for a detailed self-assessment by firms of how they organise their 
cyber defences. Its purpose was to enable UK authorities to take stock of resilience across the 
sector  and  identify  best  practice  across  firms.  Part  of  this  was  to  be  able  to  play  back  to 
individual firms where they stood relative to best practice. But lying behind this is the objective 
of raising resilience in individual firms by ensuring that the network as a whole is resilient. And 
given the importance of these firms to the stability of the financial system, this implies a level of 
resilience that goes beyond basic cyber hygiene but aims instead to ensure that firms are in a 
position  to  manage  Advanced  Persistent  Threats  (APT)  that  are  the  hallmark  of  some  state-
sponsored attackers. 
We are currently discussing the results from these questionnaires directly with firms. You will 
appreciate  that  I  cannot  go  into  specifics.  But  overall  the  responses  did  not  reveal  any 
immediate critical shortcomings in the cyber resilience of the firms involved. But they did point 
to areas for improvement that we will be following up on with firms. Let me list some common 
themes. 
1. 
Cyber has changed the rules: existing operational resilience arrangements are often 
geared  to  dealing  with  physical  threats.  These  still  matter.  But  cyber  changes  the 
game.  Cyber  is  a  dynamic,  intelligent  and  adaptive  threat.  In  the  cyber  arms  race, 
costs are stacked in favour of the attacker, not the defender. To meet the challenge, 
organisations  need  to  have  policies  and  processes  that  are  dynamic,  intelligent  and 
adaptive too. This means investment in capability to identify threats and detect cyber 
attacks.  Without  this  situational  awareness  it  is  hard  to  determine  and  achieve 
appropriate maturity levels for cyber defence and to allocate resources effectively to 
meet the threat. 
Cyber  is  not  a  minority  sport  for  technologists  only:  Of  course  the  first  line  of 
defence  is  critical  and  we  still  need  IT  specialists  who  understand  the  technical 
challenges  cyber  presents.  But  good  cyber  resilience  is  about  much  more  than 
technology.  It  is  about  culture  too  and  this  means  people  and  processes.  When 
Morgan  Stanley  reported  recently  its  customer  information  had  been  breached,  this 
wasn’t  due  to  sophisticated  hackers,  rather  an  employee  who  stole  data  from  over 
350,000 customer accounts. All parts of an organisation need to understand cyber risk 
and  their  responsibilities  towards  improved  cyber  hygiene. This  includes  Board  level 
engagement.  Front  line  business  areas  need  to  understand  and  own  the  risk. 
Management of cyber vulnerabilities needs to feature in strategic planning. 
2. 
                                                
3  The Bank, Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) and the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
3. 
Cyber requires effective and regular testing: Of people, processes and technology. 
Industry  investment  in  cyber  is  significant  but  testing  the  effectiveness  of  this 
investment  has  not  kept  pace.  Assurance  is  often  based  on  audits  and  control 
sampling which is not sufficient, not least because of the challenge for internal audit 
departments to keep pace with change in this area. And of course, given the dynamic 
nature of the threat, such tests should take place on a regular basis. 
This leads me onto the other element of our response to the FPC recommendation I wanted to 
talk about: vulnerability testing through the CBEST4 program. CBEST is a framework that we 
have  developed  working  with  government,  industry  and  commercial  providers  of  penetration 
testing and threat intelligence. 
The idea is to bring to bear the best available intelligence on potential threats to test directly a 
firm’s  ability  to  protect,  detect  and  respond  to  cyber  attacks.  The  scope  of  a  CBEST  test  is 
tailored  to  the  business  of  the  firm  and  the  critical  services  it  provides.  Given  the  scope, 
relevant  intelligence  on  threats  and  attack  types  is  drawn  together  from  threat  intelligence 
providers, including government sources, and is used to design a series of tests that mimic the 
methods that are most likely, according to the threat intelligence, to be deployed against the 
firm. The companies providing the penetration test are accredited within a framework that has 
benefitted  from  GCHQ  input  and  delivery  of  the  test  is  within  a  controlled  testing  process 
agreed between the firm, the authorities and the test provider. 
The  results  should  provide  firms  –  and  us  –  with  a  direct  read  on  the  robustness  of  their 
defences to more sophisticated attack types and a gaps analysis so that firms know what steps 
they need to take to improve their resilience. 
This is not a regulatory requirement though we are encouraging firms to participate. Rather it is 
a voluntary process. But we think the benefits to firms of CBEST are significant. This is why the 
FPC in December encouraged firms to undergo a CBEST as “soon as practicable”5. By going 
through this process, firms will not only understand where their vulnerabilities lie, but also which 
threats  should  cause  them  most  concern  and  what  steps  they  should  take  to  combat  them. 
Access  to  direct  feeds  of  commercial  and  government  intelligence,  via  accredited  red  team 
testing  by  cyber  experts,  ensures  that  the  test  involves  the  most  up-to-date  threats,  most 
relevant to their specific situation. And we are keen for other sectors, and other jurisdictions, to 
benefit from our experiences6. 
CBEST was officially launched in the summer with the same thirty six firms that participated in 
the  questionnaire.  Tests  are  at  an  advanced  stage  for  a  number  of  firms  and  we  expect  to 
include the results when we report back to the FPC in the coming months. 
So this covers how we are responding to the FPC’s recommendation. But we are also looking 
beyond this. 
I  have  already  noted  the  benefit  for  individual  firms  of  enhanced  cyber  resilience  across  the 
sector. To realise that, firms need to cooperate not compete in this space. With that in mind, we 
are working with industry to strengthen arrangements for information sharing, reviewing existing 
forums  for  tactical  information  sharing  and  supplementing  them  where  necessary  with 
arrangements for more strategic information sharing including on good practice. We are also 
working  with  the  sector  on  how  existing  arrangements  for  responding  to  a  major  operational 
disruption would work in the event of a severe cyber attack. We have used simulation exercises 
                                                
4  Further information on CBEST can be found on the Bank of England’s website: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
financialstability/fsc/Pages/cbest.aspx. 
5  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/records/fpc/pdf/2014/record1412.pdf. 
6  All  of  the  CBEST  material  is  available  under  Creative  Commons  Copyright  (free)  on  the  Bank  of  England’s 
website. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
like Waking Shark II7 to test response frameworks. And, as was announced last week, a joint 
testing programme between US and UK governments and authorities will start this year. This 
answers to the fact that cyber knows no borders and the significant operational interlinkages 
between our systems and it reflects the growing dialogue with the US and others as to how best 
to manage the risk to financial stability from cyber. 
So it is clear the world has changed; cyber is an ever-present threat. Firms need to stand ready 
to manage this risk. And just as cyber has changed the world for firms, it has also changed the 
landscape  for  authorities;  we  need  to  adapt  our  approach  to  operational  resilience  of  the 
financial sector as a whole. Our work in response to the FPC’s recommendation typifies this; 
but we will continue to work with firms, government and cyber experts to learn and evolve our 
approach. 
                                                
7  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/fsc/Documents/wakingshark2report.pdf.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
