  Haruhiko Kuroda: Some reflections on unemployment and inflation 
Speech  by  Mr  Haruhiko  Kuroda,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  ECB  Forum  on 
Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, 23 May 2015. 
 The accompanying graph can be found at the end of the speech. 
It is a great pleasure for me to be able to participate in this conference. 
More  than  40  years  ago,  in  his  seminal  speech  on  the  subject,  James  Tobin  said, 
“Unemployment and inflation still preoccupy and perplex economists, statesmen, journalists, 
house-wives  and  everyone  else.”1  For  the  Bank  of  Japan,  employment  is  not  explicitly 
included  in  its  monetary  policy  mandate,  unlike  in  the  case  of  the  Federal  Reserve. 
Unemployment is still a useful guide for us, however, in pursuing price stability, the explicit 
mandate of our monetary policy. In addition, it is widely recognized that price stability must 
be secured because it is an indispensable foundation for the health of the economy, which of 
course has a direct impact on workers. Therefore, despite some seeming differences in the 
mandates written in their respective statutes, there is little practical difference between major 
central  banks  across  jurisdictions,  in  that  both  unemployment  and  inflation  are  of  central 
concern in formulating their monetary policies. 
Nevertheless,  there  are  remarkable  differences  between  the  United  States,  the  euro  area 
and Japan in their historical observations of unemployment and inflation. Let us take a look 
at this very simple graph: a scattered diagram showing unemployment and inflation for these 
three jurisdictions. The horizontal axis is unemployment rate, and the vertical one is inflation 
rate. There are two approaches regarding how to interpret this graph. 
One approach is to focus on where each cluster of dots is located. There is a well-known 
measure of welfare, the Misery Index, which is  the simple sum of unemployment rate and 
inflation rate. If the Misery Index is indeed the most accurate measure of welfare, the further 
northeast  an economy is located, the more miserable the state of that economy is. In this 
interpretation, Japan’s performance  has been consistently outstanding for many years with 
the lowest unemployment and lowest inflation among the three.2 However, the Misery Index 
is an indicator that makes sense only in a high inflation environment, which has not been the 
case in major economies for the last twenty years. Therefore, the Misery Index would not in 
fact give us any useful hints in evaluating the monetary policies of major central banks. 
The other approach is to interpret the clusters as each jurisdiction’s Phillips curve, where the 
underlying theory is that inflation dynamics can be explained in the context of slackening in 
the labor market. I know that economists continue debating hotly whether or not a meaningful 
slope in the Phillips curve is observed in major economies in recent years.3 As a matter of 
fact, this simple graph appears to suggest that the Phillips curves for the United States and 
the  euro  area  have  barely  sloped,  if  at  all,  since  the  middle  of  the  1990s.  One  important 
aspect is that both flat “curves” are located at around 2 percent inflation. In other words, the 
inflation  rate  has  been  mostly  stable  around  2  percent,  irrespective  of  noticeable  ups  and 
downs  in  unemployment:  inflation  has  been  well  anchored  at  the  level  intended  by  the 
respective  central  banks.  Of  course,  the  recent  sizable  and  persistent  deviation  from 
2 percent for the euro area could be problematic. I understand this is exactly the reason why 
the European Central Bank joined the QE club recently. 
                                                
1   James Tobin, “Inflation and Unemployment,” American Economic Review, Vol. 62, 1972. 
2   The ranking does not alter even if we use headline inflation instead of core. 
3   See, for instance, Robert J. Gordon, “The Phillips Curve is Alive and Well: Inflation and the NAIRU during the 
Slow Recovery,” NBER Working Paper, No. 19390, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Compared with these two Phillips curves, Japan’s is unique in two points. First, the negative 
correlation  between  unemployment  and  inflation  is  more  apparent  in  Japan.  Second  and 
more importantly, the curve crosses the zero inflation line with a larger part of it remaining in 
negative territory. This suggests that long-term inflation expectation in Japan has likely been 
around zero or even slightly negative for nearly two decades since the mid-1990s. This is 
exactly the problem which the Bank decided to address decisively a little over two years ago 
through Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE). Our intention was twofold: first, 
to stimulate the economy throughout various transmission channels and thereby move the 
economy and inflation in the northwest direction along our moderately but still meaningfully 
sloped Phillips curve; and second, to create higher inflation expectations and thereby shift 
the entire Phillips curve upward, through the drastic shift in our monetary policy. 
Things are moving in line with our original intention. The latest data point can be interpreted 
as confirming that underlying inflation in Japan has been improving significantly, although the 
firmness  is  currently  masked  by  the  temporary  negative  impact  of  the  sharp  decline  in  oil 
prices.  There  have  been  a  number  of  positive  signs  in  this  regard:  first,  various  surveys 
indicate that inflation expectations have been edging up steadily over the last two years or 
so.  Second,  annual  spring  wage  negotiations  appear  to  have  started  reflecting  higher 
inflation expectations: base pay levels rose last year for the first time since the 1990s, and 
further accelerated this year. Third, the Bank’s economists recently confirmed, based on a 
rigorous quantitative analysis, that a “regime-shift” in trend inflation from zero to a meaningful 
positive  level  indeed  occurred  under  QQE.4  All  these  signs  indicate  that  we  are  now 
overcoming the deflation that has long been afflicting our economy. We must maintain our 
current efforts in order to achieve the 2 percent inflation target at the earliest possible time, 
which we now expect to be around the first half of fiscal 2016. 
Another  interesting  fact  illustrated  by  the  graph  is  that  the  recent  unemployment  rate  in 
Japan, about 3.5 percent, is low even by Japanese standards. With everything else being 
equal, the lower the unemployment rate, the better the economic welfare. 
However, that may not be the whole story. The fact that we have achieved this very low level 
of  unemployment  with  only  modest  economic  growth  in  the  last  two  years  indicates  how 
heavily  our  adverse  demography  is  weighing  on  the  supply  side  of  the  economy.  Japan’s 
working-age population started to decline in the middle of the 1990s, and this decline is now 
gaining pace. This represents a considerable threat to potential growth, which has declined 
to an anemic 0.5 percent, or possibly even lower. In order to restore a stronger supply side, 
we need to raise labor participation rates among the female and elderly population as well as 
labor productivity. As a matter of fact, the third arrow of Abenomics is already  working on 
these issues. Although a central bank cannot directly change the potential growth rate, the 
Bank of Japan’s unprecedentedly accommodative monetary stimulus is certainly helping the 
reforms by dispelling the deflationary mindset. 
In Professor Tobin’s day, the policy problem was primarily related to a trade-off between the 
social costs of unemployment and those of inflation. The picture is different now. Most major 
economies are in need of both higher inflation and more jobs. In this sense, there is no trade-
off. The new challenge has more to do with expanding our policy frontier than with choosing 
between trade-offs. This challenge is further complicated by the structural weakness of the 
economy, characterized among other things by demography. Professor Tobin stated in his 
conclusion  that,  thirty-five  years  after  Keynes,  welfare  macroeconomics  associated  with 
unemployment and inflation was still a relevant and challenging subject. At the same time, he 
sounded reasonably optimistic about future policy wisdom that would better address these 
problems.  He  was  half-right.  Inflation  has  not  been  a  serious  problem  in  advanced 
                                                
4   Sohei  Kaihatsu  and  Jouchi  Nakajima,  “Has  Trend  Inflation  Shifted?:  An  Empirical  Analysis  with  a  Regime-
Switching Model,” Bank of Japan Working Paper Series, No.15-E-3, 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
economies for many years now. Nevertheless, growth and job creation are not satisfactory. 
On top of that, the risk of deflation is a new element that now requires serious consideration, 
while it was not on the list of concerns in the 1970s. No matter how difficult the problems may 
seem,  however,  I  believe  that  the  right  policies,  with  strong  determination,  will  ultimately 
prevail.  I  hope  that  we  can  be  even  more  optimistic  after  this  conference,  with  a  deeper 
understanding of this subject, and still greater conviction that we are already heading in the 
right direction. 
 
 
Thank you. 
 3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 