  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Moving forward with financial infrastructure 
integration through the BSP’s Reverse Repurchase E-Trading System 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the signing ceremony of the BSP’s Reverse Repurchase 
E-Trading System, Manila, 30 January 2015. 
 I am pleased to see that the partnership between the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and the 
banking  industry  continues  to  grow,  strengthen  and  deepen.  Today,  the  signing  of  a 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  for  the  BSP’s  Reverse  Repurchase  Electronic  Trading 
System  marks  yet  another  milestone  in  our  efforts  to  promote  financial  market  operations 
underpinned by strong and secure infrastructure and well-designed rules. 
Over  the  years,  the  BSP  has  launched  initiatives  to  address  the  growing  needs  of  its 
stakeholders and to adapt to the changing times. These include the implementation of real-
time  gross  settlement  system  which  BSP  operates  today  as  the  PhilPASS,  the  Intraday 
Liquidity  Facility,  the  BSP  e-Rediscounting  System,  and  the  REMIT  System  for  OFW 
remittances, just to name a few. 
Ladies and gentlemen. These initiatives form important building blocks towards a domestic 
financial market infrastructure that efficiently and effectively responds to the needs of the real 
sector. 
With  this  goal  in  mind,  our  latest  initiative  is  the  RRP  E-trading  system,  a  web-based 
electronic  platform…  where  overnight  and  term  RRP  agreements  between  financial 
institutions and the BSP’s Treasury Department may be transacted and settled. 
With built-in security access procedures, the new E system will replace the manual queuing 
of  the  RRP  trade  orders  that  are  posted  via  a  combination  of  telephone  and  stand-alone 
trading  platforms,  e.g.,  Reuters  or  Bloomberg.  It  will  also  eliminate  the  unintended 
consequence of manually collating transactions from different order sources. 
Another benefit that users of the e-trading system will enjoy  is straight through processing 
where  reporting  of  interbank  call  loan  transactions  will  be  done  electronically.  In  sum, 
therefore,  the  system  should  heighten  the  security  of  the  full  dealing,  settlement  and 
reporting cycle of RRP transactions. 
But more than the benefits of automation, the creation of this system opens up for the BSP 
new  horizons  for  enhancing  the  way  it  conducts  open  market  operations  or  OMO.  This 
electronic trading system provides the BSP the flexibility to use different methods to allocate 
RRPs  to  participating  banks,  including  possibly  an  auction  system.  In  turn,  the  option  to 
auction RRPs will give the BSP the means to implement a full interest rate corridor for OMO 
in the future. Presently, our OMO is conducted with the RP as the ceiling and the SDA as the 
floor. 
The  electronic  reporting  of  transactions  will  also  expedite  the  calculations  for  another 
important initiative in progress – the OIS, which is a determinative component in completing 
the benchmark yield curve. We can see, therefore, some interesting times ahead. 
We  look  forward  to  continue  working  closely  with  the  leaders  of  our  financial  system  in 
building financial market infrastructure and systems that are safe, secure and responsive to 
its stakeholders. Thank you for your continuing support. 
Finally, let us congratulate the BSP’s Treasury Department under the leadership of Assistant 
Governor Winnie Santiago who worked with the BSP’s Payments System Office, Information 
Technology Sub-Sector, and Legal Office in setting up this trading platform. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  We look forward to more joint undertakings that will continue to move us forward toward a 
better,  bigger  and  stronger  financial  market  that  will  keep  our  economy  growing  and 
increasingly inclusive. 
Thank you all and Mabuhay! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
