 Juyeol Lee: New Year speech 
 New Year’s address by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the Bank of Korea, 
Seoul, 2 January 2015. 
 Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea! 
Today  is  our  first  day  of  work  in  2015,  the  year  marking  the  70th  anniversary  of  national 
liberation. I would first like to express my sincere appreciation to all of you for so faithfully 
carrying out your duties under difficult circumstances. 
Since returning last April to the Bank of Korea, where I had worked my entire career, I have 
devoted great efforts to fulfilling my heavy responsibilities as Governor. And looking back I 
feel rewarded with some sense of achievement and satisfaction, but I also remember even 
more clearly that last year left much to be desired. 
Since the time I took office as Governor, I have thought that monetary policy communication 
with the market is very important, and I have endeavored to do this in a smooth manner. For 
effective communication, the accurate forecasts of economic conditions is required. This will 
enable  us  to  send  consistent  policy  signals  and  gain  the  confidence  of  economic  agents. 
Economic  movements  changed  greatly  last  year,  however,  owing  mainly  to  structural 
changes in the Korean economy and to external and internal shocks, and so the results of 
our communication with the market were not so satisfactory. 
The fact that the effects of our monetary policy were unclear is also disappointing. Although 
we strengthened our accommodative monetary policy stance further last year, by reducing 
the Base Rate on two occasions and raising the ceiling on the Bank Intermediated Lending 
Support  Facility,  the  trend  of  economic  recovery  was  insufficient,  with  some  even  voicing 
concerns about deflation. 
As consumer price inflation was below the target range for a long period of time, controversy 
over  the  adequacy  of  our  monetary  policy  stance  continued.  In  a  situation  of  low  inflation 
resulting mainly from supply-side factors, such as declines in prices of international crude oil 
and domestic agricultural products, conducting monetary policy only to achieve the inflation 
target may not be desirable. I think it is disappointing that we did not get this message across 
properly to economic agents in our country. 
Dear members of the Bank of Korea! 
It is generally forecast that economic conditions in Korea will improve at least slightly more 
this year than last. The Korean economy is expected to continue its modest trend of recovery 
going forward, on the back of improvements in the global economy centering around the US, 
the sharp declines in international oil prices, and the effects of expansionary macroeconomic 
policy. 
However, it is also true that there are considerable challenges lying ahead of our economy. 
Looking first into the domestic economy, there are several structural factors weakening our 
growth  potential.  Factors  such  as  low  fertility  and  population  aging,  labor  market  rigidity, 
inter-sectoral  imbalances,  and  excessive  regulation  are  reducing  the  dynamism  of  the 
economy, and there is concern as well that the competitiveness of some leading industries in 
Korea  may  have  weakened.  It  also  cannot  be  stressed  enough  that  the  greatly  increased 
household debt may constrain consumption and undermine financial stability. 
In terms of external conditions also, factors that can cause difficulties to the Korean economy 
lurk  everywhere.  The  possibility  can  also  not  be  ruled  out  of  economic  growth  in  China 
continuing to slow, while the euro area and Japan have yet to emerge from their economic 
sluggishness.  In  the  international  financial  markets,  heightened  volatility  of  cross-border 
capital movements and price variables such as interest and exchange rates is expected due 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  to  changes  in  monetary  policy  in  major  countries  such  as  a  policy  rate  hike  by  the  U.S. 
Federal  Reserve.  The  recent  plunge  in  international  oil  prices  will  obviously  be  a  positive 
factor for the world economy, but concerns are emerging about possible adverse effects as 
well,  such  as  the  triggering  of  economic  crises  in  oil-producing  countries  and  a  resultant 
possibility of international financial market unrest. 
Against this backdrop, the top priorities for the Korean economy this year are strengthening 
its  economic  fundamentals  and  boosting  its  growth  potential  through  spurring  structural 
reform of the overall economy. The Korean government has chosen structural reform as its 
number one priority in mapping out this year’s economic policy directions. However, putting 
such  words  into  action  without  setbacks  is  as  important  as  the  drawing  up  of  appropriate 
plans. Economic agents including firms, financial institutions and households need to realize 
that  they  can  enjoy  the  fruits  of  growth  for  a  long  period  of  time  only  if  they  participate  in 
structural reform and endure the resulting pains. 
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea! 
I would like to touch now on the tasks that we will need to focus on this year. 
First of all, we should conduct our monetary policy in such a way as to support the recovery 
of economic growth on a foundation of price stability, while also paying attention to financial 
stability. Looking ahead, as it is expected that inflation will remain low amid an only modest 
recovery of domestic economic activity for a considerable time, it is desirable for the Bank to 
maintain  its  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance.  In  this  process,  given  that  economic 
uncertainties remain high we will need to continuously monitor changes in the situations of 
economic growth, financial stability and price movements. 
As I mentioned earlier, in order to secure the effectiveness and credibility of monetary policy 
it is essential that we implement our policies in a timely manner and send consistent policy 
signals  by  increasing  our  accuracy  in  economic  forecasting.  We  should  put  greater  efforts 
into improving our economic forecasting models and the procedures for outlook forecasting. 
We should in addition continuously work to improve our monthly Monetary Policy Statement 
and biannual Monetary Policy Report, so that they can be more effectively utilized as tools 
for communicating with the market. 
This year we have to set the inflation target that we will apply from the year after. To this end 
we need to seek an appropriate level of inflation supporting sustainable growth of the Korean 
economy,  based  upon  a  comprehensive  and  systematic  analysis  of  changes  in  the 
environment for inflation since the global financial crisis. We should find the most appropriate 
inflation target, and also thoroughly analyze the target’s application time horizon, tolerance 
range and target indicators. 
We will also need to devote our best efforts to securing financial stability, which has grown in 
its importance as a new central bank mandate. Inasmuch as external risk factors spread to 
the domestic economy mainly through the financial and foreign exchange markets, we need 
to  work  to  continuously  monitor  the  international  financial  markets  and  take  preemptive 
measures in response when signs of risk are detected. The recent surge in household debt 
could be a result reflecting the effects of the policies taken by the government and the Bank 
of Korea, but it is also a sign of the build-up of risk. We thus need to monitor the household 
debt-related risk more closely, and devote active efforts to mitigating it in cooperation with 
the  government  and  the  other  authorities  concerned.  Greater  efforts  will  be  made  to 
strengthen  financial  system  stability,  by  for  example  shortening  the  cycle  for  review  of 
systemic  risks  in  response  to  the  rapid  changes  in  our  financial  environment,  and  by 
establishing  an  oversight  framework  for  FinTech,  which  can  affect  the  payment  and 
settlement system considerably. 
For the successful implementation of structural reform, it is required of us that we conduct a 
serious study of the roles of the central bank and the policy tools that it can employ. Since 
the  global  financial  crisis,  the  policy  operation  targets  and  tools  of  major  country  central 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  banks  have  changed  dramatically,  and  in  Korea  as  well  calls  for  redefining  the  role  of  the 
central bank are continuing. Much more study of how to set the future of the Bank of Korea is 
thus also essential. 
Dear fellow colleagues! 
Upon my appointment as Governor of the Bank of Korea last year, I mentioned three points 
related to internal management. I vowed to improve the management administration system 
and the methods of work that were limiting the efficiency in carrying out our duties, and to 
modify  the  organization  of  the  Bank  of  Korea  to  enable  it  to  more  faithfully  fulfil  its  innate 
function as a central bank. Related to human resource allocation, I made clear that I will put 
an emphasis on the personal performance and reputation built up over a long period of time. 
These  promises  of  mine  are  being  put  into  action  step-by-step.  Your  views  on  tasks  for 
management  improvement  were  gathered  and  those  recognized  as  necessary  have  been 
wholeheartedly accepted. Our organization will be reshaped in the direction of improving our 
communication  with  the  financial  markets,  expanding  our  study  and  research  functions 
related to monetary policy, and carrying out our financial stability function more effectively. 
Personnel  management  will  be  continuously  dealt  with  in  a  fair  manner,  based  upon  the 
proposed standards. 
However,  the  management  administration  system,  the  organization  and  our  personnel 
management are no more than just hardware for performing our work well. And no matter 
how good the hardware is, the whole system will be unable to carry out its function properly if 
its software is inadequate. And what we need to do now is to update the software that runs 
the system called the Bank of Korea, meaning our attitudes and the way in which we work. 
More than anything, I hope that you will all try to work in more flexible and active manners. In 
this  rapidly  changing  economic  environment,  if  we  merely  follow  precedent  and  work 
passively there is a risk that we may miss something critical. I would like to ask our BOK staff 
to always deliberate on the current issues in the overall Korean economy and on the Bank of 
Korea’s role. If more BOK staff deliberate deeply, with a sense of ownership, we can come 
up with better ideas that will lead us to develop more feasible and timely policy measures. 
It is also important to be enthusiastic about and devoted to our work. Some of you may feel 
that your work is trivial, but your work exists because it is indispensable to the Bank of Korea. 
We need to bear in mind that if one part of a spacecraft breaks down, even just a small part, 
then that big spacecraft may explode in midair. If we realize deeply that our work does truly 
matter, then our enthusiasm for it will naturally increase. 
My dear colleagues! 
This  year  will  be  a  more  difficult  time  than  ever  before.  We  have  already  successfully 
overcome great hardships in the past, however, such as the foreign exchange crisis of 1997 
and  the  recent  global  financial  crisis,  and  in  doing  so  I  am  proud  to  say  that  the  Bank  of 
Korea  played  a  substantial  role.  If  on  top  of  your  superb  capabilities  and  talent  your  work 
attitude is also newly strengthened, then there is no doubt that we will be able to contribute 
greatly to helping our Korean economy overcome its current difficulties and take another step 
forward. 
In welcoming the new year, I wish all of you in our Bank of Korea family very abundant health 
and happiness. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
