  Christopher Kent: Monetary policy transmission – what’s known and 
what’s changed 
Public lecture by Mr Christopher Kent, Assistant Governor (Economic) of the Reserve Bank 
of Australia, at the Australian National University, Canberra, 15 June 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found on the Reserve Bank of Australia’s website. 
I thank Laura Berger-Thomson, Adam Cagliarini, Gianni La Cava and Matthew Read for excellent suggestions 
and assistance in preparing these remarks. 
Introduction 
1. 
I’d like to thank Rohan Pitchford and Martin Richardson for organising this event. It’s great to 
be back at the ANU, where almost 30 years ago I was embarking on my study of botany just 
across  campus,  with  some  economics  on  the  side  for  good  measure.  It  was  my  dislike  of 
compulsory chemistry classes led me down that side path. 
Tonight  I  want  to  talk  about  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  on  the  economy.  Interest  rates 
have  been  at  very  low  levels  for  some  time.  Yet  economic  growth  is  below  trend,  the 
unemployment rate is relatively high and domestic inflationary pressures are well contained. 
This  is  expected  to  remain  the  case  for  a  time.  It’s  natural  then  to  ask  whether  monetary 
policy is less effective than in the past. 
Almost  20  years  ago,  Stephen  Grenville,  who  was  in  my  current  role  at  the  time,  gave  a 
comprehensive  account  of  what  we  knew  and  didn’t  know  about  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy in Australia.1 The structure of the economy has changed since then in ways 
that may have altered the transmission mechanism. 
So it is timely on two counts to consider how the monetary policy transmission mechanism is 
operating in the current environment. 
2. 
How monetary policy works (in theory) 
Overview of the transmission mechanism 
2.1 
In  responding  to  cyclical  developments  and  inflation  pressures,  monetary  policy  has  a 
significant influence on aggregate demand and inflation. The transmission of interest rates 
through  the  economy  can  be  roughly  described  as  follows.  I’ll  focus  on  an  easing  of 
monetary policy. 
1. 
2. 
The Reserve Bank lowers the overnight cash rate. 
Financial markets update expectations about the future path of cash rates and the 
structure of deposit and lending rates are quickly altered. 
Over time, households and firms respond to lower interest rates by increasing their 
demand for credit, reducing their saving and increasing their (current) demand for 
goods, services and assets (such as housing and equities). 
Other things equal, rising demand increases the prices of non-tradable goods and 
services.  The  price-setting  behaviour  of firms  depends  on  demand conditions  and 
3. 
4. 
                                                
1  Grenville S (1995), “The Monetary Policy Transmission Process: What Do We Know? (And What Don't We 
Know?)”, Talk to Australian Business Economists, Sydney, 28 August. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the cost of inputs, including of labour. Higher aggregate demand leads to increased 
labour demand and a rise in wages. 
The transmission mechanism depends crucially on how monetary policy affects households’ 
and  firms’  expectations.  Expectations  about  the  future  path  of  the  cash  rate  will  affect 
financial market prices and returns, asset prices and the expected prices of goods, services 
and factors of production (including labour). Expectations of more persistent changes in the 
cash rate will have larger effects. 
The  extent  to  which  lower  interest  rates  lead  to  extra  demand  will  depend  on  how 
households and businesses alter their behaviour regarding borrowing and investing, as well 
as consuming and saving. These responses are often described as occurring via a number 
of different channels. 
How interest rates affect demand – various channels 
2.2 
The exchange rate channel is one way in which interest rates affect demand. Lower interest 
rates  contribute  to  an  exchange  rate  depreciation  by  reducing  returns  to,  and  hence  the 
demand for, domestic assets relative to foreign currency-denominated assets. A depreciation 
increases  the  prices  of  foreign  products  relative  to  domestic  products.  This  leads  to  a 
switching of demand towards domestically produced goods and services. (A lower exchange 
rate also leads directly to an increase in import prices.) 
Many  macroeconomic  models  emphasise  intertemporal  substitution  as  the  primary 
transmission  channel.  Households  and  businesses  make  decisions  about  whether  to  save 
more or less now so as to spend more or less later. Lower interest rates provide less reward 
for saving, thereby encouraging more expenditure in the near term (and less further out). 
Decreases in interest rates will boost asset prices, which can have a number of effects. First, 
it  boosts  investment  in  housing,  equipment  and  other  capital  goods  as  it  becomes  less 
expensive to build than to buy (this is likely to be important, although empirical evidence of 
the relevance of the ‘q-ratio’ is weak). Second, households typically respond to an increase 
in  their  net  worth  by  consuming  a  little  more  at  each  point  in  time.  This  is  known  as  the 
wealth  channel,  which  appears  important  in  the  Australian  context.  The  balance  sheet 
channel is closely related. Rising net worth makes it easier to borrow, with higher collateral 
values making lending a less risky proposition. 
The cash-flow channel appears to be an important part of the transmission mechanism in 
Australia.  Changes  in  interest  rates  affect  households’  and  businesses’  cash flows.  If  they 
face liquidity or borrowing constraints, an increase in cash flows will typically lead to more 
spending.2  For  example,  a  decrease  in  interest  rates  lowers  interest  payments  for 
households  with  variable-rate  mortgages,  leaving  them  with  more  disposable  income  to 
spend.  At  the  same  time,  cash  flows  will  be  lower  than  otherwise  for  those  with  interest-
earning  assets  and  they  may  choose  to  restrict  their  spending.  Notwithstanding  this  latter 
effect, decreases in interest rates can be expected to increase demand through this channel. 
This reflects the fact that the household sector in Australia is a net borrower, by which I mean 
that  its  interest  bearing  liabilities  are  greater  than  its  interest-earning  assets.3  Moreover,  it 
seems  plausible  that marginal  propensities to  spend  are generally  higher for  debtors  (who 
may face credit constraints) than for creditors. 
                                                
2   Unconstrained  households  can  adjust  their  borrowing  so  as  to  smooth  their  consumption  in  the  face  of 
temporary fluctuations in income. 
In a closed economy context (with no public sector), a net debt position of the household sector would imply 
that  the  corporate  sector  is  lending  to  households.  In  such  a  world,  lower  interest  rates  would  benefit 
households with debt, but at the expense of lower payments to households that own the corporate sector. In 
this  case,  the  cash-flow  channel  would  depend  on  differences  in  marginal  propensities  to  consume  across 
different types of households. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
3  
2 
   That’s a rough sketch of the theory of the transmission mechanism. What can we say about it 
in practice and how might it have changed over time? 
Estimates of the overall effect of monetary policy 
3. 
It is difficult enough to estimate the strength of the monetary policy transmission mechanism 
in  terms  of  its  effect  on  the  economy  overall.  It  is  harder  still  to  separately  identify  the 
strength  of  each  of  the  various  channels.  A  key  challenge  is  disentangling  the  effect  of 
monetary  policy  from  other  influences,  such  as  foreign  developments  or  changes  in  fiscal 
policy. This requires models that simultaneously account for these and other forces. 
There are a wide range of model estimates from which to choose, each capturing different 
aspects  of  the  ways  in  which  the  world  works  in  reality.  For  illustrative  purposes,  let  me 
mention  just  one  set  of  recent  estimates  provided  by  some  of  my  colleagues  using  a  so-
called  Dynamic  Stochastic  General  Equilibrium  (DSGE)  model.4  Consider  the  estimated 
effects of a decrease in the cash rate of 100 basis points. This will lead GDP to be higher 
than  otherwise  by  between  about  ½  and  ¾  of  a  percentage  point  over  the  course  of  two 
years (Graph 1). Inflation is estimated to rise by somewhat less than ¼ percentage point per 
annum over 2–3 years. These estimates are close to those of other models.5 
Estimates from this DSGE model tentatively suggest that the overall effect of monetary policy 
has  not  changed  significantly  in  recent  years.  In  particular,  estimates  of  the  ‘endogenous’ 
relationships in the model based on data up to 2008 (after which interest rates have been 
notably  lower)  are  about  the  same  as  estimates  based  on  data  to  the  present  day.  This 
suggests  that  the  period  of  below-trend  growth  in  GDP  over  the  past  few  years  may  not 
reflect  a  change  in  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism.  Rather,  the  model 
attributes  below-trend  growth  to  sizeable  exogenous  forces  or  shocks.  The  sharp  fall  in 
commodity prices has played an important role of late. Also, weakness in private investment 
– beyond that which can be explained by subdued domestic demand and falling commodity 
prices – has made a sizeable contribution to below-trend growth. The model also suggests 
that consumption growth has been a bit weaker than in the past. 
These estimates provide some tentative evidence that the overall effect of monetary policy is 
neither  more  nor  less  effective  than  in  the  past.  However,  it  may  be  that  it’s  too  early  to 
identify  any  structural  change  with  the  data  to  hand.  Alternatively,  the  effect  of  monetary 
policy on overall activity and inflation might be close to its historical average, but this could 
mask changes in its effects across different parts of the economy or variation in the relative 
strength of the different channels from one episode to the next. 
Estimates of some channels of monetary policy 
4. 
I’ll consider this possibility by looking more closely at the behaviour of dwelling construction 
and household consumption. I’ll leave to one side the effects of monetary policy on business 
                                                
4   See Rees D, P Smith and J Hall (2015), “A Multi-sector Model of the Australian Economy ,”  RBA  Research 
Discussion Paper No 2015-07. This paper does not explicitly model all of the various channels of monetary 
policy referred to above but the effect of a change in monetary policy on activity and inflation can loosely be 
interpreted as the operation of all of the relevant channels on these variables. 
5   For  example,  see  Dungey  M  and  A  Pagan  (2000),  ‘A  Structural  VAR  Model  of  the  Australian  Economy’, 
Economic  Record,  76(235),  pp  321–342;  Berkelmans  L  (2005),  ‘Credit  and  Monetary  Policy:  An  Australian 
SVAR’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2005–06; Bjørnland H (2009), ‘Monetary Policy and Exchange 
Rate Overshooting: Dornbusch Was Right After All’, Journal of International Economics, 79(1), pp 64–77; and 
Jääskelä  J  and  K  Nimark  (2011),  ‘A  Medium-scale  New  Keynesian  Open  Economy  Model  of  Australia’, 
Economic Record, 87(276), pp 11–36. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
investment  and  external  trade.6  I’d  note  though  that  a  further  rise  in  the  growth  rate  of 
household  expenditure  should  contribute,  in  time,  to  a  pick-up  in  non-mining  business 
investment. So too would a further depreciation of the exchange rate, which would raise the 
demand for domestic production. We have argued that a further exchange rate depreciation 
appears likely and necessary, particularly given the large declines in commodity prices this 
year. 
Responsiveness of dwelling construction 
4.1 
Dwelling construction is typically the most interest-rate sensitive component of expenditure in 
the  Australian  economy.  It  is  growing  strongly  in  response  to  low  interest  rates,  rising  by 
about 9 per cent over the past year (Graph 2). 
The results of a standard ‘single-equation’ reduced-form model suggest that the response (to 
date)  of  residential  building  approvals  to  lower  interest  rates  and  higher  housing  prices  is 
broadly consistent with historical experience.7 
Although the behaviour of construction investment over the past few years is not unusual, it 
is  possible  that  with  a  period  of  very  low  rates  there  will  be  some  limit  as  to  how  much 
demand for dwelling construction can be brought forward from the future. 
It is also possible that a period of very low interest rates will eventually lead to higher inflation 
for  land  and  construction  work,  as  is  normally  required  to  bring  forth  more  supply  of  a 
particular  good  or  service.  These  pressures  might  arise  from  a  depletion  of  suitable  land 
available for development or a need to attract more developers and workers into the industry. 
In such circumstances, any further increases in construction demand would tend to push up 
prices  of  existing  and  new  dwellings.  This  could  occur  via  increases  in  land  prices, 
construction wages, developers’ margins or some combination of all three. The direct effect 
of additional demand for construction on economic activity would be less than in the case of 
ample spare capacity. But such a situation would still provide support to aggregate demand 
in other ways, including via the operation of the balance-sheet and wealth channels. 
There  is  evidence  of  some  tightening  in  supply  in  pockets  of  the  country.  In  some  cities, 
stocks  of  unsold  lots  suitable  for  development  appear  to  be  unusually  low  (Graph  3). 
Shortages are most evident in Sydney, where greenfield land releases have not kept pace 
with recent strong demand. Also, some of the Bank’s liaison contacts are concerned that the 
stock of suitable sites for apartment developments in Sydney has been depleted in the past 
few years. 
There  is  little  evidence  of  labour  supply  constraints  outside  a  few  trades  and  professional 
roles. However, inflation of building material prices has risen and the Bank’s liaison suggests 
that  some  builders  have  increased  margins  over  the  past  year  or  so.  Consistent  with  this, 
inflation in new dwelling costs has risen to be almost 2 percentage points above its average 
over  the  inflation-targeting  period;  although,  it  is  still  below  that  seen  when  dwelling 
construction was strong in the early 2000s. 
Despite the potential emergence of some constraints affecting the supply of new dwellings in 
pockets  of  the  country,  there  appears  to  be  scope  for  strong  growth  in  new  dwelling 
                                                
6  
I’ve  said  quite  a  bit  about  the  difficulty  of  modelling  business  investment.  See  Kent  C  (2014),  ‘Non-mining 
Business Investment – Where to from Here?’, Address to the Bloomberg Summit, Sydney, 16 September. It is 
often difficult to find a significant empirical relationship between interest rates and business investment. For a 
discussion of how businesses respond to changes in interest rates see Lane K and T Rosewall (2015), ‘Firms’ 
Investment Decisions and Interest Rates’, RBA Bulletin, June, forthcoming. 
It  appears  that  there  might  be  a  slightly  longer  delay  between  the  time  approvals  are  granted  and  the 
construction of housing than in the past. This is likely to reflect the larger share of higher-density dwellings, 
which take longer to complete than detached dwellings. For more information on this point, see RBA (2015), 
‘Box C: The Cycle in Dwelling Investment’, Statement on Monetary Policy, May, pp 43– 45. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
7  
4 
   construction in other parts of the country. Moreover, alterations and additions activity could 
pick  up. This  used to  account for  about  45  per cent  of total  dwelling  construction,  but  has 
declined over the past few  years, despite lower interest rates and the sizeable increase in 
dwelling prices. 
In short, there are some signs of tightening supply conditions in pockets of the country, but 
dwelling construction overall is responding to low interest rates much as it always has done. 
Consumption and the behaviour of borrowers and savers 
4.2 
What about the effect of low interest rates on household consumption? 
This  can  be  modelled  in  a  simple  way  by  linking  household  consumption  to  disposable 
income  and  household  wealth.  In  such  a  model,  lower  interest  rates  affect  consumption 
indirectly by increasing household disposable income and boosting both housing and equity 
prices.8 
This  simple  model  (like  the  DSGE  model  results  I  discussed)  provides  some  tentative 
evidence that consumption growth has been a bit weaker over recent years than suggested 
by historical experience. Much of that history, however, captures the period of adjustment to 
easier  access  to  credit  from  the  early  1990s  to  the  mid  2000s.  At  that  time,  household 
indebtedness increased substantially and the saving ratio declined to be well below earlier 
norms (Graph 4).9 So in a way, the more recent experience could be regarded as the more 
standard response. Indeed, the behaviour of late appears more sustainable than that of the 
previous episode.10  
One  aspect  of  this  change  in  behaviour  is  evident  in  households  injecting  equity  into  the 
housing  stock  over  recent  years.  That  is,  their  net  new  spending  on  housing  assets  has 
exceeded their borrowing secured over housing. This stands in stark contrast to the period of 
strong  housing  market  conditions  in  the  first  half  of  the  2000s,  which  saw  households 
withdrawing housing equity to help finance their consumption (Graph 5).11  
As I just mentioned, the experience of recent years is characterised by slightly lower growth 
of  consumption  than  might  have  been  expected.  However,  the  responsiveness  of 
consumption to disposable incomes and wealth does not appear to have changed, at least in 
a statistically significant way. 
There are two possible explanations for this observation. First, the growth of consumption of 
late could be affected by factors other than the stance of monetary policy. Second, it may be 
that 
transmissions  channels  affecting 
consumption has changed, but in ways that are difficult to identify using models of aggregate 
household  behaviour.  Although  it  is  hard  to  be  definitive,  my  sense  is  that  both  these 
explanations are likely to be true. 
the  various  monetary  policy 
the  strength  of 
                                                
8   Estimates of wealth effects tend to differ somewhat based on the exact data and methodology used in their 
estimation.  Previous  work  by  Bank  staff  suggests  that  households  consume  between  3  and 4  cents  out  of 
every extra dollar of housing wealth. For examples, see Dvornak N and M Kohler (2003), ‘Housing Wealth, 
Stock Market Wealth and Consumption: A Panel Analysis for Australia’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 
2003–07  and  Windsor  C,  J  Jääskelä  and  R  Finlay  (2013),  ‘Home  Prices  and  Household  Spending’,  RBA 
Research Discussion Paper No 2013–04. 
9   See RBA (2014), Submission to the Financial System Inquiry, March, Chapter 2. 
10   See  Stevens  G  (2013),  ‘Economic  Policy  after  the  Booms’,  Address  to  The  Anika  Foundation  Luncheon, 
Sydney, 30 July. 
11   For a description of housing equity withdrawal, see Schwartz C, T Hampton, C Lewis and D Norman (2006), 
‘A  Survey  of  Housing  Equity  Withdrawal  and  Injection  in  Australia’,  RBA  Research  Discussion  Paper  No 
2006–08. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Let  me  start  with  changes  affecting  the  cash-flow  channel.  Net  interest  payments  of 
households are now more responsive to changes in interest rates than they were a decade 
or more ago (at least in the short term). To illustrate the magnitude of this, we can estimate 
the  effects  of  a  100  basis  point  reduction  in  the  cash  rate  on  net  interest  payments  (as  a 
share of household disposable incomes; Graph 6).12  
There  has  been  a  noticeable  increase  in  households’  holdings  of  interest-earning  assets 
(such as bank deposits) over recent years (Graph 7). But despite this, a reduction in interest 
rates still lowers households’ net interest payments, and by much more than was the case in 
earlier decades. This larger response reflects the substantial increase in housing credit from 
the early 1990s to the mid 2000s. 
By  itself,  the  greater  responsiveness  of  net  interest  payments  implies  that  the  cash-flow 
channel should be stronger now than it was previously. Other things equal, we might have 
expected  that  the  stronger  effect  of  interest  rates  on  the  average  household’s  cash  flows, 
and the operation of the other channels of monetary policy, would have encouraged a more 
noticeable rise in debt and a larger increase in current consumption in response to very low 
interest  rates.  Yet  household  indebtedness  has  been  relatively  stable  for  some  years  now 
(Graph 7 and Graph 9). While low interest rates may have helped to support consumption 
and debt, other forces appear to have been working in the opposite direction. Moreover, the 
response of consumption and indebtedness will depend on how different types of households 
are responding to these forces. Let me make this clearer with some examples. 
Some  households  may  have  revised  down  their  expectations  for  income  growth  and  may 
also  be  more  uncertain about  their  incomes. This  would  be  consistent  with  the  substantial 
decline in wage growth and the rise in the unemployment rate over the past few years.13 This 
could have caused some households to have become uncomfortable with the levels of debt 
that they had been carrying. Accordingly, many households may have decided to pay down 
their debts faster than they would have in a world of unchanged expectations about incomes, 
thereby  contributing  to  a  period  of  weaker  consumption  growth.  In  such  an  environment, 
lower  interest  rates  help  to  facilitate  ‘deleveraging’,  hastening  the  time  at  which  those 
households will feel more secure about their financial situation. 
There  is  evidence  of  many  households  behaving  in  this  way.  In  particular,  the  rate  of 
mortgage prepayments has increased as interest rates have fallen and more households are 
well ahead of their required schedule of repayments (Graph 8).14, 15 
Also, if we deduct funds held in mortgage offset accounts and ignore investor credit, we can 
see that the rest of household credit has declined by about 4 percentage points as a share of 
household  disposable  income  since  early  2010.  This  is  consistent  with  a  degree  of 
deleveraging among some households, particularly when we consider that low interest rates 
                                                
12   This chart estimates the reaction of cash flows to the cash rate change within a month. Since a larger share of 
deposit  rates  are  fixed  than  are  loan  rates,  this  will  overstate  the  effect  on  cash  flows  over  longer  time 
horizons, though the extent of this bias has not necessarily changed over time in an obvious way. 
13   Jacobs D and A Rush (2015), ‘Why is Wage Growth So Low?’, RBA Bulletin, June, forthcoming. 
14   A  lack  of  data  means  that  we  cannot  make  comparisons  to  earlier  easing  phases  when  indebtedness  was 
lower. 
15   Another  factor  potentially  muting  the  response  of  consumption  to  interest  rate  changes  relates  to  banks’ 
processes for adjusting scheduled mortgage repayments following changes in lending rates. Some banks do 
not decrease scheduled mortgage repayments when interest rates decrease. This means that even though 
the  interest  component  of  the  repayment  has  declined,  the  total  repayment  is  the  same,  resulting  in  many 
borrowers automatically making excess principal repayments. See Thurner M-O and A Dwyer (2013), ‘Partial 
Mortgage Prepayments and Housing Credit Growth’, RBA Bulletin, September, pp 31–38. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  might otherwise have encouraged a general increase in this type of credit over that period 
(Graph 9).16 
What about those households that rely on interest-bearing assets? Their disposable incomes 
are  lower  than  otherwise  given  the  sizeable  decline  in  interest  rates.17  Accordingly,  such 
households may be reluctant to maintain consumption by either running down their pool of 
liquid assets, or accessing capital gains they may have enjoyed on any housing or equities 
that  they  hold.  Such  behaviour  would  contribute  to  the  growth  of  aggregate  consumption 
being less responsive to a decline in interest rates than in the past. 
Finally, let’s consider those households with some spare funds to invest. The very low level 
of  interest  rates  may  have  prompted  such  households  to  search  for  yield.  Many  of  these 
households  have  combined  those  spare  funds  with  new  debt  to  purchase  housing  for  the 
purposes of investment. Indeed, the strong growth of investor housing loans has driven the 
growth  in  household  debt  (as  a  share  of  disposable  incomes)  over  recent  years  and 
contributed  to  a  rise  in  both  housing  prices  and  dwelling  construction.  While  this  may  not 
directly contribute to a rise in consumption of households undertaking the investment, it will 
support overall economic activity nonetheless. 
Conclusions 
Monetary policy is clearly  working to support demand, although it is working against some 
strong  headwinds.  These  include  the  significant  decline  in  mining  investment,  fiscal 
consolidation at state and federal levels and the exchange rate, which continues to offer less 
assistance than would normally be expected in achieving balanced growth in the economy. 
Model estimates that control for these and other forces provide tentative evidence that the 
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism,  in  aggregate,  is  about  as  effective  as  usual. 
However, it may be too early to pick up a statistically significant change using such models. 
As usual, dwelling construction is growing strongly in response to low interest rates, and this 
is making some contribution to the growth of aggregate demand and employment. It may be 
that  in  parts  of  the  country,  any  further  substantial  increases  in  residential  construction 
activity  might  run  up  against  some  supply  constraints,  putting  further  upward  pressure  on 
housing prices. As the Bank has noted for some time now, large increases of housing prices, 
if  accompanied  by  strong  growth  of  credit  and  a  relaxation  of  lending  standards,  are  a 
potential risk for economic stability. Accordingly, the Bank is working with other regulators to 
assess and contain such risks that may arise from the housing market. 
Consumption growth has picked up since 2013. But it is still a little weaker than suggested by 
historical  experience.  This  may  reflect  a  number  of  factors  including  some  variation  in  the 
ways  that  the  different  channels  of  monetary  policy  are  affecting  households  according  to 
their stage in life. Some indebted households appear to be taking advantage of low interest 
rates to pay down their debts faster than has been the norm, perhaps in response to weaker 
prospects  for  income  growth.  Those  relying  on  interest  receipts  may  feel  compelled  to 
constrain  their  consumption  in  response  to  the  relatively  long  period  of  very  low  interest 
rates. Meanwhile, the search for yield is no doubt playing a role in driving the strong growth 
of investor housing credit. This might provide some indirect support to aggregate demand, 
but this channel is not without risk. 
                                                
16   From mid 2010 to mid 2012, about half of the decline in the dashed line in Graph 9 owed to lower owner-
occupier housing credit (net of offset accounts), but since then it has returned to about the same level as it 
was five years ago (as a share of disposable income). 
17   For further discussion of this issue, see Connolly E, F Fleming and J Jääskelä (2012), ‘Households’s Interest-
bearing Assets‘, RBA Bulletin, December, pp 23’32. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  In  short,  monetary  policy  is  working.  The  transmission  mechanism  may  have  changed  in 
some  respects,  and  this  could  help  to  explain  lower-than-expected  growth  of  consumption 
and  debt  of  late.  But  it  is  hard  to  be  too  definitive.  To  know  more  about  this,  it  would  be 
helpful to better understand the behaviours of different types of households using household-
level data. To use a botanical analogy, to know more about a plant, it’s helpful to observe 
how its different types of cells work. 
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
