  S S Mundra: Indian banking sector – emerging challenges and way 
forward 
Lecture by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, as part of the 
Memorial Lecture series launched by State Bank of Mysore in the memory of His Highness 
Sri Nalwadi Krishnaraja Wadiyar, Bangalore, 29 April 2015. 
 1. 
Shri  Sharad  Sharma,  Managing  Director,  State  Bank  of  Mysore;  Shri  Karthak, 
Regional  Director  for  Karnataka,  RBI;  senior  colleagues  from  the  banking  fraternity;  ladies 
and gentlemen! It is a privilege for me to deliver the inaugural memorial lecture in the honour 
of His Highness Sri Nalwadi Krishnaraja Wadiyar, former Maharaja of Mysore. It is quite apt 
that  a  memorial  lecture  has  been  instituted  by  State  Bank  of  Mysore  in  the  honour  of  Sri 
Krishnaraja  Wadiyar.  The  prophetic  Maharaja  of  Mysore,  during  his  lifetime,  had  earned 
sobriquets  of  being  a  philosopher-king  and  a  ‘Rajarshi’  or  a  “saintly  king”  from  no  less  a 
person than the Father of the Nation. It is a glowing testimony of his popularity and prowess 
that Mysore in his times was regarded as “the best administered state in the world”. As Lord 
Sankey  noted  “princes from  other  sections  of India  were  sent  to  Mysore  for  administrative 
training” and hence, holding this memorial lecture at this newly opened learning Centre holds 
an  added  significance.  During  his  reign,  Maharaja  Wadiyar  worked  towards  social  causes 
like poverty alleviation and economic regeneration by improving rural reconstruction, public 
health,  industry  and  education;  some  of  the  goals  that  the  policy  makers  are  presently 
pursuing with support from the banking sector. 
2.  
The banks are the lifelines of the economy and play a catalytic role in activating and 
sustaining  economic  growth,  especially,  in  developing  countries  and  India  is  no  exception. 
Our banking system, at the present juncture is, however, facing significant challenges from 
several quarters. These challenges, if not addressed quickly and adequately, may result in 
loss  of  opportunities  as  and  when  the  economic  growth  starts  picking  up  momentum.  In  a 
sense,  it  has  implications  for  both-  the  banks  as  well  as  for  the  economy  as  a  whole, 
because  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  a  strong  banking  system  is  one  of  the  essential  pre-
requisites  in  the  quest  for  growth.  In  my  lecture  today,  I  intend  to  focus  on  the  economic 
landscape and the emerging challenges for the banking system at the current juncture. 
Macroeconomic landscape 
3.  
Since the onset of the Financial Crisis in 2008, the global economy has continued to 
face  rough  weather  and  the  Indian  economy  and  our  banking  system  have  not  remained 
immune.  Recovery  has  been  moderate  and  sometimes  uneven.  Different  jurisdictions 
continue to be tormented by financial fragilities and macroeconomic imbalances. Geopolitical 
risks  surrounding  oil  prices  and  the  uneven  effects  of  currency  and  commodity  price 
movements  also  pose  significant  threat  to  economic  stability.  Sustenance  of  highly 
accommodative  monetary  policy  in  the  Advanced  Economies  has  also  created  monetary 
policy challenges in emerging markets like India. 
Challenges for the banking system 
It  is  against  this  challenging  backdrop  that  the  banking  system  in  India  has  been 
4.  
operating for a relatively long period of time which has resulted in an adverse impact on the 
asset quality, capital adequacy and profitability of our banks. But the tough situation in which 
the  banking  system  finds  itself  is  also  attributable  in  a  large  measure  to  the  bankers’ 
inexperience and aggression. Let me delve upon these challenges and the way forward in a 
bit of detail. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Asset quality 
i)  
Though  on  the  whole,  the  banking  system  has  remained  resilient,  asset  quality  has  seen 
sustained  pressure  due  to  continued  economic  slowdown.  The  levels  of  gross  non-
performing advances (GNPAs) and net NPAs (NNPAs) for the system have been elevated. 
As per preliminary data received at RBI for March 15, while the GNPAs have increased to 
4.45% for the system as a whole, the NNPAs have also climbed up to 2.36%. When seen in 
isolation, the NPA ratios do not appear very distressing; however, if we add the portfolio of 
restructured  assets  to  the  GNPA  numbers,  this  rises  alarmingly.  Stressed  Assets  Ratio 
(Gross  NPA+  Restructured  Standard  Advances  to  Gross  Advances)  for  the  system  as  a 
whole  stood  at  10.9%  as  at  the  end  of  March  2015.  The  level  of  distress  is  not  uniform 
across  the  bank  groups  and  is  more  pronounced  in  respect  of  public  sector  banks.  The 
Gross  NPAs  for  PSBs  as  on  March  2015  stood  at  5.17%  while  the  stressed  assets  ratio 
stood at 13.2%, which is nearly 230 bps more than that for the system. 
It is pertinent here to also note the observations made in the Global Financial Stability Report 
released  by  IMF  recently.  Referring  to  the  high  levels  of  corporate  leverage,  the  report 
highlights that 36.9 per cent of India’s total debt is at risk, which is among the highest in the 
emerging economies while India’s banks have only 7.9 per cent loss absorbing buffer, which 
is among the lowest. While these numbers might need an independent validation, regardless 
of that, it underscores the relative riskiness of the asset portfolio of the Indian banks. 
As  you  all  know,  RBI  has  taken  various  steps  to  improve  the  system’s  ability  to  deal  with 
corporate  and  financial  institution  distress.  This  includes  issuance  of  guidelines  on  “Early 
Recognition  of  Financial  Distress,  Prompt  Steps  for  Resolution  and  Fair  Recovery  for 
Lenders: Framework for Revitalising Distressed Assets in the Economy, detailed guidelines 
on  formation  of  Joint  Lenders’  Forum  (JLF),  Corrective  Action  Plan  (CAP),  ‘Refinancing  of 
Project Loans’, ‘Sale of NPAs by Banks’ and other regulatory measures, which emphasized 
the need for early recognition of financial distress and for taking prompt steps for rectification, 
restructuring  or  recovery,  thereby  ensuring  that  interests  of  lenders  and  investors  are 
protected. 
Various reports that I get suggest that the implementation of JLF framework needs further 
improvement  on  the  ground  level.  We  have  received  representations  from  bigger  lenders 
about non-cooperation from a few lenders. On the other hand, smaller lenders have voiced 
their  concerns  about  being  arm  twisted  by  bigger  lenders.  Unless,  there  is  proper  co-
ordination between the interested parties, all the revival efforts are likely to fall flat. 
RBI had given a road map for ending the regulatory forbearance on asset classification of 
restructured  accounts  long  back  and  accordingly,  the  forbearance  has  come  to  an  end  on 
March  31,  2015.  There  has  been  a  lot  of  clamor  from  all  quarters  for  extending  this 
forbearance.  Our  stand  on  this  issue  has  been  absolutely  clear.  I  wish  to  highlight  that 
‘Restructuring’ per se is not necessarily a forbidden word. It is a legitimate financial activity 
practiced the world over to help the borrowers tide over short term problems and to preserve 
economic  value  in  the  system.  I  don’t  know  why  restructuring  a  loan  which  is  under  short 
term stress should not be done. What we are saying is that, the banks must acknowledge the 
problem,  admit  that  the  account  is  facing  stress  as  of  now,  but  is  expected  to  recover  in 
future. Hence, make a small provision and reverse it when the account becomes satisfactory 
and  starts  paying.  Staying  in  denial  mode  does  not  help  anyone  especially  in  an 
interconnected  world  where  regulation  making  has  become  global  and  so  has  the  public 
scrutiny.  Any  forbearance  extended  by  the  regulator  will  be  discounted  by  the  investor/ 
analyst community while assessing the bank’s financials. 
Capital adequacy of banks 
ii)  
Concerns  have  been  raised  about  the  ability  of  our  banks  to  raise  additional  capital  to 
support  their  business  and  I  would  admit  that  these  concerns  are  not  entirely  misplaced, 
especially  for  the  public  sector  banks.  Higher  level  of  capital  adequacy  is  needed  due  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
higher provisioning requirements resulting from deterioration in asset quality, kicking in of the 
Basel III Capital norms, capital required to cover additional risk areas under the risk based 
supervision framework as also to sustain and meet the impending growth in credit demand, 
going forward. 
Though  at  present,  the  banking  system  is  adequately  capitalized,  challenges  are  on  the 
horizon  for  some  of  the  banks.  For  the  system  as  a  whole,  the  CRAR  has  been  steadily 
declining and as at the end of March 2015, it stood at 12.70% as against 13.01% as at the 
end of March 2014. Our concerns are larger in respect of the PSBs where the CRAR has 
declined further to 11.24% from 11.40% over the last year. 
The poor valuations of bank stocks, especially the PSBs, are not helping matters either, as 
raising equity has become difficult. When even the best performing PSBs have been hesitant 
to  tap  the  markets  for  augmenting  their  capital  levels,  it  would  be  difficult  for  the  weaker 
PSBs  to  raise  resources  from  the  market.  There  is  a  constraint  on  the  owners  insofar  as 
meeting the capital needs of the PSBs and hence, the underperforming banks are faced with 
the challenge of looking at newer ways of meeting their capital needs. A singular emphasis 
on  profitability  ratios  (based  on  RoA  and  RoE)  perhaps  fails  to  capture  other  aspects  of 
performance of banks and could perhaps encourage a short term profitability-oriented view 
by  bank  management.  However,  without  getting  into  the  merits  of  this  approach,  from  a 
regulatory stand point, we feel that some of these poorly managed banks could slide below 
the minimum regulatory threshold of capital if they don’t get their acts together soon enough. 
Of course, the pressure may lessen somewhat if, going forward, the asset quality improves 
on account of higher growth, resulting in higher retained earnings for banks. The need of the 
hour  for  all  banks,  and  more  specifically,  in  respect  of  the  PSBs,  is  that  capital  must  be 
conserved and utilized as efficiently as possible. 
LCR framework 
iii)  
As you are aware, the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) regime has kicked in for the banks 
from January 1, 2015 with a minimum requirement of 60% to be gradually increased to 100% 
by January 1, 2019 in a phased manner. The LCR is a ratio of High Quality Liquid Assets 
(HQLA) to the Total Net Cash Outflows prescribed to address the short term liquidity risk of 
banks and the banks would be required to maintain a stock of HQLAs on an ongoing basis 
equal to the Total Net Cash Outflows. 
Banks  have  been  asking  for  reduction  in  SLR  citing  the  implementation  of  the  LCR 
framework.  To  a  certain  extent  their  request  has  merit.  SLR  essentially  serves  the  same 
purpose as the LCR. However, SLR does not assume certain outflow rates for liabilities while 
outflow  and  inflow  rates  under  the  LCR  framework  are  based  on  certain  assumptions  of 
stress. Presently, apart from maintaining LCR at 60%, the banks have to maintain SLR of 
21.5% of the NDTL. Going forward, as the LCR requirements gradually increase, it may be 
desirable to reduce the SLR progressively. Presently, there is a special dispensation wherein 
RBI has permitted banks to reckon up to 7% of the SLR towards LCR (2% of MSF and 5% 
under  FALLCR1).  Our  regulatory  department  is  seized  of  the  issue  and  would  take 
appropriate measures to address this issue going forward. 
Unhedged forex exposures 
iv)  
The  wild  gyrations  in  the  forex  market  have  the  potential  to  inflict  significant  stress  in  the 
books  of  Indian  companies  who  have  heavily  borrowed  abroad.  This  stress,  besides 
impacting repayment of forex liabilities, eventually hampers their debt repayment capability to 
the  domestic  lenders  as  well.  It  is  precisely  with  this  consideration  that  RBI  has  been 
                                                 
1   Facility to Avail Liquidity for Liquidity Coverage Ratio. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
advocating  a  curb  on  the  increasing  tendency  of  the  corporates  to  dollarize  their  debts 
without adequate risk mitigation. 
Our supervision of banks’ books has highlighted the need for the banks to have more robust 
policies  for  risk  mitigation  on  account  of  unhedged  foreign  currency  exposure  of  their 
corporate borrowers. Inadequacies of data further complicate the impact assessment of such 
exposures across the banking system. The banks have been advised to factor in this risk into 
their  policies/  pricing  decision  and  also  devise  means  for  sharing  of  information  on  such 
exposures amongst themselves. Regulatory guidelines have also since been issued outlining 
the capital and provisioning requirements for exposure to entities with significant unhedged 
forex exposures. 
Human resource issues 
v)  
I do not need to emphasize the HR issues in banks. This is a decade of retirement for the 
PSBs  and  I  am  sure  those  working  there  are  already  feeling  the  pinch  of  the  loss  of 
experienced  hands  in  their  day  to  day  operations.  While  the  recruitments  would  be 
happening at the junior levels, there would be a virtual vacuum at the middle and senior level 
for some time to come. The absence of middle management could lead to adverse impact on 
banks’ decision making process as this segment of officers played a critical role in translating 
the top management’s strategy into workable action plans. Some of the major banks are also 
suffering on account of prolonged leadership vacuums at the top. All banks, including those 
in  the  private  sector,  are  witnessing  high  attrition  rates,  giving  rise  to  resource  gaps.  The 
problem  is  set  to  get  accentuated  further  once  the  banks  that  have  been  newly  licensed/ 
likely to be licensed, start hiring. Therefore, bridging resource gaps and managing employee 
turnover are major challenges that banks need to be prepared to address. 
The banks need to continuously enhance the skill levels of their employees so as to remain 
viable and competitive and to take advantage of new opportunities. The banking personnel, 
across the cadres need to be suitably trained to acquire necessary skill sets to perform their 
jobs more efficiently. The biggest challenge is to build capacity at a rate which matches the 
loss  of  existing  talent  and  skills  to  retirement,  poaching  and  resignations.  The  training 
initiatives must ensure that the available talent pool in the banks is able to always keep pace 
with the fast changing ways in which banking is conducted. Of course, in these challenges 
also lie an inherent opportunity for banks to redraw their organizational profile and to create 
HR systems and processes best suited to the needs of the future. 
Revision to the priority sector lending guidelines 
vi)  
The revised priority sector lending guidelines have been released last week. Lending to a few 
new sub-sectors like renewable energy, social infrastructure and to the medium enterprises 
would now be treated as priority sector lending. Concept of a tradable Priority Sector Lending 
Certificate (PSLC) has also been introduced, which would enable the ‘deficit’ banks to buy 
these certificates from ‘surplus’ banks to meet their targets. 
There  is  also  readjustment  in  some  sub-targets,  whereby  the  banks  are  now  required  to 
progressively achieve 8% of lending to Small and Marginal Farmers and 7.5% to the micro 
enterprises  among  the  MSEs  in  a  phased  manner.  This  has  been  brought  about  with  an 
underlying objective of making available finance to the most needy and the most alienated of 
the borrowers. This may probably pose a bit of a challenge initially but I believe with proper 
planning, these targets could be achieved sooner rather than later. 
PMJDY and beyond 
vii)  
I  must  compliment  the  banking  sector  for  wholeheartedly  working  for  the  success  of  the 
PMJDY  scheme.  The  numbers  speak  for  themselves.  More  than  14.5  crore  accounts 
opened. That leads to the question- what next? Flow of individual savings, albeit howsoever 
small combined with flows from direct benefit transfer would be crucial to give an initial push 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
to  keep  these  accounts  active  while  extending  productive/need-based  credit  would  be  the 
second crucial step. The onus is upon all of us to ensure that the window of opportunity that 
has been presented by the opening of such a large number of accounts, is not put to waste 
by allowing the accounts to turn inactive. 
The  credit  absorption  capacity  of  the  farmers  can  be  enhanced  through  consolidation  of 
fragmented landholdings by ushering in land reforms or through pooling of land holdings in a 
SHG  format.  Similarly,  customers  may  also  be  trained  to  undertake  non-farm  activities. 
Efforts  to  enhance  the  credit  absorption  capacity  must  also  be  supplemented  through 
financial literacy and vocational training initiatives. Improved financial literacy would aid the 
inculcation of a savings culture and investment habit amongst the customers, which can be 
leveraged by the banks by offering suitable small savings, investment and pension products. 
A  major  challenge  for  the  banks  would  be  to  manage  their  banking  correspondent  model 
effectively.  The  problems  relating  to  their  viability,  governance,  cash management,  linkage 
and  oversight  from  a  base  branch  need  to  be  quickly  addressed.  The  entire  financial 
inclusion  ecosystem  must  progressively  develop,  if  the  momentum  gathered  under  the 
PMJDY exercise has to be sustained for all-round benefit of all stakeholders. 
viii) Globalization of regulation-making process 
As I alluded to a little earlier, banking regulations are getting increasingly globalized, subject 
of  course  to  certain  national  discretions.  As  members  of  the  standard  setting  bodies  like 
BCBS and FSB, we are committed to implement these regulations in our jurisdictions. There 
is  a  process  for  peer  review  of  regulatory  guidelines  issued  by  various  jurisdictions  to 
ascertain compliance with the global standards, failure to adhere to which would render the 
jurisdiction non-compliant to the standards. While we do participate in the regulation making 
process and suggest modifications to protect the rightful interests of the domestic economy, 
very often, we have to abide by the larger framework. I will give just one example viz. the 
large exposures regime, for which a consultation paper on new SBL/GBL norms has already 
been released by RBI. 
Technology and its impact 
ix)  
Let me briefly touch upon an issue which is relatively much more pertinent for the PSBs, i.e. 
use  of  technology  in  banking.  All  PSBs  are  now  on  CBS  platform  and  have  developed 
capabilities  to  offer  anywhere  banking.  Few  have  also  started  offering  basic  banking 
transactions  on  mobile  for  their  customers.  But  this  is  just  scrapping  the  surface  as  the 
technology  can  be  leveraged  for  a  far  greater  effect.  PSBs  must  be  able  to  leverage 
technology for building data warehouses and then be able to do data mining and analytics. 
The  goal  should  be  to  use  data  for  effective  decision  making  at  various  levels,  including 
product customization, developing business models and delivery channels, etc. 
PSBs must be able to pitch suitable products for their customers through internet and mobile 
banking channels. Traditional businesses are slowly moving on-line and e-commerce is the 
preferred choice of the gen-next customer. The challenge before the PSBs is to upscale their 
capabilities,  train  their  employees  on  the  new  technologies  to  benefit  from  the  possibilities 
that adoption of technology can open up. 
A good thing going for the banks is the current recruitment of youngsters in the work force. 
This  new-generation  staff  is  tech-savvy  and  can  quickly  connect  with  technology.  The 
enterprising  among  them  must  be  accorded  freedom  to  experiment  and  suggest  ways  in 
which the bank could reengineer its processes for its own benefit and that of its customers. 
This  would  require  a  change  in  mind-set  of  the  senior  /  Top  Management  and  this  must 
happen  if  the  PSBs  have  to  compete  efficiently  and  effectively  with  the  private  sector 
counterparts in future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  Treating customers fairly 
x)  
Protection of bank customers has been one of the thrust areas for RBI in recent times. As 
you may be aware, RBI has issued a Charter of Customer Rights based on the global best 
practices. The Charter comprises of following five rights: 
 
 
 
 
 
A model customer rights policy jointly prepared by IBA and BCSBI incorporating these rights 
has been circulated to all banks by IBA. The banks have been advised to prepare a Board 
Approved  Policy  based  on  the  model  policy  before  July  31,  2015.  RBI  may  review  the 
policies framed by the banks and their implementation as part of our supervisory assessment 
over the next 12–18 months. 
Right to Fair Treatment 
Right to Transparency, Fair and Honest Dealing 
Right to Suitability 
Right to Privacy 
Right to Grievances Redress and Compensation 
KYC/AML compliance 
xi)  
Let me now turn to another very important issue which is equally challenging for the private 
sector  banks  as  well  and  that  is,  compliance  with  the  KYC/  AML  norms.  A  majority  of  the 
enforcement action by the banking sector regulator in the recent past has been on account of 
these violations. 
The instances of fake e-mails soliciting unsuspecting customers to make payments to certain 
bank  accounts  as  a  precursor  to  receiving  prize  or  lottery  winnings  from  abroad,  have 
become quite rampant. It is surprising that even well-educated individuals are falling prey to 
such  incredulous  offers.  While  spreading  financial  literacy  remains  a  huge  challenge,  the 
banks  cannot  be  absolved  of  their  responsibilities  in  the  sequence  of  events.  Most  of  this 
money is being transferred through banking channels and obviously, there is a deficiency in 
KYC compliance. Money muling is another common occurrence which highlights deficiencies 
in risk categorization of customers and monitoring of transactions. 
I  am  emphasizing  on  this  issue  because  banks  need  to  be  sensitive  to  the  possibility  of 
regulatory strictures / penalties for non-compliance. Consistent monitoring of transactions is 
necessary  to  prevent  money  muling.  A  few  banks  in  the  past  have  already  been  fined  for 
deficiencies in adherence to KYC/AML norms and with our commitment to comply with the 
FATF norms; I can only forewarn you that the frequency and severity of such penalties would 
rise in future. 
Balance sheet management 
xii)  
Over  the  past  few  years  we  have  witnessed  an  increasing  propensity  to  defer  or  delay 
provisions in an apparent attempt to post higher net profits. Probably, this short term vision is 
also  in  part  attributable  to  short  term  tenure  which  the  CEOs/  CMDs  get.  It  must  be 
appreciated that CEOs/ CMDs would come and go but the institutions are perpetual entities. 
The  only  thing  which  can  perpetuate  their  existence  is  a  stronger  and  healthier  balance 
sheet. It must be realized that the first step towards resolving a problem is to acknowledge its 
existence. The problems which are swept under the carpet for a quarter or two would need to 
be encountered thereafter, with the issue getting further complicated in the interim. 
Making higher provisions would not only add strength to the balance sheet, but also lead to 
better  control  over  tax  out-go  and  the  dividend  pay-out,  besides  adding  credibility  to  the 
bank’s financial statements. While a lower net profit would make headlines for a day or two, 
believe me the savvy long-term investors / analysts do not read too much into the short term 
blips. If they understand that the Management is sincere about repairing the balance sheet, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
they would drive up the valuation of your stocks, which would help you in the long-term. With 
most banks in dire need of capital, the retained earnings need to increase progressively. 
As a part of balance sheet management exercise, the Board/Top Management would have to 
proactively take a call on the likely components of their balance sheets and what shape they 
would like the balance sheet to take in future. The objective of optimal utilization of capital 
would  have  to  be  necessarily  kept  in  mind  while  evolving  balance  sheet  management 
strategies. 
Risk management 
xiii)  
Risk is inevitable in the banking business and hence, a sound risk management framework is 
the touchstone of an efficient bank. The risk management effectively aims at balancing the 
Risk-Return Trade-off which is “maximizing return for a given risk” and “minimizing risk for a 
given return”. The responsibility of setting a risk appetite for the bank as a whole is that of the 
Board and the Top Management. In practice, however, we seldom see the articulation of an 
objective risk appetite statement by the PSBs. If you haven’t set out a risk limit for each type 
of risk that the bank runs and an aggregate risk appetite for the bank as a whole, how do you 
measure  and  monitor  risk?  We  must  understand  that  risk  management  is  integral  to  the 
success  of  the  bank  and  hence,  the  Top  Management  should  strive  to  put  in  place  an 
efficient risk management framework keeping in view the changing market dynamics and the 
regulatory prescriptions. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  I  would  once  again  like  to  invoke  Krishnaraja  Wadiyar  in  whose 
5. 
memory this lecture has been instituted. Maharaja was known to be a man of action, a man 
of deeds and a person of compassion and empathy for his subjects. The bankers present 
here  would  do  a  great  service  to  the  memory  of  the  Maharaja  if  they  could  imbibe  these 
qualities in their day to day operations, particularly while dealing with their customers. 
6.  
As  we  have  noted,  these  are  challenging  times  for  the  banking  sector  but  as  the 
clichéd  proverb  goes  “Every  cloud  has  a  silver  lining”.  The  future  leaders  in  the  banking 
industry  would  be  those  who  identify  this  silver  lining  early  and  initiate  necessary  steps  to 
leverage the opportunity. The impending competition from new banks and the large number 
of new accounts opened under the PMJDY Scheme are two instances that readily come to 
mind of the challenges that could be turned into opportunities. Besides this, banks as the key 
players in the country’s financial system also carry the responsibility of supporting economic 
growth,  once  the  economic  cycle  turns  favourable.  Banks  have  to  prepare  themselves  for 
meeting this responsibility by nurturing a healthier balance sheet. 
I conclude by wishing the State Bank of Mysore management the very best on this occasion 
and thank you all for patient hearing! 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
