  Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
3 September 2015. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council. As usual, let me start with the decisions taken. 
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analysis,  and  in  line  with  our  forward 
guidance, the Governing Council decided to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged. 
Our  asset  purchase  programme  continues  to  proceed  smoothly.  Regarding  non-standard 
monetary policy measures, following the announced review of the public sector purchase 
programme’s issue share limit after the first six months of purchases, the Governing Council 
decided  to  increase  the  issue  share  limit  from  the  initial  limit  of  25%  to  33%,  subject  to  a 
case-by-case  verification  that  this  would  not  create  a  situation  whereby  the  Eurosystem 
would  have  blocking  minority  power,  in  which  case  the  issue  share  limit  would  remain  at 
25%. 
Underlying  our  monetary  policy  assessment  was  a  review  of  recent  data,  new  staff 
macroeconomic  projections  and  an  interim  evaluation  of  recent  market  fluctuations.  The 
information available indicates a continued though somewhat weaker economic recovery and 
a  slower  increase  in  inflation  rates  compared  with  earlier  expectations.  More  recently, 
renewed  downside  risks  have  emerged  to  the  outlook  for  growth  and  inflation.  However, 
owing  to  sharp  fluctuations  in  financial  and  commodity  markets,  the  Governing  Council 
judged it premature to conclude on whether these developments could have a lasting impact 
on the outlook for prices and on the achievement of a sustainable path of inflation towards 
our medium-term aim, or whether they should be considered to be mainly transitory. 
Accordingly, the Governing Council will closely monitor all relevant incoming information. It 
emphasises  its  willingness  and  ability  to  act,  if  warranted,  by  using  all  the  instruments 
available  within  its  mandate  and,  in  particular,  recalls  that  the  asset  purchase  programme 
provides  sufficient flexibility  in  terms  of  adjusting  the size,  composition  and  duration  of  the 
programme. 
In the meantime, we will fully implement our monthly asset purchases of €60 billion. These 
purchases  have  a  favourable  impact  on  the  cost  and  availability  of  credit  for  firms  and 
households.  They  are  intended  to  run  until  the  end  of  September  2016,  or  beyond,  if 
necessary, and, in any case, until we see a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation that 
is  consistent  with  our  aim  of  achieving  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the 
medium term. 
Let  me  now  explain  our  assessment  of  the  available  information  in  greater  detail,  starting 
with the economic analysis. Real GDP in the euro area rose by 0.3% in the second quarter 
of 2015, which was somewhat lower than previously expected. The latest survey indicators 
point to a broadly similar pace of real GDP growth in the second half of this year. Overall, we 
expect  the  economic  recovery  to  continue,  albeit  at  a  somewhat  weaker  pace  than  earlier 
expected,  reflecting  in  particular  the  slowdown  in  emerging  market  economies,  which  is 
weighing  on  global  growth  and  foreign  demand  for  euro  area  exports.  Domestic  demand 
should be further supported by our monetary policy measures and their favourable impact on 
financial conditions, as well as by the progress made with fiscal consolidation and structural 
reforms.  Moreover,  the  decline  in  oil  prices  should  provide  support  for  households’  real 
disposable  income  and  corporate  profitability  and,  therefore,  private  consumption  and 
investment. However, economic growth in the euro area is likely to continue to be dampened 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  by the necessary balance sheet adjustments in a number of sectors and the sluggish pace of 
implementation of structural reforms. 
This assessment is also broadly reflected in the September 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.4% in 2015, 
1.7%  in  2016  and  1.8%  in  2017.  Compared  with  the  June  2015  Eurosystem  staff 
macroeconomic  projections,  the  outlook  for  real  GDP  growth  has  been  revised  down, 
primarily due to lower external demand owing to weaker growth in emerging markets. 
The risks to the euro area growth outlook remain on the downside, reflecting in particular the 
heightened uncertainties related to the external environment. Notably, current developments 
in emerging market economies have the potential to further affect global growth adversely via 
trade and confidence effects. 
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 0.2% in August 
2015,  unchanged  from  June  and  July.  Compared  with  the  previous  month,  this  reflects  a 
further decline in energy price inflation, compensated for by higher price increases for food 
and industrial goods. On the basis of the information available and current oil futures prices, 
annual  HICP  inflation  rates  will  remain  very  low  in  the  near  term.  Annual  HICP  inflation  is 
expected to rise towards the end of the year, also on account of base effects associated with 
the fall in oil prices in late 2014. Inflation rates are foreseen to pick up further during 2016 
and 2017, supported by the expected economic recovery, the pass-through of past declines 
in  the  euro  exchange  rate  and  the  assumption  of  somewhat  higher  oil  prices  in  the  years 
ahead as currently reflected in oil futures markets. However, this increase in annual inflation 
rates is currently expected to materialise somewhat more slowly than anticipated thus far. 
This assessment is also broadly reflected in the September 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation at 0.1% in 2015, 1.1% in 
2016 and 1.7% in 2017. In comparison with the June 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic 
projections, the outlook for HICP inflation has been revised down, largely owing to lower oil 
prices. Taking into account the most recent developments in oil prices and recent exchange 
rates, there are downside risks to the September staff inflation projections. 
In this context, the Governing Council will closely monitor the risks to the outlook for price 
developments over the medium term. We will focus in particular on the pass-through of our 
monetary  policy  measures,  as  well  as  on  global  economic,  financial,  commodity  price  and 
exchange rate developments. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, recent data confirm robust growth in broad money (M3). 
The annual growth rate of M3 was 5.3% in July 2015, compared with 4.9% in June. Annual 
growth in M3 continues to be increasingly supported by its most liquid components, with the 
narrow monetary aggregate M1 growing at an annual rate of 12.1% in July, compared with 
11.7% in June. 
Loan  dynamics  continued  to  improve.  The  annual  rate  of  change  of  loans  to  non-financial 
corporations (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) increased to 0.9% in July, up from 
0.2%  in  June,  continuing  its  gradual  recovery  since  the  beginning  of  2014.  Despite  these 
improvements,  the  dynamics  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  remain  subdued.  They 
continue to reflect the lagged relationship with the business cycle, credit risk, credit supply 
factors, and the ongoing adjustment of financial and non-financial sector balance sheets. The 
annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  households  (adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation) 
increased to 1.9% in July 2015, after 1.7% in June. Overall, the monetary policy measures 
we  have  put  in  place  since  June  2014  provide  clear  support  for  improvements  both  in 
borrowing conditions for firms and households and in credit flows across the euro area. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from the monetary analysis indicates the need to firmly implement the Governing Council’s 
monetary  policy  decisions  and  to  monitor  closely  all  relevant  incoming  information  as 
concerns their impact on the medium-term outlook for price stability. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its 
accommodative stance contributes to supporting economic activity. However, in order to reap 
the  full  benefits  from  our  monetary  policy  measures,  other  policy  areas  must  contribute 
decisively. Given continued high structural unemployment and low potential output growth in 
the  euro  area,  the  ongoing  cyclical  recovery  should  be  supported  by  effective  structural 
policies. Further product and labour market reforms, and particularly actions to improve the 
business  environment,  including  an  adequate  public  infrastructure,  are  vital  to  increase 
productive  investment,  boost  job  creation  and  raise  productivity.  The  swift  and  effective 
implementation of these reforms, in an environment of accommodative monetary policy, will 
not  only  lead  to  higher  sustainable  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  but  will  also  raise 
expectations of permanently higher incomes and accelerate the benefits of reforms, thereby 
making  the  euro  area  more  resilient  to  global  shocks.  Fiscal  policies  should  support  the 
economic  recovery  while  remaining  in  compliance  with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Full 
and consistent implementation of the Pact is crucial for confidence in our fiscal framework. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
