  Már Guðmundsson: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Iceland 
Speech  by  Mr  Már  Guðmundsson,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  at  the 
54th Annual General Meeting of the Central Bank of Iceland, Reykjavík, 26 March 2015. 
 Mr. President; Speaker of Parliament, Minister of Finance and Economic Affairs, Minister of 
the Interior, Directors, and Ambassadors; Ladies and Gentlemen: 
We  have  come  together  today  for  the  54th  Annual  General  Meeting  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Iceland. When we met for the Bank’s Annual Meeting five years ago, the Icelandic economy 
was at the bottom of the economic recession that followed the financial crisis of 2008. The 
future  was  highly  uncertain.  Had  the  economy  hit  bottom?  How  strong would  the  upswing 
be? How much would the unemployment rate fall? Would we be able to bring inflation back 
to  target  and  keep  it  there?  How  would  the  sizeable  debt  owed  by  Iceland’s  central 
government,  households,  firms,  and  the  national  economy  evolve?  How  would  the  newly 
established  domestic-oriented  banks  fare?  Was  Iceland’s  external  position  sustainable? 
When  and  how  would  we  manage  to  lift  the  comprehensive  capital  controls  that  proved 
necessary during the crisis? 
In my speech at that meeting five years ago, I listed three challenges that, in my view, the 
Icelandic authorities faced under the conditions then prevailing. What I said was this: 
First,  it  is  critical  to  allow  the  economy  to  adjust  without  allowing  inflation  or 
unemployment to become entrenched. The goal is a situation in which economic 
slack has disappeared, economic growth is in line with growth in potential output, 
inflation is at the target, and the external position of the economy is sustainable. 
Second, we must establish a financial system that serves Icelandic households 
and domestic business activities and is both efficient and relatively secure. The 
third  challenge  is  that  of  re-establishing  confidence  abroad  in  Iceland’s 
institutional framework, economy, and financial system; repairing the connections 
with foreign financial markets; and ensuring that the Icelandic Government and 
Icelandic companies have access to foreign credit markets once again. 
The economic recovery  was just about to begin  when the 2010 meeting  was held. It then 
gained enough momentum that, in five years’ time, we have returned to pre-crisis GDP levels 
and have eliminated virtually all of the spare capacity in the economy. At the same time, the 
unemployment  rate  has  fallen  sharply  and  is  now  close  to  its  equilibrium  value.  Structural 
reforms could reduce the equilibrium unemployment rate still further in the future, however. 
Inflation is below the inflation target at present, and inflation expectations had subsided to 
target  by  the  turn  of  the  year.  Treasury  debt  has  declined  steadily  since  2011,  and  the 
outlook  is  for  this  trend  to  continue  in  the  years  to  come.  Household  and  corporate  debt 
levels have also declined markedly. The ratio of household debt to disposable income is now 
roughly at 2005 levels, and the ratio of corporate debt to GDP is at its lowest since mid-2004. 
Iceland’s external position has proven to be sustainable. The trade surplus has been around 
8% of GDP since 2009. This is the longest continuous period with a surplus over 5 % of GDP 
in  the  history  of  the  data,  which  extend  back  to  1875.  The  current  account  balance  as  a 
whole has averaged 5.5% of GDP per year; that is, excluding the effects of the failed banks 
and other factors that do not reflect Iceland’s financial burden. The current account balance 
has reduced Iceland’s debt, cutting underlying net external debt almost in half since year-end 
2008, to about 45% of GDP by the end of 2014. But all of this does not change the fact that 
Iceland still faces a balance of payments problem, which is reflected in the fact that a too 
large share of its debt is too short-term, and a part of the debt takes the form of possibly 
volatile ISK assets held by non-residents. This situation could put substantial pressure on the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
exchange rate or the Central Bank’s foreign exchange reserves if these ISK assets were free 
to exit the country. 
The three new commercial banks have also performed well in a number of areas, as can be 
seen  in  various  indicators,  including  their  capital  ratios,  which  have  risen  from  a  2009 
average of 16% to last year’s average of nearly 29%. The initial foreign currency mismatches 
in their balance sheets have been reduced are now within the limits provided for in Central 
Bank rules, and their domestic and foreign liquidity positions have improved. But the banks 
are operating in the shelter of the capital controls, and looking ahead, questions concerning 
their size and efficiency remain to some extent unanswered. 
Many factors have been favourable for us in spite of global headwinds, which were initially 
reflected  in  a  marked  deterioration  in  terms  of  trade  and  are  still  reflected  in  a  weak 
economic  recovery  among  our  trading  partners.  Looking  back  at  the  three  challenges  I 
mentioned a moment ago, we can say in broad terms that the macroeconomic goals have 
been  met  thus  far.  The  financial  system  now  stands  on  much  more  solid  ground.  It  is 
primarily  in  connection  with  the  third  challenge,  of  reintegrating  Iceland  into  international 
capital  markets,  that  more  work  needs  to  be  done.  But  even  in  this  area  we  have  made 
significant progress. GDP growth, a balanced economy, a Treasury surplus, and the Central 
Bank’s foreign currency purchases have created good conditions for the liberalisation of the 
capital  controls.  The  credit  ratings  of  the  sovereign  and  the  commercial  banks  have 
improved. The sovereign regained access to foreign credit markets some time ago, and the 
banks have opened a crack in the door. 
But even though we have made significant progress, the game is not yet won. Debt levels 
are high, rendering borrowers vulnerable to shocks, and the capital controls are still in place. 
Iceland’s macroeconomic balance is good, but fragile. On this score, we face three relatively 
important risks: first, that the interactions between labour market unrest and the turnaround 
from output slack to a positive output gap could undermine price stability and turn the current 
account surplus into a deficit; second, that lifting the capital controls could turn out badly, with 
negative implications for exchange rate stability, inflation, and financial system stability; and 
third,  that  the  global  economic  situation  could  turn  against  us.  Therefore,  we  must  avoid 
complacency, and we must be vigilant if we are to safeguard our recently achieved stability 
and face down the three challenges that I have mentioned just now. 
In some respects, formulating monetary policy is complex at present, as it has been at times 
in the past. The Central Bank’s interest rates were lowered by 0.75 percentage points in the 
final two months of 2014, in response to rapidly falling inflation and the decline of inflation 
expectations to the target. Since then, inflation has dropped still further, falling below 1% in 
December,  triggering  the  submittal  of  a  report  to  the  Government  on  inflation  below  the 
deviation threshold. 
Even  though  inflation  is  now  below  1%,  the  Central  Bank’s  key  interest  rate  has  been 
unchanged at 4.5% so far this year. There are a number of reasons for this. First of all, the 
extremely low inflation rate is due partly to the abrupt drop in global oil and commodity prices 
in the second half of 2014. This drop could prove temporary, but even if not, it is beyond the 
scope of domestic monetary policy. Furthermore, it can be assumed that real wages will rise 
if the decline in oil prices proves long-lived, but the impact on inflation will taper off. Second, 
the inflation outlook is clouded by various domestic uncertainties. The slack in the economy 
is turning around into a positive output gap. There is far more unrest in the labour market 
than might be expected in view of overall macroeconomic conditions and supply and demand 
in the labour market. In regards to the inflation outlook, the most important factor is that some 
groups  have  demanded  extremely  large  pay  increases  that  would  set  inflation  in  motion 
again and call for a strong monetary policy response if they extended to the labour market as 
a whole. The third reason is that inflation expectations, which had subsided to target at the 
beginning of the year, have risen again in recent weeks, probably due to the unrest in the 
labour market. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The  labour  market  situation  is  both  thought-provoking  and  a  source  of  concern.  Wage 
pressures that jeopardise the inflation target are generally interpreted as a sign of a positive 
output  gap  and  excess  labour  demand,  which  call  for  a  tighter  monetary  stance.  Yet  a 
number  of  factors  indicate  that  this  is  not  the  main  explanation  for  the  current  situation. 
Instead, it appears that the consensus on wage differentials has been weakened at the same 
time  that  opening  of  the  labour  market  vis-à-vis  abroad  has  put  pressure  on  wage 
differentials – in some cases, in the direction opposite to that demanded by labour market 
organisations. 
As  Monetary  Policy  Committee  member  Gylfi  Zoëga  pointed  out  recently,  the  greater  the 
sense of cohesion about wage distribution in society, the lower the unemployment rate that is 
consistent with low and stable inflation. Conversely, the weaker that sense of cohesion, the 
less individual worker groups will be willing to participate in creating the public good that is 
price stability, and the higher the equilibrium unemployment rate will have to be. This theory 
is based partly on the work of Ezio Tarantelli, one of Italy’s leading economists in the second 
half of the twentieth century, which shows us that our experience is far from unique. If the 
theory applies to the current situation in Iceland  – and a number of factors indicate that it 
does – increased cohesion in this sense could create the conditions for lower unemployment 
and lower interest rates, but without losing control of inflation. 
Whatever  the  reason,  this  situation  gives  rise  to  the  risk  of  an  outcome  that  is  worse  for 
society as a whole, although some groups may gain at others’ expense. In other words, in 
this situation as in so many others, a cooperative solution is usually better for the whole than 
a conflict solution. Therefore, it is extremely important that the parties involved – particularly 
the social partners and the Government – make every effort to push matters in that direction. 
It is important that the decisions taken in wage negotiations over the next several months be 
based on correct information. The report published jointly by the social partners last month, 
entitled  In  the  Prelude  to  Wage  Negotiations,  contains  cogent  information  on  wage 
developments in recent years. According to the report, the emphasis placed on the lowest 
wages  in  recent  years  has  borne  fruit,  at  least  in  part.  For  example,  office  workers’  and 
general labourers’ wages rose most during the period from 2006 through 2014, and they rose 
in  excess  of  the  general  wage  index.  The  report  also  confirms  what  has  previously  been 
reported, that wages and productivity per hour worked are relatively low in comparison with 
trading  partner  countries  and  that  Icelandic  workers  compensate  somewhat  for  this  with 
longer working hours. This highlights the fact that, in the long run, increased productivity is 
the premise for higher real wages. 
In  this  context,  the  weak  productivity  growth  in  recent  years  could  give  some  cause  for 
concern. On the other hand, it also reflects the growth of labour-intensive sectors such as 
tourism,  which  have  been  supported  by  the  low  real  exchange  rate  and  have  facilitated  a 
more  rapid  decline  in  unemployment  than  would  otherwise  have  been  possible.  It  also 
explains in part why unemployment among young people is  – fortunately – much lower in 
Iceland than in many of our trading partners. When full employment is achieved, productivity 
growth will become more important, however. 
If  attempts  to  ease  the  tension  in  the  labour  market  are  unsuccessful  and  wages  rise  far 
more  than  is  consistent  with  the  inflation  target,  it  will  be  unavoidable  to  respond  by 
tightening the monetary stance; i.e., by raising interest rates. Even if inflation rises early on, 
the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  has  the  tools  it  needs  to  bring  it  back  to  target  over  the 
medium  term.  Higher  interest  rates  will  have  a  negative  effect  on  GDP  growth  and 
employment over time, however. Real wages and the real exchange rate will rise because of 
the  interactions  between  rising  nominal  wages  and  a  tighter  monetary  stance.  In  addition, 
firms would probably respond by slowing down recruitment – perhaps even by cutting back 
on  staff.  There  is  the  risk  that  such  a  turn  of  events  would  be  most  harmful  to  labour-
intensive sectors and workers whose position in the labour market is weakest. It is therefore 
important to find ways to channel the desire to improve standards of living towards measures 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
that are likely to generate more lasting results without jeopardising stability and the economic 
recovery that has brought us this far. 
Honoured  guests:  The  time for  decisive  steps  towards  lifting  the  capital  controls  is  rapidly 
approaching. Some may think this step comes rather late. This is quite understandable. And 
there is no reason to soft-pedal the fact that the capital controls are harmful to the Icelandic 
economy.  It  is  difficult  to  make  a  sufficiently  accurate  estimate  of  the  magnitude  of  the 
negative effects, and I am not sure that the assessments made thus far would all stand up to 
close examination. One thing we do know, however: the detrimental effects escalate as time 
passes. 
But we must understand the nature and scope of the problem if we are to make a reasonably 
fair assessment of the time that has passed and of how quickly the controls can be lifted. 
In  this  context,  I  have  found  it  helpful  to  explain  to  foreign  observers  that  the  collective 
collapse of Iceland’s three large banks is thought be the third-largest bankruptcy in history. 
The Lehman bankruptcy was larger, and its settlement is not complete. Our own settlement 
is taking place in one of the smallest countries in the world and is associated with a severe 
balance  of  payments  problem,  whereas  in  the  case  of  Lehman,  balance  of  payments 
problems have relatively little relevance. Another point that I make is that if all of the estates’ 
króna-denominated assets were added to the current stock of offshore krónur, the combined 
stock would increase to about half of GDP. Of course, we will not let that happen, but if it did, 
the  new  “overhang”  would  be  much  larger  in  proportional  terms  than  the  UK’s  post-war 
sterling  overhang,  which  totalled  nearly  a  third  of  its  GDP.  It  took  the  British  over  four 
decades to lift the capital controls that were imposed partly for this reason. 
The most usual way to describe the problem is to consider the capital that is likely to seek an 
exit as soon as the controls are lifted. This includes the failed banks’ estates, the potentially 
volatile  ISK  assets  held  by  non-residents  –  usually  called  offshore  krónur  –  and  possible 
outflows  from  Icelandic  residents  as  well.  In  this  context,  we  are  best  equipped  to  predict 
what  would  happen  if  the  controls  were  lifted  from  the  estates  without  any  mitigating 
measures,  as  we  have  mapped  out  the  estates  in  infinitesimal  detail.  There  is  greater 
uncertainty about the offshore krónur. Following the Bank’s foreign currency auctions in the 
past few years, some of the remaining capital could be held by patient investors, as some of 
the parties behind it swear faithfully that it is. But it is safer to verify and secure this before we 
open the exit doors wide, and there are ways to do it. 
The  greatest  uncertainty  centres  on  potential  outflows  from  residents.  To  a  degree,  it  is 
possible to estimate resident investors’ need to increase the share of foreign assets in their 
portfolios, but naturally, they may undertake such foreign investments at varying tempos. The 
most important factor either way is the level of confidence in Iceland and its financial system 
at the time the controls are lifted, which is obviously an unknown at this point. It will also be a 
major determinant of potential inflows from non-residents at the same time. 
It is precisely one of the key factors in preparing for liberalisation to facilitate the recognition 
of Iceland as a sound, trustworthy investment option, and that resident investors – and not 
only  the  sovereign  –  have  access  to  foreign  credit  markets  on  sustainable  terms.  Under 
current conditions, this means that we need an economy that is growing and is in equilibrium, 
both  internally  and  externally.  We  need  a  Treasury  surplus,  and  we  need  to  reduce  the 
Treasury debt ratio. We need strong enough national saving to support a normal investment 
level. Given the current outlook for investment, this means we must have a surplus on the 
current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments.  We  need  large  enough  foreign  exchange 
reserves to sustain the confidence of foreign lenders, maintain our credit ratings, and cushion 
us against volatility. We need a banking system that is solid and resilient. 
As I mentioned earlier, we are doing well in many of these areas, and the conditions exist for 
further 
the  maturity  of 
Landsbankinn’s debt to the old bank (LBI), which was finally negotiated towards the end of 
last  year,  has  improved  the  situation.  It  enhances  the  possibility  of  expanding  the  foreign 
the  current  year.  The  extension  of 
improvements  during 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
exchange  reserves  and  increasing  the  portion  not  funded  with  foreign  credit.  In  2014,  the 
Bank was a net purchaser of foreign currency in the amount of 111 b.kr. So far this year, it 
has bought currency for 30 b.kr., as opposed to 21 b.kr. over the same period in 2014. If it 
maintains that pace, it will buy more currency in 2015 than in 2014. As a result, the reserves 
exceed the outstanding foreign-denominated loans taken to finance them – by 65 b.kr. as of 
the end of February. But we mustn’t rest on our laurels; we need sizeable reserves as we 
prepare to lift the capital controls. 
I mentioned uncertainty surrounding the estimation of potential FX outflows once the controls 
are  lifted.  But  one  thing  is  certain:  if  the  failed  banks’  estates  were  given  a  green  light 
tomorrow and could convert all of their krónur to foreign currency, and the same happened 
with  the  offshore  overhang, there  is  no  way  we  could  safeguard  stability,  let  alone  bolster 
confidence, except perhaps after a long time has elapsed. The Central Bank of Iceland has 
designed a model intended to assess the impact of various developments in the balance of 
payments  over  a  long  horizon,  including  capital  account  liberalisation  measures.  When 
applied to this instance, the model reveals that our entire foreign exchange reserves would 
be wiped out – and more besides – if they were used to shore up the exchange rate. This 
would never be done, of course, and therefore the currency would depreciate sharply. It is 
clear that if residents were free to exit at the same time, they would participate in the run on 
the currency, and confidence would evaporate quickly, leaving us with a new currency crisis 
to grapple with. Of course, this is an extreme scenario in some respects, as the estates’ ISK 
assets, for instance, are not all liquid at this point in time, and a portion of the offshore krónur 
could be patient capital. But it gives an indication of the kind of problem we are dealing with. 
Therefore, we need other solutions that safeguard stability and prevent additional burdens 
from being placed on the sovereign or the Icelandic people. Such solutions do exist, and a 
large group of experts – foreign consultants; the task force for capital account liberalisation, 
which works for the steering committee on the capital controls; and experts from the Central 
Bank  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Affairs  –  has  been  working  hard  on 
developing them in recent months. I would like to take a moment now and thank all of these 
people for their tireless efforts and excellent work. 
It would be premature to publicise solutions at today’s meeting. Moreover, it is not within my 
purview  to  do  so  on  my  own.  The  liberalisation  of  the  capital  controls  is  a  collaborative 
project  undertaken  by  the  Central  Bank  and  the  Government,  which  actually  means  that 
elected representatives  have the last  word on the actions taken  – particularly if and when 
tools are used that are not in the Bank’s toolbox. 
Honoured guests: I have spoken at some length on monetary policy and the labour market, 
on the one hand, and the capital controls, on the other. But I have done so with a purpose, 
as these are by far the greatest economic challenges facing us at the moment. 
Yet  the  Central  Bank’s  sphere  of  activity  includes  many  other  functions  as  well,  not  least 
those centring on the structure and stability of the financial system. Let us hope that, when 
we convene a year from now for the Central Bank of Iceland’s 55th Annual General Meeting, 
we  will  have  resolved  successfully  the  urgent  issues  now  facing  us  and  can  turn  our 
attentions to these other areas of activity. 
In the field of financial stability, emphasis has been on the risks related to the capital controls 
and on the formulation and implementation of the prudential rules that, in our opinion, must 
be in place once the controls are lifted. That work is well underway. 
And  as  regards  risk  assessment  and  contingency  planning,  the  Systemic  Risk  Committee 
and  the  Financial  Stability  Council  will  be  meeting  next  month,  and  the  Central  Bank’s 
Financial Stability report is scheduled for publication on 22 April. 
Honoured guests: As the Chairman of the Supervisory Board mentioned in his speech, the 
Central Bank was relatively successful in working towards its goals in 2014. In addition, a 
great  deal  of  work  was  done  to  ensure  the  efficacy  of  the  capital  controls,  the  smooth 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
operation of financial system infrastructure, and the recovery of legacy assets from the crisis, 
among  other  things.  This  would  not  have  been  possible  without  the  competent  and  hard-
working people employed by the Bank. I wish to thank you all for your efforts. In this context, 
I would like to stress how important it is that, whatever amendments may be made to the 
Central  Bank  Act,  the  Bank  must  remain  a  strong  institution  capable  of  safeguarding 
monetary and financial stability in Iceland. In order to do so, it must have the independence 
to  apply  its  policy  instruments  to  this  end.  It  must  also  be  a  professionally  strong  and 
vigorous  workplace  where  senior  management  and  staff  members  have  a  dynamic 
interactive relationship on matters relating to operations, analysis, and policy formulation. 
In  closing,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Central  Bank’s  many  collaborators  for  a  successful 
cooperative  relationship  over  the  past  year,  in  particular  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and 
Economic  Affairs  and  the  Financial  Supervisory  Authority.  I  thank  the  financial  institutions 
with which the Bank interacts for their cooperation. I would also like to thank the Parliament 
of Iceland, particularly the Economics and Commerce Committee, for their collaboration. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
