  R Gandhi: Banks, debt recovery and regulations – a synergy 
Talk by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the “Workshop for 
Judges of DRATs and Presiding Officers of DRTs”, conducted by the Centre for Advanced 
Financial Research and Learning (CAFRAL), Lonavala, 29 December 2014. 
 Assistance provided by Ms Sadhana Varma is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Honourable  Judges  of  Debt  Recovery  Appellate  Tribunals  (DRATs)  and  the 
Presiding Officers of Debt Recovery Tribunals (DRTs) and other distinguished guests. It is an 
honour  for  me  to  address  you  all  here  at  this  Workshop  organised  under  the  aegis  of 
CAFRAL.  This  Workshop  comes  at  a  very  opportune  time  when  banks  are  facing  multi-
dimensional challenges to recover their debts. The rising level of non-performing assets is a 
major concern of the banking system. In spite of the fact that various legislations have been 
enacted  and  repeated  efforts  are  made  to  emphasize  importance  of  recovery,  the  non 
performing assets continue to increase. 
What is debt recovery? 
2. 
A  bank  begins  a  debt  recovery  process  when  it  seeks  money  it  is  owed.  A  bank 
takes recovery action for a number of reasons, but the most common is when a customer 
fails to make loan repayments. 
Debt recovery may include: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Referring the matter to a specialist debt recovery team within the bank 
Employing an external debt collection agency to act on its behalf 
Selling property over which the bank holds security 
Seeking a judgment from the courts to enforce the debts 
Why timely recovery of loans is important 
3. 
Timely  recovery  of  a  normal  loan  between  two  parties  may  not  be  of  critical 
importance to anyone, except to those two. A bank loan is not just a contract between the 
bank and the borrower. Entwined with this contract is the general welfare of the public, out of 
whose deposits the bank loan has been granted. However, timely recovery of bank loans are 
important for variety of reasons and from various perspectives. From the borrower’s angle, 
the  longer  the  delay  in  settlement,  the  outstanding  liabilities  of  the  borrower  increase;  the 
likely  penalties  may  also  increase  with  time.  From  the  bank’s  perspective,  the  longer  the 
delay  in  recovery,  they  lose  the  opportunity  to  earn  income  in  alternative  investments,  the 
security  and  collateral  may  lose  value  and  hence  may  incur  capital  loss  as  well.  More 
importantly, the delays in recovery proceeds can lead to liquidity crisis in the bank, run on the 
bank and consequent failure of the bank. From the society’s angle, the productive assets are 
held up, not producing value, not creating employment and income. From the government’s 
perspective,  if  such  loan  losses  cascade  and  turn  into  systemic  risk  and  endanger  the 
financial and economic stability, the tax payers’ money will have to be used up for rescuing 
these banks, otherwise the depositors, meaning the ordinary, general public will have to bear 
losses.  Thus  from  very  many  perspectives,  timely  recovery  of  loans  are  critical  for  the 
borrower, the bank, the society and the government. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Restructuring a bank loan 
4. 
Recognising  the  importance  of  contribution  of  productive  assets  for  generating 
employment, income and value, banks world over are expected to have forbearance towards 
loans for those assets. In many countries, banks are, by law and/or regulations, required to 
show  such  forbearance.  In  India  also  such  provisions  exist  in  law  and  regulations.  SICA, 
BIFR, CDR, JLF and several other regulations of the Reserve Bank are the examples. Viable 
businesses,  though  not  repaying  the  loans,  are  required  to  be  supported  by  the  banks; 
variety of concessions are being extended by the banks; the concessions include additional 
moratorium,  elongated  repayment  schedules,  lower  interest  rates,  write  offs  and  waiver  of 
interest, penalties, charges and even principal etc. Compromised settlements are common 
for almost every type of loans. 
5. 
Thus  the  banks  do  not  proceed  to  recovery  of  bank  loans  just  like  that.  As 
mentioned, they have to first establish the possibility of restructuring and restoration, before 
initiating recovery proceedings. 
Recovery through Debt Recovery Tribunals (DRTs) 
6. 
The  Reserve  Bank,  along  with  the  Government,  has  initiated  several  institutional 
measures to speed up recovery of bank loans. Prior to 1993, banks had to take recourse to 
the  long  legal  route  against  defaulting  borrowers,  beginning  with  the  filing  of  claims  in  the 
courts. Many years were therefore spent in the judicial process before banks could have any 
chance of recovery of their loans. 
The  Committee  on  the  financial  system  headed  by  Shri  M.  Narasimham  had 
7. 
recommended  setting  up  of  the  Special  Tribunals  with  special  powers  for  adjudication  of 
such  matters  and  speedy  recovery  as  critical  to  the  successful  implementation  of  the 
financial sector reforms. Another Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri T. Tiwari had 
examined  the  legal  and  other  difficulties  faced  by  banks  and  financial  institutions  and 
suggested remedial measures including changes in law. 
8. 
Debt  Recovery  Tribunals  (DRTs)  were  established  consequent  to  the  passing  of 
Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 to assist the banks in 
the  speedy  adjudication  of  matters  relating  to  recovery  of  NPAs  of  ₹10  lakh  and  above. 
Appeals against orders passed by Debts Recovery Tribunal (DRT) lie before Debts Recovery 
Appellate Tribunal (DRAT). 
Presently,  there  are  33  DRTs  and  5  DRATs  functioning  all  over  the  country.  The 
9. 
recent amendments to DRT Act vide the Enforcement of Security Interest and Recovery of 
Debts Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 have been carried out to improve the functioning of the 
DRTs,  to  prescribe  time  frame  for  filing  of  pleadings,  adjournments  etc.  and  to  give 
recognition  and  validity  to  the  settlements  /  compromises  entered  into  between  banks  and 
borrowers. 
10. 
Within  a  lesser  period  than  a  decade  it  was  observed  that  DRTs  could  not  give 
desired results and a need was felt that banks should be given adequate powers to recover 
their  dues  without  intervention  of  Courts  and  Tribunals.  SARFAESI  Act  was  brought  into 
existence in 2002. It was indeed a good piece of legislation which gives adequate strength to 
the Banks and Financial Institutions to expedite recovery of their dues but clever defaulters 
found their ways to move the Court / Debt Recovery Tribunal to delay the course of recovery 
and entangle the banks with endless litigation. SARFAESI Act was enacted to avoid going to 
DRTs but banks get dragged to DRTs on flimsy grounds. 
11. 
Bankruptcy law. 
The  Government  has  formed  a  committee  to  examine  the  need  for  strong 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Asset quality 
12. 
The gross NPAs to gross advances of scheduled commercial banks have increased 
from 3.4 per cent as at end March 2013 to 4.1 per cent as at end March 2014. During the 
same  period  net  NPAs  to  net  advances  increased  from  1.7  per  cent  to  2.2  per  cent.  The 
gross NPAs were ₹ 2,511 billion as on March 31, 2014 as compared to ₹ 1,839 billion as on 
March 31, 2013. Banks’ ratio of restructured assets to gross advances stood at 5.9 per cent 
as of the end of March 2014, compared with 5.8 per cent a year ago. In absolute terms, the 
restructured  assets  amounted  to  ₹  3,579  billion  as  at  end  of  March  2014.  Thus  the  total 
stressed assets, meaning the loans which are not being recovered despite having become 
due,  amounted  to  ₹  6,090  billion  as  at  the  end  of  March  2014,  as  against  total  gross 
advances of ₹ 61,018 billion as on that date. 
13. 
These data should be seen in the light of the total capital and profits of the banks. 
The total capital amounted to ₹ 7,278 billion as at end March 2014 and the total profits in 
2013–14 were ₹ 722 billion during 2013–14. It can be seen easily the extent of damage that 
can happen to the profitability, liquidity and solvency of banks, if timely recovery of such large 
amount of stressed assets do not materialise. 
Regulatory measures 
14. 
Reserve  Bank  has  been  making  constant  efforts  to  enable  banks  to  improve  the 
quality of lending. Information sharing is very critical in financial transactions and any gap in 
information can transform into risk cost for the bank. This entails significant consequences 
for  lending  as  it results in  misallocation  of  credit.  Keeping  in  view  the  importance  of  credit 
discipline  for  reduction  in  NPA  level  of  banks,  banks  have  been  advised  to  scrupulously 
ensure  that  their  branches  do  not  open  current  accounts  of  entities  which  enjoy  credit 
facilities (fund based or non-fund based) from other banks without specifically obtaining a No 
Objection Certificate from the lending bank(s). Banks should take a declaration to the effect, 
if the account holder is not enjoying any credit facility with any other bank. 
15. 
Credit Information Companies (CICs) play a major role in information sharing. Banks 
and  Financial  Institutions  are  required  to  submit  the  list  of  suit-filed  accounts  and  wilful 
defaulters of ₹ 25 lakh and above every quarter to CICs. CICs have also been advised to 
disseminate  the  information  pertaining  to  suit  filed  accounts  and  Wilful  Defaulters  on  their 
respective websites. After examining the recommendations of the Committee to Recommend 
Data Format for Furnishing of Credit Information to Credit Information Companies (Chairman: 
Shri  Aditya  Puri),  banks  /  Financial  Institutions  have  been  advised  to  furnish  the  data  in 
respect  of  wilful  defaulters  (nonsuit  filed  accounts)  of  ₹  25  lakhs  and  above  to  CICs  on  a 
monthly  or  a more frequent  basis  with  effect from  December  31,  2014. This  would  enable 
such information to be available to the banks / Financial Institutions on a near real time basis. 
16. 
The  Central  Electronic  Registry  under  SARFAESI  Act  has  become  operational  on 
March  31,  2011  with  the  objective  of  preventing  frauds  in  loan  cases  involving  multiple 
lending from different banks on the same immovable property. Initially transactions relating to 
securitization  and  reconstruction  of  financial  assets  and  those  relating  to  mortgage  by 
deposit  of  title  deeds  to  secure  any  loan  or  advances  granted  by  banks  and  financial 
institutions, as defined under the SARFAESI Act, are to be registered in the Central Registry. 
The records maintained by the Central Registry will be available for search by any lender or 
any  other  person  desirous  of  dealing  with  the  property.  Availability  of  such  records  would 
prevent  frauds  involving  multiple  lending  against  the  security  of  same  property  as  well  as 
fraudulent sale of property without disclosing the security interest over such property. 
17. 
Despite the information sharing mechanisms as detailed above, if the loans still go 
bad,  restructuring  mechanisms  have  been  spelt  out  to  help  a  borrower  who  has  a  viable 
project  or  a  viable  business  proposition.  With  a  view  to  putting  in  place  a  mechanism  for 
timely and transparent restructuring of corporate debts of viable entities facing problems, a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Scheme  of  Corporate  Debt  Restructuring  (CDR)  was  started  in  2001  for  quicker  recovery/ 
restructuring of stressed assets. 
18. 
In  the  backdrop  of  the  slowdown  of  the  Indian  economy  resulting  into  stress  to  a 
number  of  companies  /  projects  and  increase  in  Non-Performing  Assets  (NPAs)  and 
restructured accounts in the Indian banking system during the recent years, a need was felt 
to recognise the stress in the economy early on a real time basis and take preventive and / or 
corrective actions in order to preserve the economic value of banks’ assets. In view of this, 
the  Reserve  Bank  envisaged  and  released  the  “Early  Recognition  of  Financial  Distress, 
Prompt  Steps  for  Resolution  and  Fair  Recovery  for  Lenders:  Framework  for  Revitalising 
Distressed  Assets  in  the  Economy”  on  January  30,  2014.  The  framework  outlines  a 
corrective action plan to incentivise: (i) early identification of problematic accounts, (ii) timely 
restructuring  of  accounts  that  are  considered  to  be  viable,  and  (iii)  lenders  taking  prompt 
steps for recovery or sale of unviable accounts. 
19. 
The  Framework  outlines  an  early  recognition  of  stress  in  all  large  value  accounts 
and  their  reporting  to  a  centralised  repository  at  the  RBI  for  dissemination  among  all  the 
concerned  lenders  for  taking  corrective  actions  as  per  the  broad  guidelines  given  in  the 
Framework. Accordingly, a Central Repository of Information on Large Credits (CRILC) has 
been set up in April 2014 to collect, store, and disseminate credit data to lenders. Banks are 
required to furnish credit information to CRILC on all their borrowers having aggregate fund-
based  and  non-fund  based  exposure  of  ₹  50  million  and  above  with  them.  Notified 
systemically important non-banking financial companies (NBFC-SI) and NBFC-Factors would 
also be required to furnish such information. CRILC’s essential objective is to enable banks 
to take informed credit decisions and early recognition of asset quality problems by reducing 
information asymmetry. 
20. 
Banks are also required to monitor both qualitative and quantitative stress building 
up  in  their  large  accounts  at  an  early  stage  under  three  categories  of  Special  Mention 
Accounts (SMA), viz., SMA-0, SMA-1 & SMA-2. While, SMA – 1 and 2 will be based on past 
due  criteria,  SMA  –  0  will  contain  non-past  due  qualitative  and  quantitative  stress  in  the 
account. 
21. 
Once an account is reported to CRILC as SMA – 2, lenders will be required to form 
a Joint Lenders Forum (JLF) and take prompt corrective action. The corrective action plan 
(CAP)  includes  (a)  Rectification  (b)  Restructuring  and  (c)  Recovery.  Restructuring  can  be 
carried out either under the corporate debt restructuring mechanism or under JLF, but if not 
found to be feasible, JLF will initiate recovery measures. JLF formation will be mandatory for 
distressed borrowers, engaged in any type of activity, with aggregate fund based and non-
fund  based  exposure  (AE)  of  ₹  1000  million  and  above.  Non-adherence  to  regulatory 
guidelines has been disincentivised by way of accelerated provisioning. 
Since  in  terms  of  Section  128  of the Indian  Contract  Act,  1872, the  liability  of  the 
22. 
surety  is  coextensive  with  that  of  the  principal  debtor,  when  a  default  is  made  in  making 
repayment by the principal debtor, the banker will be able to proceed against the guarantor / 
surety even without exhausting the remedies against the principal debtor. As such, where a 
banker has made a claim on the guarantor on account of the default made by the principal 
debtor,  the  liability  of  the  guarantor  is  immediate.  In  case  the  said  guarantor  refuses  to 
comply with the demand made by the creditor / banker, despite having sufficient means to 
make payment of the dues, such guarantor would also be treated as a wilful defaulter. 
23. 
Last  week,  we  have  defined  the  norms  for  classifying  the  borrowers  as  non-
cooperative where there is a deliberate attempt to delay and inhibit the process of recovery 
after the due process has been followed. A non-cooperative borrower is one who does not 
engage constructively with his lender, by defaulting in timely repayment of dues while having 
ability  to  pay,  thwarting lenders’  efforts for recovery  of their  dues,  not  providing  necessary 
information sought, denying access to assets financed / collateral securities, obstructing sale 
of securities, etc. In effect, a non-cooperative borrower is a defaulter who deliberately stone 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  walls  legitimate  efforts  of  the  lenders  to  recover  their  dues.  Higher  capital  and  higher 
provisioning would be required in further lending to these borrowers. 
Role of DRTs in the financial sector 
24. 
The  expectation  from  DRTs  and  DRATs  is  very  high.  This  is  so  because  these 
institutions  were  set  up  for  a  specific  purpose.  The  underlying  purpose  is  improving  credit 
culture. If the borrower gets the message that he cannot delay recovery and get away with it, 
repayment culture is expected to improve. That will provide more funds to lend. If the cycle of 
lending and recovery goes on smoothly, the economy will grow. In this process DRTs and 
DRATs have a very big role to play. 
25. 
It  is  not  suggested  that  all  judicial  and  legal  principles  should  be  dumped  for 
improving recovery. In majority of cases our understanding is that there is no doubt that the 
money has been lent and not repaid. When the bank lends money, it pays through banking 
channels  and  when  recovery  is  made  it  also  comes  through  banking  channels.  Thus 
documentary evidence is easily discernable. In such transactions processed through banking 
channels there is hardly any doubt about the fact of lending and recovery. There could be 
disputes about calculation or some technicalities. If they are not allowed to be blown out of 
proportion,  it  is  believed  that  delays  can  be  avoided.  Even  if  undisputed  portion  of  loan  is 
required to be paid forthwith by DRTs and DRATs, that could contribute in a big way. 
26. 
The total number of cases filed in DRTs by scheduled commercial banks as a whole 
up  to  March  2014  was  1,50,503  and  the  amount  involved  was  ₹  2,601  billion.  The  total 
amount recovered up to March 2014 was ₹ 427 billion which amounted to only 16.43% of the 
total  amount  involved.  Looking  at  the  huge  task  on  hand  with  as  many  as  66,971  cases 
involving ₹ 1,415 billion pending before them as on March 31, 2014, I would like to say that 
Reserve Bank has a lot of expectations from the Debt Recovery Tribunals. Banks approach 
DRTs as a last recourse, so cases before DRTs need to be dealt with more strictly. 
27. 
We  are  very  much  concerned  that  the  sanctity  of  debt  contracts  has  been 
continuously  eroded  in  India,  especially  by  large  borrowers.  The  system  protected  large 
borrowers  and  their  right  to  stay  in  control,  rendering  bankers  helpless  vis-a-vis  large  and 
influential promoters. As explained earlier, we are separately dealing with this issue through 
the treatment towards wilful defaulters and non-cooperative borrowers. 
28. 
Since pendency of large number of cases in DRTs is one of the prime issues that 
needs to be addressed, I would like to draw your attention to some of our other concerns and 
need for better efficiency of DRTs: 
• 
It is understood that in a number of cases, DRT grants time to borrower / applicant 
to make payment and subject to payment, bank’s SARFAESI action is stayed and 
matter lingers on for a long period. 
Though  section  17  (5)  provides  that  an  application  under  section  17  shall  be 
disposed of within 60 days of date of application (extendable up to 4 months) the 
said  time  frame  is  not  being  strictly  followed  in  practice.  There  is  long  delay  in 
passing orders by the DRTs. 
The  officials  of  DRTs  /  DRATs  should  be  given  proper  training  so  that  they 
appreciate the very purpose and adjudicate the cases in a way to meet the purpose 
for which these Tribunals are established. 
As per the RDDBFI Act, though the cases are to be disposed of within six months, in 
some cases, the next date itself is given after six months to one year. 
When  an  appeal  is  filed  before  DRAT  against  the  order  of  DRT,  though  there  is 
provision  for  stipulation  of  deposit  of  75%  of  the  amount  of  debt  due  as  a  pre-
condition for admission of appeal, most DRATs are exercising their discretion and 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   do not insist for deposit of any amount despite the specific pleas made by the bank 
in this regard. 
In  many  DRTs,  even  frivolous  applications  filed  by  the  parties  are  entertained 
despite  the  fact  that  the  very  subject  matter  does  not  fall  under  their  jurisdiction. 
When an application is filed before the DRT, if they do not have jurisdiction on the 
subject matter, on the first day itself, the Presiding Officer is expected to dismiss the 
petition  for  want  of  jurisdiction  so  that  no  time  is  wasted  on  those  frivolous 
applications being filed by the parties only to delay the bank’s recovery process. 
Conclusion 
29. 
To conclude, I do hope that DRTs and DRATs would put their best foot forward in 
creating an environment where a healthy, vibrant and sound financial system can be built-up 
and sustained. We are also aware of some of the difficulties faced by DRTs and DRATs. We 
may  not  be  aware  of  many  others.  A  workshop  like  this  should  help  us  understand  your 
difficulties also, so that appropriate solutions can be worked out. 
30. 
Thank you all for your patient attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
