  Ignazio Visco: Translating a shared vision into a winning story 
Welcoming remarks by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the T2S Launch 
Celebration, Milan, 2 July 2015. 
 Good  afternoon.  President  Draghi,  colleagues  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  of  the 
European Parliament and the EU Commission, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure and privilege to welcome you all here today, in Milan (the destination of the 
year, let me say in passing), to share this important moment: the launch of the TARGET2-
Securities platform. 
For the euro area and the Eurosystem, we are now living through what is, to say the least, a 
challenging period. This acknowledged, we must nonetheless recognize that T2S is a major 
achievement.  This  ambitious  project  is  now  reality  thanks  to  the  combined  effort  and 
cooperation  of  21  countries  -  represented  by  their  central  banks,  central  securities 
depositories  and  financial  market  institutions  -  together  with  the  European  institutions:  the 
ECB, the Parliament and the Commission. 
The  T2S  platform  that  has  been  built  by  four  national  central  banks  –  Banca  d’Italia, 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Banque de France, Banco de España (the so-called 4CBs) - is now 
in operation with a first group of securities depositories and their linked-in user communities 
for  the  settlement  of  securities  transactions  in  euro.  By  February  2017,  at  the  end  of  the 
migration period, the platform will be deployed across Europe, covering the vast majority of 
securities transactions in euro. 
The activities that took place over the migration weekend of 20-21 June ran smoothly. They 
were coordinated by the teams from the 4CBs and the ECB. Since the 22nd, Banca d’Italia 
and Bundesbank have had the responsibility for operating the platform. 
The T2S project was large and complex, involving many stakeholders. We have come a long 
way: from the start of the specification phase to the go-live, the project took seven years. The 
4CBs,  mandated  by  the  Eurosystem,  developed  and  implemented  the  platform.  This  has 
been  a  demanding task,  one  to  which  our  institutions  have  devoted  substantial  resources. 
Aside  from  the  role  of  developer  and  operator  of  T2S,  the  four  central  banks  have  been 
actively involved in the project through the participation in technical and steering structures 
with an important role in the governance of the platform. 
The  participation  of  securities  depositories  in  T2S  is  voluntary;  it  took almost  two  years  of 
negotiations  between  the  Eurosystem  and  the  European  CSD  community  to  achieve  a 
mutually  satisfactory  contract  for  the  use  of  the  platform’s  settlement  services.  The  broad 
participation  in  the  governance  of  T2S  ensured  that  all  parties  were  given  a  voice  in  the 
project;  the  complex  governance  setup  will  be  tested  during  the  operational  phase,  when 
decisions will have to be taken swiftly and at times under stress. 
Why T2S after TARGET2? I imagine this topic will be addressed by the ECB President in his 
talk.  For  now,  let  me  just  briefly  rehearse  some  of the  efficiency gains that T2S  will  bring. 
First and foremost, lower fees. In fact, with T2S the cost of settling cross-border transactions 
in Europe will be lowered, and more appreciably so with the gradual increase in settlement 
volumes  as  migration  proceeds.  Second,  T2S  will  greatly  facilitate  transfers  of  collateral, 
hence liquidity management. This has become a critical issue in recent years because of the 
increasing  demand  for  collateral.  Finally,  T2S  will  contribute  significantly  to  making 
settlement more reliable thanks to its extremely robust business continuity solution, based on 
the model already developed for TARGET2. 
The  next  important  step  will  be  accomplished  at  the  end  of  August  when  the  Italian  CSD 
Monte Titoli and the Italian banking community bring their securities transactions to T2S for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  settlement. The Italian market will add operational complexity through a substantial number 
of  transactions,  averaging  100  billion  euro  a  day  and  topping  200  billion  on  the  days  of 
issuance and redemption of government bonds. This requires paying the utmost attention to 
avoid  even  the  minimal  operational  risk  that  may  still  be  related  to  the  many  technical 
procedures of the platform. 
And this is the reason why Italian banks are now still actively testing the interaction of their 
internal IT procedures in the new environment. Banca d’Italia has the job of monitoring trials 
in  the  Italian  market  to  ensure  successful  migration.  We  participate  in  the  testing  both  as 
central bank and as customer of Monte Titoli, focusing on the issuance of Italian government 
bonds and the related financial services. Banca d’Italia also serves, jointly with Consob, as 
the supervisor of Monte Titoli. 
However, the challenges are not all behind us yet. Very substantial volumes are still to arrive, 
not only with Monte Titoli at the end of August but also with the major players in the second 
and third waves. We have to work hard for T2S to be a milestone in the process of building 
the Capital Market Union. 
Finally,  I  wish  to  thank  the  staff  of  the  4CBs  and  the  ECB  for  their  effort  and  their 
commitment to the project’s success: they have all been involved in the development of T2S 
and are now actively engaged in the operational phase. And thanks to all those involved - 
central  banks,  CSDs, 
their  unflagging  support  and  decisive 
contributions. 
Once  again,  let  me  extend  our  welcome  to  everyone  present.  I  wish  you  all  a  pleasant 
evening. 
 
financial  markets-for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
