  Gurumoorthy Mahalingam: Some thoughts on forex markets in India 
Keynote address by Mr Gurumoorthy Mahalingam, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank 
of India, at the India Treasury Summit, Mumbai, 25 February 2015. 
 Contribution by Shri Anand Prakash, Director, Financial Markets Operations Department in preparing the speech 
is gratefully acknowledged. 
Introduction 
It is indeed a pleasure for me to be here at the India Treasury Summit to share my thoughts 
on  the  Indian  Foreign  Exchange  Market.  This  forum  provides  an  important  platform  for 
interaction amongst the corporate treasurers, finance professionals and market participants 
and it is being held at a time when the financial world is beset with uncertainties regarding 
economic growth prospects, oil and commodity prices and monetary policy stances of major 
economies. Given this uncertainty as the backdrop, I would like to touch on some key issues 
which impact the development of Indian forex markets. 
Indian forex market has come a long way 
Foreign  exchange  market  in  India  has  developed  significantly  in  the  post-reforms  era 
following the phased transition from a pegged exchange rate regime to a market determined 
exchange rate regime in 1993 and the subsequent adoption of current account convertibility 
in  1994.  With  the  abolition  of  liberalized  exchange  rate  management  system  (LERMS)  in 
1993,  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rupee  became  market  determined.  There  has  been  a 
significant  increase  in  both  depth  and  liquidity  in  the  spot  as  well  as  forward  market 
segments, which could be gauged from the rise in the average daily forex market turnover 
from approximately US$ 16 billion in 2005–06 to nearly US$ 55 billion in 2014–15 so far. The 
depth  of  the  foreign  exchange  market  can  also  be  gauged  from  the  fact  that  the  bid-offer 
spread in USD-INR pair is quite narrow now. 
In  the  context  of  integration  of  Indian  financial  market  with  international  markets,  the 
approach  of  Reserve  Bank  of  India  to  market  development  has  been  that  of  cautious 
gradualism, informed by the experience of other developed and developing countries. Even 
within the constraints imposed by a gradualist approach, Reserve Bank and the Government 
of  India  have  taken  several  steps  that  include  progressive  liberalization  of  capital  flows, 
calibrated increase in investment limits for Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs) in government 
and corporate debt, introduction of Qualified Foreign Investor (QFIs) as a separate investor 
class, expansion of the menu of risk management instruments, etc. 
Proper  risk  management  system  is  another  issue  of  utmost  importance  where  significant 
progress has been made. The setting up of Clearing Corporation of India, which commenced 
its  operations  in  2003,  has  helped  in  significantly  enhancing  the  efficiency  and  security  of 
settlement system for government, money market and forex market. 
As  far  as  Over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivative  products  are  concerned,  significant  progress 
has  been  made  in  the  recent  past.  In  2012,  trade  repository  became  operational  in  India 
when Reserve Bank of India advised that all/selective trades in OTC foreign exchange and 
interest rate derivatives between the banks/market makers (banks/primary dealers) and their 
clients  should  be  reported  on  the  CCIL  platform  subject  to  a  mutually  agreed  upon 
confidentiality  protocol.  The  reporting  arrangement  covering  OTC  foreign  exchange 
derivative  trades  between  Authorised  Dealers  (AD)  banks  and  their  clients  has  now  been 
fully operationalised. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Forex market movements 
The  forex  market  conditions  have  generally  remained  orderly  with  intermittent  episodes  of 
volatility in the past two decades on account of external or internal factors or a combination 
of  both.  The  day-to-day  movements  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rupee  are  market 
determined, i.e., determined by forces of demand and supply. India’s approach to exchange 
rate  management  has  been  to  avoid  volatility  without  targeting  any  level.  The  EMEs’ 
experience, in general, in the past two decades has highlighted the growing importance of 
capital  flows  in  determining  the  exchange  rate  movements  as  against  trade  flows  in  the 
1980s and before. An issue of paramount significance in this context is the volatility in capital 
flows  to  EMEs  including  India. In the  aftermath of global financial  crisis of  2008  and  more 
recently  after  Chairman  Bernanke’s  testimony  in  May  2013  about  the  possibility  of 
quantitative easing (QE) tapering, managing exchange rate volatility in EMEs like India has 
been rendered more challenging, in the background of volatile capital flows. 
India’s response to taper tantrums 
As I mentioned above, India, like most other EMEs, is facing the challenges associated with 
volatile capital flows and is susceptible to shifts in risk appetite of international investors on 
account  of  external  developments  completely  exogenous  to  whatever  happens  in  the 
country.  This  was  amply  demonstrated  during  the  May-August  2013  episode  of  taper 
tantrums. The mere hint by Chairman Bernanke about possibility of an early QE-tapering led 
to an exodus by the FIIs, especially in the debt segment. The rupee went into a tailspin and 
depreciated sharply by over 19 per cent, touching a historic low of 68.85 on August 28, 2013. 
Of  course,  India’s  weak  macro-economic  fundamentals,  especially  high  current  account 
deficit, that existed then, exacerbated the situation. In order to stem the sharp and excessive 
depreciation of the rupee, India resorted to a mix of policy measures including forex market 
intervention,  monetary  tightening  through  reduction  in  banks’access  to  overnight  Liquidity 
Adjustment Facility (LAF), increase in Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) rate and increase in 
daily  minimum  Cash  Reserve  Ratio  (CRR)  maintenance  requirements,  coupled  with  other 
policy  measures, such  as, gold  import  restrictions,  special  dollar  swap  window  for  PSU  oil 
companies, special concessional swap window for attracting FCNR (B) deposits, increase in 
overseas  borrowing  limit  of  banks,  disallowing  banks  from  carrying  proprietary  trading  in 
currency 
in 
government debt was enhanced by US$ 5 billion to US$ 30 billion in June 2013 to attract 
greater inflows. 
traded  options,  etc.  Additionally,  FII 
futures/exchange 
investment 
limit 
Positive developments during 2014–15 lending support to the rupee 
The  various  measures  taken  by  the  Reserve  Bank  in  conjunction  with  the  Government  of 
India  helped  in  restoring  stability  to  the  forex  market  with  the  rupee  recouping  most  of  its 
losses  during  September-October  2013.  The  rupee  exhibited  greater  two-way  movements 
during  2014  on  the  back  of  sustained  FII  inflows,  especially  in  the  debt  segment.  As 
compared  to  major  currencies  as  well  as  some  of  the  other  emerging  market  peers,  the 
Indian  Rupee  has  exhibited  greater  stability  during  the  recent  months.  Positive  factors 
including  continued  FII  inflows  to  the  domestic equity  and  debt markets  (around  US$  39.3 
billion  in  2014–15  so far),  sustained  FDI flows, political  stability,  fiscal  consolidation  (lower 
fiscal deficit target of 4.1 per cent of GDP in 2014–15 vis-à-vis realized fiscal deficit of 4.5 per 
cent of GDP in the previous year), continuation of reform measures by the new government 
at the Centre, significant reduction in current account deficit during the first half of the current 
financial year (1.9 per cent of GDP), improvement in macro-economic parameters, such as, 
CPI  inflation  (5.1  per  cent  in  January  2015)  and  GDP  growth  (7.4  per  cent  during  April-
December  2014  as  per  new  methodology)  have  contributed  towards  the  stability  of  the 
rupee. 
India’s forex reserves have also increased significantly in 2014–15 so far and stood at an all-
time high of around US$ 333 billion on February 13, 2015. Recent experiences, especially 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  after the global financial crisis, suggest that large reserves in the case of emerging market 
economies (EME)s like India with sustained current account deficit act as a buffer and help in 
weathering  the  impact  of  sudden  stops/reversals  in  capital  flows,  especially  during  crisis 
period.  Earlier,  having  large  reserves  was  considered  wasteful  on  account  of  quasi  fiscal 
costs but the global financial crisis led to a renewed debate about the adequacy of reserves, 
as EMEs with large reserves could weather the crisis relatively better leading to the current 
thinking that the benefits of holding larger reserves far outweigh the costs, especially in the 
case of EMEs like India. 
Additionally, the sharp downward movement in imported commodity prices, especially crude 
oil  prices,  has  also  buoyed  the  market  sentiment  and  contributed  to  the  resilience  of  the 
rupee in the recent months. The stability exhibited by the exchange rate of the rupee in the 
recent months, despite completion of the process of tapering of QE by the Federal Reserve 
in October 2014, reflects the improved confidence of global investors in the Indian economy. 
Overall,  financial  markets  in  India,  unlike  global  financial  markets,  have  exhibited  greater 
stability  and  resilience.  The  outlook  for  foreign  portfolio  flows  to  India  also  remains  quite 
positive  during  2015,  as  India  is  quite  well  placed  vis-à-vis  its  peers  on  account  of  the 
positive  factors  mentioned  above  and  remains  an  attractive  investment  destination. 
Additionally,  unlike  commodity  exporting  countries  like  Russia,  India  stands  to  gain 
substantially from the steep fall in crude oil prices through improvement in current account 
deficit,  fall  in  inflation,  reduction  in  fiscal  burden  on  account  of  oil  subsidy,  etc.  All  these 
factors would contribute towards ensuring stable conditions in the domestic forex market in 
2015. 
Normalisation of US monetary policy and weak global growth pose significant risk 
However, potential for volatility still remains, which emanates largely from external factors. 
Despite significant improvements in macro-economic fundamentals and the overall prospects 
of the Indian economy, as outlined above, the spillover impact from global financial market 
volatility to India could be disruptive, especially once normalisation of the US monetary policy 
stance begins with the commencement of tightening of interest rate cycle in the US in 2015 
and beyond. 
The US dollar has already appreciated significantly against most of the major as well as EME 
currencies  in  the recent  period  with  the  dollar  index  rising  sharply  from  the  second  half of 
2014,  taking  cues  from  the  divergence  in  the  monetary  policies  pursued  by  major  central 
banks coupled with shifts in economic outlook. While the US has completely tapered off its 
QE,  the  Euro  Zone  and  Japan  have  increasingly  resorted  to  QE  for  propping  up  their 
economies  against  the  backdrop  of  faltering  growth,  leading  to  depreciation  of  their 
currencies.  Market  volatility  in  many  EMEs  has  increased.  In  fact,  the  Indian  rupee  has 
remained relatively stable amidst volatility in other markets. However, tightening of interest 
rates by the US Fed later in 2015 can lead to some reallocation of FII portfolios away from 
the EMEs to the US on the back of improved growth prospects of the US economy. Though, 
it is unlikely that the episode of taper tantrum will be repeated this time as the markets have 
already factored in the likely tightening of the US interest rates, some volatility in the EME 
forex markets is inevitable. 
Risks  also  emanate  from  a  prolonged  period  of  weak  global  growth,  which  could  hamper 
Indian exports. Though global growth may receive some fillip from decline in oil prices, this 
may  be  largely  offset  by  negative  factors  like  decline  in  investment  associated  with 
diminishing  medium-term  growth  prospects.  Oil  exporting  countries  are  facing  enhanced 
external  and  balance  sheet  vulnerabilities  on  account  of  steep fall  in  oil  prices.  Stagnation 
and low inflation continue to remain a concern in the Euro area and Japan and geopolitical 
tensions  continue  to  remain  high.  The  recent  developments  in  Greece  have  added  a  new 
dimension  of  uncertainty  to  Euro.  China  is  also  facing  significant  slowdown  in  growth 
momentum and the outlook for EMEs also remains weak. Thus, the uncertain global growth 
prospects pose significant risks to stability of Indian financial markets. A sudden reversal in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  commodity prices, especially crude oil prices, could enhance volatility in the Indian financial 
markets, especially the forex market. 
Thus, given the uncertainties, it makes eminent sense for an EME central bank like the RBI 
to have sufficient tools in its toolkit and use them in a proactive manner. 
Unhedged corporate exposure remains a major risk factor 
Unhedged foreign currency exposure of corporates remains a major risk factor for EMEs like 
India. Corporates in many EMEs have taken advantage of benign global financial conditions 
to  increase  their  overseas  borrowing  and  leverage.  In  a  recent  Working  Paper,  Bank  for 
International Settlements (BIS) has traced a strong relationship between the widening yield 
differential and growth in off-shore USD credit (both in terms of bank credit and dollar bond 
issuances) of non-bank corporates outside the US. The outstanding US dollar credit to non-
bank  borrowers  outside  the  US  has  jumped from  USD  6  trillion  to  USD  9  trillion  since  the 
Global financial crisis. This could expose the corporates in EMEs with large forex exposure 
to significant interest rate and currency risks unless these positions are adequately hedged. 
Greater corporate exposure could, in turn, increase vulnerabilities for both local banks and 
the  financial  system  more  broadly.  Shocks  to  interest  or  exchange  rates  could  generate 
adverse feedback loops, especially if credit risks prevented the rollover of existing bank or 
bond  market  funding.  A  point  of  comfort  for  India  is  that  the  Indian  corporates  do  not 
contribute significantly to this increased exposure (basically because of the macro prudential 
measures  put  in  place  in  India);  however,  if  a  wave  of  corporate  defaults  happen  in  other 
EMEs, this can lead to some cascading impact on India and its financial markets. 
I feel that against the backdrop of imminent tightening of US interest rate cycles, and there 
are sufficient indications in this regard, there is a pressing need on the part of corporates to 
improve their risk management practices in order to preclude the possibility of huge losses in 
the  event  of  unexpected  developments.  In  this  context,  hedging  of  forex  exposure  by  the 
corporates  assumes  paramount  significance.  While  large  treasury  profits  are  alluring,  it 
should not become an all-consuming passion exposing the corporates to unacceptable risks. 
Every  corporate  needs  to  formulate  a  well-deliberated  hedging  policy  and  ensure  strict 
adherence to it. The RBI has been sensitizing the corporate and the banking system about 
the need for hedging and has devised appropriate regulations in the recent period but it is 
more  important  that  corporates  take  these  exhortations  seriously  and  act  accordingly. 
Apparently, there exists some misconception that RBI will always lean against the wind in the 
event of sharp depreciation of the rupee but this may not always be true. Banks also need to 
diligently factor in these risks while extending credit to corporates and hedging by corporates 
needs to be encouraged further to reduce risks. 
Way forward 
Greater internationalization of the rupee 
India  has  been  pursuing  calibrated  approach  towards  capital  account  liberalization  and  a 
more  liberalized  capital  account  would  require  a  deep  and  liquid  forex  market  with  wide 
variety of instruments, especially hedging instruments, to reduce volatility resulting from large 
capital flows. Further development of forex market assumes greater significance against the 
backdrop of greater internationalization of the rupee in future as India’s economic strength 
increases. Governor Rajan in his statement on taking office on September 4, 2013 stated the 
following in regard to internationalization of the rupee: “As our trade expands, we will push 
for more settlement in rupees. This will also mean that we will have to open up our financial 
markets more for those who receive rupees to invest it back in. We intend to continue the 
path  of  steady  liberalisation.”  Against  the  backdrop  of  intense  exchange  rate  volatility 
witnessed during 2013, promoting invoicing of trade in domestic currency, which has hitherto 
not been very successful, needs to be given a push. Banks and other stake holders have to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  actively explore the opportunities for popularizing invoicing in INR in an environment when 
the global investors/ corporates seem to have an unending appetite for rupee-based assets. 
Reducing the interest in the NDF market through liberalization of currency futures 
The  Non  Deliverable  Rupee  Market  is  a  symptom  of  growing  international  interest  in  a 
currency  which  is  not  fully  convertible.  The  growing  importance  of  India  in  the  global 
economy has led to an increasing interest in the rupee. Thus, the interest in the rupee along 
with the existence of capital controls in the onshore market has led to the development of an 
offshore rupee market mainly in Singapore, Dubai, London and New York. Going forward, it 
is imperative to try to bring the offshore activities onshore, to the extent possible, in order to 
deepen  the  domestic  markets  and  thereby  enhance  the  trickle-down  benefits.  As  you  are 
aware,  RBI  has  taken  a  number  of  steps  in  the  recent  past  to  liberalize  currency  futures 
market  to  obviate/reduce  the  need  for  the  NDF  market.  This  may  help  in  bringing  some 
offshore participants onshore and reducing the reliance of such participants on the offshore 
market. 
Better alignment between OTC and exchange traded markets for currency futures 
In the case of currency futures market in India, due to cash settled nature of the transactions 
undertaken on the exchanges with no mandated requirement for delivery, there is a non-level 
playing  field  between  OTC  and  Exchange  traded  markets.  There  is  a  need  for  regulatory 
alignment between OTC and exchange traded segments of the currency futures market. It is 
generally understood that exchange traded currency futures, rather than being used by the 
real  sector  are  mostly  being  driven  by  speculative  interests.  Currently,  the  liquidity  in 
exchange traded market is confined to very short-term. If such products are to be positioned 
as  a  credible  hedging  products  then  the  liquidity  has  to  extend  beyond  short-term.  These 
issues need to be addressed going forward for development of a deep and liquid currency 
derivatives market for hedging currency risks. 
Use of options 
While  there  is  increasing  interest  amongst  end-users  in  using  currency  options,  not  many 
banks  in  India  have  scaled  up  their  expertise  in  this  area  and  the  option  activity  remains 
confined  to  just  a few  banks. This  prevents  development  of  an active  options  market. It  is 
necessary  that  banks  enhance  the  necessary  skill-sets  in  this  product  which  has  been 
catching the attention of the end-users. While this will give a fillip to market development, the 
end-users’ hedging needs will also be met in a more competitive environment. 
Liberalization of net open position limits (NOPL) of banks 
Another  important  area  is  the  net  open  position  limits  (NOPL)  of  banks.  Large  open  forex 
positions  have  systemic  risk  implications  and  need  to  be  monitored  closely.  However, 
relaxation in these limits is essential to deepen the currency market as excessive restriction 
on  speculation  hinders  the  development  of  the  market.  Thus,  a  fine  balance  has  to  be 
maintained between the need to minimize risk and deepen the forex market in India. Data 
collected  by  RBI  reveals  that,  at  least  in  the  last  few  months,  banks  have  healthy  bi-
directional  views  on  Rupee  (in  contrast  to  general  unidirectional  bias),  which  have  helped 
promote healthy markets. 
Polling for financial benchmarks 
RBI has already chalked out a programme to move over to trade-based financial benchmarks 
from a polling-based system in a gradual and non-disruptive manner. In the last few months, 
stung  by  the  regulatory  actions  abroad,  many  banks  have  shown  a  great  amount  of 
reluctance to participate in the polling process in India. It needs to be recognized and borne 
in mind that that the move from a polling based system to trade-based system is a carefully 
calibrated process and cannot be accelerated at the cost of bringing the system to disruption. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  It  is,  therefore,  necessary,  in  the  interests  of  market  integrity,  for  the  active  players  to 
continue to participate in the polling process till the alternative system is on track. 
Concluding observations 
Going  forward,  further  development  of  forex  market  would  include  introduction  of  more 
instruments,  particularly  derivative  products,  widening  of  participants  base,  commensurate 
regulations  along  with  modern  risk  management  systems  and  improved  customer  service. 
Additionally, there is a need to increase liquidity in long-term hedging products. Development 
of markets for long-term hedging products is necessary to reduce risk in the system. Use of 
most advanced payment and settlement infrastructure in the forex market is required along 
with improvement in other market infrastructure. 
Reforms  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  will  continue  to  be  an  on-going  process  and  will 
have to be harmonised with the evolving macroeconomic environment and the needs of the 
real  economy  as  well  as  the  development  of  other  segments  of  the  financial  market, 
particularly the money, the equity and the government securities markets. 
Thanks for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
