   Andréa M Maechler: How negative interest works and changes in the 
management of foreign exchange reserves 
Speech by Ms Andréa M Maechler, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the Media News Conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 10 December 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
In my remarks today, I will begin by talking about developments on financial markets since the 
middle of the year. Then I will discuss the way in which negative interest works. I will conclude 
with a report on changes in the way we manage our currency reserves. 
Situation on the financial markets 
I will start with the situation on the financial markets. Financial market developments since the 
middle of the year have mainly been shaped by three topics: the uncertainty surrounding the 
first  interest  rate  move  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  monetary  policy  easing  measures  by  the 
European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  concerns  about  growth  prospects  in  the  emerging 
economies, particularly China. In mid-August, disappointing economic data and an unexpected 
depreciation of the renminbi against the US dollar resulted in a sharp decline in the Chinese 
stock  market.  The  fallout  was  also  felt  by  stock  markets  of  other  emerging  and  advanced 
economies in short succession. After volatility on the stock markets had increased sharply at 
times, investors’ appetite for risk gradually returned at the end of September. 
Favourable economic data from the US and the euro area contributed to the more positive 
sentiment. In addition, concerns about growth in China recently slipped into the background 
again. The stock markets of the advanced economies, which have since been able to partially 
recoup their losses, were the main beneficiaries of this recovery. By contrast, in the emerging 
economies, the wave of selling has had a lasting impact. In the most recent period, the MSCI 
Emerging Markets Index – calculated in local currency – was still approximately 12% below its 
level at the end of June. 
Stronger signals of diverging monetary policy stances between the euro area and the US were 
also  reflected  on  the  foreign  exchange  markets.  On  the  one  hand,  the  prospect  of  higher 
interest rates in the US boosted the US dollar. On the other, it put the currencies of emerging 
economies under pressure. Since mid-year, the US dollar has appreciated by 4.5% on a trade-
weighted  basis.  The  euro  initially  gained  ground  at  times  as  a  result  of  uncertainty  in  the 
emerging economies. However, after the ECB had held out the prospect of further monetary 
policy easing measures, the single currency came under downward pressure. By the beginning 
of December, the expectations of financial market participants had not been fulfilled and the 
euro gained in value again. By comparison with its mid-year level, the euro has appreciated 
only marginally on a trade-weighted basis. 
Demand for secure investments remained high worldwide. On the bond markets, yields on 
longer-term government bonds declined further. Chart 1 shows that the decline in yields in the 
euro area was somewhat greater than in the US. The yields on ten-year German government 
bonds have fallen by almost 20 basis points since the end of June. In France and Italy, the 
decline in yields was more pronounced. Meanwhile, yields on ten-year US treasury bonds have 
changed relatively little. 
On the Swiss capital market, almost the entire yield curve has shifted downwards again since 
mid-year. Yields on Confederation bonds with terms of up to 13 years are currently in negative 
territory. This corresponds to three-quarters of the outstanding volume. At the beginning of 
December, 
low  of 
–0.4%. Most recently, it was trading at –0.25% or about 40 basis points lower than mid-year. 
ten-year  Confederation  bonds 
reached  a  new 
the  yield  on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   How negative interest works 
In the second part of my remarks today, I will talk about the way in which negative interest 
works. Since January, the Swiss National Bank (SNB) has been charging negative interest of 
–0.75% on sight deposits held by banks and other financial market participants at the SNB. 
Negative interest is a key instrument in our monetary policy. Together with our willingness to 
intervene on the foreign exchange market, it counteracts the overvaluation of the Swiss franc. 
When calculating negative interest, the SNB grants the banks exemptions so that the banking 
system does not have to carry the full burden resulting from the high level of sight deposits. 
For banks subject to minimum reserve requirements, the exemption threshold is calculated as 
20 times the minimum reserve requirement, based on a reference period. For sight deposit 
account holders not subject to any minimum reserve requirements, the exemption threshold 
has been set at a minimum of CHF 10 million. 
By applying negative interest universally to all account holders, we are adhering to the principle 
of equal treatment. It therefore makes sense that banks with above-average sight deposits in 
proportion to their minimum reserves pay higher interest than other banks. In this respect, 
negative  interest  is  no  different  to  traditional  monetary  policy  measures.  Although  the 
conditions are always the same for all participants, the precise impact may differ for individual 
banks or market participants and depends on their balance sheet situation. 
The full effect of negative interest is felt on the money and capital markets even in the case of 
high exemption thresholds. At present, at approximately CHF 170 billion, some 40% of SNB 
sight  deposits  are  subject  to  negative  interest.  Nevertheless,  transmission  of  the  negative 
interest rate is working well, with interest rates on this market aligning themselves directly with 
the negative interest rate of –0.75%. This is because interest rate determination is based on 
the  marginal  interest  rate,  in  other  words  the  rate  for  holding  one  additional  unit  of  sight 
deposits. 
Movements in SNB sight deposits 
Chart 2 shows sight deposits of domestic banks (dark blue area) which, together with other 
sight deposits (light blue area), comprise total sight deposits at the SNB. Cumulative exemption 
thresholds come to some CHF 300 billion. When negative interest came into effect in January, 
thresholds were 88% exhausted. Since then, this percentage has steadily increased and is 
now just over 98%. 
There are two principle reasons for this. First, a redistribution of sight deposits between banks 
has taken place. Institutions whose sight deposits exceeded the exemption threshold have 
transferred money from their SNB accounts to banks which had not exhausted their threshold 
and were prepared to accept these funds at somewhat less negative interest than –0.75%. 
This redistribution of sight deposits can be observed, for instance, on the Swiss franc repo 
market.  Chart  3  shows  how,  on  that  market,  turnover  was  considerably  higher  than  that 
recorded for the whole of 2014. Most of the turnover was accounted for by transactions with 
very short terms. This is likely to include many transactions aimed at exhausting remaining 
thresholds. 
The second reason for the higher exhaustion of the exemption thresholds is that banks’ sight 
deposits  at  the  SNB  have  increased  overall.  Since  negative  interest  came  into  effect  in 
January, sight deposits have risen from approximately CHF 440 billion to some CHF 470 billion 
at present. The interest burden increases overall when the SNB feeds more liquidity into the 
system, in particular in the event of further foreign exchange market interventions. This, in its 
turn,  makes  it  even  less  attractive  to  hold  Swiss  francs.  Now  that  almost  all  exemption 
thresholds are exhausted, every newly-created Swiss franc is subject to negative interest. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Changes in the management of foreign exchange reserves 
I now come to my third and final topic. Two important new developments have occurred in the 
SNB’s investment activities this year. The SNB has enlarged its investment universe, moving 
into both Chinese government bonds and shares of companies in emerging economies. These 
developments  took  place  in  view  of  the  level  of  our  foreign  currency  investments,  at  over 
CHF 570 billion, as well as our ongoing efforts to diversify our placements of them as broadly 
as possible. 
Investment in Chinese government bonds 
In July 2014, the SNB communicated that it had been granted a renminbi investment quota by 
the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBC). The  investment  quota  amounted to  RMB  15  billion,  or 
somewhat more than CHF 2 billion. This made it possible for the SNB to invest in the market 
for  Chinese  government  bonds,  which  is  the  fifth  largest  in  the  world,  for  the  first  time. 
Experience  so  far  has  shown  that  the  market  is  sufficiently  liquid  and  that  trading  and 
settlement of transactions works smoothly. As is the case for our other investments in the Asian 
region, the operational side is handled by our Singapore branch. As it continues to open up, 
the Chinese bond market is likely to become even more attractive for foreign investors in the 
future.  For  instance,  in  July  2015,  the  PBC  announced  that  public  sector  investors,  which 
includes central banks, are to be granted unlimited access to the Chinese bond market. In 
place of investment quotas, they will merely need to be registered with the PBC. 
Shares of companies in emerging economies 
Since the beginning of the year, the SNB has also been investing in shares of companies in 
emerging  economies.  In  view  of  the  growing  importance  of  these  countries  for  the  global 
economy  and  financial  markets,  this  was  an  obvious  step  in  further  diversifying  foreign 
currency  investments.  With  this  move,  the  SNB  is  now  covering  most  of  the  market 
capitalisation of the global stock markets. The decision to invest in the shares of companies in 
emerging economies was taken during the regular review of our investment policy. It is guided 
by longer-term risk/return considerations and is independent of short-term developments on 
the financial markets. Equity investments in emerging economies are managed passively, in 
the same way as those from advanced economies, by replicating a combination of different 
indices. Overall,  however,  these  investments  only  account for  a modest proportion  of total 
equity investments. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  4 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
