  Benoît Cœuré: Paradigm lost – rethinking international adjustments 
Text  of  the  Egon  and  Joan  von  Kashnitz  Lecture  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the 
Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Clausen  Center  for  International 
Business and Policy, Berkeley, 21 November 2015. 
 I would like to thank R. Beck and G. Georgiadis for their assistance in preparing this lecture and M. Bussière, 
L. Dedola,  L.  Laeven,  F.  Moss  and  G.  Pineau  for  their  comments.  I  also  thank  P.-O.  Gourinchas  for  useful 
discussions. All views expressed herein remain mine. 
their 
Summary 
Central  banks  today  operate  in  a  highly  interconnected  world.  They  need  a  profound 
understanding  of  the  international  macroeconomics  adjustment  process.  The  research 
community  can  help  policy  makers  answering 
fundamental  questions  about 
globalization and shaping their response in terms of governance and regulation. 
During  the  past  two  decades,  policy  discussion  in  fora  such  as  the  IMF,  G7  or  G20  have 
been  predicated  on  three  key  assumptions  about  that  process:  reallocation  of  aggregate 
demand  across  economies  would  sustain  an  appropriate  pace  of  global  growth;  freely 
floating exchange rates would support such demand and act as shock absorbers; and cross 
border  capital  flows  make  international  adjustment  smoother  and  improve  the  global 
allocation of capital. 
But  recent  theoretical  and  empirical  research  has  started  deconstructing  these  three 
assumptions. First, the capacity of the global economy to generate growth is under question. 
In  a  global  zero  lower  bound  environment,  surplus  countries  hold  world  output  down. 
Second,  global  interconnectedness  seems  to  have  altered  the  shock  absorbing  role  of 
floating exchange rates. And finally, academics have questioned the resource allocation and 
risk-sharing  benefits  of  cross-border  capital  flows,  while  capital  controls,  or  as  recently 
dubbed capital flow management measures, are once again part of the policy discussion. 
In light of these discussions, is there a case for rethinking international macro adjustments 
and  the  functioning  of  the  International  Monetary  System?  And  can  we  shape  financial 
regulation in a way to reap the benefits of a global financial integration? The way academics 
and policy makers address those open issues in international economics will condition the 
resilience  of  the  global  economic  system,  i.e.  its  capacity  to  return  to  equilibrium  without 
policy intervention. This is of key importance to central bankers. If we ignore those issues, 
there  is  a  risk  that  monetary  policies  may  become  ineffective,  overburdened,  and/or 
collectively trapped in a suboptimal equilibrium. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me first thank the organisers of this conference for inviting me to deliver the Egon and 
Joan von Kaschnitz Lecture. It is an honour for me to speak to an audience of distinguished 
academics who have shaped the intellectual debates in the field of international economics 
and finance over the past decades. 
Central banks today operate in a highly interconnected world. To fulfil our mandates we have 
to both anticipate and react to swings in global commodity markets, trends in foreign demand 
and  spillovers  from  international  financial  markets.  And  in  recent  years,  these  swings  and 
adjustments have occurred more rapidly and with higher amplitudes, further complicating the 
life  for  central  bankers.  Our  reaction  functions  therefore  become  commensurately  more 
complex,  tied  not  only  to  how  domestic  markets  for  products,  labour  and  capital  adjust  to 
shocks  and  react  to  policy  impulses,  but  also  crucially  to  adjustments  in  cross-border 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  markets.  This  requires  a  profound  understanding  of  the  international  macroeconomic 
adjustment process. 
In particular, during the past two decades, policy discussions in fora such as the IMF, the G7 
and  G20  have  been  predicated  on  three  key  assumptions  about  that  process.  The  first 
assumption,  in  response  to  shocks  hitting  individual  economies,  is  that  a  reallocation  (or 
“rotation” in policymaker parlance) of aggregate demand across economies would sustain an 
appropriate pace of global growth. The second assumption is that freely floating exchange 
rates would support such shifts in demand and generally act as shock absorbers in the global 
economy. And the third is that cross-border capital flows bring the benefit of risk-sharing and 
make international adjustments smoother, in addition to supporting an efficient international 
allocation of capital. 
The starting point of my remarks today is the recognition that recent theoretical and empirical 
research has started challenging these three assumptions. 
First,  the  capacity  of  the  global  economy  to  generate  growth  is  under  question.  In  an 
environment  of  low  global  growth,  export-led  strategies  may  be relevant for  one  economy, 
but in the aggregate they are bound to fail and they risk leading the global economy into a 
high saving, low real interest rate trap. There is in other words a fallacy of composition. We 
lack a clear vision of the combination of demand and supply side policies, and the broader 
design  of  the  global  economy,  which  will  support  growth  beyond  the  short-term  impulse 
provided by fiscal or monetary policy at the individual country level. 
Second, a body of recent research has suggested that global interconnectedness may not 
have enhanced the shock-absorbing role of floating exchange rates, but rather eroded it, or 
at least modified it in many ways. If this is confirmed, we may have to modify the prior that 
under  flexible  exchange  rates,  economies  become  more  resilient,  when  each  of  them 
becomes more open. 
And finally, there is a paradox of international financial integration: as Raghu Rajan famously 
suggested,  for  all  its  theoretical  appeal,  financial  development  may  have  “made  the  world 
riskier”.1  Academics  have  questioned  the  resource  allocation  and  risk-sharing  benefits  of 
cross-border capital flows; capital controls, or as recently dubbed capital flow management 
measures, are once again part of the policy discussion; and financial deglobalisation, some 
indicators say, may be already under way. Can we let this happen with a light heart? Or can 
we shape financial regulation and other policies so as to keep reaping the benefits of global 
financial integration? 
The  way  in  which  we  address these  open  issues  will  condition  the  resilience  of  the global 
economic system, i.e. its capacity to return to equilibrium without policy intervention. This is 
of key importance for central bankers. If we ignore these issues, there is a risk that monetary 
policies  may  become  ineffective,  overburdened,  and/or  collectively  trapped  in  suboptimal 
equilibria.  Although  my  remarks  today  are  focused  on  international  adjustment,  the 
challenges faced by the euro area – as a “microcosm” of the global economy – can provide 
useful insights. 
Global growth: the fallacy of composition 
My  first  point  is  motivated  by  the  ongoing  discussions  about  economic  policies  that  can 
incentivise  sustainable  growth  globally.  This  matters  for  central  banks  locally  because 
monetary policy cannot do all the heavy lifting of stabilising our economies in place of other 
policies;  and  it  matters  globally,  to  avoid  low  global  growth  encouraging  central  banks  to 
adopt beggar-thy-neighbour policies. 
                                                
1  See Rajan, R. (2005), “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?” NBER Working Papers, 11728. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In principle, the process of opening global markets – or globalisation – should make global 
growth more resilient by allowing policymakers around the world to factor in external demand 
when designing their growth strategies. If global business cycles are not fully synchronised, 
external demand acts as an automatic stabiliser – economies in downswings can export their 
way out while those in upswings generate the necessary domestic demand. And indeed, it is 
well known that global growth in recent years has been supported by emerging markets, at a 
time when several advanced economies were mired in post-crisis balance sheet recessions. 
To my mind, however, this is not a sustainable global growth model as it relies, as I said, on 
a fallacy of composition. While it may hold in a situation where economies face a stream of 
negatively correlated idiosyncratic shocks, it clearly breaks down when all economies are hit 
by the same shock or a set of positively correlated shocks. By definition not all jurisdictions 
can simultaneously run a current account surplus – one cannot export to the moon. We are 
in fact seeing this today, as emerging markets slow down while demand growth in advanced 
economies is not sufficiently robust to pick up the slack. If every economy were to react to 
their domestic challenges by exporting their slack, it would only trigger a race to the bottom. 
A global growth model where each relies on the other’s external demand yields an inferior 
Nash equilibrium. 
That  equilibrium  is  likely  to  be  further  worsened  in  a  situation  where  interest  rates  run  up 
against the zero lower bound (ZLB), as we see across advanced economies today. This not 
only  reduces  the  scope  for  conventional  monetary  policy  to  support  domestic  demand. 
Recent  research  by  Ricardo  Caballero,  Pierre-Olivier  Gourinchas  and  Emmanuel  Fahri 
suggests that the ZLB also prevents global interest rates from falling low enough for global 
asset markets to clear (i.e. global demand for financial assets exceeds their supply).2 In such 
an  environment,  if  countries  would  run  continuous  current  account  surpluses,  the  world 
interest  rate  would  fall  until  it  hits  the  zero  bound.  The  global  economy  would  be  in  a 
permanent  liquidity  trap,  at  which  point  the  adjustment  would  take  place  in  the  form  of  a 
world recession propagated by global imbalances. In other words, the model suggests that in 
a global ZLB environment, surplus countries can hold world output down, and even countries 
which in autarky would avoid falling in a liquidity trap may then be dragged down. 
The role of current account surpluses in suppressing global growth – or the so-called “global 
savings glut” – was identified by Ben Bernanke back in 2005.3 Since then, the euro area has 
added to that global glut in a time while others have been reducing it. While the US current 
account deficit has decreased by half and Japan’s has disappeared, the euro area has built 
up an increasing current account surplus, driven by a lasting incapacity to revive domestic 
demand. What all this points to is a need to rebalance the sources of global growth. 
Admittedly, there is plenty of literature on how to address the problem from the demand side. 
Obstfeld  and  Rogoff  famously  argue  that  national  policymakers  who  pursue  domestically 
optimal stabilisation policies can come close to achieving a globally optimal solution.4 This 
includes, of course, a role for monetary policy, and central banks should not shy away from 
that responsibility. But as already explained, in a global ZLB environment the “own house in 
order” argument may not be valid any more. 
In the framework of Caballero et al., the best policy responses to the “global liquidity trap”, 
which are not zero-sum at the global level, include safe public debt issuance and increases 
in  government  spending.  Likewise,  Larry  Summers  recently  argued  that  the  best  way  to 
                                                
2  See Caballero, R.C., Farhi, E., and P.-O. Gourinchas (2015), “Global Imbalances and Currency Wars at the 
ZLB”, NBER Working Paper No. 21670, October. 
3  See Bernanke, B.S. (2005), “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit”, Speech 77, Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.). 
4  See  Obstfeld,  M.,  and  K.  Rogoff  (2002),  “Global  Implications  of  Self-Oriented  National  Monetary  Rules,” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 503–536. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  avoid a permanent liquidity trap and the resulting secular stagnation is to promote public or 
private investment.5 In economies that have sufficient fiscal space, it is indeed hard to see 
how  fiscal  expansions  at the  zero  lower  bound would  not  be  a  positive sum for  the global 
economy. I would however qualify the policy advice for economies where the fiscal space is 
squeezed  by  high  and  growing  public  debt,  as  is  the  case  across  most  of  the  euro  area 
today. 
Still, achieving sustainable economic growth is always about both demand and supply.6 And 
what I think is missing from our current understanding is a coherent view of what to do on the 
supply side. The composition of demand that we see in many advanced economies suggests 
that supply is also a drag on stronger global growth. In the euro area in particular, private 
investment  is  not  playing  the  accelerating  role  that  one  would  expect  at  this  stage  of  the 
business cycle, despite domestic demand gradually strengthening. One reason for that is the 
depressed  expectations  of future  potential  growth,  which  lead  firms  to  expect  permanently 
lower incomes and profits.7 Public investment, in particular in infrastructure and education, as 
the  October  2014  IMF  World  Economic  Outlook  has  pointed  at  as  an  additional  source  of 
stronger growth of current as well as potential output, is also not being accorded much of a 
role,  as  advanced  countries  tend  to  see  this  as  a  preferred  source  for  cutting  high  public 
deficits.8 
But weak investment demand in turn adds to the downward pressure on the equilibrium real 
rates generated by a combination of low economic growth and high external surpluses, and 
makes  it  more  likely  that  monetary  policies  will  repeatedly  hit  the  ZLB. Another reason for 
weakening investment is the existence of debt overhang. High levels of corporate short-term 
debt  in  combination  with  increasing  rollover  risk  can  hold  back  real  investment  in  the 
economy.9 
What  all  this  suggests  is  that,  if  countries  wait  for  others  to  move  first  rather  than  taking 
action  to  raise future  income  or  to  address  high  level  of  debt  overhang,  they  risk  trapping 
themselves in a low growth, low interest rate equilibrium – and holding the global economy 
hostage. 
My  point  here  is  not  to  disregard  the  complex  interaction  between  demand  and  supply 
factors,  and  the  possibility  that  hysteresis  has  contributed  to  the  post-crisis  slowdown  in 
output growth.10 And as I said, fiscal policy should contribute where it is available. But I want 
to  stress  that  we  need  to  enhance  our  understanding  of  the  supply  side  so  we  can  better 
appreciate its interactions with demand. For instance, we know too little about which policies 
                                                
5  See Summers, L. (2015), “Rethinking Secular Stagnation After Seventeen Months.” IMF Rethinking Macro III 
Conference, 16 April. 
6  See Cœuré, B. (2014), “Structural reforms: learning the right lessons from the crisis”, keynote speech at the 
Economic conference, Latvijas Banka, Riga, 17 October. 
7  For a discussion on the sources of slow productivity growth, see Gordon, R. (2015), “Secular Stagnation: A 
Supply-Side View.” Presentation delivered at the 2015 AEA meetings, Boston, January 3 . On the relationship 
between  expected  earnings  and  investment,  see  Gennaioli,  N.,  Yueran,  M.,  and  A.  Shleifer  (2015), 
“Expectations and Investment.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2015. 
8   See  Bacchiocchi,  E.,  E.  Borghi  and  A.  Missale  (2011),  “Public Investment  under  Fiscal Constraints”.  Fiscal 
Studies 32(1), pp. 11–42. 
9  See Kalemli-Özcan, S., Laeven, L., and D. Moreno (2015), “Debt Overhang, Rollover Risk and Investment in 
Europe“, mimeo. 
10  See Blanchard, O., Cerutti, E., and L. Summers (2015), “Inflation and Activity – Two Explorations and their 
Monetary  Policy  Implications”,  IMF  Working  Paper  No.  15/230.  The  authors  note  that  hystereris  can  be 
sizeable, but depending on the evolution of the (unobservable) underlying growth trend, the consequences are 
conflicting  for  monetary  policy:  in  the  presence  of  hysteresis,  output  deviation  from  its  optimal level  can  be 
long lasting and call for a strong monetary response; but the response may prove too strong if we understand 
too late that the underlying trend has in fact changed. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  teaches  us 
will extend the benefits of micro-level reforms to the macroeconomy. The empirical debate is 
also still raging over the short-term impact of such reforms on output, especially at the lower 
bound.11 And the optimal pace of supply side reforms has not been established empirically, 
although  recent  euro  area  experience 
that  gradualism  can  entrench 
disinflationary  expectations  in  a  much  deeper  way  than  a  one-off  adjustment  would  have 
achieved.12  Neither  is  the  optimal  sequencing  of  structural  reforms  sufficiently  well 
understood beyond the general concensus that such reforms should initally be more demand 
than  supply-enhancing,  hence  focused  more  on  product  than  on  labour  markets  at  the 
outset, in order not to add to a deflationary wage/price spiral. 
So here, in my view, is a gap that research needs to fill. Forging an intellectual consensus 
around these issues would inform both the G20 debate at the global level on how to create a 
framework for “Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth”, as well as  national discussions 
on how to raise weak potential output. “Structural reform” is a term that policymakers like to 
utter, but it is often too vague to be meaningful. 
In particular, my hope is that work in this area can help policymaking escape the obsession 
of  “competitiveness”  which,  when  narrowly  defined,  focuses  on  export  market  shares,  real 
exchange  rates  and  unit  labour  costs  (Cœuré,  2014).  Such  an  approach  indeed  risks 
perpetuating  the fallacy  of  composition  where  all  economies  aim  to  export  low  demand.  A 
positive-sum solution to global growth requires a global productivity shock, and in that regard 
we  need  better  evidence  on  two  things.  First,  on  what  types  of  policies  will  spur  domestic 
total factor productivity growth through innovation, technology adoption and reallocation, and 
how to optimally sequence those policies to yield the largest short-term gains. Second, we 
need  better  evidence  on  the  broader  design  of  the  global  economy  which  will  encourage 
productivity  spill-overs  and  the  reallocation  of  capital  and  labour  between  economies, 
restarting what researchers at the OECD have termed the stalled “diffusion machine”.13 
Similar reflections are needed for the euro area, where most countries have now restored an 
external  balance  after  a  painful  but  necessary  period  of  internal  devaluation,  and  where 
corporate investment is inhibited by expectations of depressed long-term output growth. It is 
high time that the growth narrative is shifted from a narrow view of “competitiveness” towards 
a  broader  understanding  of  “productivity”,  both  within  countries  and  across  countries, 
including through a stronger Single Market. Countries should no longer wait for each other to 
generate sustainable growth. 
Exchange rates: the role of openness 
My second point is related to the importance of flexible exchange rate for the international 
macroeconomic adjustment. The case for flexible exchange rates as macroeconomic shock 
absorbers  was  made  as  early  as  1953  by  Milton  Friedman.  Evidence  for  developing 
countries in the post-Bretton Woods era seemed to confirm that view, at least for emerging 
market economies.14 The world’s major central banks have been operating on the basis of 
the  Mundell-Fleming  assumption  that  their  ability  to  conduct  independent  monetary  policy 
                                                
11  See Eggertsson, G.A., Ferrero, A., and A. Raffo (2013). “Can Structural Reforms Help Europe?”, International 
Finance Discussion Papers 1092, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
12  A one-off price adjustment has distributional effects ex post, but it does not affect the perception of real rates 
going forward – insofar as it boosts future income, it may indeed raise inflation expectations and lower real 
rates. By contrast, if adjustment is gradual, it creates disinflationary expectations and real rates increase. In 
other  words,  a  slower  adjustment  makes  the  contractionary  effect  of  reforms  more  prolonged.  See  Cœuré 
(2014, op. cit.) for a comparison of euro area countries’ post-crisis structural adjustment. 
13  See OECD (2015), “The future of productivity”, Paris. 
14  See  Broda,  C.  (2001),  “Coping  with  Terms-of-Trade  Shocks:  Pegs  versus  Floats.”  American  Economic 
Review, 91, No. 2 May 2001. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  relies on exchange rates being flexible – and that assumption is still hardwired into G7 and 
G20  doctrine.15  This  benign  view  of  the  role  of  exchange  rates,  however,  has  been 
challenged on several accounts. 
Early  on,  Mike  Mussa  noted  that  contrary  to  the  notion  of  nominal  exchange  rate  regime 
neutrality,  real  exchange  rates  were  much  more  volatile  under  flexible  than  under  pegged 
nominal exchange rate regimes. Another widely-known stylised fact questioning their role as 
shock  absorbers  is  that,  while  exchange  rates  display  far  greater  volatility  under  floating 
regimes,  macroeconomic  variables  do  not  –  another  manifestation  of  the  so-called 
“exchange rate disconnect”.16 But now we know that certain real-world features that were not 
originally part of our structural models explain the “Mussa puzzle” and related observations.17 
One such feature is trade invoicing patterns.18 Specifically, under producer-currency invoicing 
exchange rate fluctuations impact on an economy’s import prices, and thereby on its inflation 
rate, while under local-currency invoicing exchange rate pass-through is smaller. At the same 
time, for quantities, producer-currency invoicing implies a high elasticity of foreign demand to 
exchange  rate  fluctuations,  while  local-currency  invoicing  implies  that  foreign  demand 
responds  less  strongly  and  the  profit  margins  of  exporters  fluctuate  more.  Recent  studies 
indeed  suggest  that  the  impact  of  exchange  rates  on  domestic  prices  differs  substantially 
across countries. For the euro area, ECB staff research recently found that an increase in the 
share  of  the  euro  as  an  invoicing  currency  can  lower  exchange  rate  pass-through 
considerably.19 
Indeed, structural changes can have a significant impact on the role of the exchange rate as 
a  shock  absorber.  But  a  rise  in  openness,  in  contrast  to the  results  of  earlier  international 
macro-models, does not necessarily lead to an increase in exchange rate pass-through. As 
countries become more vertically integrated via global value chains, exchange rate variations 
will have a diminishing impact on the terms of trade. Vertical integration means that exports 
are  produced  using  imported  inputs.  And  this  means  that  the  prices  of  imported 
intermediates  move  in  the  same  direction  as  the  price  of  the  economy’s  exports.  For 
example,  recent  research  from  the  World  Bank  finds  that  between  1996  and  2012  the 
elasticity of manufacturing export volumes to the real effective exchange rate has decreased, 
                                                
15  See  the  G20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  communiqué  of  4–5  September  2015:  “We 
reiterate our commitment to move toward more market-determined exchange rate systems and exchange rate 
flexibility to reflect underlying fundamentals, and avoid persistent exchange rate misalignments”. 
16  The Mussa puzzle is laid out in Mussa, M. (1986), “Nominal exchange rate regimes and the behavior of real 
exchange rates: Evidence and implications”, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 25(1), 
pp. 117–214. The evidence on the lack of relationship between the exchange rate regime and macroeconomic 
outcomes  is  discussed  is  Baxter,  M.,  and  A.  Stockman  (1989),  “Business  cycles  and  the  exchange-rate 
regime:  Some  international  evidence”,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics,  23(3),  pages  377–400;  ,  Flood,  R., 
and  A.  Rose  (1995),  “Fixing  exchange  rates:  A  virtual  quest  for  fundamentals”,  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics,  36(1),  pp.  3–37.  and  Rose,  A.  (2011),  “Exchange  Rate  Regimes  in  the  Modern  Era:  Fixed, 
Floating, and Flaky.” Journal of Economic Literature, 49(3), pp. 652–72. 
17  See Betts, C., and M. Devereux (2000), “Exchange rate dynamics in a model of pricing-to-market”, Journal of 
International Economics, 50(1), pp. 215–244. and Devereux, M., and C. Engel (2002), “Exchange rate pass-
through,  exchange  rate  volatility,  and  exchange  rate  disconnect”,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics,  49(5), 
pp. 913–940. 
18  See Gopinath, G., Itskhoki, O., and R. Rigobon (2010), “Currency choice and exchange rate pass-through.” 
American Economic Review, 100 (1), pp. 304–36. 
19  See Gräb, J., and R. Lafarguette (2015), “Differences in exchange rate pass-through in the euro area: The 
role of currency invoicing”. European Central Bank, mimeo, Frankfurt am Main. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and that the rise of participation in global value chains explains on average 40% of the fall in 
the elasticity.20 
Another feature that can alter the role of the exchange rate as a shock absorber is related to 
the existence of global financial cycles. Some have suggested that rather than being driven 
by the response to traditional demand and supply shocks, exchange rates react to shocks to 
the leverage and risk appetite of financial intermediaries.21 As a result, exchange rates are 
largely  determined  by  capital  flows  unrelated  to  fundamentals  and  seldom  act  as  shock 
absorbers  for  the  real  economy.  Others  have  even  claimed  that  in  major  advanced 
economies  exchange  rates  are  a  source  of  macroeconomic  fluctuations.22  For  example, 
Hyun  Shin  and  co-authors  have  argued  that  exchange  rates  can  contribute  to  the  global 
financial cycle by reducing the perceived credit risk in countries experiencing capital inflows, 
only to precipitate crises when flows reverse and credit risk soars.23 
Moreover,  even  the  traditional  trilemma  arguing that  exchange rate flexibility  is  a  sufficient 
condition for monetary policy autonomy under the assumption of globalised financial markets 
is  not  as  robust  as  we  thought.  Hélène  Rey  has  recently  argued  that  in  the  presence  of 
largely  unrestricted  capital  flows  driven  by  a  global  financial  cycle,  flexible  exchange  rates 
are  not  a  sufficient  condition  for  monetary  independence.24  As  result,  the  ‘trilemma’  in 
international  macroeconomics  may  have  grown  smaller  and  become  a  dilemma.  This,  as 
such, does not question the usefulness of flexible exchange rates. In a small open economy 
where  financial  conditions  are  driven  by  a  larger  economy  (the  “centre”),  exchange  rate 
adjustment  can  still  mitigate  the  monetary  policy  reaction  when  the  centre  lifts  its  interest 
rates up or down. But given the financial frictions likely to be involved, it cannot be taken for 
granted that monetary policy will be fully insulated. 
These insights lead me to ask the following question: do freely floating exchange rates along 
with largely unrestricted capital flows still provide the basis for a well-functioning international 
monetary system? I don’t intend to provide an answer today. I know very well that when it 
comes  to  the  Marshall-Lerner  elasticities,  the  devil  lies  in  the  econometric  details,  and  I 
acknowledge that exchange rate adjustment has served us well in many instances, allowing 
monetary  policies  to  adjust  to  national  circumstances.  Neither  do  I  underestimate  the 
difficulties in a  world of nation-states of altering the parameters of the current system. But 
whether the shock absorbing role of exchange rates can be taken for granted is a question 
we should all reflect on. It is clear to me that there is much more about the functioning of the 
international monetary system that we need to understand. It’s another field in which we as 
policymakers, once again, depend on you as researchers. 
Importantly, this discussion suggests that a frequently heard explanation for the challenges 
facing  the  euro  area  –  that  its  participating  economies  are  suffering  from  having  given  up 
exchange  rate  flexibility  –  may  be  too  simplistic.  Indeed,  it  is  worth  remembering  that 
monetary union was created precisely because cycles of repeated devaluations did not yield 
macroeconomic  stability,  and  that  was  in  a  world  of  less  intense  capital  flows.  Indeed,  as 
                                                
20  See Ahmed et al. (2015), “Depreciations without exports: Global value chains and the exchange rate elasticity 
of  exports”, World  Bank  Policy  Research Working  Paper  7390;  see  also  the  IMF World  Economic  Outlook 
2015, October, chapter 3. 
21  See  Maggiori,  M.,  and  X.  Gabaix  (2015),  “International  Liquidity  and  Exchange  Rate  Dynamics”.  Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, 3, pp. 1369–1420. 
22  See Farrant, K., and G. Peersman (2006), “Is the Exchange Rate a Shock Absorber or a Source of Shocks? 
New Empirical Evidence”. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 38, pp. 939–961. 
23  See  Bruno,  V.,  and  H.S.  Shin  (2015),  “Cross-Border  Banking  and  Global  Liquidity”.  Review  of  Economic 
Studies, 82(2), pp. 535–564. 
24  See Rey, H. (2013), “Dilemma not trilemma: The global financial cycle and monetary policy independence”. In: 
Jackson Hole Economic Symposium 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Charles Engel and co-authors have argued, there is little evidence that real exchange rates 
under floating rates adjust in a desirable way. And a currency union can actually deliver a 
superior performance, because it reduces the deviations from price equality for traded goods 
that can occur under a floating regime.25 Still, for that to hold, the ability to engineer internal 
devaluation is crucial. And that is another reason why a better understanding of the impact of 
the nature and sequence of structural reforms in the euro area is crucial. 
Financial globalisation: the paradox of integration 
Like the debate on the role of exchange rates, the discussion about the benefits and possible 
costs of financial integration has become more nuanced over time. 
Conventional theory predicts that international financial integration fosters growth by allowing 
for a more efficient global allocation of capital, by facilitating organisational and technological 
spillovers across economies, and by boosting domestic financial market development. And it 
should also allow for greater international risk-sharing and specialisation, thereby providing 
an  automatic  stabilisation  tool.  The  years  since  the  emergence  of  financial  globalisation, 
however,  have  shown  that  it  can  also  magnify  spillovers  and  spillbacks,  creating  risks  of 
financial instability, that interfere with central banks’ mandates. The exact balance of these 
effects is, unfortunately, still unclear. 
A very large body of empirical work – both at the macro- and micro-level – has been devoted 
to the effects of international financial integration on growth and risk-sharing. The literature 
has  examined  the  issue  by  looking  for  gains  following  episodes  of  financial  account 
liberalisation  and  by  computing  the  gains  arising  from  a  shift  from  autarky  to  integrated 
financial  markets  in  theoretical  international  macroeconomic  models.  Both  strands  of 
literature, however, have in my view failed to deliver conclusive results. That is likely to be for 
several reasons. 
First,  it  might  well  be  that  the  improved  capital  allocation  across  countries  implies  only  a 
small increase in output.26 Indeed, in theoretical models the gains from international financial 
integration  have  been  found  to  be  relatively  small.  The  intuition  is  that  imperfect  capital 
mobility  represents  only  a  transitory  distortion  that  delays,  but  does  not  hinder  the 
convergence to a long-run equilibrium with higher capital.27 
Second,  as  in  the  domestic  finance  and  growth  literature28,  some  have  argued  that  non-
linearities  play  an  important  role:  only  if  economies  have  reached  a  minimum  level  of 
                                                
25  See  Berka,  M.,  Devereux,  M.,  and  C.  Engel  (2012),  “Real  Exchange  Rate  Adjustment  in  and  out  of  the 
Eurozone”. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 102(3), pp. 179–185. 
26  See  Obstfeld,  M.  (2009),  “International  Finance  and  Growth  in  Developing  Countries:  What  Have  We 
Learned?,” IMF staff papers 56.; Van Wincoop, E. ”Welfare Gains from International Risk Sharing,” Journal of 
Monetary Economics, 1994, 34, pp. 175–200 ; Van Wincoop, E. (1999), “How Big are Potential Welfare Gains 
from International Risk Sharing?,” Journal of International Economics, 47(1), pp. 109–135 ; Lewis, K. (1999), 
“Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption,” Journal of Economic Literature, 37, pp. 571–608; 
Lewis,  K.  (2000),  “Why  Do  Stocks  and  Consumption  Imply  such  Different  Gains  from  International  Risk 
Sharing?,”  Journal  of  International  Economics  52,  pp.  1–35;  Lewis,  K.,  and  E.  Liu  (2014),  “Evaluating 
International Consumption Risk Sharing Gains: An Asset Return View,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 71, 
pp. 84–98. 
27  See Gourinchas, P.-O., and O. Jeanne (2006), “The Elusive Gains from International Financial Integration.” 
Review  of  Economic  Studies,  73,  pp.  715–741  ;  Coeurdacier,  N.,  Rey  H.  and  P. Winant  (2013),  “Financial 
Integration and Growth in a Risky World,” mimeo; Other authors find larger gains if capital goods are imperfect 
substitutes,  see  Hoxha,  I.,  Kalemli-Ozcan,  S.  and  D.  Vollrath  (2013),  “How  Big  Are  the  Gains  from 
International Financial Integration?,” Journal of Development Economics Volume 103, pp. 90–98. 
28  See Cœuré, B. (2014), “On the optimal size of the financial sector,“ speech at the ECB Conference, Frankfurt, 
2 September. See also Beck, T., Degryse, H. and C. Kneer (2014), “Is More Finance Better? Disentangling 
Intermediation and Size Effects of Financial Systems”, Journal of Financial Stability, 10(C), pp. 50–64. Beck, 
R.,  Georgiadis,  G.  and  R.  Straub  (2014),  “k’  Finance  and  Growth  Nexus  Revisited”,  Economics  Letters, 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial  and  institutional  development  that  allows  them  to  cope  with  possible  swings  in 
capital flows, and to allocate large influxes of capital efficiently, can they reap the benefits of 
international  financial  integration.29  Specifically,  in  the  absence  of  developed  and  well-
regulated domestic financial markets, foreign short-term funding may be used for inefficient 
borrowing, leading to excessive domestic credit cycles and even financial crises.30 The euro 
area banking system is a case in point: the fragmentation of domestic money markets may 
have led to an excessive reliance on dollar funding before the crisis, ending in a sudden stop. 
Indeed, if one only considers economies with relatively sound institutions, there does appear 
to be a positive relationship between international financial integration and growth.31 
This previously discussed global credit cycles are also relevant to policymakers’ perception 
of financial globalisation. In particular, in emerging economies, it has reignited an old debate 
on  the  use  of  capital  controls.  In  light  of  this  discussion,  a  wave  of  theoretical  work  has 
emerged  that  rationalises  the  use  of  capital  account  restrictions  as  a  welfare-optimising 
policy,  when  large  global  shocks  to  capital  flows  lead  to  over-borrowing  and  financial 
vulnerability due to financial frictions.32 This work has also contributed to the IMF’s revision of 
its  view  on  the  use  of  capital  controls.33  This  new  institutional  view  on  capital  flow 
management measures gives relatively ample space for the use of such tools, in particular 
when they bear the label “macro-prudential”. And indeed, such measures have been used 
more actively in recent years.34 
The exercise of these and other financial sector policies during the crisis, however, may have 
had  a  national  bias,  thus  contributing  to  the  fragmentation  and  deglobalisation  of  financial 
markets  that  we  are  currently  witnessing.35  Global  and  European  banks  in  particular  have 
reduced their foreign exposures in the aftermath of the crisis. While this may partly reflect a 
change  in  risk  and  return  considerations,  policies  aimed  at  preserving  domestic  financial 
stability  may  have  contributed.  This  reminds  me  of  the  notion  that  global  financial  stability 
may  be  compatible  with  either  national  financial  stability  or  international  banking,  but  not 
both.36 There are also signs of “de-risking” of the global correspondent banking network and 
some countries are at a risk of being cut out of the international market for capital.37 And at 
                                                                                                                                                   
124(3),  pp.  382–385;  Arcand,  J.,  Berkes,  E.  and  U.  Panizza  (2015),  “Too  Much  Finance?”,  Journal  of 
Economic Growth, 20(2), pp. 105–148. 
29  See  Kose,  A.,  Prasad,  E.,  and  A.  Taylor  (2011),  “Thresholds  in  the  Process  of  International  Financial 
Integration,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 30(1), pages 147–179. 
30  See  Lane,  P.,  and  P.  McQuade  (2014),  “Domestic  Credit  Growth  and  International  Capital  Flows”, 
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 116, pp. 218–252; Avdjiev, S., R. N.  McCauley and H.S. Shin (2015), 
“Breaking Free of the Triple Coincidence in International Finance”, BIS Working Papers 524. 
31  See  Kose,  A.,  Prasad,  E.,  and  A.  Taylor:  “Thresholds in  the  Process of  International  Financial  Integration,” 
Journal of International Money and Finance, 2011, 30(1), pages 147–179. 
32  See  Jeanne,  O.,  and  A.  Korinek  (2012),  “Macroprudential  Regulation  Versus  Mopping  up  after  the  Crash,” 
NBER Working Paper 18675; Bianchi, J., and E. Mendoza (2013), “Optimal Time-consistent Macroprudential 
Policy,” NBER Working Paper 19704; Brunnermeier, M., and Y. Sannikov (2015), “International Credit Flows 
and Pecuniary Externalities,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, pp. 297–338. 
33  See  IMF  (2012),  “The  Liberalization  and  Management  of  Capital  Flows  –  An  Institutional  View,”  Public 
Information  Notice,  12/137;  Ostry,  J.  D.,  and  A.R.  Ghosh:  “On  the  Obstacles  to  International  Policy 
Coordination,” Journal of International Money and Finance, forthcoming. 
34  See Forbes, K., M. Fratzscher, and R. Straub (2015), “Capital Controls and Macroprudential Policies: What 
Are They Good For?,” Journal of International Economics, pp. 76–97. 
35  See  Beck,  R.,  Beirne,  J.,  Paternò,  F.,  Peeters,  J.,  Ramos-Tallada,  J.,  Rebillard,  C.,  Reinhardt, 
D., Weissenseel,  L.,  and  J.  Wörz  (2015),  “The  side  effects  of  national  financial  sector  policies:  framing  the 
debate on financial protectionism”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 166, September. 
36  See Schoenmaker, D. (2011), “The Financial Trilemma”. Economics Letters, vol. 111(1), pp. 57–59. 
37  See  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  (2015),  “Correspondent  banking”.  Consultative 
report, October. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  the  macroeconomic  level,  such  developments  may  have  contributed  to  a  re-emergence  of 
the  correlation  between  domestic  saving  and  investment,  known  as  the  Feldstein-Horioka 
puzzle. While the correlation between savings and investment across OECD countries had 
fallen  from  0.8  from  mid-1990  when  financial  globalisation  took  off  to  essentially  zero  just 
before the global financial crisis, it has risen back to about 0.6 in the last couple of years.38 
In  view  of  the  ongoing  academic  debates  about  the  costs  and  benefits  of  international 
financial integration, it is not clear how to judge these trends from a normative perspective. 
Given  the  prevailing  uncertainties,  should  we  see  the  current  pause  or  even  reversal  in 
financial globalisation as a desirable “new normal”? Or should we rather see it as the start of 
a harmful spiral of financial protectionism, against which the memories of the 1930 provide a 
potent warning? Should we then not use the current pause a window of opportunity to rethink 
more vigorously the institutional setting in which it is taking place, to establish a framework 
that  can  better  contain  the  costs  of  financial  integration  while  retaining  its  benefits?  If  so, 
what should that framework look like in terms of regulation and governance? 
Finally, turning again to the euro area, it is clear to me that similar reflections are needed, 
namely,  on  how  to  redesign  a  pre-crisis  financial  integration  model  which  failed  to  deliver 
either  economic  stabilisation  or  an  efficient  allocation  of  capital.39  The  European 
Commission’s plan for a Capital Market Union provides the framework for these reflections. 
These  are  the  types  of  questions  where  we,  as  policymakers,  are  looking  to  the  research 
community  for  answers.  Important  discussions  are  taking  place  in  forums  such  as  the 
Financial Stability Board, but on the fundamental issues – how much financial globalisation, if 
good, and what type – we need up-to-date evidence. 
Conclusion 
The  overarching  theme  in  my  remarks  was  a  call  to  review  the  narrative  about  the 
international macroeconomic adjustment process. Such a restored narrative will need to be a 
more nuanced one compared to what we used to call the “Washington Consensus”. But it will 
need to be convincing that it can deliver stronger and more sustained global growth, a better 
functioning  international  adjustment  mechanism  and  more  benefits  from  international 
financial integration that what we have been witnessing over say the past decade or so. 
To successfully build such a new consensus, we need research in the area of international 
economics  that  is  not  just  aimed  at  underpinning  the  growing  evidence  that  the  current 
system  is  unable  to  deal  with  the  lingering  problems,  but  that  will  also  deliver  the  tools  to 
allow  policy  makers to  build  and  implement  a  better global  international  economic  system. 
Otherwise,  we  risk  policy  being  made  on  the  basis  of  ideas  that  no  longer  hold  –  or  as 
Keynes famously put it, based on “voices in the air”. 
                                                
38  Source:  ECB  calculation  based  on  Cœuré,  B.  (2013),  “Global  liquidity  and  international  risk-sharing  in  the 
post-crisis  environment”.  Speech  at  the  Bank  of  Korea  International  Conference  2013  “Assessing  Global 
Liquidity in a Global Framework”, Seoul, 3 June. A correlation between domestic savings and investment can, 
however also reflect an adjustment to certain shocks in the absence of obstacles to financial integration, see 
Giannone,  D.,  and  M.  Lenza (2009),  “The  Feldstein-Horioka  Fact”,  NBER  Chapters, in: NBER  International 
Seminar on Macroeconomics, pp. 103–117g. 
39  See Cœuré, B. (2014), “Completing the single market in capital”. Speech at the ICMA Capital Market Lectures 
Series, Paris, 19 May. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
