  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Enhancing the professionalism of Malaysia’s 
Islamic financial services industry 
Speech  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia 
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Launch  of  the  Chartered  Institute  of  Islamic  Finance 
Professionals (CIIF), Kuala Lumpur, 6 November 2015. 
 to  enhance 
that  reflects  our  collective  effort 
Today’s  official  launch  of  the  Chartered  Institute  of  Islamic  Finance  Professionals  (CIIF) 
marks  a  momentous  occasion 
the 
professionalism  of  the  Islamic  financial  services  industry.  We  are  embarking  on  a  long 
journey  to  create  a  new  landscape  of  talent  development,  one  which  is  permeated  with  a 
strong culture of professionalism, integrity and ethics. Greater professionalism among Islamic 
finance  practitioners  will  instil  greater  confidence  and  capability  to  the  Islamic  finance 
industry to better serve public interest. 
The recent global financial crisis has brought to the fore the importance of trust, confidence 
and integrity in the financial services sector. The banking industry is subjected to continuous 
scrutiny  on  their  values,  professionalism  and  work  ethics.  This  has  prompted  a  host  of 
initiatives  both  domestically  and  globally,  aimed  to  strengthen  the  industry,  given  the 
significant  role  financial  institutions  have  to  the  broader  interest  of  society  and  the  overall 
economy. Maintaining public confidence is critical. 
It is therefore in the industry’s interest to always place public trust above everything else, and 
only  if  we  are  able  to  do  this,  we  shall  enjoy  the  confidence  that  ensures  the  long-term 
growth of the industry. Such expectations are even greater on Islamic finance given that the 
professed  values  of  this  industry  are  driven  by  the  principles  of  Shariah  which  promote 
fairness, equality and justice. It is from this perspective that Islamic finance practitioners are 
duty-bound  to  observe  the  norms  of  high  ethical  conduct  to  uphold  the  values  and  the 
sanctity of Shariah. The need is even more now, given the increasing complexities faced by 
Islamic  finance  brought  about  by  more  competition  and  evolving  regulatory  requirements, 
more offerings of sophisticated products and growing cross-border activities. 
In Malaysia, it has always been our priority from the beginning to develop talent in Islamic 
finance as we recognise that quality talent is a crucial prerequisite for the continued success 
of  the  industry. There  has  been  significant  investment  in  capacity  building,  in  line  with  our 
strategic  approach  in  realising  the  visions  of  talent  development  outlined  in  the  Financial 
Sector Master Plan and the Financial Sector Blueprint. 
To  elevate  the  next  stage  of  growth  would  require  talents  with  different  levels  of  technical 
competency and capabilities. The knowledge of yesterday might be useful for tomorrow, but 
more likely, would not be sufficient to meet future challenges. 
It is with this realisation that we should strategically implement a plan of action to develop 
true  professionals  who  would  lead  the  industry  to  the  next  stage  of  development,  and 
recognised and respected as authorities in their chosen fields. These professionals should 
produce results that exceed expectations. They should also possess the highest degree of 
integrity in personal and business dealings. They are expected to adhere to ethically-driven 
values  that  reflect  Shariah  principles.  They  should  be  regarded  as  the  true  exemplars  of 
Islamic finance. In short, they are the embodiment of what is good about Islamic finance. 
The establishment of CIIF is therefore a significant milestone in our collaborative efforts to 
raise the bar for professionalism and ethics in the industry. We aspire for CIIF to become the 
global body for professionals in Islamic finance. As we envisage CIIF as the leading driver 
and  advocator  of  professionalism  and  ethical  conduct,  we  should  expect  the  new  body  to 
adopt global best practices of similar professional institutions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  CIIF will embark on a task that is both revolving and rewarding. A key imperative for CIIF to 
advance in its quest, as the advocator of the highest degree of professionalism and ethical 
conduct amongst Islamic finance professionals, is for the professional body to receive strong 
and continuous support and recognition from the industry. The industry cannot be a passive 
player.  It  must  be  an  activist.  Together  with  CIIF,  it  must  be  a  strong  advocator  of 
professionalism and ethics. 
The  signing  of  a  first  of  its  kind  industry-led  charter  between  The  Association  of  Islamic 
Banking Institutions Malaysia (AIBIM), Malaysian Takaful Association (MTA), The Malaysian 
Investment Banking Association (MIBA) and CIIF is a very strong reflection of the industry’s 
support. This public commitment by AIBIM, MTA and MIBA acknowledges the noble intent of 
CIIF.  It  is  also  a  pledge  by  the  industry  to  provide  the  required  support  by  allocating  the 
needed  resources  in  our  endeavour  to  create  and  promote  an  internationally  recognised 
Islamic finance professional body. Industry recognition to the bearers of CIIF qualification as 
highly  qualified  and  competent  professionals  will  give  an  added  boost  to  the  entity  as  it 
embarks on this important journey. 
Although CIFF is only being officially launched today, the entity has completed two guiding 
principles  and  two  guidelines  which  will  be  launched  today.  These  issuances  will  set  the 
minimum  requirements  on  the  pathway  of  becoming  Chartered  Professionals  and  for 
financial institutions to become accredited institutions that would enable the training of staff 
as  Islamic  finance  professionals.  More  is  in  the  pipeline  and  I  am  confident  that  CIIF  is 
committed  towards  developing  the  highest  quality  of  guiding  principles  and  guidelines  that 
are in line with the current and future developments. 
Another  bold  action  that  we  shall  embark  on  is  the  transformation  of  The  Association  of 
Shariah  Advisors  in  Islamic  Finance  (ASAS)  to  become  the  leading  professional  body  for 
Shariah advisors. 
This transformation would further complete the Islamic finance service providers ecosystem. 
This is envisioned in the Financial Sector Blueprint, with standards to be set for professional 
programmes, qualifications and continuous professional education on Shariah. 
I would like to congratulate the Board and management of CIIF on its official launch. I am 
confident  that  CIIF  can  contribute  towards  higher  professionalism  for  the  Islamic  financial 
services  industry.  I  am  confident  CIFF  would  embed  a  culture  that  places  unequivocal 
commitment to professionalism and ethics that would raise the prestige of the Islamic finance 
industry and its practitioners. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
