  Y V Reddy: Financial inclusion and central banking – reflections and 
issues 
Keynote speech by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India from 2003 to 2008, 
at the 14th SEACEN Executive Committee Meeting and High-Level Seminar, Port Moresby, 
1–4 October 2015. 
 I am thankful to Rakesh Mohan, Usha Thorat, Deepak Mohanty and Saibal Ghosh, all from the Reserve Bank of 
India, for their valuable input. 
Governor  Loi  Bakani,  Chairman,  SEACEN  Board  of  Governors,  Deputy  Governors,  Hans 
Genberg  of  SEACEN,  Madhusudan  Mohanty  of  BIS,  distinguished  central  bankers  and 
friends. 
I  am  thankful  to  the  BIS  and  SEACEN  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  of  being  with  central 
bankers  again  and  delivering  a  keynote  speech  on  a  subject  close  to  my  heart.  It  is  a 
pleasure and privilege to be with you again. It is said that “once a central banker, always a 
central banker”, and so I remain one, although I joined the fraternity towards the end of my 
career. I continue to have a close association with SEACEN, where I meet old friends and 
make new ones. 
I am grateful to Governor Bakani and his team for hosting this event; and for the excellent 
arrangements. Governor,  you  and  your  team  have  been  courteous,  pleasant, cheerful  and 
helpful, and we greatly enjoyed the hospitality over dinner yesterday evening. We also had 
discussions, as all central bankers do when they meet, about worrying about what we should 
be worrying about. 
In this presentation, I will share my personal reflections with you on the origins of financial 
inclusion as a concept and a policy in India; and how it became a joint responsibility of the 
government and the Reserve Bank. 
I will follow it with what I may term the globalisation of financial inclusion as a policy and what 
is new about it after the Global Financial Crisis. I will then summarise the issues of concern 
to central banks that have been flagged so far. 
I  will  conclude  with  what,  I  believe,  are  right  questions,  in  addition  to  issues  that  central 
banks should be asking when they deal with financial inclusion. 
I took over as Governor of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in September 2003. I continued 
with the reform process and like my predecessors recognised expectations that the RBI will 
continue to be involved in credit availability for development and stability. Also, I was not a 
blue-blooded  central  banker,  having  been  in  local,  state  and  union  governments.  So,  I 
wanted to project the Reserve Bank as an institution concerned with the common people and 
not just financial markets and financial institutions. 
Keeping 
to  evolving 
circumstances, we in the RBI pursued five broad policy directions. First, reforms in monetary 
management consistent with global developments; second, alignment of bank regulation with 
global  standards;  third,  improving  legal  and  institutional  infrastructure  to  enable  a  modern 
financial system, in particular in the payments system; fourth, harmonising as far as possible, 
developmental  objectives  with  those  of  stability  in  consultation  with  government,  and; fifth, 
exploring ways in which the financial sector could better serve ordinary people. I emphasised 
the  fifth  aspect,  that  finance  should  serve  ordinary  people,  as  opposed  to  making  the 
assumption that the development of the financial sector by itself will contribute to economic 
development and welfare. Some initiatives, particularly those relating to financial inclusion in 
India  since  2003,  reflect  this  orientation  towards  the  common  people.  Financial  inclusion, 
thus, was not designed as a programme in isolation, but as a part of the overall strategy in 
for  continuity  with  change  as  appropriate 
the  need 
in  view 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  regard  to  the  role  of  the  central  bank,  as  warranted  by  the  Indian  context  of  inadequate 
access to essential financial services. 
I  was  acutely  aware,  having  been  a  Deputy  Governor  for  six  years,  that  the  needs  of  the 
common  person  were  not  served  well  enough  by  the  financial  sector,  despite  all  the 
investment,  innovation  and  strengthening  of  existing  institutions  in  the  financial  system, 
particularly banks. So, while pursuing the reform agenda already set, and in parallel, I put the 
focus on serving the needs of ordinary people in their interactions with the banking system. 
In doing this, I realised that our efforts were addressed to meeting the needs of those who 
already had links to banks. What about the rest, who actually were far more in number than 
those with links to banks? So, the reform agenda provided for improvements in the way that 
the financial sector served ordinary people better and ensuring that it would reach out to all. 
My assessment of the common person’s requirements at that time was as follows: 
What do ordinary people in India, at this juncture want most from us, the central bank? First 
and foremost, a safe place to keep their cash especially for poor women who have to keep 
their  earnings  out  of  the  reach  of  their  drunken  husbands.  Second,  mechanisms  for 
consumption-smoothing since 90% of the population is employed in the unorganised sector 
with seasonal or uncertain income flows. Third, remittances to families by migrant workers; 
migration of labour within the country in search of seasonal employment was large. Workers 
had  to  migrate  to urban  areas  in  order to  continue  supporting  their  families  in  rural  areas. 
This required attention to remittance facilities, also out in the countryside. Fourth, increased 
stringency  in  regard  to  know-your-customer  and  anti-money  laundering  requirements  after 
9/11 were hindering access for people in the unorganised sector to banking facilities. This 
understanding  led  me  to  a  design  for  what  we,  at  some  stage,  described  as  financial 
inclusion. 
Prior to the formal articulation of this concept, with the support of Indian Bank, especially Dr 
Chakraborty and Mr Samba Murthy, we attempted a survey of people’s access to banking 
facilities and their utilisation in one region. Efforts were also made to experiment with “no frills 
accounts” and “zero balance accounts”. We made assessments that revealed a distinction 
between access and utilisation, and the underlying factors. A major issue was the all-in cost 
of a financial service. For instance, when the costs of travel to a bank, foregone wages for 
that day, the need for documentation, and uncertainty about the timely availability of credit 
are  included,  the  cost  of  formal  credit  to  the  borrower  may  exceed  that  of  credit  from  an 
informal source. 
In  parallel,  the  Institute  for  Development  &  Research  in  Banking  Technology  (IDRBT)  in 
Hyderabad, in collaboration with the Government of Andhra Pradesh, was experimenting on 
the scope for transfer of funds from the government to individual beneficiaries of government 
cash  disbursement  programmes  via  the  use  of  technology.  This  required  the  opening  of 
accounts for  individual  beneficiaries  who  were  widely  dispersed  and  large  in  number. This 
laid the foundation for what has been described as a new system of government-to-person 
payments. 
A  committee  under  the  chairmanship  of  Mr  H  R  Khan  gave  several  recommendations,  of 
which  the  Business  Correspondent  Model  was  an  important  one.  We  tried  to  expand  the 
reach of each bank branch through a correspondent; and the bank was expected to ensure 
compliance  of  the  correspondent  with  all  the  RBI’s  regulatory  requirements.  People  had 
comfort  that  they  were  linked  to  a  bank  branch  and  the  Reserve  Bank  could  have  some 
regulatory  comfort.  Microfinance  institutions,  which  were  for  the  most  part  not-for-profit 
institutions  at  that  time,  were  also  supported  as  instruments  of  financial  inclusion.  They, 
however, tended to concentrate on areas that were already banked or covered by self-help 
groups sponsored by banks, such as those in Andhra Pradesh. A measure that had great 
impact  on  financial  inclusion  was  making  all  ATM  transactions  across  all  branches, 
irrespective  of  where  accounts  are  held,  free  of  charge.  This  initiative  actually  became  a 
means of transferring money to migrants and students at no cost. It reduced the need to hold 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  cash in advance of needs. Unlike a branch, it was a place where everyone, rich or poor, was 
in the same queue. 
As we  were undertaking all these different measures, I wanted to communicate this policy 
commitment to meeting the needs of ordinary people for essential financial services in the 
Monetary Policy Statement of 2005. Mrs Usha Thorat, the Deputy Governor, and I worked 
together on a draft. It required several painstaking interactions. A literature review indicated 
that  most  policy  measures  in  this  regard  related  to  the  development  of  financial  markets, 
financial  sector  deepening,  regulation  of  financial  institutions  and  payment,  clearing  and 
settlement  systems  and,  to  some  extent,  the  provision  of  microcredit.  There  were  some 
examples  of  policy  actions  that  addressed  the  issue  of  exclusion  from  facilities  available 
through  banking  system.  Examples  were  found  mainly  in  the  United  States.  In  France  we 
found that access to a bank account was a right. I initially considered the title of “Financial 
exclusion” and a description of measures to overcome it. As I was finalising the draft of the 
Annual  Policy  Statement  for  the  year  2006–07,  issued  on  18  April  2006,  it  struck  me  that 
what had been attempted particularly in the past year was actually reaching out, and hence 
the title should be “Financial inclusion”. This articulation by the Reserve Bank is the origin of 
the concept of financial inclusion. It also paves the way for the central bank’s involvement, in 
India at least. 
The concept of financial inclusion as articulated by the RBI caught the imagination of many 
people,  particularly  in  state  governments.  It  also  attracted  the  attention  of  the  central 
government,  and  a  Committee  on  Financial  Inclusion  under  the  Chairmanship  of  Dr  C 
Rangarajan  was  appointed.  Financial  inclusion  was  formally  defined  by  the  Committee,  as 
“the process of ensuring access to financial services and timely and adequate credit where 
needed to vulnerable groups such as weaker sections and low income groups at affordable 
cost”.  Mrs  Usha  Thorat  was  also  a  member.  The  Committee’s  report  (January  2008) 
presented  what  I  may  call  the  “government’s  view”  of financial  inclusion,  and  continued  to 
give  a  central  place  to  provision  of  credit  to  vulnerable  sections,  especially  for  productive 
purposes,  as  an  important  ingredient  of  the  financial  inclusion  concept.  The  main 
responsibility  for  the  programme  was  assigned  to  the  National  Bank  for  Agriculture  and 
Development, an apex development institution in India. 
These are the origins of the concept of financial inclusion, which has now become an agenda 
item  in  public  policy  with  responsibility  shared  between  the  government  and  the  RBI. 
However,  it first  caught the  attention  of  the global  community  immediately  after the Global 
Financial Crisis in 2008. 
Globalisation of financial inclusion 
I believe that financial inclusion gave a positive twist to the policy responses to the Global 
Financial  Crisis  (GFC).  The  GFC  warranted  a  massive  coordinated  policy  intervention,  by 
both  governments  and  central  bankers,  to  save  the  world  economy  from  depression.  The 
financial sector was viewed as a villain by many, and governments and central banks were 
often accused of bailing banks out at great expense to the exchequer. In the context of the 
GFC and Occupy Wall Street etc, policymakers must have felt a need to demonstrate that 
they  were  concerned  as  much  with  people  as  with  finance.  Further,  they  had  to  create  a 
direct  stake  for  larger  segments  of  the  population  in  the  financial  sector  that  they  were 
intending to build for the future. 
Many  developing  countries  were  concerned  for  quite  some  time  with  issues  of  connecting 
people  with  finance,  but  for  the  global  community  this  became  an  issue  only  as  a 
consequence  of  the  GFC.  Before  the  GFC,  for  advanced  economies,  the  focus  was  on 
extending credit to those without assets. 
The G20 statement and subsequent follow-up actions by various multilateral institutions have 
to  be  viewed  in  this  context.  Financial  inclusion  was  put  on  the  G20  agenda  in  November 
2008 and, in 2010, it became one of the pillars of the global development agenda. So, we 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  now have the G20’s Financial Inclusion Action Plan and the Global Partnership for Financial 
Inclusion, apart from follow-up work by the IMF, World Bank and BIS, among others. As a 
result of the GFC, the policy of leaving it to the markets had to be replaced with a promise of 
a little more financial sector regulation. To secure a wider acceptance of globally coordinated 
actions, a commitment to bailouts had to be accompanied by a policy of reaching out to the 
underprivileged. 
The  net  result  has  been  that  central  banks,  who  pre-GFC  were  required  to  focus  on 
monetary  policy  with  a  single  objective  or  at  least  one  primary  objective,  namely,  price 
stability,  are  now  encouraged  to  add  financial  stability  to  their  concerns  and  also  financial 
inclusion. 
What is new? 
As the Indian case has illustrated, central banks and governments all over the world have 
been  taking  measures,  as  part  of  their  normal  policies,  to  ensure  the  availability  of  and 
access to financial services for all segments of population. In particular, developing countries 
have  been  promoting  microfinance,  which  has  been  recognised  as  a  form  of  financial 
inclusion. So, what is new about financial inclusion? I will attempt a few generalisations. 
First, as already mentioned, financial inclusion, along with financial stability, has become the 
joint  responsibility  of  central  banks  and  governments.  However,  developing  and  emerging 
market economies have become leaders in innovation in this regard, since their requirements 
are huge. 
Second,  the  objectives  of  financial  inclusion  have  been  expanded  to  encompass  ease  of 
financial transactions and economic development, well beyond addressing issues relating to 
the  provision  of  credit  to  the  underprivileged.  Financial  inclusion  is  expected  to  deliver  on 
several fronts. It is expected to provide a more stable retail deposit base and reduce reliance 
on borrowed funds. Combined with IT solutions, it is a powerful catalyst for payments system 
and  remittances.  It  could  enhance  financial  stability  by  improving  the  health  of  household 
sector. It is also expected to help in the monitoring of suspicious transactions by expanding 
the  scope  for  the  formal  sector.  Financial  inclusion  is  also  expected  to  lead  to  innovative 
solutions,  as  it  extends  the  provision  of  financial  services  to  a  larger  and  more  diverse 
population. There are claims that financial inclusion could also help reduce income inequality 
and narrow the gender gap. Policies for financial inclusion, which were hitherto restricted to 
credit  and,  to  some  extent,  deposit-taking,  cover  several  financial  products,  especially 
insurance  products.  There  have  been  some  voices,  such  as  the  IMF’s,  which  take  a 
balanced view of the benefits, costs and risks of various components of financial inclusion. 
Third, new types of bank, with a special focus on local areas and specific tasks, are being 
considered,  as  in  India.  No  doubt,  many  countries  have  community  banks  and  other 
institutions,  but  financial  inclusion  has  led  to  a  search  for  new  institutions  with  a  different 
focus.  Non-bank  financial  institutions  are  also  involved  in  financial  inclusion.  Policies  for 
financial  inclusion  recognise  and,  indeed,  emphasise  the  role  of  for-profit  enterprises  to 
ensure scalability and sustainability. This is in contrast to microcredit, where in the past not-
for-profit institutions and the integration of credit with income generation were preferred. Not-
for-profit entities such as the Bill Gates Foundation have extended full support to the global 
initiatives in this regard. 
Fourth, the coverage of financial inclusion has been expanded from households to include 
small enterprises, small businesses and some organisational forms. At the same time, limits 
are set in terms of transaction size to define what constitutes financial inclusion. 
Fifth,  some  of  the  regulatory  and  procedural  prescriptions  that  had  inhibited  financial 
inclusion, such as know-your-customer, are being revisited. 
Sixth, above all, technological developments are throwing up vast opportunities for financial 
inclusion. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Finally, for very valid reasons, financial inclusion recognises a variety of policies packaged as 
appropriate  for  different  countries.  They  may  reflect  differing  degrees  of  emphasis  on 
deposit-taking,  extending  credit,  easing  transactions  and  remittances,  or  popularising  or 
innovating financial instruments. Data have been collated and are being analysed on many 
aspects of financial inclusion for purposes of cross-country comparisons, and difficulties in 
interpreting the data are recognised. 
the 
took 
then 
import,  government 
inclusion  has  a  broader 
The Indian case 
Financial  inclusion as currently understood in India is, in some  ways,  different from what I 
had envisaged when it was adopted in India. The RBI’s policy objective for financial inclusion 
at  that  time  was  related  to  activities  within  its  jurisdiction,  namely,  the  payments  system, 
banking system, and to a limited extent, non-banks that were under its jurisdiction. RBI put a 
high priority on the spread of financial literacy and financial counselling. To the extent that 
financial 
initiative,  as 
recommended  by  Dr  Rangarajan’s  Committee,  and  the  major  instrument  was  the  National 
Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD). Currently, India’s financial inclusion 
policy  encompasses  several  objectives,  several  institutions  and  several  financial  products, 
and the central bank is the major instrument of national policy. The intellectual origins of the 
current policy may be traced to the Nachiket Mor Committee, while a massive policy thrust 
was given by the Prime Minister in 2014. The national government has galvanised the RBI, 
the regulator, the public sector banking system, and disbursements by governments. So the 
RBI now appears to be the lead agency in the implementation of financial inclusion policy. 
The  game  changers  in  Indian  policy  in  the  recent  past  have  taken  advantage  of  the 
opportunities  provided  by  technology  for  implementing  financial  inclusion.  This  needed 
significant changes in institutional and regulatory systems. Avenues other than public sector 
banks, on whom the main burden of Financial Inclusion policy fell, are being explored. The 
initiative still remains bank-led but with different types of bank. RBI has taken the lead in this 
regard. 
A new policy framework has been designed by the RBI following the report of the Nachiket 
Mor Committee. The Committee recommended four design principles and advocated multiple 
models and partnerships. They also recommended differentiated banks. The Prime Minister’s 
Jan  Dhan  Yojana,  the  National  Mission  for  Financial  Inclusion,  gave  a  boost  to  the 
implementation of the recommendations. 
In  July  2015,  the  RBI  constituted  a  Committee  to  formulate  a  Medium-Term  Path  on 
Financial  Inclusion  at  the  Prime  Minister’s  suggestion  to  take  the  lead  in  encouraging 
financial institutions and to set a medium- to long-term target for sustainable inclusion. The 
Committee has representation from academia, bankers, the Bill Gates Foundation and other 
parties. The components of financial inclusion are specified, and include payments, deposit, 
credit, social security transfers, pensions and insurance. 
Simultaneously,  small  finance  banks  in  the  private  sector  have  been  licensed,  primarily  to 
undertake  basic  banking  activities  such  as  deposit-taking  and  lending  to  unserved  and 
underserved  sectors  including  small  businesses,  small  and  marginal  farmers,  micro  and 
small industries, and unorganised sector entities. These are, in some ways, similar to local 
area  banks,  an  experiment  that  was  abandoned,  but  with  a  significant  difference,  namely, 
that there is no restriction in their area of operations. 
A more innovative initiative is licenses to payment banks, of which the Department of Posts 
with its deep penetration is one. The banks offer only deposits, which are described as an 
enhanced version of a prepaid wallet. Banks have to consider a model that will allow people 
to  deposit  and  withdraw  cash.  The  benefits  expected  include  seamless  payments,  swift 
remittances, a higher rate on deposits, and the replacement of unregulated entities. Banks 
may  potentially  become  sourcing  agents  for  third-party  products,  such  as  insurance  and 
mutual  funds.  This  is  uncharted  territory.  We  had  a  category  known  as  non-bank  finance 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  companies, and two such entities out of six accounted for over 70% of total deposit-taking 
activities  in  the  non-bank  finance  category.  They  were  permitted  to  take  retail  deposits 
across the country and expected to invest the money almost wholly in government securities. 
RBI  viewed  them  with  disfavour  and  encouraged  them  to  quit  and  change  their  business 
model. But the payment banks are expected to be vastly different in some respects. 
Thus, in India, financial inclusion has become a national policy with the Prime Minister and, 
hence,  the  government  taking  the  lead  and  the  RBI  being  the  most  important  institution 
involved in the policy. 
Issues 
Recent developments in regard to the emphasis on financial inclusion and the responsibilities 
assigned  to  or  assumed  by  central  banks  raise  several  issues  and  these  have  been  well 
documented. I will flag them here to facilitate deliberations in the meeting. 
First,  how  far  are  the  central  banks  going  to  the  other  extreme,  from  a  “one  target-one 
instrument”  to  a  “multi  target–multi  instrument”  approach  to  central  banking?  How  much 
would  this  result  in  a  dilution  of  the  focus  of  central  banks?  What  should  be  the  relative 
emphasis between the various objectives? 
Second,  under  the  new  dispensation,  there  is  a  widening  of  central  bank  mandates.  How 
much would this widening result in a dilution of the independence of central banks? 
Third, in view of recent developments relating to the responsibility for and response to global 
financial  crisis,  the  independence  of  central  banks  and,  more  importantly,  the  credibility  of 
central banks is under stress. At the same time, the central banks, by and large, are already 
in uncharted waters in handling the exit from the Global Financial Crisis. How far would the 
acceptance  of  financial  inclusion  as  a  major  responsibility  at  this  juncture  threaten  the 
effectiveness of central banks’ core function, namely, monetary policy. 
Fourth,  there  is  evidence  that  very  high  expectations  have  been  created  for  a  positive 
outcome for the programme of financial inclusion. It is being described as a win-win game. 
National targets that appear to be quite ambitious have been adopted. To what extent would 
the central banks face reputational risks in the event of the expectations not being met? 
Fifth,  there  is  increasing  recognition  that  there  are  limits  to  what  monetary  policy  can 
achieve,  and  there  is  acute  awareness  of  complexities  of  regulation  of  financial  sector.  In 
such an environment, how far could a central bank deliver some of the laudable objectives of 
financial  inclusion,  such  as  poverty  alleviation,  reduction  of  inequality  and  environmental 
improvements? 
Sixth, do central banks have the expertise to be closely involved in a wider programme of 
financial inclusion since the demand factors are difficult to assess, even assuming that the 
central bank can ensure the supply of financial services? 
Seventh, what are the lessons that could be learnt from experience in regard to programmes 
for  financial  inclusion,  including  those  from  the  US  housing  bubble,  credit  facilities  to 
government employees in South Africa, and microfinance in India? 
Eighth,  a  programme  of  financial  inclusion,  as  generally  understood  in  the  current  global 
initiatives, warrants inter-agency regulatory coordination. The policy encompasses regulatory 
institutions,  financial  institutions,  financial  instruments,  financial  markets  and  governmental 
programmes. Three major roles have been identified for the governments by the IMF in the 
programme,  ie  promoter,  enabler,  and  developer.  Is  there  a  global  understanding  of  what 
governments could do in this regard, corresponding to what central banks are expected to 
do? 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Finally,  relative  to  advanced  economies,  emerging  and  developing  economies  possess 
valuable experience and have a greater stake in the debates on financial inclusion. Perhaps, 
they could contribute more than before to global knowledge and wisdom on this subject. 
Asking the right questions 
There are issues for central bankers in pursuing the goal of financial inclusion, but central 
banks cannot afford to ignore their legitimate role in financial inclusion. In fact, the adoption 
of such policies has a humanising influence on central banks. However, each central bank 
has to carve out its role and responsibilities in this regard carefully, with a view to enhancing 
its effectiveness and mitigating downside risks. With this objective, let me suggest a list of 
questions  that  the  participants  in  the  seminar  could  address  during  the  deliberations,  in 
addition to the issues that I have listed. 
First, what are the externalities that require or demand that global standards are set for the 
policies that affect financial institutions? What is the likelihood and risk of a country’s financial 
inclusion policy influencing other countries? In other words, is there enough justification for 
considering or recommending global standards in regard to financial inclusion? 
Second, financial inclusion is predominantly a problem for emerging market economies and 
other  developing  countries.  The  weight  of  their  financial  sector  in  global  finance  is  very 
limited. It is unlikely that a programme for financial inclusion would warrant global attention, 
however significant it may be for its home country, except as a part of an issue affecting the 
wider global economy such as poverty, environment and public health. To what extent should 
the  definition  of financial  inclusion  be  extended  beyond  households  to  include  provision  of 
credit to enterprises, thus diluting the focus of financial inclusion? 
Third, is it possible that a programme for financial inclusion will be treated as a substitute for 
a commitment to provide the poor with public services such as education and health, or, in 
other  words,  is  such  a  programme  likely  to  undermine  the  global  commitment  to  welfare 
programmes? 
Fourth, a policy on financial inclusion essentially involves moving frontiers of formal finance 
into  informal  finance,  particularly  in  regard  to  households.  By  its  very  nature,  the  informal 
sectors in different countries and in different communities are highly varied and deeply rooted 
in local conditions. So, should the focus be on learning from other countries’ experiences, as 
considered useful by individual countries? 
Fifth,  is  there  merit  in  focusing  on  financial  services  and  products,  other  than  credit, 
inasmuch  as  credit  involves  issues  of  risks  and  leverage,  much  more  than  other  banking 
products do? In other words, what should be the relative emphasis on different components 
of financial inclusion such as remittances, deposit-taking, consumption-smoothing, vis-à-vis 
financial  products  such  as  insurance?  The  relative  emphasis  may,  of  course,  be  country-
specific. 
Sixth, a study by the IMF indicates that too much emphasis on credit could adversely affect 
stability. Easier credit delivery as part of a policy of financial inclusion may lead to the excess 
indebtedness  of  poor  households,  as  experience  has  shown.  If  the  emphasis  is  on  credit, 
which institution will bear the risks involved? Should the central bank assess the risks, if any, 
in the respective country’s financial inclusion programme and, in particular, who would bear 
the risks? Would it be the banking system or the central bank or government? 
Seventh, experience in India shows that institutions such as local area banks that address 
exclusively  one  area  or  one  segment  of  the  population  or  one  type  of  activity  may  not  be 
viable unless the regulatory environment is softer than that of their competitors. At the same 
time,  soft  regulation  provides  an  opportunity  for  arbitrage.  Smaller  institutions  with  limited 
expertise may find it difficult to deliver financial inclusion. At the same time, there are very 
few mechanisms available to ensure that larger conglomerates will find it profitable to adopt 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  this  programme.  In  other  words,  what  are  the  limitations  on  instruments  available  to  the 
central bank to implement financial inclusion programmes? 
Eighth, what would be the role of regional or local government in the financial inclusion? How 
does  a  central  bank  co-opt  such  local  governments?  My  experience  suggests  that  local 
governments,  especially  in  large  economies,  are  better  able  than  national  governments  to 
reach poorer sections of the population. 
Ninth,  do  we  recognise that  the  major  issue  is not  one  of  inclusion  or exclusion,  but  huge 
inequalities in terms of inclusion? A low-income person has to pay disproportionately higher 
fees  for  any  financial  service  than  a  high-income  person  does.  This  is  common  to  both 
advanced  and  emerging  economies.  Can  and  should  central  banks  address  the  issue  of 
terms  on  which  financial  inclusion  takes  place?  Should  we  propose  equitable  terms  of 
financial inclusion for the global agenda? 
Finally, the limits to the spread of financial inclusion may be set by the economic or social 
disadvantages of segments of the population. Financial inclusion programmes may do many 
things  to  facilitate  financial  transactions  and  financial  sector  coverage,  as  well  as  the 
penetration  and  the  efficiency  of  financial  sector,  but  the  temptation  to  treat  them  as  a 
panacea  must  be  resisted.  They  can  at  best  facilitate  but  cannot  deliver  employment, 
development,  equity  or  environmental  benefits.  The  most  important  lessons  of  the  Global 
Financial Crisis must not be forgotten. Financialisation in excess doses can be injurious to 
health. Finance can facilitate, but cannot lead, and central banks should focus on money and 
finance, while never ignoring economic, social and political factors. 
Let me conclude by saying that financial inclusion is an important policy that gives a human 
face  to  the  tasks  of  central  banking.  But  its  role  in  policy  depends  on  how  broad  or  how 
narrow  the  scope  of  financial  inclusion  is  in  any  given  country.  It  would  be  useful  to 
demarcate what government should do, what central banks could do, and how they should 
relate to each other in pursuit of a national policy for financial inclusion. 
Thank you. 
to 
2015 
relevant 
January 
financial 
inclusion, 
References 
Bank  for  International  Settlements,  Range  of  practice  in  the  regulation  and  supervision  of 
publication. 
institutions 
http://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d310.pdf 
Chakrabarty,  D  C,  Financial  Inclusion:  A  road  India  needs  to  travel,  Oct.  2011,  Article 
published by Reserve Bank of India. www.livemint.com 
Dafe,  Dr  Florence  and  Volz  Professor  Ulrich,  Financing  Global  Development:  The  Role  of 
Central  Banks,  Briefing  Paper  Aug.  2015,  German  Development  Institute.  https://www.die-
gdi.de/uploads/media/BP_8.2015.pdf 
de  Sousa,  Mariana  Maraldi:  Financial  Inclusion  and  Global  Regulatory  Standards:  An 
Empirical  Study  across  Developing  Economies,  March  2015.  Centre  for  International 
Governance 
Innovation,  Ontario  Canada  https://www.cigionline.org/sites/default/files/ 
new_thinking_g20_no7.pdf 
Era  Dabla-Norris,  Yan  Ji,  Robert  Townsend,  and  D  Filiz  Unsa,  Identifying  Constraints  to 
Financial  Inclusion  and  Their  Impact  on  GDP  and  Inequality:  A  Structural  Framework  for 
Policy,  Jan.  2015, 
IMF  Working  Paper  WP/15/22.  https://www.imf.org/external/ 
pubs/ft/wp/2015/wp1522.pdf 
Goran  Amidzic,  Alenander  Massara,  and  Andre  Mialou,  Assessing  Countries’  Financial 
Inclusion  Standing−A  New  Composite  Index,  Feb.  2014,  IMF  Working  Paper  WP/14/36. 
https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2014/wp1436.pdf 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  for  Financial 
“Dhan  Yojna”,  published 
Inclusion,  Mexico,  June  2014, 
from  African  Countries,  April  2011, 
the  Middle  East,  Sept.  2015,  Brookings 
Hannig  Alfred,  Financial  Inclusion:  A  New  Common  Ground  for  Central  Banks,  May  2014, 
Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion.  http://www.afi-global.org/blog/2014/05/14/financial-inclusion-
new-common-ground-central-banks 
Hariharan  Govind  and  Marktanner  Marcus:  The  Growth  Potential  from  Financial  Inclusion. 
ICA Institute and Kennesaw State University. https://www.frbatlanta.org/-/media/Documents/ 
news/.../Hariharan.pdf 
Lagarde, Christine, Empowerment Through Financial Inclusion: Address to the International 
Forum 
International  Monetary  Fund. 
https://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/2014/062614a.htm 
Lewis Robin, Villasenor John and West Darrell M, Advancing financial inclusion in Southeast 
Institution. 
Asia,  Central  Asia,  and 
http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/techtank/posts/2015/09/16-fdip-results-asia 
Mehrotra,  Aaron  and  Yetman,  James:  Financial  inclusion  and  optimal  monetary  policy. 
Working Paper No.476, Bank for International Settlements www.bis.org/publ/work476.pdf 
Mehrotra, Aaron and Yetman, James: Financial Inclusion – Issues for central banks, March 
2015, Bank for International Settlements. http://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1503h.htm 
Mihasonirina  Andrianaivo  and  Kangni  Kpodar,  ICT,  Financial  Inclusion,  and  Growth: 
IMF  WP/11/73.  https://www.imf.org/ 
Evidence 
external/pubs/ft/wp/2011/wp1173.pdf 
Modi,  Narendra, 
in  Economic  Times,  Oct.  2014. 
http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2014–10–07/news/54735604_1_prime-minister-
narendra-mode-pradhan-mantri-jan-dhan-yojana-bank 
Morgan, Peter and Pontines, Victor, Financial Stability and Financial Inclusion (July 9, 2014). 
ADBI  Working  Paper  488.  http://ssrn.com/abstract+2464018  or  http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ 
ssrn.2464018 
Rajan, Raghuram, Sustainable Growth in the Financial Sector, Sept. 2015, speech delivered 
at 
https://rbi.org.in/scripts/ 
BS_SpeechesView.aspx?Id=976 
Rajan, Raghuram, Democracy, Inclusion and Prosperity, Feb. 2015, speech delivered at the 
D 
https://rbi.org.in/scripts/ 
BS_SpeechesView.aspx?Id=941 
Ravi,  Shamika  and  Gakhar  Shruti,  Advancing  Financial  Inclusion  in  India  beyond  the  Jan-
Dhan  Yojana,  January  2015,  Brookings  Institution  India  Center  (Brookings  India  Impact 
Series:  Development  and  Governance)  http://www.brookings.in/wp-content/uploads/ 
2015/01/Advancing-Financial-Inclusion-in-India.pdf 
Reddy,  Y  V,  Reserve  Bank  of  India  –  Annual  Policy  Statement  for  the  Year  2005–06. 
https://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_ViewMonetaryCreditPolicy.aspx?Id=221 
Reddy,  Y  V,  Mid-term  Review  of  Annual  Policy  for  the  year  2005–06,  Oct.  2005. 
https://rbi.org.in/scrips/NotificationUser.aspx?Id=2539 
Reddy, Y V, Banks and Service to the Common Person, Address on the occasion of release 
of  the  Code  of  Bank’s  Commitment  to  Customers  at  the  RBI,  Mumbai,  July,  2006. 
https://rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_SpeechesView.aspx?Id=294 
Reddy,  Y  V,  Use  of  technology  in  the  financial  sector:  Significance  of  concerted  efforts, 
Address at the Banking Technology Awards Function, at the Institute for Development and 
Research 
https://rbi.org.in/Scripts/ 
BS_SpeechesView.aspx?Id=297 
Technology,  September 
Prahalad  Memorial 
in  Banking 
Kosambi 
Lecture. 
Festival 
2006. 
Ideas 
Goa. 
held 
4th 
the 
in 
D 
C 
K 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  the  Bank  of 
Fund  Regulatory 
and  Development  Authority,  September 
Reddy, Y V, Credit Counselling: An Indian Perspective, Address delivered at the Foundation 
Day  Function  of 
India,  Mumbai,  September  2006.  https://rbi.org.in/ 
Scripts/BS_SpeechesView.aspx?Id=298 
Reddy,  Y  V,  The  Role  of  Financial  Education:  The  Indian  Case,  Inaugural  Address  at  the 
International  Conference  on  Financial  Education  organised  by  OECD  and  co-hosted  by 
Pension 
2006. 
https://rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_SpeechesView.aspx?Id=301 
Reddy,  Y  V,  Financial  sector  regulation  and  macroeconomic  policy,  Special  address, 
November 2011, CAFRAL-BIS International Conference on Financial Sector Regulation for 
Growth,  Equity  and  Stability  in  the  Post  Crisis  World.  http://www.cafral.org.in/sfControl/ 
content/Programm/12112013102854AMBP62_full_document_WEB.pdf 
Reddy,  Y  V:  Society,  economic  policies,  and  the  financial  sector,  The  Per  Jacobsson 
Foundation  Lecture  2012,  Basel,  Switzerland,  June  2012.  http://www.bis.org/review/ 
r120704e.pdf 
Reserve  Bank  of  India,  Report  of  the  Internal  Group  to  Examine  Issues  relating  to  Rural 
Credit  and  Microfinance,  July  2005.  http://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PublicationReport/ 
Pdfs/65111.pdf 
Sasidaran Gopalan and Ramkishen S. Rajan: How Does Foreign Bank Entry Affect Financial 
Inclusion  in  Emerging  Economies?  Working  Paper  No.  2015–04,  Feb.  2015.  Institute  for 
Emerging  Market  Studies,  Hong  Kong  University  of  Science  and  Technology 
http://iems.ust.hk/WP -content/uploads/2015/02/IEMSWP2015–04.pdf 
The 
Development 
Report 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTGLOBALFINREPORT/Resources/8816096–
1361888425203/9062080–1364927957721/GFDR-2014_Complete_Report.pdf 
Vivina  Vishwanathan,  10  changes  payments  banks  may  bring  in,  Aug.  2015,  published  in 
The  Livemint  http://www.livemint.com/Money/34XcRmgHz4ExLQVhabyLlM/10-changes-
payments-banks-may-bring-in.html 
Financial 
Global 
World 
2014. 
Bank 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
