  William C Dudley: Regulation and liquidity provision 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  SIFMA  Liquidity  Forum,  New  York  City,  30  September 
2015. 
 the 
that 
tougher  bank  regulation  claim 
The charts can be found at the website (Federal Reserve Bank of New York). 
The financial crisis and the ensuing recession exacted a high cost on the country. Real gross 
domestic  product  (GDP)  declined  by  over  a  half  of  a  trillion  dollars.  Total  nonfarm  payroll 
employment  declined  by  8.7  million  jobs,  and  5.8  million  households  lost  their  homes  to 
foreclosure.  Extraordinary  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  efforts  were  required  to  prevent  a 
collapse of the financial system and the onset of a world-wide economic depression. In the 
aftermath, new regulations, such as Basel III and the Dodd-Frank Act, were implemented to 
strengthen the financial system and to limit the risk of a future financial crisis. 
Some  opponents  of 
increased  regulatory 
requirements, such as the higher capital requirements and new liquidity standards, that have 
been  imposed  on  large  financial  institutions  in  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis  have 
reduced  these  firms’  market-making  capacity.  As  a  result,  so  the  argument  goes,  this  is 
leading to less liquidity for trading securities, and to more illiquidity events in which the prices 
of financial assets move sharply and become temporarily unmoored from their fundamental 
valuations.  The  contention  is  that  higher  liquidity  costs  and more frequent  illiquidity  events 
will,  over  time,  drive  up  the  borrowing  costs  of  households,  businesses  and  the  U.S. 
government;  and  that  this  is  a  substantial,  largely  unintended  cost  imposed  by  tougher 
regulation. Thus, the argument concludes, the regulatory burden should be rolled back. 
This is a noteworthy assertion and would have significant implications for regulatory policy if 
it were correct. However, as I will lay out in my remarks, I don’t think the hypothesis is well-
supported by the available evidence. First, the evidence to date that liquidity has diminished 
markedly is, at best, mixed. Second, even if one were to interpret the evidence as indicating 
that  liquidity  has  been  reduced,  it  is  not  clear  whether  regulation  is  the  primary  driver,  as 
other changes have played important roles as well. Moreover, even if higher capital and new 
liquidity  requirements  were  found  to  result  in  greater  transaction  costs,  these  costs  would 
need  to  be  assessed  against  the  benefits  of  having  a  more  robust  and  resilient  financial 
system and a reduced risk of financial crises in the future. 
That said, more work should be undertaken to fully assess this issue. There is much that is 
still unknown. The available market liquidity data primarily focus on the inter-dealer markets 
and thus do not shed light on possible liquidity changes between dealers and customers. In 
addition,  the  financial  system  is  adjusting  in  complex  ways  in  reaction  to  regulatory, 
technological  and  other  changes.  We  need  to  better  understand  the  degree  to  which  any 
changes in the nature of liquidity reflect the evolving structure of financial markets, changes 
in regulatory policy or other factors. With respect to regulatory policy, an important objective 
should  be  to  achieve  the  best  balance  between  the  benefits  of  increased  safety  and 
soundness versus any costs imposed by these regulatory changes on market function and 
liquidity. 
In my remarks today, I will focus on market liquidity rather than funding liquidity, although I 
recognize that the two are related in important ways. I  will examine market liquidity in two 
important  fixed-income  markets  –  the  U.S.  Treasury  market  and  the  U.S.  corporate  bond 
market.  The  Treasury  and  corporate  bond  markets  provide  a  useful  contrast  in  evaluating 
liquidity conditions as they differ with respect to the homogeneity of their securities, how their 
securities  are  traded  and  how  regulatory  changes  may  have  affected  the  incentives  of 
dealers to make markets in these securities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  Treasury  market  is  much  more  homogeneous  and  the  average  size  of  each  issue  is 
much  larger.  Trading  volume  and  average  trade  sizes  are  much  larger,  and  much  of  the 
trading  activity  for  interdealer  on-the-run  securities  is  conducted  electronically  through  the 
use of central limit order books (CLOB). In contrast, the corporate bond market is much more 
heterogeneous;  there  are  many  more  distinct  bonds  available;  and  bond  sizes  are  much 
smaller. As a result, corporate bond trading is fragmented across a large number of distinct 
outstanding  bonds.  Consequently,  trading  tends  to  occur  infrequently  and  largely  on  a 
bilateral basis. 
Through the prism of these two asset classes, I hope to provide some preliminary answers to 
five key questions. First, what do we mean by liquidity and how can we measure it? Second, 
what does the available evidence show in terms of how liquidity has changed in recent years 
in  the  U.S.  Treasury  and  corporate  bond  markets?  Third,  what  factors  could  influence 
liquidity  provision?  Regulation  might  be  one factor,  but there  also  could be  others.  Fourth, 
what are the costs associated with shifts in liquidity and how do these costs compare to the 
benefits of a more resilient and robust financial system? Fifth, what future work is needed to 
better assess whether increased regulation has damaged liquidity provision and whether the 
resulting  costs  exceed  the  benefits  of  higher  capital  and  liquidity  standards  in  terms  of 
financial  stability?  As  always,  what  I  have  to  say  today  represents  my  own  views  and  not 
necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve 
System.1 
What do we mean by liquidity and how can we measure it? 
I would define liquidity as the cost – both in expense and in time – of buying or selling an 
asset  for  cash.  This  would  incorporate  any  direct  transaction  expense,  such  as  fees  or 
brokerage costs, the price the transaction was executed at relative to the midpoint of bid-ask 
spreads,  how  much  –  if  at  all  –  the  size  of  the  transaction  moved  market  prices,  and  the 
immediacy or speediness with which the transaction could be completed. How quickly prices 
revert back to earlier prices after a large trade also is relevant in assessing liquidity costs. 
The costs of liquidity would go up if the costs of execution rose, the bid-ask spread widened, 
if prices moved more in response to a given sized transaction or if it took a longer period of 
time to complete the transaction and receive cash. 
In  assessing  liquidity,  we  also  need  to  distinguish  between  those  liquidity  conditions  that 
generally prevail versus those that arise during periods of market stress when liquidity may 
become  constrained.  Liquidity  risk  is  the  risk  that  liquidity  might  be  impaired  in  the  future 
when  one  wants  to  buy  or  sell  an  asset.  If  liquidity  risk  is  high,  this means  that  there  is  a 
substantial  risk  that  the  price  received  could  be  at  a  greater  concession  to  the  prior  trade 
than anticipated. 
Liquidity is dynamic, unobservable and multi-dimensional in nature, and, as such, can only 
be measured indirectly. We can measure liquidity using a number of metrics, including bid-
ask spreads, market depth and price impact. Bid-ask spreads are a measure of the potential 
compensation for market makers for liquidity provision. Market depth measures how thick the 
central limit order book is at any point in time. If the CLOB is denser and thicker, then a large 
trade  should  result  in  a  smaller  price  concession,  everything  else  equal.  Price  impact 
measures how the price of a security changes in response to trades of a given size. 
To measure liquidity risk, we combine the various measures of liquidity discussed above into 
a single liquidity index. Large jumps in illiquidity are identified as days in which the liquidity 
index  deteriorates  by  an  unusually  large  amount. We benchmark  this  as  moves  of greater 
                                                
1   Tobias  Adrian,  Dianne  Dobbeck,  James  Egelhof,  Michael  Fleming,  Joshua  Frost,  Lorie  Logan,  Michael 
McMorrow,  Matthew  Raskin,  Ernst  Schaumburg,  Katherine  Tilghman-Hill,  Joseph  Tracy  and  Nathaniel 
Wuerffel assisted in preparing these remarks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  than  two  standard  deviations.  Liquidity  risk  is  calculated  as  the  number  of  such  jumps  in 
illiquidity  over  a  two-year  rolling  window.  Constructed  in  this  manner,  we  are  implicitly 
assuming that the risk of an illiquidity event in the future is correlated with the frequency of 
such illiquidity events in the recent past. 
What does the available evidence show in terms of how liquidity has changed in 
recent years in the U.S. Treasury and corporate bond markets? 
With respect to the U.S. Treasury market, we do not find much evidence based on available 
measures consistent with a significant deterioration in liquidity. For example, quoted bid-ask 
spreads, after widening sharply during the financial crisis, subsequently narrowed and have 
remained  stable  at  pre-crisis  levels  since  2010.  (Exhibit  1)  Other  measures  paint  a  more 
mixed picture. While order book depth is appreciably lower now than in 2012 and 2013, it is 
much  higher  than  during  the  financial  crisis,  and  does  not  appear  to  be  unusually  low  by 
historical standards. (Exhibit 2) Similarly, the price impact of trades appears to have risen a 
bit  since  the  October  15 flash  rally  indicating  some  deterioration  of  liquidity,  but  is  still  not 
high  relative  to  its  longer-run  experience.  (Exhibit  3)  Average  trade  sizes  have  followed  a 
similar pattern to the order book depth and have recently declined somewhat. (Exhibit 4) 
Another way to assess liquidity conditions is through the potential impact on Treasury yields. 
If liquidity had deteriorated markedly, then we would expect to see larger deviations of actual 
yields compared to the yields predicted by an empirically fitted yield curve. If liquidity were 
more  costly,  the  deviations  of  actual  yields  from  fitted  yields  would  increase  because  the 
costs of arbitrage to eliminate those divergences would be higher. During the financial crisis, 
for example, there was a sharp deterioration in liquidity, which was associated with a sharp 
rise in some measures of yield curve fitting errors to a peak of about 20 basis points. This 
compares to less than 2 basis points prior to the crisis. In contrast, yield curve fitting errors 
have been low and stable recently and not outside historical norms. (Exhibit 5) Of course, the 
Federal Reserve’s large scale interventions in the Treasury market over this period may also 
have had an impact on this measure. 
Turning to corporate bonds, given their heterogeneous nature, liquidity in the corporate bond 
market  depends  on  the  ability  and  willingness  of  dealers  to  hold  these  securities  on  their 
balance sheets while they find buyers. Disaggregated data on dealer balance sheet holdings 
have only been published since April 2013. While limited in terms of its history, these data 
indicate no clear reduction in investment grade security holdings over time, but do show a 
significant reduction in high-yield security holdings since the end of the financial crisis. This 
might be indicative of deterioration in market liquidity in corporate bonds. 
To  investigate  corporate  bond  market  liquidity  in  more  detail,  let’s  examine  three  liquidity 
measures:  the  average  trade  size,  “effective”  bid-ask  spreads  and  price  impact.  The 
evidence on the average trade size for investment grade corporate bonds indicates a slight 
reduction from between $700,000 to $800,000 in the early 2000s to around $500,000 in the 
last  few  years.  (Exhibit  6)  However,  price  measures  of  corporate  bond  liquidity  do  not 
substantiate  the  trend  in  this  quantity  measure.  The  effective  bid-ask  spread  has  been 
trending  down  since  the  early  2000s,  around  the  same  time  that  TRACE  reporting  was 
introduced. The spread spiked during the financial crisis, but is now lower than its pre-crisis 
levels. (Exhibit 7) Similarly, price impact – the effect on price from a $1 million trade – has 
also been trending down since the early 2000s apart from the jump during the financial crisis. 
(Exhibit 8) 
Although  liquidity  in  the  Treasury  and  corporate  bond  markets  does  not  appear  to  have 
changed much recently, liquidity risk may have risen. For the Treasury market, our liquidity 
risk  measure  increased  sharply  with  the  financial  crisis,  and  declined  from  2009  to  2013. 
However, over the last two years Treasury liquidity risk has moved higher and relative to the 
pre-crisis period is currently somewhat elevated. For the corporate bond market, liquidity risk 
also increased sharply during the financial crisis, and then quickly fell as the crisis passed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Corporate  bond  liquidity  risk  subsequently  increased  again  in  2012  and  early  2013,  but  is 
now back down close to its pre-crisis level. (Exhibit 9) 
In  sum,  there  is  limited  evidence  pointing  to  a  reduction  in  the  average  levels  of  liquidity. 
However, there are reasons to think liquidity risk may have increased, and there are some 
data to support this conjecture. 
Two cautionary notes are warranted in evaluating the available evidence. First, the Treasury 
market  evidence  is  based  on  the  inter-dealer  markets,  and  we  do  not  have  comparable 
evidence on liquidity conditions in the dealer-to-customer market. Second, it is important to 
note that the FOMC’s unconventional monetary policy may have affected recent measures of 
liquidity in ways that could make it more difficult to clearly discern any potential changes. To 
the extent that this may be the case, then a clearer picture on liquidity conditions may only 
emerge as monetary policy is normalized. 
What factors could influence liquidity provision? 
Clearly  many  factors  could  affect  liquidity  provision.  On  the  regulatory  side,  capital  and 
liquidity  requirements  are  probably  the  most  important  factors.  Dealers  have  been  an 
important provider of liquidity. Higher capital requirements reduce dealers’ returns on equity 
for  a  given  level  of  intermediation  activity  and  margin.  At  the  same  time,  liquidity 
requirements increase the cost of holding less liquid assets. To compensate for the higher 
capital and liquidity requirements, dealers can shrink their activity in lower margin businesses 
and  raise  the  price  for  the  liquidity  services  they  provide.  Presumably,  both  adjustments 
occur in most markets with the ease of entry, the degree of economies of scale, business 
model and overall client profitability influencing whether the adjustment occurs more through 
a resizing of the activity or a change in unit trading margins. 
For  the  U.S  Treasury  market,  the  most  important  change  in  regulatory  requirements  is 
probably the introduction of the supplementary leverage ratio (SLR) in the United States. The 
SLR  limits  how  leveraged  a  dealer  balance  sheet  can  be.  Because  in  the  SLR  all  assets 
require regulatory capital, the SLR is much tougher on low risk assets compared to the risk-
based capital measures it complements. Of note, the long-standing U.S. tier 1 leverage ratio 
also  requires  the  same  amount  of  regulatory  capital  for  all  assets,  but  the  SLR  has  been 
more  binding given  its  higher  calibration  and more  expansive  coverage  of  exposures. The 
SLR  is  currently  the  binding  capital  requirement  for  some  dealers,  and  it  has  significantly 
increased  the  amount  of  capital  that  needs  to  be  held  against  low-risk  assets.  This  has 
resulted in significant adjustments in the composition of dealer balance sheets. For example, 
the imposition of the SLR has been cited as an important factor in the shrinkage of dealer 
repo  financing  activity.  In  contrast,  the  risk-based  capital  standards  and  new  liquidity 
standards  are  unlikely  to  be  important  for  Treasuries  and  repo  backed  by  Treasuries 
because Treasuries are treated as posing less risk to the banks that hold them and count as 
high-quality liquid assets. 
For  the  corporate  bond market, the  most  relevant factors  are  probably  the  increase  in  the 
Basel risk-weighted capital ratio, the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) 
stress tests – which subject the dealer trading book to additional global market shocks that 
include a sudden increase in general risk premiums and credit risk combined with significant 
market illiquidity – and the Volcker Rule, which prohibits proprietary trading for a number of 
asset classes including corporate bonds, but not U.S. Treasuries. 
However,  for  both  markets,  other  non-regulatory  factors  are  also  important.  Liquidity 
provision  is  affected  by  changes  in  market  structure,  how  trades  are  executed  and  by 
competition  from  outside  of  the  regulatory  boundaries  that  have  been  established  for 
systemically important financial institutions. The market structure for many asset classes has 
evolved from a bilateral OTC structure toward a more open, centralized structure through the 
adoption  of  electronic  trading  platforms,  post-trade  infrastructures  and  higher  degrees  of 
transparency. For example, in the U.S. Treasury market, firms specializing in high-frequency 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  algorithmic trading have become much more important and now make up more than half the 
trading  in  the  electronic,  interdealer  cash  market.  This  change  in  market  structure  has 
reduced  the  cost  of  trading  in  the  interdealer  market,  especially  for  small  trade  sizes. 
Electronic  trading  enables  the  use  of  automated  trading  strategies  which  tend  to  employ 
speed for executing small-size trades, and the liquidity on electronic trading platforms allows 
traders  to  get  in  and  out  of  positions  quickly.  The  growth  in  high-frequency  trading  likely 
accounts  for  the  reduction  in  trade  size  discussed  earlier  rather  than  this  reduction  being 
indicative  of  less  liquidity.  The  movement  toward  electronic  trading  has  allowed  a  more 
diverse set of actors to participate in the market, thereby increasing competition and likely 
leading  to  improved  market  liquidity.  These  changes,  though,  may  have  reduced  the 
profitability  of  providing  liquidity  for  dealers  engaged  in  trading  activity  in  the  Treasury 
market.2 
Liquidity  risk  in  the  Treasury  market  may  also  reflect  the  growth  in  high-frequency  trading 
rather than the impact of regulation. Temporary illiquidity events may reflect unanticipated, 
complex and dynamic interactions among high-frequency trading strategies that can play out 
faster than the timeframe in which human intervention can occur. In addition, high-frequency 
trading  activity,  by  undercutting  the  returns  to  providing  liquidity  services  on  a  lower 
frequency  and  a  higher  trade  size  basis,  may  have  both  increased  liquidity  in  the  small  – 
hence narrowing bid/offer spreads in normal trading conditions – but decreased it in the large 
– when selling or buying pressure on one side of the market predominates. 
For  the  corporate  bond market,  market  structure  has  also  changed  in  important  ways.  For 
example, bond mutual funds and exchange traded funds now hold a much higher proportion 
of corporate bonds than before the financial crisis. Presumably, this shift in the structure of 
the  market  has  affected  liquidity  provision  and  liquidity  risk  in  the  corporate  bond  market 
through  the  redemption  risk  faced  by  these  funds.  Also,  shifts  in  market  structure  and 
regulation  have  undoubtedly  affected  other  markets  related  to  the  corporate  bond  market. 
For  example,  changes  in  capital  requirements  for  single  name  credit  default  swaps  have 
presumably – and appropriately from a supervisory perspective –  increased hedging costs 
and affected dealer market-making appetites and capabilities. 
What are the costs associated with shifts in liquidity and how do these costs compare 
to the benefits of a more resilient and robust financial system? 
Even  if  one  were  to  read  the  evidence  as  supporting  the  notion  that  liquidity  has  become 
somewhat more costly, this does not imply that we should simply unwind recent regulatory 
requirements.  First,  as  I  discussed,  there  are  non-regulatory  factors  that  could  be  more 
important  factors.  Second,  even  if  a  connection  could  be  made  to  regulatory  causes,  the 
costs  of  any  reduction  in  liquidity  or  increase  in  liquidity  risk  might  be  low  relative  to  the 
benefits of the regulations. 
As I noted at the outset of my remarks, recent regulatory changes have been designed to 
produce a safer and sounder financial system. Higher capital and liquidity requirements have 
made major financial institutions less prone to failure. This can be seen in the sharp fall in 
credit  default swap  spreads for major  dealers  in  recent  years.  Moreover,  other steps  have 
made  the  financial  system  more  robust  to  the  failure  of  a  systemically  important  firm.  For 
example,  the  shift  to  central  clearing  of  over-the-counter  derivatives  through  central 
counterparties (CCPs) has reduced bilateral risk exposures, and significant progress is being 
                                                
2   The Federal Reserve’s large scale asset purchases presumably have also played a role by removing a large 
volume of Treasury securities from the marketplace. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  made  on  how  to  resolve  the failure  of  a  systemically  important financial  firm  in  a  way  that 
does not threaten the entire financial system.3 
As I see it, the prior regime did not sufficiently foster financial stability, a necessary condition 
for sustained economic growth. Most noteworthy to me is the fact that the regulatory regime 
that  was  in  place  in  2008  and  2009  was  associated  with  an  episode  of  the  most  illiquid 
market conditions since at least the Great Depression. A return to such a regime could lead 
to a higher cost for liquidity over the long-run. 
I think we are in a much better place today. We have a financial system that is much more 
resilient, and the available evidence suggests that this transformation has not resulted in any 
significant erosion in market liquidity. 
What future work is needed? 
There  is  a  tendency  to  compress  a  complex  world  into  a  sound  bite  –  such  as,  “tougher 
regulation is increasing the cost of liquidity and driving up liquidity risk.” Policy needs to be 
based on evidence and the available evidence supporting this claim is mixed, at best. Most 
importantly,  I  think  it  ignores  the  complex  nature  of  the  changes  underway  in  financial 
markets.  The  methods  of  intermediation  are  changing  and  will  likely  continue  to  evolve. 
There are new players with different objectives and goals, and technology is evolving rapidly. 
These factors strike me as just as important as the increase in regulatory requirements for 
the large dealers. 
The  recent  work  analyzing  the  October  15  Treasury  market  flash  rally  illuminates  the 
complexity  of  today’s  market  structure.  After  a  careful  examination  of  the  evidence,  the 
authors  of  the  October  15  flash  rally  report  conclude  that  “the  events  of  October  15 
underscore the importance of efforts by the official and private sectors to understand more 
fully the implications of the evolving Treasury market structure for liquidity, trading and risk 
management practices, data access, and monitoring and surveillance.” The report goes on to 
suggest “further study of the evolution of the U.S. Treasury market and the implications for 
market  structure  and  liquidity;”  “continue  monitoring  of  trading  and  risk  management 
practices  across  the  U.S.  Treasury  market;”  “an  assessment  of  the  data  available  to  the 
public  and  to  official  sectors  on  U.S.  Treasury  cash  securities;”  and  “continued  efforts  to 
strengthen  monitoring  and  surveillance  and  to  promote  interagency  coordination  related  to 
trading across the U.S. Treasury market.”4 I concur with all these recommendations. 
There  is  much  more  work  to  do  –  not  just  with  respect  to  the  U.S.  Treasury  market,  of 
course,  but  also  on  the  broader  issue  of  how  changes  in  regulation  and  market  structure 
influence  liquidity  conditions  across  the  different financial  markets.  For example,  electronic 
trading  was  introduced  to  the  foreign  exchange  market  well  before  recent  regulatory 
changes. Consequently, a study of the foreign exchange market may shed some additional 
light  on  the  role  of  electronic  trading  on  liquidity  risk  in  an  environment  prior  to  recent 
regulatory  changes.  Only  through  much  more  careful  study  and  data  analysis  can  we 
thoughtfully  address  the  two  most  important  questions  –  not  whether  regulation  should  be 
rolled back in order to return to the liquidity conditions prior to the financial crisis, but instead: 
whether  there  is  a  diminution  of  liquidity  and/or an  increase  in  liquidity  risk that  is 
• 
costly or poses risks to financial stability or macroeconomic performance; and, if this 
this is the case, 
                                                
3   This includes requirements for total loss-absorbing capital (TLAC), Title I resolution plan requirements and the 
option of Title II single point of entry resolution 
4   See Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014, pp 6–7. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  whether  financial  market  regulation  could  be  altered  in  a  way  that  improves  the 
balance between the benefits of tougher regulation in terms of enhanced financial 
stability  versus  the  costs  of  such  regulation,  including  any  adverse  impacts  on 
market  liquidity  provision.  In  addition,  whether  microstructure  reforms  aimed  at 
improving the functioning of markets could be promising in that respect. 
 We  certainly  don’t  want  to  undermine  the  progress  we  have  made  in  making  the  financial 
system  more  robust  and  resilient.  But  if  there  are  adjustments  to  regulation  that  could 
improve liquidity provision without increasing financial stability risks, we should be open to 
considering  such  changes.  I  suspect,  however,  making  this  determination  will  require 
considerably more data, research and reflection before we reach any definitive conclusions. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
