  Fernando Restoy: Bank credit developments in Spain 
Speech  by  Mr  Fernando  Restoy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  European 
Association of Public Banks (EAPB) Annual Congress, Barcelona, 10 November 2015. 
 Introduction 
1.  
Good morning everyone. It is a pleasure for me to be here today participating in the Annual 
Congress  of  the  European  Association  of  Public  Banks,  which  is  being  held  this  year  in 
Barcelona.  Allow  me  to  thank  the  organisers  and,  in  particular,  the  Institut  Català  de 
Finances and its CEO, Josep-Ramon Sanromà, for his kind invitation. 
I will focus my remarks on the developments in bank credit in Spain during the recent crisis 
and  the  current  recovery.  I  really  cannot  think  of  a  more  qualified  audience  to  share  my 
reflections on these issues, given the active role played by national promotional banks in the 
recent crisis in facilitating the flow of credit. 
As is well known, bank credit flows have contracted markedly in many advanced countries 
over  much  of  the  recent  crisis.  In  Spain,  the  outstanding  amount  of  bank  lending  to 
households and firms has been decreasing, in real terms, since 2009. The current process of 
deleveraging marks the sharpest contraction in bank credit in this country since the 1980s. 
The persistency of the adjustment of the stock of credit is likewise remarkable. In particular, 
even after emerging from the last recession in mid-2013, the outstanding stock of credit has 
continued contracting, albeit at a rate that has moderated significantly in recent times. 
The weakness of bank lending over the recent past has motivated much discussion on the 
reasons  behind  this  and  on  the  best  policies  to  deal  with  the  situation.  In  order  to  define 
these  best  policy  measures,  it  is  important  first  to  fully  understand  the  behaviour  of  this 
phenomenon and to identify possible frictions in the credit market that may be hampering its 
recovery.  With  this  in  mind,  I  will  next  provide  an  overview  of  the  main  factors  explaining 
recent credit developments in Spain: first, in the context of the crisis period, and then in the 
current  recovery  phase. 
I  will  conclude  with  some  reflections  on  possible  policy 
considerations. 
The determinants of bank credit in Spain during the crisis 
2.  
When  analysing  the  factors  behind  the  contraction  of  bank  lending  during  the  crisis  it  is 
useful  to  distinguish  between  demand  and  supply  elements,  even  after  discounting  the 
practical difficulties in separating both components. 
Demand-side factors 
2.1. 
Starting  with  the  demand  side,  several  factors  contributed  to  the  sharp  reduction  in  the 
demand  for  credit  during  the  crisis.  First,  loan  demand  fell  sharply  as  a  result  of  the 
deterioration in economic conditions, which limited current and planned spending levels and, 
hence, the need for new credit. 
Second, the need of households and non-financial corporations to deleverage and rebuild a 
sounder  financial  position  is  another  factor  behind  the  pronounced  slowdown  in  credit 
demand. To give you some figures, non-financial corporation debt ratios grew rapidly during 
the  last  expansion  up  to  close  to  120%  of  GDP  in  mid-2010,  clearly  above  the  average 
values  in  the  euro  area,  which  stood  at  around  80%  of  GDP  at  that  time.  Similarly,  the 
household debt-to-GDP ratio rose up to almost 85% in the same period, 20 pp above euro 
area levels. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Supply-side frictions 
2.2. 
Turning  now  to  the  supply  side,  there  exist  some  frictions  that  tend  to  exacerbate  the 
negative  pressure  on  credit  exerted  by  the  contractionary  demand  factors.  One  significant 
friction  in  this  regard  is  the  existence  of  asymmetric  information  between  lenders  and 
borrowers, a circumstance that limits the ability of the lenders to assess correctly the actual 
level of risk posed by a given borrower or a project. This friction normally intensifies during 
periods of crisis and, for reasons well known, is comparatively more relevant in the case of 
small and medium-sized firms as opposed to large companies. 
The  comparative  disadvantage  of  small  firms  in  accessing financing  relative  to  their  larger 
competitors has, in fact, been one of the most pervasive features of the recent crisis, despite 
the  mitigating  impact  provided  by  the  special  facilities  activated  by  many  of  the  public 
institutions represented here today. 
Another  factor  that  significantly  restrained  credit  supply  conditions  until  recently  was  the 
financial  fragmentation  of  the  euro  area  that  emerged  as  a  result  of  the  tensions  in  the 
European sovereign debt markets. In fact, one of the most visible consequences of financial 
fragmentation was the strong sensitivity of funding costs to the borrowing agents’ nationality 
and not just to their creditworthiness. 
Thus,  drawing  all  the  strands  together,  I  think  it  is  reasonable  to  conclude  that  the 
unsustainable  accumulation  of  debt  over  the  previous  expansion  paved  the  way  for  the 
subsequent  credit  contraction  seen  during  the  crisis.  In  my  view,  this  contraction  reflects 
primarily  the  sizable  and  unavoidable  downward  adjustment  in  the  demand  for  credit. 
However,  a  number  of  frictions  related  to  the  supply  of  credit,  such  as  those  discussed 
earlier, have also played a relevant role. 
Recent developments in bank credit and its determinants 
3. 
Let me  now  turn to the recent  developments  in bank  credit. The  latest data  show  that the 
stock  of  credit  to  the  private  sector  in  Spain  continues  to  fall,  but  the  rate  of  decline  has 
tended to slow gradually since the second half of 2013, in parallel with the recovery in GDP. 
This slow pace of recovery of the credit cycle is consistent with historical regularities during 
previous  similar  episodes.  In  fact,  there  is  a  well-established  branch  in  the  economics 
literature that has coined this phenomenon “creditless recoveries”, and there are abundant 
studies showing that these episodes are not exceptional either in emerging or in advanced 
economies, especially in the aftermath of a recession accompanied by a banking crisis. 
The moderation in the contraction of the aggregate stock of credit points to an increase of 
new  lending  operations,  which  is  consistent  with  the  economic  recovery.  In  fact,  the 
information  available  on  new  credit  transactions  suggests  that  the  segment  of  lending  to 
SMEs has started to recover. And in the most recent period, this trend has gradually spread 
to the other credit categories, such as in the case of credit extended for house purchases. 
What  are  the  determinants  behind  these  recent  developments?  In  my  view,  demand-side 
factors are playing a relevant role in the incipient recovery in credit flows. The improvement 
in  growth  and  employment  prospects  and  the  reduction  in  aggregate  uncertainty  have  all 
resulted in an increase in current and expected income, expanding the willingness of agents 
to spend and their ability to take on new debts while reducing the risk perceived by lenders. 
In  parallel  with  the  recovery  in  the  demand  for  investment,  we  have  witnessed  an 
improvement in the financial position of borrowers. Specifically, from the peak observed in 
mid-2010, the gap between debt ratios in Spain and the euro area average has fallen from 
37 pp to 9 pp in the case of corporates and from 20 pp to 9 pp in the case of households. 
But  credit  flows  are  also  being  stimulated  in  the  current  juncture  by  several  factors  more 
directly  connected  with  the  supply  side.  First,  the  strengthening  of  the  capital  position  of 
banks, following the conclusion of the cleaning-up, recapitalisation and restructuring of the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial  system,  is  contributing  to  enhancing  their  capacity  to  finance  the  economy.  The 
Comprehensive  Assessment  carried  out  last  year  at  the  European  level  also  contributed 
notably to restoring investors’ confidence in the Spanish banking industry. 
The  increasing  reintegration  of  European  financial  markets  since  2013,  stemming  from 
various  actions  taken  both  at  the  national  and  European  level,  does  also  facilitate  the 
normalisation of the economy´s financial flows. These initiatives include the adoption by the 
Eurosystem  of  a  number  of  bold,  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures,  including  the 
introduction of new long-term operations linked to new lending (the so called TLTROs) and 
the purchase of public and private sector securities. 
The ongoing improvements to euro area governance arrangements are also operating in the 
right direction, helping stabilise European financial markets and reducing their fragmentation. 
One key development in this field is the Banking Union, which, though still incomplete, marks 
an  unprecedented  step  towards  a  genuine  European  common  mechanism  of  rules  and 
procedures for supervising and resolving banks and protecting their depositors. 
All  in  all,  the  recent  normalisation  in  European  financial  markets  has  contributed  to  a 
significant  easing  in  financing  conditions  in  those  jurisdictions  that  were  previously  under 
higher  macrofinancial  pressure,  including  Spain.  As  a  result,  the  cost  of  lending  in  these 
countries  has  tended  to  converge  gradually  to  the  lower  levels  observed  in  the  core  euro 
area. 
At  the  same  time,  some  measures  recently  introduced  at  the  national  level  have  also 
supported the availability of bank financing to SMEs. Specifically, the regulatory definition of 
an  SME  has  been  significantly  widened,  bringing  it  in  line  with  that  predominating  at  the 
European level and so extending the benefits of the lower capital requirements associated 
with loans to such firms. 
As a result of the conjunction of the previous developments, most quantitative and qualitative 
indicators point to a higher dynamism in credit flows in Spain which is linked both to supply 
and  demand  factors.  For  instance,  data  from  the  Central  Credit  Register  show  an  upward 
trend  in  the  number  of  credit  transactions  with  non-financial  corporations  which  has  been 
driven  by  an  increase  in  both  loan  applications  and  their  approval  rates.  This  evidence  is 
moreover  consistent  with  the  results  of  the  survey  on  the  access  to  finance  of  firms 
conducted by the ECB on the basis of a sample of European companies. In particular, since 
the end of 2013, Spanish SMEs have reported an improvement in their perception of access 
to credit, a signal which is consistent with that from the Bank Lending Survey. 
Policy considerations on SME’s financing 
4. 
Allow  me  to  say  now  a  few  words  on  policy  considerations  regarding  the  specific  case  of 
small  firms’  financing.  Undoubtedly,  the  crisis  has  been  a  painful  reminder  for  us  that  the 
access  of  SMEs  to  finance  may  deteriorate  suddenly  and  sharply  in  periods  of  high 
uncertainty. 
Financial institutions, such as those represented here, with a mandate to promote access to 
financing for SMEs, can make an important contribution in this field. In any case, it is also 
necessary  to  study  ways  to  tackle  directly  the  asymmetric  information  problems  faced  by 
these firms. This in turn requires enhancing the quality and quantity of information available 
on both the credit track record and the financial situation of companies. In this regard, it is 
worth  mentioning  a  new  regulation  recently  approved  in  Spain  that  obliges  banks,  under 
certain conditions, to pre-announce three months in advance should they decide not to roll 
over  existing  credit  lines  or  loans  at  maturity.  Also,  in  those  cases  banks  are  obliged  to 
provide  relevant  information  on  the  credit  profile  of  their  customers  whose  loans  are  not 
rolled over. The Banco de España, in response to the mandate conferred to it under this new 
regulation, is currently working on a Circular, which will specify the relevant information to be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  provided  to  the  SMEs  in  these  circumstances,  together  with  a  methodology  to  produce  a 
standardised report on the SME credit assessment. 
Other actions that could also help mitigate the possible frictions in the credit market during 
crisis  periods  include  those  facilitating  debt  restructuring  by  improving  the  bankruptcy 
legislation.  These  measures,  if  well-designed,  could  help  to  smooth  the  reallocation  of 
resources from non-viable firms to viable and productive firms. Spain has recently introduced 
various reforms to improve the effectiveness of bankruptcy procedures, though it is still too 
early  to  appreciate  in  full  what  additional  reforms  are  needed  to  further  improve  those 
procedures. 
At the European level, I also welcome the Action Plan on Building a Capital Markets Union 
recently approved by the European Commission. This project envisages some measures to 
overcome  information  barriers  that  could  inhibit  SME  lending.  That  includes,  following  the 
Spanish  example,  the  strengthening  of  the  feedback  given  by  banks  declining  SME 
applications  and  the  promotion  of  systems  facilitating  the  availability  for  investors  of 
comprehensive information on SMEs. 
Moreover, the Action Plan also foresees actions to reactivate securitisations markets. Let me 
stress the importance of this specific set of measures. 
For smaller firms, for which direct access to markets is not feasible due to problems of scale, 
bank credit will remain the predominant financing source. Therefore, an adequate availability 
of funds for SMEs requires banks to have sufficient means and capacity to properly conduct 
their  intermediation  activity.  In  that  regard,  the  development  of  the  securitisation  markets 
seems a promising avenue to facilitate credit risk management by banks and, therefore, to 
support  lending.  Indeed,  securitisation  markets  activity  was  seriously  impaired  after  the 
subprime crisis due to the stigma attached to any kind of asset-backed securities, and the 
lack  of  recognition  by  investors  and  regulators  of  the  specific  quality  of  each  product.  To 
address  some  of  these  problems,  the  European  Commission  has  recently  published  an 
interesting  proposal  for  amending  the  European  regulation  on  prudential  requirements  for 
credit  institutions  and  investment  firms  that  introduces  a  differentiated  treatment  for  high 
quality securitisations that meet stringent standards in terms of simplicity, transparency and 
standardization. 
Concluding remarks 
5. 
Let me now conclude by highlighting what I think are the main lessons drawn from the recent 
crisis  in  connection  with  credit  developments.  First,  it  seems  clear  that  given  the  large 
financial imbalances that emerged during the expansionary years, a protracted contraction in 
credit  demand  seems  not  only  unavoidable  but  also  positive  to  restore  the  ability  of  the 
economy to grow on a sustainable basis. Yet there is little doubt that frictions on the supply 
side amplified the contractionary effects of weak demand and that those frictions merit bold 
policy attention. 
In any case, policy interventions aimed at revitalising credit during a crisis should be carefully 
designed and calibrated, duly taking into account that credit flows should not be expected to 
fully recover until lenders’ and borrowers’ balance sheets are on sufficiently firm ground. 
In the case of Spain, some of the main constraints affecting credit developments for most of 
the  recent  crisis  have  abated  considerably  as  a  result  of  the  improvement  in  the 
macroeconomic  outlook,  the  bold  banking  sector  reform  and  the  introduction  of  various 
measures at both the national and European level. 
These positive developments, however, should not be taken as conclusive evidence that the 
task is complete and that all relevant risks have been dispelled. Rather, the consolidation of 
the recent positive signals in the macroeconomic and financial spheres requires resolve to 
complete the reforms still pending on various relevant fronts. This should, in my opinion, be 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the main priority in seeking to enhance economic growth prospects on a sustainable basis 
and to mitigate the volatility of the financial and economic cycles. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
