  Carl-Ludwig Thiele: RMB initiative – one year after start of clearing 
Speech  by  Mr  Carl-Ludwig  Thiele,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  European-Chinese  Banking  Day  during  the  18th  Euro  Finance  Week, 
Frankfurt am Main, 16 November 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
I  am  delighted  to  be  speaking  about  such  an  interesting  topic  at  this  year’s  European-
Chinese  Banking  Day.  At  last  year’s  China  Day,  we  celebrated  the  first  RMB  transactions 
processed by the RMB clearing bank in Frankfurt. So how do things stand now, one year on, 
with regard to the development of the RMB and the clearing of RMB transactions? 
Development of the RMB hub in Frankfurt 
China has been experiencing an enormous economic upturn since the end of the 1970s, and 
has now become the second-largest economy in the world. In just one generation, therefore, 
China has made the quantum leap from donkey carts to high-speed Transrapid trains. The 
importance of the Chinese economy to the world economy is growing visibly. Six years ago, 
its share in global gross domestic product was roughly 9%; this year, it looks set to hit 14%. 
Given  the  ever  growing  importance  of  the  real  economy,  the  Chinese  government  has  for 
some years now been pursuing a policy of cautiously opening up the financial market and is 
endeavouring  to  gradually  internationalise  the  RMB.  Even  though  the  US  dollar  is  still  the 
most widely used currency for trade with China, the use of the RMB as a currency of account 
has gained significant ground in the past few years. In trade finance, the Chinese currency 
has surpassed the euro and now occupies second place, directly after the US dollar. 
Measured in terms of transaction values, the RMB edged up to fourth place in August in the 
international payment transactions ranking. According to data from SWIFT, more than 1,700 
banks worldwide (from a total of just over 10,000 participants in the SWIFT network) clear 
payments in RMB. 
In  the  past,  the  Chinese  government  strengthened  the  RMB  offshore  markets,  giving 
importers outside China a means of paying in RMB. For the political leaders, this was part of 
the  long-term  strategy  to  open  up  the  markets  with  greater  convertibility  of  RMB  while 
retaining the ability to exercise control. This is because clearing in the RMB offshore markets 
requires the appointment of a (Chinese) RMB clearing bank. 
As  part  of  this  strategy,  the  Chinese  central  bank  designated  the  Frankfurt  branch  of  the 
Bank of China as the official RMB clearing bank for Frankfurt and Germany in June of last 
year. Four offshore RMB clearing banks have been named in Europe (in Frankfurt, London, 
Paris and Luxembourg) by the People’s Bank of China, the Chinese central bank. There are 
now 14 clearing banks globally. 
New developments in the RMB clearing infrastructure 
With  the  introduction  of  the  new  China  International  Payment  System  (CIPS),  China  has 
taken  another  major  step  in  forging  ahead  with  the  internationalisation  of  the  RMB.  The 
Chinese  central  bank  commenced  operation  of  CIPS  a  little  over  a  month  ago.  It  was 
co-developed  by  19  banks,  including  eight  foreign  institutions,  such  as  Deutsche  Bank, 
Hongkong  and  Shanghai  Bank  (HSBC)  and  Citibank. These  are  now  the  first  banks to  be 
directly connected – albeit via their branches in mainland China – to CIPS. In a second step, 
foreign banks are to be enabled to participate directly from outside China. This will include 
the offshore RMB clearing banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  CIPS  is  designed  to  provide  an  infrastructural  buffer  for  the  expected  growth  in  RMB 
transactions.  CIPS  processes  offshore  RMB  payments  only.  At  a  political  level,  CIPS  will 
foster  integration  in  the  international  clearing  system,  cut  down  the  drawbacks  in  clearing 
efficiency with respect to other currencies (especially USD) and promote the use of RMB in 
global trade. CIPS is generally viewed as a measure flanking the RMB’s advancement into a 
global reserve currency, as manifested by the aim of being included in the basket of special 
drawing rights. 
On the whole, the relationship between China and Germany has developed very positively 
also  beyond  the  economic  cooperation.  The  foundation  of  the  Sino-German  Centre  of 
Finance  and  Economics  about  two  months  ago  in  Peking,  a  German  Chinese  scientific 
research institute, is an obvious demonstration of the further growing cooperation. I am of the 
opinion  that  such  cooperation  is  very  useful  in  the  restructuring  phase  of  the  Chinese 
economy. 
And another key milestone in the German Chinese cooperation is approaching. In just two 
days, the first official trading platform for Chinese investment products denominated in RMB 
outside the People’s Republic of China will go into operation. The Deutsche Börse Group, 
the  Shanghai  Stock  Exchange  and  the  China  Financial  Futures  Exchange  made  an 
announcement  this  May  about  their  joint  venture  to  set  up  the  China  Europe  International 
Exchange. The new exchange grants investors access to the Chinese capital market during 
European and US trading times. 
The new enterprise is based in Frankfurt. The German-Chinese exchange will operate using 
the established and globally available infrastructure of the Deutsche Börse Group. The three 
joint  venture  partners  intentionally  chose  Frankfurt  as  the  financial  platform  from  which  to 
offer their service in a European regulatory environment and in the European and American 
time  zones.  The  money  flows  resulting  from  securities  settlement  are  to  be  channelled 
through the clearing infrastructure provided in Frankfurt. 
In  my  view,  China’s  real  economic  development  and  the  launch  of  the  China  Europe 
International Exchange will give rise to additional volumes of RMB payments. The German 
banking  industry  will  decide  which  channels  shall  be  used  to  clear  RMB  payments. 
Nevertheless,  I  would  wish  that  the  German  banking  community  will  support  the  German 
financial  market  to  become  an  RMB  hub.  This  could  be  done  by  processing  RMB 
transactions via the RMB Clearing Bank in Frankfurt. 
Potential prospects 
The Bundesbank operates the TARGET2 system together with the French and Italian central 
banks,  while  the  Eurosystem  is  currently  looking  at  strategically  enhancing  its  market 
infrastructures.  For  example  the  Eurosystem  discusses to  offer multicurrency  services  in a 
future TARGET2 system. For such a new service the Renminbi and its processing would be 
a candidate. 
A connection on infrastructure level between the Chinese payments traffic and an enhanced 
TARGET2 system – we can call it TARGET3 – would also an option. However this will only 
be possible, if both systems use a harmonised ISO 20022 standard. This is not yet the case 
today. 
All in all the surrounding will remain interesting and exciting. Many new ideas and visions can 
still be developed. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
