  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Launching of the Paranaque City Credit Surety 
Fund 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Launching of the Paranaque City Credit Surety Fund, 
Manila, 3 November 2015. 
 This is truly a happy event. Today, we launch the Paranaque City Credit Surety Fund with 
Mayor  Olivarez.  Paranaque  is  the  3rd  city  in  Metro  Manila  to  have  its  own  CSF  –  after 
Quezon City and Marikina (both in 2014); it is also the 22nd in Luzon and the 44th CSF in the 
country.  This  CSF  is  bound  to  benefit  the  Paranaque-based  Micro  Small  and  Medium 
Enterprises or what we call MSMEs. 
Indeed, our CSF program has come a long way from 2008 when we launched the 1st CSF in 
the Province of Cavite. It has been a challenging but fruitful seven years. We have seen how 
MSMEs  that  lack  collateral,  gain  access  to  bank  loans  and  grow  their  business  with  the 
support of the credit surety fund program. 
As  of  August  2015,  the  43  operating  CSFs  in  the  country  have  benefitted  14,600  MSME 
borrowers who received a total of P1.7 billion in bank loans. 
But more than these aggregates, we are particularly proud that past due ratio has been at a 
minimal 0.93%. Clearly, CSF leaders across our country implement the program with care 
and due diligence, to ensure that MSMEs given bank guarantees are viable and have a good 
track record of paying their obligations. In this manner, many more MSMEs and cooperatives 
stand to benefit from the CSF program. 
In this connection, the total trust fund of CSFs has also continued to grow – it now stands at 
P515 million, 8% higher than last year. In other words, the CSFs as a whole, can guarantee 
more bank loans. 
And so, we welcome the City of Paranaque to the growing CSF community. 
Actually,  simple  lamang  po  ang  gusto  nating  marating  sa  CSF  –  ang  mapa-buti  ang 
kabuhayan  ng  ating  mga  kababayan  sa  MSMEs  sa  pama-magitan  ng  pa-utang  mula  sa 
bangko. 
Traditionally,  MSMEs  who  lack  collateral  turn  for  funding  to  informal  lenders  with  onerous 
conditions  and  interest  rates  that  can  reach  over  1,000  percent  a  year.  With  the  CSF 
providing  guarantees  to  banks  for  loans  extended  to  their  coop  members,  MSMEs  gain 
access to bank loans at much lower interest rates. As monitored by the Bangko Sentral ng 
Pilipinas, loans granted under the CSF program range from 8–12% a year, a fraction of the 
cost of borrowing from informal lenders! 
This is the reason why the BSP has been working on promoting financial inclusion across the 
country for over ten years now. 
In July this year, the BSP and 12 other government agencies launched the National Strategy 
for Financial Inclusion (or NSFI). Our objective is to avoid duplication and to ensure optimum 
results from our collective efforts and deployment of resources in extending the reach of our 
financial system to the unserved and the underserved. 
This milestone event was also highlighted by the visit of Queen Maxima of the Netherlands 
who attended the launching with a commitment of assistance and partnership not only from 
the  Netherlands,  but  also  from  the  United  Nations,  in  her  capacity  as  the  designated  UN 
Secretary General’s Special Advocate for Inclusive Finance for Development. As described 
by Queen Maxima, “the Philippines should be the voice on financial inclusion.” Indeed, our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  financial inclusion program is considered an international best practice model. 
Through the NSFI, we envision a regionally-responsive, development-oriented and inclusive 
financial system that provides for the evolving needs of a diverse Filipino public. One of the 
priority areas of concern in the NSFI is access to credit, which is being addressed through 
this CSF program. 
Our survey early this year indicated that about 47 percent of Filipino adults borrow money 
and most of them access loans from informal sources such as family members and informal 
lenders.  Only  a  few  obtained  credit  from  formal  institutions  such  as  lending/financing 
companies  (12%),  cooperatives  (10.5%),  microfinance  non-government  organizations 
(NGOs)  (9.9%),  and  banks  (4.4%).  Nevertheless,  more  than  85%  of  respondents  indicate 
that they want to access financial services from formal financial institutions. 
One restrictive consideration in borrowing money is the lack of collaterals. This can now be 
addressed through the Credit Surety Fund, which serves as an alternative security in place of 
conventional collaterals. 
You will be pleased to know that our CSF program is on the agenda of the APEC summit. 
During the APEC SME Financing Forum in Iloilo City last September, one of the key priorities 
of the summit is “Fostering SMEs Participation in Regional and Global Markets.” One of the 
proposals is the promotion of inclusive growth through sustainable and resilient SMEs with 
support from the CSF program. 
Similarly, the CSF has advocates in Congress who seek to institutionalize the CSF program. 
At the Senate, Senator Bam Aquino is its principal author and Congressman Cresente Paez 
at the House of Representatives. Their bills were unified during the Bicameral Conference 
Committee meeting last month and will be submitted for approval by President Benigno C. 
Aquino III. 
And  so,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  story  of  our  CSF  program  continues  to  evolve  and 
produce positive results for our MSMEs, their owners and their employees. 
With  Paranaque  joining  our  CSF  community,  we  look  forward  to  generating  more  benefits 
from financial inclusion, this time within Metro Manila. 
Congratulations to Paranaque under the leadership of Mayor Olivarez, for taking this major 
step forward to empower MSMEs in their city, to help improve lives through entrepreneurship 
and in generating jobs in their community. 
Maraming salamat sa inyo at Mabuhay po tayong lahat!  
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
