  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The financial well-being journey – building on the 
momentum and identifying new paths 
Opening address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Malaysia-OECD  High-Level  Global  Symposium  on  Financial 
Well-Being, Kuala Lumpur, 30 September 2015. 
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  be  here  at  this  Global  Symposium  on  Financial  Well-Being,  an 
important area of priority in the current world economic environment. Bank Negara Malaysia 
is most pleased to host this important event in collaboration with the OECD. Let me extend a 
very  warm welcome to  all delegates to Kuala Lumpur and to our facilities here at Sasana 
Kijang. 
The advancements in the provision of financial services in these recent few decades have 
had  a  transformational  impact  on  financial  well-being.  Key  features  of  this  transformation 
have been the greater diversification of financial systems and the increased leverage on the 
advancements in technology. Today, a growing share of financial intermediation is supported 
by a wider range of financial products and services that are not only being offered by banks 
but also by capital markets and non-bank financial intermediaries that are now assuming a 
larger role in the financial system and the economy. This has contributed to greater flexibility 
in managing financial risks and it has expanded the avenues for businesses and households 
to meet their financial needs and goals. 
Advancements  in  technology  have  also  improved  access  to  financial  services  to  be 
undertaken  more  effectively.  It  has  also  contributed  to  lower  costs  of  financial  services. 
Additionally  it  has  supported  the  development  of  a  broad  range  of  financial  services, 
including  advisory  and  product  aggregation  services  that  allow  for more  informed financial 
decisions.  Ongoing  regulatory  and  supervisory  reforms,  particularly  in  this  recent  decade, 
have  further  reinforced  the  potential  benefits  of  financial  development  –  by  improving  the 
resilience  of  financial  systems  to  disruptions  and  reducing  the  harm  it  could  have  to 
consumers that may arise from market failure and financial crisis. 
For the benefits of financial development to be fully realised, it needs to be complemented 
with the effective use of the financial system by consumers and businesses. With economic 
progress,  individuals  need  to  assume  greater  responsibility  for  financing  their  lifetime 
financial  needs  that  may  include  education,  healthcare  and  retirement.  In  addition,  easier 
access to credit has also increased the risk of households falling under the crippling weight 
of excessive debt burdens, while the challenges associated with operating in a more complex 
financial  system  have  also  increased  the  vulnerability  to  inappropriate  financial  risk  taking 
and to financial fraud. Indeed, the identification of vulnerable groups is no longer confined to 
the poorest segments of society as defined by poverty threshold levels, but it also includes 
young adults, households living in urban centres, those in temporary unemployment, and the 
older segments of the population. 
The focus on strengthening the ability of consumers and businesses to effectively use the 
financial services must therefore be an important part of any effort to improve financial well-
being.  This  would  involve  enhancing  the  ability  of  users  of  financial  services  to  make 
discerning financial  choices  that  best  suit  their needs,  while  increasing  their  confidence to 
take advantage of the new spectrum of channels and tools for financial management. This 
would result in better financial planning and more stable consumption patterns as well as the 
ability of individuals to better withstand the macroeconomic shocks that are now occurring 
more frequently in the global economic environment. 
Increased financial capability would also contribute towards evolving more inclusive financial 
systems and the broader financial stability. There is greater expectations on the potential for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
financial  education  to  deliver  improvements  in  responsible  financial  behaviour;  encourage 
stronger market discipline and lift the poorest segments of society out of poverty in addition 
to  helping  communities  adjust  to  the  changing  economic  and  financial  conditions.  The 
achievement  of these  outcomes  will  increasingly  hinge  on  consumers of financial  services 
being financially competent. 
Over  the  years,  important  progress  has  been  made  to  provide  the  foundations  on  which 
enhanced financial capability can be built. These foundations include: (i) greater provision of 
truthful  disclosures  on  financial  products  and  services;  (ii)  expanded  financial  knowledge; 
(iii) an  environment  which  is  supportive  of  consumer  choice,  including  the  ability  for 
consumers  to  exercise  their  preferences  without  impediments;  and  (iv)  effective  redress 
mechanisms. Policy makers, the private sector and market participants have a key role in 
building these foundations. 
In the area of disclosures alone, there has been extensive improvements in the quality and 
consistency of disclosures, making it easier to understand through the use of plain language, 
and  adopting  the  various  approaches  to  bring  important  disclosures  to  the  attention  of 
consumers.  For  many  regulators,  the  use  of  disclosures  has  been  particularly  useful  to 
promote positive consumer outcomes, without creating distortions that could result from more 
intrusive policy interventions. 
On enhancing further financial knowledge, more than 50 countries have accorded priority to 
this agenda and have implemented or designed national financial education strategies. This 
will  gain  further  traction with  the  publication  of the  OECD  high  level  principles  on  national 
strategies  for  financial  education  in  2012.  It  will  be  further  reinforced  with  the  reporting  of 
progress  made  by  countries  in  implementing  their  national  strategies.  Of  significance  has 
been improvements to better coordinate and achieve greater alignment between the financial 
education strategies, the financial inclusion agenda and the consumer protection regime in 
order to maximise the impact of the respective individual initiatives and avoid duplication so 
as to optimise the impact of financial education efforts over the longer term. 
In the area of facilitating consumer choice, initiatives have been pursued to reduce exit and 
switching costs so that informed consumers can easily exercise their preferences and adapt 
to the changing circumstances. While measures to reduce financial exit costs have met with 
some success in reducing switching barriers within the financial industry, responding to other 
factors that discourage consumers from switching to a superior product or financial service 
has  been  more  challenging.  Such  factors  include  the  additional  effort  required  to  switch 
financial service providers or products arising from the higher marginal cost of switching. 
Finally,  the  measures  to  strengthen  redress  mechanisms  are  also  contributing  to  the 
enhanced  capability  of  financial  consumers,  by  providing  an  expedient  and  cost–effective 
means  for  consumers  to  assert  their  rights  and  protect  their  interests.  Effective  redress 
mechanisms also increase consumer confidence in using financial services, while serving to 
strengthen market discipline. 
Looking ahead, strategies to further strengthen these foundations are likely to be significantly 
influenced by two important developments. The first is the broader application of behavioural 
finance so as to better understand and identify the levers that contribute to better financial 
decisions  in  the  different  circumstances.  Recent  insights  from  the  study  of  behavioural 
finance suggest that emotional and psychological associations with finance are as powerful 
as  the  intellectual  grasp  of  how  to  make  wise  financial  choices.  This  will  have  important 
implications for the design and implementation of both consumer protection policies as well 
as financial capability strategies. 
We have found that providing consumers with relevant information in Malaysia did not always 
lead  to  better  decisions.  This  was  frequently  because  it  was  not  easy  to  understand  the 
information and there was also too much of it. The Bank now requires for the simplification of 
disclosures by financial service providers and for the strengthening of the role of independent 
advisory  services  in  the  financial  institutions.  Financial  institutions  are  also  required  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
exercise  a  higher  degree  of  diligence  in  ensuring  that  the  respective  products  sold  to 
consumers  had  to  be  commensurate  with  their  financial  capability  and  to  steer  financial 
consumers  towards  decisions  that  are  in  their  interests,  whereby  choices  are  in  the  best 
interest of consumers. 
Approaches  to  financial  education  have  also  become  more  targeted  in  an  effort  to  more 
effectively influence financial behaviour. This reflects the growing customisation of financial 
education  programmes  to  target  audience  groups  that  are  delivered  at  the  right  time  and 
using the right channels. Programmes are increasingly being tailored to behavioural traits, 
demographics  and  stages  in  the  financial  lifecycle  of  individuals  so  as  to  appeal  to  the 
intrinsic motivations and incentives that would drive financial behaviour. 
The  second  development  relates  to  the  advances  in  technology  that  has  had  a  profound 
impact  on  financial  capability.  While  it  presents  new  challenges  for  financial  capability 
strategies, it also brings with it the potential to revolutionise how financial capability strategies 
can be designed and delivered, enabling policymakers and financial institutions to achieve 
what was previously not possible. Online classrooms and games, have for example, opened 
up new and engaging avenues for imparting important messages on financial management. 
The  use  of  mobile  applications  has  also  made  it  much  more  convenient  for  individuals  to 
monitor and control financial habits, in addition to helping consumers make financial choices. 
This  has  also  enabled  resources  to  go  further  by  significantly  expanding  the  reach  of 
financial capability initiatives, and increased its potential to create a more lasting impact on 
financial behaviour. 
In Malaysia, initiatives to strengthen financial capability began almost 20 years ago and is an 
important component of the Bank’s business conduct and financial inclusion responsibilities. 
The  Bank  has  in  collaboration  with  the  Ministry  of  Education  and  the  financial  industry, 
implemented financial education in schools to promote financial capability skills from an early 
age.  This  has  now  culminated  in  a  process  of  formally  integrating  financial  education 
elements into key subjects in the school curriculum. 
Financial capability programmes among adults are closely aligned to the nature of financial 
decisions and exposure that individuals are likely to be confronted with at the different stages 
of  their  lives.  This  has  therefore  shaped  the  content,  approach  and  timing  of  our financial 
education  programmes.  Of  significance,  has  been  the  involvement  of  the  private  sector, 
through initiatives such as financial education in the workplace which are organised by large 
corporates  in  collaboration  with  the  Credit  Counselling  and  Debt  Management  Agency  in 
Malaysia. The enabling infrastructure is also being enhanced to provide financial consumers 
with an integrated platform for easy access to financial education contents that are relevant 
for financial decision making. 
The Bank assesses all major financial education programmes to evaluate their effectiveness 
in meeting the intended objectives through a Financial Education Assessment Framework. 
The Framework, developed in 2013, assesses the impact of financial education programmes 
on the overall level of financial literacy and on changes in behaviour. 
Mobile applications have also been introduced to promote more informed financial decisions. 
These  includes  applications  for  personal  money  management,  updates  on  important 
consumer  news  including  financial  fraud  alerts  issued  by  the  Bank,  and  for  consumers  to 
make  enquiries,  obtain  advice  and  raise  their  complaints  with  financial  institutions.  These 
mobile  applications  are  customised  for  use  in  Malaysia  and  can  be  downloaded  by 
individuals  at  no  cost.  It  is  envisaged  that  wider  use  of  these  applications  will  contribute 
towards enhancing financial competence. 
The  financial  education  initiatives  in  Malaysia  has  been  advanced  through  collaborative 
efforts  by  the  public  and  private  sectors.  Key  agencies  involved  have  included  the  Credit 
Counselling  and  Debt  Management  Agency,  the  financial  industry,  consumer  associations 
and the Employees Provident Fund (which has more than 14 million contributors) to ensure 
that  messages  on  financial  management  address  all  the  key  issues  in  savings,  debt, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
investment and protection. These strategies are pursued together with the efforts to promote 
financial inclusion and to ensure fair treatment of financial consumers. 
It  is  important  to  recognise  that  the  financial  industry  itself  plays  a  pivotal  role  in  helping 
consumers  improve  their  financial  well-being.  The  global  financial  crisis  significantly 
undermined  confidence  in  the  financial  system,  and  the  discovery  of  ethical  lapses  that 
continue to be reported today has further eroded public trust in financial institutions. There is 
an  urgent  need  to  restore  faith  in  the  utility  of  financial  services,  firstly  through  the 
demonstration of fair  and  responsible  practices and  reinforced  with  the provision  of  value-
adding products and services that are meeting the real needs of consumers and businesses. 
Financial institutions with their extensive reach and customer relationships are in a unique 
position  to  have  a  more  significant  role  in  advancing  the  financial  education  agenda.  In 
Malaysia, this has included providing technical support and materials for teachers to improve 
their knowledge and increase confidence in teaching financial matters in schools. Financial 
institutions  have  also  adopted  more  than  10,000  schools  across  the  country  under  the 
School  Adoption  Programme  with  wide  ranging  activities  in  money  management  for  the 
children. The financial institutions also work closely with the Credit and Debt Management 
Agency in the implementation of financial education programmes for adults. 
Today,  the  focus  on  financial  capability  has  become  a  global  agenda.  This  has  provided 
opportunities for policymakers to learn from their peers across countries and leverage on the 
international  network  of  expertise  in  addressing  common  issues  and  challenges.  This 
Symposium  is  a  great  example  of  realising  such  opportunities.  The  possibilities  for 
meaningful cooperation at the regional and global levels are tremendous. This has already 
included  research,  technical  assistance  and  guidance  for  policymakers.  Leveraging  on 
technology,  financial  education  applications  can  be  developed,  tested  and  translated  for 
adoption  in  different  countries.  International  collaboration  can  not  only  be  for  training 
programmes, but also on the access to the network of international experts through online 
platforms and communication channels. 
I would also like to take this opportunity to invite all the delegates of this Symposium to our 
Financial LATeracy exhibition that is being held in this building. This is an exhibition of more 
than  150  distinctive  caricatures  by  a  renowned  Malaysian  cartoonist  that  depict  the 
promotion  of  good  habits  for  money  management.  The  drawings  are  compiled  from  the 
annual pocket money books for students which were published by Bank Negara Malaysia. 
More than 15 million copies of these pocket money books have been distributed annually to 
students since 1999 to more than 10,000 schools throughout the country to encourage good 
money management habits. The drawings also illustrate the many aspects of the culture and 
environment in Malaysia. I hope you will enjoy the exhibition and also draw inspiration from it. 
Let me now conclude my remarks. The commitment to financial education is an important 
imperative. As the theme of this Symposium reminds us, it is to improve the financial well-
being  of  our  communities.  It  is  the  very  reason  why  we  are  on  this  journey.  It  is  so  that 
members of our society will benefit from the effective utilisation of the financial system and 
avoid despair and desperation that is brought by poor financial decisions. Additionally, we will 
also  help  build  more  resilient  and  inclusive  financial  systems  and  thus  contribute  towards 
achieving more balanced growth and development. 
Thank you and I wish you productive discussions at the Symposium. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
