  Ignazio Visco: Investment financing in the European Union 
Keynote address by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at OECD-Euromoney 
Conference on Long-Term Investment Financing, Paris, 19 November 2015. 
 I first wish to thank the OECD and Euromoney for inviting me here today. 
Following  the  outbreak  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  Europe  experienced  a  large  fall  in 
investment,  which  continued  throughout  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  The  fall  was  unusual  in 
terms of severity and duration. Set equal to 100 its pre-crisis peak in 2007, in 2014 real gross 
fixed  capital  formation  was  still  lower  than  85  in  the  euro  area  while  it  had  almost  fully 
recovered  in  the  United  States  and  the  whole  OECD  economies.  Moreover,  investment 
trends in Europe were very heterogeneous: compared to a level of 100 in 2007, last year real 
gross fixed capital formation was equal to 105 in Germany, 97 in the United Kingdom, 94 in 
France and lower than 70 in Italy and Spain. 
There is no need to add much on the short- to medium-term outlook, except to underline that 
the growth recovery in advanced countries, and especially in the euro area, is still fragile, as 
it faces non-negligible headwinds from the slowdown in emerging economies. The dramatic 
recent  developments,  which  culminated  in  the  so  difficult  to  comprehend,  and  cope  with, 
terrorist attacks here in Paris, certainly add their negative weight on confidence and raise the 
level  of  uncertainty.  This  may  make  the  recovery  in  capital  accumulation  more  difficult  to 
sustain. 
It is against the backdrop of such an exceptional decline in capital formation that we have to 
analyse investment financing in Europe. I will offer some remarks on three issues: the need 
to  diversify  the  European  economy’s  sources  of  financing  and  overcome  financial  markets 
fragmentation; the challenges of the Capital Markets Union (CMU); and some key issues that 
come up in financing infrastructures. 
Diversifying financing sources and improving financial market integration 
1. 
The  European  Commission  proposal  unveiled  last  February  to  establish  a  Capital  Markets 
Union  by  2019  has  among  its  primary  objectives  the  broadening  of  non-bank  sources  of 
financing and lowering barriers to cross-border investment. 
The need to achieve a more diversified financial system is especially due to the bank-centric 
character of European financial systems. The European economy is as big as the US one, 
but Europe’s equity markets are less than half the size, its non-bank debt markets less than a 
third.  According  to  the  Commission’s  estimates,  European  SMEs  receive  five  times  less 
funding from capital markets than their US peers do. 
Identifying the effect of financial factors on corporate decisions has always been a daunting 
task.  Nonetheless,  econometric  estimates  by  the  Bank  of  Italy  show  that  the  collapse  of 
corporate  investment  in  Italy  since  2007  was  aggravated  at  the  height  of  the  crisis  by 
financial factors, namely tightening in banks’ lending standards and the surge in the user cost 
of  capital.  These  factors  were  obviously  connected  with  the  heightened  uncertainty 
determined by the global financial crisis and the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area, which 
also led to a very weak credit demand. 
It is fair to say that the dominance of bank lending is one of the causes underlying the slower 
recovery of the euro-area economy when compared with more diversified financial systems 
such  as  in  the  US  or  the  UK.  There  is  evidence  that,  during  recessions,  market-based 
financial  systems  are  more  resilient  than  bank-centric  systems,  especially  when  the  fall  in 
economic activity goes hand in hand with a financial crisis. Moreover, as economies develop, 
capital  markets  become  comparatively  more  important  because  they  improve  investors’ 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  to  deleverage  and 
portfolio  choices  and  risk  management  techniques  and  broaden  the  set  of  financing  tools 
available to borrowers. 
As the most acute phase of the financial crisis and its aftermath is over, a number of factors 
weigh  on  bank  lending.  On  the  one  hand,  the  major  overhaul  of  financial  regulation  is 
reflected  in  stricter  banks’  capital,  liquidity  and  leverage  ratios.  Moreover,  the  low-return 
environment tightens banks’ margins. On the other hand, the demand for credit is weakened 
by  non-financial  corporations’  drive 
the  challenging  economic 
environment. 
The regulatory push and the other forces, while combining to build a safer financial sector, 
are leading banks to adjust their business models, with longer-term effects on their lending 
activity. 
The CMU aims to promote a financial system that is not only more diversified but also more 
integrated across countries. Financial market integration in Europe is incomplete and fragile. 
In 2011–12, at the peak of the crisis, fragmentation of the euro area financial markets along 
national  lines  made  an  abrupt  return,  hampering  the  regular  and  uniform  transmission  of 
monetary  policy  across  the  area  and  severely  limiting  the  ability  of  financial  markets  and 
institutions to smooth shocks across countries. Given the incompleteness of the European 
institutional architecture, the sovereign debt crisis called into question even the very survival 
of the single currency. While sovereign credit risk premia in the euro area have, over the last 
three  years,  been  substantially  retraced,  European  capital  markets  as  a  whole  remain 
relatively underdeveloped and fragmented. 
The  importance  of  pursuing  better  integration  of  European  financial  markets  has  been 
emphasised in the report on Financing business investment recently delivered to the French 
Prime Minister by a task force led by François Villeroy De Galhau. Out of the 10 proposed 
policy recommendations, only 3 are targeted at the French context, while the other 7 call for 
European and international action. 
As  a  result  of  the  political  push  towards  more  diversified  and  integrated  national  financial 
systems, going forward, capital markets and non-bank financial institutions will have to take 
on  a  larger  role  in  corporate  financing  in  Europe  and  remaining  obstacles  to  cross-border 
investments will have to be overcome. 
The  Banking  Union  and  the  Capital  Markets  Union  should  complement each  other.  I  have 
often  underscored  the  fact  that  the  benefits  expected  from  the  CMU  can  be  magnified  by 
exploiting the complementarities between bank financing and market financing. 
To begin with, banks can reinforce their central role in the financial system if they prove able 
to  accompany  the  shift  of  part  of  the  intermediation  process  from  them  to  the  markets  by 
expanding  their  activity  in  the  field  of  services  and  assisting  firms  in  direct  capital  raising. 
Secondly, high quality securitisation, one of the CMU’s short-term priorities, can effectively 
blend the banks’ comparative advantage in screening and monitoring borrowers with market 
funding,  allowing  banks  to  free  up  regulatory  capital,  increase  their  lending  and  manage 
credit risks more efficiently. 
In  the  same  vein,  broadening  funding  sources  for  firms  provides  benefits  also  to  banks. 
Better  access  to  non-bank  financing,  notably  equity  capital,  improves  firms’  financial 
structure, supports innovation and makes them more creditworthy, thus safeguarding banks’ 
balance sheets and avoiding vicious firm-bank loops. 
This  is  not  to  deny  that  the  CMU  can  put  pressure  on  banks.  By  enlarging  the  pool  of 
financial instruments available to households, the CMU creates incentives to allocate savings 
out of bank deposits; it may also contribute to narrow banks’ margins on loans to households 
and  firms,  to  the  extent  that  borrowers  gain  access  to  a  larger  set  of  alternative  financing 
solutions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The challenges of the Capital Markets Union 
2. 
The CMU is ambitious and prioritisation is the key to advancing it effectively. The Action Plan 
on  Building  a  CMU,  presented  by  the  Commission  on  September  30,  sets  out  both  the 
actions needed to build the CMU and a calendar for their implementation. 
Short-term  actions  range  from  (i)  a  legislative  proposal  to  develop  simple  and  transparent 
securitisation,  possibly  subject to favourable  prudential  treatment,  through  (ii)  a  revision  of 
the capital requirements on investments in infrastructure for insurance companies, to (iii) the 
simplification of the Prospectus Directive (so as to facilitate listing for firms, especially SMEs). 
Consultations have been launched on cross-border investments in venture capital as well as 
on covered bonds, retail financial services and the impact of financial regulatory reforms. 
These  are  all  steps  that  go  in  the  right  direction,  and  we  look  forward  to  having  them 
implemented in a timely manner. But the challenges are tougher over the longer term. Let me 
highlight what I think are the key policy directions and then I will move to the important topic 
of investment in infrastructures. 
First, it is essential that more risk capital flows to firms that want to innovate and grow in size. 
Equity  financing  is  best  suited  for  higher  risk  and  innovative  projects,  that  display  strong 
information  asymmetries  and  mostly  translate  into  intangible  assets;  the  low  availability  or 
lack of tangible assets to offer as collateral for debt finance is a serious issue, especially for 
start-up  firms.  Equity  can  be  raised  through  individual  investors,  venture  capital  or  private 
equity  funds,  or,  when  a  company  matures,  listing  on  a  stock  exchange.  Private  equity  or 
venture  capital  financiers  also  provide  managerial  expertise  and  deeper  knowledge  of 
innovative sectors. Going public makes it easier to raise additional equity, reduces the cost of 
capital, enhances the discipline of firms’ management and allows shareholders to sell their 
shares more easily. In the European Union, while the overall share of (listed and unlisted) 
equity on firms’ liabilities is broadly comparable to that in the United States, only one third of 
this equity is accounted for by listed shares compared with slightly more than half in the US. 
As for venture capital, it represents a negligible share of firms’ external finance, much lower 
than in the United States. 
Firms’ capital bases can be strengthened by pursuing a more neutral tax treatment of equity 
compared  to  debt,  through,  for  example,  an  allowance  for  equity  in  corporate  income  tax. 
Such allowances could be strengthened for firms that list their shares on stock exchanges. 
Equity financing can also be supported by tax incentives, targeted for instance to innovative 
firms  or  venture  capital  investors.  These  are  examples  of  measures  that  have  been 
introduced in Italy in recent years. 
Second,  informational  barriers  about  corporate  borrowers,  in  particular  SMEs,  should  be 
overcome.  Financial  claims  on  unlisted  firms  are  typically  risky  and  illiquid.  They  call  for 
specific  professional  skills  and  information.  Many  investors  thus  need  services  and 
infrastructures  to  acquire  and  analyse  the  information  necessary  for  risk  assessment.  The 
European  Commission  wants  to  facilitate  the  exchange  of  best  practices  in  the  (private  or 
public) provisioning of advisory services to businesses looking to develop and grow. It is also 
planning  to  link  up  national  information  services  on  credit  risk,  such  as  central  credit 
registers, in order to build pan-European information systems. Data standardisation will be 
facilitated  by  the  ECB  AnaCredit  database  on  corporate  loans,  which  is  currently  being 
developed. 
Third, non-bank debt finance has to become a structural component of corporate financing 
alongside bank lending and equity. In a number of countries, including Italy, there have been 
national initiatives to promote the investment in, or the direct supply of loans to, mid-sized 
firms  by  long-term  institutional  investors  and  investment  funds.  Such  initiatives  should  be 
coordinated. The private placement market is also gaining ground in some countries. This is 
a form of financing that allows firms to directly place their bonds with institutional investors 
and other qualified market participants at a lower cost than that of issuing securities to the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  public. Its further development requires process standardisation and a greater availability of 
information on credit risk to institutional investors. 
Fourth, national laws on insolvency, tax and securities should become more homogeneous. 
In  particular,  debt  finance  would  greatly  benefit  from  a  greater  convergence  of  insolvency 
and  restructuring  proceedings  across  European  countries.  Potential  discriminatory  taxation 
rules should also be tackled. The harmonisation of national laws will inevitably be a gradual 
process.  As  also  recently  suggested  in  the  Villeroy  de  Galhau  Report  on  investment 
financing, we should not rule out any possible solution a priori, from the definition of common 
principles to the devising of a European solution (such as a European insolvency procedure). 
It will also be preferable to follow a modular approach, starting with the easiest reforms and 
then subsequently gauging where there is room to tackle more ambitious challenges. 
Other very important policy actions included in the CMU proposal are the removal of market 
infrastructure obstacles to cross-border investment, the promotion of a European market for 
personal  pensions  plans,  and 
the  supervisory  practices  and 
macroprudential framework for financial markets. 
the  enhancement  of 
Key issues that come up in financing infrastructures 
3. 
The CMU is also intended to be a key support and complement to the EC Investment Plan 
for Europe. There is broad consensus that raising investment, notably in infrastructure, is a 
key priority to strengthen the recovery. At the same time, along with lending to SMEs, the 
financing of infrastructure displays distinct challenges that deserve outmost attention, notably 
the  role  and  needs  of  institutional  investors  and  the  regulatory  framework  for  long-term 
investment. 
Infrastructure financing takes centre stage within the EC Investment Plan for Europe, which 
marks a first attempt to organise coordinated fiscal action to revamp investment in Europe as 
a  whole.  The  overall  size  of  the  resources  that  will  be  raised  by  the  Plan  through  its 
European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI) is a relevant but perhaps over-emphasised 
issue. What matters more is the ability of the EFSI to become a tool through which public and 
private  resources  can  be  channelled  towards  sectors  that  are  important  for  productivity 
growth and job creation, such as infrastructures and SMEs. 
The main challenge for the Plan comes from the demand side, i.e. the availability of suitable 
projects.  Designing  the  construction  and  financing  of  a  new  infrastructure  is  a  complex 
operation  that  takes  time.  In  order  to  build  a  rich  pipeline  of  bankable  projects,  the  Plan 
introduces two specific advisory tools at an EU level, a knowledge hub and a project portal. 
These two initiatives are designed to facilitate the sharing of information and best practices 
and to enhance the matching of individual projects to financing options. They will be available 
for all investment projects, not only those that intend to seek funding from the EFSI. 
Research  carried  out  at  the  Bank  of  Italy  on  the  Italian  experience  in  Public-Private 
Partnerships  (PPPs)  since  the  mid-nineties  highlights  the  difficulties  that  emerge  in 
structuring these operations, due above all to pitfalls in the regulatory framework and limited 
availability  of  data.  Improvements  would  arise  from  a  systematic  recourse  to  ex-ante 
analyses  of  risks,  an  appropriate  standardisation  of  contracts,  an  in-depth  monitoring  of 
single operations and an improvement in the efficiency of public administration. It must be 
underlined  that  the  preparation  of  contracts  greatly  benefits  from  the  recourse  to  soft  law 
instruments  such  as  guidelines,  standard  documents  and  best  practices,  which  testifies  to 
the importance of several reports on PPPs that have been recently produced by the OECD, 
the World Bank and other international organisations and discussed at G20 level. 
But there are challenges also regarding the supply of funding, i.e. the availability of financial 
resources  for  investments  in  infrastructures.  Pension  funds  and  insurance  companies  are 
types  of  “patient”  investors  that  fit  optimally  for  investing  in  infrastructure  and  long-term 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  projects  However,  as  the  OECD  and  the  EC  have  well  documented,  their  exposure  to 
infrastructures is limited. 
In Europe, two important steps ahead have been recently taken. The European Long Term 
Investment  Funds  are  dedicated  cross-border  fund  vehicles  that  can  be  used  by  both 
institutional  and  individual  investors  to  gain  exposure  to  long-term  projects.  The  EC’s 
Communication  of  end-September  makes  another  step  forward  by  proposing  measures  to 
create infrastructure investments as a dedicated asset class that can thus benefit from more 
favourable regulatory capital requirements. 
Another thorny issue with infrastructure financing is the lack of data. Recent OECD analyses, 
which  also  draw  on  studies  conducted  by  national  authorities  including  the  Bank  of  Italy, 
suggest  that  the  scant  availability  of  comparable  and  sufficiently  detailed  data  on 
infrastructures and related financing is a problem common to all G20 countries and applies to 
both the macro as well as to the micro level (i.e., firm or project data). We also need more 
information  on  the  risk/return  properties  of  financial  claims  on  infrastructures.  The  OECD 
research on infrastructure as an asset class is particularly important, as it would help shed 
light on the riskiness of this type of investment compared with traditional asset classes and 
its hedging properties, especially in relation to the needs of long-term institutional investors 
such as pension funds and life insurers. 
Concluding remarks 
The  Banking  Union  and  the  Capital  Markets  Union  share  a  common  goal:  fostering 
investment and, ultimately, growth. Since its peak in 2007, gross fixed capital formation in the 
EU  has  dropped  by  about  10  percent  in  real  terms.  The  need  to  support  investment  – 
national and European, private and public – in order to strengthen the recovery in the euro 
area,  is  paramount.  Finance  for  growth  has  been  one  of  the  priorities  of  the  Italian 
Presidency  of  the  Council  of  the  European  Union  in  2014.  In  many  analyses  the  need  to 
support investment stands out singularly as a shared priority. 
The  ongoing  push  to  diversify  the  sources  of  financing  for  investment  contributes  to  the 
building of a stronger and safer financial system. However, banks will generally remain the 
primary source of credit for non-financial companies, notably SMEs. It is thus paramount to 
continue all efforts in strengthening the European banking sector. 
Completing the Banking Union is a priority. The Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) must 
be  implemented  across  countries  in  a  consistent  way.  The  Single  Resolution  Mechanism 
(SRM) will be fully in place as of January 2016. Further progress is now proceeding or being 
discussed  in  three  directions:  ensuring  a  level  playing  field  by  addressing  options  and 
national discretions allowed for by the CRD/CRR; setting up a common public backstop to 
the new  Single Resolution Fund; and establishing a common European Deposit Insurance 
Scheme.  We  have  to  move  in  these  directions  with  the  necessary  care  in  order  to  avoid 
“unintended consequences” but at the same time without waiting for another financial crisis 
to occur. 
The  free  movement  of  capital  is  a  long-standing  objective  of  the  European  Union,  which 
dates back to the Treaty of Rome. The single currency, the Banking Union, and the need to 
relaunch investments and potential output make it as important as ever. 
A stable, efficient and well-diversified financial system is also the result of effective structural 
policies. Both investment and investment financing flourish in sound economic environments. 
The rule of law, a low level of taxation on productive factors, competitive markets, efficient 
public administration and effective financial supervision, these are the basic ingredients of a 
system that is able to foster entrepreneurship and innovation, allocate resources to the most 
productive sectors and create good jobs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
