  Andreas Dombret: The Single Supervisory Mechanism – from European 
supervisor to European supervision 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Handelsblatt  Annual  Conference  “New  developments  in  banking 
supervision”, Frankfurt am Main, 11 November 2015. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It gives me great pleasure to speak to you here today at the Handelsblatt Annual Conference 
on the topic of new developments in banking supervision. Carnival season begins today, 11 
November at 11.11 am – but to those of you who are hoping for a traditional, witty Carnival 
speech at this point, I’m afraid I’m about to let you down. Besides, 11 o’clock is still a good 
couple of hours away. 
Nonetheless, I think we should begin on a light-hearted note. Have you heard the one about 
the German, the Frenchman and the Englishman who are sentenced to death but granted 
one final request? The Frenchman chooses a six-course meal with red wine. The German 
asks to give one last, long speech. And the Englishman’s final request? “I want you to shoot 
me before the German starts speaking.” 
Ladies and gentlemen, I hope that none of us will have to make such a final request any time 
soon, and I promise to keep my speech short. In any case, the topic I have chosen is still 
fairly new – the Single Supervisory Mechanism, or SSM. 
One year of European banking supervision: initial successes ... 
2. 
Just as today marks a new season for those who celebrate Carnival, we banking supervisors 
entered a new era just over a year ago – the era of European banking supervision. 
On 4 November 2014, we established the first pillar of the European banking union in the 
form of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). On that day, the European Central Bank 
(ECB) assumed responsibility for directly supervising the approximately 120 largest banks in 
the  euro  area.  It  therefore  now  supervises  over  85%  of  the  euro-area  banking  sector, 
measured by total assets. 
To make one thing clear from the start, it is obvious how much has been achieved over the 
past  year.  The  SSM,  which  is  staffed  by  personnel  from  the  ECB  and  each  euro-area 
country’s national competent authorities, has got off to a flying start, which is mainly down to 
the  excellent  teamwork  between  these  two  groups  of  supervisors.  The  joint  supervisory 
teams, or JSTs, show us on a daily basis how diverse supervisory cultures are growing ever 
closer to one another. 
A year ago, a new age also began for the banks we supervise. The supervisory approach 
has taken on a significantly more quantitative slant, for example, and day-to-day supervisory 
practices are now mainly being conducted in English. All in all, it appears to me that banks 
have adapted well to the new supervisory setting. 
The SSM represents the creation of the first ever European supervisory regime. However, it 
is  crucial  that  the  SSM  also  establish  a  consistent  basis  for  banking  supervision  across 
Europe. 
Only then will  we be able to tackle the weaknesses exposed by the recent financial crisis. 
One such weakness was the tendency of national supervisors to train their sights primarily 
on the institutions based in their own jurisdiction, meaning that risk that spilled over to other 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
countries  sometimes  went  undetected  until  it  was  too  late.  The  SSM  can  address  this 
problem  by  taking  an  explicitly  European  approach  and  comparing  banks  from  different 
countries, for example. 
Another aim of the SSM is to prevent banks in different countries from being supervised with 
varying  degrees  of  strictness  because,  for  instance,  national  supervisory  regimes  are  too 
heavily  influenced  by  national  interests.  To  reduce  this  risk,  the  JSTs  are  headed  by 
coordinators who are not usually from the country in which the supervised bank is located. 
The  upcoming  EU-wide  stress  test  also  demonstrates  the  need  to  apply  a  European 
perspective. Last Thursday, the ECB announced which euro-area banks will participate in the 
EU-wide  stress  test,  to  be  conducted  next  year  by  the  London-based  European  Banking 
Authority (EBA). For the first time, the sample has been defined from an SSM-wide rather 
than  a  national  perspective.  The  19  euro-area  countries  will  be  treated  as  a  whole  when 
calculating  asset  coverage,  instead  of  taking  a  country-by-country  approach.  Making  the 
stress tests more European marks another important step towards creating a level playing 
field. 
Yet  it  is  not  just  the  supervisors  –  supervisory  standards  also  have  to  become  European, 
which  is  why  the  ECB  is  constantly  striving  to  harmonise  the  prudential  standards  of  the 
individual  euro-area  countries.  The  situation  at  present  is  that  national  supervisors  can,  in 
some cases, choose between various options under European supervisory law and are able 
to decide autonomously on the concrete application of the law. The outcome is that banks in 
the euro area are still subject to completely different rules. 
For example, discussions are underway concerning the treatment of deferred tax assets. In a 
number of countries, these assets are recognised as equity when, under the CRR – an EU 
Regulation governing supervisory requirements – they generally have to be deducted from 
equity  capital.  One  option  allows  for  a  longer  transitional  period,  during  which  the  new 
deduction requirements are introduced step by step. In my opinion, however, this results in 
disparate  competitive  conditions  among  EU  banks.  Other  options  that  are  currently  being 
discussed  include,  for  instance,  the  treatment  of  intragroup  loans  in  the  light  of  the  large 
exposure limit and the exemption from liquidity requirements for single entities that are part 
of a group. 
I take a positive view of the SSM’s current efforts to limit these national options. And today 
marks the beginning of a consultation on the possible harmonisation of these options. If we 
can bring in a reasonable limit here, this will help us harmonise supervision in the individual 
countries  and  restrict  the  influence  of  national  interests.  Nonetheless,  any  effort  at 
harmonisation needs to be accompanied by a sense of proportion; I will return to this point 
later. 
Ladies and gentlemen, like Carnival today, the SSM  was kicked off one year ago – and, I 
believe,  successfully.  But  there  is  no  question  that  such  a  new  structure  has  to  be further 
consolidated and is faced with challenges so soon after its launch. 
...but challenges remain
3.
Today I will address two current challenges facing European supervisors at the moment: first, 
the  balance  of  harmonisation,  subsidiarity  and  proportionality,  and  second,  institutional 
challenges. 
I  have  already  mentioned  the  necessity  of  harmonised  supervisory  standards.  However,  it 
must  also  be  clear  when  striving  to  harmonise  that  harmonisation  has  its  limits,  because 
what  is  important  is  a  sustainable  balance  between  harmonisation  and  proportionality.  It 
should go without saying that, for example, a smaller bank running a low-risk business model 
is not supervised as intensively as a larger one engaged in riskier transactions. 
2 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the  ECB  only 
Of course, the principle of proportionality is apparent even in the structure of the SSM itself. 
Only  the  123  most  significant  institutions  are  supervised  directly  by  the  ECB;  the  ongoing 
supervision of the approximately 3,500 less significant banks remains the task of the national 
supervisors.  These  banks  communicate  directly  with 
in  exceptional 
circumstances  –  for  instance,  if  they  require  authorisations  or  wish  to  acquire  qualifying 
holdings.  The  ECB  is  informed  about  each  less  significant  institution  in  an  annual  report 
drawn  up  by  the  national  supervisors.  In  close  consultation  with  the  national  competent 
authorities,  it  has  additionally  defined  a  group  of  institutions  on  which  it  wishes  to  receive 
more frequent and more detailed reports. 
I consider this approach to be sensible and correct, as it upholds the principle of subsidiarity. 
For instance, most smaller banks apply regional, relatively low-risk business models that do 
not  require  harmonised  European  supervision.  National  supervisors  will  be  able  to 
appropriately supervise and classify the special features of these banks in future, too. 
Nonetheless,  these  less  significant  banks  are  also  affected  by  the  SSM.  In  future,  these 
institutions are to be supervised under harmonised European standards as well. In order to 
ensure such consistent supervision, the ECB can give national supervisors guidance on how 
to  design  the  supervision  of  smaller  institutions.  For  instance,  it  can  set  supervisory  focal 
points or define principles for the assessment of certain issues. In individual cases, however, 
the ECB does not have the power to order national supervisors to take specific supervisory 
actions or to issue specific decisions. 
The  ECB  and  the  national  supervisors  are  currently  setting  the  relevant  guidelines  and 
revising the SSM Supervisory Manual. The challenge they face is to strike the right balance 
between  harmonising  supervisory  practice,  which  is  quite  rightly  an  objective,  and  the 
principles of subsidiarity and proportionality. We must prevent a situation in which inherently 
different matters are supervised according to the same standards. 
After all, the size of a bank is indeed relevant when it comes to risk. Of course, small banks 
are also capable of entering into bad deals, making bad decisions and failing. However, the 
implications for the financial system are much less severe than if a bigger bank fails and are, 
for the most part, likely to be contained at the national or even regional level. Small banks 
are not “too big to fail” and therefore have, from the outset, less incentive to take particularly 
high risks. Supervisors should address these differences in their requirements. It is essential 
that the principle of proportionality be upheld. 
This  principle  should  be  considered  in  the  current  review  of  national  options  that  I  have 
already mentioned. As sensible as harmonisation is, it sometimes makes just as much sense 
to  interpret  rules  in  the  light  of  national  special  features.  We  therefore  have  to  review  all 
national options very carefully and keep only those options that truly reflect the peculiarities 
of various markets and banks. It is my firm conviction that all other options should, sooner or 
later, be phased out. 
Last but not least, a European supervisory regime needs a sounds institutional framework. In 
this  context,  thought  must  also  be  given  to  the  SSM’s  decision-making  structures  and 
processes.  Now  that  the  ECB  is  responsible  for  banking  supervision,  the  ECB  Governing 
Council  is  the  supreme  decision-making  body  for  supervisory  decisions  in  addition  to 
monetary policy ones. These two decision-making powers are relevant in that banks are, on 
the one hand, an essential part of the monetary policy transmission mechanism but, on the 
other hand, are also subject to the scrutiny of the banking supervisor. It would be wrong to 
claim that conflicts of interest could never arise here. 
Of  course,  these  potential  conflicts  of  interest  were  discussed  back  when  the  SSM  was 
established,  and  the  institutional  framework  that  restricts  the  role  of  the  ECB  Governing 
Council in supervisory decisions is meant to address this. This framework has worked thus 
far, but I am not sure whether it will work in all circumstances. It therefore can’t do any harm 
to think of ways to improve it. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Alongside the institutional structures, I also see further need for improvement with regard to 
the  decision-making  structures  and  processes.  Specifically,  I  mean  that  the  SSM’s  senior 
management  levels  must  –  due  to  requirements  laid  down  in  the  ECB  Statute  –  also  deal 
with many routine tasks which, purely in terms of their content, could also be carried out at 
other levels of the organisation. The “fit and proper” assessments of future members of the 
supervised banks’ management bodies with executive and supervisory functions are an apt 
example here. This year alone, the Supervisory Board, followed by the Governing Council, 
has  made  more  than  1,000  such  fit  and  proper  decisions.  The  ECB  recognises  these 
problems and is currently working on a solution that will hopefully soon be found. 
Conclusion 
4. 
A European supervisor for the largest banks in the euro area has now been in place for one 
year. From my perspective, this first year has been satisfactory and shown great promise. 
Nevertheless, we still have some way to go before a genuine European supervisory regime 
is established. 
We  will  only  reach  this  destination  if,  when  harmonising  supervisory  standards  and 
supervisory options, we strike a balance that makes sense from a supervisory and economic 
perspective and fits the structures and circumstances of the European banking market. This 
challenge  can  certainly  be  overcome,  and  it  is  with  this  in  mind  that  I  look  forward  to  the 
SSM’s second year. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
