   Már Guðmundsson: Monetary policy at a crossroads 
Speech by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the Icelandic 
Chamber of Commerce Monetary Policy meeting, Reykjavík, 5 November 2015. 
 Honoured chairman, ladies and gentlemen: 
The Iceland Chamber of Commerce has a decades-long tradition of holding a meeting like this 
one  on  economic  developments  and  prospects  and  monetary  policy.  The  meeting  is  held 
following  the  publication  of  the  Central  Bank’s  autumn  forecast  and,  in  latter  years,  the 
Monetary Policy Committee’s interest rate decision. 
The title of my talk today is Monetary policy at a crossroads. These crossroads are, first, the 
disappearance of the slack in the economy and the development of a positive output gap, with 
the result that the task of monetary policy is no longer to stimulate GDP growth to the extent 
that the inflation target allows but to ensure that the tension in the economy does not cause 
overheating,  which  would  jeopardise  economic  stability.  The  second  crossroads  is  that,  in 
recent months, the labour market situation has become much more serious than would have 
been  anticipated  given  the  state  of  the  economy.  The  third  lies  in  the  unusual  level  of 
uncertainty  about  the  inflation  outlook,  stemming  from  the  interplay  between  domestic 
inflationary pressures and the global tendency towards deflation. And fourth is the recent rapid 
progress  in  solving  the  of  the  balance  of  payments  problem  Iceland  has  faced  since  the 
financial crisis struck and the approaching liberalisation of capital controls. Because of this, the 
monetary policy transmission mechanism has been somewhat disturbed, as Iceland is more 
susceptible to contagion from low global interest rates at a time when financial conditions and 
the banks’ liquidity are changing. 
Some might say that these represent challenges rather than a crossroads. I prefer crossroads 
as a metaphor, however, because in all of these instances the economy is moving from one 
state  to  another. This  certainly  poses  challenges for  monetary  policy  and for  all  economic 
policy. But they are compounded by the fact that the economy is travelling through all of these 
crossroads at roughly the same time, and the challenges often interact in a manner that makes 
monetary  policy  formulation  and  conduct  more  problematic  than  usual.  This  will  become 
clearer after I have described each of the crossroads more fully. 
The first one is growing demand pressures in the domestic economy. According to the Bank’s 
forecast,  published  yesterday, GDP  growth  in  2015  and  2016, measuring  4.6%  and  3.2%, 
respectively, will exceed growth in potential output. The sizeable slack that developed during 
the economic contraction ending in 2010 was gradually absorbed between 2011 and 2013. 
Measured productivity growth has been negligible or non-existent and GDP growth therefore 
labour-intensive. As a result, unemployment has declined rapidly and demand pressures have 
developed in the labour market. According to the forecast published yesterday, the positive 
output gap is expected to peak next year at 1½% of GDP. Domestic demand will grow well in 
excess  of  GDP  during  the  forecast  horizon,  which  extends  into  2018.  Terms  of  trade  are 
projected to improve significantly this year, contributing to a larger current account surplus than 
would otherwise occur, but the improvement will reverse to an extent in 2017 and 2018. The 
sizeable current account surplus of the past few years will therefore shrink significantly during 
the forecast horizon and will have nearly disappeared by 2018. 
Rapid growth in domestic demand under conditions of full utilisation of resources has often 
proven dangerous to Icelanders. Other things being equal, such a situation calls for monetary 
and fiscal tightening. Our initial position is unusually good this time, as can be seen in a strong 
current account surplus, a central government surplus and declining government debt, and 
inflation that is still below the target. But the tug-of-war between large pay increases and the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
global  tendency  towards  deflation  will  determine  how  much  and  how  rapidly  this  situation 
deteriorates in the coming term. 
In my speech at the Central Bank’s Annual General Meeting, I expressed considerable concern 
about the unrest in the labour market and the consequences that it could have for economic 
stability. In the speech, I noted that wage pressures that jeopardise the inflation target are 
generally considered a sign of both demand pressures in the economy and excess demand in 
the labour market, which must be met with tighter monetary policy. However, this was not 
consistent with a slack that was just about to disappear and a sizeable current account surplus. 
I mentioned another possible explanation: that the consensus on wage differentials had broken 
down at the same time that the opening of the labour market vis-à-vis abroad put pressure on 
those differentials – in some cases, in the direction opposite to that demanded by labour market 
organisations. This is consistent with theories indicating that, other things being equal, if there 
is  a  broader  consensus  about  income  distribution,  a  lower  level  of  unemployment  will  be 
consistent with low and stable inflation. 
Other  possible  explanations  should  be  borne  in  mind,  however,  in  any  interpretation  of 
developments in the labour market. One is that the recent improvement in terms of trade has 
created greater scope for non-inflationary wage increases. This is true, to the extent that the 
improvement is not merely transitory. But even if it is merely transitory, it keeps inflation from 
rising above target for a while, even if wage increases are well in excess of the level that is 
consistent with the target in the long run. Another possible explanation is that the equilibrium 
real exchange rate is rising at present because of the improvement in terms of trade and the 
reduction of external debt, owing in part to the settlement of the failed banks’ estates and the 
release and tying-up of offshore krónur. To the extent that this does not surface in a nominal 
currency appreciation, it will put temporary pressure on wages and prices. 
  It seems to me that a number of signs indicate that all of these explanations apply to some 
degree. But the consequences for economic stability will be determined, among other things, 
by the weight of each one and by the response of monetary policy and other economic policies. 
In any case, it is clear that something has to give. As Chart 1 shows, we are undergoing a 
period of several years during which unit labour costs are growing well in excess of the level 
that is consistent with the inflation target. At the same time, productivity growth is very weak. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
If the Central Bank’s most recent forecast materialises, the result will be as is shown in Chart 2: 
the real exchange rate and wage share will rise far above their historical averages, and the 
tension in the labour market will be amplified even further. 
 
  But I consider it unlikely that this will be the outcome. Either the adjustment will take place 
through some combination of higher inflation and higher unemployment, or positive shocks will 
provide some assistance; for example, the improvement in terms of trade will be greater and 
more lasting, productivity growth will be stronger, and interest payments to abroad will be lower 
because of reduced external debt and improved credit ratings. It will be very interesting to see 
how things develop in the next few years. It would be imprudent, however, for economic policy 
and contingency planning to rely blindly on positive shocks. 
And then there is inflation. Inflation has risen more slowly following the recent pay hikes than 
perhaps could have been expected in view of historical experience, and it is still well below 
target.  This  could  be  due  in  part  to  the  additional  scope  provided  by  the  favourable  initial 
position  of  many  firms  and  by  the  improvement  in  terms  of  trade.  But  the  most  obvious 
explanation is that lower prices in international trade and low or zero inflation in trading partner 
countries offsets domestic inflationary pressures, as can be seen in Chart 3. 
The downward price pressures from abroad have been stronger in recent months than was 
projected last spring, partly because of economic developments in China. But it is unlikely that 
the price of oil and other commodities will continue falling for a long time to come. The question, 
then, is what happens when prices stop falling – not to mention if they begin to rise again, as 
is forecast. Other things being equal, measured inflation would rise in Iceland. The Central 
Bank’s new forecast assumes, in fact, that oil prices will begin to rise again towards the end of 
this  year.  In  addition,  a  portion  of  the  wage  increases  will  finally  pass  through  to  prices. 
According to the forecast, inflation will therefore rise in coming months, overtaking the target 
next year and peaking at just over 4% in the first half of 2017. It will not return to target until 
2018. It should be borne in mind that this forecast entails an endogenous tightening of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
monetary stance as the positive output gap widens and inflation rises. The Monetary Policy 
Committee’s decision to raise Central Bank interest rates by 0.25% must be viewed in this 
light. 
  The final crossroads is the most important: the resolution of the balance of payments problem 
and the liberalisation of the capital controls. It has long been clear that taking this step would 
entail numerous challenges for monetary policy. Two in particular have been focused on. 
The first is that the banks’ liquidity position could deteriorate as a result of the liberalisation of 
the capital controls. The Central Bank has mapped out the potential scope of these effects, as 
was  presented  when  the  settlement  of the  estates  on  the  basis  of  stability  conditions  was 
announced recently. The result is that the change in liquidity will be within manageable limits. 
This does not change the fact that the banks must proceed with caution in coming months and 
protect  their  liquidity  position  throughout  the  process.  In  support  of  this,  the  Central  Bank 
recently increased minimum reserve requirements. The intention is to reverse the change in 
reserve requirements when the strain on liquidity is at its peak. 
The latter is that before capital controls on residents are finally lifted, we must implement a 
monetary  policy  framework  different  from  that  pursued  before  the  crisis.  This  is  because 
experience has shown that it is difficult for small economies to pursue independent monetary 
policy if interest rates are their only policy instrument, their currencies float freely, there are no 
restrictions in residents’ unhedged foreign exchange risk, and financial integration with the rest 
of the world disconnects the transmission of monetary policy through the interest rate channel. 
I would like to pause here, as this last item is of particular importance for Iceland at present. I 
conducted a study of this topic during my tenure with the Bank for International Settlements in 
2004–2009.1  I  delved  into  it  again  last  summer,  as  can  be  seen  in  the  speech  I  gave  in 
Singapore  last  August,  which  can  be  found  on  the  websites  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements  and  the  Central  Bank,  and  in  my  forthcoming  paper,  to  be  published  in  the 
                                                
1 
“Financial globalisation: key trends and implications for the transmissions mechanism of monetary policy”. BIS 
Papers No. 39, April 2008. http://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/bispap39c.pdf 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Singapore  Economic  Review. These writings contain more detailed explanations, but if we 
consider the main points and allow the tendencies entailed in financial integration to develop 
to their limit, the outcome is abundantly clear. The interest rate channel of monetary policy 
becomes utterly clogged up in small, open, and financially integrated economies where longer-
term interest rates are determined by rates in large economies. Monetary policy transmission 
shifts  entirely  to  the  exchange  rate  channel.  But  transmission  through  the  exchange  rate 
channel is uncertain and volatile, as the exchange rate is also an asset price that fluctuates 
with speculative capital flows and can deviate from equilibrium over time, only to correct quite 
suddenly. Unless the financial system is even better protected, this process can interact very 
badly with financial stability, as was the case in Iceland during the financial crisis. 
In  its  publications  “Monetary  policy  in  Iceland  after  capital  controls”  and  “Prudential  rules 
following capital controls”,2 the Central Bank has described the framework that it considers 
appropriate to replace the pre-crisis framework. Much of what is described in the two reports 
has already been put in place, but the final brushstrokes remain undone. We intervene in the 
foreign exchange market; i.e., we have a managed float and not a free-floating currency. We 
have adopted prudential rules that greatly reduce the banks’ opportunities to take risks with 
their foreign currency balance sheets. We have established a Financial Stability Council and a 
Systemic Risk Committee in order to monitor financial system risk more effectively than we did 
previously, and we are developing prudential rules and macroprudential tools to respond to 
systemic risk. This will make the conduct of monetary policy easier. And in addition, I hope that 
statutory  amendments  will  be  passed  soon  in  order  to  put  brakes  on  foreign-denominated 
lending to resident borrowers without foreign currency income and assets. 
But the final brushstrokes remain undone: we have yet to develop tools that can be used to 
reactivate the interest rate channel if and when it becomes clogged up because of capital 
inflows related to carry trade. In this context, one might ask whether we are too late. To be 
sure, the capital inflows are taking place sooner than generally expected. We still have not 
released those who entered last, but we have already received capital inflows of nearly 50 b.kr. 
for investment in nominal Treasury bonds – most of it after Iceland’s sovereign ratings were 
upgraded because the next steps towards capital account liberalisation were announced in 
early June! And this has certainly disrupted the monetary policy transmission mechanism, as 
can be seen in Chart 4. 
Thus far, the impact has been more or less limited to the Treasury bond market, and the banks’ 
nominal interest rates have broadly followed Central Bank rates. The first signs of contagion 
to other parts of the financial market had begun to show before the Central Bank’s rate hike 
yesterday. It will be interesting to see what impact the rate hike has. 
Independent monetary policy entails the possibility of maintaining a different monetary stance 
than  other  countries  do  if  and  when  the  need  arises.  Recent  research  and  international 
discourse indicate that it can be difficult for small, open, and financially integrated economies 
to  pursue  monetary  policy  that  differs  significantly  from  that  in  large  economies.  The  final 
brushstrokes entail developing tools that will, if applied, restrict the benefits accruing to non-
residents as a result of our having higher interest rates than our trading partners. The precise 
structure of this will come clear in the next few months, but possibilities include some form of 
taxation or a special reserve requirement. 
                                                
2  Central Bank of Iceland Special Publication no. 4: Monetary policy after capital controls, December 2010 and 
Central  Bank  of  Iceland  Special  Publication  no.  6:  Prudential  rules  following  capital  controls,  August  2012. 
http://www.cb.is/publications/publications/special-publications/ 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
    
I have now reviewed the multiple crossroads that I mentioned at the outset. Each one of them 
poses a challenge for monetary policy. But it is not least the interactions among them and the 
timing that make monetary policy so unusually complicated at present. For instance, it would 
be much easier to cope with capital inflows if domestic economic developments did not call for 
a tighter monetary stance at this juncture. The oft-quoted Chinese blessing – or curse – “May 
you live in interesting times” – continues to follow us. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
