  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Prospects for and developments in the 
Philippine banking system 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Philippine  International  Banking  Convention  2015, 
Makati City, 2 October 2015. 
 I am pleased to be joining you again for this Philippine International Banking Convention. For 
five years now, we have gathered to consider the pressing issues of the time as a way for us 
to take an inward look at how the Philippine banking system is positioned. 
For today’s conference, the organizers have chosen for us to look at the Philippine financial 
system through the lens of ASEAN financial integration. I particularly like the operative word 
of today’s theme – “transforming”. The word evokes movement over time, change, reaction, 
adaptation. In other words – dynamism. This is what really is needed in a time of flux. 
But perhaps what we need to be reminded of is that our regional operating environment has 
already been changing even before recent times when ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) 
and ASEAN integration have become more talked about. 
Prospects of an integrated regional financial market 
The  reason  possibly  why  ASEAN  integration  has  become  more  elevated  in  public 
consciousness lately is that the AEC will be “formally” launched at year-end. But, we should 
not be misled to believe that end December represents a “switch-on” for regional integration. 
The reality is, even if we count only the AEC, integration efforts have been unfolding under 
an  AEC  Blueprint  since  2008.  The  Blueprint  contains  four  pillars,  17  core  elements, 
176 priority  actions  and  414  targeted  measures.  Based  on  the  most  recent  scorecard, 
ASEAN  has  completed  80.7%  of  its  economic  integration  program  (i.e.,  334  out  of 
414 measures completed as of end 2014). 
For those of us in the financial markets, however, the more critical target is 2020 at which 
time the ASEAN Financial Integration Framework or AFIF is expected to be in place. This 
initiative has many moving parts and perhaps the best way to appreciate it is to understand 
the underlying philosophy behind an integrated ASEAN. 
It is actually a rather simple story with a compelling business case. Instead of 10 separate 
economies,  a  single  market  provides  an  enormous  base  within  which  consumers  and 
providers can operate. Measured by GDP, this single base is significant. In addition, ASEAN 
has a track record of strong growth. At the end of 2014, ASEAN (at $2.57 trillion GDP) was 
just smaller than France and the United Kingdom but larger than Brazil, Russia and India.1 
The expectation, however, is that ASEAN will continue to outpace the rest of the world. In 
fact, in a May 2014 report2, McKinsey & Company projected that ASEAN will be eventually 
the 4th largest economy in the world by 2050. 
To achieve this single base, however, barriers to trade have to be minimized to the fullest 
extent  possible.  This  allows  the  economics  of  “comparative  advantage”  to  take  over, 
effectively  unbundling  distribution  of  goods  and  services  from  their  production.  In  other 
words, not every jurisdiction needs to produce each and every good that it requires. Already, 
                                                
1   At end 2014, ASEAN GDP stood at $2.57T. France and UK were are $2.829T and $2.942T, respectively while 
Brazil, Russia and India were at $2.346T, $1.861T and $2.067T, respectively. 
2   “Understanding ASEAN: Seven things you need to know”. McKinsey & Company. May 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
ASEAN is home to 227 of the world’s largest companies, ranking us 7th in the world by that 
metric.3 
This  “unbundling”,  in  turn,  is  important  if  ASEAN  is  to  service  its  diverse  population  with 
differentiated needs. This demographic detail is key. With 81 million households already in 
2013, this is projected to double to 163 million households by 20304, creating an engine that 
naturally fuels further demand and further growth. 
Creating and sustaining this growth will of course require more labor resources. Simulations 
from  the  joint  work5  of  ADB  and  the  ILO  show  that  high-skill  employment  in  Cambodia, 
Indonesia,  Lao,  Philippines, Thailand  and  Vietnam  could  grow  by  41%  between  2010  and 
2025. With Mutual Recognition Arrangements (MRAs) in place and intended to be expanded, 
labor mobility will all the more be enhanced. 
Financial markets will certainly play a critical role within this vision. This is because financing 
is  needed  by  the  entrepreneurial  initiatives  in  that  single  market,  augmenting  what  the 
respective jurisdictions can provide on their own. For the financial consumer, more choices 
present themselves under integration. The idea is that under integration, a Filipino investor 
would be able to take on financial instruments out of Hanoi nearly as seamlessly as investing 
in Manila itself. 
Financial markets, however, come in different colors and rich hues. To make an integrated 
market come alive, we need the breadth and depth of capital markets. The ability to raise 
capital is necessarily premised on having thriving fixed income and equity markets so that 
surplus funds can be invested on those willing to take an entrepreneurial risk. 
Doing  so  requires  a  payments  and  settlements  system  that  is  holistic  and  efficient,  from 
large-value to retail payment systems and securities settlements. This must be supported by 
the  necessary 
infrastructures  –  CCPs,  CSDs,  TRs  –  run  under 
uncompromising standards of good governance and risk management. All of these must be 
in  place  in  each  jurisdiction  and  then  linked  and  aligned  with  the  rest  of  the  ASEAN 
jurisdictions6. As I understand, there is still much work to be done in this area, particularly in 
light of the global market reform agenda. 
We  need  a  functioning  insurance  market  so  that  stakeholders  can  either  hedge  their  risk 
exposures  or  transfer  the  risks  to  those  who  are  better  positioned  to  manage  them.  The 
notion of an “insurable event” for both property and finance has shifted through time and the 
same dynamism is necessary if we are to adapt to a fast evolving market landscape. 
And  certainly,  we  need  indigenous  ASEAN  banks  to  bridge  markets,  offer  products  and 
services and meet the varied needs of consumers and producers. ASEAN’s saving – at 31% 
of GDP and 11 percentage points higher on average than the rest of the world – needs a 
repository  before  these  can  be  intermediated  or  invested.  With  collective  GDP  at 
USD2.57 trillion7 in 2014, the amount of economic saving is not trivial. 
ASEAN banks must have the depth of risk capital and the breadth of expertise if they are to 
handle  cross-border  banking.  This  is  for  a  region  that  has  consistently  grown  but  is  also 
defined by the diversity of its member states. 
financial  market 
Ibid. 
                                                
3  
4   “Southeast Asia at the Crossroads: Three Paths to Prosperity”. McKinsey & Company. November 2014. 
5   “ASEAN Community 2015: Managing integration for better jobs and shared prosperity”. ADB & ILO. 2014. 
6   The current linkage is the ASEAN Trading LINK – on equity exchanges of Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore. 
7   Data from ASEAN website. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Market “Surprises”: what we learned 
For  all  ASEAN’s  current  strength  and  potential,  recent  global  developments  have  had  an 
impact. 
One  would  surmise  that  ASEAN  trade  exposures  to  Greece  would  not  be  that  significant. 
Yet, when the prospect of a “Grexit” heightened, global financial markets recoiled. ASEAN 
was not spared from the contagion even though the impact was not protracted. 
When China devalued the Renminbi, this was, literally, closer to home and the impact was 
more  pointed.  The  devaluation  on  August  11  was  itself  a  significant  surprise  but  to  see  it 
done on three consecutive days raised considerable concern over the potential extent of a 
slowdown of the Chinese economy. 
And  certainly,  we  have  all  talked  about  the  “normalization  of  US  monetary  policy”  for  a 
considerable  period  now.  We  went  through  the  taper  tantrums  in  2013  –  2014  and  then 
anticipated the lift off in 2015, only to find ourselves still reading between the lines of Fed 
pronouncements. 
The impact that these developments have had on ASEAN does not reflect in any way on any 
potential weakness of ASEAN itself. Instead, the lesson that I take away is the reminder that 
we – either as a collective bloc or as individual jurisdictions – are deeply integrated to the 
ebb and flow of the global financial markets. 
The Philippine boat may not be the large  vessel of other jurisdictions but the fact that we 
have been able to steer through the turbulent and uncertain waters of the last decade is itself 
the testament of our resolve and our strength as a market. 
In part, we have been able to steer the economy through these disturbances because over 
the years we have built the foundations of a strong macroeconomy. In 2002, we adopted a 
rigorous framework for monetary policy formulation – inflation targetting. The discipline that 
this framework requires has caused us to be focused on maintaining stable prices, which has 
in turn been central in building market confidence. That said, we constantly also find ways of 
doing things better. For instance, just last week, the Monetary Board approved the adoption 
of  an  interest  rate  corridor  system  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  This  operational 
change  is  expected  to  make  the  signals  from  monetary  policy  more  effective,  strengthen 
price discovery and therefore make the transmission of monetary policy more efficient. 
We  have  also  consciously  crafted  market-based  banking  regulations  consistent  with  the 
evolving  international  reform  agenda.  This  has  created  an  operating  environment  that 
encourages our banks to innovate while being conscious of risks. 
In line with this, we have also sustained a foreign exchange rate policy wherein the exchange 
rate is allowed to be essentially market-determined, with scope for official action only to limit 
excessive price movements. 
Are we ready? 
This brings me to my point today: are we ready for what lies ahead? 
If we go by mainstream indicators, the Philippine banking industry remains to be in a position 
of strength. Total resources of universal and commercial banks (whose share dominates the 
industry)  grew  by  11.6%  between  2010  and  June  2015  while  their  July  NPL  ratio  was  at 
1.9%.  The  capital  adequacy  ratio  of  these  banks  was  at  15.1%  with  stress  test  results 
confirming that there is enough capital buffer in the event of extreme shocks. 
Beyond these traditional measures, I want to focus on how financial technology or FinTech 
has positively transformed our banking industry. 
Today’s banking experience is more personal in the sense that it is driven by FinTech. Those 
of us in Generation X may find that to be a contradiction in terms because we grew up not 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
equating  “service”  with  “gadgets”.  Yet,  this  is  precisely  the  world  of  the  “millennials”  who 
capture thoughts and experiences in gigabytes. 
Over the counter withdrawals now run in parallel to online banking services where the speed 
of  transactions  is  limited  only  by  bandwidth.  ATMs  are  no  longer  just  cash-dispensing 
machines since the networks offer a full range of consumer and corporate banking services. 
The widespread use of e-money means that payment systems can clear and settle the most 
retail of transactions without cash physically moving from wallet to wallet. 
Yes ladies and gentlemen, this is the banking landscape of today and our banks have, by 
and large, redirected their attention to these facets. From a policy perspective, this was the 
wherewithal for crafting Circular 854 which adjusted the minimum capital levels required of 
banks. It is a recognition that banking has moved on from the folders and filing cabinets of 
old to the systems and interfaces of today. 
We put in place an IT Risk Management framework (under Circulars 808 and 859) so that all 
of these are governed by appropriate standards. To instil continuing credit discipline, Circular 
855  provided  for  credit  risk  management  practices  that,  among  others,  de-emphasize 
reliance on collaterals and nurture verifiable credit underwriting decisions of banks. And to 
protect the consumer, the BSP has  issued the  landmark Consumer Protection Framework 
(under  Circular  857)  that  sets  our  expectations  on  the  behaviour  and  actions  of  covered 
institutions. 
All  these  matter  because  our  own  demographic  profile  points  to  half  of  the  population  at 
younger  than  25  years  old,  precisely  the  millennials.  We  are  also  an  archipelago  and  we 
need to bring banking to the people rather than expect people to adjust to banking. Thus, it 
should  come  as  no  surprise  that  the  BSP  has  pushed  actively  on  our  financial  inclusion 
campaign. 
Financial inclusion literally binds all our efforts because it creates a sustainable link between 
economic  activity,  financial  products  and services  as  well  as  the  universal  aspiration for  a 
better future through economic growth and financial well-being. 
Stronger onshore conditions provide better offshore links 
Ladies and gentlemen, if you are wondering how inclusion, fintech and millennials relate to 
ASEAN financial integration, the connection is not complicated. 
To be able to compete in the broader offshore market of ASEAN, Philippine banks need to 
establish what their comparative advantages are onshore. It would be difficult to imagine how 
a bank can actively engage in the potential of ASEAN integration if it cannot be competitive 
in its own domestic market. 
This  issue  becomes  even  more  significant  in  light  of  the  passage  in  2014  of  legislation 
(RA 10641) which fully liberalized our domestic banking system, allowing for 100% foreign 
ownership of our banks. 
Is  the  Philippine  banking  system  ready?  We  are  clearly  in  a  position  of  strength  as  an 
industry  and,  individually  our  banks  have  been  enlarging  their  domestic  footprint  – 
constructing  brick  and  mortar  branches  outside  of  the  greater  metropolis,  creating  “other 
banking  offices”,  which  are  scaled-down  bank  operations,  and  capitalizing  on  e-banking 
technology. 
While  the  biggest  of  the  ASEAN  banks  can  indeed  penetrate  smaller  jurisdictions,  the 
diversity of ASEAN suggests there are niche markets that can be realized, different needs 
that can be explored and pockets of expertise that can be harnessed. 
This is an important reality to bear in mind. And as you can appreciate, this “distinctiveness” 
of ASEAN is the pressing motivation why our banks are currently focused on fortifying their 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
domestic franchise in a variety of modes. We can, however, only surmise that this insular 
perspective will not be the norm for long. 
The peculiar diversity of ASEAN ensures that banks across the 10 jurisdictions will have a 
role to play in the ASEAN. This also ensures that the gains from regional banking integration 
will not only accrue to the biggest of ASEAN banks. 
That said, competition creates fluidity and the possibility of external shocks is a constant. As 
we scan the horizon, the waters may appear to be relatively calm for us now, but there are 
shifts in the currents. We have to be able to adapt to the market flows and we cannot make 
the mistake of being oblivious to the under-currents. 
In the end, as they say, if each member jurisdiction is successful in shielding itself from the 
currents of change, if together we are successful in transforming ourselves within the context 
of an integrated market, then ASEAN may just prove the case that the whole would indeed 
exceed the sum of its parts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
