   Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Monetary Policy Report 
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, Ontario, 21 October 
2015. 
 Good morning. We are happy to be here to answer your questions about today’s interest rate 
announcement,  and  our  October  Monetary  Policy  Report  (MPR). We  will  begin  with  a  few 
remarks about the issues that were most important to the Governing Council’s deliberations. 
Let’s start with the global context. We expect the global economy to strengthen over the next 
couple of years, although on a lower path than predicted in our last MPR in July. Growth is 
being supported by accommodative monetary policy and the positive effects of low oil prices 
in a number of economies. The U.S. economy continues to strengthen largely as we expected, 
shaking off the temporary factors that held it back earlier in the year. We see particular strength 
in areas that are important to Canadian exports, such as business investment. 
However, we also see weaker growth prospects in a number of emerging-market economies, 
particularly  China.  Governing  Council  spent  a  lot  of  time  discussing  what  this  means  for 
Canada. There has been volatility in financial markets and downward pressure on the prices 
of many commodities that Canada sells. 
China  is  transitioning  to  a  lower  and  more  sustainable  long-term  growth  path.  While  this 
transition may not happen in a straight line, China should continue to be a solid source of 
growing demand for commodities. If you look at Chart 8 of the MPR, for example, you’ll see 
that Chinese imports of copper are still rising strongly in volume terms. 
Nonetheless, there is downside risk for some emerging-market economies, particularly in the 
context of U.S. monetary-policy normalizing. In our discussions, we thought it was important 
to keep in mind that many of these countries have become more resilient in recent years: they 
have been restructuring their economies, strengthening their fiscal positions, and moving to 
more flexible exchange rates. Given these factors, if uncertainty fades about the prospects for 
China  and  other  emerging  markets,  there  is  some  upside  risk  to  our  commodity  price 
assumptions, with implications for Canada. 
Let’s now turn to Canada. While the first half of the year was weak, there are clear signs of a 
pickup in growth. Taken as a whole, the second half should see growth in line with our July 
outlook, and we expect the economy will gather strength over the next couple of years. 
The complex adjustment to Canada’s terms of trade shock is playing out over two tracks. In 
the  resource  sector,  we  see  firms  cutting  production  and  investment.  We  are  also  seeing 
spillovers  into  other  areas  of  the  economy.  It’s  not  surprising  that  car  sales  and  housing 
markets  in  energy-producing  regions  aren’t  doing  as  well  as  those  in  other  regions.  We 
estimate that the oil price shock, on its own, took about 1 1/4 percentage points off GDP growth 
in the first half of the year. 
At the same time, Canada’s non-resource economy is doing much better. Table 4 in the MPR 
shows that retail sales, housing starts and labour markets are showing solid strength outside 
of the energy-intensive provinces. 
Non-energy exports are also showing encouraging signs. You’ll recall that in July we  were 
puzzled because non-energy exports had faltered by more than would have been expected 
given developments in the United States. So Bank staff have updated the analysis that they 
did last year by looking at more than 4,000 export categories. This work was posted today on 
our web site. It shows that categories of exports that were expected to lead the recovery – 
such  as  building  materials  and  fabricated  metal  products  –  have  grown  strongly  in  recent 
months, and new sources of export growth are emerging. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   While it’s clear that there are risks to our outlook, the bottom line is that economic momentum 
is building in Canada. Real GDP growth should increase over the next two years, although by 
less than we forecast in July. Lower commodity prices and the drop in energy-related business 
investment are acting as significant drags. At the same time, stronger U.S. demand, a lower 
Canadian dollar and the monetary stimulus we added earlier this year are all having a positive 
effect on growth. 
Governing  Council  considered  carefully  the  implications  of  the  commodity  price  shock  on 
potential output because it is important to gauging the outlook for inflation. Potential output 
growth – the sustainable rate of non-inflationary growth – is a tricky thing to estimate under 
normal circumstances. It is even more so now, due to the adjustments in investment and jobs 
that  are  underway.  Overall  business  investment  has  been  revised  sharply  lower.  This  is 
because investment in the resource sector is being reduced faster than it is growing in the non-
resource part of the economy. This means that, over the near term, potential output is likely to 
grow in the lower part of the range of estimates that the Bank presented in April. Potential 
output  growth  should  eventually  recover  as  existing  capacity  expands  and  new  firms  are 
created in the non-resource sectors. This process will unfold over a long period. 
Taking this on board, we can expect the economy to return to its full potential around mid-
2017.  The  underlying  trend  in  inflation  is  still  around  1.5  to  1.7  per  cent.  Core  inflation  is 
currently higher than the underlying trend, because the lower dollar is raising the prices of 
imports. Today, we published a paper that outlines our staff estimates of exchange rate pass-
through to inflation. Total inflation, however, remains much lower than the underlying trend 
because  of  past  declines  in  fuel  prices.  We  expect  inflation  to  return  to  2  per  cent  in  a 
sustainable way as the output gap closes. We see the risks around the profile for inflation as 
roughly balanced. 
As  part  of  our  risk  management  approach  to  monetary  policy,  Governing  Council  always 
considers financial  stability  risks. We know  that accommodative  policy  has  implications for 
financial vulnerabilities in the household sector. In the current context, getting the economy 
back to full capacity with inflation on target is central to supporting financial stability over the 
longer term. 
Taking all of these developments into consideration, the Bank judges that the current stance 
of monetary policy remains appropriate. Therefore, we kept the target for the overnight rate at 
1/2 per cent. 
We would now be happy to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
