  Philip Lowe: Fundamentals and flexibility 
Speech by Mr Philip Lowe, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the CFA 
Institute Australia Investment Conference, Sydney, 13 October 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
I would like to thank Adam Cagliarini for assistance in the preparation of these remarks. 
It is a pleasure for me to be able to speak at the CFA’s Australia Investment Conference. I 
participated in the 2013 conference in Melbourne and it is very good to be back at your 2015 
conference here in Sydney. 
I would like to congratulate CFA Societies Australia for the topic that they have chosen for 
this  year’s  conference:  Going  Back  to  Fundamentals.  In  a  world  in  which  the  focus  is  too 
often  on  the  short  term,  this  conference  serves  as  a  timely  reminder  that  it  is  the 
fundamentals that really matter. 
In the area of finance, the CFA Institute has been playing a leading role in reinforcing the 
fundamentals  of  trust  and  fiduciary  duty.  Over  recent  years,  we  have  seen  too  many 
examples around the world where not enough attention was paid to these fundamentals and, 
as a result, the reputation of the finance sector has been badly tarnished. The work of the 
CFA in promoting the highest standards of ethics and professional excellence is helping to 
return the focus on these fundamentals. This is important work and I wish you every success 
in it. 
This  morning,  though,  I would  like  to focus  on  a  different  set  of fundamentals:  that  is,  the 
fundamentals of the Australian economy. 
My central message is that these fundamentals are strong and that they provide us with the 
basis to be optimistic about the future. At the same time, none of us has a crystal ball, so we 
can’t be sure exactly what that future holds. What we can be sure of is that we will be best 
placed  to  take  advantage  of  our  strong fundamentals  if  our  economy  is flexible  and  if  it  is 
able to adapt to the changing world in which we find ourselves. Hence the title of my remarks 
this morning: Fundamentals and Flexibility. 
Some background 
It is probably helpful to start with some context. This is usefully provided by this first graph, 
which shows various measures of how Australia’s output and real income have evolved over 
the past couple of decades or so (Graph 1). 
The green line shows output per hour worked. This is the conventional measure of labour 
productivity. 
The  orange  line  shows  real  income  per  hour  worked.1  In  most  countries,  real  output  and 
income typically track one another quite closely and indeed this was the case for Australia 
during the 1990s. But over the 2000s, our real income increased much more quickly than our 
output owing to the large increase in our terms of trade. We became much better off as a 
nation because the prices of the goods that we were selling to the rest of the world increased 
quicker than the prices of the goods that we were buying from the rest of the world. 
                                                
1   The  measure  of  income  used  here  is  Real  Net  National  Disposable  Income  (RNNDI).  It  adjusts  Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) to take account of changes in the prices of our exports relative to our imports (the 
terms  of  trade  effect),  real  income  flows  between  Australia  and  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  depreciation  of 
machinery, buildings and other produced capital. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  And,  finally,  the  blue  line  shows  real  income,  not  per  hour  worked,  but  per  person  in 
Australia.  This  is  probably  the  best  measure  of  how  average  living  standards  have 
progressed through time: it takes into account the lift in productivity, changes in the relative 
prices of our exports and imports, and changes in the share of the population that is in paid 
employment. It is the strongest of the three lines shown here. This reflects the fact that over 
the  past  two  decades  or  so  there  has  been  a  substantial  increase  in  the  share  of  the 
population  in  paid  employment;  between  1993  and  2008,  this  share  rose  by  7  percentage 
points  to  over  50  per  cent.  This  rise  is  accounted  for  by  three  trends:  a  decline  in  the 
unemployment rate, a rise in the participation rate and a decline in the share of children in 
the population (Graph 2). 
Taking these two decades or so as a whole, Australians have enjoyed very strong growth in 
average living standards. Real income per capita is currently around 60 per cent higher than 
it was in the early 1990s, having grown at an average rate of around 2 per cent per year over 
this long period. In the 1990s, we benefited from strong productivity growth. In the 2000s, we 
benefited  from  the  rising  terms  of  trade.  And  across  both  decades  we  benefited  from 
increasing labour force participation and favourable demographic trends. 
The story, over recent years, is a less positive one. While productivity growth has picked up a 
bit, the terms of trade have declined, as has the share of the population in employment. As a 
result, there has been very little growth in real income per capita since 2008. As is evident 
from Graph 1, this is quite different from the strong upward trend over the previous 15 years. 
I  suspect  that  it  is  this  change  that  lies  at  the  heart  of  some  of  the  recent  soul  searching 
about the future of the Australian economy. 
This soul searching is evident in the increasing number of people asking what comes next. 
What  comes  after  the  resources  boom?  Where  will  future  growth  in  our  living  standards 
come from? Where will the jobs of the future be? 
These are all excellent questions. They help focus our minds on the challenge ahead. And 
they can help promote better public policy. But we do need to be careful that the uncertainty 
that we feel about the future – and that is sometimes the undercurrent to these questions – 
does not mutate into chronic pessimism. If that were to happen, many of the opportunities 
that we do have are likely to go begging. 
Looking to the future, it is unlikely that growth in our living standards will again come from a 
sustained lift in our terms of trade, which remain high in a historical context despite the falls 
of recent times (Graph 3). Of course, we cannot dismiss the possibility that we will be lucky 
again.  But  it  would  surely  be  unwise  to  hope  for  ever-rising  export  prices  as  the  basis  for 
improving our living standards. 
Similarly, with our population ageing, it seems unlikely that we will see a repeat of the large 
increase in the share of the population in paid employment. 
Fundamentals 
This leaves improving our productivity – the bottom line in Graph 1 – as the only alternative. 
And this is where our fundamentals matter. I have spoken about some of these fundamentals 
on other occasions, but it is worth highlighting some of these again today.2 There are five in 
particular to which I would draw your attention. 
The first is our strong institutional framework, including: the rule of law, respect for property 
rights, a well-functioning public administration and a well-established regulatory system. We 
                                                
2   See Lowe P (2014), “Building on Strong Foundations”, Address to the Australian Business Economists Annual 
Dinner, Sydney, 25 November. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  can sometimes take these things for granted but, together, they form the bedrock upon which 
our high-income economy is built. 
The  second  is  our  people.  Our  education  system  ranks  reasonably  highly  by  global 
standards.  Australians  generally  have  a  ‘can  do’  mentality  and  we  have  a  demonstrated 
capability  to  adjust to  a changing  world. We  adopt  new  technologies  relatively  quickly  and 
many  of  us  are  prepared  to  take  a  risk.  And  we  have  successfully  drawn  people  from  all 
around the world to our shores, with more than 40 per cent of our population having been 
born overseas or having at least one parent who was born overseas. 
The third is our tremendous base of mineral resources. Australia is fortunate to have some of 
the  biggest  and  best-quality  resource  deposits on  the  planet. While the  resources  industry 
goes through large cycles, our resources continue to be in strong demand from the rest of 
the world. The export receipts from these resources effectively pay for many of the imports 
that  we  buy;  over  recent  times  these  receipts  have  been  equivalent  to  around  half  of 
Australia’s annual import bill. 
The  fourth  is  our  agricultural  assets.  As  average  incomes  in  Asia  grow,  so  too  does  the 
demand  for  protein.  Higher  incomes  also  mean  that  there  is  a  greater  preparedness  and 
ability to pay a premium price for high-quality, clean food. With our large tracts of agricultural 
land  and  the  expertise  built  up  from  using  that  land  over  many  decades,  Australia  has 
obvious advantages here. 
And the fifth is our links with Asia and our expertise in delivering high-quality services. Over 
recent  years,  the  focus  has  been  very  much  on  our  relationship  with  China.  This  focus  is 
likely  to  continue.  But  there  are  also  significant  opportunities  elsewhere,  including  in 
Indonesia and India with their very large populations. Many of these opportunities lie in the 
services  part  of  the  economy,  including  in  tourism,  finance,  education  and  professional 
services. 
Together, this combination of fundamentals should provide us with confidence that we can 
continue to experience advances in our living standards. It is a combination of fundamentals 
that few other countries enjoy. 
The importance of flexibility 
In an ideal world, we might be able to take these fundamentals and map them into a clear 
path for  the future. We might  be  able  to  say  that these  particular  industries  will  thrive  and 
these ones will not. That this is where the jobs of the future will come from. And that this is 
where we will find the success stories. 
Unfortunately, the real world is not so simple. It is full of surprises and it is difficult to predict. 
Looking back over recent decades, the two factors that stand out as the main sources of this 
unpredictability are advances in technology and shifts in the global economy. 
The advances in technology are reshaping, in unexpected ways, the jobs that we do. If we 
were to go back to 1995, or perhaps even to just 2005, I suspect that there are very few of us 
who could have imagined many of the new occupations that have emerged. There are big 
data  architects,  cloud  computing  experts,  social  media  strategists,  mobile  app  developers, 
information  security  technicians,  green  retrofit  architects,  genetic  counsellors  and  the  list 
goes on. Each of these new occupations is possible only because of advances in technology. 
More  broadly,  the  huge  growth  in  employment  in  the  services  sector  has  taken  many  by 
surprise (Graph 4). Again, I suspect that if in the early 1990s we had known that there would 
be  a  net  loss  of  over  100  000  jobs  in  the  manufacturing  sector  in  Australia  over  the  next 
25 years,  there  would  have  been  a  sense  of  despair  about  the  future.  This  despair  would 
probably have been compounded if we had also known there would be no growth in jobs in 
both the utilities and wholesale trade sectors over the next quarter of a century. Yet, over this 
period,  we  have  enjoyed  a  strong  rise  in  our  living  standards,  the  unemployment  rate  has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  come  down  substantially  and  we  have  generated  around  4  million  new  jobs  across  the 
economy, mostly in the services sector. 
As I said, the other big source of unpredictability has been shifts in the global economy. You 
might recall that around the time of the Sydney Olympics there was much gnashing of teeth 
by those who saw Australia as an old economy, just selling resources to the rest of the world 
at ever-declining prices. We were seen by many to be locked out of the ‘new economy’ and 
destined for decline. At the time, few people saw the great opportunities that would come our 
way as a result of the emergence of China as a major force in the global economy. 
One example of the difficulty of predicting change that I am fond of quoting comes from the 
conferences that the RBA organises every decade or so to provide a stocktake as to how our 
economy  has  evolved  and  the  challenges  ahead.  In  the  volume  published  after  the 
conference in 2000, the words ‘China’ and ‘Chinese’ do not appear a single time, but there 
were nearly one hundred references to the United States. In contrast, a decade later, in the 
volume published in 2011, there were nearly 300 references to China  (with the number of 
references to the United States being similar to that in the 2000 volume). 
A related example of the changes that can take place due to the shifts in the global economy 
is  from  the  changing  destination  of  Australia’s  exports.  The  very  strong  growth  in  the 
Japanese  economy  for  some  decades  after  World  War  II  saw  Japan  become  the  major 
destination  of  our  exports  (Graph  5).  Given  this,  if  in  the  1970s  we  had  known  what  lay 
ahead for the Japanese economy, we might have been concerned about our own future. But 
as Japan slowed, exports to other parts of east Asia took off. And then, over recent years we 
have seen a third phase with the very strong growth of exports to China. None of these big 
shifts in our trade patterns was widely predicted. 
The  point  of  these  various  examples  is  that,  while  we  might  wish  for  certainty  about  the 
future, it is not possible to have certainty. Technological progress is unpredictable and when 
it occurs it opens up possibilities that today we have trouble even imagining. And patterns in 
the global  economy  will  no  doubt continue to  evolve. While  we  can  hazard  a guess  about 
what this evolution might look like, the future does have a way of surprising us. 
So the question is how we can best take advantage of our strong fundamentals in this world 
where it is difficult to predict the future. 
A  large  part  of  the  answer  surely  lies  in  ensuring  that  our  economy  has  a  high  degree  of 
flexibility.  That  it  is  adaptable  and  nimble.  And  that  it  can  respond  quickly  to  changes  in 
relative  prices  and  seize  new  opportunities  brought  about  by  advances  in  technology  and 
shifts in the global economy. 
There  is  no  single  policy  lever  though  called  ‘flexibility’  or  “adaptability”.  The  degree  of 
flexibility of the economy is the result of the accumulation of numerous decisions and policies 
across many, many areas. 
In the area directly related to the central bank, the flexibility of the exchange rate is a key 
element. For more than three decades now our floating exchange rate has, arguably, been 
the single most stabilising influence on our economy. It has helped us deal with very large 
global shocks and it continues to do. In particular, the depreciation over the past couple of 
years  is  playing  an  important  role  in  helping  the  economy  adjust  to  the  wind-down  of  the 
boom in mining investment. 
Another  area  critical  to  flexibility  is  the  financial  sector,  as  it  provides  the  resources 
businesses  need  to  expand  as  new  opportunities  emerge.  While  Australia  has  been  well 
served by its financial institutions and markets over many years, we need to make sure the 
regulatory  environment  remains  conducive  to  new  forms  of  finance  that  can  help  fund 
innovation  and  the  development  of  new  ideas.  The  recent  work  by  the  Australian 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Government to facilitate crowd-sourced equity funding is a step in this direction.3 Here, the 
challenge is to get the balance right between funding innovation and protecting investors. 
Most of the areas, though, that affect the flexibility of the economy lie beyond the world of 
central banks and finance. I would like briefly to mention four of these. 
The first is the competitive environment in which firms operate. Where competition is robust 
and  entry  to  markets  is  easy,  businesses  have  a  stronger  incentive  to  find  better  ways  of 
doing things. They also have a stronger incentive to move quickly, lest a competitor seize an 
opportunity before they do. I think it is fair to say that few businesses really like competition, 
but, often, it is competition that drives them to do better and respond to new opportunities. 
And  competition  benefits  us  all  as  consumers,  bringing  new  and  lower-cost  goods  and 
services  to  market.  So,  we  need  a  regulatory  environment  that  is  conducive  to  new  entry, 
including  by  those  who  are  able  to  harness  new  technologies  to  reinvent  how  things  are 
done. 
A second area is the nature of the incentives to innovate and to start new businesses. These 
incentives  are  affected  by  the  tax  system  and  the  regulatory  and  legal  systems.  They  are 
also  affected  by  the  general  community  attitude  to  risk taking. We  will  be  better  placed  to 
take advantage of the opportunities made possible by our strong fundamentals if our culture 
is one that accepts risk and appropriately rewards risk taking. 
A  third  area  is  the  operation  of  the  labour  market.  From  a  macroeconomic  point  of  view, 
Australia’s  labour  market  arrangements  have  worked  well  over  recent  times.  During  the 
global  downturn,  flexibility  in  hours  worked  helped  limit  the  rise  in  unemployment.  Then, 
during the years of the resources boom, very large wage increases were mainly confined to 
the  areas  where  skills  were  in  the  shortest  supply  and  they  did  not  spread  across  the 
economy as a whole. And more recently, the slowing in aggregate wage growth has helped 
employment  to  grow  reasonably  strongly  despite  below-average  growth  in  the  overall 
economy (Graph 6). So, from a cyclical perspective, the labour market has proved to be quite 
flexible and things have worked reasonably well. 
A more open question is the degree of flexibility in dealing with structural change. Again, we 
are more likely to be able to capitalise on our strong fundamentals if our system of workplace 
relations  helps  businesses  and  their  employees  respond  quickly  and  effectively  to  new 
opportunities. This is especially so when business models and the preferred working patterns 
of  Australians  are  changing.  As  the  Productivity  Commission’s  recent  draft  report  on 
Australia’s framework for workplace relations concludes, it should be possible to simplify and 
improve the responsiveness of our current system while, at the same time, addressing the 
sometimes unequal bargaining positions in the labour market.4 
And the fourth area is the nature of our education system. No matter what the future holds, it 
seems probable that continual improvement in our human capital will hold us in good stead. 
But given the unpredictability of the world in which we live, we need to find the right balance 
between  the  development  of  specific  technical  and  professional  skills  and  the  general 
cognitive skills that are central to flexibility and adaptability. 
In  each  of  these  four  areas  –  competition  policy,  the  reward  for  innovation,  the  industrial 
relations  system  and  the  education  system  –  the  choices  that  we  make  are  critical  to  the 
flexibility of the economy. 
                                                
3   See,  for  example,  Australian  Government  (2015),  Facilitating  Crowd-sourced  Equity  Funding  and  Reducing 
for  Small  Businesses,  Consultation  Paper,  The  Treasury.  Available  at 
Compliance  Costs 
http://www.treasury.gov.au/~/media/Treasury/Consultations%20and%20Reviews/Consultations/2015/Crowd-
sourced%20equity%20funding/Key%20Documents/PDF/Crowd-sourced-equity-funding.ashx 
4   See Productivity Commission (2015), Workplace Relations Framework, Draft Report, Canberra. Available at 
http://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/current/workplace-relations/draft/workplace-relations-draft.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  I want to conclude by noting that I have not mentioned interest rates once today. That is not 
because they are unimportant! The RBA’s monetary policy plays a key role in dealing with 
cyclical swings in the economy. We aim to keep inflation low and stable so that people can 
go about their business without having to worry about large movements in the general level 
of  prices.  And  our  actions  help  promote  stability  in  Australia’s  overall  economy  and  its 
financial system. These are all important contributions. 
But, ultimately, the rate at which our living standards improve is unlikely to be driven by the 
actions  of  the  central  bank.  Instead,  the  improvement  in  our  living  standards  rests  on  our 
ability to improve our fundamentals and enhance the flexibility of our economy so that it can 
take full advantage of the opportunities in our ever-changing world. 
I wish you all success today in your own deliberations about fundamentals and I would be 
happy to answer any questions. 
Thank you. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 1 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
 Graph 2 
 8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 3 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
 Graph 4 
 10 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 5 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
 Graph 6 
 12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
