   Minouche Shafik: Fixing the global financial safety net – lessons from 
central banking 
Speech by Ms Minouche Shafik, Deputy Governor for Markets and Banking of the Bank of 
England, at the David Hume Institute, Edinburgh, 22 September 2015. 
 The views in this speech are my own, and not those of the Bank of England. I would like to thank James Benford, 
Simon Whitaker, Ed Denbee and Glenn Hoggarth for their policy analysis and insights; and Chris Salmon, Andrew 
Hauser, Ankita Mehta and Grellan McGrath for their comments. 
Introduction 
1. 
It gives me great pleasure to deliver my first internationally themed speech as a central banker 
in  Edinburgh  on  the  30th  Anniversary  of  the  David  Hume  Institute.  Of  course,  Scots  have 
played a vital role in the Bank of England’s history – including one William Paterson, whose 
idea it was to set up the Bank of England to help put order on the government’s finances in the 
late 17th century. But Paterson is perhaps best known for the catastrophic Darien scheme – 
an unsuccessful attempt to establish a Scottish trading colony in Panama. It has been argued 
that  the  failure  of  the  scheme  crippled  the  country’s  economy  –  an  early  example  of  how 
troubles abroad can rebound at home1. 
Scotland also has a tradition of producing internationally renowned economists including, of 
course, David Hume. Hume was a great advocate of free trade between nations. His “Of the 
Balance of Trade”, published 34 years before Smith’s “The Wealth of Nations”, was arguably 
the first example of modern economic reasoning. In it he railed against the “numberless bars, 
obstructions, and imposts, which all nations of Europe, and none more than England, have put 
upon trade” which “deprive neighbouring nations of that free communication and exchange 
which the Author of the world has intended, by giving them soils, climates, and geniuses, so 
different from each other2.” What an elegant way to talk about the gains from international 
trade! 
The  benefits  of  free  trade  are  now  well  established.  Similarly,  economic  theory  provides 
compelling arguments for the potential advantages of integrated global capital markets based 
on the efficient allocation of resources. But, in practice, cross-border capital flows can be fickle 
and flighty, with destructive effects on the real economy. It is fair to say that the case for the 
free movement of capital took something of a knock following the string of crises since the 
early 1990s in Latin America, East Asia, Russia and most recently in Europe. As a result, a 
variety of means to insure against sharp changes in capital flows have developed at domestic, 
regional and international levels which are collectively referred to as the “global financial safety 
net”.3 The cross border impact of the global financial crisis has forced a fundamental rethink 
about  whether  this  global  financial  safety  net  is  functioning  as  efficiently  as  it  should,  and 
whether more needs to be done to contain the systemic spillovers from sovereign crises. 
A key means by which the Bank of England pursues its mission of monetary and financial 
stability is through the provision of liquidity insurance to the financial system – something it has 
been doing in one form or another since David Hume’s time. In some ways, this makes the 
Bank of England the domestic safety net for the liquidity needs of solvent financial institutions. 
As Hume himself put it: “private bankers are enabled to give…credit by the credit the receive 
                                                
1  See Pagan (1865). 
2  See Hume (1758).  
3  These crises have also spawned a rethinking of capital flow management tools – akin to macro prudential policy 
for global flows – a topic which shows promise but one that I will not cover in this speech. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   from the depositing of money in their shops; and the Bank of England in the same manner, 
from the liberty it has to issue its notes in all payments4.” 
Today, given my current role overseeing the Bank of England’s market functions, as well as 
my previous experience at the IMF dealing with the crisis in the Eurozone and in the wake of 
the Arab Spring, I would like to offer some thoughts on how lessons from reform to the domestic 
financial safety net for banks could be applied to sovereigns, to the IMF as international lender 
of last resort and to the global financial safety net more broadly. I will argue that we need a 
stronger and more resilient global financial safety net to reduce the systemic implications of 
sovereign crises and allow nations to cope with shocks in order to reap the economic rewards 
of an integrated system of trade and finance. I will also argue that the effectiveness of that 
safety net would be enhanced by implementing policies that strengthen surveillance and the 
stress testing of countries balance sheets, and better mechanisms for resolving sovereign debt 
crises when they occur. These are of course my personal thoughts rather than an official UK 
position, but I offer them in the spirit of encouraging debate. 
The domestic financial safety net 
2. 
Before turning to the global safety net, let me first say a few words about how the financial 
regulatory reform agenda in the UK has enabled the strengthening of the domestic safety net 
– the provision of liquidity insurance to the financial system by the central bank. 
Since the onset of the financial crisis, to keep the financial system open for business, central 
banks have used their balance sheets as never before. At the Bank of England, for example, 
new published liquidity facilities have been introduced that extend liquidity for longer durations 
against  expanded  sets  of  collateral  to  new  counterparties.5  As  with  any  kind  of  insurance, 
however, liquidity insurance creates incentives to take more of the insured risk. The extent of 
this moral hazard and how best to tackle it was a key concern for the Bank of England when 
making these changes – it is not the role of the central bank to lend to insolvent institutions.6 
To that extent, the expansion of the provision of liquidity insurance was enabled by reform to 
the regulatory framework for banks, including: 
(i) 
Micro prudential supervision that raised the levels and quality of capital and liquidity 
banks are required to hold; 
Regular,  transparent  stress  testing  to  ensure  an  ongoing  assessment  of  solvency 
under different scenarios; 
A credible resolution regime for insolvent banks that reduces contagion to the wider 
system and the need for taxpayer support. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
It would be foolish to declare categorically that the Bank of England has eliminated stigma or 
moral hazard. But we can say that these regulatory reforms have made it easier for the Bank 
of England to provide liquidity insurance to solvent institutions. In turn, this has allowed us to 
increase the availability and flexibility of our liquidity facilities and to give more clarity around 
the circumstances under which that insurance would be provided. These changes should help 
to  reduce  the stigma  attached  to the  use  of  central  bank  liquidity  facilities,  and  encourage 
earlier take-up to limit contagion and protect financial stability during future crises. 
                                                
4  See Hume (1758). 
5  See Carney (2013) and Shafik (2015). 
6  See Hauser (2014) and Tucker (2014). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Are sovereigns like banks? 
3. 
Attention more recently has turned to sovereign rather than banking vulnerabilities and two 
issues  in  particular  have  brought  this  into  sharper  focus.  First,  do  fundamentally  sound 
emerging market economies have access to the right form of liquidity insurance to deal with 
the challenges posed by lower growth, falling commodity prices and potential spillovers from 
the possible exit of exceptional monetary policy in advanced economies? And second, how 
can we manage the tension between the need to recognise when one sovereign’s debt has 
become unsustainable and the need to avoid contagion across countries in times of stress? 
There are many ways in which sovereigns are like banks in terms of the liquidity risks they 
face.  Cross-border  capital  flows  can  “run”–  just  as  deposits  can  “run”  for  banks.  And  the 
majority  of  a  sovereign’s  assets  –  claims  on  future  taxpayers,  are  both  hard  to  value  and 
inherently illiquid – so, like banks, they are susceptible to runs by international investors, which 
even if not based on fundamentals, could threaten their solvency by raising borrowing costs. 
Sovereigns are particularly exposed to run risk or a sudden “stop” if they have borrowed in 
foreign  currency  –  the  so  called  “original  sin”  –  as  large  depreciations  raise  the  domestic 
burden of repaying the debt, particularly if there is a shortage of foreign exchange reserves. In 
the Euro-area, countries have become painfully aware of the risks of borrowing in a domestic 
currency that individual sovereign states have no right to issue. 
But of course, sovereigns are also very different from banks. By definition, their finances are 
not regulated by any authority, and there is no legal framework for dealing with bankruptcy or 
resolution, giving them more discretion to default. Instead, we have IMF surveillance (which is 
weaker than bank supervision) and a complex and often messy process whereby markets and 
the official sector deal with sovereign debt restructurings. While there are important differences 
between sovereigns and banks, I think there are enough parallels to draw some insights. 
Problems with the global financial safety net 
4. 
Hume himself recognised that the nature of sovereign flows created an incentive to insure 
against a sudden stop, lamenting: “There still prevails, even in nations well acquainted with 
commerce…a fear, that all their gold and silver may be leaving them7.” 
There are different ways for countries to insure against the risk of sudden stops in capital flows: 
(i)  individually  through  the  stockpiling  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  (ii)  via  collective 
arrangements  with  other  countries,  for  example  regional  reserve  pooling  or  swap 
arrangements or (iii) through the International Monetary Fund (IMF). This multi-layered global 
safety net has some advantages but it seems to me that the current configuration is suboptimal: 
it is fragile, costly and fragmented. 
Fragile 
The aggregate size of the global financial safety net had been in decline before of the financial 
crisis, despite rapid reserve accumulation. There has been some recovery since then, as the 
size of the IMF and Regional Financial Arrangements increased in response to the crisis and 
central bank swap agreements were put in place. But the composition of the global financial 
safety net is now more fragmented [Chart 1] and it is unclear whether it would be sufficient 
during a systemic crisis. The IMF element is fragile, with borrowed resources accounting for 
an unprecedented three-quarters, around $500 billion of which are temporary loans due to 
start rolling off next year with no agreement in place to extend them [Chart 2]. 
                                                
7  See Hume (1758). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Costly and inefficient 
Self-insurance remains the most popular tool. Individual countries’ reserves remain the largest 
component of the global financial safety net – reserves have risen from $1.5 trillion in 1995 to 
over $11 trillion now. To be sure, self-insurance is prudent to a point – indeed it is something 
we  have  encouraged  banks  to  do.  But  there  are  several  problems  with  excessive  reserve 
accumulation: 
(i) 
First,  reserves  are  distributed  very  unevenly  across  and  within  some  regions. 
Emerging markets with adequate reserves (largely in Asia and the Middle East) are 
over-insured  by  about  $1.5  trillion  in  total.  By  contrast  the  Central  and  Eastern 
European  region  and  Latin  America  are  underinsured  by  around  $200  billion 
[Chart 3]. This suggests the distribution of reserves does not correspond well to the 
distribution of risks. 
Second,  even  when  they  are  in  abundance,  there  are  doubts  about  countries’ 
willingness to run down their reserves. In the last financial crisis, nine of the largest 
emerging market economies refrained entirely from using reserves. There is some 
evidence that markets judge countries according to their relative rather than absolute 
level of reserves. So no one wants to blink first by running them down. 
Third,  issuing  high  yielding  local  currency  debt  to  purchase  reserves  is  costly  to 
emerging markets, resulting in an annual cost of around 0.5% of GDP8. 
Finally,  reserve  accumulation  causes  distortions  to  domestic  economies  with 
potential spillovers to the global system. It can crowd out domestic investment, the 
flip side of current account surpluses and savings gluts. The investment of emerging 
market savings in advanced countries’ public debt has contributed to a worldwide 
shift in preferences for risk-free assets, which may have been partly responsible for 
the build-up in financial imbalances prior to the financial crisis. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
Uneven coverage 
Pooling reserves would seem to be one obvious solution to these costs and inefficiencies. And 
indeed there have been moves in that direction at a regional level with the expansion of the 
Chiang  Mai  Multilateralization  Initiative  and  more  recently  the  BRICs  Contingent  Reserve 
Arrangement. But pooling at a regional level is ineffective against shocks that affect the entire 
region and these regional mechanisms remain untested, with the exception of the European 
Stability Mechanism. Regional arrangements are also complicated because of the difficulties 
of  imposing  reform  conditions  on  a  neighbour  (as  the  Eurozone  learned  with  Greece). 
Moreover,  many  emerging  market  economies  do  not  have  access  to  Regional  Financial 
Arrangements at all [Chart 4]. So while regional insurance is a welcome layer of the safety net, 
it needs to operate in concert with a better global system including possible IMF facilitation of 
lending. 
The role of the IMF 
5. 
If we are to continue to benefit from global financial integration then we need a system that 
can effectively and efficiently provide liquidity insurance to fundamentally sound sovereigns in 
order to contain spillovers to other parts of the globe. As with an independent central bank that 
houses supervision and liquidity provision under one roof, there are advantages to combining 
country surveillance and lending in one global institution, with an impartial and experienced 
staff. And risks are most efficiently pooled at a global level. This is the raison d’etre for the IMF. 
                                                
8  Bank of England staff estimates based on the spread between returns on reserve assets and those paid on 
domestic bonds. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Unfortunately, signs of fragmentation of the global financial safety net are obviously in part a 
reaction  to the failure to  implement the  2010 quota  and governance reforms to  bolster  the 
IMF’s resources and the representation of emerging market economies. The priority must be 
to implement those. But we also need to consider whether and how the temporary resources 
collected by the IMF in the form of bilateral loans when it passed the hat around in 2012 could 
be put on a more permanent footing. One possibility is to extend these bilateral loans further. 
Another possibility is for the IMF to borrow directly from capital markets9 during a systemic 
crisis which would create safe assets when demand for them is high, allowing funds to be 
recycled to those parts of the world with temporary liquidity needs. 
A more reliable and flexible resource base would allow the IMF to more credibly perform a 
crisis prevention role of providing committed lines of credit to sound sovereigns through its 
Flexible  and  Precautionary  Liquidity  lines.  Take  up  of  the  IMF’s  liquidity  lines  has  been 
disappointing in large part because of stigma. As a country with a sound balance sheet, but 
concerned about potential liquidity problems arising from spillovers from shocks in the rest of 
the globe, what signal does requesting liquidity support from the IMF convey? Some members 
of the IMF have resisted more widespread use of these liquidity facilities because of concerns 
about moral hazard. Is there a way to address both the stigma and moral hazard issues? 
Lessons from central bank liquidity insurance 
6. 
These are precisely the issues the Bank of England has had to deal with in the context of 
central  bank  liquidity  insurance  facilities.  The  Winters  Review10 conducted  into  the  Bank’s 
published liquidity facilities highlighted the risk of these facilities becoming stigmatised – usage 
being  taken  as  a  signal  of  fundamental  solvency  problems.  If  that  led  banks  to  self-insure 
against extreme “tail” liquidity risks, that would be inefficient for the financial system as a whole. 
The  Bank  has  reduced  the  stigma  associated  with  its  liquidity  facilities  by  offering  greater 
predictability of access on more favourable terms. This improved access to liquidity has been 
enabled by the fact that supervision is tougher on capital and liquidity requirements, banks 
undergo regular stress testing, and credible resolution tools (including ring fencing to protect 
depositors and bail-in to protect taxpayers) are being put in place. These reforms are recent 
and not yet fully tested under the most difficult circumstances. But I do think there are some 
lessons that can be learned from the overhaul of central bank liquidity facilities that could be 
applied to the provision of liquidity insurance to sovereigns. 
What would the equivalent enablers be for sovereigns? 
(i) 
(ii) 
Better surveillance, particularly of the vulnerabilities to sudden stops; 
Stress 
assessments; and 
Better mechanisms for reducing disorderly spillovers. 
testing  countries’  balance  sheets 
through  better  debt  sustainability 
(iii) 
Surveillance 
The  Bank  of  England’s  Sterling  Monetary  Framework11  is  available  to  banks  and  building 
societies on a presumptive basis – banks with a genuine short-term liquidity can rely on it when 
a shock hits. A key part of that access is the agreement of supervisors that firms meet micro 
prudential  standards.  By  contrast,  there  is  no  system  of  pre-qualification  for  the  IMF’s 
precautionary liquidity facilities, at the margin discouraging sovereigns from relying on the IMF 
                                                
9  Although I note the governance implications of capital market borrowing need further thought. 
10  See Winters (2012). 
11  Further  information  on  the  Bank  of  England’s  Sterling  Monetary  Framework  can  be  found  here: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/pages/money/default.aspx. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   as a form of insurance. One potential means of giving countries greater incentives to rely less 
on  self-insurance  could  be  to  offer  pre-qualification  on  the  basis  of  strong  economic 
fundamentals and policy track records as part of the Article IV process of surveillance, on a 
confidential basis. Strengthening countries’ resilience through advice on better financial sector 
reforms or ways to reduce excessive debt would also help. Though, I should note that the 
IMF’s job of assessing sovereigns’ fundamentals is made more difficult by the fact that they 
have no formal supervisory role in relation to sovereigns. 
Stress testing 
The Bank of England carries out an annual stress test12 for major UK banks to assess their 
ability to withstand shocks in a range of scenarios and takes pre-emptive measures to enhance 
resilience  if  necessary. This  not  only  reduces the  likelihood that  banks will  require  liquidity 
support from the Bank of England, but also provides an ongoing assessment of their solvency. 
This informs the difficult judgement of insolvency vs illiquidity in the event that a bank does 
require access to the Bank of England’s liquidity facilities. 
There is scope for the IMF to strengthen its surveillance toolkit to include stress testing. The 
2014  Triennial  Surveillance  Review13  highlighted  the  importance  of  national  balance  sheet 
analysis  in  detecting  risks  and  identifying  spillover  channels.  The  IMF  could  extend  debt 
sustainability  assessments  to  cover  external  liquidity  risks  and  analysis  of  how  balance  of 
payments flows are likely to respond in crisis scenarios. This ex ante analysis would provide 
greater assurance on the economic fundamentals of countries seeking liquidity support from 
the IMF and enable countries to take pre-emptive measures to increase their resilience. 
Reducing the risk of disorderly spillovers 
A strengthened global financial safety net alone does not address the tension between the 
need  to  recognise  when  one  sovereign’s  debt  has  become  unsustainable  and the  need  to 
avoid contagion across countries via a disorderly restructuring. To do that, we need to put in 
place mechanisms analogous to those we have put in place for banks to ensure that they can 
be  resolved  in  an  orderly  fashion.  This  would  have  the  added  benefit  of  increasing  the 
credibility  of  the  IMF’s  commitment  not  to  lend  to  insolvent  sovereigns,  just  as  improved 
resolution  regimes  for  banks  has  strengthened  the  credibility  of  the  Bank  of  England’s 
commitment not to lend to insolvent institutions. Usefully, the IMF has launched important work 
on drawing lessons from recent experiences with sovereign debt restructurings14. Here I offer 
three preliminary ideas which could reduce the systemic spillovers of sovereign debt crises: 
(i) 
Sovereign balance sheets could be made safer by using state-contingent bonds to increase 
risk-sharing with private sector creditors. For example, GDP-linked bonds advocated in a Bank 
of  England  paper  in  2013,15  are  debt  instruments  that  directly  link  principal  and  interest 
payments  to  the  level  of  a  country’s  nominal  GDP  and  so  provide  a  form  of  ‘recession 
insurance’. Economies with higher GDP growth volatility or countries where monetary policy is 
constrained in its ability to respond to growth shocks (such as those in a monetary union) are 
likely  to  benefit  most.  Giving  such  bonds  favourable  treatment  in  debt  sustainability 
assessments could enhance their attractiveness. More work is needed to pin down how such 
instruments could be implemented in practice. Work by the IMF on introducing flexibility for 
sovereign debt in distress situations is also worth considering. 
Managing the risk of sovereign crises 
                                                
12  See Bank of England (2013). 
13  See IMF (July 2014). 
14  See IMF (April 2013). 
15  Brooke et al (2013). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Facilitating agreements on a debt restructuring 
(ii) 
The  Bank  has  also  been  a  strong  supporter  of  the  recent  contractual  innovations  to  ease 
resolvability once default occurs: i) changes to “Collective Action Clauses” (CACs) in bond 
contracts so that decisions can be taken by a majority of creditors across all bond issuances, 
without the need for an issuance-by-issuance vote; and ii) reforms to the “pari passu” clause 
to prevent a repeat of the Argentinian situation. 
Indeed, the Bank has set an example here by including a new style CAC clause in a recent US 
Dollar bond issue. The new style contracts have also seen good take-up among emerging 
market issuers in their foreign-law bonds (the new clause was designed for foreign law bonds, 
for which the collective action problem tends to be more acute). Since October 2014, 59% of 
the  nominal  principal  amount  of  total  issuances  has  included  these  enhanced  CACs  for 
countries such as Mexico, Armenia, Bulgaria, Croatia and Egypt.16 But as the September 2015 
G20 communique17 highlighted, there is a need to further explore market-based ways to speed 
up the incorporation of such clauses to the outstanding stock of debt. 
(iii) 
A  commitment  to  bail-in  rather  than  bail-out  creditors  of sovereigns  can  only  be  credible if 
losses  can  be  absorbed  safely  without  significant  spillovers  across  borders.  Sovereign 
exposures receive special and in some cases preferential treatment in prudential regulation, 
with low or even zero capital requirements and exemptions from large exposure limits. It is 
hardly surprising then that they make up an important part of banks’ balance sheets. Claims 
on foreign public sectors reported by BIS-reporting banks as a share of their total foreign claims 
have risen from 17% in 2004 to 25% at end-2014.18 The Basel Committee has recently started 
a review of the treatment of sovereign exposures in the Basel Standards. This is an important 
part  of  the  resolution  agenda  –  reducing  international  spillovers  from  sovereign  debt 
restructurings will make it more feasible to implement them when needed. 
Reducing large cross-border exposures 
Conclusion 
Promoting cross border capital flows as a means of allowing resources to flow to where they 
will be best used is a logical extension of the arguments David Hume first put forward in favour 
of free trade more than 250 years ago. However, such flows leave nations exposed to a “capital 
stop”, in much the same way that banks can experience a run on their deposits. 
The  mix  of  self-  and  multi-lateral  insurance  arrangements  that  have  arisen  in  response  to 
recent events and liquidity pressures appears suboptimal – resembling more of a patchwork 
than a safety net. We need a better global financial safety net with the IMF at its heart and 
three key additional elements that will make the safety net more effective. 
• 
First, a more reliable and flexible source of funding for the IMF and greater clarity on 
coordination with Regional Financial Arrangements. 
Second,  a  stronger mandate for IMF  surveillance  and  stress testing to  reduce the 
likelihood  that  countries  might  need  recourse  to  the  safety  net,  and  possible 
prequalification to reduce stigma when liquidity is needed. 
                                                 
16  See Briefing for G20 Meeting, September 4, 2015, Inclusion of Enhanced Contractual Provisions in International 
Sovereign  Bond  Contracts.  https://g20.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/IMF-Note-on-Inclusion-of-Enhanced-
Contractual-Provisions-in-International-Sovereign-Bond-Contracts-Briefing-for-G20-Meeting.docx. 
17  See  Communique,  G20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  Meeting,  4–5  September  2015. 
https://g20.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/September-FMCBG-Communique.pdf. 
18  Bank of England staff calculations based on BIS data. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Third, better mechanisms for dealing with debt restructuring and reducing the risk of 
disorderly spillovers. 
  None  of  this  will  be  easy.  As  Hume  said  “it  must,  however,  be  confessed  that…all  these 
questions of trade  and money  are  extremely  complicated.19”  But  there  are  some  important 
lessons from the experience of central bank reforms since the crisis that, while complicated, 
show us what might be possible. 
 
                                                 
19  See Hume (1758). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Charts and Tables 
Chart 1: Evolution of the global financial 
safety net as a percentage of external 
liabilities 
(1980–2014) 
  Chart 2: Composition of IMF resources 
 GAB – General Arrangements to Borrow 
NAB – New Arrangements to Borrow 
Source: IMF and Bank calculations. 
 
 
 
Per cent of global external 
liabilities
14
Per cent of global external 
liabilities 
3.5
Regional Financing Arrangments
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Swap Lines
IMF Temporary
IMF Permanent
Self Insurance: FX Reserves
(LHS)
1980 1984 1988 1992 1996 2000 2004 2008 2012
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
 Sources: IMF, central bank websites, RFAs, Lane and Milessi-
Feretti (2012) and Bank calculations.  
 
Chart 3: Regional FX over- and under-
insurance (2014)(a) 
 
$ billion
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
a
i
s
A
Sum overinsurance
Sum underinsurance
d
n
a
 
l
a
r
t
n
e
C
n
r
e
t
s
a
E
e
p
o
r
u
E
n
i
t
a
L
a
c
i
r
e
m
A
t
s
a
E
 
e
l
d
d
i
M
h
t
r
o
N
d
n
a
 a
c
i
r
f
A
n
a
r
a
h
a
s
-
b
u
S
a
c
i
r
f
A
Sources: IMF and Bank calculations. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 (a) Degree of insurance is measured against the standard IMF 
metric. 
 
Chart 4: Access to regional financial arrangements bigger than 0.5% of regional GDP 
(2014) 
   Sources: National Sources, IMF and Bank calculations. 
 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   References 
Brooke, M et al (2013) Sovereign default and state-contingent debt, Financial Stability Paper 
No. 27. 
Carney, M (2013) The UK at the heart of renewed globalisation, http://www.bankofengland.  
co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2013/speech690.pdf. 
Hauser,  A  (2014)  Lender  of  last  resort  actions  during  the  financial  crisis:  seven  practical 
lessons from the United Kingdom in: Rethinking the lender of last resort, BIS Papers, No. 79, 
pp 81–92. 
Hume, D (1758) Of the Balance of Trade, in: Essays – Moral, Political and Literary. 
Pagan, W (1865) The Birthplace and parentage of William Paterson, founder of the Bank of 
England, and projector of the Darien scheme. 
The  Bank  of  England  (2013)  A  Framework  for  Stress  Testing  the  UK  Banking  System, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/fsc/Documents/discussionpaper1013.pdf. 
The International Monetary Fund (June 2014) The Fund’s Lending Framework and Sovereign 
Debt  –  Preliminary  Considerations  Staff  Report,  http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/ 
eng/2014/052214.pdf. 
The International Monetary Fund (July 2014) 2014 Triennial Surveillance Review Overview 
Paper, http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2014/073014.pdf. 
The  International  Monetary  Fund  (April  2013)  The  Sovereign  Debt  Restructuring  –  Recent 
Developments  and 
the  Funds’  Legal  and  Policy  Framework, 
https://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2013/042613.pdf. 
Tucker,  P  (2014)  The  lender  of  last  resort  and  modern  central  banking:  principles  and 
reconstruction in: Rethinking the lender of last resort, BIS Papers, No. 79, pp 10–42. 
Shafik,  M  (2015)  Goodbye  ambiguity,  hello  clarity:  the  Bank  of  England’s  relationship  with 
financial  markets,  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2015/ 
speech801.pdf. 
Winters, B (2012) Review of the Bank of England’s Framework for Providing Liquidity to the 
Banking  System,  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2012/cr2 
winters.pdf. 
Implications 
for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
