  François Groepe: African central banks and monetary policy challenges 
Address by Mr François Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Credit Suisse Africa Conference, Cape Town, 6 November 2015. 
 Introduction 
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
Allow  me  to  express  my  pleasure  at  being  invited  to  deliver  the  opening  address  at  this 
year’s Credit Suisse Africa Conference. 
The theme chosen for this address – “African central banks and monetary policy challenges” 
– is particularly relevant today, seeing as financial market participants grapple with volatile 
markets  informed  by  a  fluid  economic  and  monetary  policy  environment.  The  context  is  a 
highly interconnected world where spillover and spill-back risks are evident, and which brings 
about new challenges. 
In my speech, I will look at some of these global challenges and how they have shifted over 
the past few years, then focusing on their particular relevance for African nations and, in turn, 
looking at the ways in which African central banks can deal with their policy implications. I will 
briefly  highlight  the  experience  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  in  that  respect,  and 
discuss how increased cooperation between regional central banks can help to strengthen 
the way in which we navigate these challenging times.  
A more challenging world environment 
Despite the elapse of nearly seven years since the height of the global financial crisis, a fully-
fledged global economic recovery remains elusive, and new challenges continue to appear. 
The  recovery  process  that  began  in  some  segments  of  the  world  economy  has  started  to 
tentatively bear fruit. Banks in the United States and, increasingly, in the eurozone have seen 
sufficient improvements in their balance sheets to allow for the resumption of positive credit 
growth.  At  the  same  time,  financial  conditions  have  improved  sufficiently  for  corporate 
entities  in these regions  to resume  hiring,  a  necessary  condition for  a  consumer  recovery. 
Furthermore,  in  Europe,  a  mix  of  central  bank  initiatives  and  political  will  to  hold  the 
European  construct  together  has  handed  most  peripheral  countries  markedly  lower 
borrowing costs and has created room for them to escape from their double-dip recession. 
The global growth outlook, however, continues to vacillate and has once again deteriorated 
somewhat recently. In its October 2015 World Economic Outlook, the International Monetary 
Fund  downgraded  its  global  GDP  growth  forecasts  by  0,2  per  cent  to  3,1  per  cent  and 
3,6 per  cent  in  2015  and  2016  respectively.  The  3,1  per  cent global  growth  forecasted for 
2015 is materially lower than the 3,8 per cent forecasted a year ago. This downward revision 
is  mainly  as  a  result  of  the  downscaling  of  the  growth  projections  for  the  emerging 
economies. 
The  downwardly  revised  growth  outlook 
is  mainly 
attributable  to  the  relative  slowdown  in  China  which  faces  overcapacity  in  its  traditional 
industries,  a  property  oversupply,  an  erosion  of  its  competitive  advantages,  and  elevated 
levels of debt. Other large emerging-market economies are, however, also feeling the strain, 
in  particular  those  which  have  a  high  degree  of  dependence  on  commodity  exports. 
Furthermore, investor risk aversion towards emerging-market assets has been rising against 
a  backdrop  of  market  uncertainties  about  the  timing  and  impact  of  US  policy  rate 
normalisation coupled with concerns about the economic slowdown in Asia and the impact of 
lower  commodity  prices.  This  has  contributed  to  significant  capital  flow  reversals  from 
for  emerging-market  economies 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  emerging-market economies, and the Institute of International Finance has recently projected 
that emerging markets will see net capital outflows this year for the first time since 1988.1 
financial  crisis,  regional  growth  was  relatively  sheltered 
Why these developments matter to Africa 
These international developments are highly relevant for sub-Saharan Africa. At the time of 
the  global 
from  adverse 
developments  in  the  major  economies.  Regional  GDP,  for  instance,  continued  to  grow  by 
4,1 per cent in 2009, whereas most of the advanced economies and some emerging-market 
economies were in recession. The lack of depth in most African financial markets as well as 
the limited linkages between their banking systems and those of the advanced economies 
had in part explained Africa’s relative resilience. However, Africa appears to have become 
more vulnerable to global developments since then. 
The  exposure  of  sub-Saharan  economies,  particularly  to  China  –  which  is  now  a  key 
contributor  to  the  global  slowdown  –  has  continued  to  increase  over  recent  years.2  The 
region’s exports to China have grown, on average, by around 25 per cent per year between 
2000 and 2014, far outpacing the growth rates of less than 10 per cent for exports to the US 
and the EU. According to the IMF, China in 2014 accounted for more than 20 per cent of 
exports  in  about  15  sub-Saharan  countries,  including  Angola,  the  DRC,  South  Africa  and 
Zambia. Interestingly, exports to the other BRICS economies also increased over the past 
decade, by close to 20 per cent on an annual basis. 
But  China’s  relevance  for  African  economies  is  not  limited  to  trade  links.  According  to  the 
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), China is now the largest 
developing  foreign  investor  in  Africa,  and  official  Chinese  data  indicate  a  doubling  in  the 
stock of foreign direct investment to Africa between 2009 and 2012, to US$21 billion.  
The sharply lower commodity prices equally hold significant implications for Africa. Despite 
some  diversification  of their  economies  over  the  past  decade  or so  –  in  particular  into the 
services sectors such as retail, finance and mobile telephony – the export base of countries 
in  sub-Saharan  Africa  remains  highly  dependent  on  commodities.  The  IMF  has  identified 
15 countries  in  the  region,  beyond  its  eight  oil-exporting  countries,  where  non-renewable 
resources represent more than 25 per cent of exports. In nine of those, the share exceeds 
50 per cent – and these calculations exclude agricultural commodities, on which many poorer 
African  nations  remain  heavily  dependent.3  The  negative  impact  of  the  lower  commodity 
prices is not limited to lower domestic income, tax revenues and employment in the mining 
sector,  but  is  equally  likely  to  result  in  the  curtailment  of  drilling  and  extraction  investment 
projects. 
The region, however, is likely to continue growing above trend in the near future. The IMF 
forecasts sub-Saharan GDP growth of 4,3 per cent in 2016, up from the estimated 3,8 per 
cent in the current year but still below the 5,25 per cent average growth rate of the past five 
years. The most recent projections of the World Bank similarly show a moderate recovery in 
2016 and 2017. There are, however, some downside risks to these forecasts, such as the 
impact  of  adverse  weather  conditions  on  the  agricultural  sector  and  the  possibility  that 
ongoing public spending on infrastructure may be curtailed due to deteriorating public finance 
metrics in several countries. 
                                                
1  See ‘Capital flight darkens economic prospects for emerging markets’, Financial Times, 1 October 2015. 
2  See ‘Linkages between China and sub-Saharan Africa’, Global Economic Prospects, World Bank, June 2015. 
3  See  ‘Dealing  with  the  gathering  clouds’,  Regional  Economic  Outlook  for  sub-Saharan  Africa,  International 
Monetary Fund, October 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Indeed,  the  more  challenging  external  environment  for  African  countries  occurs  at  a  time 
when  these  countries’  external  and  budget  balances  have  been  deteriorating.  The  IMF 
forecasts that, in 2016, 30 of the 45 sub-Saharan countries will have a current-account deficit 
in excess of 5,0 per cent of GDP. The region’s external shortfall is expected to be as high as 
5,5 per cent of GDP, compared with the low of 0,7 per cent in 2011 and net surpluses in the 
years before the global financial crisis. Equally, the average budget deficit for the region is 
estimated to have risen to 4,2 per cent of GDP this year, up from 1,8 per cent three years 
ago; as a result, the public-debt-to-GDP ratio is likely to have reached its highest level since 
2005.  The  re-emergence  of  the  ‘twin  deficit’  phenomenon  in  many  African  countries  may 
prove of particular concern at a time when global financing conditions have deteriorated and 
the  credit  spreads  of  most  emerging  sovereigns  widen  this  year,  in  particular  among  sub-
Saharan issuers. 
Many  African  countries  have  taken  advantage  of  the  low  yields  in  developed  countries  to 
increase  their  issuance  of  foreign  currency-denominated  Eurobonds  in  recent  years.  Such 
issuance has helped these sovereigns to tap into international investor demand for yield and 
reap  the  rewards  of  earlier  efforts  to  improve  their  creditworthiness.  However,  it  has  also 
increased  their  external  debt  burden  as  most  of  the  region’s  currencies  have  come  under 
pressure.  The  trend  towards  currency  depreciation  that  was  witnessed  throughout  most of 
the  emerging  world  has  not  spared  sub-Saharan  Africa.  Since  the  start  of  the  year,  for 
example,  the  currencies  of  countries  such  as  Angola,  Ghana,  Kenya  and  South  Africa 
depreciated by between 10 and 25 per cent against the US dollar. In the case of others, like 
Zambia, the currency-value loss has been close to 50 per cent. 
These  currency  developments  have  complicated  the  servicing  and  refinancing  of  external 
debt,  and  have  also  contributed  to  a  rise  in  inflationary  pressures  in  some  countries, 
offsetting  the  positive  effect  of  lower  oil  prices  in  this  context.  For  the  sub-Saharan  Africa 
region as a whole, the IMF now forecasts average inflation to accelerate to 6,9 per cent this 
year and to 7,3 per cent in 2016 compared to 6,4 per cent in 2014. 
How central banks can respond to the challenges 
A situation where real economic growth slows but inflation accelerates is not one that central 
banks  particularly  relish  in  having  to  contend  with.  Central  banks’  mandate  of  inflation 
targeting,  be  it  direct  or  indirect,  requires  them  to  be  responsive  to  any  build-up  of  price 
pressures,  especially  if  it  could  result  in  the  un-anchoring  of  inflation  expectations.  This  is 
particularly  relevant  where  inflation  remains  sticky  at  the  upper  end  of  the  inflation  target 
range. Yet at the same time, a slowdown in economic growth – at least in the event that it is 
demand-driven and results in a negative output gap – means that the central bank has to be 
mindful not to exacerbate the cyclical moderation by unduly tightening monetary policy. Pro-
cyclical  monetary  tightening  can  negatively  impact  on  economic  growth  and  employment, 
and over time could contribute to financial instability. 
It is worth noting that the nature of the inflation pressures faced by African central banks may 
itself be changing. A recent IMF study showed that while, in the past, inflation cycles tended 
to  be  heavily  influenced  by  domestic  supply  shocks,  the  role  of  foreign  exchange,  money 
supply and domestic demand shifts has gradually increased over time.4 It is therefore likely 
that demand shocks (global, regional and local) matter increasingly more for inflation rather 
than supply-related ones. Ever-increasing trade and financial integration has been beneficial 
to growth and development in sub-Saharan Africa over the past decade or two; it has also 
brought greater dependency on and responsiveness to international economic and financial 
                                                
4  See ‘On the drivers of inflation in sub-Saharan Africa’ by Anh D.M. Nguyen, Jemma Dridi, Filiz D. Unsal and 
Oral H. Williams, Monetary Fund Working Paper Series WP/15/189, August 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  trends, and with it also the need for greater cooperation and exchange of information among 
African countries, including their central banks. 
So how should central banks in Africa respond to these new challenges? First of all, there is 
no “one size fits all” policy response. Because of the structural differences between African 
countries – such as their oil exporter/importer status, the diversification of their production, 
the degree of development of their respective financial sectors, and the health of their public 
finances  –  they  are  not  equally  vulnerable  to  the  current  global  challenges.  As  mentioned 
earlier,  the  outlook  for  both  growth  and  inflation  in  the  region’s  member  states  shows 
significant divergences. The IMF, for example, forecasts that inflation in several countries – 
mostly members of the CFA zones but also some oil importers, like Kenya – is expected to 
remain muted, or even to decline, in 2016. Several other countries, however, including many 
of  the  largest  economies  of  the  continent,  are  likely  to  see  inflation  drifting  higher  or 
remaining around uncomfortably elevated levels.  
Nonetheless, common themes may be emerging. In an environment of weakening growth in 
key trading partners such as China, of lower commodity prices and of potentially challenging 
global liquidity conditions, exchange rates are likely to remain under some kind of pressure. 
But  this  need  not  be  a  negative  development.  In  many  ways,  provided  that  a  country’s 
external debt remains moderate, depreciated exchange rates act as an automatic stabiliser 
against an external demand and/or terms-of-trade shock. 
It is nevertheless the responsibility of central banks to ensure that such depreciation does not 
result in a lasting price spike or in an un-anchoring of inflation expectations. This can be a 
particular risk in Africa, where a large share of consumer goods is imported, and at a time 
when  food  prices  –  a  large  portion  of  the  CPI  basket  in  many  regional  economies  –  are 
increasingly sensitive to global, rather than domestic, developments. According to the IMF’s 
latest Regional Economic Outlook for sub-Saharan Africa, a key factor behind the improved 
growth  performance  of  sub-Saharan  Africa  in  recent  years  has  been  an  improved  policy 
environment. Gains in the quality of policymaking and sounder macroeconomic management 
can ill-afford to be reversed. 
In some countries, the challenge for policymakers has been compounded by the relaxation in 
public spending policy – in particular civil service wage settlements – in recent years. This is 
certainly  not  an  unusual  or  a  surprising  development  as  it  is  reasonable  to  affect  some 
degree  of  redistribution  when  economic  growth  and  improved  fiscal  revenue  allows  for  it 
given  the  skewness  of  income  and  wealth  distribution  in  many  of  these  countries.  It  is, 
however, of great importance that such efforts be undertaken in a sustainable manner and 
not  at  the  cost  of  discarding  fiscal  discipline,  as  a  lack  thereof  could  exacerbate  inflation 
pressures  and  weigh  on  investor  sentiment,  thus  complicating  the  task  of  monetary 
policymakers. 
Admittedly,  this  possibly  points  to  the  limitations  of  the  role  that  central  banks  can  play  in 
dealing with the current global and regional challenges. Other economic agents, in particular 
fiscal policymakers, have a key role to fulfil alongside monetary authorities in ensuring that 
the  path  to  sustained  growth  and  development  in  Africa  is  not  derailed.  Appropriate 
countercyclical fiscal policies, which prioritise investment in infrastructure and human capital 
over  current  spending,  would  go  some  way  in  assisting  central  banks  in  executing  their 
mandates. 
It is worth noting that many central banks’ mandates have been expanded to now explicitly 
include financial stability. This may not have been a major focus area in the past for most 
African  central  banks  due  to  the  region’s  relatively  low  credit  depth  and  its  lack  of  large, 
sophisticated  financial  markets.  But  the  rapid  development  of  the  financial  sector,  the 
growing interconnectedness of the countries’ banking systems, and the gradual opening of 
their  capital  markets  has  necessitated  an  increased  focus  on  financial  stability.  The  IMF 
recently  found  evidence  of  linkages  –  in  particular  in  the  case  of  sub-Saharan  Africa 
countries  –  between  lower  commodity  prices  and  financial  stability  metrics,  such  as  non-
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  performing  bank  loans,  returns  on  equity,  and  ratios  of  liquid  assets  to  deposits.  Despite 
these  linkages,  it  is  evident  that  a  growing  financial  system  which  is  well  regulated  and 
supervised is likely to result in better allocation of capital to different economic sectors, the 
facilitation  of  entrepreneurship,  stronger  job  creation  and,  overall,  the  promotion  of 
sustainable economic development. 
Dealing with challenges – the experience of the South African Reserve Bank 
The global challenges described above, and the questions of how to deal with them, have 
not spared the South African Reserve Bank. South African growth has slowed due to various 
external  factors,  not  least  due  to  the  worsening  terms  of  trade  on  the  back  of  softer 
commodity  prices.  It  is  worth  noting  that  commodity  exports  continue  to  represent  about 
60 per  cent  of  South  Africa’s  external  trade  but  trade  is  increasingly  shifting  to  other 
emerging-market economies, for example export shipments to China and the other BRICS 
countries  have  risen  from  2,6  and  3,0  per  cent  in  2005  to  9,6  and  5,2  per  cent  in  2014 
respectively. 
These external factors have been compounded by domestic supply issues, prominent among 
which were electricity constraints, prolonged strikes in the mining and manufacturing sectors 
as well as skills shortages and uncertainties in certain fields of policy, such as the mining and 
agricultural sectors. The South African Reserve Bank forecasts GDP growth of 1,5 per cent 
this year and 1,6 per cent next year, which is substantially lower than the post-recession high 
of 3,2 per cent in 2011. The Bank further estimates that a part of this deterioration may be 
structural and that potential economic growth has slowed from around 3 to 3,5 per cent in 
20105 to about 1,8 per cent this year. 
Inflation continues to remain of some concern, even as growth slowed and the persistence of 
a  negative  output  gap  seemingly  dampened 
the  pass-through  effects  of  currency 
depreciation  to  headline  CPI  inflation.  Core  consumer  price  increases  have  remained 
relatively elevated against a background of prolonged currency depreciation, above-inflation 
wage  settlements  and  administrative  price  increases.  Furthermore,  the  Bank  projects  that 
headline inflation will exceed its target range for two quarters in 2016 before declining to 5,7 
by the fourth quarter of 2017. 
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  has  also  been  closely  monitoring  the  broad-based 
measures of inflation expectations, in particular the Bureau for Economic Research’s surveys 
of analysts, businesspeople and trade unions, which have shown greater stability over the 
past three to four  years  yet  have  remained  anchored  around  the  upper  limit  of  the  Bank’s 
inflation target range. With inflation expected to overshoot its target range for two quarters in 
2016, the Bank has been wary of any possible un-anchoring and/or an upward drift in these 
expectations.  As  a  result,  it  stands  ready  to  tighten  policy  further  should  such  adverse 
developments occur. The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee has repeatedly indicated that it 
sees itself in a gradual tightening cycle. So far, interest rates have increased by 100 basis 
points, to 6,0 per cent, since January 2014. The sluggishness of economic growth and the 
persistence  of  a  negative  output  gap  inform  our  view  of  the  gradualism  of  the  current 
normalisation  cycle.  Nevertheless,  the  core  mandate  of  the  Bank  is  price  stability,  which 
means that the Bank remains vigilant and stands ready to act against any build-up of inflation 
pressures which may result in a persistent deviation from the inflation target range. 
                                                
5  See  ‘A  semi-structural  approach  to  estimate  South  Africa’s  potential  output’  by  V  Anvari,  N  Ehlers  and 
R Steinbach, South African Reserve Bank Working Paper Series WP/14/08, November 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Cooperation and the role of the Association of African Central Banks 
Before  concluding,  let  me  return  to  the  importance  of  cooperation  between  the  respective 
central banks on the continent, and in particular allude to the work undertaken through the 
Association of African Central Banks, the AACB. 
As the economic, banking and financial inter-linkages between African countries multiply, the 
mutual  understanding  of  our  financial  systems  and  the  exchange  of  information  on  risks 
associated with, among others, cross-border bank lending can be of paramount importance 
to limit the risks of contagion through the continent of any future shock. In this respect, the 
role  of  the  AACB,  which  has  provided  African  central  banks  with  a  mechanism  for 
cooperation and a forum for discussion since 1965, is likely to continue to grow in the coming 
years. 
I would like to highlight the role which the South African Reserve Bank in particular is playing 
in leading the recently established working group on cross-border banking supervision. Our 
initial  interaction  with  colleagues from  other  African  central  banks makes  us  confident  that 
the  working  group  will  be  able  to  formulate  sufficient  methods  to  improve  cross-border 
supervision.  Indeed,  we  anticipate  that,  over  time,  this  working  group  will  become  the 
preferred platform where experiences are shared, ideas are discussed, and, ultimately, the 
effective  supervision  of  cross-border  banking  operations  is  strengthened.  The  sharing  of 
knowledge  and the  more  effective  use  of  skills and  resources  will  no  doubt  be key,  in  the 
longer run, to improving the supervision of continental banking groups. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, I would like to emphasise that sub-Saharan Africa has shown promising gains 
in economic growth and diversification, human development and policy governance over the 
past  decade.  It  will  be  the  task  of  all  stakeholders,  central  banks  included,  to  ensure  that 
these gains are built upon in coming years, even as the global environment becomes more 
challenging.  Allowing  for  the  necessary  adjustments  of  financial  variables,  like  exchange 
rates,  without  endangering financial  stability;  keeping  inflation  stable  without  putting  undue 
strain  on  fragile  economic  growth;  and  ensuring  cooperation  between  the  continent’s 
regulatory institutions to allow for the development of cross-border financing while keeping 
risks in check are among the major challenges of the coming years. I have no doubt that, 
despite these challenges, the African Renaissance will continue to gain traction and that the 
next  decade  or  two  will  see  significant  overall  improvements  in  all  developmental  and 
economic metrics. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
