  Patrick Njoroge: Kenya’s experience and prospects in banking and 
economic infrastructure development 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Patrick  Njoroge,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
4th KBA  (Kenya  Bankers  Association)  Annual  Banking  Research  Conference,  Nairobi, 
24 September 2015. 
 Good morning! I am very pleased to be here at this opening of the 4th KBA Annual Banking 
Research  Conference.  I  am  grateful  to  KBA  for  inviting  me  to  this  important  forum  and 
appreciate the presence of all the participants. 
This Conference’s theme, Kenya’s Experience and Prospects in Banking and Economic 
Infrastructure Development is indeed relevant to our current context. This is because most 
of the countries across Africa and the world are experiencing huge infrastructure gaps, and 
Governments  are  grappling  with  the  challenges  of  coming  up  with  innovative  solutions  to 
financing  these  investments.  The  importance  of  reliable  infrastructure  in  raising  the 
economy’s  growth  potential  cannot  be  overemphasized.  In  most  Sub-Saharan  African 
countries, the infrastructure deficit is in critical sectors such as energy, transportation, health, 
water, sewerage, and telecommunications, and is a significant drawback to the continent’s 
economic performance. 
Vision 2030, Kenya’s development blueprint, gives prominence to infrastructure development 
as a key driver of long-term growth. In recognition of the important role the private sector can 
play, the Government is committed to creating an enabling environment to facilitate private 
participation. With support from the World Bank, the Government initiated the Infrastructure 
Finance and Public Private Partnership (IFPPP) Project and has put in place a supportive 
legal  and  regulatory  framework  through  the  PPP  Act,  2013  and  the  related  Regulations, 
giving  private  participation  a  central  role  in  the  Government’s  long-term  development 
strategy. 
The  complementary  roles  of  the  Government  and  private  sector  in  infrastructure  funding 
were  most  recently  highlighted  at  the  UN’s  3rd  International  Conference  on  Financing  for 
Development,  held  in  July  2015  in  Addis  Ababa,  Ethiopia.  At  this  summit,  participants 
reiterated the vital roles both Governments and the private sector can play in infrastructure 
delivery, sustainable development and poverty eradication. Involving the private sector, not 
only  eases  the  fiscal  and  administrative  burden  on  Governments  but  also  enhances 
efficiency  in  the  delivery  of key  public  services.  In  this  regard,  Public-Private  Partnerships 
(PPPs) are an increasingly popular mechanism by which the private sector has been brought 
in. PPPs are therefore among the options that have been sought by Governments to address 
this funding challenge. 
It  is  clear  that  there  is  interest  in  PPP  projects  in  Kenya.  As  of  July  2015,  the  National 
Treasury had approved 71 projects in transport, energy, education, water, health, agriculture 
and the hospitality sectors. Whereas many of these projects are still at the negotiation and 
feasibility stage, a number have reached financial closure, with several banks participating 
through  syndicated  lending.  The  71  PPP  projects  so  far  identified  present  a  pipeline  of 
investable opportunities for the Kenyan financial sector. 
In addition, the Government’s efforts in recent years to tap into other sources of infrastructure 
finance, include: 
• 
Direct  borrowing  from  foreign  governments  and  multilateral  lenders  such  as  the 
African Development Bank (AfDB) to fund specific projects. 
Issuance  of  tax-free  infrastructure  bonds  targeting  investors  to  finance  capital 
projects. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Issuance  of  a  USD  2  billion  sovereign  bond  (Eurobond)  in  2014  to  raise 
development funds from the international market. 
 As  of  June  2015,  the  Government  had  raised  approximately  Ksh.250  billion  through 
infrastructure bonds, which have drawn both domestic and international participation. In a bid 
to widen potential sources of funding even further, the Government is also considering Sukuk 
and Samurai bonds as options for further sovereign bond issuance. These will further widen 
investor participation and deepen the market. 
There  is  clearly  a  case  for  participation  in  PPPs  by  banks  and  other  private  financial 
institutions.  However,  there  are  a  number  of  challenges  that  could  arise  from  such 
participation, which I would like to highlight for your consideration in this forum. 
First, many infrastructure investments are long-term in nature, generating cash-flows many 
years  after  project  inception.  However,  the  maturity  of  most  bank  deposits  is  short-term. 
There is therefore a need for banks to manage this intermediation, taking a more long-term 
view about the economy, which we flag as the single most-important constraint. Additionally, 
alternate sources of longer-term funding could be sought. I am happy to note that banks in 
Kenya have started to explore solutions such as collaboration with multilateral lenders and 
development finance institutions to obtain long-term funding for infrastructure projects. 
Secondly, given the huge scale and long duration of many infrastructure projects, lenders are 
likely  to  find  themselves  exposed  to  significant  credit,  liquidity  and  political  risks.  It  is 
therefore  vital  that  all  project  proposals  be  thoroughly  and  reliably  assessed  for  their 
economic, financial and technical viability before loans are disbursed. More importantly for 
banks,  projects  should  have  a  clear  and  equitable  contractual  structure  that  optimally 
allocates project risks among participants. Such risks should be well-mitigated at the outset 
to make projects bankable. 
Thirdly, participation in infrastructure projects by banks would also be constrained by legal 
and  prudential  limits  on  the  proportion  of  banks’  lending  as  a  share  of  their  core  capital. 
Given the considerable financial outlays involved in infrastructure projects, commercial banks 
would need to enhance their capital base to participate in PPPs while remaining compliant 
with regulatory requirements. 
Finally, given the increased investments in infrastructure and the environmental implications, 
I do hope that the studies lined up for discussion in this conference will give consideration to 
the  green  economy  (green  growth)  aspects.  This  proactive  discussion  by  the  Kenyan 
banking industry will no doubt contribute towards adopting sustainable finance principles as 
per  the  commitments  of  the  Addis  Ababa  Financing  for  Development  Summit  earlier 
mentioned. 
In view of the large size, huge cost and complexity of infrastructure projects, I would urge 
banks and other financial institutions to build the requisite legal and technical capacities to 
evaluate the value for money of PPPs relative to traditional asset classes. This will assist in 
identifying the potential risks and the risk mitigation to be put in place in advance before the 
commitments are undertaken. 
I  take  that  the  engagement  you  will  have  for  the  next  two  days  will  be  an  on-going 
conversation and the research work arising from this conference’s theme will inform future 
research  in  the  area.  I  am  optimistic  that  the  banking  industry  will  continue  to  play  an 
important  role  in  supporting  the  various  sectors  of  the  economy  and  in  particular,  the 
challenge  to  address  the  nation’s  infrastructure  gap.  The  Central  Bank  is  committed  to 
creating an enabling regulatory environment that facilitates the banking sector to effectively 
execute its intermediation function. 
With  those  remarks,  it  is  my  honour  to  declare  the  4th  KBA  Annual  Banking  Research 
Conference officially open. I wish you fruitful deliberations. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
