   Mark Carney: Introduction to the Open Forum 
Introduction  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial Stability Board, to the Bank of England Open Forum, London, 11 November 2015. 
 Thank you, Lord Mayor for your extraordinary service this past year and for your gracious hospitality today. 
Welcome, everyone, to the Open Forum. 
In a building that started its life in 1411 as “a little cottage”.1  
And which has become the place to bring people together: 
Livery companies and businesses, 
Traders and market makers, 
World leaders and citizens. 
Today, we draw inspiration from this great tradition by gathering representatives from across 
civil society to discuss how to build the real markets of tomorrow. 
The Bank of England has a statutory responsibility to protect and enhance the stability of the 
financial system in the UK. Therefore, even if we don’t regulate markets per se, we have a 
close interest in working with others to create real markets that enjoy the trust of society whilst 
effectively allocating capital and risk. 
Markets can be powerful drivers of prosperity and security for all. 
Financial markets matter. By financing firms to hire, invest and expand, markets drive growth. 
By opening up cross border trade and investment they create new opportunities for businesses 
and savers. 
By transferring risks to those most willing and able to bear them markets help households and 
investors insure against the unexpected. 
Indeed markets are becoming ever more important as individuals bear increasing responsibility 
for financing their retirements and insuring risks. It is vital markets work well - and are seen to 
do so. 
Only real markets can deliver. 
Real markets are resilient. They don’t collapse when the going gets tough. 
Real markets are fair. Participants compete on merit rather than collude online. 
Real markets aren’t ends in themselves but means to much greater ends. 
Only  markets  that  transparently  serve  the  real  economy  can  retain  the  trust  of  society  to 
operate; in other words, only real markets have social licence. 
The crisis and its aftermath laid bare that many of our markets didn’t live up to these standards. 
At  times,  some  of  the  most  important  Fixed  Income,  Currencies  and  Commodities  (FICC) 
markets proved fragile, unfair, ineffective and unaccountable. 
The  twin  crises  of  the  solvency  and  legitimacy  of  finance  undermined  trust  in  market 
mechanisms and the effectiveness of the financial system. 
                                                
1   Old and New London by Walter Thornbury ('Guildhall', Old and New London: Volume 1 (1878), pp. 383-396. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   It is hardly surprising that only a third of people believe markets work in the interests of society.2  
The more people see, the less they like. People trust markets less with age. 
And yet, most people think markets will become ever more important. 
And they’re right. As I wrote this week to G20 Leaders, the structure of financial system has 
changed significantly since the crisis. Virtually all of the net credit since the crisis has been 
from the bond markets and the size of assets under management has increased by 60% to 
$74 trillion. 
Real markets don’t just happen. They depend on the quality of the market infrastructure. 
That means hard infrastructure, the plumbing of markets that determines the mechanics of 
markets; and soft infrastructure, like standards and codes that define how market participants 
should behave. 
Robust  market  infrastructure  is  a  public  good.  But  like  many  public  goods  it  risks  being 
undersupplied. 
If  taken  for  granted  the  infrastructure  that  supports  markets  won’t  keep  pace  with  their 
dynamism; just as it failed to do so in the run-up to the crisis. 
We all have a responsibility to stop this from happening again. 
That’s why I am delighted that so many people are here today, joining those that have already 
participated in panels in Manchester and Cambridge. 
I am also very pleased that we will be hearing from many others who are attending parallel 
forums in Birmingham and Edinburgh. 
And that people are already sharing comments, ideas and thoughts on social media. 
For the first time, people who connect with markets from all sides and in all ways are being 
brought together. Not just bankers, traders and regulators; but companies, investors, workers, 
academics, judges, trade unionists and journalists. 
That’s important. Because we all rely on markets and we are all affected by them. 
And because everyone who connects with markets can help rebuild the real markets we need. 
The good news is that today isn’t the beginning of this process. 
Over the past seven years, a huge programme of reform has been underway to fix the fault 
lines  that  led  to  the  crisis  and  to  build  more  resilient  sources  of  finance  to  serve  the  real 
economy.3  
The  UK  has  played  a  leading  role,  consistent  with  our  position  as  the  pre-eminent  global 
financial centre. 
40% of global foreign exchange trading goes through London. 
Half of all trades in OTC interest rate derivatives. 
Two-thirds of trading in international bonds. 
And more international banking activity is booked here than anywhere else. 
                                                
2   Bank of England survey results. Bank of England survey results. Respondents were asked for their views on 
the statement ‘I believe that financial markets work in the interest of society’. Possible responses were: strongly 
agree, agree, neutral, disagree, strongly disagree. 
3   See  the  FSB  Chair’s  letter  to  G20  Leaders,  available  at  http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/2015/11 
/financial-reforms-achieving-and-sustaining-resilience-for-all/. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Great strides have been made in making the system more resilient. 
The banks that sit at the centre of many markets are safer, with capital requirements that have 
increased ten-fold and liquid assets on balance sheets that have risen four‐fold. 
A new, simple leverage ratio requirement protects the system from risks that we think are low 
but in fact are not. 
Banks’ trading assets have fallen by a third since the crisis, and their interbank borrowings 
have been cut by almost a half. 
Banks’ newfound resilience has been demonstrated recently, as they have dampened – rather 
than amplified – short-lived but significant financial market volatility. 
And those banks must be resilient because they can no longer rely on the support of the state. 
This week the Financial Stability Board proposed to G20 Leaders a landmark agreement on 
the Total Loss Absorbing Capacity which is central to ending Too Big To Fail in the banking 
system. 
Once implemented, it will ensure that large financial institutions can fail without disrupting the 
financial system or calling on taxpayers to bail them out. 
The era of heads-I-win; tails-you-lose capitalism is drawing to a close. 
Complex webs of derivatives are being simplified and made safer. 
We are also working to turn the tide of ethical drift. Market benchmarks have been reformed 
to end abuse. 
Most importantly, market participants are being made accountable for their actions. 
Misconduct will be met with genuine penalties. 
By holding individuals accountable, authorities are ending the Age of Irresponsibility. 
The  best  in  industry  are  playing  a  leading  role,  for  example,  by  getting  the  FICC  Markets 
Standards Board up and running. 
The  Board  will  establish  clearly  understood  standards,  keep  them  up-to-date  with  market 
developments and promote adherence. 
In  parallel,  the  Banking  Standards  Board  is  promoting  higher  standards  of  conduct  and 
competence across the UK banking sector. 
To give these measures teeth, Her Majesty’s Government is extending the Senior Managers 
Regime to all firms in FICC markets and putting them on a common basis with banks and 
insurers. 
Being a senior manager in finance now brings the responsibility and accountability that befits 
what the best in the industry have long recognised: finance is a true profession. 
The Bank of England’s role in markets has been comprehensively overhauled. We’re replacing 
constructive ambiguity with open for business when we provide liquidity to markets. 
We’re working with others as One Bank to develop markets that support financial stability and 
the real economy. 
We’ve  revamped  our  governance  and  we’re  holding  ourselves  to  the  highest  standards  of 
accountability,  including  the  Senior  Managers  Regime  on  top  of  parliamentary  and  public 
scrutiny. 
So  a  huge  amount  has  already  been  completed  to  make  markets  fairer,  more  resilient, 
accountable and effective. 
These reforms are essential for the UK to remain the leading international financial centre. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   They are essential not least because the size of the UK-based market-based financial system 
could increase from six to nearly 15 times UK GDP by 2050. 
But the journey isn’t finished. 
Today is a chance to take stock and reflect: not just on our achievements but on what we might 
have missed, overdone, or simply got wrong.  
Given the complexity and scale of financial reform, it would be remarkable if every measure 
were perfectly constructed. Or if they all fit seamlessly into a totally coherent, self-reinforcing 
whole.  
Authorities  must  have  the  courage  to  listen,  the  honesty  to  admit  our  mistakes  and  the 
confidence to set them right.  
Because  we’re  determined  not  to  repeat  the  cycles  of  the  past  when  bursts  of  post-crisis 
reforms would eventually drift into complacency and cohabitation.  
When  the caravan  moved  on, markets  were  left  unattended to  slip  slowly  into  excess  and 
ethical drift.  
Today we want not only to profile progress made, but also to spur a continual process of review 
and reform. This isn’t just about fixing the fault lines that caused the last crisis, but also about 
seizing new opportunities from fintech and market-based finance. It's about building truly global 
markets, in the UK and elsewhere, and the cross-border governance and cooperation they 
need to function well. 
It is precisely because we don’t know all the answers that we’re setting questions before us 
today: 
- What more needs to be done? Are there gaps that will ultimately allow markets to go wrong 
again?  
-  Are  there  other  places  where  the  pendulum  has  swung  too  far,  preventing  markets  from 
serving 
should? 
- And are there other changes needed to build the necessary supports over time? 
We want to hear from those who might question the steps already taken. We welcome new 
ideas that challenge conventions of how markets should operate, and whose eyes are fixed 
on the future of markets that will become ever more important.  
I’m only sorry there couldn’t be more of us here today. 
We were four times oversubscribed for places. 
But I trust that those unable to be here in person are following us via the web, and will interact 
throughout the day. 
They’ll  also  be  joined  by  some  of  the  5000  pupils  from  the  300  schools  who  watched  our 
webinar earlier this week.  
After all, those students will reap the rewards and bear the consequences of financial reform. 
They will be the ultimate judges of our efforts. 
Our  first  speaker  today  has  set  out  clearly  the  standards  against  which  those  judgements 
should be made.  
As  he  said  five  months  ago:  “Five  years  from  now,  UK  financial  services  will  be  the  best 
regulated in the world, with markets of unquestioned integrity and the highest standards of 
conduct.  
There will be more competition, more innovation and more players in retail markets – offering 
customers a better service. 
There will be new firms disrupting the status quo, and big firms raising their game in response, 
with Britain leading the fintech revolution.” 
society 
they 
as 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Please join me in welcoming the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Right Honourable George 
Osborne to the stage, to begin the debate.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
