   R Basant Roi: Overview of recent economic and financial developments 
in Mauritius 
Address by Mr R Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Bank of Mauritius’ 
Annual Dinner with major economic stakeholders, Flic en Flac, 27 November 2015. 
 Hon Senior Puisne Judge, Eddy Balancy 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Nine years ago, I gave what was my last address to this august gathering of businessmen, 
bankers and professionals at the Sugar Beach Hotel in this very neighbourhood. It never ever 
crossed my mind that I would be back to the Bank of Mauritius someday. It’s a tryst with destiny. 
I am back and am pleased to address you on an occasion that has become an established 
tradition. 
Decades ago, when I was trying to decide on a subject for my dissertation, a famous professor 
advised me that if I wanted to maximize the probability of success I should be guided by two 
principles: one was to make sure to cover issues where I knew more than those who would be 
evaluating  my  work;  and  the  other  was  to  make  sure,  while  putting  together  everything  I 
needed, to travel from dialectics to such a logical conclusion that no one in their right mind 
would ever think of doing. I did not listen to the professor’s counsel. I remembered this counsel 
while  I  started  writing  this  address  a  few  days  ago.  This  evening,  I  have  decided  to  be 
somewhat guided by his counsel. In so doing, I hope not to cross the delicate line that every 
speaker fears and faces: the line that separates courage and stupidity.  
We, at the Bank of Mauritius, do not claim to have incandescent intellect whose every idle 
utterance is brilliant. We are certainly not gifted with cosmic wisdom for spinning regularly in 
public. We are just a team of modest central bankers who happen to be the powerhouse of 
information.  The  Bank  is  not  omniscient  though.  One  paradox  in  this  age  of  near-perfect 
communication system is that nobody can claim to know what is actually happening. Given the 
nature of the functions we are called upon to fulfill, not all the information held by the Bank can 
be made public. We, too, like all the citizens of this country have to be law-abiding. We have 
the best interests of Mauritius as a very well-regulated and supervised jurisdiction at heart. I 
have  ensured  that  the  Bank’s  decisions,  in  particular  those  regarding  regulation  and 
supervision of deposit-taking institutions, are not guided by prejudices. I want to be open. I 
want to be frank. I want to be candid. I want to be straightforward. I find no better audience 
than this gathering of businessmen and professionals to express freely some concerns of the 
Bank of Mauritius. 
For over 300 years, central banking policies have been guided by the ultimate objective of 
achieving sustainable economic growth. Central banks support sustainable growth through the 
pursuit of price stability and financial stability. Far from a desire to lecture on the meaning of 
price stability, I need to touch upon it since it keeps being variously misinterpreted after every 
MPC meeting. There does not exist a universally accepted rigorous definition of price stability. 
It is, however, generally meant to be a condition in which the rate of inflation is low – not far 
away from zero – and sustained over a period long enough such that expectation of changes 
in the general price level does not alter business and household decision making. In other 
words,  people  do  not  find  the  general  price  level  a  matter  of  concern  in  their  day-to-day 
decision making. For the purpose of this audience, put in its simplest possible form, financial 
stability, on the other hand, is a state in which our financial system, that is, all the financial 
intermediaries,  markets,  and  market  infrastructures,  can  withstand  internal  and  external 
shocks  without  any  consequential  disruption  to  financial  intermediation  and  to  the  efficient 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   allocation of savings to investment. Price stability and financial stability are the pre-requisites 
of sustainable growth. 
Economic, cultural and political pressures have, over the years, dictated emphases on central 
banks’ policy goals. In fact, the balance between policy goals has not always been the same. 
Most central banks had multiple policy goals in the decades before the 1980s. In the decades 
before the 2008 financial crisis, the policy pendulum swung strongly to price stability as the 
goal. Inflation rates dropped dramatically. Some central banks were even asking for a little 
higher rate of inflation to grease the growth process. Who would have ever imagined in the 
1980s that there would come a time when some central banks would wish inflation rates to 
pick up a little? In the years after the crisis, against a backdrop of deflationary forces, the policy 
pendulum of central banks again swung and this time to achieving financial stability. Inflation 
stopped being an overriding policy concern for central banks. As many of you must be aware, 
many central banks have been pursuing aggressive unconventional policy action. Collectively, 
central  bank  policies  since  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis  have  made  a  crucial  contribution  to 
restoring financial stability. Given the depressed economic conditions and various challenges 
that have emerged, we, at the Bank of Mauritius, are expected not to lose sight of financial 
stability while formulating policies; it’s a dragon that we cannot afford to leave out of our policy 
calculations.  
Soundness and robustness of banks as well as financial stability are not a novel policy concern 
for  Mauritius.    Mauritius  is  one  of  the  rare  countries  in  the  free  world  that  has  known  free 
banking in the 17th and 19th centuries. Bank failures were as common a feature in Mauritius as in 
the US and elsewhere.  A few years after Independence in 1968, more specifically after the 
breakdown  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  in  September  1971  that  had  rendered  the 
international  monetary  system  unstable,  the  Bank  established  a  division  that  eventually 
evolved into what is known today as the Bank Supervision Department. Its objective was and 
still is to regulate banks and ensure financial stability. The Bank has hitherto not lost sight of 
the critical importance of financial stability to the economy. 
  
We have a bank-centred financial system. Total assets of our financial system are 
currently estimated at around 385 per cent of GDP. The banking sector alone accounts for 
around 300 per cent of GDP which goes to say that banking accounts for 80 per cent of the 
total assets of our financial system. Total assets of the most domestic systemically important 
bank in the country are nearly 70 per cent. The assets of the insurance sector are equivalent 
to 33 per cent of GDP while those of the pension sector stand at 25 per cent of GDP.  The 
non-bank deposit taking sector, inclusive of leasing companies and finance companies, have 
assets equivalent to 16 per cent of GDP. These ratios suggest that the importance of banks in 
our financial system cannot be understated. If Government ever had to bail out banks in order 
to protect the economy from collapsing, our debt-to-GDP would fly through the roof. It goes to 
say that regulation and supervision of banks is a function of the Bank of Mauritius that cannot 
be  taken  lightly  and  politicians  should  stay  out of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  arena.  In 
particular, licensing of financial institutions should be free of political influence in the first place. 
 
However  effective  and  robust  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  in  place, 
banks do fail. And they fail due to a variety of reasons. There is no magic elixir that grants 
immortality to banks. In the last 46 years, the Bank of Mauritius revoked the banking licences 
of five banks. The funeral list of banks has not been so long as to suggest that the Bank of 
Mauritius has been ineffective as a regulatory authority of banks. 
The  US  Controller  of  Currency  wrote  a  letter  of  guidance  to  banks  way  back  in 
 
December 1863. Three short lines in the letter give an idea as to why the five banks lost their 
banking  licences.  The  lines  read  as  follows:  “Pursue  a  straightforward,  upright,  legitimate 
banking business. Never be tempted by the prospect of large returns to do anything but what 
may be properly done under the National Currency Act. ‘Splendid financiering’ is not legitimate 
banking, and ‘splendid financiers’ in banking are generally rascals or humbugs.”   
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    
In 1996, the Bank of Mauritius had revoked the Banking Licence of the Mauritius Co-
operative Central Bank Ltd (MCCB). The MCCB, as the bank was popularly known, suffered 
from serious capital deficiency. The bank had a scheme to attract deposits at the mind-boggling 
rates of interest of over 15 per cent. The rates were of course far higher than the then prevailing 
market rates. When the chicken had come to roost, the bank did not have liquidity. The bank’s 
shareholders and staff as well as informed depositors had started withdrawing funds. The bank 
barrelled  towards  failure  and  dashed  around  like  a  panicked  headless  chicken.  The 
shareholders  of  the  bank,  representatives  from  the  small-planters  community  and  those 
personalities  who  were  politically  well  connected  clamoured  for  the  Bank  of  Mauritius 
intervention. The then Bank of Mauritius was not yet independent. As per the Bank of Mauritius 
Act  1971,  the  Minister  of  Finance  was  fully  empowered  to  issue  directives  to  the  Bank. 
Reluctantly,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  had  intervened  by  way  of  capital  and  liquidity  injection. 
Already, public trust in the bank was lost and irrecoverable. The death sentence of the bank 
was readable on the wall for quite some time. Yet, the Bank of Mauritius was asked to revive 
a clinically dead bank. The Bank of Mauritius had yet to learn a fundamentally important lesson 
when dealing with banks in trouble: a troubled bank can survive without capital for some time. 
But without liquidity, that bank is bound to collapse within hours. No amount of liquidity injection 
by tax-payers would be sufficient to rescue such a troubled bank. Once public confidence in a 
troubled bank is lost more so in a small gossip-ridden society like ours, it stays lost. This sad 
story and other equally sad stories about bank failures in Mauritius remind me of Hemingway’s 
conversation between Bill Gorton and Mike Campbell. Bill asks: “How did you go bankrupt?” 
Mike  answers:  Two  ways.  Gradually.  Then,  suddenly,”  Final  outcome:  MCCB  was  put  on 
liquidation. A large chunk of the funds injected by the Bank of Mauritius into the ailing bank 
has not yet been recovered; it never will be.  Tax-payers lost what was then a colossal sum of 
about Rs375 million. In financial markets lexicon, it’s said, bulls made money, bears made 
money  and  the  pigs  got  slaughtered.  And  the  smart  guys  cleverly  got  away  with  criminal 
offences.  Fortunately, the MCCB was not part of a bigger corporate group resembling a galaxy 
loaded with loss making planets of all sizes and orbits. The aftertaste of the MCCB episode – 
a low-intensity tremor in our banking industry though – still lingers in the soul of the Bank of 
Mauritius. 
One more dramatic episode. Same play, different acts. In 2001, the Bank of Mauritius was 
made aware by whistleblowers of several frauds totalling hundreds of millions of rupees in a 
bank. There were more policemen than bankers at the bank’s annual shareholders meeting. 
This was a bank that had obtained a form of Bank of Mauritius subsidy after its acquisition of 
the defunct Union Bank Ltd in 1996. A Bank of Mauritius subsidy means a subsidy granted by 
taxpayers. This is a phenomenon not easily grasped by the public at large. The Chairperson 
of the Board of Directors who was also the majority shareholder was unseated as chairperson 
in  May  2001  and  was  respectfully  asked  to  inject capital  into  his  bank. Without  the  capital 
injection,  the  bank  had  no  legal  right  to  exist.  The  unseated  Chairperson  hurriedly  left  the 
country without injecting the capital and refused to show up in Mauritius despite repeated calls. 
That bank did not meet the deadline for capital injection. The Bank of Mauritius revoked the 
banking licence of the bank in early 2002. Still, he had refused to show up. But he battled from 
afar to win back his enterprise the liabilities of which had far exceeded its assets. The battle 
was just a public show; he abandoned the game - eventually. The bank was Delphis Bank Ltd 
and  Chairperson’s  name,  just  in  case  you  have  forgotten,  was  Ketan  Somaia,  a  brilliantly 
nefarious thespian who finally failed to malinger his way out of prison in Kenya and the UK, 
just over a year after the revocation of the banking licence of his bank in Mauritius. The Bank 
of Mauritius did not receive a felicitous remark for its bold and pre-emptive decision to close 
the bank though it was profusely castigated by some politicians and a specific section of the 
population. 
 
These two banks and all the others in the funeral list of defunct banks were given a 
fair  trial  –  and  a  fair  hanging  –  by  the  regulatory  authority.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  always 
ensured that depositors never lost their money in the bargains that followed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
    
No single career officer of the Bank of Mauritius derives sadistic pleasures out of the 
revocation of banking licences because the aftertaste is known to be very unpleasant. The 
Bank of Mauritius does hold a licence to kill an ailing bank as many of you have been made to 
believe. The power to revoke a banking licence must never be construed as the itchy finger of 
a depressed man at the trigger of a loaded pistol. It is rather the equivalent to having a gun 
hanging on the wall. The Bank knows that once a while it shoots off, but it does not know when. 
The gun is there but the Bank has no pre-commitment to use it. Revocation of a banking licence 
is a very last recourse decision. May I emphatically state that the primary responsibility of a 
regulatory and supervisory authority is to rescue banks in trouble, not to act as a gunslinger. 
Financial  stability  is  indeed  an  overpowering  consideration  for  any  responsible  regulatory 
authority. The Bank of Mauritius as the regulatory authority of deposit-taking institutions in the 
country is not guided by prejudices. 
  
Several  reasons  have  motivated  me  to  come  up  with  narratives  regarding  the 
revocation of the banking licences of the two banks in quite a distant past. One of the reasons 
is  particularly  important.  I  have  to  share  it  with you  this  evening. The  tension  between  the 
regulator  and  the  shareholders  of  the  defunct  banks  engenders  some  kind  of  a  social 
electricity. Every voice suddenly becomes a digital loudspeaker. People react to the revocation 
of banking licences with all kinds of biases and irrational impulses. They overreact to illusory 
threats  and  underreact  to  real  threats.  Some  of  them  seem  to  instantly  develop  the  deep 
torments of a retarded poet in a broken marriage. Revocation of the banking licences of the 
two banks had attracted unjustified criticisms. Aspersions were violently cast on the Bank of 
Mauritius by a specific section of the population for not having done enough to bail out the two 
banks and let down that ethnic group having affinity to those two banks. Extending liquidity to 
a very badly managed bank owned by almost a single person was tantamount to giving more 
liquor to an alcoholic to soothe his tremors – a short-term fix that does not do anything to solve 
the problem. Make him feel good enough, and soon he won’t feel anything again. In one of the 
three cases, an ailing bank needed a massive amount of liquidity from the Bank of Mauritius. 
The Bank of Mauritius does not lend to ailing banks, however desperate the situation, against 
fake collaterals – collaterals that have been already and secretly sold by the ailing bank. It is 
totally irresponsible to express vociferous opinion on a subject when you suffer from ignorance-
cultivated diseases. In the Delphis Bank ltd case, I was left with an impression that I ought to 
have given sympathetic considerations, at whatever the cost to taxpayers. One of my family 
members was even physically attacked. It requires enormous emotional stability not to allow 
personal misfortunes or sufferings to affect one’s judgment.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I need not underscore that there are some things you cannot learn from 
others. You have to pass through the fire. Everyone sees your exterior but few can discern 
what you store in the heart.  
It’s easy to take the role of victim, since we live in a world where most are looking for the 
shortest and fastest way out of a situation.  In a society of instant gratification where we want 
it all and want it now, the default mechanism is to claim to be a “victim.” It’s a quick and dirty 
way to get it over with. Where the regulatory authority is involved, you just point a finger. The 
Bank of Mauritius told the truths with evangelistic fervour. No one believed in the truths. The 
shareholders told vociferous lies. People believed in their vociferous lies. It is said that power 
corrupts. We hardly realize that weakness also corrupts. Power corrupts a few. Weakness 
corrupts the many. George Orwell knew what he was talking about when he had described 
political language as “designed to make lies sound truthful and murder respectable, and to give 
an  appearance  of  solidity  to  pure  winds.”  Today,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  become 
accustomed to the distortions of political speak. People who wear victimhood as a badge of 
courage get lots of attention. There are interpersonal and sociological components to this that 
run  very  deep  in  our  society.  Perhaps  our  society  merits  ecclesiastical  review  by  common 
sense. 
Three of the five banks whose banking licences the Bank of Mauritius has revoked in its history 
have a common thread that runs through to their demise. Like a piece of an Indian classical 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   raga,  a  theme  plays  throughout  in  different  variations,  tempos  and  pitch.  In  small,  heavily 
politicized,  clan-based  societies,  relations  between  politics,  banking  and  business  tend  to 
become too cozy, not to say incestuous. The politically well-connected CEOs or the politically 
well-connected  biggest  shareholders  have  had  a  domineering  influence  in  their  respective 
banks.  They  found  it  difficult  to  imagine  that  anything  bad  could  happen  –  a  phenomenon 
known as ‘disaster myopia” – which makes them develop an infallible instinct to self-destroy 
and ruin their own banks. Another striking feature of the three defunct banks under reference 
is specific management weakness, particularly in the lending area, a frequent initial cause of 
financial distress known even to the most stupid external auditor of banks. By the way, external 
auditors generally have the right nose. Tragedy! They pretend to have sniffing deficiency. Bad 
lending practices, often motivated by considerations other than normal, opened the door to 
credit weaknesses and left the banks vulnerable to adverse economic cycles. One of our latest 
discoveries was massive lending to sister companies having fantasy science fiction balance 
sheets or no balance sheet at all. The tantalized regulator wondered whether he or she should 
believe  in  astrologists  or  physicists  in  astronomy.  Non-performing  loans  and  associated 
problems  accumulated  rapidly.  The  attitude  and  behaviour  of  top  management  permeated 
middle  management  and  other  organizational  layers.  A  bad  management  culture  is  very 
difficult to change. The change for the better may take as long as the change for the worse. 
The  regulator  finds  himself  in  an  impossible  position.  From  technical  mismanagement,  the 
defunct  banks  shifted  to  cosmetic  management  and  then  to  desperate  management.  And 
finally, to fraud. It’s a sobering reminder of man’s capacity for folly. 
Ladies and gentlemen, this year a distressed insurance group involved in shadow banking fell 
tragically. At least Rs25 billion, that is, as big as 6 per cent of our 2014 GDP, passed through 
the shadow bank like the proverbial “dose of salts” to elsewhere. The insanity underlying the 
mind-boggling  interest  rates  set  to  deceptively  attract  funds  drove  savers  to  fateful  ‘sweet 
dreams’.  A profile of the holders of the funds in the shadow bank reveals that they were mostly 
households, not necessarily low income households. Those who held the funds as part of their 
portfolio of savings were of course merry and felt wealthy. The ‘wealth effect’ on consumption 
expenditure, particularly on non-essential items, appears to have been significant. The loss of 
wealth seems to have had a dampening effect on consumption of non-essential items this year 
and is likely to last in the months ahead. Along with other developments, this dampening effect 
should be reflected in a narrowing of the current account deficit of our balance of payments. 
In the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, financial stability has assumed much more importance 
than before. Monetary policy transmission mechanism is severely disrupted when a financial 
system is crippled by instability. This is not news to most of you; financial papers are replete 
with discussions on this issue. Regulatory authorities are rightly placing greater emphasis on 
quality  human  capital  in  the  financial  services  industry.  They  have  come  up  with  stringent 
requirements for appointment and accountability of senior officers and board directors. In some 
countries, the UK for instance, appointment for senior positions including appointment of board 
directors has to go through regulatory authorities. In the selection process, in-depth interviews 
of candidates are conducted by the regulatory authorities. This appointment procedure is now 
binding  for  the  financial  services  industry.  Shareholders,  board  directors  and  senior 
management are being called to assume greater responsibility than before. Failure of a bank 
does  not  happen  overnight.  The  politics  of  credit  decision  making  and  other  decisions 
detrimental to a bank are known to the insiders. Over time they build up to a point where the 
bank finally discovers that its capital is seriously impaired, its liquidity position is perilous and 
finally  it  is  insolvent.  The  question  is:  should  such  a  bank  be  bailed  out  without  any 
accountability of the senior officers, directors of the board and shareholders? The latest trend 
is a set of new norms of conduct and accountability for senior officers and directors. They are 
being made personally liable in the event of malfeasance. A major improvement in the culture 
of banks is now an economic necessity.  
To the external auditors of banks, I have a few remarks that I do not believe should be restricted 
to private room conversations. When you make errors, make sure they are errors of judgment, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   not errors of principle. I do not intend to sermonize. We, as regulator, have noted that moral 
compasses of people in the business have been spinning erratically. I would like to share with 
you  a  piece  from  Lectures  on  Jurisprudence  by  the  father  of  Economics,  Adam  Smith. 
"Whenever  commerce  is  introduced  into  any  country,  probity  and  punctuality  always 
accompany it . . . "When people seldom deal with one another, we find that they are somewhat 
disposed to cheat, because they can gain more by a smart trick than they can lose by the injury 
that it does to their character . . . "Wherever dealings are frequent, a man does not expect to 
gain so much by any one contract as by probity and punctuality in the whole, and a prudent 
dealer, who is sensible of his real interest, would rather choose to lose what he has a right to 
than give any ground for suspicion . . . "When the greater part of people are merchants they 
always bring probity and punctuality into fashion, and these therefore are the principle virtues 
of a commercial nation." This was said 240 years ago in Scotland. Someone I know of at Brunel 
University came up with a researched finding that we are undergoing a “cultural shift” in our 
attitudes  to  honesty.  Jurors  hold  widely  different  views  as  to  what  constitutes  dishonest 
behaviour. There is little consistency in the outcome of trials. A defendant could find himself 
convicted  by  one  jury  and  acquitted  by  another.  Jurors  are  asked  to  decide  whether  a 
defendant’s actions are “honest according to the standards of reasonable people”. That always 
seemed to work well enough in the past, but not now. The difference is that we no longer have 
a  universal  standard  for  honesty.  Firms  of  Accountants  do  have  a  universal  standard  of 
conduct.  Like  a  reckless  and  non-performing  schoolboy  who  did  not  do  his  homework,  an 
external auditor has no right to say at trilateral meetings with the regulator that his family dog 
ate his homework. Lately, I personally noted unethical behaviour and signs of rivalries that 
breached professional decency between what appeared to be gangs of external auditors. One 
firm turned into a guerrilla game player in order to grab an even bigger piece of the pie. It was 
an ugly sight. You might not like your neighbour across the street. But is it in your best interest 
to cause his property value to plummet? When external auditors fail in their duties because of 
greed and recklessness, they put an entire financial industry in jeopardy. Greed is good only if 
it leads to honest wealth creation. 
Take due cognizance of what’s happening the world over and in the country. Over the past 
three  years,  there  has  been  a  significant  decline  in  correspondent  banking  facilities.  The 
regions that have been the hardest hit are the Caribbean, Eastern Europe, Central Asia, East 
Asia and especially small jurisdictions with significant offshore banking activities and high-risk 
jurisdictions.  The  threats  posed  by  the  decline  in  correspondent  banking  are  serious. 
Regulators, including the Bank of Mauritius, the Financial Services Commission, the Financial 
Intelligence  Unit  and  most  importantly  external  auditors  of  financial  institutions  have  to  be 
extraordinarily diligent in tracking the nature of financial flows failing which the economy could 
be  seriously  affected.  The  realities  and  challenges  have  been  mutating  fast  due  to  cross-
currents of forces in recent years. I ask external auditors to wake up and smell the coffee; it’s 
a far different coffee. 
I would have very much liked to end this address right now. But I would feel something missing 
if I resume to my seat without highlighting an issue. Our bank supervisors have observed that 
one  of  the  key  reasons  for  loan  delinquency  and  rising  non-performing  loans  is  due  to 
borrowers diverting funds from the main activity for which funds are directed. The ease with 
which  a  client  in  arrears  opens  another  operating account  with  a  new  bank  with  a  view  to 
diverting  funds  for  financing  non-business  related  activities  is  a  serious  concern  from  the 
standpoint of financial stability. Disaster lies in wait for bankers who smoke the same hashish 
they give out to other bankers. It is no doubt the duty of a banking industry to put a stop to 
such diversion of funds. Any well-meaning and competent association of bankers with a sense 
of purpose for the promotion of a robust banking industry ought to have resolved this issue 
already. An effective association of bankers has to be representative of all the banks, not to 
be  a  representative  of  one  or  two  persons.  In  1982,  I  happened  to  be  in  the  campus  of 
l’Université de Bordeaux, France. I was asked by a friend why the guy from Belgium goes to 
sleep with one glass full of water and one empty glass next to his bed. I could not give the 
correct reply. And I was then told that the Belgian guy never knows if he’ll be thirsty or not 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   when he wakes up in the night. When an association of bankers start resembling the Belgian 
guy, I believe it has no raison d’être in our banking industry, more so if issues affecting its own 
members are not resolved in-house. I have been open. I have been frank. I have been candid. 
I  have  been  straightforward.  You  have  choices  to  make.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius,  too,  has 
choices to make. 
Ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the Board of Directors, Members of the Monetary Policy 
Committee, the staff of the Bank and my wife, I extend to you all and your families Happy 
Holidays.  
Thank you. God Bless You. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
