   Sabine Lautenschläger: Stormy times – how is the ECB handling them? 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the 2015 – General Assembly of the Bavarian Economic Advisory Committee, 
Munich, 23 November 2015. 
 Introduction 
State Minister Aigner, 
Dr Wiesheu, 
Professor Zeitler, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me first of all thank you for inviting me to address you, the leading representatives of the 
Bavarian  economy,  here  in  the  Bavarian  capital  Munich.  I  am  very  pleased  to  have  this 
opportunity to speak to you today. 
Munich is no stranger to stormy times, if you think back to the many serious storms and other 
adverse weather conditions that have hit the city over the years. In January 2007 Hurricane 
“Kyrill” took the roof off the Hofbräuhaus. Only a few months later, in August 2007, storms 
began brewing on the international financial markets and, with the collapse of Lehman Brothers 
in autumn 2008, developed into a full blown storm. 
What I’d like to talk about today is how the European Central Bank’s monetary policy has 
responded, and continues to respond, to the stormy times we have been experiencing in the 
euro area and in Germany for more than eight years. 
And in Germany in particular, since the beginning of the financial crisis, there has been much 
discussion about the ECB’s monetary policy. No other euro area country has examined each 
individual monetary policy measure of the ECB as intensively and passionately as Germany. 
This  is  particularly  true  for  the  people  of  Bavaria,  known  for  their  clear  views  and  plain 
speaking. Nowhere have the interest rate cuts, purchase programmes and negative (deposit) 
rates been as widely criticised as here in Bavaria. As I am also fond of plain speaking, I am 
happy to come here to the “den” of the Bavarian lion to discuss the objectives, risks and side-
effects of the ECB’s current monetary policy. We are guided by our objective of ensuring price 
stability. Our actions, and in particular our most recent monetary policy instruments, are not 
without risk. Now is an opportune moment to reflect on the pros and cons of the asset purchase 
programme,  or  “quantitative  easing”.  In  December,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  will 
discuss whether further monetary policy measures are required, such as an expansion of the 
above-mentioned purchase programme. It is therefore time to consider carefully the costs and 
benefits of such an exceptional measure. Now is also an opportune moment to recall to mind 
the  need for  the  national  governments  of the  euro  area countries to create  in  a  sustained 
manner more growth and more jobs through sound budgetary policies and structural reforms 
– which, as a kind of desirable side-effect, would also facilitate the swift return to a normal 
monetary policy: something which is particularly close to my heart. 
On the ECB’s mandate and independence 
In  order  to  penetrate  the  depths  of  monetary  policy,  it  is  important  to  once  again  remind 
ourselves of the ECB’s role and what it needs in order to fulfil its mandate. The ECB’s task is 
to keep the value of money stable in the medium and long term. Our Governing Council has 
set  itself  the  objective  of keeping  inflation  in  the  euro  area  just  under  2%. The  ECB must 
therefore prevent both excessively high inflation and excessively low inflation or even deflation. 
But I will come back to that point later on. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
To achieve this, the ECB needs to be independent; also independent from political influence. 
The independence of central banks is a relatively new, but now undisputed, achievement. The 
Deutsche Bundesbank was the trailblazer in this regard: since 1957 it has been the very model 
of an independent central bank. Since the 1990s most industrialised countries have adopted 
this  model  in  one  form  or  another.  Indeed,  the  ECB  itself  was  also  modelled  on  the 
Bundesbank. 
Why does a central bank need to be independent? On a matter as important as money, people 
justifiably want to see tight controls. History has shown independent central banks to be the 
most  successful  in  keeping  the  value  of  money  stable.  The  underlying  principle  is  that 
responsibility for maintaining price stability should be in the hands of independent experts, 
rather than politicians, who are forced to think in terms of legislative periods and who may be 
tempted to solve problems with the printing press or, at least, to make life slightly easier for 
themselves through excessively low interest rates. Comparative surveys have indeed shown 
significant positive effects of a country’s central bank being accorded independence, such as 
macroeconomic stability and, in particular, lower rates of inflation. 
To enable a central bank to fulfil its mandate of ensuring price stability, it uses monetary policy 
instruments in a way that is designed to have the best possible impact on price developments. 
This  cannot  happen  without  side-effects.  Effective  monetary  policy  has  also  always  had 
unavoidable distributional effects. A change in key interest rates, for example, shifts wealth 
between savers and borrowers: savers get lower interest rates on their deposits with the bank; 
borrowers  can  borrow  at  lower  rates  and  use  the  borrowed  money  to  invest  in  their  own 
business. In addition to these direct effects, there are also indirect effects on economic activity 
and, consequently, on earnings and income from investments. This reallocation concerns not 
only individuals and generations, but also countries. It is therefore understandable that each 
group should try to push monetary policy in a direction favourable to them. 
This is precisely why independence as a protection against interference is so important. A 
central  bank  should  be  able  to  act  independently  of  a  politically  desirable  or  politically 
undesirable  distributional  effect  and  concentrate  solely  on  maintaining  monetary  stability. 
Politicians – our democratically elected representatives – are alone responsible for resolving 
distributional conflicts; such conflicts should not be resolved, for lack of democratic legitimacy, 
through  the  back  door  by  monetary  policy.  If  a  central  bank  were  to  get  involved  in  such 
distributional conflicts, it would become a party in a political dispute and, sooner or later, would 
lose credibility. And every central bank needs credibility to be successful in the long run. 
Subjecting powerful institutions to appropriate controls is an essential feature of democracies. 
With the privilege of independence, a central bank is with good reason exempt from part of the 
control. But independence also means responsibility for the central bank: an unconditional 
responsibility to fulfil its mandate while interpreting the limits of that mandate narrowly and 
respecting them consistently. 
We have felt this responsibility very intensely during the storms of recent years, as we have 
faced the significant challenges posed by the global financial and economic crisis. 
The reasons for the low interest rate policy 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me now turn to the specific monetary policy decisions; decisions 
which have sometimes been poorly understood in Germany and have given rise to concern. I 
will start with our current low interest rate policy. 
Let me be clear straight away: low interest rates are not something that I am enthusiastic about 
– not least because of the associated risks and side-effects. However, the low interest rate at 
present is both necessary and justified. I understand the concerns of German savers, myself 
included, who view the yield on their savings book with very little enthusiasm. Higher interest 
rates  would  permanently  stall  economic  recovery,  and  bring  about  lasting  low  inflation,  a 
persistent economic slowdown and rising unemployment – and this would curb the ability to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   save even more extensively. Moreover, interest on savings deposits also depends on the long-
term economic outlook. And that is determined by the economic conditions and government 
policies in the euro area, and not so much by monetary policy. 
The low key ECB interest rates reflect the persistently low inflation in the euro area, and also 
in Germany. The inflation rate in the euro area since mid-2013 has been below 1%, often well 
below 1%. To give you more precise figures: in October, inflation in the euro area was at 0.1%, 
and at 0.2% in Germany. That is significantly lower than our target of below, but close to, 2%. 
Since the beginning of this year, inflation has hovered around zero. This is certainly, in part, 
due to falling energy prices, which, incidentally, are good for economic growth and can lead us 
back to rising prices. However, even if the inflation rate is adjusted for the highly volatile energy 
prices, it has still been around 1% since autumn 2014, including in Germany. 
When considering monetary stability, I am not one to focus on short-term inflation trends and 
fluctuations, but rather I take a medium- and long-term perspective. The inflation outlook for 
the next few years confirms the low price pressure in the euro area. Our inflation forecast from 
September  puts  inflation  at  1.1%  in  2016  and  1.7%  in  2017.  We  are  therefore  slowly 
approaching our target – also on account of the low interest rate policy. But we are approaching 
that  target  only  very  slowly.  A  reversal  of  the  low  interest  rate  policy  is  therefore  not  yet 
warranted – and there is certainly no question of inflation risk. 
The persistently too low inflation is the result of a protracted economic weakness in which the 
euro area continues to find itself. 
Since the 2008 financial crisis the euro area has experienced two recessions, strictly speaking. 
The deep recession at the turn of year 2008/09 was only partially offset in 2010 and 2011. In 
2012  and  2013,  the  economy  dropped  back  again  and  recovered  only  very  hesitantly 
thereafter. Overall, the gross domestic product (GDP) per capita in the euro area is still 1.5% 
lower than in 2008. There is still a large demand gap and investments are weak. 
Many citizens are not particularly worried when inflation is low for a long time. However, the 
fact  that  not  only  high,  but  also  such  low,  inflation  entails  costs  and  risks  is  sometimes 
overlooked. 
Moderate inflation lubricates the economy by facilitating adjustments in relative prices and, 
above all, in wages. Price and wage adjustments are among the most important instruments 
for companies to improve their competitiveness. Studies show, however, that firms lower their 
wages only very rarely in absolute terms; instead, they do not increase their employees’ pay. 
In times of normal inflation of about 2%, this works quite well, as Germany showed in the first 
decade of this millennium. However, when inflation is excessively low competition will not allow 
wages to soar either and the adjustment process is delayed. Low inflation thus holds back the 
sometimes necessary adjustment in relative wages and prices. Rigid wage structures, higher 
unemployment and lower economic growth are the result. 
It is not only the cyclical factors that currently speak in favour of low interest rates. There are 
also global trends which affect the euro area and from which we cannot escape. Since the mid-
1990s global real interest rates, i.e. inflation-adjusted interest rates, irrespective of the policies 
of the respective central bank, have been falling. Real interest rates on ten-year government 
bonds fell from 4% in the mid-1990s to 2% in 2007. To make it clear once again: this decrease 
occurred before the crisis and has nothing to do with the subsequent cuts in interest rates. The 
main  reasons  for  the  fall  in  real  interest  rates  are  the  demographic  development  in  the 
industrialised countries and the catching-up process in emerging countries such as China. 
People there, for the first time, are enjoying increasing prosperity and can save for the first 
time. This leads to high savings and the interest rate falls further as a result of the plentiful 
supply of savings. All of this has caused us to reduce the key interest rate to close to zero, like 
the central banks of almost all industrialised countries. Compared with other central banks, we 
have been relatively cautious in handling this instrument. We left the main refinancing rate, i.e. 
the key rate, at 1% until the end of 2011 and then, with the start of the recession in 2012, 
lowered it further. Since the beginning of the initial turbulence in August 2007 and especially 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
since the collapse of Lehman Brothers in October 2008 we have done a lot to supply banks 
with liquidity; we have not only provided unlimited liquidity in our refinancing operations, but 
also extended their maturity by up to three years. 
Determining the key rate and liquidity for banks are among the standard tasks of monetary 
policy. Yes, the current rates are exceptionally low and the liquidity for banks exceptionally 
generous. However, that is justified in view of the economic climate. There can be no doubt, 
therefore, that with its low interest rate policy the ECB is operating within the framework of its 
mandate. 
The risks and side-effects of the low interest rate policy 
Ladies and gentlemen, I briefly mentioned earlier that the low interest rate policy also has risks 
and side-effects. Nothing is free in life. That applies to monetary policy as well. That’s why it’s 
important to keep a close eye on the cost of certain measures and to always weigh them up 
against the benefits. But what costs or, more precisely, what risks are we are talking about? 
Low interest rates create false incentives since they reduce the pressure on the respective 
governments to make savings and reforms. And reforms are what the euro area needs. The 
lower interest burden and the possibility of new borrowing at favourable rates make it easier 
for the euro area Member States to service their debts. This may lead to a relaxation of reform 
efforts by governments. 
The situation becomes more difficult when it’s more than a matter of easing the government’s 
debt  burden  but  if  the  debt  level  of  government  budgets  continues to  grow  during  the  low 
interest phase. Then, in the worst case, a point can be reached at which the exit from the 
expansionary monetary policy becomes a problem – that is to say, if the increase in the key 
rate could lead more or less automatically to a government debt crisis. In such a situation, the 
central bank might find itself compelled to keep government debt sustainable. Monetary policy 
would then have been subordinated to budgetary policy and would have lost its freedom of 
action to maintain price stability. 
The euro area now consists of 19 Member States. The sovereign debt crises of recent years 
show that the ECB comes under pressure to act in such a position. Due to the close national 
links between government finances and banks, the banks in the crisis countries also came 
under pressure. Market participants were concerned that a state in financial difficulties might 
not have the resources to support the banks in its jurisdiction. At the same time, a country with 
ailing public finances and a faltering economy does not offer the best earnings prospects for 
the banks operating there. Following this logic, the money and capital markets cut off funding 
for  banks  in  economically  weak  countries  –  although  the  banks  as  such  might  have  been 
sound. In this situation, the Governing Council found itself obliged to offer the above-mentioned 
long-term refinancing operations in order to support the banks there and continue to ensure 
the  functioning  of  monetary  policy.  Not  least,  the  fact  that  the  political  decision-making 
processes in Europe were, and still are, rather cumbersome added to the pressure on the ECB 
to act. 
A second risk and cost factor arising from lower interest rates are possible disincentives and 
distortions in financial markets, which threaten financial stability. In the low interest rate phase, 
banks and investors only obtain low margins with their usual business. They are tempted to 
increase the low returns by building up riskier positions. To that end, they either buy riskier 
paper or expand their balance sheets. Such an increase in risk appetite can lead to asset price 
bubbles on the financial markets and excessive borrowing. 
All this continues smoothly as long as the interest rates remain low and prices are fuelled by 
central bank purchases. But an unexpected event can occur at any time, be it a political crisis 
or  surprisingly  poor  economic  data;  turbulence  on  the  financial  markets  are  the  inevitable 
outcome.  These  are  all  the  more  intense  the  more  imbalanced  and  risky  the  portfolios  of 
investors are. We experienced that before the crisis: for example, in the case of US subprime 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
mortgages. By fuelling the risk appetite of investors, overly expansionary monetary policy can 
sow the seeds for the next crisis on the financial markets. In a phase of low rates it is therefore 
particularly important to pay attention to the stability of the financial markets. 
Of course, those investors who are obliged to invest long-term and risk-free especially find 
themselves  under  pressure.  This  applies  in  particular  to  pension  funds  and  life  insurance 
companies, which need to cover long-term insurance commitments. 
This brings me to the third cost factor, the distributional effects of the expansionary monetary 
policy. In Germany and elsewhere, there are repeated complaints that the low interest rates 
are at the expense of savers. And it’s true that anyone who has his money in his savings book 
is suffering at present. 
But when one talks about the effects of the low interest rate policy, one should not only mention 
the cost factors. Let us consider some selected side effects, positive ones, that occur. Many 
home builders directly benefit from the low interest rates – even in Bavaria. And also small, 
medium-sized  and  large  enterprises,  of  which  fortunately  there  are  many  in  Bavaria,  can 
borrow cheaply to invest, to increase their market share and create employment. And the low 
interest  rate  policy  also  benefits  Bavaria  indirectly:  let’s  not  forget  that  Bavaria  is  one  of 
Europe’s most successful regions with its internationally oriented economy. More than half of 
the exports of Bavaria’s industry go to the euro area. Therefore, the low interest rates not only 
stabilise  the  economy  in  the  euro  area,  but  also  ensure  Bavaria’s  exports  and  thus  also 
Bavarian jobs. 
And on the subject of positive side effects, we should not overlook the advantages that German 
taxpayers gain from the low interest rate policy; they are the ones paying lower taxes because 
the German Government can refinance itself at more favourable rates. 
All this does not mean, of course, that I wish to play down the difficulties savers face in finding 
appropriate forms of saving. On the contrary. But I fear that we will for some time have to adapt 
to low real interest rates, even after the end of the expansionary monetary policy and beyond 
the control of a central bank. The reasons for this are the aforementioned major global trends, 
notably the demographic developments and the so-called “savings glut”. 
Low real interest rates are neither solely the result of the ECB’s policy nor are they unusual 
from a historical perspective. As I have already indicated, the low real interest rates are partly 
the result of shifts in global savings and investments, i.e. developments beyond the control of 
the ECB. And there have also been prolonged episodes of negative real interest rates in the 
past:  in  Germany,  for  example,  the  real  returns  on  savings  between  1974  and  1981  and 
between 1989 and 1994 were almost always negative. Many people  were unaware of this 
because the nominal interest rates were higher – but inflation was even higher. 
Let me summarise my comments on the low interest rate policy. For me, the low interest rate 
policy was and is the appropriate response to the persistently too low inflation rate. I may not 
like  low  interest  rates,  but they  are  necessary  to  support  economic  growth  and  thereby to 
achieve the objective of price stability. In the same way, the programmes to supply liquidity to 
the banking industry were suitable to restore the monetary policy transmission mechanism and 
to relieve the banking industry. After careful consideration of the risks and benefits, I regard 
these standard measures as being appropriate. Although the risks associated with them are 
undeniable, with both monetary policy instruments the benefits currently outweigh the costs. 
Quantitative easing 
Ladies and gentlemen, I would, of course, not wish to leave Munich without talking about the 
purchase of assets – in particular government bonds – by the ECB. This purchase programme 
has caused quite a stir in Germany and attracted a great deal of controversy. A programme 
which in many countries of this world is regarded as a sensible instrument in the arsenal of a 
central bank is, for historical, economic, political and legal reasons, the target of fundamental 
criticisms in Germany. I think we could fill a whole seminar explaining why a large proportion 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
of the German public is so sceptical about this programme. I don’t want to do that here, but I 
would like to put on record that I share the impression of many people both inside and outside 
of Germany that, with the massive purchase of assets, the ECB has entered into a new era of 
its existence; in so doing, the ECB has assumed a new form. However, before we get lost in a 
philosophical  discussion  about  the  role  of  a  central  bank,  let  us  return  to  the  very  real 
programme of the ECB. 
As you know, in 2014 we cut key interest rates further – and, at minus 20 basis points, even 
took the deposit rate into negative territory. Our measures did not have an immediate impact 
– which was not to be expected – and both inflation and inflation expectations continued to fall 
initially. In the light of this, and following intensive discussions, the Governing Council decided 
in January 2015 to launch an asset purchase programme, also known as “quantitative easing”. 
The ECB programme currently foresees the purchase of securities to a value of €60 billion per 
month until at least September 2016. The purchases in the secondary market primarily consist 
of government bonds, but also include covered bonds and asset-backed securities. So far the 
Eurosystem has acquired government bonds to a value of €419 billion, covered bonds to a 
value of €134 billion and asset-backed securities to a value of €14 billion. There is a direct joint 
European liability for 20% of the purchased assets. The rest of the risk from the purchased 
securities falls on the respective national central bank. 
With the purchases, the Governing Council aims to clearly signal its determination to achieve 
its goal of price stability. It wants to put further downward pressure on interest rates in the euro 
area and expects corporations and private households to make use of the favourable interest 
rate  environment  to  issue  bonds  or  take  up  loans.  It  is  hoped  that  this  investment  and 
consumption will stimulate the economy. This should restore the inflation rate to close to 2%. 
There are doubts among the general public in Germany about whether the benefits of the 
purchase  programmes  outweigh  the  costs.  The  criticism  is  often  made  that,  unlike  for  our 
interest rate instrument, there are no reliable empirical data on the effect of the purchases. The 
benefit of quantitative easing is called into question. In fact, we can identify the first positive 
effects on financing conditions in the euro area. However, there is uncertainty about how large 
the effects actually are. 
It is also pointed out that the potential benefits are also accompanied by risks. Because there 
is no historical comparison for the effects of such a broad programme in the euro area, these 
risks are, in part, difficult to assess and almost impossible to quantify. The already mentioned 
side-effects of the low interest rate policy – wrong incentives for governments, financial market 
stability and distribution effects – are even more acute in the case of quantitative easing. 
Further monetary policy easing? 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me briefly summarise what has been said so far: I have explained 
to you why I consider the low interest rate policy to be necessary and the risks it creates for 
financial market stability and the sustainability of fiscal policy. One thing, however, is crucial: 
there are limits to expansive monetary policy. It buys time, but does not heal the structural 
causes of the sluggish economic recovery in the euro area and the persistently weak inflation 
trend.  Like  any  medicine,  the  beneficial  effects  of  monetary  policy  measures  decline  with 
continued use, while the undesirable side-effects increase. And over-use can lead to the result 
that the patient feels well and no longer works on the causes of the illness. In that case, long-
term harm cannot be ruled out. 
Even though less than a year has passed since the decision to launch the quantitative easing 
programme, new measures are being considered, such as the expansion of the programme. 
Although certain successes of the programme are visible in the financial markets (for example, 
in the form of lower interest rates for long-term borrowing) the hopes of a rapid normalisation 
of medium-term inflation expectations have not yet been fulfilled. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
However, this raises two questions. Are the inflation and economic outlooks so bad that new 
measures  are  needed?  And  how  effective  can  further  monetary  policy  measures  be,  in 
particular an expansion of the programme, in the current situation? 
For me, it is clear. At the moment I see no grounds for further monetary policy measures, 
particularly not for an expansion of the purchase programme. For me, nothing has changed 
with regard to the imbalance between the benefits and risks of such a measure. This applies 
in particular because our programme is in full swing and, as with any monetary policy measure, 
it takes time for the effects to appear in the credit conditions for corporations and households. 
Besides, in my view, the economic situation in the euro area has not fundamentally worsened 
when compared with January. According to the ECB’s September forecasts, economic growth 
in the euro area will increase from 0.9% last year to 1.4% this year. The rate of inflation, which 
this year is just above 0%, is forecast to rise to 1.1% next year and 1.7% in 2017. And the 
Survey of Professional Forecasters indicates an expected rate of inflation of 1.9%. 
The  data  of  recent  weeks  suggest  that,  so  far,  the  economy  in  the  euro  area  has  shown 
resistance to the uncertainties in the global economy. In addition, there are the effects of low 
energy prices, which have led to growth in real incomes and consumption. The low cost of 
financing for corporations and households is being reflected in an expansion of lending. 
All of this together is evidence that the euro area is not in a situation in which there is no 
alternative to further monetary policy easing. With our low interest rate policy, the current scale 
of the purchase programme and the forward guidance on interest rates, we are already taking 
sufficient account of the weak economic outlook, including negative structural factors such as 
demographic trends,  public  finances  and financial  sector  adjustments. We should  give  the 
numerous and, together, powerful monetary policy measures time to take their full effect. 
For me, it goes without saying that particular caution must be exercised in connection with 
unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  on  such  a  massive  scale;  the  potential  benefits 
must be even more carefully balanced against the associated risks and costs. In particular, I 
fear that, with future increases, ever greater resources will be needed to achieve the same 
effect. 
An expansion of the monetary policy stimulus is therefore, in my opinion, overshooting the 
target. For me, this would only be justified as a last resort to combat an exceptional danger, 
such as the previously mentioned deflation. However, we are a long way from such dangers. 
In the discussion, we should also not forget to ask about the reasons for the current weak 
growth. Subdued investment – and you know this better than me – is not only due to poor 
financing conditions. Often, the causes are structural economic conditions and the situation 
and regulation of the labour market. This is where action is required in order to encourage 
investment. 
Let me therefore talk now about the conditions which are necessary for strong growth and 
employment and which therefore, incidentally, could contribute to price stability and normality 
in monetary policy. You can see where I’m going. How can budgetary and structural policy 
contribute to bringing our difficult monetary policy path to a successful conclusion? I will devote 
the rest of my speech to this question of appropriate framework conditions. 
A framework for the return to normal monetary policy 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  I  have  explained,  the  ECB  responds  to  the  overall  economic 
situation in the euro area. The economy is subject to the usual fluctuations. Monetary policy 
must, of course, respond appropriately to this. However, the euro area is not only suffering 
from economic weakness, but also has structural problems that are hampering its economic 
development.  I  am  speaking  about  inflexible  labour  markets,  complex  tax  systems,  slow 
insolvency proceedings, unsustainably financed welfare systems and much more. All of this is 
like lead boots slowing down our economic recovery. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   
Monetary policy is largely powerless to deal with structural problems. All that we can do in 
Frankfurt with regard to structural reforms is to buy valuable time. Because the effect of our 
measures declines over time, politicians must make use of the time bought by the ECB. Only 
fundamental reforms will lead to a structural economic recovery in the euro area and thus 
create the basis for a sustainable economic upturn. When this recovery is foreseeable, it will 
finally be possible for the ECB to end its expansive monetary policy. 
Many countries in the euro area have achieved remarkable things in the area of structural 
reforms in recent years, making huge social sacrifices. Examples such as Ireland, Portugal, 
Spain and Cyprus show that the reform efforts pay. For example, after three years of recession, 
the  Cypriot  economy  will  grow  again  this  year,  and  the  country’s  budgetary  position  is 
improving more quickly than expected. Ireland, Spain and Portugal are expecting a current 
account surplus this year – as much as 3% in the case of Ireland. Admittedly, we’re not quite 
out of the woods yet, and we still have a long road ahead, but there are encouraging signs. 
However, on the subject of structural reforms, we should not only focus on far flung horizons, 
but also look closer to home. Germany should lead by example. As a recent OECD study 
describes, this has not always been the case recently. Germany too has structural problems 
which need to be addressed. Examples of these include the lack of sustainable funding of the 
pension  system,  inadequate  investment  in transport  infrastructure,  and a  reform  of the  tax 
system, to mention but a few. Even Bavaria should not rest on the laurels of the past, but 
should maintain the ambition to defend its leading position. Decisive reforms will create the 
basis for growth and better future prospects in the euro area. Rising investment will increase 
demand for labour, leading to rising wages and, indirectly, rising prices. This will not only bring 
an end to the low interest rates that are causing many of us such a headache, but we will again 
have an economically healthy and strong Europe of which we can all be proud. 
Many thanks for your patience and your attention! 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
