   François Groepe: The role of small business in the economy 
Address by Mr François Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
AHI  conference  on  “The  role  of  business  in  local  government  and  local  economic 
development”, organised by the George Business Chamber, George, 9 October 2015. 
 Introduction 
It is an honour and a great pleasure for me to speak at the AHI conference, not least since I 
firmly  believe  that  small  business  plays  a critical  role  in  a  thriving  economy. When  viewed 
through an evolutionary lens, small business can make two indispensable contributions to an 
economy.  Firstly,  it  is  an  integral  part  in  the  renewal  process  that  pervades  and  defines  a 
market economy as it plays a crucial role in innovation that supports technological change and 
productivity growth. In the second instance, small business is an essential conduit whereby 
millions of people enter the economic and social mainstream of a society, and is particularly 
adapt at creating opportunities for women, immigrants and minority groups.1 
The domestic and global economy 
Current economic conditions and trends to a large extent shape the environment within which 
business has to function. Allow me therefore to highlight a number of key developments that 
have a bearing on our business environment. 
Ever  since  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in 
September 2008, the world economy has been struggling to regain robust growth momentum. 
Advanced economies have generally recorded subdued performance, with activity in the euro 
area  and  Japan  particularly  sluggish.  This  disappointing  state  of  affairs  has  continued 
notwithstanding  expansionary  monetary  and  fiscal  policies.  Ultra-stimulatory  monetary 
policies, with policy interest rates close to zero, have been sustained in the United States, the 
United Kingdom, the euro area and Japan for more than half a decade. Financial markets are 
awaiting the first upward movement in the US policy rate with bated breath and which is likely 
to be within the next six months. 
Growth in developing economies has been stronger than in advanced economies, as may be 
expected. China in particular has played an important role to ameliorate the slowdown in the 
advanced economies’ growth rate in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, and with its 
high propensity to invest in commodity-intensive  capital projects has lent strong support to 
commodity markets. Recently, however, economic growth in China has started to decelerate 
while  at  the  same  time  the  composition  of  domestic  expenditure  has  begun  to  shift  from 
commodity-intensive investment to less commodity-intensive consumption. This structural shift 
has acted as a drag on commodity prices. The South African Reserve Bank estimates that the 
price of a basket of South African export commodities like gold, platinum and coal has declined 
by 20 per cent in US dollar terms over the past 12 months to September 2015. 
South Africa’s economic growth has disappointed in recent years. In 2014, real gross domestic 
product (or GDP) growth registered 1,5 per cent and the latest projections estimate that real 
GDP growth in 2015 will also be around 1,5 per cent. This falls short of the estimated population 
growth of 1,6 per cent, The slow growth outcomes have been registered despite expansionary 
monetary and fiscal policies, and mainly relate to a number of structural impediments in the 
                                                
1   Zoltan, J. (ed.) 1999. “Chapter 1: The new American revolution”. In Are small firms important? Their role and 
impact. New York: Springer Science + Business Media. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   South African economy, such as the electricity constraints; the small pool of skilled labour and 
certain infrastructure bottlenecks. 
Several sectors experienced contractions in output volumes in the second quarter of 2015. In 
the case of agriculture, this was the result of drought which reduced the size of the maize crop 
by about 30 per cent from that of the previous year. The electricity sector suffered from a lack 
of capacity as unplanned maintenance disrupted supply, resulting in numerous instances of 
load-shedding.  This  in  turn  contributed  to  a  reduction  in  manufacturing  and  mining  output, 
exacerbating the impact of already lustreless domestic and global demand. 
As could be expected in an environment of slow growth, employment creation has also been 
weak recently. For instance, underlying employment in the formal sectors of the economy has 
declined by 0,3 per cent over the year to the second quarter of 2015, taking out the distortion 
arising  from  the  election-related  130  000  temporary  government  employees  added  to  the 
second-quarter 2014 base level of employment. Employment declines have been concentrated 
in the goods-producing part of the economy while services employment has been more stable. 
Overall, unemployment remains elevated at around 25 per cent of the workforce. 
The international price of oil have more than halved since mid-2014 causing inflation outcomes 
in South Africa to have been favourably affected, with the most recent reading of the consumer 
price inflation rate, at 4,6 per cent, quite close to the midpoint of the 3–6 per cent inflation target 
range. However, due to base effects, 12-month inflation is expected to pick up notably in the 
coming  months  and  to  exceed  6  per  cent  in  2016.  This  does  not  leave  much  room  for 
complacency in monetary policy as prices are known to be sticky and inflation expectations 
remain stubbornly entrenched around the upper end of the inflation target range. The South 
African Reserve Bank continues to be in a tightening cycle and has raised the repurchase rate 
by a cumulative one percentage point since early 2014 to its current level of 6 per cent. Despite 
this tightening, monetary policy remains broadly accommodating, with the real repurchase rate 
remaining close to 0 per cent. 
The public sector has, over the past six years, stepped up its capital expenditure to alleviate 
the bottlenecks in the economy – a welcome development. South African households have 
simultaneously raised their consumption expenditure. Both capital and consumption spending 
have  a  high  import  content,  directly  or  indirectly,  with  the  result  that  imports  have  been 
elevated. At the same time, exports were held back by certain structural impediments, as well 
as by deteriorating export prices. Accordingly, the deficit on the current account of the balance 
of payments has exceeded 5 per cent of GDP since 2012. These large deficits reflected a 
considerable depreciation in the real (i.e. inflation-adjusted) effective exchange rate of the rand 
since mid-2011, when the rand traded at less than R8 to the US dollar. However, the deficits 
have continued to be financed by savings from abroad as non-residents continue to invest in 
South African assets. 
Only  more  recently,  in  the  second  quarter  of  2015,  has  the  deficit  on  the  current  account 
narrowed to 3,1 per cent of GDP – an improvement due to a number of factors, which include 
a reduction in industrial action, additional exports met by drawing down inventories, the lower 
oil price, and the impact of the sustained lower exchange value of the rand. 
In the banking sector, conditions have remained stable, with the banks adequately capitalised. 
Overall credit extension growth in the banking sector remains slow, consistent with the state 
of the economy. Loans to businesses are growing at a moderate double-digit rate, with brisk 
increases in lending to firms engaged in green energy projects. Loans to the household sector 
are also growing, albeit at a low single-digit pace, with microlending activity particularly weak. 
Following a long period of negligible growth, the pace of increase in mortgage credit has started 
to firm in recent months. 
With global interest rates still relatively low, share prices continued to rally. On the JSE, share 
prices reached record highs in the second quarter of 2015 but have subsequently receded as 
growth projections for China weakened which in turn contributed to the Chinese share market 
correcting from the exuberant levels previously reached. Further contributing factors included 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   softer commodity prices and expectations of an imminent increase in US interest rates. Despite 
the downward correction, South African price-earnings ratios still seem to be on the demanding 
side when compared to historical trends. South African house prices have continued to rise 
over the past year, but at a subdued single-digit rate. 
Ever since the onset of the global financial crisis, South Africa’s public finances have been 
growth-supportive.  Caution  about  the  upward  trend  in  government  debt  has  prompted 
authorities  to  adopt  a  programme  of  gradual  reduction  in  the  deficit,  both  through  capping 
expenditure and through raising additional revenue. This has been somewhat complicated by 
the  weakening  in  international  commodity  prices  and  the  subdued  domestic  and  global 
economy, resulting in downward pressure on tax collections and the extension of the original 
fiscal consolidation timeframe. 
Small business in the economy 
“Small business” is difficult to define. In South Africa’s National Small Business Act, passed in 
1996, the definitions provide for “micro enterprises” to have fewer than 5 employees, “very 
small  businesses”  to  have  6  to  20,  “small  businesses”  to  have  21  to  50,  and  “medium 
businesses” to have fewer than 200 employees.2 
Government has recently raised the status of its small business initiatives with the creation, in 
2014,  of  a  department  dedicated  to  this  cause:  the  Department  of  Small  Business 
Development, under the political leadership of Minister Lindiwe Zulu, with an annual budget of 
approximately R1 billion. Previously, programmes dealing with small business development 
fell under the Department of Trade and Industry and the Economic Development Department. 
Estimates of the contribution of small, medium and micro enterprises (SMMEs) to the economy 
vary. In terms of contribution to GDP, an estimate of 52 to 57 per cent has been quoted by the 
Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry, Elizabeth Thabethe, who put the number of SMMEs in 
South  Africa  at  2,8  million  and  their  contribution  to  employment  at  60  per  cent.  Moreover, 
looking ahead, the National Development Plan projects that, by 2030, no less than 90 per cent 
of new jobs will be created in small and expanding firms. 
Small  business,  furthermore  forms  part  of  the  backbone  of  a  thriving  society.  In  order  to 
survive, it has little choice but to be versatile, innovative and entrepreneurial as SMMEs seldom 
have  a  monopoly.  Hence,  SMMEs  are  often  subjected  to  fierce  competition  with  scant 
opportunities to extract rents. This, by necessity brings out the best in them. 
Innovation 
Innovation is not the exclusive domain of small business as many forms and kinds of innovation 
require economies of scale, large investments in research and development, and the ability to 
bear out long periods to gestation and regulatory approval. But there are numerous examples 
of small businesses that have sufficient talent to produce significant and bankable innovations. 
Being nimble, lean and hungry supports executional excellence, as is borne out by the garage 
innovators of Silicon Valley and the swimming-pool equipment innovators of South Africa. 
South Africa, however does have some way to go on the innovation front. The IMD3 World 
Competitiveness Yearbook 2015, for instance, shows that South Africans register very few 
patents. With the 2 211 patent applications filed by South Africans in 2013, the country comes 
out  at  number  49  out  of  61  countries  in  the  “patent  applications  per  capita”  category  of 
competitiveness measurement. Total expenditure on research and development at 0,73 per 
                                                
2   This is a rough approximation because the National Small Business Act in fact provides for different numbers 
depending on the industry, and also introduces turnover and total asset value criteria. 
Institute for Management Development. 
3  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   cent of GDP puts South Africa at number 46 out of the 61 countries ranked by the IMD, with 
Israel  topping  the  list  with  4,2  per  cent  of  GDP.  South  Africa  also  lags  on  the  number  of 
computers per capita criterion – at 195 computers per 1 000 people, it occupies place number 
53 out of 61, with the US leading the way at a ratio of 1 111 per 1 000 people. 
Incidentally, on the overall competitiveness scoreboard, the IMD ranks South Africa 53rd out 
of the 61 countries ranked. Of the BRICS countries, only Brazil, at number 56, is below South 
Africa. The US, China and Singapore occupy the first three places. 
Entrepreneurship 
Significant changes in relative prices signal great entrepreneurial opportunities. An example is 
the sharp reduction in the relative prices of information technology as well as communication 
goods and services, the huge opportunities which they created, and the impressive way in 
which entrepreneurs – worldwide – have responded to these opportunities. 
In South Africa too, our IT entrepreneurs continue to scale new heights. An opportunity which 
is worthwhile bearing in mind relates to the big changes in the exchange rate of the rand, i.e. 
the relative price of producing goods and services locally rather than elsewhere. A domestic 
wine exporter selling a bottle of wine for US$5 would have pocketed R37 five years ago; today 
they would realise R69. 
The  entrepreneurial  response  –  expanding  exports  and  substituting  imports  –  is  probably 
initially muted due to what the academic literature attributes to lags in both consumers’ and 
producers’ responses and imperfect competition. Given the state of the world economy, the 
probability of a strong recovery in the international prices of South African export commodities 
in the near term seems low, which should assist the real exchange rate of the rand to remain 
relatively  competitive.  In  addition,  entrepreneurs  can  use  hedging  strategies  to  lock  in  the 
advantages of a certain set of relative prices for lengthy periods; for example, in South Africa 
there  is  an  active  market  for  forward  cover  in  foreign  exchange,  with  outright  forward 
transactions against the rand fluctuating at around US$1,7 billion and swap transactions at 
around US$13 billion per day. I am therefore confident that the adjustment towards external 
balance will gain further momentum and it is supported by the fact that export volumes have 
risen more briskly than the pace of global growth in the first half of 2015. 
To incubate entrepreneurship, South Africa needs bold improvements in the education and 
school system. Interestingly enough, South Africa’s total public expenditure on education as a 
percentage of GDP, at 7,0 per cent, puts the country in the third-highest position among the 
61 countries ranked, with only Denmark and Iceland above it. However, the amount spent per 
capita gives a dramatically different result, pushing South Africa down to the 42nd position on 
the  IMD  ranking.  Education  outcomes  in  South  Africa  do  however  show  room  for  further 
improvements in support of enhancing the small business sector as well as in the interest of 
long-term economic growth and developments. 
The role of the South African Reserve Bank (the “Bank”) 
The Bank is responsible for monetary policy in  South Africa. It has been given the task of 
protecting  the  purchasing  power  of  our  money  in  the  interest  of  balanced  and  sustainable 
economic growth and development. Apart from ensuring price stability, it also plays a key role 
in maintaining an environment of financial stability. 
Since 2000 the task of protecting the purchasing power of our money has been given clearer 
definition, with government adopting an inflation-targeting framework. The target has been set 
at 3 to 6 per cent, and the Bank has instrument independence to do what is necessary with its 
repurchase rate to ensure that inflation remains inside the target band. In doing so, the Bank 
is mindful of the lag between changes in the repurchase rate and inflation, and of the need to 
avoid unnecessary volatility in output. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Since 2002, when the inflation target became effective, the targeted rate of consumer price 
inflation has averaged 6,1 per cent to date. In the preceding two decades, consumer price 
inflation averaged 12,3 per cent. Furthermore, the more gradualist approach facilitated by the 
adoption of flexible inflation targeting can be inferred from the range within which the banks’ 
prime lending rate fluctuated over the respective periods. Under inflation targeting, the prime 
rate has ranged between 8,5 and 17 per cent per annum. In the two decades prior to that, it 
ranged between 9,5 and 25,5 per cent. 
Small businesses often lack the financial reserves and facilities of the large business sector. 
Accordingly, large swings in interest rates and inflation can be far more crippling to the SMME 
sector. It follows  that keeping  inflation  low  and stable,  and  therefore  being  in  a  position  to 
prevent  sharp  swings  in  interest  rates,  is  the  contribution  that  the  Bank  can  make  to  the 
financial health of the country and of SMMEs in particular. This is complemented by the role 
of the Bank in making sure that the financial system is safe and sound, while allowing for the 
orderly entry and exit of financial institutions. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  let  me  firstly  emphasise  that  the  current  environment  is  testing  for  small 
businesses. With agricultural output and mineral commodity prices down, the spending power 
arising from agriculture and mining-based communities and enterprises is under considerable 
downward pressure. This also triggers various multipliers and accelerators in the economy, 
working in reverse gear and extending the pain to other sectors, capital expenditure and the 
like. 
Secondly,  every  opportunity  should  be  grasped  and,  as  indicated  above,  the  depreciated 
external value of the rand may be one such opportunity, bringing about more attractive relative 
prices  of  exports  and  import-substituting  goods  and  services.  Agile  businesses  that  can 
respond appropriately stand to benefit. 
Thirdly, to grow the number of small businesses in the country the education system has an 
important  role  to  play  by  raising  the  level  of  skills  among  the  workforce  and  empowering 
potential entrepreneurs to realise that potential. 
Finally, the growth and indeed the flourishing of small business is key to our future. The South 
African Reserve Bank is conscious of its enabling role as the provider of a stable platform for 
price and financial stability in this regard. With its commitment to well-contained inflation that 
feeds  into  less  volatility  in  interest  rates  and  maintaining  an  environment  of  stability  in  the 
financial system, the Bank hopes to provide small business with at least one less thing to worry 
about. 
References 
Zoltan J. (ed) 1999. Chapter 1: “The New American Revolution” in Are Small Firms Important? 
Their Role and Impact. Springer Science + Business Media, New York. 
Institute for Management Development. 2015. IMD World Competitiveness Yearbook 2015. 
Institute for Management Development, Lausanne, Switzerland. 
Maye,  M.  2014.  Small  Business  in  South  Africa:  What  the  Department  of  Small  Business 
Development Can Do to Stimulate Growth. Southern African Catholic Bishops’ Conference 
Parliamentary Liaison Office. Occasional Paper 35. Cape Town. September 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
