  Gent Sejko: Rethinking economic policies and central banks’ 
methodologies 
Speech  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  9th  Workshop  of 
Economic Research in Southeastern Europe, Tirana, 4 December 2015. 
 Distinguished guests, Workshop participants, Ladies and Gentlemen 
I consider it a privilege to address you all for the opening of the 9th South Eastern European 
Economic Workshop, here in Tirana. In line with the tradition of this event, we once again 
attempt to complement the need for research with the need for policy novelties. Please allow 
me  to  say  that  judging  from  the  contributions  and  the  presence  in  this  workshop,  I  am 
confident that this event will fulfill its commitments and expectations and provide all of us with 
useful and practical lessons. 
It is important to emphasize the global and national economic background in which this event 
takes  place  and  these  are  very  difficult  times.  The  global  recession  remains  present.  The 
European  core  was  shaken  not only  by  events  in  Greece,  but  also  in  Spain,  Portugal  and 
Italy,  and  remains  fragile.  The  recent  developments  from  the  Middle  East  will  add  to 
hardships  and  overstretch  available  resources.  Therefore,  economic  activity  might  take  a 
longer  time  to  return  to  its  previous  glorious  days.  Despite  the  fact  that  our  region  has 
managed  to  remain  on  the  positive  side  of  economic  growth,  the  hardships  were  quick  to 
reach  us  as  well.  Economic  and  income  growth  is  not  what  it  used  to  be  and  inflation 
continues to break new low records. 
Central  banking  has  received  its  share  of  challenges  and  hardships  as  well.  Continuous 
standard  monetary  policy  easing  was  coupled  with  micro  and  macroprudential  policy 
interventions. Even interventions like quantitative-easing in the euro area were brought into 
attention and implemented, but still the general economy seems slow to react properly. 
Furthermore, the issue is not about monetary policy alone. The non-standard interventions 
(micro  and  macroprudential  policies)  require  special  attention  and  resource  allocation  in 
order  to  properly  manage  their  implementation  and  impact  on  the  general  economy. 
Additionally, maintaining financial stability requires additional central bank to prevent possible 
negative spillovers from the financial sector toward other areas of the economy. 
In  short,  the  general  economic  difficulties  have  placed  central  banking  at  a  cross-road  in 
relation to its principles, policies and management. Moreover, even though the requirement 
to  maintain  price  stability  remains  appealing,  dangers  do  not  occur  only  from  inflation. 
Exchange rate fluctuations have provided additional hazards, particularly  within economies 
where foreign currency transactions dominate. 
Additionally, financial stability challenges are present even at higher levels. Credit demand 
reaction  to  continuous  monetary  policy  stimulus  has  been  sluggish,  reflecting  the  poor 
expectations of consumers and enterprises on future developments. Supplementary easing 
of the general requirements for obtaining credits did not have the expected impact and that 
can be observed in the recent dynamics of aggregate demand components. Unquestionably, 
financial agents are into profit making and it is their duty to search and find alternative clients 
if the traditional end-users are unwilling or uncommitted to new credit. Besides that, the need 
for financing will stimulate end-users to search and find alternative sources. This raises the 
question at more strategic levels associated with credit efficiency allocation and informality. 
Allocation  deficiencies  tend  to  intensify  in  times  of  crises  reflecting  usually  a  condition  of 
over-lending  in  certain  sectors,  which  are  most  probably  with  poor  spillover  effects  on  the 
rest  of  the  economy.  In  the  meantime,  the  sectors  that  are  truly  productive  might  remain 
detached from financial sources, thus with little stimulus to move forward. Even worse, these 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  sectors  might  address  to  informal  lenders  to  compensate  for  their  financial  needs.  This  is 
also  an  activity  that  booms  in  times  of  crisis  and,  since  these  activities  are  entirely 
unmonitored by financial regulators, they could dangerously harm and diminish the ability of 
financial regulators to influence the economy at large. 
Having  mentioned  all  these  arguments,  I  would  like  to  return  to  our  event  and  emphasize 
how  the  challenges  mentioned  above  are  translated  into  challenges  for  central  banking 
research. I am most glad that all issues have been addressed at the different panels of this 
workshop. Additionally, although we are yet to hear them, I am most confident that the policy 
implications  suggested  in  these  contributions  are  relevant  and  important.  The  question 
remains: are they practical and can they be easily adapted? 
This  question  involves  the  major  challenge  for  research  both  at  this  workshop,  and  in 
general. It is your duty to provide a balance between the academic properties of research 
and its practical endeavors. The academic properties will guarantee a standard of research 
enriched  with  methodological  novelties  and  points  of  view.  Furthermore,  the  practical 
patterns  would  allow  policy  makers  to  fully  and  easily  implement  your  policy  proposals 
making them relevant. 
This is the main expectation that I have from this event and I am confident it will be fulfilled at 
the end of these two days. 
Without further ado, I would like to give a warmly welcome and congratulate you all for your 
good work and for being here today. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
