  Daniel Mminele: South African monetary policy amidst an uncertain and 
volatile global economic backdrop 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at The 
Economist Annual Investment Agenda Conference, Johannesburg, 20 October 2015. 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen. 
Thank you to the Economist for the invitation to deliver the welcome keynote address at “The 
Investment Agenda Johannesburg 2015”. The first part of the title of the Investment Agenda, 
“No Man Is An Island”, is taken from a poem of John Donne. To quote a little further from that 
poem: “No man is an Island, entire of itself; every man is a piece of the Continent, a part of 
the main…” 
This expression can be related not only to our personal lives, but lends itself particularly well 
to  the  world  of  financial  markets  and  economics.  Each  part  of  the  economic  and  financial 
system,  while  separate,  is  driven  by  similar  factors  with  many  interdependencies.  For 
example, the global financial crisis of 2008/09, started off as a crisis in the housing sector, 
but quickly broadened to money markets and other areas of the financial sector. In addition, 
the crisis was not contained but spread from the US to other advanced economies (AEs) and 
ultimately  to  emerging  markets  (EMs).  It  had  serious  ramifications  for  economic  growth, 
employment  and  inflation,  and  ultimately  elicited  strong  responses  from  both  fiscal  and 
monetary  authorities.  Some  have  argued  that  these  responses  sowed  the  seeds  of  other 
crises, citing the European sovereign debt crisis, and more recently, the increasing talk of a 
possible EM crisis on the back of a credit crunch fears as capital flows decelerate or reverse. 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to  delve  a  little  into  the  global  economic  environment, 
particularly as it pertains to monetary policy as a source of financial volatility and the more 
recent developments in China and how this is impacting on Africa. I will then conclude with a 
few remarks on monetary policy in South Africa against this backdrop. 
Global monetary policy 
Monetary policy has been one of the dominant topics in financial circles over the past few 
years.  The  current  nuance  of  concern  is  how  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  AEs  is 
influencing  financial  market  developments  and  the  spillover  effects  to  EMs.  I  am  sure  you 
have been inundated with information on this topic. However, please indulge me a little since, 
after all, it is a source of substantial uncertainty and volatility in financial markets and is most 
certainly a factor of significant concern for monetary authorities, including the South African 
Reserve Bank (SARB). 
The  SARB  is  one  of  23  monetary  authorities  worldwide  to  have  tightened  monetary  policy 
during the course of 2015 thus far. It is interesting to note that with the exception of Iceland, 
the  remaining  22  countries  with  tighter  policy  stances  are  developing  economies,  for  the 
majority  of  which  the  policy  stance  is  intended  to  try  and  suppress  inflationary  pressures, 
particularly second round effects, rather than suppressing domestic demand per say. In fact, 
inadequate  or  subdued  demand  is  a  feature  that  most  of  these  economies  share  at  the 
moment. The conundrum of balancing inflation and growth concerns is nothing new to central 
bankers,  but  our  nous  is  certainly  being  tested  presently.  However,  this  tightening  bias  is 
hardly a global trend as 45 other monetary authorities have in fact eased their policy stance 
this year. This is the first time since the onset of the financial crisis that such a divergence 
has existed in the global monetary policy environment. 
If we narrow our focus to the two largest global economies, potential policy divergence in the 
near future is a stark reality that policymakers will have to face. Since the inception of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  ECB  at  the  turn  of  the  century,  the  policies  of  the  ECB  and  the  Federal  Reserve  have 
generally been complementary. Today, as the world awaits the first change in the Federal 
Funds Target Rate in seven years, the ECB by contrast is only in the first half of an ambitious 
quantitative  easing  program.  Much  has  been  said  about  these  two  moves  and  the 
unprecedented  nature  thereof,  but  I  am  not  quite  sure  that  we  fully  understand  the  exact 
implications of this development going forward. 
The SARB has mentioned in the past that whilst the timing of the first movement by the Fed 
is  significant,  the  timing  and  magnitude  of  future  hikes  are  just  as  important.  After  all,  the 
latest “dot plots” of the FOMC suggests that participants consider the appropriate long-term 
nominal interest rate to be at between 3 and 4 per cent, which is a fair distance away from 
the current policy stance. On the other hand, there are indications that the ECB could expand 
its current QE program, potentially both in terms of scope and duration. This highlights the 
uncertainty around the current environment, where spillovers from divergent policy between 
the two largest global players might imply that each could pull harder in opposite directions in 
order to achieve the desired effect in their respective economies. This implies that potentially 
the policy challenge will entail larger and more unpredictable spillovers into the global real 
economy. 
Naturally this has implications for the domestic financial environment. The exchange rate of 
the rand against the US dollar has been mentioned time and again as a significant risk to the 
domestic  inflation  outlook  with  implications  for  the  pace  of  domestic  policy  normalisation. 
Whilst part of the Fed’s normalisation may have been priced into the domestic currency, it 
isn’t at all clear by how much. Furthermore, it is important to note that the domestic policy 
response isn’t as simple as responding to each Fed hike, as some analysts sometimes seem 
to  suggest.  Instead  the  implications  and  spillovers  of  Fed  rate  hikes  have  to  be  viewed 
alongside other domestic and global factors, which have a bearing on the domestic economic 
outlook and the mandate of the SARB. 
The euro area as a region remains our largest merchandise export destination and hence, a 
recovery in euro area domestic demand is in our mutual interest. However, should the ECB 
expand its QE program – which appears increasingly likely – and in so doing, cause another 
round of euro depreciation, this could be to the detriment of our exporters. However, in this 
case the impact on the rand might actually be secondary to the financial market volatility that 
these spillovers might create. 
A week from now the FOMC will emerge from their penultimate meeting of the year and may 
take the decision that will end months of speculation and set the wheels of normalisation in 
process.  A  decision  that  may  serve  to  heighten  or  reduce  volatility  in  global  markets  and 
such a decision rather than providing certainty may merely push the focus to the timing of the 
next rate hike. Alternatively, the FOMC could continue in the current holding pattern and take 
the  familiar  „wait  and  see‟  approach  that  most  AEs  are  adopting,  which  again  may  also 
induce more volatility. It’s almost a matter of „damned if you do, and damned if you don‟t‟. 
Whichever decision the Fed takes, clear communication will be vital in influencing the market 
impact,  something  that  has  received  increasing  attention  in  monetary  policy  since  the 
financial crisis. 
China adds another dimension 
Amidst  this  highly  uncertain  monetary  policy  backdrop,  China  has  added  another  twist. 
According to the IMF1, China’s economy  is expected to slow to 6.8 per  cent in 2015, from 
7.4 per cent last year. This slowdown is in line with the government’s target of around 7 per 
cent  and  reflects  progress  in  addressing  vulnerabilities,  particularly  a  much  needed 
moderation in real estate investment. This is also nothing new, as we have known for some 
                                                
1  World Economic Outlook, IMF, October 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  time that China is slowing and that a rebalancing towards consumption-led growth and what 
the People’s Bank of China (PBoC) has termed the „new normal‟ is under way. What this 
entails is growth of around 6 to 7 per cent over the next 5 years, significantly lower than the 
double digit levels that we had become accustomed to. What was of note however, was the 
recent market correction of share prices, following a period of extraordinary growth whereby 
equity prices in China grew by almost 160 per cent between mid-June 2014 and 2015. 
The  correction  in  the  stock  market  resulted  in  an  outflow  of  capital,  exacerbated  by  the 
double  devaluation  of  the  renminbi  in  August.  Chinese  authorities  undertook  a  number  of 
measures to stabilise markets, including a cut in the benchmark interest rates and regulatory 
reserve  requirements,  relaxed  rules  on  margin  financing,  a  restriction  on  short-selling, 
pledging  central  bank  liquidity  support  for  the  China  Securities  Finance  Corporation  and 
initiating a share buyback programme for state-owned enterprises. It is also speculated that 
the PBoC spent over US$90 billion defending the currency in August alone2. 
However, the IMF and PBoC do not believe that the stock market correction will derail the 
ongoing adjustment to a slower yet more balanced growth path. It is generally agreed that 
this adjustment is preferable to relying on an unsustainable growth model of excessive credit 
and investment, which could lead to large vulnerabilities in the fiscal, real estate, financial, 
and  corporate  sectors.  In  line  with  the  above  mentioned  slower  growth  forecasts,  recent 
indicators such as the manufacturing PMI, point to weaker growth for the remainder of the 
year.  As  imports  continue  to  fall  faster  than  exports,  China  will  likely  record  a  large  trade 
surplus.  China’s  current  account  surplus  on  the  other  hand,  has  come  down  from  heady 
levels of around 10 per cent of GDP, to current levels of around 2.7 per cent of GDP. 
Indeed, the recent article in the Economist titled “The Great Fall of China”, asserts that this is 
not  the  hour  of  China’s  crisis  and  that  the  financial  tumult  is  misleading.  While  questions 
remain about true health of the Chinese economy, this sentiment of China not being in crisis 
was  also  borne  out  in  discussions  at  the  recent  the  IMF/World  Bank  Annual  Meetings  in 
Lima,  Peru.  The  Asian  Development  Bank  also  noted  a  number  of  reasons  to  remain 
optimistic despite the slowing growth outlook, notably a growing services sector and resilient 
consumption amongst others. Deutsche Bank, in a recent article3 notes that a “hard landing” 
scenario in China is not on the cards and interpret recent evidence as pointing to, at worst, a 
gradual decline in growth such as has been evident over the past couple of years. Deutsche 
Bank  argues  that  while  China’s  credit/GDP  ratio  is  rising,  the  inherent  advantages  of  a 
current account surplus, high net foreign assets (13 per cent of GDP) and low external debt 
burden (about 10 Per cent of GDP) offer a significant counterweight to the risks of a crisis 
posed by a high credit/GDP ratio. Therefore, it is unlikely that there would be a „sudden stop‟ 
of international capital, such as the kind that in the past has triggered crises. In addition, it is 
argued that China doesn’t need to import capital to sustain credit growth, neither are banks in 
China likely to voluntarily suspend financing to borrowers. 
What does this all mean for Africa? 
The current low level of commodity prices has had a significant impact on some commodity 
exporters.  If  we  take  oil  as  an  example,  Nigeria  as  an  oil  exporter  has  seen  a  dramatic 
slowing  in  growth  to  2.4  per  cent  in  the  second  quarter  of  2015  from  6.5  per  cent  a  year 
earlier. The oil market accounts for more than 90 per cent of foreign exchange earnings and 
about 70 per cent of government revenues in Nigeria. The central bank has spent reserves 
and more recently implemented capital controls to defend the currency. It is also worth noting 
that the IMF has significantly revised downwards the sub-Saharan Africa growth outlook for 
2016, from 5.1 per cent in July, to 4.3 per cent in the October 2015 World Economic Outlook. 
                                                
2   http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/order-from-chaos/posts/2015/09/21-chinese-currency-devaluation-dollar 
3   Global Economic Perspectives, A hard landing in China? Deutsche Bank, 5 October 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  While China is Africa’s largest trading partner, it does not follow that because China slows, 
that it is all doom and gloom for Africa. We should remember that Africa’s average growth 
rates have exceeded 5 per cent since 2000, double the pace of the 1980s and 1990s. With 
the outbreak of the financial crisis in 2008, Africa remained resilient as borne out by strong 
growth  numbers.  While  it  is  true  that  the  boom  in  commodity  prices  during  the  2000s 
provided a significant boost to export revenues, this was only part of Africa’s broader growth 
performance. 
There  has  been  a  steady  rise  in  the  contribution  of  domestic  demand  to  gross  domestic 
product  (GDP),  owing  to  a  fast-growing  middle  class  in  many  African  countries.  On  the 
supply side, the rise of the services sector has been one of the defining characteristics of the 
structural change in African economies. Telecommunications, banking, and the retail sector 
have been flourishing in many countries. This has contributed to the improvement in Africa’s 
growth  prospects,  which  in  turn,  has  attracted  the  attention  of  foreign  investors.  The 
concerted efforts of policymakers to address some of the major binding growth constraints, 
which  were  previously  neglected,  have  also  played  a  significant  role  in  Africa’s  enhanced 
growth performance. In the 2015 World Bank Doing Business Report SSA was reported to 
have accounted for the largest number of regulatory reforms, making it easier to do business 
in the past year. 
Over  the  past  decade  Africa  has  increasingly  been  earmarked  as  a  profitable  investment 
destination  by  international  investors.  Foreign  Direct  Investment  (FDI)  to  Africa  increased 
from approximately US$10 billion per year in 2000 to more than US$50 billion in 2012. The 
institutional  and  political  changes,  coupled  with  the  continent’s  enhanced  growth  potential 
have been the main factors underpinning investor confidence in Africa. Africa is also seen as 
an attractive FDI destination by those multinational investor groups that are keen to benefit 
from the intra-Africa trade opportunities that currently exist. In addition, other investors that 
already  have  operations  in  Africa  are  looking  to  expand  their  footprint  on  the  continent,  to 
ensure  that  they  are  well  positioned  to  benefit  from  the  favourable  growth  prospects  that 
prevail in many countries. It is also worth noting that intra-continent FDI has been growing at 
a healthy pace. In fact, the share of African countries in total FDI in the continent more than 
doubled  between  2003  and  2012;  whereas  in  2003  some  8  per  cent  of  FDI  into  African 
countries came from other African countries, by 2012 this share had risen to 18 per cent. 
Thus, given the aforementioned successes and progress made in Africa, particularly on the 
investment front, there should not be an overly negative impact on Africa as a result of these 
global  developments.  However,  given  the  increasing  concern  around  tightening  financial 
conditions  on  account  of  the  global  developments  that  I  discussed  earlier,  it  is  incumbent 
upon us on the continent to work harder to counter persistent misconceptions and investor 
scepticism  when  it  comes  to  investing  in  Africa,  especially  in  infrastructure.  We  need  to 
market  project  opportunities  better  and  leverage  off  initiatives  such  as  the  World  Bank’s 
Global Infrastructure Facility. To quote the 2015 Ernst & Young attractiveness survey: “We 
remain  confident  that,  despite  economic  headwinds,  the  „Africa  rising‟  narrative  remains 
intact and sustainable.” 
Some challenges to monetary policy formulation in South Africa 
So where does the SARB stand amidst this complicated global backdrop? Monetary policy in 
South Africa is being conducted against the background of a global economy experiencing a 
deceleration of growth, a rotation from AE to Ems as drivers of growth, a transition in China 
to a new growth model, and amid uncertainty over the timing and scale of US interest rate 
hikes, and increased volatility in financial markets. 
Like  many  other  emerging market  central  banks,  monetary  policy  in  South  Africa  has  also 
faced  the  dilemma  of  sharply  slowing  growth  and  rising  inflation.  The  domestic  growth 
outlook has deteriorated significantly, as reflected by the SARB‟s downward revisions. At the 
beginning of the year growth for 2015 was revised lower from 2.5 per cent to 2.2 per cent, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and  more  recently  to  1.5  per  cent.  In  its  October  2015 WEO,  the  IMF  downgraded  South 
Africa’s  growth  forecast  for  2015  to  1.4  per  cent,  a  downward  revision  of  0.6  percentage 
points  from  its  previous  forecast.  The  IMF  forecast  for  2016  was  revised  downwards  by 
0.8 percentage point to 1.3 per cent. 
South Africa’s second quarter economic performance reflected a contraction in growth, with 
the weakest performances recorded in the primary and secondary sectors of the economy, 
although the tertiary sector also witnessed a slight moderation. Consumer demand is weak 
and  the  outlook  is  one  of  a  constrained  consumer  given  a  backdrop  of  slow  employment 
growth,  declining  disposable  income  growth  and  rising  inflation.  Confidence  indicators  for 
business have also deteriorated. Growth will remain constrained by global developments as 
well as low confidence levels and domestic bottlenecks such as limited electricity supply. 
On the upside, South Africa’s wide current account deficit of the past few years has narrowed 
for four consecutive quarters. This can, in part be attributed to temporary factors, but there is 
also some indication that both import and export volumes are responding to the depreciation 
of  the  rand  and the  weaker  economy.  How  global  headwinds,  including  China’s  slowdown 
may alter this outlook, remains to be seen. 
As  you  know,  the  SARB  targets  inflation  within  a  flexible  framework,  which  allows  for 
temporary breaches of the target being tolerated under certain circumstances. The inflation 
forecast has been somewhat erratic, impacted by the combination of a weaker exchange rate 
on  the  one,  hand  and  falling  oil  prices  on  the  other.  However,  the  rand  exchange  rate 
remains the one of the biggest upside risks to the inflation outlook. The ZAR has fluctuated in 
a range of between R11.30 and just over R14,00 against the US dollar since the beginning of 
the year, depreciating to a historic low of R14.16 against the US dollar, but more recently we 
have seen some correction. On a year-to-date basis, the rand is almost 12 per cent weaker 
against the US dollar. This is in the mid-range of other EMs currencies, some of which have 
depreciated  by  over  30  per  cent  (such  as  Brazilian  real)  and  others  by  around  3  per  cent 
(such as the Indian rupee). 
The most recent inflation forecasts point to an average inflation rate of 4.7 per cent in 2015. 
Temporary  breaches  of  the  target  are  expected  in  the  first  quarter,  and  again  in  the  final 
quarter  of  2016.  Much  of  this  is  due  to  base  effects.  For  2017,  inflation  shows  a  slow 
downward trend. 
The SARB Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) remains on a gradual normalisation path and 
is of the view that monetary policy remains accommodative. The MPC has to achieve a fine 
balance between realising its core objective, and not unduly undermining growth in the short-
term.  While  we  have  raised  the  policy  rate  in  July  2015  by  25  basis  points,  bringing  the 
cumulative  increase  in  the  policy  rate  since  the  first  upward  move  in  January  2014  to 
100 basis points, in real terms monetary policy remains accommodative as pointed out in our 
recent MPC statement, released in September 2015. 
The current environment requires policy makers to remain vigilant and to carefully analyse 
incoming data, and not hesitate to act if the risks of a more persistent breach in the inflation 
target  materialise  and  inflation  expectations  become  unanchored,  thus  posing  a  threat  to 
inflation outcomes over the medium term. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
