  Daniel Mminele: Challenges today – opportunities tomorrow 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Daniel  Mminele,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve 
Bank,  at  the  African  Central  Bank  Reserves  Management  2020  Conference,  Arusha, 
1 December 2015. 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is indeed a privilege to have been invited to deliver the keynote address at this prestigious 
African Central Bank Reserves Management Conference. I would like to thank the Bank of 
Tanzania,  Allianz  Global  Investors,  and  the  Deutsche  Gesellschaft  für  Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) for affording me the opportunity to share some thoughts regarding the 
challenges  and  opportunities  we  face  in  managing  official  reserves.  Thank  you  also  for 
creating this valuable opportunity to discuss and swap notes on best reserve management 
practices. 
The  ever-changing  landscape  in  the  financial  markets  poses  significant  and  exciting 
challenges for reserves managers, but change can also bring new opportunities, which could 
require a rethink in the way that central bankers manage official reserves. 
As  is  always  the  case  with  change,  new  risks  also  emerge.  This  is  even  the  case  when 
considering  only  the  primary  objective  of  capital  preservation,  for  which  historically  there 
were  seemingly  simple  solutions.  In  the  not  so  distant  past,  there  was  a  clear  formula  for 
achieving capital preservation by placing deposits with AAA– rated counterparties or buying 
highly  rated  government  bonds.  However,  holding  government  bonds  in  the  current 
environment may not necessarily guarantee capital preservation. For instance, in countries 
such as Germany, negative yields prevailing in the short to medium maturity notes actually 
guarantee not being able to achieve capital preservation. 
How to deal  with negative interest rates is just one of the challenges we face as reserves 
managers.  Judging  by  the  structure  of  the  agenda  and  the  speakers for  this  conference, I 
have no doubt that many other issues will be unpacked, to help enhance our understanding 
as we grapple with these extraordinary economic circumstances that have created today’s 
trying conditions under which reserves managers have to operate. 
In my remarks this morning, I will touch briefly on the global economic and financial markets 
context; then talk about recent developments in reserves management, and the challenges 
currently  facing  central  bank  reserve  managers.  Before  exploring,  towards  the  end  of  my 
remarks, possible opportunities stemming from this changing global landscape, as we cast 
our eyes out to 2020, I will briefly share with you how we at the South African Reserve Bank 
(SARB) have been thinking about and approaching these challenges. 
Recent economic and market trends 
Due to the global financial crisis in 2007 and 2008, there was coordinated global easing in 
monetary policy in an effort to boost the global economy. Given the severity of the crisis, it is 
probably  fair  to  say  that  investors  and  other  market  participants  had  believed  this  would 
remain the policy stance for a protracted period. But the game changer came in May 2013 
with what is now commonly referred to as the ‘taper tantrum’, when the then Fed Chair, Ben 
Bernanke, indicated that the authorities may consider reducing the pace of asset purchases. 
This  was  the  starting  point  of  markets  needing  to  adjust  to  a  world  of  diverging  monetary 
policies. 
Since  then,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  entirely  ceased  with  its  asset  purchases  by  slowly 
reducing its monthly purchases to zero from December 2013 to October 2014. Subsequently, 
the  debate  shifted to the  timing  of the rate  hiking  cycle. While  the  United  States (US)  has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  interest 
shown sound economic performance amid resurgent domestic spending, and indications by 
the monetary authorities of the need to reduce the accommodative stance in interest rates, 
the market chose to focus on the lack of consumer and wage inflation. Consequently, there 
was a divergence between the indication from Fed officials and the market pricing about the 
expected path of interest rates, adding uncertainty and volatility to the market. More recently, 
labour  market  statistics  and  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  communication  has 
seen  the  market  move  to  bring  forward  its  rate  hike  expectations,  with  the  chance  of  a 
December hike now priced at around 74 per cent. 
During  this  period  of  uncertainty  in  the  US  markets,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB) 
embarked  on  quantitative  easing  with  consequential  negative 
rates.  On 
18 November 2015, Germany issued 2-year bonds at a record low of –38 basis points! The 
spread  of  the  US  10-year  yield  over  the  equivalent  maturity  German  bond  is  now  trading 
around 175 basis points, close to its historic high of 190 basis points. 
At the same time, China’s process of transitioning to a more domestic, consumption-driven 
economy from one that is investment-led and relies heavily on exports, was a major factor in 
slowing  down  its  overall  economic  growth.  We  are  all  acutely  aware  that  this  slowdown 
adversely  affected  commodity  prices  and  export-driven  countries,  which  has  severe 
repercussions for emerging-market economic growth, including on the African continent. In 
addition,  the  falling  oil  prices,  partially  due  to  downward  revisions  to  Chinese  growth 
expectations,  contributed  to  keeping  inflation  tame  and  adding  to  the  deflation  dilemma  in 
some developed markets. 
Today, we therefore face divergent monetary policies, with the US on the verge of increasing 
interest  rates,  likely  to  be  followed  by  the  United  Kingdom  next,  while  the  Eurozone  and 
Japan are set to continue with looser monetary policies. This dichotomy presents reserves 
managers with a clear dilemma: investments in US treasuries may produce negative returns 
during an interest rate hiking cycle. At the same time, with reserves generally reported in US 
dollars, non-US dollar investments are expected to underperform in response to an expected 
stronger US dollar. This is of course adding to the complexity faced in global policy-making 
and investor decision-making.  
Trends in reserves management 
With  the  investment  environment  clearly  becoming  more  complicated,  it  may  be  useful  to 
review recent trends in reserves management, both globally as well as on the continent. 
According  to  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  data,  global  foreign-exchange  reserves 
(excluding  gold  and  Special  Drawing  Rights  (SDR)  increased  from  US$2,5  trillion  to 
US$8,3 trillion,  or  332  by  per  cent,  in  the  ten  years  to  2014.  Over  the  same  period,  total 
foreign-exchange  reserves  in  Africa  increased from  US$81,9  billion  to  US$271,8  billion,  or 
331 per cent. This sudden increase in reserve accumulation did not happen in isolation. The 
increased globalisation of economic relationships brought with it the requirement for holding 
additional reserves. This as many of the reserves adequacy metrics will involve the ratio of 
either trade data or debt levels to gross domestic product. Consequently, as economies open 
up,  so  their  required  reserve  holdings  need  to  increase.  Such  strong  growth  in  reserve 
holdings brought with it a number of changes in reserves management practices. 
According  to  the  April  2015  HSBC  Reserve  Management  Trends  Survey,  conducted  in 
association  with  Central  Banking  Publications,  central  banks  continue  to  focus  on 
diversification  into  non-traditional  markets,  such  as  Australia,  Canada,  Scandinavia  and, 
recently, China. Central bank respondents to the survey expect that the Chinese Renminbi 
will reach 10 per cent of global reserves by 2025. In terms of asset classes, more than 20 per 
cent  of  central  banks  are  either  investing  now  or  considering  investment  into  emerging-
market bonds and equities. Furthermore, more than 10 per cent of the respondents indicated 
that  either  they  are  investing  now  or  considering  investment  into  exchange-traded  funds. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Interestingly, the survey also points out that about 70 per cent of central banks are active in, 
or considering, securities lending. 
Based on our interactions with colleagues in other central banks on the continent, the recent 
focus among African reserves managers has been on: (i) formalising the investment decision 
processes; (ii) introducing the use of bond futures for efficient portfolio management; and (iii) 
investigating  the  viability  of  including  Chinese  bonds,  onshore  and/or  offshore,  into  their 
reserves portfolios. 
Work currently under way under the auspices of the Committee of Central Bank Governors of 
the  South  African  Development  Community  (SADC)  indicates  convergence  in  reserves 
management  practices  in  this  sub-region  of  Africa.  The  initial  research  results  show  that 
reserve management activity in the region is governed by proper policies and guidelines, and 
nearly  all  central  banks  have  adopted  strategic  asset  allocation  (SAA)  frameworks.  It  also 
notes  that  there  is  a  general  approach  of  using  tranching  when  constructing  reserve 
portfolios. The SAA framework determines tranche sizes where relevant. Most central banks 
invest  in  cash,  cash  equivalents  and fixed  income  instruments,  with  the  US  dollar  and  the 
euro being common currencies in all portfolios. 
Challenges facing reserves managers 
With  that  contextual  backdrop,  and  before  moving  on  to  discuss  some  of  the  challenges 
faced by reserves managers, it is worth reflecting on one of the consequences of the global 
financial  crisis  that  we  are  still  grappling  with  today.  This  is  the  deterioration  in  the  credit 
quality of the reserve currencies. Since 2008, using Standard & Poor’s ratings, we have seen 
the Japanese government debt being downgraded from AA to A+ and the US drop from AAA 
to AA+. Within Europe, while Germany has remained AAA-rated, France was downgraded 
from AAA to AA and peripheral European countries such as Spain (from AAA to BBB+) and 
Portugal (from AA- to BB) saw an even more dramatic drop in their ratings. This narrowed 
the high-grade investment universe, requiring, in some instances, adjustments in investment 
guidelines  to  accommodate  these  changes.  With  issuers  consequently  falling  outside  the 
traditional investment universe, finding yield-enhancing assets became more difficult. These 
challenges  persist  and  with  the  continued  subdued  global  economic  growth  outlook  are 
unlikely to go away anytime soon. 
Moving on to developments that are more recent, and with reference to my earlier discussion 
on diverging monetary policies, the key challenges that reserves managers have been facing 
since the latter part of 2013 have been around the ongoing uncertainties on the timing of the 
rise  in  US  interest  rates  and  the  negative  yields  in  Europe.  This  has  required  reserves 
managers to take stock of their SAA as well as review their tactical strategies.  
For central banks with low reserves, the SAA tends to be set along the currency patterns of 
their foreign trade and external debt. While debt obligations tend to be dollar based, trade 
patterns  can  vary  more  significantly.  I  remarked  earlier  that  all  SADC  central  banks  have 
euros in their portfolio, which reflects the importance of this region to the continent. However, 
central  banks  typically  invest  in  maturities  up  to  three-years,  and  this  part  of  the  German 
yield curve has negative yields of around 40bps. For countries with larger reserve holdings, 
there are opportunities to enhance returns through lengthening the maturity of investments or 
adding  credit  risk  to the  portfolio.  However,  such  strategies  in  turn  bring  additional  market 
and credit risk to the portfolio, potentially coming into conflict with the overarching objective 
of capital preservation. 
With  expectations  of  higher  interest  rates  in  the  US,  the  dollar  has  strengthened  and 
investors have started to shy away from investing in commodities, including gold. According 
to  Bloomberg,  the  amount  of  gold  held  in  exchange-traded  funds  has  dropped  from 
2,633 tonnes  in  late  2012  to  1,494  tonnes  in  November  2015.  There  has  been  a  striking 
correlation between the gold held by these funds with the dollar price of gold. Gold holdings 
in these funds are still substantially higher than pre-2008 levels and therefore there is a risk 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  of further unwind. For South Africa, the decline in the gold price has seen the dollar value of 
gold holdings decline from US$ 7,1 billion in September 2012 to US$ 4,6 billion at the end of 
October 2015. 
Another  consequence  of  the  global  financial  crisis  was  a  significant  tightening  in  the 
regulatory framework. The new regulatory environment (introduction of Basel III and Dodd-
Frank)  in  financial  markets  has  raised  concerns  about  liquidity,  especially  in  fixed  income 
markets.  The  concerns  stem from  the fact  that many  global  investment  banks  and  market 
makers  are  adjusting  their  balance  sheets,  and  consequently  their  business  operating 
models,  in  order to  comply  with  these  new  regulations  and  deal  with  the  associated  costs 
structures.  As  reserves  managers,  we  should  be  acutely  aware  of  how  market  liquidity 
develops  so  that  we  are  confident  that  we  will  be  able  to  convert  assets  into  cash  when 
required. The risk is that it is exactly in crisis times when central banks may need to tap into 
reserves, and it is in crisis times that market liquidity tends to disappear.  
Finally, we should not overlook the role of technology, which is another challenge reserves 
manager  are  dealing  with.  With  the  growing  complexity  of  the  investment  environment 
reserves  managers  are  required  to  enhance  their  analytical  skills  and  capabilities,  but  the 
increasing cost of technology could stand in the way of a proper assessment of the long-term 
benefits  of  such  essential  investment.  This  is  particularly  important  for  central  banks 
diversifying into new assets classes across various currencies and instruments. It is essential 
for  reserves  managers  to  invest  in  prime  technology  in  order  to  receive  an  optimal  risk-
adjusted return and reduce the probability of negative returns. At the SARB, we are keenly 
aware of the benefits and risks associated with new technology, a subject I will return to in a 
moment. 
The South African Reserve Bank’s response to these challenges 
One of the steps the SARB took when thinking about how best to deal with expected higher 
rates in the US was to include the use of bond futures in its investment guidelines in order to 
provide an efficient way to protect the internally managed bond portfolios invested in the US 
and  other  major  markets.  Secondly,  the  SAA  was  diversified  to  allow  investment  into 
currencies of some of the high credit-rated and liquid bonds from markets with low debt to 
gross domestic product (GDP) ratios. For the SARB, this meant fixed income investments in 
Canada,  Sweden,  South  Korea,  and  China.  The  diversification  into  the  Chinese  onshore 
bond market was a result of a strategic view on the long-term outlook for the role of China in 
the global economy and its economic relations with South Africa. The Chinese bond market 
also  offered  good  yields  together  with  diversification  benefits  that  have  proved  to  be  very 
valuable. 
In  addition  to  the  diversification  of  our  currency  universe,  the  SARB  included  high-rated 
covered bonds and mortgage-backed securities in the SAA in order to diversify the sources 
of return and reduce the negative impact of rising rates on the overall portfolio. 
Other strategies employed by the SARB to reduce external vulnerability and ensure access 
to foreign exchange in times of stress included negotiating swap lines with the Peoples Bank 
of China (PBoC) and the Contingent Reserve Agreement among the BRICS nations. 
Lastly, the SARB is making considerable investments in improving technology by acquiring 
new systems and staff capacity so as to future-proof the reserves management function. We 
have  undertaken  a  comprehensive  review  of  our  system  architecture  used  in  the 
management  of  gold  and  foreign-exchange  reserves.  To  this  end,  we  have  decided  to 
replace our existing IT system with a new one, more appropriate to our current and future 
needs, so as to enhance the reserves management value chain. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Potential opportunities for reserves managers 
What opportunities does the current environment provide when we think about the next five 
years  or  so?  Firstly,  the  prospect  of  higher  rates  in  the  US  will  provide  an  opportunity  for 
reserves managers to invest in higher yielding but safer investments. The indication by the 
FOMC  that  it  intends  to  raise  rates  at  a  measured  pace  should  help  manage  the  risk  of 
negative  portfolio  returns.  As  central  banks  tend  to  invest  in  short  maturity  bonds  with  a 
duration of three years or shorter, a ‘sweet spot’ may exist in that when rates are expected to 
increase modestly, longer maturity investors may shorten durations in order to avoid losses, 
keeping the short end of the yield curve somewhat supported. As the bulk of global reserves 
are held in US dollars, there is no doubt that after some initial mark-to-market losses, higher 
rates  will  in  due  course  increase  the  yield  in  the  portfolio.  Here  it  becomes  important  for 
reserves  managers  to  focus  on  the  investment  horizon,  and  not  on  annual  financial 
accounting outcomes. 
After  the  global  financial  crisis,  bond  yields  in  the  developed  economies  became  highly 
correlated  as  these  countries  added  stimulus  to  their  economies  in  order  to  avoid,  among 
other things, deflation. Consequently, risk adjusted returns of portfolios invested in advanced 
economies were depressed owing to the loss of diversification benefits. The current diverging 
monetary policies may in future provide diversification benefits, which will improve the risk-
adjusted returns of the overall portfolio of reserves.  
Furthermore,  African  countries  have  improved  in  respect  of  overall  political  and  economic 
stability,  thus  providing  possible  opportunities  for  long-term  stable  investments.  As  these 
countries provide both hard and domestic currency investments, the weaker exchange rates 
could now be providing entry points for reserves managers who may want to diversify their 
investments and benefit from the higher yields. 
Likewise,  the  devaluation  of  the  Chinese  Renminbi  in  recent  years  may  have  created  an 
opportunity for reserves managers to enter the market at a more favourable exchange rate. 
With the Chinese authorities taking steps to support economic growth and recent measures 
announced to further internationalise the Renminbi, the Renminbi is likely to become more 
attractive. The most recent reforms have certainly made things a lot easier for central banks 
in particular. In this light, and with the Renminbi set to be included into the IMF’s SDR basket 
from  October  next  year,  following  approval  by  the  IMF  executive  board  yesterday,  central 
banks  and  other  official  institutions  are  likely  to  include  this  currency  into  their  reserves 
portfolios (or increase current holdings). An opinion piece by Jukka Pihlman in yesterday’s 
Financial  Times  pointed  to  the  potential  significant  demand  for  Renminbi,  estimating  that 
even a conservative one per cent reallocation of global reserves each year would result in 
inflows of about USD80bn annually. 
Amid  the  lack  of  allure  of  traditional  government  bonds,  which  could  be  in  play  in  the 
foreseeable  future,  alternative  instruments  and  assets,  such  as  equities,  could  feature  in 
future SAAs. Some research has shown that improved capital preservation, while generating 
somewhat  higher  returns,  is  on  offer from  equities  relative  to  bonds.  But  any  broad  based 
moves into equities will be highly country-specific. 
Concluding remarks 
There can be no doubt that the game has changed for central bank reserves managers. The 
fast changing world and investment landscape is requiring of reserves managers to adapt to 
a playing field that is characterised by high levels of uncertainty and volatility, resulting in the 
need to reconsider investment strategies on a more frequent basis. This will necessitate SAA 
processes that are vigilant and rigorous. Old and trusted assets are not yielding returns and 
some are even eroding capital. New instruments and assets that fall within the familiar and 
accepted investment universe are not plentiful. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Reserves  managers  must  keenly  evaluate  factors  such  as  investment  time  horizons,  what 
constitutes and acceptable risk-return balance, what role alternatives should play alongside 
traditional  asset  classes,  and  whether  our  traditional  benchmarks  still  fit  it  in  with  new 
strategies.  However,  at  all  times  reserves  managers  must  also  remember  that  they  are 
custodians of public funds, and have to be guided by prudent strategies, which implies that 
there must be a limit to “thinking outside the box” in the quest for ever higher returns. 
Dealing with these challenges will certainly require human capital that is appropriately skilled, 
and  equipped  with  the  right  technology.  Conferences  such  as  this  one  present  a  unique 
opportunity to share experiences, and transfer skills and knowledge among African central 
banks,  as  it  brings  together  central  banks  with  private-sector  players,  and  development 
institutions,  a  uniquely  powerful  combination.  I  understand  that  the  conference  is  the 
culmination of two years of work involving members of the East African Community. I would 
encourage the organisers to find ways of sustaining this momentum. 
Finally,  I  trust  that  you  will  leave  Arusha  with  better  insights  and  an  improved  network  of 
contacts in the central banking community to help you navigate the future as you strengthen 
reserves management practices in your own environments to the benefit of your respective 
central banks and countries. 
Enjoy the rest of the conference. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
