  Yutaka Harada: Economic activity and prices in Japan and monetary 
policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Yutaka  Harada,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a 
meeting with business leaders, Tochigi, 11 November 2015. 
 Introduction 
This  will  be  my  first  speech  to  deliver  as  a  Policy  Board  member  of  the  Bank  of  Japan. 
Before starting, I would like to extend my sincere condolences for the lives lost and to the 
people  who  have  suffered  from  the  heavy  rains  that  devastated  areas  including  Tochigi 
Prefecture in September. 
Thank you for giving me this opportunity to exchange views with people representing Tochigi, 
who have taken time to be here despite their busy schedules. It is indeed a great honor to be 
here  today.  Please  allow  me  to  express  my  gratitude  for  your  great  cooperation  with  the 
activities of the Bank’s Research and Statistics Department on the economy of Tochigi, and 
also with those of the Bank’s other departments. 
Around  two  and  a  half  years  have  passed  since  the  Bank  introduced  quantitative  and 
qualitative monetary easing (QQE) in April 2013. Today, I would like to offer my assessment 
of QQE and then discuss the Bank’s outlook for economic activity and prices through fiscal 
2017  indicated  in  its  report,  the  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (hereafter  the 
Outlook Report), which was released at the end of October this year. Following my speech, I 
look forward to hearing your views on the actual situation for Tochigi’s economy, and to your 
candid opinions. 
Major shift in monetary policy 
I.  
The  current  QQE  was  adopted  following  a  major  shift  from  the  previous  monetary  policy 
regime. In January 2013, the Bank introduced the price stability target of 2 percent in terms 
of the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI). Furthermore, in March 
that  year,  Mr.  Haruhiko Kuroda  was  appointed  as  Governor  of  the  Bank,  and  in  April,  the 
Bank  introduced  QQE  in  order  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  at  the  earliest  possible 
time, with a time horizon of about two years. 
QQE consists of a strong commitment to achieving 2 percent inflation in terms of the year-
on-year rate of change in the CPI and bold monetary easing measures to underpin such a 
commitment. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held on April 3 and 4, 2013, the Bank decided 
on the following specific measures. First, it decided to change the main operating target for 
money market operations from the interest rate – namely, the uncollateralized overnight call 
rate – to the monetary base, and to conduct money market operations so that the monetary 
base would increase at an annual pace of about 60–70 trillion yen, doubling in two years, 
from  138  trillion  yen  at  the  end  of  2012 to 270 trillion  yen  at  the  end  of  2014.  Second,  in 
terms of the qualitative aspect, with a view to encouraging a further decline in interest rates 
across the yield curve, the Bank decided to purchase Japanese government bonds (JGBs), 
so that the amount outstanding  of its holdings would increase at an annual pace of about 
50 trillion  yen,  similarly  doubling  in  two  years,  from  89  trillion  yen  at  the  end  of  2012  to 
190 trillion  yen  at  the  end  of  2014.  In  addition,  the  Bank  decided  to  extend  the  average 
remaining maturity of its JGB purchases from slightly less than three years to about seven 
years.  Third,  with  a  view  to  lowering  the  risk  premia  of  asset  prices,  the  Bank  decided  to 
purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) 
so  that  their  amounts  outstanding  would  increase  at  an  annual  pace  of  1  trillion  yen  and 
30 billion yen, respectively. And fourth, the Bank committed to continuing with QQE, aiming 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it was necessary for maintaining 
that target in a stable manner. 
Furthermore,  the  Bank  decided  to  expand  QQE  in  October  2014  to  prevent  a  risk  that 
conversion of the deflationary mindset would be delayed because, after the consumption tax 
hike  in  April  that  year,  it  became  clear  that  the  negative  effects  of  the  hike  on  economic 
activity and prices would persist, and also because of the drop in crude oil prices – a factor 
that would be desirable in the longer term but exert downward pressure on prices in the short 
term.  Specifically,  the  Bank  decided  to  accelerate  the  annual  pace  of  increase  in  the 
monetary base from 60–70 trillion yen to 80 trillion yen, and to increase purchases of JGBs 
so that the amount outstanding of its holdings would be increased from an annual pace of 
50 trillion yen to 80 trillion yen. The average remaining maturity of the Bank’s JGB purchases 
would be extended from about seven years to a range of seven to ten years. In addition, the 
Bank decided to accelerate the annual paces of increase in the amounts outstanding of its 
holdings of ETFs and J-REITs from 1 trillion yen and 30 billion yen, respectively, to 3 trillion 
yen and 90 billion yen. 
Next, I will explain what has occurred as a result of these monetary easing measures, as well 
as the problems with them. 
II.  
Consequences of the monetary policy shift 
Trends in production, consumption, and investment 
First, I will talk about trends in production, consumption, and investment over the period of 
around two and a half years since the introduction of QQE. Chart 1 shows that, excluding the 
negative effects of the consumption tax hike in April 2014, investment, in terms of domestic 
shipments  and  imports  of  capital  goods,  has  been  expanding  as  a  trend,  although  it  has 
shown weakness very recently. On the other hand, production and consumption have been 
stagnant. Even excluding such factors as the effects of the front-loaded increase in demand 
prior  to  the  consumption  tax  hike  and  the  subsequent  decline,  it  is  difficult  to  say  that 
production and consumption have been recovering steadily. 
The effects of the consumption tax hike have been particularly large on consumption. The 
Synthetic  Consumption  Index  –  which  is  a  combination  of  supply-side  and  demand-side 
statistics  and  shows  similar  movements  to  consumption  on  a  GDP  basis  –  has  not  yet 
surpassed the peak before the front-loaded increase in demand. However, it is natural that a 
consumption  tax  hike  leads  to  a  decrease  in  consumption  because  the  hike  reduces 
households’ real income. What is important is whether real consumption is increasing as a 
trend despite this phenomenon. The Bank’s baseline scenario is that consumption has been 
resilient, but I think that there have been some worrisome developments in consumption very 
recently, as in production. 
Steady growth in employment 
In contrast, employment has grown steadily since the shift to QQE. As shown in Chart 2, the 
numbers of both part-time and full-time employees have continued rising. The unemployment 
rate has been declining steadily. 
The  active  job  openings-to-applicants  ratio,  as  shown  in  Chart  3,  was  1.24  times  in 
September 2015, marking its highest since January 1992. 
Improvement in employment is spreading across Japan, although we have heard voices of 
concern  that  the  economic  recovery  has  only  been  observed  in  major  cities.  As  shown  in 
Chart 3, the active job openings-to-applicants ratio has risen in all regions, although it had 
temporarily declined following the consumption tax hike. It rose to 0.99 times in September 
2015 in Hokkaido, where the ratio has been the lowest in Japan. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Increase in wages 
It has been said that wages have not increased despite the rise in employment. However, as 
shown  in  Chart  4,  employee  income  –  that  is,  wages  multiplied  by  the  number  of 
employees – has increased. Real employment income has also increased, when excluding 
the  effects  of  the  April 2014  tax  hike.  Since  April  2015  –  when  the  effects  of  the  tax  hike 
dissipated – the uptrend in employee income has become clearer. 
Here, I would like to note that, according to the Monthly Labour Survey, employment income 
fell sharply in June and did not rebound much in July. However, the results seem odd given 
that  all  surveys  concerning  the  outcome  of  summer  bonus  payments  in  2015  indicated  a 
year-on-year increase.1 I personally think that there was a sample bias in the Monthly Labour 
Survey. 
One reason wages are not rising is that the commonly used data on wages are the monthly 
average of wages for all employees. During the early stage of an economic recovery, firms 
try to meet increases in labor demand by hiring non-regular employees. This is because they 
are not sure whether such demand will grow continuously. As a result, during this stage of 
economic recovery, the number of employees increases for those with low hourly wages and 
short monthly working hours. Statistically, this appears as a decline in the monthly average 
wages  for  all  employees.  If  economic  recovery  continues,  firms  will  start  to  hire  regular 
employees, but it takes time before they do so. 
Chart 5 shows nominal hourly wages for full-time and part-time employees. As wages for full-
time  employees  include  bonuses,  their  wage  level  fluctuates  widely  even  after  making 
seasonal adjustments,  and therefore  it is difficult to find a clear trend. However, the wage 
level for part-time employees has been rising in a stable manner. Wages for both full-time 
and  part-time  employees  are  likely  to  increase  in  a  sustainable  manner  as  the  economic 
recovery continues, enabling us to confirm an uptrend in wages. As for the rate of increase in 
wages between April 2013 – when QQE was introduced – and September 2015 – the latest 
month for which the data are available – the rate for part-time employees was 3.8 percent, 
which is higher than the rate for full-time employees of 1.2 percent. 
Sluggish growth in exports 
There has been criticism that exports have not grown even after the introduction of QQE. On 
the other hand, those who have opposed monetary easing have argued that this policy would 
create a serious problem by causing exports to surge, which  would reignite trade frictions. 
However, the economy is improving and exports have not grown much, as shown in Chart 6, 
and  I  believe  this  is  a  rather  desirable  situation  on  balance.  I  will  refer  to  the  outlook  for 
exports later. 
There  is  a  strong  perception  that  exports  have  been  the  main  driving  force  of  Japan’s 
economic  recovery.  However,  past  experience  shows  that  exports  have  not  necessarily 
acted as such during economic recovery phases.2 Chart 6 shows the real export index, the 
real import index, and the difference between the two; that is, the real trade balance. Here, 
only the upward/downward movement of the real trade balance, and not the absolute level, is 
meaningful.  Japan’s  economy  has  experienced five  recovery  phases  since  1990,  from  the 
troughs of October 1993, January 1999, January 2002, March 2009, and November 2012. 
However,  exports  and  the  trade  balance  increased  simultaneously  only  in  two  phases,  in 
                                                
1   According  to  the  Monthly  Labour  Survey,  summer  bonus  payments  in  2015  (special  cash  earnings  for  the 
June-August  period)  were  minus  3.3  percent  on  a  year-on-year  basis.  Surveys  conducted  by  the  Japan 
Business Federation (Keidanren), Nikkei Inc., the Institute of Labour Administration, and the Ministry of Health, 
Labour and Welfare indicated increases of 2.8 percent, 2.1 percent, 3.0 percent, and 4.0 percent, respectively. 
2   This is when “export-driven” growth is defined as the growth in net exports, which in turn contributes directly to 
GDP growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
2002  and  2009.  Moreover,  in  the  2002  phase,  the  trade  balance  started  to  increase  after 
more than three years had passed since the trough. In the 2009 phase, the trade balance 
increased at first but decreased thereafter. 
These  findings  indicate  that  the  monetary  easing  policy  can  achieve  economic  recovery 
without causing such problems as trade frictions. 
Decline in crude oil prices has been weighing on price increases 
We cannot rule out the risk of a pause in economic recovery, and yet, as I have explained, 
the  economy  thus  far  has  continued  to  recover,  albeit  at  a  moderate  pace.  In  particular, 
employment has been improving continuously. Even so, some people may criticize the Bank 
for not being able to achieve the price stability target of a year-on-year rate of increase in the 
CPI of 2 percent. As shown in Chart 7, prices do not appear to be rising, as the year-on-year 
rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was negative for September, registering 
minus 0.1 percent3. However, this was caused by a decline in energy prices due to the fall in 
crude oil prices worldwide, and prices in terms of the CPI for all items less fresh food and 
energy  show  a  steady  increase.  As  energy  prices  will  not  continue  falling  forever,  I  am 
confident that the CPI for all items, including energy, will start to rise as the effects of the fall 
in energy prices dissipate over time. 
Monetary policy and price movements 
Chart  8  shows  the  correlation  between  the  monetary  policy  and  price  movements  since 
2012.  This  chart  indicates  the  actual  inflation  rates  in  terms  of  the  CPI  and  inflation 
expectations; namely, the breakeven inflation (BEI) rates, which are calculated from the price 
of  inflation-indexed  JGBs.4  Both  the  BEI  rates  and  the  CPI  started  to  rise  after  the 
introduction of QQE in April 2013 that followed the inauguration of the second Abe Cabinet in 
December  2012.  However,  after  entering  fiscal  2014,  increases  in  the  CPI  excluding  the 
effects of the consumption tax hike, the CPI for all items less fresh food, the CPI for all items 
less  fresh  food  and  energy,  and  also  the  BEI  rates  became  stagnant.  To  resolve  this 
situation, the  Bank  expanded  QQE  in  October  2014,  and  the  BEI  rate  and  the  CPI for  all 
items less fresh food and energy started rising again. In light of this result, the introduction 
and expansion of QQE have been effective in pushing up the inflation rate, as recent price 
developments show. 
Here, I would like to note that the consumption tax hike has a negative impact on economic 
activity,  and  that  this  works  to  push  down  the  inflation  rate.  The  hike  reduces  consumer 
demand by exerting downward pressure on households’ real income, which then lowers the 
inflation  rate.  I  feel  that,  in  many  cases,  this  is  a  point  that  is  forgotten  in  discussions  on 
prices. 
The reasons why the bank had not implemented monetary easing 
Japan’s economy has been recovering and moving toward overcoming deflation as a result 
of QQE. Until this bold measure was taken under Governor Kuroda’s leadership, there had 
been  criticism  that  the  Bank  had  not  been  implementing  sufficient  monetary  easing.  The 
following arguments have been pointed out as reasons behind the Bank’s hesitation at that 
time. The Bank was not able to implement monetary easing given that interest rates were at 
                                                
3   While the Bank has adopted the CPI for all items including fresh food as its price target, to determine the 
underlying trend in prices, it makes forecasts for the CPI for all items less fresh food, for which prices fluctuate 
significantly. 
4   The Bank makes an assessment of inflation expectations by taking into account indicators based on surveys 
conducted of firms, households, and economists, in addition to those calculated from market data, e.g., the 
BEI based on transaction prices of inflation-indexed JGBs shown in Chart 8.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
zero.  Even  if  quantitative  easing  were  to  be  implemented,  this  would  only  increase  the 
outstanding  balance  of  private  banks’  current  accounts  held  at  the  Bank  and  would  not 
stimulate  lending.  Under  zero  interest rates,  quantitative  easing  would  not  affect the  yen’s 
exchange  rates  against  other  currencies.  Should  the  yen  depreciate,  there  would  be  a 
serious  problem  of  invoking  competition  among  countries  to  devalue  their  currencies.  In 
reality,  the  Bank  has  managed  to  implement  effective  monetary  easing  both  in  terms  of 
quantity and quality. Bank lending has been increasing, and, as I discussed earlier, the yen 
has depreciated without causing competition among countries with regard to devaluing their 
currencies.5,6  Another  argument  that  has  been  pointed  out  is  concern  about  the  risk  that 
monetary easing would lead to higher interest rates in the long term and cause some banks 
that are holding a large amount of JGBs to be saddled with massive unrealized capital losses 
on their JGB holdings. A rise in interest rates is naturally a positive factor for banks’ business 
conditions in the long term, but it is likely to temporarily increase their losses before getting to 
that stage. However, I believe that, even if there was indeed such a risk, the Bank should not 
have put off monetary easing. This is because, if deflation is allowed to continue, banks will 
have no option but to increase their holdings of JGBs in the absence of borrowers. 
Loans account for a large portion of banks’ assets. An interest rate rise of 1 percentage point 
would reduce the total value of bonds held by the entire banking sector by 7.5 trillion yen, 
compared  with  the  total  assets  outstanding  of  nearly  1,200  trillion  yen.7  If  deflation  is 
overcome and interest rates rise as a result of economic recovery, the business conditions of 
banks’ borrowers will improve, enhancing the soundness of loan assets. In other words, the 
business conditions of banks will improve when interest rates rise as a result of economic 
recovery. 
In  a  newspaper  opinion  page,  Professor  Paul  Krugman  of  Princeton  University,  a  Nobel 
economic  sciences 
from 
expansionary policy in 1932” in the midst of the Great Depression, arguing that “a key factor 
[behind  the  decision]  was  the  complaints  of  commercial  banks  that  low  interest  rates  on 
government securities were squeezing their profits.”8 Given that the monetary tightening led 
to a further deepening of the depression and deterioration of banks’ business conditions, the 
tightening clearly was a misjudged action that focused on narrow and fleeting interests. 
laureate,  cited  “the  Fed’s  strange,  destructive 
turn  away 
Transmission mechanism of QQE for economic recovery 
III.  
Thus far, I have shown that QQE has helped Japan’s economy recover, albeit at a moderate 
pace. Now, I would like to discuss the mechanism through which this has been achieved. 
QQE has been effective in reducing real interest rates by lowering long-term interest rates 
and raising inflation expectations. The Bank has committed to increasing the monetary base 
in  order  to  raise  inflation  expectations,  and  the  increase  in  the  monetary  base  has  had 
                                                
5  
In the current phase of economic recovery, bank lending has been increasing, but there were many cases in 
the past where the economy recovered as a result of monetary easing without an increase in bank lending. 
For details, see Yutaka Harada, “Nihon wo Sukutta Rifure-ha Keizaigaku (Reflationalist Economics that Saved 
Japan),” Nikkei Publishing Inc., November 2014, pp.49–50 (available only in Japanese). 
6   For details on foreign exchange rates mentioned  in the arguments, see Ai Nakagawa and Yutaka Harada, 
“Kinyu Kanwa Seisaku, Tsuka Sensou, Koueki Joken (Monetary Easing Policy, Competitive Devaluation, and 
Terms  of  Trade),”  The  Keizai  Seminar,  December  2015-January  2016,  Nippon  Hyoron  Sha  Co.  Ltd. 
(forthcoming; available only in Japanese). 
7   Bank of Japan, Financial System Report, October 2015, charts III-1–29 and IV-2–2. 
8   Paul Krugman, “Rate Rage in 1932,” The New York Times, September 22, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
portfolio rebalancing effects in the broad sense of the term; namely, the effects of boosting 
stock prices and weakening the yen.9 
Chart 9 shows the BEI rates, which are calculated from the price of inflation-indexed JGBs, 
and real interest rates. From the chart, we can see that inflation expectations in terms of the 
BEI rate started to rise following the introduction of QQE. This will reduce real interest rates, 
leading to a rise in asset prices, a decrease in the yen’s exchange rate, and an expansion in 
employment  and  production  through  an  increase  in  business  fixed  investment  and 
consumption of durable goods, and consequently economic recovery. 
My views on criticisms against QQE 
IV.  
As I have explained, QQE has somehow managed to support economic recovery. There is a 
theoretical basis for this, but even so, criticism against this policy has not subsided. 
Let me first introduce a general criticism. 
(1)  
Many  people  do  not  feel  that  the  economy  is  recovering.  Indeed,  only  about 
10 percent of respondents answered that economic conditions have improved in the Bank’s 
survey. Chart 10 shows the trend in responses to the question: “How do you think economic 
conditions have changed compared with one year ago?” Here, 10 percent is by no means 
low.  Even  at  its  peak  before  the  Lehman  shock,  the ratio  was  only  at  around  20  percent. 
Considering  the  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike  in  fiscal  2014,  it  will  take  time  before 
people begin to feel more strongly that economic conditions are improving. 
Criticisms against monetary policy are as follows. 
(2)  
Exports have not grown even after the introduction of QQE. It is true that exports 
had  been  sluggish  at  the  time  of  the  introduction.  However,  this  was  due  to  the  shift  of 
Japanese  firms’  production  sites  to  overseas  that  was  brought  about  by  the  fact  that  no 
measures were taken to deal with the appreciation of the yen after the Lehman shock. Even 
though  the  yen  has  depreciated,  it takes time  to  shift  production  sites  back to  Japan. If a 
monetary  easing  policy  like  the  one  that  is  now  in  place  had  been  adopted  immediately 
following the Lehman shock, I think that this situation could have been avoided. 
Meanwhile, revenue from inbound tourism, which is part of service exports, has grown by a 
considerable degree. Such revenue, which was 1.2 trillion yen in 2012, rose to 1.5 trillion yen 
in 2013 and nearly 2.0 trillion yen in 2014, and already has exceeded 2.0 trillion yen in the 
January-August  period  of  2015.  It  takes  time  to  shift  production  sites  back  to  Japan,  but 
tourism is apparently an industry that can respond quickly. However, it is necessary to make 
additional investment, such as in hotels, in order to continue attracting international tourists, 
as the lack of hotels has become conspicuous. 
Since the beginning of 2015, exports have been declining again, but this has been caused by 
a temporary pause in the U.S. economic recovery and the slowdown in growth in emerging 
economies, including China. 
(3)  
Another  criticism  concerning  monetary  policy  is  that  QQE  will  weaken  fiscal 
discipline  by  making  it  easier  for  the  government  to  issue  JGBs.  Needless  to  say,  the 
objective  of  monetary  policy  is  to  dispel  the  deflationary  mindset  and  achieve  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent, thereby improving and stabilizing economic activity. 
                                                
9   Monetary Affairs Department, “Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing: Assessment of Its Effects in the 
Two  Years  since  Its  Introduction,”  Bank  of  Japan  Review  Series,  2015-E-3,  May  2015;  Kikuo  Iwata  and 
Yutaka  Harada,  “Kinyu  Seisaku  to  Seisan:  Yoso  Infureritsu  no  Keiro  (Monetary  Policy  and  Production:  A 
Channel of Expected Inflation Rate),” Waseda Institute of Political Economy Working Paper, No.1202, March 
2013 (available only in Japanese). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
If fiscal discipline weakens due to monetary policy, the same is true in the case of a tax hike. 
If the government squanders revenues because it is easy to issue JGBs, I believe that it will 
also  squander  additional  revenues  gained  from  a  tax  hike.  The  government  and  the 
parliament are responsible for maintaining fiscal discipline, and monetary policy should be 
independent. 
(4)  
Another line of criticism is that QQE is a failure because prices are not rising. QQE 
would  be  criticized  as  a  serious  failure  if  prices  rose  without  employment  growth.  In  my 
opinion,  growing  employment  means  that  this  policy  has  been  very  successful.  Prices  will 
rise  in  due  course  in  line  with  the  narrowing  of  the  output  gap  and  a  decline  in  the 
unemployment rate, both of which follow expansion in employment; thus, there is no cause 
for concern. 
(5)  
The last example pertains to future concerns: a serious problem will come up sooner 
or  later  even  though  the  current  situation  may  be  favorable.  For  example,  people  making 
such a criticism argue that QQE eventually will lead to hyperinflation despite the lack of an 
increase in prices so far, a surge in interest rates, or a loss of confidence in the currency due 
to impairment of the Bank’s balance sheet. I think that these arguments are merely pointing 
to what could occur in the future, whereas the present situation has proved to be favorable. 
The October 2015 outlook report 
V.  
I have basically talked about the past thus far, but would now like to discuss the outlook for 
Japan’s  economy  in  and  after  fiscal  2015,  based  on  the  recently  released  October  2015 
Outlook Report. 
The Bank’s baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity – that is, the median of the 
Policy  Board  members’  forecasts  of  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  –  as  in  Chart  11,  was 
1.2 percent for fiscal 2015, 1.4 percent for fiscal 2016, and 0.3 percent for fiscal 2017. 
The  forecast  of  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  for  fiscal  2017  is  low  because  consumption 
obviously is likely to be restrained as the result of another consumption tax hike scheduled to 
take place in April 2017. To respond to this situation, I believe that various approaches are 
expected to be taken under the government’s strategic framework of Abenomics as well as 
the promotion of dynamic engagement of all Japanese citizens. 
The  Bank’s  baseline  scenario  of  the  outlook  for  prices  –  that  is,  the  median  of  the  Policy 
Board members’ forecasts of the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh 
food) – was 0.1 percent for fiscal 2015, 1.4 percent for fiscal 2016, and 3.1 percent for fiscal 
2017 on a basis including the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike, and 1.8 percent 
on a basis  excluding such effects. The forecast for fiscal 2017 is lower than that for fiscal 
2016 because the negative impact of the scheduled consumption tax hike on the economy 
will exert downward pressure on prices as well. 
I have explained the Bank’s baseline scenario so far. My outlook for economic activity and 
prices is only slightly weaker, and I do not feel it is necessary to explain it in detail. 
Risk of economic deceleration 
In  terms  of  economic  activity  and  prices,  there  are  indeed  many  risks  that  deviate  from 
projections.  Here,  I  will  discuss  solely  the  Chinese  economy,  over  which  uncertainty  has 
been spreading since this summer. There is a criticism that data on the Chinese economy 
released  by  the  Chinese  statistics  office  are  unreliable.  I  admit  that  these  data  may  be 
questionable.  But  I  do  not  think  that  the  economic  activity  indicated  by  these  data  has 
diverged widely upward from the actual situation. 
How can we confirm whether the recent economic activity in China indicated by the official 
statistics – for example, production – diverges widely from the actual situation? On this point, 
rather  than  looking  at  statistics  with  a  high  degree  of  processing,  such  as  those  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
production and GDP, I think we should examine economic data with a relatively low degree 
of processing – for example, real exports and imports, as well as the Purchasing Managers’ 
Index (PMI) for manufacturing activity that consists of an indicator compiled by the Chinese 
government and one by a private-sector organization called Markit – or data for economies 
that are closely connected with production in China, such as production in Taiwan and South 
Korea.  All  of  these  data  showed  movements  corresponding  to  the  official  statistics  on 
Chinese  production.  Recently,  however,  the  figures  estimated  by  the  regression  between 
these  data  and  the  official  statistics  have  shown  higher  growth  rates  than  the  official 
statistics. Among them, I have shown only the results calculated using data on Taiwan and 
South Korea in Chart 12. The results indicate that the official statistics on Chinese production 
have not been overly assessed upward. 
Japan’s exports to China may face stagnation due to the economic slowdown in China, and 
this  eventually  may  lead  to  deceleration  in  Japan’s  economy.  In  fact,  Japan’s  exports  to 
China have already been decreasing. However, I do not think that they will see a significant 
further decrease. Meanwhile, the possibility cannot be ruled out that, if such a decrease in 
exports becomes large, this will lead to a decline in production, and further to a deterioration 
in employment. 
Concluding remarks 
As I mentioned, QQE has been exerting its intended effects. Despite the negative impact of 
the April 2014 consumption tax hike, employment has continued to recover. The active job 
openings-to-applicants  ratio  has  risen  in  all  regions,  although  it  had  been  said  that 
Abenomics  would  not  benefit  local  economies. It  also  has been  said  that  wages  have  not 
increased  despite  the  rise  in  employment,  but  hourly  wages  have  been  rising.  Employee 
income – that is, wages multiplied by the number of employees – also has increased in real 
terms.  Corporate  profits  have  been  increasing  as  well,  and  thus  so  has  income.  If  these 
developments  lead  to  positive  movements  in  spending,  such  as  consumption  and 
investment, production will recover. Unfortunately, however, recoveries in consumption and 
investment remain weak despite the continued rise in income. 
Prices have not risen as much as initially had been expected, but I think that QQE would be 
criticized as a serious failure if prices rose without employment growth. Prices eventually will 
start rising as the output gap in the overall economy tightens. We will be able to confirm by 
the end of fiscal 2015 that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is accelerating toward 
2 percent. 
However, there are still risks of economic deceleration in Japan, caused by factors such as 
(1)  a further  slowdown  in  emerging  economies, particularly  China;  (2) the  possibility  of  an 
unexpected  shock  stemming  from  an  interest  rate  hike  in  the  United  States;  and  (3)  a 
resurgence of the European sovereign debt crisis. If the virtuous cycle of income to spending 
ceases to operate, with employment deteriorating, consequently undermining the mechanism 
through  which  prices  trend  upward,  I  think  that  the  Bank  should  implement  additional 
monetary easing without any hesitation. Particular attention also should be paid to the fact 
that indicators of employment are lagging those of economic activity. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
  10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11 
  12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13 
 14 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
