   Luis M Linde: Performance of and outlook for the Spanish economy 
Testimony by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, before the Senate in connection 
with the draft State budget for 2016, Madrid, 23 September 2015. 
 Luis M Linde: Performance of and outlook for the Spanish economy 
Testimony by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, before the Senate in connection 
with the draft State budget for 2016, Madrid, 23 September 2015. 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
In my appearance today, as part of the process of discussion and approval of the budget in 
the Senate, I will focus on analysing the performance of, and outlook for, the Spanish economy 
and  on  the  role  of  the  State  budget  for  2016,  following  approval  of  the  draft  law  by  the 
government on 31 July, and the role of the Budget Plan for 2016, submitted to the Council of 
Ministers on 11 September. 
The external setting of the Spanish economy 
Heightened uncertainty is presently the most noteworthy feature of the external setting of the 
Spanish economy. 
The recovery in the advanced economies and the return to normal on the international financial 
markets  have  been  affected  by  the  consequences  of  the global  economic  slowdown,  as  a 
result of the downturn in some emerging economies, particularly China, and especially in light 
of the difficulties involved in assessing its real magnitude in the medium term. 
The  risk  that  the  figures  that  are  now  emerging  might  herald  a  sharp  correction  in  the 
imbalances that built up in the Chinese economy during the lengthy period of strong growth is 
having a negative impact on world trade, oil prices and the stock markets and foreign exchange 
markets.  It  is  also  very  probably  having  an  effect  on  the  timing  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
decision to raise its key policy rates. 
A  more  positive  development,  however,  is  the  approval  and  start-up  of  the  Third  Bailout 
Programme for Greece, which has mitigated another key source of uncertainty for both the 
European and the Spanish economy. 
In the euro area, GDP rose by 0.4% in Q2. This is lower than the Q1 figure (0.5%) and it is 
also lower than most forecasts of public and private sector analysts. Along the same lines, on 
3 September the European Central Bank (ECB) revised down slightly its growth projections for 
the euro area, for both 2015 and 2016, to 1.4% and 1.7%, respectively. These figures continue, 
in any event, to be more positive than those expected at the end of last year. 
The inflation projections were also revised down, to 0.1% for 2015 and 1.1% for 2016. Inflation 
is, therefore, expected to continue to rise, in 2017 also, but at a slower pace, remaining still 
some distance from the price stability target of 2%. 
On 3 September the ECB reiterated that it was willing and able, if need be, to adopt a more 
expansionary monetary policy stance. The various measures taken, including in particular the 
purchases  of  government  debt  securities,  have  allowed  a  more  uniform  transmission  of 
expansionary momentum to the euro area countries. This benefits, in particular, the countries 
such as Spain that were hardest hit by the fragmentation of European financial markets. 
The  financing  conditions  of  the  Spanish  economy  have  improved  significantly.  Lending  is 
slowly but gradually returning to normal, as households and firms undertake the necessary 
deleveraging and new financing flows towards those that are in the best position to take on 
new  investment  and  spending  projects.  As  the  cost  of  these  new  funds  is  lower,  this  also 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   reinforces  the  fiscal  consolidation  process  and  helps  improve  the  balance  of  payments 
position. 
Performance of and outlook for the Spanish economy 
Compared with the weakening in the euro area, GDP in Spain grew by 1% in Q2, slightly above 
the growth rate for the opening months of the year. This figure confirms the recovery in the 
Spanish economy, the progress made in the correction of imbalances and the improvement in 
financing conditions for households and firms. 
GDP  growth  in  Q2  continued  to  be  based  on  highly  robust  domestic  demand,  with  some 
quickening  among  the  components  most  closely  linked  to  private  demand  (household 
consumption and investment in capital goods and housing). However, net external demand 
made a slightly negative contribution, as has been the case almost continuously since the start 
of the recovery, owing to the strong import momentum. 
The latest indicators, for Q3, suggest that this growth trajectory will hold in the second half of 
the year, in keeping with the Banco de España’s pre-summer projection of GDP growth of 
slightly over 3% in 2015. For 2016 the estimate was marginally lower (2.7%), on the back of a 
degree of weakening in some of the factors that have driven growth this year, stemming in the 
main from the drop in oil prices and the depreciation of the euro. 
As  I  indicated  earlier,  the  outlook  for  the  external  setting  has  deteriorated  and  there  is 
heightened uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets. It is too soon to assess the scale 
of  these  developments  and  their  possible  impact  on  the  growth  prospects  for  the  Spanish 
economy. In any event, the downside risks have increased, making it even more important to 
maintain the policies that have permitted economic recovery, job creation and the correction 
of imbalances. 
Spain’s higher growth will come from the strong rate of expansion of national demand. It is to 
be  hoped  that  higher  household  disposable  income,  together  with  the  foreseeable 
improvement in credit conditions, will continue to boost consumption and prompt a recovery in 
housing investment. In turn, strong final demand and a gradual return to normal in financial 
conditions will continue to have a positive impact on investment. 
In the area of foreign trade, the latest projections pointed to a practically neutral contribution 
from net external demand in 2015 and 2016. Exports were expected to move upwards, driven 
by the progressive recovery of foreign markets in 2016 and by the effects of exchange rate 
depreciation heightening the gains in competitiveness built up over the last few years. Imports 
were  projected  to  remain  buoyant,  in  line  with  final  demand.  The  data  on  foreign  trade 
transactions for the first half are in line with this forecast made in June. 
Until June the balance of payments performed more strongly than last year. In the first six 
months the current account balance reached a surplus of 0.6% of GDP compared with a deficit 
of 0.1% last year. The bulk of this improvement derived from the smaller energy deficit due to 
cheaper  imports,  and  from  the  smaller  income  deficit.  By  contrast,  the  non-energy  goods 
surplus has continued to shrink due to the greater vigour of our imports of this type of goods. 
The dynamism of imports stems in part from the momentum of domestic spending. It should 
be kept in mind that gains and losses in competitiveness manifest themselves not only in export 
capacity,  but  also  in  competition  in  the  domestic  market  between  national  production  and 
imports. The vigour with which imports are reacting to the upsurge in demand signals the need 
to maintain and further pursue the improvements in competitiveness. 
The recovery of output has been accompanied by the somewhat more expansionary behaviour 
of  employment  than  might  be  expected  from  historical  patterns.  Both  the  second-quarter 
Spanish Labour Force Survey figures and the Quarterly National Accounts estimates released 
at the end of August reflect high employment growth rates in the first half of the year (3% year-
on-year; around half a million new jobs). The most recent data on Social Security registrations, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   i.e. those for July and August, show a certain moderation in the rate of job creation in this 
period, albeit still in a positive vein. 
Labour costs continued to moderate in the first half of the year, reflecting the greater flexibility 
with which firms can adjust their labour conditions to the macroeconomic environment. If the 
trend prevailing in the past year and a half continues, the rise in employment may put the 
unemployment rate at around 20% in 2016 Q4. 
In the realm of inflation, the recent energy price falls have interrupted the course of recovery 
of the CPI. After posting positive year-on-year rates in June and July, for the first time in nearly 
a year, the overall price index slipped back (by –0.4%) in August. 
It is important, however, to emphasise the temporary nature of this new bout of disinflation, 
linked to the recent oil price fall in the international markets. In fact, the rate of change of the 
CPI excluding energy increased by 0.9% in August, growing slightly faster than in July, while 
the indicator which excludes unprocessed food as well, so-called “core inflation”, grew by 0.7%. 
The latest data have not invalidated the outlook for gradual recovery of inflation reflected in the 
most recent forecasts. 
Budgetary policy in 2016 
As I have said in previous appearances before the Senate, the primary objective of budgetary 
policy  is  to  ensure  that  the  recovery  is  underpinned  by  lasting  stability.  In  particular,  it  is 
indispensable to persevere with the strategy of fiscal consolidation leading to the stabilisation 
and subsequent reduction of the public debt ratio. 
The improvement in the cyclical conditions envisaged in the macroeconomic scenario used to 
prepare  the  draft  Budget  has  a  positive  effect  on  public  finances  owing  to  increased  tax 
collection, a further drop in unemployment benefits and a progressive reduction of the average 
interest rates paid on public debt. All this means that the budgetary policy measures to meet 
the budget deficit targets are less costly. 
Specifically, the draft State budget envisages economic growth of 3.0% for 2016, slightly below 
the 3.3% projected for 2015, with growth of domestic demand and a progressive recovery of 
inflation rates which would lead to an increase in nominal GDP of nearly 4%. 
Against  this  background,  the  overall  general  government  deficit  for  the  coming  year  will 
foreseeably stand below 3%, the ceiling established in the Stability and Growth Pact, while the 
public debt/GDP ratio will decrease for the first time since 2007. 
The  State  and  Social  Security  budget  under  discussion  here  is  the  first  element  of  this 
budgetary strategy. However, a few days ago the general government budget plan for 2016 
was released. It includes the local and regional government projections, so it allows the fiscal 
policy analysis for the coming year to be completed. 
This Budget Plan is crucial, not only because these regional and local governments are now 
together responsible for more than 40% of overall general government expenditure, but also 
because their initiatives are essential for implementing fiscal consolidation. In fact, the regional 
governments will have to bear almost half of the reduction of the government deficit envisaged 
for 2015 and 2016 (which amounts to 3 pp of GDP in cumulative terms for general government 
overall), by moderating their deficits by 1 pp of GDP in 2015 and by 0.4 pp in 2016. 
In any event, it should be taken into account that the early submission of the Budget Plan for 
2016 means that it does not include information on the essential outlines of the regional and 
local  government  budgets,  which  makes  it  difficult  to  evaluate.  Allow  me  to  underline  the 
importance  and  also  the  complexity  of  preparing  this  document  in  an  environment  as 
decentralised as that existing in Spain. Its content should permit an analysis of the compatibility 
of  the  fiscal  targets  set  and  the  budgets  of  the  different  levels  of  government;  this  entails 
significant challenges in terms of accounting and aggregation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   The starting point for the 2016 fiscal consolidation strategy is, firstly, the assumption that the 
government deficit target for 2015 will be met, which requires a reduction of 1.6 pp of GDP 
with respect to the deficit observed in 2014. The available information on the budget outturn to 
date in National Accounts terms shows that, on data to May, the consolidated aggregate of 
central government, regional government and Social Security recorded a deficit of 2.2% of 
GDP, close to 0.2 pp of GDP lower than the figure recorded in the same period of the previous 
year.  In  relation  to  this  information,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  Social  Security  surplus 
decreased by 0.2 pp of GDP, compared with the required improvement of 0.5 pp, and the 
regional government deficit narrowed by 0.1 pp of GDP, compared with the reduction of 1 pp 
envisaged for the whole year. In consequence, in order to meet the general government deficit 
target  for  the  year,  the  increase  in  revenue  and/or  the  containment  of  spending  in  the 
remainder of the year will need to be greater than that observed in the early months of the 
year. 
The main changes in the State and Social Security Budget for 2016 are, on the revenue side, 
the application of the second phase of the tax reform designed in 2014 and, on the expenditure 
side, still in the context of observing the spending ceiling, certain expansionary measures such 
as the approval of a wage increase of 1% for public employees, payment of the second part of 
the  salary  payment  eliminated  in  2012,  and  the  general  increase  in  the  average  staff 
replacement rate to 50%. The 2016 Budget Plan presents an estimate of the impact of these 
measures on regional and local governments, which are the levels of government that manage 
the  most  labour-intensive  public  services.  Noteworthy  in  the  area  of  Social  Security  is  the 
revaluation of pensions by 0.25%, in accordance with the application of the new revaluation 
index. 
In light of the macroeconomic developments envisaged and the above-mentioned measures, 
the  2016  Budget  Plan  anticipates  growth  of  around  4.5%  in  overall  general  government 
revenue,  which  is  slightly  higher  than  projected  nominal  GDP.  This  would  take  the  public 
revenue/GDP ratio to 38% in 2016, compared with 37.8% estimated for 2015. 
On the expenditure side, the State spending ceiling, the improvement in the economic situation 
and the application of the above-mentioned measures to overall general government would – 
according to the estimations of the 2016 Budget Plan – give rise to a decrease of 1.4 pp in the 
public  expenditure/GDP  ratio.  The  decline,  as  a  percentage  of  GDP,  in  government 
consumption, social transfers and the interest burden is particularly noteworthy. 
As  a  result  of  the  interplay  between  these  fiscal  targets  and  the  macroeconomic  setting 
described above, the budgetary policy stance can be described as practically neutral, if the 
estimations of the change in the primary structural balance included in the 2016 Budget Plan 
are taken into consideration. Clearly, if any of the risks to growth I mentioned earlier were to 
materialise,  or  financing  costs  were  to  increase,  it  would  be  more  difficult  to  meet  the 
government  deficit  commitments,  and  this  must  continue  to  be  the  main  aim  of  Spanish 
budgetary policy. The enhanced credibility of Spanish economic policy in recent years is a 
result of the achievements in the area of fiscal consolidation; to maintain this credibility we 
need to continue and complete the process of correcting the fiscal imbalances. 
Conclusions 
The Spanish economy has made visible progress in the correction of the external imbalance, 
the deleveraging of households and firms, the redressing of fiscal balances towards levels 
more  compatible  with  the  sustainability  of  public  finances  and  the  restructuring  and 
consolidation of the banking sector. Unemployment has also begun to decrease significantly. 
The reforms undertaken within Spain, along with the headway made in furthering economic 
and monetary union and the ECB’s highly expansionary monetary policy, have proven key to 
restoring  confidence.  However,  the  legacy  of  the  crisis,  eight  years  after  its  onset,  is  still 
burdensome as shown by the high levels of unemployment and foreign debt. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   In this setting, the main risk is that of doubts arising over the continuity of the macroeconomic, 
fiscal and financial re-balancing drive. Such doubts could prompt a deterioration of confidence 
and a fresh tightening of financing conditions which is highly significant for a country like Spain 
with a very high net debtor position, that is, ongoing net borrowing. 
Undoubtedly, therefore, in order to avoid reversals in the achievements attained, it is necessary 
to persevere with competitiveness-enhancing and fiscal consolidation policies, which provide 
the foundations for confidence, economic growth and job creation. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
