  François Groepe: Strengthening South Africa’s resolution framework for 
financial institutions 
Address by Mr François Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
public  workshop  on  the  discussion  paper  titled  “Strengthening  South  Africa’s  resolution 
framework for financial institutions, Cape Town, 15 September 2015. 
Introduction: addressing ‘too big to fail’ 
 After  the  global  financial  crisis  of  2007/08,  and  the  severe  and  lingering  consequences 
thereof on the global economy, one of the key items on the agenda of the G-20 (the Group of 
Twenty Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors) was to address the ‘too big to fail’ 
problem. 
During the past couple of decades, financial sectors have outgrown the size of their national 
economies and have expanded beyond their national borders. The individual balance sheets 
of large, global financial conglomerates are now larger than those of most economies. For 
example, the balance sheet of JP Morgan Chase amounted to US$2,6 trillion in 2014 – larger 
than the gross domestic product, or GDP, of all but the six largest economies in the world1. 
Moreover, the activities of these large financial institutions are highly interconnected, and the 
services  they  provide  are  inseparably  integrated  into  the  modern  financial  system  and  the 
global  economy.  Unlike  non-financial  corporates,  which  can  be  liquidated  in  the  event  of 
failure even if they are large, the failure of a single large financial institution can disrupt the 
functioning of the whole financial system and the economy so that the ultimate cost of the 
failure far exceeds the initial losses that caused the failure.1 
This is what had forced governments to intervene in past financial crises, and what came to 
be known as the ‘too big to fail’ problem. 
The ‘too big to fail’ problem is not only a global phenomenon. In South Africa, banks’ total 
assets  amount  to  some  R4,4  trillion.  This  approximates  to  125  per  cent  of  South  Africa’s 
GDP  of  about  R3,7 trillion.  The  assets  of  long-term  insurers  amount  to about  R2,4  trillion, 
and those of self-administered pension and provident funds to R1,7 trillion2. These are just 
some  examples  to  show  how  important  financial  institutions  have  become  in  our  own 
economy, and how exposed the system has become to the consequences of a failure of one 
of  the  significant  financial  institutions,  especially  since  the  financial  system  is  highly 
concentrated  and  interconnected.  Even  if  government  were  willing  to  support  these 
institutions  in  the  event  of  failure,  such  an  intervention  would  bring  a  huge  burden  on  the 
public purse. We are fortunate that our large financial institutions are all in a healthy financial 
condition and well managed, with a very low probability of failure. However, this is also the 
best time to prepare for the unlikely event of failure.2 
Lessons from the financial crisis for resolution 
The global financial crisis as well as the way in which both governments and central banks 
had to act to contain the effects thereof has taught us important lessons. The list of lessons 
is extensive, but I will highlight a few that have a particular bearing on resolution and on what 
we are attempting to achieve with a strengthened resolution framework. 
                                                
1  China,  France,  Germany,  Japan,  United  Kingdom  and  United  States  (data  from  the  International  Monetary 
Fund and the World Bank) 
 All amounts quoted from the June 2015 Quarterly Bulletin 
2 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
 Implicit support leads to moral hazard. If banks believe that they will not be allowed 
to fail (i.e. that they will be ‘bailed out’), they tend to take greater risk. Similarly, if 
bank  managers  and  executives  are  rewarded  on  the  basis  of  profitability  without 
facing the consequences of excessive risk-taking, it creates skewed incentives. This 
did not happen in South Africa on any large scale, which helped to protect us from 
the  worst  of  the  crisis,  but  it  certainly  happened  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  with 
devastating effects. 
Implicit support leads to a mispricing of risk. If investors believe that banks will be 
bailed  out  and  will  therefore  not  be  liquidated,  they  basically  believe  that  their 
investment  risk  profile  is  similar  to  that  of  the  sovereign.  An  effective  resolution 
framework should promote market discipline by ensuring that investors and creditors 
price  for  the  risk  of  the  institution  in  which  they  invest,  without  relying  on  a 
government bailout and hence an implicit subsidy. 
Markets  overreact  in  a  crisis.  An  effective  resolution  framework  should  enable 
authorities  to  prevent  excessive  losses  that  arise  from  fire  sales,  frozen  markets, 
excessive  volatility,  additional  collateral  requirements,  margin  calls  and  early 
termination rights. 
Early intervention and corrective action reduce the losses resulting from failure. The 
cost of a failure can be significantly reduced if authorities have the power and the 
tools to intervene while the financial institution is still solvent. Once the market loses 
confidence in the ability of an institution to recover, its failure becomes a self-fulfilling 
prophecy. 
Planning  and  preparing  for  resolution  is  important.  Although  the  reason  for  a 
possible failure cannot be predicted, and although the likelihood of failure could be 
very  small,  proper  planning  always  puts  authorities  in  a  better  position  to 
successfully  manage  an  orderly  resolution.  Being  caught  unawares  –  without  the 
necessary information, resolution tools and/or cooperation agreements – may cause 
delays during which asset values and market confidence are eroded and possibly 
destroyed. 
It  is  not  only  banks  whose failure  can  cause  a financial  crisis.  The failure  of  non-
bank financial institutions can have equally devastating effects on financial stability, 
as  was  clear  from  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers,  AIG  and  others.  Authorities 
therefore need tools to deal with the failure of various kinds of financial institutions, 
as well as of financial groups. 
Financial failures cause hardship for ordinary people. Financial crises can result in 
job  losses, financial  losses,  and  an  inability  to  conclude  transactions.  An  effective 
resolution  framework  should  contain  safety  net  arrangements  to  protect  the  most 
vulnerable citizens from severe hardship as a result of a financial failure. 
Cooperation and coordination among regulators and other authorities is essential to 
achieving  an  orderly  resolution,  especially  if  a  financial  group  operates  in  various 
jurisdictions.  Coordination  arrangements  should  be  supported  by  appropriate 
legislation. 
The international response 
Various international standard-setting bodies, including the G-20 and the Financial Stability 
Board 
the 
implementation of enhanced regulatory standards to increase the resilience of the financial 
sector to shocks. 
(FSB),  have  made  significant  progress 
in  developing  and  promoting 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  South Africa’s own regulatory framework is undergoing significant changes as a result of this 
response,  with  the  introduction  of  Basel  III,  …  (SAM),  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives 
market reforms and the Twin Peaks regulatory framework, to name but a few. 
However,  even  the  most  effective  regulatory  framework  cannot  completely  rule  out  the 
possibility  that  financial  institutions  and  financial  groups  may  fail.  Therefore,  significant 
attention has been given to the development of new standards for resolution. 
G-20  member  countries  have  committed  themselves  to  the  objective  of  implementing 
measures which will allow large financial institutions fail in a way that critical economic and 
financial functions continue uninterrupted and without taxpayer money while maintaining the 
financial stability of the sector. To achieve this objective, the FSB has developed a set of new 
international standards that G-20 member countries have to implement in order to make it 
possible  to  resolve  the  failure  of  large,  complex  and  interconnected  financial  institutions, 
which  often  operate  in  multiple  jurisdictions,  without  having  to  provide  public  support  and 
without interrupting the provision of critical functions. Drawing on lessons learnt during the 
global financial crisis, the FSB developed the Key attributes for effective resolution regimes 
(Key attributes), which describe the minimum set of legal powers, processes and governance 
arrangements that countries should have in place in order to achieve the orderly resolution of 
failing financial institutions. G-20 member countries have to comply with these Key attributes 
from 2016. 
The second thematic peer review on resolution, conducted by the FSB in May 2015, showed 
that G-20 member countries have made progress in implementing the Key attributes. In the 
European  Union  (EU),  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (or  BRRD)  was 
introduced,  which  contains  the  full  range  of  resolution  powers.  The  BRRD  is  being 
incorporated into national legislation by EU members. In the United States (US), the Dodd-
Frank Act introduced all but one of the Key attributes powers. Six jurisdictions have all but 
two  or  three  powers.  Most  jurisdictions  have  reported  that  they  are  planning  and 
implementing  reforms.  Significant  progress  has  also  been  made  in  the  areas  of  recovery 
planning  and  resolution  planning,  in  particular  with  regard  to  global  systemically  important 
banks (G-SIBs). 
South Africa’s response 
As a G-20 member, South Africa is committed to implementing the framework contained in 
the Key attributes. But this is not merely an exercise to comply with international standards; 
rather, this is seen as a key element of a resilient financial sector that can withstand shocks 
and continue to serve the economy and all its stakeholders, even in the event of a systemic 
disruption or failure. 
A thematic peer review conducted by the FSB in 2013 and a comprehensive review of South 
Africa’s  resolution  framework  in  2009/10  under  the  auspices  of  the  World  Bank’s  First 
Initiative Programme revealed gaps in a number of areas where South  
Africa’s resolution powers did not comply with the Key attributes. These gaps were confirmed 
in  the  findings  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  in  its  2014  Financial  Sector 
Assessment  Programme  (FSAP)  for  South  Africa.  Our  current  framework  for  dealing  with 
failed financial institutions is fragmented across various pieces of legislation and regulations. 
In  general,  there  are  inconsistencies  in  dealing  with  different  kinds  of  financial  institutions, 
inadequate  powers  for  ‘business  rescue’  practices  that  would  be  appropriate  for  financial 
institutions,  and  some  implicit  assumptions  and  beliefs  that  drive  activities  in  the  financial 
sector  but  that  would  not  always  be  possible  or  realistic.  Table  1  in  the  paper  contains  a 
more complete assessment of South Africa’s existing resolution framework against the Key 
attributes, and highlights the gaps that the new framework should address. 
The new resolution framework is intended to rectify the inconsistencies; to clarify the position 
of investors, depositors, policyholders and creditors in the event of a failure; to ensure the fair 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  and transparent allocation of losses with appropriate safeguards; to put measures in place 
for the funding of resolution actions; to provide protection where it is most needed; and to 
introduce the tools necessary for maintaining financial stability and ensuring the continuation 
of critical financial services. 
The key elements of an effective resolution framework 
The discussion paper sets out the key elements of an effective resolution framework, as it 
could be applied to South Africa. 
It  is  important  to  understand  that  the  term  ‘resolution’  is  not  a  synonym  for  ‘liquidation’, 
‘curatorship’  or  ‘administration’,  the  latter  terms  representing  South  Africa’s  current 
arrangements for dealing with failed financial institutions. Resolution in the context of the Key 
attributes is a new concept that requires a paradigm shift. Going forward, resolution is about 
earlier intervention, preserving value, restoring confidence, and preventing ‘fire sale’ losses. 
Going forward, resolution is about allocating losses where they are due without necessarily 
having  to  liquidate,  and  about  being  able  to  rectify  malpractices,  structural  problems  and 
mismanagement  while  there  is  still  a  chance  for  recovery.  Going  forward,  resolution  is 
focused  at  maintaining  critical  functions  rather  than  rescuing  legal  entities.  Going  forward, 
resolution is about protecting broader financial stability instead of protecting only particular 
groups of creditors or depositors. 
The  intention  is  to  establish  a  new,  strengthened  framework  for  resolution  by  drafting  and 
promulgating a Special Resolution Bill. The main objective of this Special Resolution Bill will 
be to maintain financial stability in the event of an institutional failure. 
I will highlight the main elements of the new framework, each of which is discussed in detail 
in the paper itself. 
i.  
The paper introduces the concept of a ‘designated resolution institution’, applicable 
to any financial institution whose failure would disrupt financial stability. The Special 
Resolution  Bill  will  apply  to  all  banks  and  to  systemically  significant  non-financial 
institutions.  The  Bill  will  potentially  (but  not  necessarily)  apply  to  financial  groups 
from  the  level  of  the  ultimate  holding  company;  this  will  be  determined  by  the 
structure and operations of each financial conglomerate. 
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  will  be  the  Resolution  Authority,  in  line  with  its 
financial  stability  mandate.  However,  appropriate  consultation  and  coordination 
requirements  as  well  as  appropriate  governance  and  accountability  arrangements 
will be in place. 
Resolution plans and resolvability assessments will become a legal requirement in 
terms  of  the  Special  Resolution  Bill,  and  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  will  be 
able to share these plans or parts thereof with other regulators, if required. 
A  deposit  guarantee  scheme  will  be  established  as  part  of  the  new  resolution 
framework. A panel of experts is currently conducting a research project to finalise 
detailed proposals on the design features of the scheme.  
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  as  the  Resolution  Authority,  should  have  the 
ability  to  share  information  with  other  regulators  and  enter  into  agreements  to 
facilitate the execution of an orderly group-wide resolution strategy. 
The Special Resolution  Bill should provide for pre-resolution powers  which should 
be  available  to  the  Resolution  Authority  in  order  to  facilitate  ongoing  resolution 
planning,  the  operation  of  the  deposit  guarantee  scheme,  and  cross-border 
cooperation. In addition, the powers needed in a resolution process are also needed 
to implement the resolution strategy. The powers proposed in the paper should be 
available to all institutions but may not be equally appropriate to all institutions in all 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 vii. 
viii. 
 circumstances.  The  powers  used  should  be  proportionate  to  the  nature  and 
systemic significance of the institution being resolved. 
The  point  at  which  an  institution  is  put  into  resolution  (the  ‘point  of  resolution’  or 
POR)  will  be  triggered  if  the  institution  is  no  longer  able  to  meet  its  minimum 
prudential requirements or is judged to be no longer viable, if recovery options have 
become  depleted  or  ineffective,  and  if  no  private-sector  solution  seems  likely  or 
feasible. These criteria are applicable to all financial institutions, not only to banks. 
The  paper  proposes  a  number  of  new  stabilisation  powers,  namely  the  ability  to 
establish a bridge institution, to transfer assets and liabilities, and to ‘bail in’ within 
resolution  (the  so-called  ‘statutory  bail-in’).  The  paper  also  proposes  a  creditor 
hierarchy for financial institutions that will facilitate bail-in in a way that no creditor or 
investor will be worse off in resolution than they would have been in liquidation. Bail-
in is the tool available to the Resolution Authority to recapitalise a failed institution or 
a bridge institution, and to allocate losses to shareholders, creditors and investors 
outside of liquidation. Bail-in can contribute to greater market discipline and better 
pricing for risk, provided that the conditions for and the hierarchy of the instruments 
that are potentially subject to the bail-in are fair, transparent and well understood.  
Conclusion 
I  trust  that  you  will  find  this  workshop  interesting  and  useful  to  understand  what  we  are 
aiming to  achieve  with  a  strengthened resolution framework. We  depend  on  your  valuable 
input  on  the  proposals  presented  in  the  discussion  paper  to  ensure  that  we  design  a 
framework that will serve our financial system better into the future. I foresee likely changes 
to  the  policy  proposals  once  we  have  processed  all  the  comments  and  inputs.  We  look 
forward  to  receiving  your  honest  and  constructive  opinions  to  help  us  achieve  the  best 
possible outcome. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
