   Juyeol Lee: Leverage in Asia 
Opening address by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the Bank of Korea-IMF 
conference “Leverage in Asia: Lessons from the Past, What’s New Now?, and Where to Watch 
Out For?”, Seoul, 11 December 2015. 
 Greeting 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for the Bank of Korea, together with the IMF, to host this conference on 
“Leverage  in  Asia,”  which  is  sponsored  by  the  Korean  Ministry  of  Strategy  and  Finance.  I 
sincerely welcome all of you attending. My special gratitude goes to Director Siddharth Tiwari 
of  the  IMF  Strategy,  Policy  and  Review  Department,  our  keynote  speaker,  and  to  Deputy 
Director  Kalpana  Kochhar  of  the  IMF  Asia  and  Pacific  Department,  the  conference  co-
organizer. I would also like to thank First Vice Minister Joo Hyung-Hwan of the Ministry of 
Strategy  and  Finance,  who  will  deliver  the  welcoming  remarks.  Let  me  express  sincere 
appreciation as well to all of our esteemed conference speakers, discussants, moderators, and 
panelists. 
Leverage in emerging market economies has drawn increased attention lately, given the so-
called  G2  risks,  stemming  from  U.S.  monetary  policy  normalization  and  slowing  growth  in 
China. At this important juncture, I think today’s conference is a very meaningful opportunity 
to consider the current status of leverage in Asia and the related potential risks, in order to 
seek effective policy measures in response. 
Current status of leverage in Asia 
During  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  global  economy  suffered  a  severe  recession.  Asian 
economies were also affected, but managed to recover from the crisis relatively quickly thanks 
to their lower leverage compared to the U.S. and Europe. 
Whereas advanced countries have carried out deleveraging since the crisis, leverage ratios in 
Korea and many other Asian countries have been rising. This is due largely to the abundant 
global liquidity provided by major advanced countries through their unprecedented quantitative 
easing, and to the accommodative policies pursued in Asian countries. The resulting lower 
borrowing costs, coupled with easier access to finance, have led to higher leverage in our 
region. 
Effects of increased leverage on the economy 
Leverage  occurs  in  the  process  where  economic  agents  fund  their  economic  activities. 
Specifically, it increases when households try to smooth out fluctuations in their consumption, 
when firms raise funds for investment, and when the government spends more than its tax 
revenues. As long as leverage increases within a manageable extent, it helps to boost growth 
by promoting economic activities. 
If leverage rises excessively, however, relative to the country’s fundamentals, it can constrain 
consumption, investment and other activities as economic agents’ debt burdens grow. In an 
extreme  case,  it  can  heighten  the  credit  risks  of  borrowers  and  financial  institutions,  and 
destabilize  the  financial  system.  The  country’s  sovereign  rating  can  fall  as  a  result,  with 
inevitable impacts on the real economy. 
Since  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  financial  interconnectedness  across  countries  has 
deepened greatly due to expanded international capital movements. As a result, changes in 
monetary policy or financial conditions in one country can have considerable effects on those 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
in other countries. And if one country suffers financial instability owing to excessive leverage, 
then other countries are more likely to face contagion risks now more than ever before. 
Policy response measures 
In the future, the degree of global financial accommodation is likely to gradually decline with 
the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve’s  monetary  policy  normalization,  leading  international  financial 
conditions to develop in directions different from those seen until now. In these circumstances, 
both  the  public  and  private  sectors  need to  devote  greater  attention to stable,  appropriate 
management of their leverage. 
Financial institutions need to improve their capabilities for screening when supplying credit to 
borrowers.  This  will  allow  them  to  manage  their  leverage  well,  both  quantitatively  and 
qualitatively. They also need to expand the shares of stable funding, to minimize any adverse 
shocks in case the global financial environment changes. 
Borrowers, for their part, need to maintain stable financial structures, by properly managing 
their  risks  stemming  from  future  income  flows,  from  changes  in  interest  rates,  and  from 
possible maturity mismatches between their assets and liabilities. 
On the policy authority side, efforts should be made, using macro-prudential policies, to prevent 
any excessive rise in leverage. 
Corporate restructuring is needed as well, since the continuing operation of inefficient firms 
only leads leverage to increase. And when deciding on monetary and fiscal policies, the effects 
of these policies on leverage should also be carefully investigated. 
Asian  emerging  market  economies  have  substantial  external  debt,  and  are  therefore 
vulnerable  to  external  shocks,  due  for  example,  to  U.S.  dollar  appreciation.  Policymakers 
should thus devote efforts to developing and implementing new measures to ensure external 
sector  stability.  Policies  for  macro-economic  stability  are  of  foremost  importance,  and  the 
strengthening of financial cooperation among countries world wide is also essential. 
Conclusion 
I am confident that today’s conference will be a valuable opportunity for participants to carefully 
evaluate the potential risks associated with leverage in Asian countries, and to discuss in-
depth  policies  to  alleviate  them. I  also  believe  that  the  insightful  suggestions  made  in  this 
conference  will  help  us  to  find  ways  of  strengthening  the  financial  systems  and  economic 
fundamentals of countries in Asia and around the world. 
Let me conclude by saying once again how much I appreciate you all taking time from your 
busy schedules to participate in the conference here today. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
