   François Groepe: Game changers in financial markets – regulation, 
innovation and cybersecurity 
Keynote address by Mr François Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the STRATE, PASA and GIBS Conference, Johannesburg, 29 September 2015. 
 Introduction 
Good day, ladies and gentlemen. 
I would like to thank the organisers of the STRATE, PASA and GIBS Conference for inviting 
me to give this keynote address. 
I look forward to sharing my views on the developments that can be considered game changers 
that  may  affect  financial  markets  and  shall  focus  primarily  on  regulation,  innovation  and 
cybersecurity in this context. 
A game changer can be defined as “a newly introduced element or factor that changes an 
existing situation or activity in a significant way”.1 
Another  way  of  thinking  about  game  changers  may  be  in  terms  of  what  the  well-known 
Austrian-born  economist,  Joseph  Schumpeter,  called  “creative  destruction”.  Schumpeter, 
writing on economic and social evolution in his work Capitalism, socialism and democracy in 
1942, wrote: 
The  opening  up  of  new  markets,  foreign  or  domestic,  and  the  organisational 
development from the craft shop to such concerns as US Steel illustrate the same 
process of industrial mutation – if I may use that biological term – that incessantly 
revolutionises the economic structure from within, incessantly destroying the old 
one, incessantly creating a new one. This process of creative destruction is the 
essential fact about capitalism. 
Inventive economists have since adopted this term to describe the disorderly manner in which 
the free market delivers progress. 
The disruptive nature of innovation is essential for both progress and prosperity, and the theory 
of “creative destruction” gives us some insights into understanding this phenomenon and the 
evolutionary changes that follow in its aftermath. 
Disruptive innovation brings opportunity in the form of productivity gains, for example, but it 
also brings challenges such as increased cyber-threats and vulnerabilities stemming from the 
greater degree of interconnectedness and, in the latter case, increased risks of contagion. 
Regulation,  by  necessity,  has  to  keep  pace  and  respond  to  the  changing  environment. 
Unfortunately, regulators often play catch-up due to the speed of technological change and 
innovation as well as their lagging ability to fully understand the technology and the risks that 
it may give rise to. Despite this, regulators should promote an environment that is conducive 
to technological change and at the very least not become a hindrance or frustrate innovation 
as it supports economic development and growth. In this regard, the OECD opines: 
One of the important lessons of the past two decades has been the pivotal role of 
innovation  in  economic  development. The  build-up  of  innovation  capacities  has 
played a central role in the growth dynamics of successful developing countries. 
These countries have recognised that innovation is not just about high-technology 
products  and  that  innovation  capacity  has  to  be  built  early  in  the  development 
                                                
1  Merriam-Webster dictionary. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   process  in  order to  possess the  learning  capacities  that  will  allow  “catch-up”  to 
happen  …  Ultimately  a successful  development  strategy  has to  build  extensive 
innovation capacities to foster growth.2 
Regulatory developments affecting financial markets 
1. 
The most recent global financial crisis has impacted negatively on the global economy and 
financial markets, and has revealed significant deficiencies in the policy frameworks of many 
countries. In an attempt to address these deficiencies, the G-20 has called for financial markets 
and regulation to be reformed, with the objective of making financial systems more resilient. 
This initiative has accelerated the rate of reform, with governments putting increasing pressure 
on regulatory authorities to adhere to and implement international best practice and standards. 
Activities  offered  by  financial  service  providers  in  the  financial  system  are  highly 
interconnected, and these services are inseparably integrated into both the domestic and the 
international economy, which means that regulatory authorities had to take note of the way in 
which these markets are developing and the role they play within the broader global context. 
The magnitude of the financial system and regulatory reform has been unprecedented. The 
reforms have focused mainly on the banking, insurance and financial markets and providers 
of financial services, as well as on the infrastructure supporting these sectors. 
As  regulatory  frameworks  develop  and  reforms  are  implemented,  new  aspects  to  financial 
regulation come to the fore. Previously, regulators were mainly concerned with the supervision 
of  banks  and  the  oversight  of  payment  systems.  Now  they  have  to  contend  with  a  much 
broader universe (which includes non-bank participants in the financial markets) and consider 
shadow-banking, how it affects the financial system and financial stability, and how to regulate 
these activities. The focus, however, is no longer narrowly on prudential regulation. In this age 
where  we  are  confronted  with  a  society  that  is  well  informed  and  digitally  connected,  that 
proactively engages in consumer activism and that places great emphasis on values such as 
fairness, the spotlight shines brightly on issues such as market conduct, transparency and calls 
to “level the playing fields”. 
It is indeed so that regulation and liberalisation happen in cycles, and periods of deregulation 
are often followed by periods of re-regulation. Given the devastating effects of the most recent 
global  financial  crisis,  the  astronomical  social  costs  resulting  from  it,  and  the  perceptions 
around the role that financial engineering and technology alongside deficient supervision and 
regulation played in the run-up to the crisis, we have inevitably been catapulted into an epoch 
of re-regulation. 
Regulators and economic agents alike face a number of challenges at this point in time. These 
include: 
1. 
International  standards  have  been  developed  –  for  markets,  regulators  and 
participants – to assist with the management of risks and even behaviour. Whether 
they are encapsulated in the new Basel III requirements for capital or liquidity, or in 
the Principles for financial market infrastructures, or in the codes of conduct, these 
standards are introducing requirements that require adherence. Non-compliance with 
these  standards  is  likely  to  lead  to  hefty  penalties.  There  is  a  strong  demand  for 
participants to be accountable and responsible, and to incur liability if they are not 
playing by the rules. This has resulted in numerous large financial-sector firms being 
slapped with fines running into billions of dollars. 
Standards are inextricably linked to the next point, which is governance arrangements 
and remuneration. Governance arrangements have been a focal point for some time 
2. 
                                                
2  OECD Directorate for Science Technology and Industry, 2012, Innovation for development. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3. 
4. 
5. 
  now, and recent events in international markets have highlighted the importance of 
good governance and of ethical behaviour from all stakeholders. The global financial 
crisis has also refocused the attention of regulators on the remuneration structures of 
management  and  other  individuals  participating  in  financial  markets  and  systems. 
This,  in  some  ways,  can  be  related  to  what  economist  describe  as  the  “agency 
problem” and which under certain conditions may result in risk-shifting. This is a key 
area of focus of reform in attempts to promote the soundness of the financial sector 
in  particular,  hence  governance  arrangements  and  remuneration  continue  to  be 
intensely discussed at various international regulatory forums. 
“Shadow-banking”  and  “new  (non-bank)  participants”  have  come  into  sharp  focus 
since the global financial crisis due to their role in the run-up to the global financial 
crisis  and  in  financial  regulatory  arbitrage.  Efforts  to  regulate  these  entities  will 
intensify. This is likely to draw criticism from certain quarters but is entirely justifiable. 
The  reason  is  that  shadow-banking  has  the  potential  to  transform  the  financial 
environment, to open up markets, to promote financial inclusion, to reduce frictional 
costs, and so forth. Hence, the further development of shadow-banking should be 
encouraged, simultaneously mitigating any risks that these entities may pose to the 
financial system and ensuring that the playing fields are level. 
Financial  market  infrastructures  (or  FMIs),  resolution  and  cross-border  issues 
constitute  a  further  challenge.  Central  banks  have  traditionally  fulfilled  the  role  of 
lender of last resort to commercial banks. The global financial crisis has shown that 
central banks may need to reconsider this function and consider the role of FMIs. 
Financial markets are interconnected and integrated internationally, creating a further 
challenge for central banks as they need to consider the position and cross-border 
transactions of global FMIs. 
Conduct has already been raised in terms of standards, codes and governance. As 
much as financial market participants must come to terms with the fact that there are 
now  a  multitude  of  regulators  to  contend  with,  regulators  need  to  consider  the 
mandates  of  other  regulators  and  agree  on  arrangements  or  memorandums  of 
understanding to work with one another to create an enabling environment for a safer 
financial  sector.  It  is  also  vitally  important  that  regulators  do  not  merely  regulate 
because  that  is  their  mandate.  It  is  vital  that  the  impact  of  regulation  is  properly 
assessed ex ante and that careful consideration is lent to the possible unintended 
consequences  and 
regulation  or  
so-called “red tape”. Regulators should strive towards smart and effective regulation 
as opposed to simply issuing more regulations. 
the  economic  costs  of  unnecessary 
Innovation and financial markets 
2. 
Regulators should not inhibit innovation. However, as custodians of financial stability, central 
banks in particular are tasked with the safety and efficiency of financial systems, and should 
act appropriately to address any risks that may emerge. 
Electronic trading in South African bonds 
During 2012, the Bond Market Development Committee, under the auspices of the Financial 
Markets Liaison Group, embarked on an initiative to enhance liquidity in the South African bond 
market. 
The Bond Market Development Committee, chaired by National Treasury, and in consultation 
with the World Bank and bond market stakeholders, has made considerable progress and is 
currently  at  an  advanced  stage  of  the  development  of  an  electronic  trading  platform;  it  is 
envisaged that the platform will be introduced before the end of this year. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   The initial phase will, however, include only government bonds; it will be expanded to corporate 
bonds at a later stage. Initially in the electronic trading platform, primary dealers will be the 
only “price makers” while the rest of the market will be “price takers” but with full access to 
trading and pricing information. 
In addition to the general benefits of enhanced market transparency, credit risk management 
and trading, the electronic trading platform also aims to improve liquidity by expanding this 
platform  to  include  other  market  participants  complying  with  the  requirements  as  market 
makers, in addition to the primary dealers. Competition among market makers is paramount 
to supporting liquidity at an instrument level and to minimising transaction cost. 
The introduction of the electronic trading platform will enable National Treasury and the South 
African Reserve Bank to monitor market-making activities in the secondary bond market, which 
could result in the enhanced monitoring of liquidity conditions. 
Enhancements to over-the-counter trading 
In response to the recommendations of the G-20 and the subsequent Principles for financial 
market infrastructures, the South African Central Securities Depository, known as STRATE, is 
in the process of addressing the lack of transparency and risk management in over-the-counter 
(or OTC) instruments. To address these concerns, the Financial Markets Act was promulgated 
and regulation was passed to include the clearing through a central counter party and to record 
all the financial transactions of OTC derivatives contracts in a Trade Repository. 
Collateral optimisation 
In collateral markets, “collateral optimisation” has become a key objective. Not only do banks 
invest in systems that optimise the way in which their collateral can be utilised, but vendors 
and central securities depositories now also provide these services to their clients. These smart 
systems have built-in intelligence which optimises the way in which the collateral is applied 
and will substitute assets if required. An example is the Clearstream collateral management 
system, which is gaining momentum globally. 
The speed of transactions 
The need for faster services, trading, transactions and payments is stimulated by a generation 
demanding  access  and  speed,  accommodated  by  the  proliferation  of  new  technologies, 
growing familiarity with technology, and expectations of real-time satisfaction if not gratification 
– not only in financial market transactions and payments, but also in communication, services, 
social media and entertainment. 
Participants in financial markets have created systems which enable the “trawling” of financial 
markets  to  detect  opportunities  within  markets  and  then  to  transact  on  these  opportunities 
within milliseconds – also termed “high-frequency trading”. Not only do these transactions take 
place within seconds; the system development and innovation within financial markets makes 
it possible to transact from anywhere in the world 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
Blockchain technology 
Blockchain  technology,  another  example  of  the  recently  trending  phraseology,  enables  the 
ordering (grouping) of various transactions in an inexpensive decentralised manner by making 
use of a number of servers. These transactions are not only limited to near-real-time payments 
but can also include financial market transactions and information relating to the settlement 
thereof. Blockchain has the ability to reduce transaction costs, as it takes away the requirement 
for intermediaries and is completely decentralised. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Blockchain is still in its infancy and while regulators and markets are still trying to get to grips 
with the concept of Bitcoin, newer or more innovative technologies are already on our doorstep. 
Cybersecurity 
3. 
The  developments  in  cyberspace  are  a  cause  of  concern  for  regulators,  financial  market 
participants, business and informed consumers. With the interconnectedness of systems and 
the ease of Internet access, regulators need to understand the cyber-threats that the financial 
system is exposed to. 
Nearly every week one reads about the latest victim of a cyberattack, and the targets range 
from  banking  systems  through  consumer  information  held  by  retailers  to  social  media 
facilitators and even governments. 
The rapid developments in technology and the cyber-world have opened the doors to a new 
and uncharted frontier. Companies and countries alike are trying to get to grips with this latest 
threat  and  to  find  ways  in  which  to  mitigate  the  risk  while  protecting  their  information  and 
reputation at the same time. 
Governments, central banks, financial service providers and companies are expanding their 
cyber-protection capabilities. This means there is a growing demand for the limited technical 
skills  available  in  this  environment.  The  focus  is,  however,  not  only  on  prevention.  In 
responding to security breaches, one has to respond with agility and speed while trying to limit 
the damage done and importantly to ensure continuity of service. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, I would like to revisit the idea of a “game changer”. A game changer can be the 
discovery of something as small as a molecule or the invention of something that transforms 
the way in which we communicate, like mobile telephony. 
The way in which one looks at game-changing innovations will alter the way in which one sees 
the world and will affect one’s strategies and business plans. Game changers can be perceived 
as opportunities or threats, and both the number and the frequency are likely to increase in the 
future. 
No country can afford to have a myopic view and narrow national focus when it considers the 
game changers in financial market developments. Equally, regulators cannot afford to be left 
behind and only react to the changes in financial markets. Regulators must work alongside all 
stakeholders and not only the incumbents to try to understand the disruptive innovations and 
the policy implications thereof. It is important to emphasise the point of incumbents, as Rajan 
and  Zingales  eloquently  set  out  the  role  that  incumbent  coalitions  play  in  financial  system 
developments  but  also  underline  how  such  coalitions  may  hold  back  financial  sector 
development.3 
Lastly, regulators need to be agile and forward thinkers and appreciate that their role extends 
beyond simply regulating. Their role is to help facilitate progress with the ultimate objective of 
improving the quality of peoples’ lives. 
Thank you. 
                                                
3  Rajan,  R.  and Zingales, l.,  2003, ‘The  great  reversals:  the politics  of  financial development in  the twentieth 
century’, Journal of Financial Economics 69, p. 5–50. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
