  Sayuri Shirai: Monetary policies in a diversifying global economy – 
Japan, the United States, and the Asia-Pacific region 
Remarks by Ms Sayuri Shirai, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at the panel 
discussion at the 2015 Asia Economic Policy Conference, organized by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, 20 November 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech and on the Bank of Japan’s website. 
Introduction 
I. 
Thank you very much for inviting me as a panelist to the discussion on monetary policy at the 
2015  Asia  Economic  Policy  Conference  organized  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San 
Francisco. My presentation today will highlight two topics. First, as one of the policymakers at 
the  Bank  of  Japan  (BOJ),  I  would  like  to  talk  about  Japan’s  price  developments  and 
monetary policy by making a comparison with the case of the United States. I will then focus 
on the Asia-Pacific region by summarizing the recent features of price developments and its 
challenges related to monetary policy, covering nine countries (Australia, China, Indonesia, 
Malaysia,  New  Zealand,  the  Philippines,  Singapore,  South  Korea,  and  Thailand).  Let  me 
stress that the views expressed here are entirely my own and do not necessarily represent 
those of the BOJ. 
II. 
Japan’s price developments and monetary policy: comparison with the United 
States 
As  you  may  know,  the  BOJ  adopted  a  2  percent  price  stability  target  in  January  2013, 
followed  by  the  implementation  of  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE)  the 
following April. Partly reflecting the impact of QQE, the year-on-year rate of change in the 
headline  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  turned  positive  in  June  2013.  It  then  achieved 
1.6 percent  in  December  2013  and  March  2014  –  the  highest  rate  of  inflation  since  the 
introduction of QQE after excluding the direct impact of the consumption tax hike. From the 
end of 2014, however, the rate of change in the CPI began to decelerate and since July 2015 
has  been  sitting  at  around  0  percent,  mainly  due  to  drops  in  crude  oil  prices  and  other 
commodity  prices.  The  sluggish  performance  of  headline  price  indices  is  also  commonly 
observed in many other countries. Here, I would like to highlight the features of Japan’s price 
developments in comparison with those of the United States. 
Headline and core price index deviations from 2 percent inflation 
A. 
As the first feature, the year-on-year rate of change in the price index excluding energy has 
been higher than that in the headline price index both in Japan and the United States. In the 
case of Japan, not only has the rate of change in the headline CPI been recently hovering 
around  0  percent,  but  also  that  of  the  core  CPI  (defined  as  all  items  less  fresh  food). 
However,  the  CPI  (excluding  fresh  food  and  energy)  has  risen  to  1.2  percent  (Chart  1). 
Similarly,  in  the  United  States,  the  rate  of  change  in  the  headline  personal  consumption 
expenditures (PCE) deflator has recently been more or less flat, at around 0 percent year-on-
year, but that in the core PCE deflator (defined as all items less food and energy) has been 
around 1.3 percent. The rates of change in the CPI and PCE deflator have been substantially 
below  the  2  percent  target  (or  the  longer-run  goal)  in  the  two  countries.  However,  looking 
ahead, the rates of change in the price indices will likely accelerate as the effect of the crude 
oil price drop wanes in the near future – provided that crude oil prices will at least remain 
unchanged or begin to rise moderately. 
Against this backdrop, it is taking longer than initially projected for the BOJ and the Federal 
Reserve  to  achieve  2  percent  inflation.  In  particular,  for  the  Federal  Reserve,  such  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  prolonged underperformance of prices has not been experienced in recent years, given that 
inflation in the decade prior to the sharp drop in oil prices in October 2014 averaged around 
2 percent,  even  including  the  period  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  One  encouraging 
development in the United States is that economists’ and market-based long-term inflation 
expectations  currently  remain  stable,  at  near  2  percent,  which  indicates  that  the  recent 
sluggish  price  performance  is  projected  to  be  temporary  and  will  eventually  converge  to 
about  2  percent.  Meanwhile,  Japan’s  corresponding  long-term  inflation  expectations  rose 
rapidly in 2013, but have since generally remained more or less flat at a little over 1 percent 
and distant from the 2 percent target (Chart 2). This suggests a need to generate a further 
increase in inflation expectations in Japan with a view to achieving a steady inflation rate of 
around 2 percent. 
Labor market approaching full employment with sluggish wage growth 
B. 
Regarding  the  second  feature,  both  Japan  and  the  United  States  continue  to  enjoy  a 
sustained  recovery  in  employment.  As  a  result,  the  rate  of  unemployment  has  reached 
around  3.0–3.5  percent  in  Japan  and  5  percent  in  the  United  States  –  approaching  the 
structural  rate  of  unemployment  (longer-run  normal  rate  of  unemployment  for  the  United 
States).  Considering the favorable  pace  of  job  creation,  however,  the  rate  of  wage growth 
appears to be limited in both countries. 
Let me elaborate on this point. In Japan, the number of job applicants exhibits a declining 
trend  due  to  a  decline  in  the  working  age  population.  A  growing  number  of  firms  report  a 
persistent labor shortage, and thus economic opportunities appear to be constrained at some 
firms in labor-intensive industries. Firms enjoy historically high profits, but so far those profits 
have not generated sufficiently high wage growth. The mediocre wage growth reflects a shift 
effect – or a rising share of part-time (mostly voluntary part-time) workers in total employment 
– caused mainly by the increased labor market participation of older adults and housewives, 
as well as by firms’ high demand for flexible low-cost part-time workers. The rate of change 
in per worker wages turned positive from fiscal 2014 onward, but presently remains roughly 
at  around  0.5  percent  (or  slightly  below  1  percent  on  an  hourly  basis).  To  achieve  the 
2 percent price stability target, it is clear that wages must further increase. To do so, firms 
must  review  their  business  strategies  fostered  during  the  persistently  stagnant  wage 
environment, and improve labor productivity. Meanwhile, in the United States, there are still 
some discouraged workers and involuntary part-time workers. Partially because of this slack 
and  moderate  labor  productivity  growth,  the  hourly  rate  of  wage  growth  remains  at  
2–2.5 percent, which is about half of the level prior to the global financial crisis. 
Moreover,  the  output  gap,  a  broader  concept  of  the  economic  slack,  reports  a  demand 
shortage of about negative 1.5 percent in 2015 in both countries, according to International 
Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  estimates.  The  slack  is  larger  than  the  one  based  on  the 
unemployment  rate,  suggesting  extra  room  for  further  improvement  in  the  labor  force 
participation rate and the capital stock utilization rate. That said, it is becoming increasingly 
difficult  across  countries  to  estimate  the  output  gap  partly  due  to  the  declining  trend  in 
potential  GDP  after  the  global  financial  crisis  –  leading  to  widely  dispersed  output  gap 
estimates.  For  example,  the  BOJ’s  estimate  on  the  output  gap  for  the  recent  April-June 
period  is  negative  0.7  percent  and  is  smaller  than  that  of  the  Cabinet  Office  of  negative 
1.6 percent.  This  implies  that  the  output  gap  estimates  must  be  interpreted  with  wide 
margins. In any case, the trends indicate that both Japan and the United States have been 
achieving steady improvement in the employment and output gap, and thus their downward 
pressures  on  prices  have  weakened.  Large  swings  in  commodity  prices  and  foreign 
exchange  rates,  however,  have  blurred  the  positive  price  effects  driven  by  the  domestic 
demand-supply balance. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Households’ upward bias in inflation expectations and its relation to income 
C. 
As  the  third  feature,  short-  and  long-term  inflation  expectations  (median)  have  been 
fluctuating at around 2–3 percent in Japan and the United States (Chart 3). From the BOJ’s 
Opinion  Survey  on  the  General  Public’s  Views  and  Behavior  and  Michigan  University’s 
Surveys of Consumers, short-term inflation expectations – one year ahead in Japan and over 
the  next  year  in  the  United  States  –  have  remained  stable,  at  a  similar  level  of  around  3 
percent over the past two years. Long-term inflation expectations – five years ahead in Japan 
and  over  the  next  five  to  ten  years  in  the  United  States  –  have  been  stable  for  a  longer 
period, at about 2 percent in Japan and around 3 percent in the United States. Furthermore, 
it  is  not  widely  known  that households in Japan  kept  positive  inflation  expectations  even 
when  mild  deflation  prevailed  from  2009  to  mid-2013.  Similarly,  Japanese  households’ 
present perceived inflation (defined as present perceived price changes relative to one year 
ago)  has  never  turned  into  the  negative  territory  over  the  same  mild  deflationary  period 
(Chart 4). 
Another  commonly  observed  trend  that  should  be  highlighted  is  that  households’  inflation 
expectations tend to be higher than the actual price developments captured in official price 
statistics  in  both  countries  –  suggesting  the  presence  of  an  upward  bias  in  inflation 
expectations. This may reflect that households’ responses in the survey are often affected 
by  the  recent  price  movements  of  everyday  goods  and  services,  such  as  food,  daily 
necessities,  and  gasoline.  However,  there  is  a  difference  in  the  scale  of  upward  bias;  it 
appears to be generally greater in Japan than in the United States. Let me assume that a 
gap  between  the  average  rate  of  long-term  inflation  expectations  and  the  average  rate  of 
change  in  the  headline  price  index  roughly  reflects  an  upward  bias.  The  scale  of  the  bias 
over  about  the  decade  before  the  sharp  drop  in  oil  prices  in  October  2014,  averaged  at 
around 2 percent in Japan and around 1 percent in the United States. This implies that the 
seemingly  stable  long-term  inflation  expectations  of  around  2  percent  held  by  Japan’s 
households  may  simply  be  a  result  of  the  upward  bias,  rather  than  representing  their  true 
inflation expectations. Under the presence of such a bias, households in Japan may perceive 
that a rate of actual inflation is much higher than 2 percent in the process of approaching the 
2 percent price stability target, and regard such a price rise as unacceptable. 
One  factor  contributing  to  Japan’s  larger  upward  bias  may  be  a  difference  in  future 
income  prospects.  To  see  this,  a  comparison  can  be  made  between  the  two  countries  by 
focusing on the diffusion index (DI) for expected income (one year ahead in Japan and over 
the  next  year  in  the  United  States)  –  calculated  by  subtracting  the  percentage  share  of 
households responding that prices will “decrease” from that of “increase.” Japan’s expected 
income DI always remains negative and currently records about negative 30 percent. This 
suggests  that  Japan’s  households  always  expect  a  decline  in  future  income,  leading  to 
anticipated tighter budgets as a sign of a strong defensive action, and resulting in a larger 
upward bias in their inflation expectations. If so, it will be important for the BOJ to promote 
public understanding that its objective is to achieve a moderate price rise associated with a 
wage  hike  and  a  sustainable  increase  in  household  spending,  to  improve  households’ 
tolerance to price rises. 
In  sharp  contrast,  the  corresponding  expected  income  DI  in  the  United  States  always 
remains  positive  and  has  recently  risen  to  around  40  percent  (Chart  5).  Moreover,  in  the 
United States, the year-on-year rate of change in (household) expected income over the next 
year (median) has started to improve since around 2013 and since early 2015 has risen to 
around  1.5  percent  –  after  having  dropped  from  around  2.5  percent  before  the  global 
financial crisis to a low of around 0.5 percent in 2009–2012 (Chart 6). Let me also illustrate 
that the upward bias appears to be different across income groups in the United States, 
by  comparing  expected  income  growth  over  the  next  year  and  corresponding  expected 
inflation  by  high-  and  low-income  groups.  Specifically,  expected  income  growth  for  low-
income (bottom third of the income distribution) households tends to be lower than that of 
high-income  (top  third  of  the  income  distribution)  ones,  while  inflation  expectations  of  low-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  income households tend to exceed those of high-income ones (Chart 7). This suggests that 
in the United States there is a similar positive correlation between lower income prospects 
and higher expected prices as in Japan. 
Next,  we  look  at  income  prospects  in  real  terms.  We  can  do  so  by  paying  attention  to 
expected price DI (one year ahead in Japan and over the next year in the United States) and 
corresponding  expected  income  DI.  Expected  price  DI  has  always  been  positive  in  both 
countries with each currently recording around 50 percent in Japan and over 80 percent in 
the United States. Moreover, the expected price DI continues to exceed expected income DI 
in both countries (Chart 5). The comparison between Japan and the United States suggests 
that  a  large  number  of  households  in  Japan  project  a  decline  in  real  income,  as  many 
households  expect  lower  incomes  and  more  expect  higher  prices.  In  the  United  States, 
households  are  less  likely  to  perceive  tighter  budgets  than  in  Japan  because  households 
expect  a  rise  in  nominal  income,  although  many  households  probably  project  lower  real 
income. In fact, the probability expectations on real income gains over the next five years – 
available from the U.S. survey – have risen from 2013 onward and have now fully recovered 
to  the  level  before  the  global  financial  crisis  of  around  40  percent,  having  dropped 
temporarily to a low of around 30 percent after the crisis (Chart 8). These data support the 
view that U.S. households’ recent income conditions are relatively favorable both in nominal 
and real terms. 
Japan’s mild deflationary experience and monetary policy 
D. 
Based on the aforementioned observations, I will now summarize my views on Japan’s mild 
deflationary experience and the effectiveness of QQE. Japan’s deflationary experience could 
be characterized with the following two features. 
First,  the  expression  the  “prevalence  of  deflation-oriented  mindsets”  seems  to  have  been 
very  applicable  to  the  state  of  the  corporate  sector.  It  refers  to  firms’  deflationary 
expectations and associated cautious price-setting behavior. As for the household sector, 
on  the  contrary,  they  tended  to  form  high  inflation  expectations  reflecting  long-standing 
stagnant  income  growth  and  anticipated  tighter  budgets.  As  a  result,  whenever  the 
households’ present perceived inflation rose, their tolerance to price rises dropped, fostering 
a  negative  correlation  between  them  (Chart  9).  Based  on  this  perception,  firms  appear  to 
have found it difficult to raise sales prices, contributing to a wide spread of discount-based 
marketing strategies. 
Since the introduction of QQE, firms’ price-setting behavior has been gradually changing – 
some firms  have  raised  their  sales  prices  by  providing  innovative  goods  and  services  that 
stimulate  potential  demand,  and  maintaining  sales  volumes.  Nevertheless,  many 
households continue to perceive that current prices are much higher than the official price 
statistics  and  expect  a  rise  in  prices.  This  could  be  one  reason  why  many  firms  still 
generally maintain cautious price-setting behavior. Indeed, this seems to be reflected in the 
recent developments in firms’ sales price expectation DI for three months ahead in the BOJ 
Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), which has shown significant 
improvement from the low level in 2013 but currently hovers around 0 percent (Chart 10). In 
addition,  the  average  inflation  outlook  on  sales  prices  for  one  year  ahead  (relative  to  the 
current  level)  dropped  moderately  to  somewhat  below  1  percent  year-on-year.  In  detail, 
looking at the percentage share of the number of respondents, 60 percent of firms answered 
“around 0 percent,” reaching about 80 percent if those that answered “will decline” and “don’t 
know”  are  included.  Looking  ahead,  favorable  corporate  profits  and  an  increase  in  wage 
growth,  if  sustained,  may  improve  households’  tolerance  to  price  rises,  thereby  helping  to 
correct households’ upward bias. Once that happens, firms may be gradually more willing to 
change their cautious price-setting behavior. 
Against  this  backdrop,  I  feel  that  a  policy  to  raise  average  inflation  is  relatively  more 
challenging  than  to  lower  inflation.  On  this  front,  a  lesson  can  be  learned  from  the  U.S. 
experiences of an anti-inflationary policy through bold monetary tightening adopted by then 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker in the late 1970s to the early 1980s. At that time, 
until around 1983 economic recession caused a continuous decline in households’ expected 
income DI over the next year. At the same time, however, both actual inflation and inflation 
expectations  dropped  sharply,  and  thus  real  income  and  its  outlook  improved  instead  and 
partially contributed to an improvement in consumption. For example, during that period, the 
aforementioned U.S. survey responses showed that there was an increase in the share of 
households  that  considered  low  prices  as  a  good  reason  to  purchase  durable  goods  and 
automobiles. In other words, while a tight monetary policy to reduce inflation in a sustainable 
manner  could  be  accompanied  by  a  serious  challenge  of  potentially 
increasing 
unemployment,  it  may  obtain  more  support  from  the  public  compared  with  the  opposite 
inflationary policy – as it could bring about improvement in real income as long as a decline 
in inflation moves ahead of a decline in income growth. Turning to Japan, wage growth per 
worker in real terms turned positive in July this year, but still remains at around 0.5 percent. 
To  achieve  around  2  percent  inflation,  a  further  improvement  in  real  wage  growth  is 
necessary. 
Regarding the second feature of Japan’s deflationary experience, a lack of healthy risk-
taking practices should be mentioned. Households have accumulated their assets largely in 
the  form  of  deposits.  Assessing  in  real  terms,  they  have  benefitted  from  relatively  high 
interest  rates  and  an  increase  in  value  of  outstanding  deposits,  owing  to  the  zero  lower 
bound  on  nominal  interest  rates  and  mild  deflation.  Setting  aside  whether  households 
actually perceived this to be true, their risk-averse behavior has turned out to be rational. In 
the corporate sector, on the other hand, the expected returns on investment were so low that 
actions to improve profitability and to efficiently utilize their assets were limited. Meanwhile, 
financial institutions concentrated their assets on government bonds and their supply of risk 
money necessary to support startup firms and business was limited. Since the introduction of 
QQE, this situation has been gradually changing together with the government’s economic 
policies. Households and financial institutions increasingly express interest in riskier assets 
and diversification of risks. Banks are more eager to extend credits with innovative financial 
services. The number of initial public offerings has increased and firms are more active in 
business  investment,  mergers  and  acquisitions,  and  organizational  rationalization  both 
domestically  and  globally.  It  is  important  that  the  BOJ  continue  to  support  these  positive 
developments by maintaining an accommodative monetary environment. 
Price developments and monetary policy in the asia-pacific region 
III. 
Next, I would like to focus on the Asia-Pacific region, covering nine countries. Among these 
nine,  six  (Australia,  Indonesia,  New  Zealand,  the  Philippines,  South  Korea,  and  Thailand) 
have officially adopted an inflation-targeting framework (Chart 11). Regarding the monetary 
policy frameworks of the region, I had an opportunity to speak in Singapore in July 2014.1 
Since then, economic and financial conditions have changed dramatically globally as well as 
in the region. Thus, today I will briefly review recent developments. 
Growing divergence in monetary policy in the Asia-Pacific region 
A. 
Since the East Asian economic crisis in the 1990s, central banks in the region have placed a 
greater emphasis on price stability than on exchange rate stability. Specifically, six central 
banks  took  the  lead  on  this  by  adopting  an  inflation-targeting  framework  with  a  clear 
numerical  inflation  target.  Under  the  framework,  the  realized  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations  of  these  six  countries  gradually  showed  a  downward  trend  in  line  with  their 
targets.  The  inflation-targeting  framework  in  the  region  is  more  flexible  than  that  in  other 
                                                
1  See  Sayuri  Shirai,  “Recent  Monetary  Policy  Trends  in  Advanced  Economies  and  the  Asia-Pacific  Region,” 
Keynote  Address  delivered  at  the  National  Asset-Liability  Management  Conference  held  in  Singapore  (July 
2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  inflation-targeting countries with the following features: (1) an adoption of an inflation target 
range  rather  than  an  inflation  target  point;  (2) the  acceptance  of relatively  large  deviations 
from the inflation target; and (3) the use of relatively frequently reviewed inflation targets – 
rather than fixed inflation targets – in South Korea, Indonesia, Thailand, and the Philippines. 
Inflation developments showed a tendency to converge, albeit with temporary deviations, to 
the  long-term  inflation  expectation  level,  which  has  remained  stable  within  target  ranges 
(Chart 12). One difference observed between inflation-targeting countries and other countries 
until the first half of 2014 was that the policy interest rates were more frequently adjusted to 
actual price developments in the former. 
I would like to highlight two new developments that have occurred since the second half of 
2014. First, inflation in all six inflation-targeting countries has now deviated from the inflation 
target range (Chart 12). Among them, only in Indonesia has inflation been above the upper 
bound of the target range again since late 2014. This is due to a cut in the fuel subsidy in 
2014  and  a  sharp  depreciation  of  the  rupiah.  In  contrast,  inflation  in  the  remaining  five 
countries has been below the lower bound of the target range, mainly due to declining crude 
oil prices. Looking ahead, depending on future global economic and financial conditions, it 
may take some time for these six countries to achieve their respective inflation targets. That 
said, as their long-term inflation expectations have remained more or less within the target 
range, inflation is projected to reach the target levels in the future. 
Second,  since  the  adoption  of  their  inflation-targeting  frameworks,  these  countries  have 
regarded short-term policy interest rates as their major operational tool for monetary policy 
and these policy rates tended to be frequently adjusted to price developments. Meanwhile, in 
China  and  Malaysia,  the  two  non-inflation-targeting  countries,  such  rates  remained  largely 
flat because they also used other tools including reserve requirements. Since the second half 
of  2014,  however,  this  differentiation  no  longer  seems  valid.  Namely,  China  has  been 
lowering policy interest rates more flexibly in response to a declining trend in the inflation rate 
since November 2014 – to contain an increase in real interest rates. Together with a cut in 
the  reserve  requirement,  moreover,  China  has  dealt  with  a  shortage  in  market  liquidity 
caused  by  a  drop  in  foreign  reserves  by  expanding  the  volume  and  frequency  of  funds-
supplying operations (including term facilities). As a result, the annual growth rate of M2 has 
exceeded the annual target of 12 percent. Meanwhile, inflation in both Indonesia, an inflation-
targeting  country,  and  Malaysia,  a  non-inflation-targeting  country,  has  risen  significantly, 
mainly owing to a large depreciation of their currencies.2 However, because their policy rates 
were  barely  adjusted  perhaps  in  an  attempt  to  avoid  capital  outflows,  their  inflation  rates 
have  been  approaching  their  policy  rates,  leading  to  a  recent  decline  in  their  real  interest 
rates to nearly 0 percent. 
The  region  has  been  subject  to  various  domestic  and  external  shocks  ranging  from 
commodity  price  drops,  a  reversal  of  capital  inflows  centered  on  securities  investment,  a 
depreciation  of  currencies,  a  decline  in  trade  with  China,  and  unstable  global  financial 
markets. Depending on the type and extent of those shocks received, price developments in 
each  country  are  diverse  and  are  not  necessarily  consistent  with  the  business  cycle.  This 
makes  the  direction  of  their  monetary  policy  stances  diverse.  While  it  is  likely  that  these 
shocks will eventually fade away, until then the region’s monetary policy conduct will remain 
divergent – regardless of whether a country has an inflation-targeting framework. 
Future possible direction of monetary policy conduct and challenges 
B. 
To  conclude,  let  me  summarize  the  implications  for  monetary  policy  conduct  in  the  Asia-
Pacific region based on recent developments. 
                                                
2 
In Malaysia, the inflation rate has also been affected by the introduction of the 6 percent Goods and Services 
Tax in April 2015. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      In the region, a growing number of countries are conducting more flexible exchange 
rate arrangements. This is confirmed by the fact exchange rates have become more 
volatile  than  before.  One  example  is  China,  which  has  gradually  enhanced  the 
flexibility of exchange rate movements. As a result, the IMF concluded in the recent 
Article IV consultation report that the renminbi is no longer undervalued. The report 
also recommended that China adopt a flexible exchange rate regime over the next 
two to three years. 
Nonetheless,  a  sharp  depreciation  of  the  exchange  rate,  while  contributing  to 
improving international price competitiveness, may generate a further depreciation 
expectation  and  thereby  accelerate  capital  outflows.  This  may  amplify  the  risk  of 
overshooting the exchange rate far beyond the equilibrium (depreciated) level, thus 
leading to the risk of a surge in domestic interest rates and economic recession. For 
this  reason,  the  region  could  utilize  the  accumulated  foreign  reserves  to  mitigate 
abrupt  exchange  rate  volatility.  Depending  on  the  type  of  shocks,  the  scale  of 
changes  in  foreign  exchange  rates,  and  the  size  of  foreign  reserves,  policy 
responses vary widely across the region. 
In  the  case  of  drawing  down  foreign  reserves,  a  country  may  need  to  deal  with 
possible  slower  growth  in  the  monetary  base.  To  offset  the  resultant  shortage  in 
liquidity supply to the market, a central bank may find it necessary to expand funds-
supplying operations to a greater extent than before. To enable smooth operations, 
monetary  policy  conduct  must  be  more  centered  toward  a  policy  interest  rate 
adjustment – together with measures to foster collateral asset markets, to develop 
yield curves with long maturities and sufficient liquidity, and to promote the monetary 
policy transmission mechanism based on the policy interest rate. 
In this sense, this may be an opportunity for a country that once relied on liquidity 
supply  through  foreign  reserve  accumulation  as  a  monetary  easing  tool  to  shift 
toward  a  more  market-based  monetary  policy  tool.  Such  a  practice  may  promote 
convergence of monetary policies to ones that are more consistent with the flexible 
inflation-targeting framework within the region, regardless of whether a country has 
an inflation-targeting framework. 
This concludes my presentation. Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
  10 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  12 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    13 
  14 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    15 
     16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    17 
  18 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   19 
