  Timothy Lane: Inflation targeting – a matter of time 
Remarks by Mr Timothy Lane, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the CFA Society 
Atlantic Canada, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 27 October 2015. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for inviting me to speak to you here in Halifax. In my remarks today, I want to take 
you inside the Bank of Canada and walk you through our monetary policy decision making. 
In particular, I want to discuss how we take into account the dimension of time. 
Let’s start with a very basic reality: all Canadians make choices in the present that we know 
will have consequences far into the future. Anyone who makes a decision on whether to take 
a  job,  pursue further  education,  buy  a  house  or  save  for  retirement  has  to  form  a  view  of 
what  the  results  will  be.  Businesses  deciding  whether  to  hire  more  workers,  expand  their 
plant  and  equipment,  seek  new  customers,  adjust  their  prices,  or  finance  their  operations 
face a similar reality. As CFAs, you know that time is at the centre of every financial decision 
you make or advise on. 
The  Bank  of  Canada’s  mandate  –  to  deliver  low,  stable  and  predictable  inflation  –  is 
fundamentally rooted in the importance of time. Our job is to make sure that those longer-
term  decisions  are  not  wrong-sided  by  unexpected  changes  to  the  value  of  money.  The 
confidence Canadians have in their money can’t be taken for granted: it’s something we work 
hard to achieve and maintain. When we look around the world or even back over Canadian 
experience, we see many cases in which either high inflation – or its opposite, deflation – has 
had damaging, or sometimes even devastating, effects. 
The second aspect of time that we have to address is that, for the Bank of Canada too, our 
short-term decisions have long-term results. To achieve a good inflation outcome, we need 
to  make  decisions  on  our  policy  interest  rate  in  the  short  run  –  every  six  weeks.  These 
decisions influence how the economy and inflation will evolve over a much longer period. 
As you know, six weeks can be a long time for the economy and the markets. We approach 
each decision with a vast set of new information. To start with, inflation itself can fluctuate, 
both  for  fundamental  reasons  and  as  a  result  of  various  temporary  and  one-off  factors.  In 
addition, we receive all kinds of other economic data from Canada and the economies that 
affect us; financial market and commodity price data; as well as many relevant news items 
about economic policies, foreign conflicts and even the weather. 
So how do we react to all that information – without overreacting – and keeping our eyes on 
the prize? 
I hope you aren’t disappointed that I won’t tell you what we will do next. To tell the truth, I 
don’t  really  know.  A  lot  can  happen  between  now  and  our  next  policy  announcement  on 
December 2! What I will do is spell out the logic of our approach – how we think about the 
underlying trend in inflation and how we make sense of the stream of information coming in. 
The test of time 
Let’s start with some background on our inflation-targeting framework. Canada’s decision in 
1991 to set a target for inflation did not come out of the blue: it was a product of two decades 
of unacceptably high and variable inflation. 
During the 1970s and 1980s, inflation became part of everyone’s calculations. Adjustments 
for  inflation  were  a  contentious  element  in  wage  negotiations. Interest  rates  rose  into  high 
double digits, building in a premium for the high expected rate of inflation and the uncertainty 
around it. High and variable inflation also had very different effects on different groups: some 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  saw their salaries, savings and pensions erode away, while others reaped windfalls on their 
houses and financial investments. 
For most of that period, Canada’s monetary policy struggled to find a clear direction. Half a 
century ago, it was anchored by the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates.1 That 
system collapsed in the early 1970s in the face of increasingly open financial markets and 
contradictory policies in the United States and other major economies. 
In the mid-1970s, Canada, like many other advanced economies, tried targeting the rate of 
growth of the money supply. This approach was based on extensive research showing that 
inflation tended to be associated with increases in the supply of money in the economy. But 
with deregulation and financial innovation, the relationship between the rate of expansion of 
the money supply and the rate of inflation proved unstable. Money supply targets were no 
longer viable and were abandoned in 1982. 
Before  and  after  that  money-targeting  period,  the  Bank  of  Canada  had  no  clear  policy 
framework to guide monetary policy actions and anchor the public’s expectations of inflation. 
Inflation rose higher as monetary policy reacted by accommodating the inflationary pressures 
coming  from  commodity  prices,  fiscal  deficits  and  higher  inflation  in  other  countries. While 
inflation  was  eventually  tamed  during  the  1980s,  it  was  a  long  and  arduous  process  that 
came at the cost of several years of sub-par economic growth. 
In 1991, recognizing the importance of inflation to the economic and financial well-being of 
Canadians and the central role of monetary policy in controlling inflation in the longer run, the 
Bank began pursuing an explicit target for inflation. The results have been impressive. Since 
1991,  inflation  in  Canada,  as  measured  by  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI),  has  been 
remarkably stable. Inflation has averaged 2 per cent (Chart 1), and its variability has fallen by 
roughly two-thirds. 
Canadians have benefited in a number of important ways. Greater price stability has allowed 
consumers  and  businesses  to  manage  their  affairs  with  greater  certainty  about  the  future 
purchasing power of their incomes and financial assets. Real and nominal interest rates have 
also  been  lower  across  a  range  of  maturities,  in  part,  because  they  no  longer  include  a 
substantial premium to compensate investors for inflation risk. More broadly, low, stable and 
predictable inflation has facilitated more stable economic growth in Canada and lower and 
less-variable unemployment (Table 1). 
Our inflation-targeting regime has also stood the test of the 2007–09 global financial crisis. 
As the fallout was hitting the Canadian economy, the Bank of Canada responded. We eased 
monetary  policy  aggressively  to  forestall  a  deeper  and  more  prolonged  economic  slump. 
Inflation targeting gave us the flexibility to allow that strong policy response. It provided an 
analytical framework for calibrating how far we should go, and for how long. It also anchored 
the  public’s  confidence  that,  despite  the  extreme  conditions  of  that  period,  policies  would 
remain on track to achieve the 2 per cent inflation target. 
A particularly useful feature of our inflation-targeting framework is that, every five years, we 
renew  our  agreement  with  the  federal  government.  The  agreement  sets  the  target  for 
inflation  and  the  parameters  for  achieving  it.  And  the  renewal  process  provides  the 
opportunity  and  the  discipline  to  reassess  our  approach  in  a  systematic  way  and  look  for 
room for improvement. 
But the bar for any major change is high. We know that inflation targeting has turned out to 
be far superior to any other framework that has been tried. Also, as I have stressed, part of 
                                                
1  Canada  adhered  to  Bretton  Woods  for  only  part  of  the  post-war  period.  See  M.  Bordo,  T.  Gomes  and 
L. Schembri, “Canada and the IMF: Trailblazer or Prodigal Son?” Discussion Paper 2009–1, Bank of Canada, 
2009; and D. Dodge, “The Evolving International Monetary Order and the Need for an Evolving IMF” (speech 
to Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, Princeton, New Jersey, 30 March 2006). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the  purpose  of  a  monetary  policy  framework  is  to  allow  Canadians  to  make  longer-term 
decisions  without  having  to  worry  too  much  about  inflation  –  and  that  argues  against 
changing our framework unless it’s really necessary. 
A matter of time 
Let’s now look at time and the way in which it enters into how we target inflation. 
Targeting inflation involves important challenges, because we don’t control inflation directly. 
Normally, we influence inflation through our policy interest rate – more precisely, a target for 
the overnight interbank rate. 
Our policy rate affects other interest rates in the economy, overall financial conditions and, in 
turn,  the  economy  at  large.  It  affects  inflation  through  the  amount  of  excess  demand  or 
supply  in  the  economy  –  the  output  gap  –  which  can  generate  pressures  for  inflation  or 
disinflation. The exchange rate and expectations can also play important roles in transmitting 
the effects of monetary policy to inflation. 
There can be long lags in this transmission process – and these lags can vary significantly, 
depending on the economic context. 
Total  inflation  can  be  “noisy”  because  many  temporary  sector-specific  factors  impinge  on 
inflation in the short run and, in many cases, are quickly reversed (Chart 2). Some examples 
are consumer energy prices such as gasoline prices, or prices of certain food products that 
may fluctuate because of weather and other factors. In Canada, for example, 90 per cent of 
the  observed  monthly  variations  in  the  CPI  are  linked  to  price  changes  in  just  eight 
categories of goods and services, which together amount to only about one-seventh of the 
whole CPI basket. 
There are many examples of such temporary factors, but let me take just one. In the early 
2000s, auto insurance premiums soared by about 30 per cent over a span of one year. By 
itself, this one component of the CPI basket was adding a full percentage point to inflation 
(Chart 3).2 This outcome was not reflective of broader inflationary processes. 
In this setting, we can’t hit our inflation target precisely or continuously – and we don’t try to. 
To illustrate, consider what would happen if we raised our policy rate mechanically whenever 
inflation was above target and lowered it whenever inflation was below target. We would end 
up reacting to a lot of temporary factors. And because our policies work with long lags, we 
would  have  to  overreact,  making  huge  adjustments  in  our  policy  rate  to  have  any  effect, 
followed by huge corrections to compensate for the lagged effects of our own policies. This 
would lead to  what has  been called “instrument instability” – a kind of policy over-steering 
that would quickly land us in the ditch. 
This  reasoning  points  us  in  two  directions.  First,  we  need  to  be  able  to  look  through 
temporary factors that affect inflation in the short run, so that we don’t overreact to shocks 
that are going to reverse themselves anyway. Second, we need to understand and anticipate 
the forces that will affect inflation in the future so that our policy decisions will keep inflation 
on target until their effects have worked their way through the economy. 
Both of these elements go into making a judgment on the underlying trend in inflation and 
how it is evolving. 
So,  rather  than  trying  to  hit  the  inflation  target  continuously,  we  set  a  time  horizon  for 
reaching it. Normally it’s two years, based on estimates of what is a reasonable time frame 
for policies to have their effects and for temporary shocks to dissipate. 
                                                
2  M. Khan, L. Morel and P. Sabourin, “A Comprehensive Evaluation of Measures of Core Inflation for Canada,” 
Discussion Paper No. 2015–12, Bank of Canada, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  But we have the flexibility to return sooner or to take longer, depending on the nature of the 
shocks  affecting  the  economy.  In  particular,  under  flexible  inflation  targeting,  we  have  the 
scope to take longer to get back to target in a situation where returning to target within two 
years  would require aggressive policies that could result in a buildup of imbalances in our 
financial system and possible instability down the road. This point was made explicit in our 
inflation-targeting framework the last time we renewed it in 2011. The timing for a return to 
target thus requires a judgment on the balance of risks. 
Even  when  inflation  is  at  target,  we  can’t  afford  to  be  complacent.  Sometimes  there  are 
forces pushing inflation higher or lower, and we need to use monetary policy to counteract 
them. In such cases, the policy rate will need to deviate from its long-run level to provide the 
stimulus or restraint necessary to offset these forces.3  
There are also some situations in which we need to get ahead of shocks that we can see will 
have a significant effect on inflation in the future. Otherwise, we  would  be in a situation of 
trying to catch up with these effects after they have already become entrenched. That was 
the logic of our January 2015 rate cut. We could see that a 60 per cent decline in the price of 
oil  would,  on  balance,  be  bad  for  the  Canadian  economy.  So  even  though  it  was  still 
uncertain  how  large  and  prolonged  that  effect  would  be,  we  needed  to  act  promptly  to 
achieve our inflation target. 
The combination of long- and short-run factors affecting inflation, the lags in the effects of our 
policies,  and  the  uncertainties  around  each  element makes monetary  policy  fundamentally 
an  exercise  in  risk  management.  While  one  can  try  to  write  a  reaction  function  or  rule  to 
describe monetary policy, a rule or function can only go so far. For example, the Taylor rule 
holds that monetary authorities adjust the policy rate in response to deviations of the inflation 
rate from target and output from potential. That’s a useful rule of thumb, but too mechanical 
to go very far in explaining how policy actually behaves. 
Inflation  targeting  is  also  “informationally  inclusive,”  meaning  it  doesn’t  just  react  to  the 
current inflation rate and GDP. It also takes account of a broad range of other information. 
That information includes economic data as well as soft information such as the responses to 
our  Business  Outlook  Survey  and  a  wide  range  of  more  informal  conversations  that  we 
conduct  with  businesses  and  other  Canadians.  We  use  a  combination  of  models  and  our 
own judgment to understand the underlying forces working on inflation. We want to get as 
clear a picture as possible, not only of what is actually going on, but also of what could go 
wrong if the unexpected happened. 
Underlying inflation 
In thinking about targeting inflation over time, an aspect that has received a lot of attention 
recently is underlying inflation: the inflation rate that would prevail in the absence of various 
sector-specific and one-off factors that can affect the measured CPI from month to month. 
Conceptually, underlying inflation should be driven mainly by the amount of excess supply or 
demand in the economy, together with the public’s expectations of inflation. 
Underlying inflation has been a particularly important concept this year. We have the impact 
of  the  oil  price  shock,  which  is  pushing  inflation  down  via  prices  of  gasoline  and  other 
consumer energy products. At the same time, the weaker Canadian dollar, which is largely 
associated  with  the  lower  prices  of  oil  and  other  Canadian  commodity  exports,  has  been 
pushing  measured  inflation  upward.  A  number  of  other  one-off  factors  have  also  been 
affecting  inflation.  Our  challenge  is  to  distinguish  the  trend  from  the  temporary  to  avoid 
                                                
3  For  a  more  detailed  discussion  of  the  use  of  monetary  policy  to  counteract  headwinds  or  tailwinds,  see 
Technical Box 2, Bank of Canada Monetary Policy Report (July 2011): 28. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  overreacting to the temporary – and give the public confidence that inflation will return to the 
right track. 
For this reason, the Bank of Canada, along with many other central banks, uses a number of 
measures  to  calculate  core  inflation,  which  are  designed  to  minimize  the  influence  of 
transitory price movements (Table 2). 
An effective core measure must have four key properties. It must be less volatile than total 
inflation; closely track long-run movements in the total CPI (in other words, be “unbiased”); 
be  related  to the  underlying  drivers  of  inflation, notably  the  output gap, in  order  to reliably 
predict future trend movements in the total CPI; and be easy to understand and explain to 
the public. 
Since  2001,  the  Bank  of  Canada  has  featured  one  measure  of  core  inflation  as  our 
operational  guide  for  monetary  policy:  CPIX,  which  excludes  eight  of  the  most  volatile 
components  of  the  CPI  and  adjusts  the  remaining  components  for  the  effects  of  indirect 
taxes  (Chart  4).4  Included  in  those  eight  components  are  mortgage  interest  costs,  which 
CPIX  strips  out  for  a  different  reason:  to  avoid  giving  a  perverse  reading  of  the  impact  of 
monetary policy on core inflation. (A measure of core inflation that includes mortgage interest 
costs increases when policy is tightened to bring down inflation.) 
Another exclusion-based core measure, CPIXFET, takes out food, energy and indirect taxes. 
Yet  others  calculate  core  inflation  using  a  trimmed  mean,  which  excludes  different 
components each month based on whether or not they are exhibiting volatility at that specific 
point in time. 
More  sophisticated  methods  track  common  price  movements  across categories  in  the  CPI 
basket.  Such  movements  are  more  likely  to  reflect  aggregate  demand  fluctuations  than 
sector-specific developments. The advantage of these tools is that they take information on 
all  the  prices  in  the  CPI  and  use  objective  methods  to  filter  that  information.  The 
disadvantage is that in some cases they are constructed using techniques that, while firmly 
founded in logic and statistical theory, are very opaque. 
All  the  measures  have  followed  similar  tracks  (Chart  5).  Each  measure  satisfies  the  key 
properties  identified  above  to  differing  degrees.  They  all  display  less  volatility  than  total 
inflation (Chart 6). And all but one track long-run movements in total CPI very closely. While 
the various measures are correlated with the output gap to differing degrees, they all have 
some predictive power for total inflation (Chart 7).5  
But no formula can completely exclude idiosyncratic factors. We’ve had some examples of 
those  lately  with  automobile  pricing,  telecoms,  consumer  electricity  and  natural  gas.  The 
products that are subject to idiosyncratic factors can change from period to period; obviously, 
we can’t change our measure each time that happens. Nor should we ignore those sector-
specific factors: sometimes, movements in individual prices can be an advance warning of 
wider price movements, so we have to look at them in the right context. 
As we prepare for the renewal of our inflation-control agreement with the federal government 
in 2016, we are examining the properties of these measures of core inflation to determine 
whether the Bank should continue the practice of identifying one pre-eminent measure as its 
                                                
4  The  excluded  items  in  CPIX  are  fruit,  vegetables,  gasoline,  fuel  oil,  natural  gas,  mortgage  interest  costs, 
intercity transportation and tobacco products, as well as the effects of changes in indirect taxes such as the 
GST. 
5  All the core measures are generally better predictors of total inflation than total inflation itself. However, none 
of the measures outperforms a naïve forecast of 2 per cent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  operational guide and, if so, whether CPIX should continue to play that role. We published 
today on our website our latest technical assessment of these measures of core inflation.6  
Exchange rates and inflation targeting 
I want now to discuss one factor that can have a particularly important effect on inflation: the 
exchange rate. Inflation targeting can only work with a flexible exchange rate, which gives 
the Bank of Canada room to set monetary policy independently of other countries. We don’t 
target the exchange rate or even publish a forecast. 
With  a floating  exchange  rate,  the  external  value  of  the  Canadian  dollar  can  change for  a 
variety of reasons, and that affects inflation in Canada through two channels. It has a direct 
pass-through effect on the prices of imported goods. The exchange rate also affects inflation 
more indirectly through its impact on aggregate demand in the Canadian economy, mainly 
through its effects on the competitiveness of Canadian-produced goods and services relative 
to those produced elsewhere. The pass-through effects are transitory, while the effects on 
aggregate demand will generally persist over a longer period. 
The importance of both of these kinds of effects is particularly clear when the change in the 
exchange rate is as large as it has been recently: in less than two years, the Canadian dollar 
has lost more than 20 per cent in value against the U.S. dollar. 
The  effect  of  this  depreciation  on  exports  and  the  real  economy  is  already  evident.  It  has 
improved  the  competitiveness  of  Canadian  producers.  Export  categories  that  historically 
have been sensitive to exchange rate movements are showing stronger activity. Examples 
include building and packaging materials, furniture and fixtures, clothing and textile products, 
and  large  motor  vehicles  (e.g.,  heavy  trucks  and  buses).  Exports  of  services,  which 
constitute about 15 per cent of total exports, are also benefiting. 
The pass-through effects are also quite significant. They are estimated to be adding 0.9 to 
1.1 percentage points to total CPI inflation (Chart 8).7  
So  how  does  monetary  policy  react?  If  the  change  in  the  exchange  rate  is  seen  as  a 
temporary factor reflecting other structural changes, it is clearly appropriate to look through 
the pass-through effects in assessing underlying inflation and in making policy. 
That is the case at the present time. The depreciation of the Canadian dollar is driven mainly 
by two factors. First, it is associated with the sharp decline in Canada’s terms of trade as the 
prices of oil and other Canadian commodity exports have decreased. These commodity price 
developments  are,  in  turn,  a  result  of  the  dynamics  of  supply  and  demand  for  those 
commodities in a global market, certainly not a result of Canadian monetary policy.8 Second, 
it is part of the general strengthening of the U. S. dollar as that economy strengthens and the 
Federal Reserve moves closer to normalizing monetary policy. 
By that logic, we exclude the direct impact of the pass-through effect of the exchange rate 
movement in assessing underlying inflation. Therefore, we judge that underlying inflation is 
around 1.5 to 1.7 per cent. Of course, the effect of the weaker Canadian dollar in stimulating 
the Canadian economy is an essential element of our projection that underlying inflation will 
return sustainably to target, with the economy back to its potential, over the next couple of 
years. 
                                                
6  M. Khan, L. Morel and P. Sabourin, “A Comprehensive Evaluation of Measures of Core Inflation for Canada,” 
Discussion Paper No. 2015–12, Bank of Canada, 2015. 
7  L.  Savoie-Chabot  and  M.  Khan,  “Exchange  Rate  Pass-Through  to  Consumer  Prices:  Theory  and  Recent 
Evidence,” Discussion Paper No. 2015–9, Bank of Canada, 2015. 
8  T.  Lane,  “Drilling  Down  –  Understanding  Oil  Prices  and  Their  Economic  Impact”  (speech  to  the  Madison 
International Trade Association (MITA), Madison, Wisconsin, 13 January 2015). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Although we believe that’s the right decision at the present time, it would not always be the 
right call. There are times, as in the 1970s, when exchange rate movements are part of a 
broader inflationary process. In such cases, looking through the pass-through could put us 
on  a  treadmill  of  accommodating  higher  inflation.  Moreover,  identifying  pass-through 
depends  on  a  combination  of  estimation  and  judgment.  For  that  reason,  we  issue  our 
estimate of the underlying trend in inflation as our own judgment in the current policy context, 
rather than as an alternative measure of core inflation. 
Expectations 
Expectations of inflation, which are based on actual inflation as well as the credibility of our 
target, also play a central role in the conduct of monetary policy. 
Many  economic  decisions  depend  on  expectations  of  future  inflation.  For  businesses, 
inflation expectations influence their stance in wage negotiations and price setting, as well as 
in  assessing  rates  of  return  for  decisions  on  production,  hiring  and  investing  in  productive 
capacity. For households, expectations have an impact on savings decisions as well as on 
their choice of alternative savings vehicles.9 
Through their influence on all of these decisions, expectations tend to become self-fulfilling. It 
would be much more challenging to keep inflation on target if expectations were to become 
unanchored – or anchored at a lower or higher level. For these reasons, we keep a close eye 
on expected inflation. 
We  measure  business  expectations  with  our  own  quarterly  Business  Outlook  Survey  and 
recently  began  tracking  household  expectations  with  a  quarterly  online  poll  of  1,000 
Canadian consumers. The poll measures both the inflation expectations of participants over 
various time horizons and the uncertainty surrounding those expectations. It also covers a 
wide  array  of  other  economic  expectations  that  will  inform  the  Bank,  and  Canadians  in 
general, on issues ranging from labour market prospects to personal finances. 
Conclusion 
Let me wrap up. Our inflation-targeting framework has stood the test of time. It has proved 
vastly superior to any other policy alternatives that have been tried. 
Our  periodic  renewals  are  important  opportunities  to  make  sure  it  continues  to  serve  its 
purpose and to suggest improvements. I have focused on one set of improvements that we 
are  considering:  how  we  assess  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation,  separating  it  from  price 
movements that are likely to be temporary. 
The critical test is the confidence you have that inflation will remain within our target range. 
We would like the public to take 2 per cent inflation for granted. We don’t, however, take your 
confidence in us for granted. We know we have to earn your trust by delivering, without fail, 
on that commitment. 
                                                
9  A.  Côté,  “Inflation,  Expectations  and  Monetary  Policy”  (speech  to  the  Association  québécoise  des 
technologies, Mont-Tremblant, Quebec, 19 February 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
      8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
      10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
      12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
