   Ignazio Visco: New global challenges and the global economy 
Statement by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Governor of the Constituency 
of Albania, Greece, Italy, Malta, Portugal, San Marino and Timor-Leste, to the Development 
Committee, Lima, 11 October 2015. 
 Adjusting to new global challenges 
1. 
The recent approval of the Sustainable Development Goals comes at a challenging moment 
for the global economy. The important development successes since 2000 should not make 
us complacent. Poverty has fallen substantially, but it is deep and concentrated. Furthermore, 
growth  is  losing  steam  in  some  developing  economies  while  in  others  economic  activity  is 
heavily affected by the downturn in commodity prices. More importantly, growth alone will not 
be sufficient to reach the deepest pockets of poverty and boost shared prosperity. 
We  welcome  the  emphasis  of  the  Global  Monitoring  Report  (GMR)  on  the  non-income 
dimensions of development, which do not always correlate well with poverty measured by the 
money metric. A proper analysis of these dimensions is essential for eradicating poverty and 
increasing  shared  prosperity  in  a  comprehensive  way.  The  GMR  also  rightly  points  to 
demographics as a crucial factor in shaping the evolution of the global economy in the next 
fifteen years. 
Key  drivers  of  population  dynamics  are  migration  flows.  Cooperative  policies  regulating 
migration  between  countries  affected  by  demographic  decline  and those  experiencing  high 
population  growth  could  ease  regional  aging  pressures  and  smooth  trends  in  population 
growth. In this context, the upheaval caused by conflict outbreaks has intensified the already 
strong trend to migrate and resettle brought on by often dramatic economic conditions and 
global and domestic shocks. 
Dealing  with  the  root  causes  of  migration  requires  development  policies  that  grant  poor 
countries  better  market  access  for  their  products  and  transfer  expertise  and  technological 
know-how to speed up development. On its own, however, foreign aid may not be sufficient. 
For it to be effective, it also requires coherent development programs. Large flows of foreign 
aid, for example, are unlikely to be helpful if they finance unproductive investments or delay 
needed structural reforms. On the contrary, when foreign aid complements domestic policy 
reforms  in  the  recipient  country  it  can  ease  the  costs  of  adjustment,  provide  a  catalyst  for 
change, and thereby drive a sustainable improvement in the country’s growth prospects. 
Providing voice and vision to the new global economy 
2. 
In  the  context  of  the  Bank’s  periodical  shareholding  reviews  we  recommit  to  reaching  an 
agreement  on  a  realignment  mechanism  based  on  a  formula.  This  will  ease  the  task  of 
maintaining an equitable representation of shareholders over time and will strengthen the IBRD 
legitimacy  as  a global  player.  The formula  should  reflect global  economic  weights  and  the 
contributions  to  the  Bank’s  development  mission.  Rewarding  support  to  this  mission  is 
essential to building up adequate incentives for future contributions. 
Any discussion of future resource needs to be preceded by a thorough conversation on the 
future positioning of the Bretton Woods institutions. A long-term vision of the role of multilateral 
financial institutions – and of the WBG in particular – needs to take into account the importance 
of engaging in the financing of global public goods and the benefits of cross-border integration. 
This  requires  the  promotion  of  regional  cooperation  efforts.  We  should  at  the  same  time 
recognize  that  official  development  assistance  represents  only  a  small  portion  of  global 
financial  flows  for  development.  The  role  of  the  WBG  in  enhancing  the  use  of  domestic 
resources – through technical assistance – should be intensified, and IFC and MIGA should 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   strengthen their efforts to catalyze private sector capital into development projects. The time 
is ripe for updating the IDA financing model. 
A partner in climate change financing 
3. 
As we approach the COP21 meeting in Paris, where decisions need to be taken to step up 
international action on climate change, we envision an important role of the WBG as a key 
partner in both promoting the transition to a “greener” economy and alleviating the impact of 
climate change on developing countries. 
This  effort  requires  financial  resources  that  largely  exceed  those  available  to  development 
institutions  and  calls  for  combining  limited  public  resources  with  larger  private  sources  of 
capital. The WBG is strategically positioned to contribute to this effort. 
The problem of climate change falls in the domain of global public goods and posits complex 
intergenerational questions. As a global financial organization, the World Bank is well-suited 
to address both these issues. Furthermore, as a multi sector development agency, the Bank 
should make use of its expertise in a broad array of policy areas to provide sound evidence 
that climate-smart projects are good development projects. 
A sustainable development organization 
4. 
We welcome the substantial increase in WBG commitments. It is now time to deliver with an 
effective  implementation  of  WBG  projects.  Large,  transformative  development  solutions 
require a focus on results and appropriate fiduciary and safeguards policies to manage risks. 
The  IBRD  should  focus  on  financing  long-term  structural  projects,  even  if  the  shift  toward 
investment lending is likely to reduce the growth of the IBRD loan portfolio. This requires a set 
of  strategic  priorities  fully  shared  by  the  institution  at  all  levels  and  supported  by  robust 
analytical evidence. 
A balanced structure of revenues and expenses will effectively protect capital from the vagaries 
of the economic cycle. The prolonged period of low interest rates continues to constrain the 
income of the IBRD and calls for a continuous monitoring of efficiency-enhancing measures. 
The  objective  of  the  full  implementation  of  the  new  organizational  structure  should  be 
efficiency. Efficiency must remain a guiding principle once financial sustainability is eventually 
achieved. 
All these challenges call for strategic prioritization and joint action. Over the decades, the World 
Bank Group has consistently displayed a remarkable capacity to adapt to the changing external 
environment, redefining its mission over time and expanding its clientele and its tools. At this 
critical  juncture  we  have  no  reason  to  doubt  that  it  will  once  more  rise  to  the  level  of  the 
challenge. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
