  Stanley Fischer: The transmission of exchange rate changes to output 
and inflation 
Speech by Mr Stanley Fischer, Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System,  at the  research  conference “Monetary  Policy  Implementation  and  Transmission  in 
the  Post-Crisis  Period”,  sponsored  by  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System, Washington DC, 12 November 2015. 
 The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open 
Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful to Christopher Erceg, Joseph Gruber, and 
Deborah Lindner for their contributions to this speech and to William English and David Skidmore for comments. 
Good  evening.  My  discussion  tonight  will  focus on  a key  transmission  channel  in  an  open 
economy – the exchange rate. The exchange rate is a primary focus of central bankers in 
small open economies as well as a prime concern of the broader public in those economies – 
and, to a lesser extent, in even the largest of economies. When I was governor of the Bank 
of Israel prior to joining the Federal Reserve, my markets screen was continuously open at a 
chart of the exchange rate of the shekel against the dollar. For small open economies, the 
exchange rate may well matter as much for output and inflation as do interest rates.1  
Given  that  the  U.S.  economy  is  much  less  open  than  Israel’s,  it  is  not  surprising  that 
fluctuations in the dollar typically receive somewhat less attention here in the United States. 
Indeed,  much  of  the  focus  on  dollar  fluctuations  in  the  recent  research  literature  is  on 
transmission to foreign economies, including through balance sheet channels, as in the Bank 
for  International  Settlements  paper  (Hofmann,  Shim,  and  Shin,  forthcoming)  that  will  be 
presented tomorrow. Nevertheless, the exchange value of the dollar also plays a significant 
role in the U.S. economy, a role that has increased over time given growing global trade and 
financial linkages. My remarks will focus on the consequences of the dollar’s ascent since 
last summer for U.S. output and inflation – and thus for monetary policy. 
Size of Dollar’s appreciation and its causes 
As seen in figure 1, the roughly 15 percent appreciation of the broad real dollar since July 
2014 is large, though not unprecedented by historical standards.2 Two related factors appear 
to  have  played  key  roles  in  the  dollar’s  rise.  First,  while  the  U.S.  economy  has  performed 
relatively well – as is visible especially in our steady progress toward full employment – major 
foreign  economies  have  generally  experienced  weak  growth,  along  with  persistently  low 
inflation.  Because  foreign  central  banks  responded  appropriately  by  providing  additional 
monetary accommodation, foreign interest rates have declined relative to U.S. interest rates, 
encouraging investors to shift into dollar-denominated assets and in turn boosting the dollar. 
But  widening  interest  rate  differentials  can  explain  only  part  of  the  dollar’s  large  ascent. A 
second  factor  has  been  heightened  concern  about  the  global  outlook  and  an  associated 
decrease in investor risk tolerance – factors that tend to increase investment in dollar assets. 
In  recent  months,  investors  have  been  particularly  focused  on  the  possibility  of  a  sharp 
slowdown in China and other emerging market economies, with commodity exporters seen 
                                                
1   At times, starting in the 1990s, several central banks – most prominently, the Bank of Canada – have used a 
monetary  conditions  index,  generally  a  weighted  average  of  changes  in  a  short-term  interest  rate  and  a 
multilateral exchange rate from some baseline, as a policy indicator. 
2   The broad dollar is a weighted average of the foreign exchange value of the U.S. dollar against the currencies 
of  a  broad  group  of  major  U.S.  trading  partners.  More  information  on  the  construction  of  the  index  can  be 
found in Loretan (2005). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  as particularly vulnerable in the wake of the dramatic drop in oil and non-oil commodity prices 
since the summer of 2014. 
Effects of a stronger Dollar on U.S. activity and inflation 
In considering the transmission of changes in the dollar’s value to U.S. output and inflation, it 
will be convenient for illustrative purposes to focus on the effects of a 10 percent appreciation 
that  is  assumed  to  be  permanent  –  and  then  to  draw  on  this  analysis  to  provide  some 
guidance on how the dollar’s rise since mid-2014 has played out. 
Because the main way in which a stronger dollar affects U.S. output is through causing real 
exports to decline, I will begin by focusing on the factors determining the export response. 
Broadly speaking, an appreciation of the dollar reduces U.S. exports because it causes the 
relative  price  of  U.S.  goods  to  rise  in  foreign  markets;  for  example,  the  price  in  yen  of  a 
U.S.-made pair of jeans will rise. To gauge the quantitative effects on exports, the thick blue 
line in figure 2 shows the response of U.S. real exports to a 10 percent dollar appreciation 
that  is  derived  from  a  large  econometric  model  of  U.S.  trade  maintained  by  the  Federal 
Reserve Board staff.3 Real exports fall about 3 percent after a year and more than 7 percent 
after  three  years.4  The  gradual  response  of  exports  reflects  that  it  takes  some  time  for 
households and firms in foreign countries to substitute away from the now more expensive 
U.S.-made goods. 
A stronger dollar makes foreign goods cheaper for U.S. consumers and hence boosts U.S. 
real imports. Nevertheless, an extensive literature has found that the degree of pass-through 
of exchange rate changes to U.S. import prices is low, as foreign exporters prefer to keep the 
dollar  price  of  the  goods  they  sell  in  the  U.S.  market  relatively  constant.  For  example,  a 
typical estimate is that an appreciation of the dollar of 10 percent causes U.S. non-oil import 
prices  to fall  only  about  3  percent  after  a  year  and  only  slightly  more  thereafter.5  The  low 
exchange rate pass-through helps account for the more modest estimated response of U.S. 
real imports to a 10 percent exchange rate appreciation shown by the thin red line in figure 2, 
which indicates that real imports rise only about 3-3/4 percent after three years.6  
Figure 3 uses these results to gauge how a 10 percent dollar appreciation would reduce U.S. 
gross domestic product (GDP) through the net export channels we have just discussed. The 
staff’s model indicates that the direct effects on GDP through net exports are large, with GDP 
falling over 1-1/2 percent below baseline after three years. Moreover, the effects materialize 
quite gradually, with over half of the adverse effects on GDP occurring at a horizon of more 
than a year. 
In  interpreting  these  estimated  effects  on  GDP,  it  is  important  to  underscore  that  the 
estimates  do  not  take  account  of  any  offset  due  to  monetary  policy  easing  –  a  key 
consideration that I will discuss shortly. Even so, recalling that the dollar’s actual appreciation 
has  been  about  15  percent,  the  model  estimates  suggest  that  the  cumulative  reduction  in 
                                                
3   The results presented here are taken from the staff’s U.S. International Transactions (USIT) model of the U.S. 
external sector. A forthcoming article in the Federal Reserve Board’s International Finance Discussion Papers, 
or IFDP, Notes series will provide further detail on the structure and estimation of the trade block of the USIT 
model that is used in these computations. 
It may be useful to note that exports in 2014 amounted to about 13-1/2 percent of GDP and imports to 16-1/2 
percent of gross domestic product. 
4  
5   These  estimates  are  consistent  with  recent  analysis  by  Gopinath  (2015)  and  Bussière,  Delle  Chiaie,  and 
Peltonen (2014). 
In  the  staff’s  trade  model,  imports  are  specified  to  depend  on  GDP  in  addition  to  the  exchange  rate.  The 
estimates shown in figure 2 simply show the effects arising through the latter channel. Similarly for exports, 
the staff’s model also controls for changes in a trade-weighted aggregate of foreign GDP, with the estimates in 
figure 2 showing only the effects from a change in the value of the dollar. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
6  
2 
   U.S. aggregate demand from the dollar’s appreciation is likely to total almost 2-1/2 percent of 
GDP  after  three  years  –  in  the  absence  of  policy  action  to  boost  private  demand  or 
government spending. Given these perhaps surprisingly large effects, an obvious question is, 
how  well  has  the  model  done  so far  in  accounting for  the actual  behavior  of  U.S.  real  net 
exports? While trade flows are affected by many factors that are difficult to capture in models 
– such as the labor disputes at major ports that occurred earlier this year – the drag from net 
exports over the past year does appear to be relatively close to the estimated effect implied 
by  the  staff’s  econometric  trade  model,  with  net  exports  reducing  GDP  by  almost 
¾ percentage point in the data, compared with an estimated fall of 1 percentage point in the 
model. 
Looking  forward,  given  that  the  effects  of  the  stronger  dollar  play  through  gradually  to  the 
economy,  there  is  good  reason  to  expect  that  the  drag  on  GDP  growth  from  the  stronger 
dollar will persist well into next year and likely spell continued weakness in the traded-goods-
producing sectors of the economy that are especially exposed to the exchange rate. Indeed, 
the more export-oriented manufacturing sector has already taken a hit during the past year 
and has experienced weaker growth than the broader economy. 
Turning now to inflation, consumer price inflation has been running well below the Federal 
Reserve’s  2  percent  target,  and  the  strong  dollar  has  played  an  appreciable  role  in  this 
shortfall.  One  way  in  which  the  stronger  dollar  depresses  inflation  is  by  putting  downward 
pressure on import prices. Figure 4 uses an econometric model discussed in a recent speech 
by Chair Yellen to illustrate how a 10 percent appreciation of the dollar might play through to 
core  personal  consumption  expenditures  (PCE)  inflation,  which  excludes  the  more  volatile 
food  and  energy  components.7  This  particular  model  implies  that  core  PCE  inflation  dips 
about 0.5 percent in the two quarters following the appreciation before gradually returning to 
baseline,  which  is  consistent  with  a  four-quarter  decline  in  core  PCE  inflation  of  about 
0.3 percent in the first year following the shock. While the Board staff uses a range of models 
to gauge the effect of shocks, the model employed in figure 4 – as well as other models used 
by  staff  –  suggests  that  the  dollar’s  large  appreciation  will  probably  depress  core  PCE 
inflation between 1/4 and 1/2 percentage point this year through this import price channel. 
Thus, given that core PCE inflation is running around 1-1/4 percent on a four-quarter-change 
basis,  the  stronger  dollar  has  played  a  material  role  in  holding  core  PCE  inflation  below 
2 percent. 
A  second  channel  through  which  dollar  appreciation  reduces  inflation  is  by  increasing 
economic  slack.  Greater  slack  amplifies  the  downward  pressure  on  inflation,  although  the 
quantitative effect is probably fairly modest given the flat slope of the Phillips curve. Because 
the pass-through of dollar appreciation to oil and food commodity prices is much higher than 
for  most  imports,  dollar  appreciation  tends  to  depress  overall  PCE  inflation  by  even  more 
than it depresses core inflation. 
An important difference between the transmission of dollar appreciation to inflation compared 
with output is that the effects on inflation are probably more transient. In particular, given that 
most of the effect on inflation occurs through changes in import prices – and import prices 
respond quickly to the exchange rate – the peak effect on inflation probably occurs within a 
few  quarters.  From  the  standpoint  of  the  outlook,  this  transience  means  that  some  of  the 
forces holding down inflation in 2015 – particularly those due to a stronger dollar and lower 
energy prices – will begin to fade next year. Consequently, overall PCE inflation is likely on 
this  account  alone  to  rebound  next  year  to  around  1-1/2  percent.  And  as  long  as  inflation 
expectations remain well anchored, both core and overall inflation are likely to rise gradually 
toward  2  percent  over  the  medium  term  as  the  labor  market  improves  further  and  the 
transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate. 
                                                
7   This econometric model is described in the appendix to Yellen (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  U.S. monetary policy and the Dollar 
The  stronger  dollar  and  some  of  the  factors  causing  it,  including  weaker  foreign  demand, 
have played an important role in accounting for revisions to the expected path of U.S. policy 
rates compared with what was expected in the summer of last year. The forecasts made by 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  participants  on  a  quarterly  basis,  which  are 
published in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), provide a good indication of the 
extent  to  which  forecasts  for  inflation,  output  growth,  and  the  federal  funds  rate  have 
changed since the summer of 2014. The June 2014 SEP showed U.S. GDP growth centered 
at roughly 3 percent in 2015 and core inflation running around 1-3/4 percent, and the median 
participant projected that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate at the end of 2015 
would be 1-1/4 percent before rising to 2-1/2 percent at the end of 2016.8 But in the most 
recent SEP following the September 2015 FOMC meeting, the median participant saw GDP 
growth at only 2 percent this year, core inflation at 1-1/2 percent, and the federal funds rate 
below 1/2 percent at the end of 2015 before rising to only 1-1/2 percent at the end of 2016.9 
This  greater  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  seems  appropriate  given  the  adverse 
effects  on  U.S.  aggregate  demand  coming  from  the  rise  in  the  dollar,  an  associated 
weakening  of  foreign  economic  prospects,  and  other  developments  that  have  restrained 
spending and kept inflation undesirably low. Monetary policy easing helps through “crowding 
in” domestic demand, which in turn helps boost price inflation and makes it less likely that 
inflation expectations drift below our 2 percent target. 
The  Board  staff’s  general-equilibrium  models  that  take  explicit  account  of  the  ability  of 
monetary  policy  to  crowd  in  domestic  demand  –  including  the  staff’s  FRB/US  and 
multicountry SIGMA models – suggest that monetary policy easing can substantially mitigate 
the effects of adverse shocks on GDP, including from the recent run-up in the dollar. In the 
case of the dollar shock considered previously, these models suggest that the all-in effects of 
the stronger dollar on GDP are only about one-half to two-thirds as large as implied by the 
trade model that abstracts from a monetary policy response – still substantial, to be sure, but 
much less significant for the economy than if monetary policy failed to play an active role. 
Conclusion 
To wrap up, while the dollar’s appreciation and foreign weakness have been a sizable shock, 
the  U.S.  economy  appears  to  be  weathering  them  reasonably  well,  notwithstanding  their 
large  effects  on  certain  sectors  of  the  economy  heavily  exposed  to  international  trade. 
Monetary policy has played a key role in achieving these outcomes through deferring liftoff 
relative to what was expected a little over a year ago. The October 2015 FOMC statement 
indicated that it may be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate at the 
next meeting in December, though the outcome will depend on the Committee’s assessment 
of the progress – realized and expected – that has been made toward meeting our goals of 
maximum employment and price stability.10 Of course, as policymakers, we must always be 
vigilant  to  events  unfolding  differently  than  we  expect,  and  we  must  be  ready  to  react 
accordingly. 
References 
Board  of  Governors  of the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2014).  “Minutes  of the  Federal  Open 
Market Committee, June 17–18, 2014,” press release, July 9. 
                                                
8   The SEP is an addendum to the FOMC minutes. For the June 2014 SEP, see Board of Governors (2014). 
9   The September 2015 SEP is available in Board of Governors (2015b). 
10   For the October 2015 FOMC statement, see Board of Governors (2015a). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  ———— (2015a). “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement,” press release, October 28. 
————  (2015b).  “Minutes  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee,  September  16–17, 
2015,” press release, October 8. 
Bussière, Matthieu, Simona Delle Chiaie, and Tuomas A. Peltonen (2014). “Exchange Rate 
Pass-Through  in  the  Global  Economy:  The  Role  of  Emerging  Market  Economies,”  IMF 
Economic Review, vol. 62 (1), pp. 146–78. 
Gopinath, Gita (2015). “The International Price System,” NBER Working Paper Series 21646. 
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October. 
Hofmann, Boris, Ilhyock Shim, and Hyun Song Shin (forthcoming). “The Risk Taking Channel 
of Currency Appreciation,” BIS Working Paper. 
Loretan, Mico (2005). “Indexes of the Foreign Exchange Value of the Dollar (PDF),” Federal 
Reserve Bulletin, vol. 91 (Winter), pp. 1–8. 
Yellen, Janet L. (2015). “Inflation Dynamics and  Monetary  Policy,” speech delivered at the 
Philip  Gamble  Memorial  Lecture,  University  of  Massachusetts,  Amherst,  Mass., 
September 24. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
    6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
