   Simon M Potter: The Federal Reserve’s counterparty framework – past, 
present and future 
Remarks by Mr Simon M Potter, Executive Vice President of the Markets Group of the Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  2015  Roundtable  on  Treasury  Markets  and  Debt 
Management, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 19 November 2015. 
 Good evening. I would like to thank the Office of Debt Management for inviting me to speak at 
this  year’s  roundtable.  This  forum  provides  a  valuable  opportunity  for  policymakers, 
academics, and market participants to discuss issues related to the primary and secondary 
markets  for  U.S.  Treasury  securities.  I  will  focus  my  remarks  tonight  on  the  counterparty 
framework employed by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which directly affects not only 
our implementation of monetary policy, but also the underwriting and distribution of Treasury 
debt issuance. I will begin with an overview of the objectives that underpin the framework, 
continue by describing how those objectives have influenced the historical development of the 
primary dealer system, and conclude by looking ahead as the private and official sectors adapt 
to the evolving structure of the Treasury market. Before I begin, I would note that the views I 
share  with  you  this  evening  are  mine  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.1  
Principles and objectives 
Throughout the history of Federal Reserve operations in financial markets, our approach to 
engaging  with  counterparties  has  been  designed  to  serve  the  effective  implementation  of 
monetary  policy.  The  New  York  Fed,  through  its  Open  Market  Desk  (the  Desk),  is  in  the 
business of implementing policy as directed by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC, 
or the Committee), and the Desk has demonstrated a willingness to engage with a wide range 
of counterparties to achieve this objective under the guidance of the Committee. In addition to 
its  role  in  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy,  the  New  York  Fed  has  a  number  of 
responsibilities and duties as the fiscal agent for the U.S. Treasury. We have therefore also 
used  our  counterparty  relationships  to  assist  the  activities  we  undertake  in  support  of  the 
Treasury. Indeed, for decades, the primary dealers have played a critical role not only in open 
market  operations,  but  also  in  the  underwriting  and  distribution  of  newly  issued  Treasury 
securities. 
In addition to carrying out these domestic operations, we stand ready to conduct a number of 
foreign exchange operations.2 Foreign exchange counterparties are essential to the successful 
implementation of U.S. foreign exchange policy operations, which are conducted by the Desk 
but directed and funded generally equally by the Fed and the Treasury. Similarly, the Desk’s 
foreign reserve management counterparties facilitate operations that are investments of the 
Fed’s and also the Treasury’s foreign currency reserves. 
Two  other  considerations  underlie  the  counterparty  framework  and  support  the  effective 
execution of open market operations and primary issuance of Treasury securities. First, the 
Desk has long recognized the importance of transacting with established, regulated market 
participants that are capable of settling trades and financing long and short positions reliably 
                                                
1  
I would like to thank Stephen Douglass, Frank Keane, and Susan McLaughlin for their excellent assistance in 
the  preparation  of  these  remarks  and  colleagues  in  the  Federal  Reserve  System  for  numerous  insightful 
comments and suggestions. 
2   Counterparties  also  facilitate  the  Desk’s  provision  of  services  to  foreign  central  banks,  governments  and 
international official institutions. Additional detail on these services can be found on this website. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
and on a consistent basis in a range of market conditions. Our counterparty framework must 
be  of  an  appropriate  size  to  provide  adequate  execution  capacity  and  competitive  pricing. 
Second, the execution of domestic open market operations and primary issuance of Treasuries 
is facilitated by a liquid, smoothly functioning secondary market for Treasury securities. 
The  Federal  Reserve’s  abiding  interest  in  promoting  the  integrity  and  efficiency  of  the 
secondary  market  has  motivated  our  recent  efforts  to  join  other  agencies  in  analyzing  the 
events of October 15, 2014, and to understand the implications of the evolution of Treasury 
market  structure  and  the  increasing  incidence  of  electronic  and  automated  trading.  The 
Treasury  Market  Practices  Group  (TMPG),  a  private  sector  group  of  market  professionals 
sponsored by the New York Fed, has played an important role in these efforts. Building on 
analysis that started before October 15, 2014, the TMPG released earlier this year an updated 
set of best practice recommendations and a companion white paper discussing automated 
trading.3  As  is  typical  of  TMPG  initiatives,  the  group’s  work  on  automated  trading  was 
undertaken to support market liquidity amid these changes in the market ecosystem. Much 
work remains to calibrate an appropriate response to changes in market structure, and last 
month’s conference “The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market” provided a valuable 
opportunity for the official and private sectors to engage in a healthy and open debate on a 
range  of related  topics.4  The  conference,  organized  by  the Treasury,  the  Federal  Reserve 
Board, the  New  York  Fed, the  Securities  and Exchange  Commission, and  the  Commodity 
Futures Trading Commission, featured a review of the agencies’ July 2015 Joint Staff Report 
and highlighted a number of key issues, including the adequacy of the Treasury market data 
currently available to the public and to the official sector, the impact of the current regulatory 
environment  on  liquidity,  and  some  potential  operational  risks  posed  by  shifting  market 
structure and trading behavior.5 The Treasury made clear at the conference that work in this 
area is ongoing when it disclosed plans for the agencies to issue in the near future a request 
for information on the next steps outlined in the Joint Staff Report. 
The Joint Staff Report presented data showing that primary dealers now account for less than 
half of trading volumes in the interdealer broker market, but it is important to remember that 
this is only a portion of the secondary market for Treasuries. As a forthcoming Liberty Street 
Economics  blog  post  will  show,  when  these  data  on  the  interdealer  broker  market  are 
combined with the dealer-to-customer market data from the New York Fed’s Primary Dealer 
Statistics, we can see that primary dealers accounted for roughly two-thirds of overall Treasury 
market secondary trading volume in April 2014, and about 60 percent on the day of October 
15, 2014.6 (see the table) So while the primary dealer share of daily interdealer broker volume 
has  fallen  below  50  percent,  primary  dealers  still  account  for  the  majority  of  aggregate 
secondary  market  trading  activity,  owing  to  their  important  role  in  the  dealer-to-customer 
market. 
                                                
3   The best practice guidance and white paper on automated trading are available on the TMPG homepage. 
4   Additional information about the conference is available here. 
5   The Joint Staff Report is available here. 
6   The forthcoming blog post will be published on the Liberty Street Economics website. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    
A robust counterparty framework, specifically one that provides reliable execution capacity of 
sufficient scale and is facilitated by a liquid and smoothly functioning secondary market for 
Treasury securities, aids the Desk in pursuing our objectives with respect to the implementation 
of  monetary  policy  and  the  activities  we  undertake  in  support  of  the  Treasury.  But  these 
benefits must be balanced against the cost of maintaining counterparty relationships. Staff time 
and resources are required to monitor and manage these relationships to ensure that we are 
getting good value not only in terms of trade execution, but also in terms of market monitoring, 
an important function that the Desk provides for the benefit of the Federal Reserve System 
and the Treasury. A large, diverse set of counterparties can contribute to competitive trade 
execution  and  richer  sources  of  market  intelligence,  as  well  as  the  increased  operational 
coverage and resiliency that support adaptation to changes in market structure or operating 
directives. But diversity also entails complexity and requires initial and ongoing investment in 
infrastructure to support a wider range of firm types. Evaluating and onboarding firms, setting 
up  transactional  systems  and  account  arrangements,  and  monitoring  and  evaluating 
counterparty performance and risk all take time and resources that must be balanced against 
the potential benefits of a larger list.7  
One final consideration that bears mention is the concept of an imprimatur that some market 
participants associate with status as a New York Fed counterparty. Despite this long-standing 
perception  among  some  market  participants  that  primary  dealer  status  represents  an 
endorsement  by  the  New  York  Fed  of  a  financial  institution’s  creditworthiness  or  ability  to 
provide efficient execution of large transactions, we have repeatedly stressed the importance 
of other market participants’ engaging  in their own assessment of potential counterparties’ 
capabilities.  Recent  history  provides  several reminders  that  the  primary  dealer  designation 
provides no guarantee against credit risk or other counterparty risks. While the New York Fed 
certainly performs its own due diligence, we do so in pursuit of our unique business objectives, 
which  may  differ  from  those  of  private  agents.  Market  participants  should  therefore  be 
                                                
7   Since July 2013, the Desk has conducted pilot programs with seven smaller firms outside of the primary dealer 
system in order to explore how to conduct open market operations in Treasury and mortgage markets with firms 
that are considerably smaller than existing primary dealers. The Treasury Operations Counterparty (TOC) and 
Mortgage Operations Counterparty (MOC) pilot programs have provided valuable insight into the appropriate 
size and operational capacity of open market operation counterparties. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
engaging in the appropriate level of due diligence required by their fiduciary responsibilities in 
the context of their specific business requirements. Such independent assessments are in our 
collective interest because they foster market discipline and a safer, more secure financial 
system. 
Primary dealer history 
The pursuit of these objectives is reflected in the history of the Fed’s counterparty framework, 
of which the primary dealer system has long formed the foundation. But before I review that 
narrative, I must acknowledge that most of what I know about the history of primary dealers 
I’ve  learned  from  Ken  Garbade,  who  kindly  introduced  me  tonight.  Along  with  his  superb 
analysis of the evolution of the Treasury market, exemplary work for the TMPG and critical 
contributions during the financial crisis, Ken has expertly researched more than 100 years of 
history concerning the financial institutions and trading practices that ultimately became the 
primary dealer system. Ken has published a staff report covering the early years of this system 
from the 1930s to the 1950s, and we expect to publish more of his research on primary dealers 
in the future.8  
Looking back over the first century of the Fed’s history, we can see how our counterparty 
relationships  have  adapted  over  time  in  response  to  changing  operational  needs  and  the 
evolution of financial markets to create a system that is unique among the world’s leading 
central banks. Open market operations were first established by the Federal Reserve as a tool 
to  control  U.S.  monetary  conditions  in  1922,  in  response  to  uncoordinated  purchases  of 
Treasury securities by different Reserve Banks interested in acquiring earning assets. The 
Banks formed an “Open Market Investment Committee” to coordinate their activities, and the 
Committee soon began to make policy recommendations to increase or reduce the availability 
of reserves to member banks. The Banking Act of 1935 created the modern Federal Open 
Market Committee, and the Committee selected the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as its 
operating agent.9 The Federal Reserve Act specifies the types of transactions that Reserve 
Banks can undertake, but does not designate how they should be undertaken. Although other 
possibilities exist, such as public auctions and reverse auctions, for more than 80 years the 
Desk has conducted monetary policy operations with  bank and nonbank dealers, primarily 
because  they  were  the  core  market  makers  –  that  is,  liquidity  providers  –  for  Treasury 
securities. 
In 1942, the Fed and the Treasury agreed to cap Treasury yields for the duration of the Second 
World War in order to facilitate funding the war effort. By the end of the war, open market 
transactions were conducted with a small group of “qualified” dealers. The FOMC set the terms 
and conditions of the counterparty relationship. In 1951, the Fed returned to using open market 
operations  as  a  tool  for  maintaining  control  over  the  monetary  base  and  restored  the 
“recognized” dealer program that had been in place before the war.10  
                                                
8   Kenneth Garbade, The Early Years of the Primary Dealer System (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, 2015). 
In fact, the FOMC directs a “Selected Reserve Bank” to conduct open market operations. Since the centralization 
of open market operations in a single Reserve Bank in 1935, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has always 
been designated as the Selected Bank, owing in part to New York City’s historical importance to U.S. financial 
markets. 
9  
10   According to Ken’s research, “the concept of a recognized dealer was somewhat amorphous. An October 1939 
Bank memo remarked that the term was ‘not an exact appellation’ and noted that ‘the principal factors which we 
consider in extending such recognition are (1) reputation for integrity, experience, and knowledge, (2) capital at 
risk of the business, (3) willingness to make markets under all ordinary conditions and to take positions both 
long and  short, and  (4)  large  volume  [of  business]  of  national scope,  with  the  contacts  which  such  trading 
provides.’” (Garbade, The Early Years of the Primary Dealer System, pp. 8–9). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
In the early 1960s, a reporting dealer regime was created, featuring reporting on positions and 
a public list of the firms that communicated various data to the New York Fed. During the 
1980s, in considering new firms for primary dealer designation, Desk staff increasingly looked 
for evidence that a firm had a certain share of total customer trading activity. The working 
threshold was generally 1 percent, with some fluctuations in this level over time. An explicit 
requirement for primary dealers to participate in Treasury debt auctions was added in the mid-
1980s. In 1992, following the Salomon Brothers Treasury auction scandal, the Desk altered its 
primary dealer requirements and ended its dealer surveillance program, in an effort to eliminate 
the perception that it had a regulatory relationship with primary dealers and to encourage more 
firms to become primary dealers. Nevertheless, over the following decade, the list of primary 
dealers contracted, largely as a result of declining profitability and industry consolidation in the 
mid-1990s as well as the departure of some Japanese financial institutions following losses in 
their  home  market.  The  number  of  primary  dealers  declined  further  with  the  failure  and/or 
consolidation of several large dealers during the recent financial crisis, but has begun to grow 
slowly again in subsequent years. The last revision of our primary dealer operating policy, 
published in 2010, formalized a pro rata Treasury auction bidding requirement for all primary 
dealers, which requires primary dealers to bid for their proportional share of each Treasury 
offering.11  
Relative  to  domestic  open  market  operations  and  auctions  for  primary  Treasury  issuance, 
foreign market operations undertaken with private counterparties to further foreign exchange 
policy and the investment of foreign reserves are relatively small and infrequent and have a 
somewhat  shorter  history.  The  Fed  first  undertook  very  limited  foreign  exchange  (sterling) 
purchases in the market during the late 1920s and early 1930s in an effort to defend the gold 
standard.12  The  Gold  Reserve  Act  of  1934  established  the  U.S.  Treasury’s  Exchange 
Stabilization  Fund  (ESF)  to  undertake  such  operations,  but  the  ESF  did  not  exercise  its 
authority very often until the Bretton Woods fixed-exchange-rate regime came under pressure 
in the 1960s. In 1962, the Fed began to undertake foreign exchange operations in cooperation 
with the ESF, and the Desk acted as agent for both accounts. 
In those early years, the Fed and the Treasury focused on conducting swap operations with 
foreign central banks, although some direct intervention with the private-market participants 
did take place. In 1973, after the collapse of Bretton Woods, the dollar began to float, and 
foreign exchange operations entered a new phase. Over the next two decades, interventions 
in the private foreign exchange market became much more frequent and on some occasions 
quite large. Since the 1990s, foreign exchange intervention has become less frequent. The 
history of foreign reserves investment operations in the market is even shorter; the Desk began 
to transact directly with market participants to invest foreign reserves held in the System Open 
Market  Account  and  ESF  foreign  reserves  only  in  the  mid-1990s.  Before  that,  the  U.S. 
monetary authorities held all foreign currency reserves in the form of deposits at other central 
banks. 
International context 
Comparing the Federal Reserve’s counterparty framework with those of our foreign central 
banking peers highlights a number of differences. To begin with, the Federal Reserve is among 
the  most  transparent  of  central  banks  in  disclosing  the  specifics  of  its  market  operations, 
including  the  data  reported  under  the  requirements  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act.  Details  about 
foreign exchange transactions and foreign exchange investment operations are reported in the 
                                                
11   Primary dealers are expected to bid in every auction for, at a minimum, an amount of securities representing 
their pro rata share of the offered amount. That share, currently 1/22nd, is based on the number of primary 
dealers at the time of the auction. 
12   Stephen V. O. Clarke, Central Bank Cooperation 1924–31 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
1967), pp. 162, 175–76, 205, and 209. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
quarterly foreign exchange reports released to the public by the New York Fed. In addition, 
summary information about all operations appears on the weekly Federal Reserve balance 
sheet, which is available on the Board’s website. The Desk posts comprehensive results of all 
domestic open market operations with primary dealers and expanded counterparties to the 
New York Fed’s public website within a few minutes of the operations’ completion. Results of 
Treasury  auctions  are  likewise  released  to  the  public  within  a  few  minutes  of  the  close  of 
competitive bidding and contain considerable detail regarding participation by primary dealers 
and both direct and indirect bidders. Such reporting by the Treasury exhibits a high level of 
transparency relative to foreign treasuries’ reporting. 
In most foreign jurisdictions, the central bank or monetary authority has the ability to conduct 
open  market  operations  with  a  large  number  of  banks  that  make  markets  in  government 
securities and also have reserve accounts with the central bank, while the national treasury 
separately manages relationships with financial institutions to underwrite and distribute its debt 
issuance;  these  latter  entities  are  termed  “primary  dealers”  and  are  often  the  only  entities 
having access to primary market auctions. In the United States, by contrast, a comparatively 
smaller number of firms simultaneously act as counterparties for the central bank’s domestic 
open  market  operations  and  as  backstop  underwriters  and  distributors  for  Treasury  debt 
issuance; firms designated as “primary dealers” are required to act in both capacities. In fact, 
the United States is somewhat unique in that (i) being a “primary dealer” means that the firm 
is a counterparty for central bank monetary policy operations and has certain obligations with 
respect to primary national debt issuance and (ii) management of the primary dealer system 
resides with the central bank rather than the national treasury. 
This unique structure is a legacy of history. Beginning in World War I, the Treasury offered 
coupon-bearing  securities  on  a  fixed-price  basis.  Small  banks  and  securities  brokers 
commonly subscribed for their own and customers’ accounts, and there was little need for any 
formal or informal underwriting process. Market making in outstanding Treasury securities, 
however, was a capital-intensive process conducted mostly by nonbank dealers, though a few 
banks did have significant dealer operations. These dealers maintained the liquid secondary 
market for Treasuries and served as counterparties for open market operations. This state of 
affairs continued until 1970, when the Treasury introduced auction offerings of coupon-bearing 
debt.  Auction  participation,  like  market  making,  was  a  risky,  capital-intensive  activity,  and 
dealers  –  especially  primary  dealers  –  began  to  play  an  increasingly  important  role  in  the 
primary market. Though the transition was gradual, this period represented the moment in 
history  when  the  same  set  of  counterparties  began  to  participate  in  both  open  market 
operations and the primary issuance of Treasury securities. 
Recent changes 
More  recently,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  approach  to  designing  an  effective  counterparty 
framework has been informed by our experience of conducting asset purchases as well as 
other balance sheet actions and exercises necessary to implement policy in the post-crisis 
period. In these years, we have ventured beyond the primary dealers to conduct open market 
operations with a wider and more diverse range of market participants. The introduction of 
daily  reverse  repurchase  agreement  (RRP)  test  operations  in  September  2013  required 
several  years  of  work  by  the  Desk  to  establish  relationships  with  an  expanded  set  of 
counterparties  beyond  the  primary  dealers  or  entity  types  that  are  currently  eligible  to  be 
primary dealers, and to develop an approach to evaluating the capabilities of these firms that 
is distinct from the process for assessing primary dealers. This expansion is a requirement of 
our  business  needs  given  the  current  size  of  our  balance  sheet,  specifically  the  need  to 
maintain appropriate control of short-term interest rates with abundant excess reserves in the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
banking system.13 Primary dealers, and entities of the type that are currently eligible to be 
primary  dealers,  which  typically  exhibit  structural  demand  for  cash  financing  to  support 
inventories, are unlikely to satisfy this requirement. 
To the extent that the ongoing evolution of the structure of the Treasury market, including 
technological  advancements  and  changing  investor  behavior,  affects  the  role  of  primary 
dealers as market makers, it is important to analyze the implications for the Fed’s ability to 
meet its objectives. The primary dealer system has proven to be very effective for both the 
conduct of monetary policy and the issuance of Treasury debt. I am very confident that the 
existing counterparty framework – continuing to utilize primary dealers for traditional domestic 
policy  open  market  operations,  expanding  to  new  counterparty  types,  as  appropriate,  for 
targeted  operations  to  increase  the  effectiveness  of  domestic  policy  implementation,  and 
maintaining relationships with a sufficient number of large market participants in the relevant 
foreign exchange markets for possible foreign exchange policy and investment operations – 
provides enormous capacity to implement a wide range of monetary policies. Moreover, we 
have demonstrated a commitment throughout our history to make any adjustments necessary 
to ensure a robust and effective operational framework. Toward that end, the Desk presented 
at the June 2015 FOMC meeting an update on a review of the counterparty framework, and 
indicated that we anticipate regular reviews of the counterparty framework roughly every three 
years in the future.14 We look forward to working with our official and private sector partners 
represented in this room as we pursue these goals. 
Thank you. 
                                                
13   For more on policy normalization, see these three earlier speeches: “Interest Rate Control during Normalization,” 
“Money Markets and Monetary Policy Implementation” and “Implementation of Open Market Operations in a 
Time of Transition.” 
14   See the minutes from the FOMC meeting of June 16–17, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
