   Muhammad bin Ibrahim: ASEAN financial integration, collaboration with 
Myanmar and other challenges for Malaysia 
Speech by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank 
Negara  Malaysia),  at 
the  Maybank  Myanmar  Grand  Opening,  Yangon,  Myanmar,  
2 October 2015. 
 A very good evening, it is an auspicious occasion. Congratulations to Maybank on the opening 
of its branch in Yangon, Myanmar. I am very confident that the launching of this first branch 
marks  the  beginning  of  a  productive,  innovative  and  meaningful  journey  for  Maybank  in 
contributing to the economic transformation of Myanmar and in particular the development of 
its financial sector. I am confident that this branch will be the first of many to come. 
My  remarks  today  will  touch  on  three  subjects:  Firstly,  the  importance  of  ASEAN  financial 
integration; secondly, the close and long-standing friendship between Myanmar and Malaysia; 
and the role of financial institution as a responsible corporate citizen. 
ASEAN: Story of the future that begins today 
Members  of  ASEAN  have  adopted  an  ambitious,  unique  and  comprehensive  vision  for  an 
economically and financially integrated region. I term it as unique since we are embarking on 
this process in a phased and gradual manner. Each member country is given the flexibility to 
progress towards integration based on its state of readiness. It is an inclusive approach and a 
long term strategic plan to unlock the growth potential of our region in the coming decades. 
The  case  for  integration  is  self-evident.  From  its  inception,  Malaysia’s  and  its  founding 
members’ vision have always been for a strong and integrated ASEAN region. The “ASEAN 
Way”  believes  there  is  strength  in  diversity  and  no  country  should  be  left  behind.  ASEAN 
strongly believes in the concept of shared prosperity, where wealth creation within the region 
will be enjoyed by all. 
The  spirit  of  cooperation  and  flexibility  are  amongst  the  principles  which  underpinned  the 
success of Myanmar’s chairmanship of ASEAN in 2014. Under Myanmar’s leadership, we saw 
major strides in financial integration that culminated in the conclusion of the ASEAN Banking 
Integration  Framework  (ABIF)  by  the  ASEAN  Central  Bank  Governors.  A  framework  of 
gargantuan achievement. 
Myanmar’s leadership in seeing this through was crucial and now ABIF represents the single 
most  important  agreement  in  strengthening  the  ASEAN  banking  system,  driving  deeper 
integration  and  enhancing  the  region’s  growth  potential.  It  is  an  agreement  of  momentous 
significance. 
I would also like to congratulate Myanmar for successfully advancing the Yangon Outcomes 
for Financial Inclusion during their tenure as Chair in 2014. The groundwork that Myanmar laid 
during their Chairmanship was key to the announcement by the Finance Ministers and Central 
Bank Governors in March 2015 that financial inclusion will be elevated to be an important policy 
priority for ASEAN. This has resulted in the establishment of a dedicated working committee 
in ASEAN to deliberate policy options, engage stakeholders and coordinate collective actions 
to advance financial inclusion. 
Malaysia also places a big priority on financial inclusion. In particular, we have found it useful 
to be a member of the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI), a network of policymakers from 
developing countries, where we are able to work alongside other policymakers to advance 
financial inclusion globally. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Additionally,  AFI  is  a  platform  where  members  could  share  experiences  and  learn  about 
policies that have been successfully implemented by others. 
ASEAN member countries, such as Myanmar, who are not a member of AFI, may wish to 
consider becoming a member to stay connected and expand the network of financial inclusion 
collaboration. 
Financial integration as the building block to unlock growth 
Finance is an important component of any economy. Its development and greater financial 
integration will be the catalyst and foundation upon which an economy will progress and grow. 
Central  to  this,  is  a  well-developed  financial  infrastructure  that  can  appropriately  serve 
effectively at every stage of an economy’s development. 
Myanmar is on the cusp of a remarkable period. It is blessed with a strategic location in the 
greater Mekong region with a young, productive and rising demographic base, as well as the 
beginnings of an emerging and rapid development process. 
This economic transformation of Myanmar will most likely require investment at a rapid pace. 
McKinsey  Global  Institute  estimates  that  around  USD650  billion  worth  of  investments  are 
needed for this transformation over the next 15 years, of which USD320 billion is solely for 
infrastructure building. 
ASEAN  has  one  of  the  highest  saving  rate  in  the  world  at  approximately  30%  of  GDP,  or 
USD750 billion. Part of these savings could be recycled within the region and used to meet the 
investment needs of Myanmar. This includes the provision of sufficient housing, efficient public 
transportation and access to clean water and electricity. 
Central to this premise, is allowing the region’s financial resources to move more freely across 
borders. This is where financial integration will play a critical role, by opening new opportunities 
for trade and financial linkages and for our banking institutions to enhance their presence. 
Similar to the experiences of Malaysian banks in other ASEAN countries, it is our expectation 
that Maybank will play its part in the development and modernisation of Myanmar’s financial 
sector. This includes playing its expected role in promoting greater financial inclusion for the 
micro, small and medium enterprise segment, the most important component in developing an 
economy. 
Myanmar and Malaysia: Close and long-standing friendship 
The  opening  of  Maybank’s  Yangon  branch  is  a  testament  of  many  things.  It  is  a  start  of 
substantive  bank  linkages  between  our  two  countries.  The  flourishing  socio-economic  and 
commercial interlinkages between Malaysia and Myanmar is evidenced by the rise of cross-
border trade and investment in recent years between the two economies. 
Malaysia’s total exports to Myanmar was over USD800 million in 2014, while imports stood at 
over USD160 million. Malaysia is also consistently one of the top 10 contributors to foreign 
direct investment in Myanmar. 
Myanmar  and  Malaysia  has  built  a  strong friendship  based  on  mutual trust.  In  this  regard, 
Malaysia was glad to have extended a helping hand to Myanmar when financial assistance 
was  needed  in  the  past.  In  return,  Myanmar  has  reinforced  this  trust  with  good  faith.  A 
substantial amount of the assistance has been repaid in a timely manner commensurate with 
Myanmar’s steadily strengthening international financial standing. 
At  the  central  banking  level,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  (BNM)  and  Central  Bank  of  Myanmar 
(CBM)  collaborate  very closely.  I  am glad to  say  that the  results  of this  collaboration  have 
yielded tangible results. For instance, in October 2013, CBM and BNM signed an enhanced 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The MoU affirmed commitments from the two sides to provide capacity building support in 
areas including financial and monetary stability and financial inclusion. I am pleased to say that 
since 2012, almost 200 officials from the government of Myanmar have attended and benefited 
more than 30 programmes and study visits organised by BNM. 
In the long run, these programs could contribute towards raising the internal capacity of CBM 
so that as a group, we can better enjoy the benefits and meet the opportunities and challenges 
of regional financial integration. 
As a member of the central bank fraternity, BNM alongside institutions such as the World Bank 
(WB) and International Monetary Fund (IMF), has facilitated the implementation of Myanmar’s 
Financial  Sector  Development  Strategy.  Through  this  program,  several  opportunities  for 
collaboration on training have been identified, particularly in the context of existing plans for 
human  resource  development  at  the central  bank,  the  CBM’s  strategic plan  for  onsite  and 
offsite supervision, and a future CBM training institute. 
And  today,  with  the  opening  of  this  Maybank  branch,  marks  another  milestone  in  the 
relationship between Myanmar and Malaysia. The granting of a banking license to Maybank 
provides Malaysia with yet another avenue to participate and contribute towards the economic 
development of Myanmar. 
Being a responsible corporate citizen 
It is in the interest of financial institutions to be a responsible corporate citizen and contribute 
to the flourishing and wellbeing of society. Financial institutions must adapt to their domestic 
environment and be mindful of the needs of the community in which they operate in. 
Access  to  financial  services  for  all  segments  of  society  is  important  for  inclusive  and 
sustainable growth for an economy. The low and moderate income households must be served 
as they represent the future. 
There are at least two dimensions to being a responsible corporate citizen. The first dimension 
is  to  design  and  grow  business  responsibly,  by  providing  ethical  and  sustainable  financial 
products and services to all segments of society. Part of this essential component is promoting 
greater  levels  of  financial  literacy  and  understanding  of  financial  products  among  the  local 
community. Banks need to strive to deliver the highest standards of service to all. 
The second dimension is the act itself of giving back to the community. On this note, I am 
encouraged to hear that Maybank’s Yangon office is already driving initiatives for the local 
community, through its Project H.E.A.R.T (Helping Every Asian Rise Together). 
Therefore, judging by Maybank’s by-line, with its stated aim of “humanising financial services”, 
I am confident Maybank will show a stellar example in making a difference in Myanmar. 
I also expect that as a good corporate citizen, Maybank will contribute to the development of 
the domestic financial sector, as over the long term and given the opportunity, they can meet 
the overall financial services needs of the low and moderate income households. I should also 
expect a meaningful participation and contribution of Maybank in Myanmar’s interbank and 
foreign exchange markets as well as the payment system. 
Conclusion 
As we speak, Myanmar is undergoing a profound shift. It stands at the cusp of something great. 
During  this  historic  time,  it  gives  us  a  great  honour  that  Malaysia  is  actively  involved  and 
contributing to Myanmar’s transformation. For we consider Myanmar not only a partner, but a 
close friend. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   With  this,  I  wish  Myanmar  all  the  success  in  her  future  endeavours.  Congratulations  to 
Maybank again for the start of a new chapter in what I trust will be an enduring and productive 
presence in this great country. 
Truly, the future is bright and this is indeed, Myanmar’s moment. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
