Mr Bergo focuses on Norges Bank’s responsibility for promoting
an efficient payment system
Address  by  Mr  Jarle  Bergo,  Deputy  Governor  of  Norges  Bank,  to  the  Banks’  Payment  Systems
Conference, held in Oslo on 11 November 1999.
 Background
1.
Risk in the payment system is closely linked to the use of deposits. Payment transactions - via banks -
take  time,  and this time-lag  (between  payment  and  settlement)  is  an  important  source  of  settlement
risk. Cash payment allows immediate settlement without any such risk. Therefore, the transition from
cash  settlement  to  the  use  of  deposits  involves  greater  risk,  but  also  greater  efficiency.  Thus,  the
public’s choice of means of payment and payment instruments directly affects the degree of risk and
efficiency in the payment system.
The public’s choice of different means of payment and payment instruments varies over time. This is,
of  course,  nothing  new.  Already  in  1924,  the  Banking  Commission  -  which  drafted  a  new  law  on
commercial banks at the time - stated the following:
The  concept  of  means  of  payment  is  not  beyond  change;  it  has  taken  different  forms
throughout  time.  The  law  states  what  should  be  considered  legal  tender...,  but  common
practice also allows certain secure assets to be used as payment... These bank-issued means
of payment have - in the more developed countries - reduced the use of legal tender to minor
daily disbursements (cash payments in its narrowest sense).
Today,  the  payment  system  continues  to  undergo  rapid  change.  New  technology,  new  participants,
new regulations and more globalisation have made this fairly complicated subject matter even more
challenging  to  keep  up  with.  Norges  Bank  has  a  statutory  responsibility  for  promoting  an  efficient
payment system. This responsibility becomes even more demanding when the systems change rapidly.
The  focus  of  my  address  here  today  will  be  on  Norges  Bank’s  responsibility  as  distinct  from  the
responsibility of the market participants and, in particular, that of the banks. However, before I embark
upon this I will provide an assessment of risk and efficiency in the Norwegian payment system.
I would like to begin with four observations on risk and efficiency in the payment system:
Observations
2.
First,  payment  system  risk  is  closely  linked  to  the  organisation  of  payment  services  (legal
agreements, time of payment, etc.)
Central banks have been particularly concerned with risk in large value transfer systems, or systems
for clearing and settlement of payments between banks. These systems are located at the top  of  the
so-called payment pyramid.
1
BIS Review 7/2000
Chart 1: The payment pyramid
The payment pyramid
Settlem en t ban k
Clearing  h ou se
Ban k
B an k
P ayer
Payee
inte rbank  sy stem
pa ym e nt 
se rv ice s  
sy stem  
(re tail)
This is where the large, time-critical payments occur and obviously where the system risk is greatest.
Disruptions in this segment of the payment system can lead to severe consequences, partly through the
banks’ exposure to each other and partly through the banks’ processing of payments to and from their
customers – i.e. retail payments.
At Norges Bank, we have come to focus more on risk in the retail payment system, not least because
many small transactions can amount to a fairly large sum, but also because it typically takes some time
before final settlement between banks occurs. Internationally, more attention has been paid to risk in
retail systems. Moreover, if such systems combine pure retail payments and large payments - as is the
case in Norway  - it is recommended internationally that the  risk-reduction  measures be  as  strict for
these systems as for systems for large-value transfers.
We have also seen that part of the credit risk between banks arises in connection with (the legal basis
related to) the various payment services. In some cases, the banks’ legal obligations actually coincide
with the time the customer pays, i.e. long before the actual interbank transaction. For this reason, an
assessment of the risk in interbank systems must be based on a thorough analysis of settlement times
for the most important payment services.
As a central bank, we are naturally concerned that the entire payment system functions smoothly. If
important systems for payment services fail, robust interbank systems will obviously be of limited use.
At  the  very  worst,  extensive  problems  in  systems  for  payment  services  might  reduce  the  public’s
confidence in deposits, leading to a transition to cash payments. Therefore, we need to be aware of the
interplay between the interbank systems and the systems for payment services.
BIS Review 7/2000
2
Second, the risk in the payment system can be reduced by increased use of gross settlement in
the central bank - but there are costs attached to such a conversion.
An  increasing  number  of  countries,  including  Norway,  have  introduced  gross  settlement  systems  -
RTGS  systems  -  for  large-value  transfers.1  The  conversion  from  net  to  gross  settlement  for  large
payments can eliminate credit risk and, thus, a fundamental cause of systemic risk from an interbank
settlement. However, such conversion is not cost-free. Let me briefly mention two disadvantages of
gross settlement:
- 
First, it is evident that gross settlement does not completely eliminate the danger of systemic
risk.  Banks  will  continue  to  be  linked  through  interbank  loans,  and  problems  in  one
institution may still lead to considerable spill-over effects even if the settlement risk of the
net settlement  has  been eliminated.2  Moreover, the risk  may  increase  for  other  institutions
which must grant more credit (to those in need of liquidity for the gross settlement) or for
institutions which do not receive settlement as quickly as before (due to queuing problems
with the gross settlement).
 Second,  the  transition  to  gross  settlement  may  increase  the  liquidity  costs  for  settlement
participants. Whenever transactions are to be settled concurrently, there is always a risk of
“gridlock”,  i.e.  that  settlement  is  halted  because  liquidity  has  been  unevenly  distributed.
However,  this  is  a  well-known  situation  and  is  resolved  in  many  countries  by  the  central
bank providing loans to system participants.
Third, there is greater need to balance risk against efficiency
In recent years, more attention has been drawn to weighing risk against efficiency. This is particularly
the result of experiences we and other central banks have had with the new payment systems and the
accompanying  operating  rules.  RTGS  systems  are  relatively  liquidity  intensive,  and  the  cost  of
collateral may be fairly high. Compared with the initial situation - “non-secure” net systems - this cost
was widely considered as a reasonable price to pay. However, a number of “in-between solutions” -
i.e.  hybrids  -  have  appeared  over  time,  blurring  the  distinction  between  net  and  gross  systems.  For
instance, in some net systems several settlements occur throughout the day, often in conjunction with
various forms of exposure limits and collective guarantee arrangements. Certain gross systems have
solved  liquidity  problems  with  new  queuing  solutions  (algorithms),  often  in  combination  with  new
forms of central bank loans (primarily against security).
We thus see some convergence towards a new type of clearing and settlement system:  “secure”  net
systems or “optimised” gross systems. This does not mean a reduction in the risk-reduction measures
placed on such systems; if anything, the minimum requirements have become stricter.
And, fourth, there is a greater consensus on the (international) standards that must be met by
the payment systems.
The Lamfalussy minimum standards are well known. They were drafted by a G10 committee at the
beginning  of  the  1990s,  and  are  minimum  requirements  intended  to  reduce  the  risk  in  large,
international  clearing  and  settlement  systems.  Gradually,  they  have  also  become  standards  for
corresponding national systems.
According  to  the  Lamfalussy  standards,  payment  systems  should  have  a  well-founded  legal
foundation,  the  risk  should  be  known  and  understood,  the  division  of  responsibility  and  risk  limits
should be clearly defined, settlement should be completed - even if the largest participant experiences
payment problems, and there should be publicly-disclosed admission criteria and satisfactory back-up
routines.
1 RTGS = real-time gross settlement.
2
If the banks practise early crediting (based on queuing information) the credit risk will also arise in a gross system.
3
BIS Review 7/2000
Chart 2: The Lamfalussy minimum standards
Lamfalussy standards
(cid:127) Well-founded legal basis
(cid:127) The risk must be known and understood
(cid:127) Clear division of responsibility
(cid:127) Exposure limits
(cid:127) Settlement is to be completed even if the largest
participant experiences problems
(cid:127) Objective and publicly-disclosed admission criteria
(cid:127) Operational, reliable technical systems
(cid:127) Satisfactory back-up routines
The Lamfalussy minimum standards are still viable but, as mentioned above, some adjustments have
been necessary in the light of what has been experienced since they first appeared in 1990. A proposal
for  revised  standards  is  currently  being  evaluated  in  the  BIS3  and  a  final  version  is  expected  to  be
available some time next year.
I have pointed out these requirements because they are also relevent for us in Norway. If there should
ever be any link to TARGET,4 our interbank systems would be expected to meet similar requirements.
Moreover,  we  must  assume  that  foreign  bankers  will  demand  that  our  systems  satisfy  international
requirements.  We  could  probably  discuss  whether  these  requirements  are  equally  relevant  for  all
portions  of  the  NICS-system,5  but  I  think  that  in  a  given  situation  involving  a  link-up  with  an
international system, we will have only one choice - full implementation of the requirements! In the
proposed system for licensing interbank systems, emphasis will be placed on evaluating whether the
systems fulfil such international requirements.
3.
Risk and efficiency in the Norwegian payment system
Retail payments
3.1.
Allow me to turn to a closer examination of the state of the Norwegian payment system. First looking
at the retail side of the payment system - where so-called customer payments dominate - there are two
factors I would like to bring to the fore: one is the (continuing) sharp increase in electronic services
and the other is the stable use of cash.
3 BIS: Bank for International Settlements.
4 TARGET: Trans-European Automated Real-time Gross settlement Express Transfer (system).
5 NICS: Norwegian Interbank Clearing System.
BIS Review 7/2000
4
3.1.1.
Transition to electronic payment instruments
If we first look at electronic payment services, we see that the increase in the use of cards is what is
most striking.
Chart 3: Retail payment services (number of transactions) in 1990 and 1998
Retail payment services (no. of transactions)
1990
444 million transactions 
1998
 785 million tran sactions
12 %
25 %
22 %
25 %
63 %
53 %
Cards (both credit and debit 
card)
Electron ic giro services
Cheques an d other paper-based 
payment services
Source: Norges Bank, Annual Report on Payment Systems 1998
The use of payment cards in Norway now exceeds use in most other OECD countries6 and the rate of
increase is higher than in many other countries with advanced payment systems - such as Finland and
Denmark.
An increased use of electronic services is important for efficiency, including cost-effectiveness, in the
payment system. We know there are considerable cost differences between various payment services
and  that  there  is  an  equally  large  potential  for  savings.  In  terms  of  cost,  the  transition  to  more
cost-efficient paper-based services - such as the mail giro - is important. It is estimated that the total
cost of the payment system in Western countries may approach 2-3% of GDP. Therefore, a transition
to electronic - or more cost-efficient paper-based - services will be essential to the establishment of an
efficient payment system.
If we look at the breakdown between the various payment services in terms of value, we get a different
picture.
6 Measured as number of transactions per inhabitant per year.
5
BIS Review 7/2000
Chart 4: Retail payment services (value) in 1990 and 1998
Retail payment services (value)
1990 
(approx. NOK 1735 billion)
1998 
(NOK 4795 billion)
28%
3%
69%
66%
29%
5%
Cards (both credit and debit 
card)
Electron ic giro services
Cheques an d other paper-based 
payment services
Source: Norges Bank, Annual Report on Payment Systems 1998
We see that the share in value of payments made with payment cards - in spite of a sharp increase in
the  number  of  transactions  -  has  not  advanced  much  (still  accounting  for  a  mere  3-5%  of  the  total
transaction amount in the payment system). The average amount per transaction remains fairly low –
i.e.  approximately  NOK  400.  In  general,  we  can  nevertheless  say  that  with  the  exception  of  cash,
payment cards have become Norway’s most important payment instrument for small transactions.
On the other hand, the electronic giro is the instrument which has increased the most in terms of value.
The increase in direct transfers by business terminals has been particularly sharp, while the growth rate
has been highest for “new” services - such telebanking and home banking.
These  developments  are  important  for  the  further  improvement  of  payment  system  efficiency.  The
emergence of home banking is a natural progression from telebanking, an area which is already highly
developed in Norway. At the beginning of 1999, the vast majority of banks in Norway were able to
offer  giro  services  over  the  Internet,  and  turnover  in  1998  already  amounted  to  a  good  NOK  7bn.
Considering  that  PC  and  Internet  coverage  in  Norway  is  high,  conditions  should  be  favourable  for
developments  in  this  area.  In  this  connection,  it  will  also  be  exciting  to  see  how  banks  meet  new
demands for payment services related to increased trading over the Internet.
Based on the above, I would conclude that efficiency in the Norwegian payment system has improved
considerably in the 1990s.
Factors behind these developments
The  transition  to  electronic  payment  instruments  is  obviously  closely  connected  with  the  spread  of
information  technology  in  Norway  in  the  1990s.  Nevertheless,  it  is  important  to  point  out  that  the
correlation between new technology and an increase in efficiency is not automatic. Efficiency is the
result of interaction between technology, institutions and users. The following three prerequisites must
be in place for an efficient use of new technology:
First,  system  participants  must  be  able  to  make  use  of  the  new  technology.  Coordination  of  the
Norwegian payment system has been an important factor behind the swift adoption of new electronic
payment services by the industry. Second, it is imperative that customers gain quick and moderately
BIS Review 7/2000
6
priced  access  to  the  new  payment  services,  such  as  has  been  the  case  with  the  spread  of  EFTPOS
terminals.7 And third - and perhaps most importantly - the payment system must encourage the use of
(cost-) effective payment instruments. The public must face correct incentives if their payment habits
are to be changed in the right direction. Prices which reflect real cost are an important instrument in
this  connection.  Norway  has  a  substantial  head-start  on  most  other  countries  in  this  field.  Current
prices largely reflect the difference in costs between various payment services, showing that “correct”
prices are a suitable instrument in changing behaviour in the payment system.
3.1.2.
The use of cash and the paradox of levelling off
Another characteristic of the Norwegian payment system in the 1990s has been the levelling off of the
use of cash, when measured as the value of banknote and coin circulation as a share of GDP, following
a considerable decrease throughout the 1980s.
Chart 5: Cash in circulation as a share of GDP, 1980-1998
Cash in circulation as a percentage of GDP
P
D
G
 
f
o
 e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P
8%
7%
6%
5%
4%
3%
2%
1%
0%
0
8
9
1
1
8
9
1
2
8
9
1
3
8
9
1
4
8
9
1
5
8
9
1
6
8
9
1
7
8
9
1
8
8
9
1
9
8
9
1
0
9
9
1
1
9
9
1
2
9
9
1
3
9
9
1
4
9
9
1
5
9
9
1
6
9
9
1
7
9
9
1
8
9
9
1
Year
Source: Norges Bank: Annual Report on Payment Systems 1990-1998, Annual Report 1980-1990, Statistics Norway: Historical Statistics
1994, Statistical Yearbook of Norway 1999, 1995.
From a level of about 7% of GDP at the beginning of the 1980s, it appears that the use of cash may be
in the process of levelling off at close to 4%. A similar levelling off has also been observed in other
countries, even though the level varies. The question we ask is whether this levelling off is permanent
or whether we may expect a further reduction in the use of cash. Let me briefly outline three factors I
believe may be of some significance:
First, it has become less expensive to use cash in the 1990s. Cash is not an interest-bearing instrument.
As such, forfeited interest income is part of the “cost” of using cash. A declining interest rate in the
1990s has substantially reduced this cost, both for the public and banks. Second, the public has been
spared  the  real  costs of  cash  use,  while  other payment  instruments  have  increasingly  been  assigned
full-cost prices. And third, developments in new payment instruments for small payments - cash cards
- have progressed slowly. This is probably in part because we already have a well-developed EFTPOS
infrastructure in Norway, and perhaps in part related to what I mentioned above - that cash continues
to be an efficient and inexpensive alternative.
7 EFTPOS= electronic funds transfer at the point of sale.
7
BIS Review 7/2000
Predicting further developments in the use of banknotes and coin, both internationally and in Norway,
is a difficult task. Low inflation, low interest rates and greater access - for example, via the EFTPOS
system’s  cash-back  arrangement  -  will  promote  the  further  use  of  cash,  whereas  new  technological
solutions will reduce it. Developments in relative prices will also be of importance.
Many of Norges Bank’s activities within this area are linked to  our role  as  issuer  of  banknotes  and
coins; these activities are a public service, and costs are covered by the central bank. However, Norges
Bank  is  also  often  in  competition  with  others  when  it  performs  a  number  of  other  payment  system
services for banks and the postal system, which incur either no charges or no cost-covering charges for
these services. This practice is currently under internal evaluation at the Bank. Consequently, we must
anticipate that pricing for processing cash will approach full cost over time. It will be interesting to see
if this has any affect on the public’s use of cash.
Interbank systems (clearing and settlement systems)
3.2.
I would now like to look more closely at risk and efficiency in interbank systems and, particularly, at
our standing internationally.
3.2.1. We have made a fair amount of progress
The establishment of NICS and NBO8 provided us with a modern clearing and settlement system in
Norway, which we managed to implement at approximately the same time as the G10 countries and
the EU. Our systems have certain positive properties, such as the possibility of releasing  a  gridlock
situation in gross settlement (in NBO) and centralised information on banks’ liquidity (in NICS). Our
central bank lending arrangements are generally similar to those found in other countries, where it is
commonplace for collateral to be furnished for all loans in the central bank.
However, we differ from other countries in two areas in a somewhat disadvantageous way: first of all,
we  let  a  portion  of  the  large-value  transfers  go  through  multilateral  netting  before  being  settled  in
Norges Bank. This is not common, but obviously contributes to less stringent liquidity requirements
(this occurs in Germany and the US, among others). Second, in Norway we still make use of so-called
“T-copying”,  in  which  the  payee  receives  information  on  payments  before  the  settlement  has  taken
place.9 This creates the risk of the payee bank crediting the customer before the bank has received the
money. The payee bank may thus be exposed to a non-controlled risk relative to the payer bank.
On the whole, however, we may conclude that we have come a long way relative to the systems some
of us recall from 10-15 years ago.
3.2.2
Risk can be further reduced
In  spite  of  the  progress  which  has  been  made,  I  still  think  that  risk  in  the  Norwegian  clearing  and
settlement system can and should be reduced. Allow me to point out three areas where I believe risk is
still too high:
Retail netting in NICS
Turnover  in  this  area  has  been  high  and  on  the  rise.  Average  daily  turnover  is  now  NOK  28bn  -
compared with about NOK 18.5bn in 1998. Turnover has reached up to NOK 76bn on certain days.
8 NBO: Norges Bank’s settlement system.
9 T-copying: the payer bank sends a payment order for the entire amount to the payee bank, with a copy to the data centre
or the settlement bank, which sends a confirmation to the payee bank when settlement has occurred.
BIS Review 7/2000
8
Thus, a delayed or rejected netting - resulting from payment problems in one bank - can cause serious
problems for other banks, at any rate if the netting is prolonged until the following day.
In addition, there are no exposure limits or transaction limits for this netting system. The system really
does not live up to its name, because it involves both small and large-value transfers. As I pointed out
previously,  this  may  call  for  us  to  place  stricter  requirements  on  this  clearing  system  than  what  we
would demand if only retail payments were involved.
If it should turn out that the bank responsible for the delay in the mass settlement really is insolvent,
then  we cannot rule  out  that the other  banks  will  incur such  sizeable  losses  that  systemic  problems
may arise. We have very roughly estimated that the bilateral (gross) exposure may exceed NOK 5bn in
certain  settlements.  However,  this  situation  will  soon  be  improved  when  the  netting  is  given  legal
protection. This may reduce the total maximum loss to the amount of the multilateral net debit of the
insolvent bank. If the banking industry is also able to agree on an adequate loss-sharing agreement, we
assume that the remaining danger of systemic risk in this part of the payment system.
Gross settlements in NBO
Turnover through gross settlements in NBO fluctuates between NOK 100bn and NOK 200bn per day,
which  is  by  far  the  largest  portion  of  the  settlement.  Since  it  is  a  gross  settlement,  risk  would  be
expected to be minimal or non-existent. Such is not the case, however.
Liquidity problems can arise as a result of such factors as technical failure at one or several banks –
i.e. operational risk. We have already experienced such situations and seen that they can quickly bring
considerable  liquidity  strains  upon  other  NBO  participants.  Norges  Bank  is  actively  analysing  and
improving routines associated with such situations in connection with preparations for the year 2000.
This work will enable us to be well prepared if such unforeseen situations should arise after the turn of
the century.
Another risk-creating factor in connection with gross settlement is the extended use of early crediting.
Relevant  information  is  lacking,  but  is  our  impression  that  this  practice  is  fairly  widespread.  The
possibility of early crediting is, as is well known, connected to the information exchange model used
in  the  Norwegian  payment  system  (see  my  previous  comments  on  so-called  “T-copying”).  This
practice - which, by the way, is not in accordance with international recommendations - can result in
the  payee  bank  coming  into  a  position  of  non-controlled  exposure  in  relation  to  the  payer  bank.  A
transition to a so-called “Y-copying” - also in the Norwegian SWIFT system - should be a long-term
objective.10
Foreign exchange settlement
We must assume that the Norwegian payment system is also vulnerable to a fairly substantial amount
of foreign exchange settlement risk. This risk arises because the parties to a trade must usually send
the currency sold long before they know whether the currency they have purchased has been received.
We  know  that  the  krone  portion  of  foreign  exchange  turnover  makes  up  a  very  large  part  of  the
turnover in the gross settlement system, and that such trades can amount to NOK 90bn kroner daily.
The transition to gross settlement has thus reduced settlement risk in the Norwegian system, but at the
same time this transition may not have addressed what may represent the largest risk. Norges Bank
intends to identify foreign exchange settlement risk among Norwegian banks in the same way as has
been  done  for  G10  countries.  Norges  Bank  also  supports  the  inclusion  of  Norwegian  kroner  in  the
10 Y-copying: the payer bank sends a payment order to the data centre, which first sends a settlement order to the settlement
bank and then, when the settlement bank has confirmed that settlement has occurred, sends the payment order on to the
payee bank.
9
BIS Review 7/2000
foreign  exchange  settlement  system  CLS.11  Ties  to  the  CLS  will  be  in  line  with  international
recommendations and will greatly reduce the foreign exchange settlement risk of trading in NOK.
3.2.3.
Efficiency is not satisfactory
This observation is particularly associated with the present lending arrangement with Norges Bank and
its  corresponding  collateralisation.  At  present,  all  loans  with  Norges  Bank  must  be  covered  by
security. The last adjustment to this policy was made in September, when collateral requirements were
introduced  for  F-loans  as  well.  Following  this  change,  we  now  have  a  system  resembling  those  of
many  other  countries,  particularly  in  Europe.  However,  the  government  paper  market  in  Norway  is
small compared with other countries - which is, for that matter, an advantage - but it also requires us to
make better use of available collateral than other countries.
When  measured  in  October  of  this  year,  the  ratio  of  total  turnover  to  security  furnished  in  the
Norwegian settlement system was roughly 5.12 This is on a par with the situation in Stockholm, but far
below London, where daily turnover is around GBP 125bn - with highs of almost twice that amount -
while collateral requirements are at a mere GBP 8bn, i.e. a ratio of about 16. When measured in this
way, efficiency is thus at least three times greater in London than in Oslo or Stockholm - and we find
nothing  to  indicate  that  the  system  in  London  is  less  secure.  This  indicates  that  there  is  room  for
improvement in the Norwegian system.
What areas can we improve? First of all, the retail netting system. The present system is cumbersome
and both banks and Norges Bank would like to see some changes. It should  be  possible to  develop
better  routines  to  reduce  the  need  for  collateral.  A  review  of  traffic  patterns  (in  particular,  for
government  payments)  combined  with  other  appropriate  measures  (such  as  exposure  limits  and
collective collateral) should make it possible to reduce the collateral requirement substantially.
Changes in the rules for collateralisation are the other promising area for achieving noticeable gains.
Present regulations hamper ongoing changes in the amount that can be pledged in favour of Norges
Bank. Banks are unable to alter the collateral which has already been furnished (the previous day) in
favour  of  Norges  Bank.  If  it  turns  out  on  the  day  of  settlement  that  too  little  collateral  has  been
furnished, banks are not able to increase the amount of collateral - even though they have securities
available in the VPS.13 This sluggish system - resulting from the Act relating to the Norwegian Central
Securities  Depository  -  prevents  banks  from  adjusting  their  collateral  throughout  the  day.  It  goes
without saying that this is not an optimal situation, which we have already pointed out. The matter is
under consideration in the VPS legal commission, and we are hoping that a solution is imminent.
Let  me  now  turn  to the responsibilities and roles  of  the  central  bank  and  the  banks  in  the  payment
system.
Responsibilities and roles in the payment system
4.
The primary responsibility for the development of the payment system lies with, and must lie with, the
banks.  Self-regulation  is  still  the  rule.  However,  more  complex  systems  and  the  potential  of  new
participants  increase  the  need  for  the  public  sector  to  take  on  partial  responsibility.  This  is  the
background  to  the  proposal  for  a  new  act  on  payment  systems,  which  is  under  deliberation  in  the
Storting.  According  to  the  bill,  Norges  Bank  is  to  be  granted  responsibility  for  licensing  and
supervision of interbank systems in Norway. We wish to exercise this responsibility together with the
industry and its participants. In the following, I will take a closer look at this interaction, how it may
be developed and what our respective roles and responsibilities should be. I will also briefly touch on
11 CLS: Continuous Linked Settlement.
12 Based on combined average daily turnover of about NOK 175bn in NBO and total collateral of NOK 37bn.
13 VPS: the Norwegian Central Securities Depository.
BIS Review 7/2000
10
our  preparations  for  the  new  role  as  licensing  authority,  and  provide  a  few  opinions  on  which
requirements must be placed on the interbank systems.
The importance of self-regulation
4.1.
Norges  Bank’s  new  licensing  and  supervisory  responsibility  will  be  a  supplement  to  present-day
self-regulation.  Up  to  the  present,  participants  have  cooperated  on  standards,  rules  and  routines  for
security  and  transaction  exchange  within  the  payment  system.  Agreements  on  obligations  and
responsibilities between the participants have assured coordination between banks. Self-regulation has
primarily taken place through and between the two banking associations. There is consensus that this
model  has  given  rise  to  substantial  results,  not  least  an  infrastructure  which  safeguards  important
social considerations, while also providing for active competition between participants.
The challenge for Norges Bank will be to fulfil its licensing and supervisory responsibility in such a
way that self-regulation may be maintained, but which also allows us to move in the right direction in
terms of both risk (reduction) and efficiency in the interbank systems.
Norges Bank’s responsibility
4.2.
That Norges Bank has responsibility in connection with the payment system  is  not  new  to  this  bill.
Under the Norges Bank Act, Norges Bank shall promote an efficient payment system domestically as
well as vis-à-vis other countries. This formulation requires us to balance risk against efficiency.
Norges  Bank  also  serves  as  settlement  bank  for  the  banks.  Norges  Bank  has,  as  a  result  of  this
function,  set  requirements  on  the  banks  and  their  clearing  systems,  with  particular  emphasis  on
risk-reducing measures.
As a future licensing authority for the interbank systems, we will have to strike a balance between risk
and efficiency in our assessment of the systems.
In the following, I will provide a few observations on our new responsibility before commenting on
the licensing process itself and the requirements which must be placed on the systems. Given that the
law has not yet been adopted, this is of course somewhat speculative.
We are highly aware that the law is to be supplementary to the approach of self-regulation. We must
(according to proposition 96, 1998-99 to the Odelsting) endeavour to promote incentives which enable
this approach to be maintained. At the same time, I showed above that risk in the settlement system
can  and  should  be  further  reduced.  This  raises  the  question  of  whether  we  have  had  the  proper
incentives up to now. It will be a challenge to find incentives which accommodate the industry’s need
for self-regulation, while leading to a better system - with slightly lower risk.
As  licensing  authority,  we  must  take  a  stand  as  to  which  systems  are  to  fall  under  the  licensing
requirement  and  which  will  be  exempt  (because  they  have  no  significance  for  financial  stability).
There are several issues which will have to be addressed in this area. Turnover and risk exposure in the
systems will be key indicators in our evaluations. NICS is obviously a system which will be subject to
the licensing requirement, and we will probably have to focus our evaluations on this system initially.
We will also have to define which requirements will apply to the interbank systems and, particularly,
what actions must be taken for us to fulfil the law’s objective that:
Interbank  systems  shall  be  organised  with  a  view  to  promoting  financial  stability.  Special
emphasis  shall  be  placed  on  countering  risks  resulting  from  a  deficiency  in  liquidity  or
financial strength among participants in the system.
This must be interpreted to mean that the interbank systems should be organised in such a way that
they are robust and can withstand stress. They will probably have to satisfy international requirements
placed on similar systems. This is not to say that Norges Bank will dictate specific solutions for these
systems, but that we will demand that risk be identified and brought under control, and that there be
satisfactory solutions for dealing with crisis situations. Several alternative solutions may be possible.
The banks will have to decide for themselves within the limits set by sound risk management.
11
BIS Review 7/2000
An example may serve to illustrate this. Risk in net settlement arises primarily because of the time-lag
between payment and settlement. It has been common up to now for the payee bank to make funds
available to its customer - pending the final transfer of funds from the payer bank in the settlement.
This  practice  can  lead  to  large  and  unforeseen  exposure  before  settlement  is  finalised.  If  the  payee
bank  postpones  crediting  instead,  credit  risk  will  be  eliminated  from  the  net  settlement,  but  at  the
expense  of  efficiency  -  because  the  customers  receive  funds  one  (or  perhaps  two)  days  later.  The
advantages of delayed crediting must therefore be weighed against the disadvantages. My point here is
that  the  banks  themselves  must  be  responsible  for  this  assessment,  while  we  at  Norges  Bank  must
evaluate whether the relevant measures are sufficient for promoting the objective of the law.
Let  me  add  that  licensing  does  not  mean  that  Norges  Bank  has  issued  a  stamp  of  approval  for  the
technical solutions of the interbank systems. This is also emphasised in the preparations to the law,
where it states  that  ...  the  processing  of licence  applications  does  not  mean that  the  authorities  are
responsible for the properties of the system’s operation, etc.
It terms of the licensing process itself, Norges Bank has initiated preparations and we will be ready to
receive licence applications when the law enters into force. At the same time, we are aware that the
formulation of these applications will take some time, not to mention that any changes in agreements
or  routines  (which  become  necessary  based  on  legal  requirements)  may  take  even  more  time.
However, we will endeavour to facilitate this process. We have already had informal contact with the
banking associations concerning this matter and we are prepared to provide counsel and guidance in
the further progress of this process.
The responsibility of the banks
4.3.
The primary responsibility for the development of the payment system must, as mentioned, lie with
the banks. This is in line with the  approach  of  self-regulation.  Further  development  of  the  common
infrastructure,  agreements  and  new  payment  services  must  come  from  the  industry  itself.  In  this
process, it is important that banks provide more information on risk in the systems, so that an explicit
division of responsibilities can be established - both for the individual  systems  operator  and  for the
participants in the payment systems.
However,  the  banks’  ability  to  develop  efficient  and  stable  payment  services  is  influenced  by  the
regulatory framework established by the authorities. Norges Bank can be of assistance in helping the
industry  to  make  the  “proper”  choices  by  providing  a  regulatory  framework  which  maintains
competition, while also encouraging that participants are faced with relative prices reflecting the real
costs of the systems. Allow me to comment on these factors:
4.3.1.
The importance of reliable information on risk and a clear division of responsibility
It is important that the banks provide more information on the actual risk in the payment systems, so
that the risk is known and understood (see the second Lamfalussy minimum standard). Our knowledge
of  settlement  risk  in  the  Norwegian  system  is  still  insufficient.  We  know  too  little  about  exposure
throughout  the  day,  how  it  arises  and  the  optimum  approach  to  reducing  it.  We  have  to  gain  more
insight into these factors, particularly since risk information will be an important element in granting
licenses  to  interbank  systems.  Moreover, this  information is  also essential  for  the  correct  pricing  of
risk in payment services.
In this connection, I would also like to point out what it means to specify the respective responsibilities
of the netting provider and the participants (see the third Lamfalussy standard). I firmly believe that
the law’s requirement that there shall be “one operator who is responsible for the establishment and
operation of the system” may result in the necessary clarification of the division of responsibility in
the payment system. For this reason, this requirement is not just a formality, but a real opportunity to
create more transparency relative to the present system.
BIS Review 7/2000
12
4.3.2.
The importance of “proper” incentives
It is important to have incentives which reflect the real costs connected to various payment services if
participants  are  to  come  up  with  their  own  solutions  balancing  risk  against  efficiency.  A  pertinent
example may be the regulations concerning loans in the central bank. It is a basic responsibility of the
banks to ensure that liquidity is sufficient to cover settlement. The main rule for settlement in Norges
Bank is that there shall be adequate cover in the account. If, for one reason or another, a bank does not
have sufficient cover, it must turn to the market for financing. If necessary, the settlement should in
part or in its entirety be delayed so as to give the institution enough time to obtain sufficient liquidity.
Too  easy  access  to  loans  in  the  central  bank  in  situations  where  financial  stability  is  not  at  risk
involves costs in that it weakens banks’ incentives to address elements of risk in the payment systems
and  presents  the  customer  with  prices  which  do  not  reflect  the  risk  attached  to  various  payment
services.
4.3.3.
The importance of competition
The  stipulated  regulatory  framework  affects  competition,  such  as  who  is  allowed  to  initiate  new
payment services. Competition is important, both for improving the use of known, reliable payment
services and for the development of new services.
At the same time, we know that competition may come  at  the  expense of  efficiency  if  it leads  to  a
large number of services which are not coordinated. Maintaining a coordinated payment system while
also ensuring a level of competition which can sustain and develop dynamics and innovation can be a
difficult balancing act. As mentioned, it can be said that our experiences in Norway have been fairly
good.  In  our  view,  coordination  that  promotes  positive  network  effects  should  be  encouraged.
Competition  considerations  should  primarily  be  safeguarded  through  objective  and  publicly  known
criteria for access to the network which makes it possible for new competitors to become established
within the common infrastructure.
How shall we assess new participants wishing to establish proprietary systems alongside the common
infrastructure? This matter was discussed by the Banking Law Commission - which provided for the
possibility  of  institutions  other than  banks  and  other  financial  undertakings  to  establish  systems  for
payment services if licensed. The present bill does not address this question. It will be reverted to at a
later time when the formulation of the regulation of institutions is addressed.
Norges  Bank  has  provided  its  view  on  these  matters  in  earlier  submissions  to  the  Banking  Law
Commission’s fourth report. At that time, we supported the  Commission’s  proposal for  opening  for
new participants in this area, by pointing out that such new systems for payment services will not be
based on account agreements. Therefore, these “deposits” cannot be used as general means of payment
and thus will pose no threat to the current deposits-based payment system.
Nothing has happened since to change our point of view. On the contrary, we believe that heightened
competition will give us a better opportunity to test various technological solutions. This will certainly
make it possible to establish new settlement and clearing systems alongside the present infrastructure,
but  it  cannot  be  assumed  that  this  will  be  a  disadvantage  to  the  user.  If  such  systems  -  contrary  to
expectations  -  should  gain  ground,  then  it  is  likely  that  the  question  of  licensing  with  a  view  to
ensuring equal framework conditions will quickly be addressed.
Our experience from the financial industry as well as from other industries has shown that intensified
competition results in improved and lower-priced products - for the benefit of the customer. There is
no reason that it should be any different in the area of payments.
One  challenge  for  the  authorities  will  be  to  formulate  a  regulatory  framework  which  achieves  a
balance between the positive sides of coordination and the need for competition and innovation. The
challenge  for  the  banks  will  be  to  take  advantage  of  the  leeway  within  this  framework  in  order  to
develop  systems  which  are  beneficial  to  the  customer  and  which  ensure  a  healthy  and  competitive
business arena for Norwegian financial institutions.
13
BIS Review 7/2000
Conclusion
Review and “streamlining” of the retail netting system
5.
It is my foremost impression that we, in Norway, have a fairly efficient payment system, but that it is
not  quite  as  robust  as  we  would  like.  There  is  room  for  improvement.  For  interbank  systems,  I
particularly see possibilities in the following areas:
- 
- 
- 
- 
As for the retail system, we already have a very efficient system in place, and here competition will
push new products and services.
Address foreign exchange settlement risk
Limit the practice of early crediting
Improve the use of collateral
As  I  pointed  out  in  my  introduction,  the  transition  from  cash  payments  to  deposits  has  yielded
substantial  efficiency  gains,  but  has  also  led  to  new  forms  of  risk.  As  such,  the  public’s  choice  of
means of payment and payment instrument affects both risk and efficiency in the payment system. It
will also be interesting to see the effect of real-cost pricing on the public’s use of cash.
Experience  has  shown  that  the  public’s  choice  is  affected  by  relative  prices.  So  far,  we  have  had
positive experiences with real-cost pricing in Norway. The usual cost concept is a little too narrow,
however, and it may be time to take a closer look at “risk adjusted real-cost” prices. Different payment
systems give rise to different risk in the payment system. This relationship is not always reflected in
the prices charged customers. Often this is due to a lack of information about what the actual risk is to
the customer, the bank and the entire payment system.
In  this  respect,  the  banks  have  an  important  responsibility  to  identify  and  manage  the  risk  in  the
payment system. Only then will it be possible to say that the risk is “known and understood”. Norges
Bank also has a responsibility in this area, such as establishing a regulatory framework that provides
better incentives than what the present system offers.
We all have a common goal: a more efficient and secure payment system.
BIS Review 7/2000
14
