Willem F Duisenberg: The future of banking supervision
and the integration of financial markets
Speech  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  conference
organised  by  Euro  Group  entitled  “Improving  integration  of  financial  markets  in  Europe”,  held  in
Turin, on 22 May 2000.
 I should like to thank the organisers for the opportunity to participate in this interesting event. We are
here to discuss the important and profound changes taking place in the banking industry and financial
markets worldwide. In Europe, these changes have been significantly intensified by the introduction of
the euro. I wish to offer my remarks today on the issue of preserving financial stability for the euro
area in this rapidly changing environment.
Ensuring effective banking supervision and crisis prevention  plays  a  key  role in this  respect, and  is
facing  challenges  from  two  major  sources:  the  internationalisation  of  financial  activities  and  the
geographical split between the jurisdiction of monetary policy and banking supervision. The monetary
policy function now embraces the 11 countries that have adopted the euro, while supervision remains a
national responsibility. This situation introduced by the Maastricht Treaty is a novelty; it does not have
historical precedents.
It  is  the  view  of  the  ECB  that  the  existing  institutional  arrangements  can  provide  an  adequate  and
flexible  basis  for  safeguarding  financial  stability  -  also  in  the  future.  However,  the  practical
functioning  of  supervision  needs  to  be  developed  and  cooperation  between  competent  authorities
needs to be enhanced in order to ensure the effective execution of supervision and corrective action in
the increasingly integrated euro area financial system. Moreover, authorities should be able to take an
area-wide  -  or  even  a  global  -  view  whenever  the  situation  so  requires.  The  desirability  of  these
enhancements  is  also  acknowledged  in  the  recent  report  on  financial  stability  prepared  by  the
Economic  and  Financial  Committee  and  endorsed  by  the  ECOFIN  Council  at  its  meeting  on
8 April 2000.
Let me proceed by describing in more detail the two challenges for supervision that I just mentioned.
After  that,  I  should  like  to  evaluate  the  necessary  steps  for  promoting  adequate  cooperation  and
coordination among the authorities concerned.
Increasing cross-border banking
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  fostered  the  internationalisation  of  banking
activities.  In  particular,  the  rapid  integration  of  the  wholesale  and  capital  markets,  as  well  as
large-value payment systems, has already produced more and new kinds of linkages among banks. As
a result, banks are increasingly exposed to risks originating from abroad, and risks to financial stability
are less and less confined to national borders.
The  most  substantial  increase  in  cross-border  activity  and  market  integration  has  taken  place  in
wholesale  activities.  For  example,  the  currency-based  segmentation  of  the  markets  for  unsecured
interbank  deposits  disappeared  very  quickly  after  the  euro  was  introduced.  The  differences  in
quotation  spreads  across  countries  fell  during  the  first  weeks  of  1999  to  an  average  of  around  two
basis points from significantly higher levels. These spreads are deemed to indicate normal thresholds,
beyond  which  arbitrage  is  no  longer  profitable.  Wider  price  differentials  still  prevail  in  the  repo
market, reflecting lower liquidity and remaining segmentation of the national markets owing to legal
and other factors.
Market integration has not only been reflected in price quotations, but also in trading volumes. The
share of cross-border transactions currently accounts for more than 50% of overall activity in both the
1
BIS Review 42/2000
unsecured  and  repo  markets.  Some  large  institutions  are  starting  to  act  as  “money  centre”  banks
assuming  an  area-wide  scope  of  activity.  The  smaller  institutions  still  mainly  operate  with  their
domestic counterparts, but nonetheless benefit from the equalised market conditions. Accordingly, the
share of cross-border transactions in the large-value payment transfers through the TARGET system
has been increasing - from 36% in the first quarter of 1999 to 41% in the fourth quarter. The values
exchanged  cross-border  are  of  substantial  magnitude.  The  average  daily  value  of  TARGET
cross-border  payments  is  close  to  400  billion  euro,  representing  mostly  interbank  payments.  In
addition,  a  large  amount  of  payments  is  channelled  through  EURO  1  (EBA)  and  Euro  Access
Frankfurt.
In addition to the single monetary policy and the creation of the single risk-free yield curve, two main
reasons explain the rapid integration of  the  wholesale activities  in the euro  area  -  of  the  market  for
unsecured  interbank  deposits  in  particular.  First,  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  settlement  of
cross-border payments, mainly performed through the TARGET system, allows banks to trade safely
throughout  the  euro  area.  Second,  the  swift  acceptance  of  euro  area  indices  (EONIA  and  Euribor)
forms a common basis for pricing. The experience with TARGET demonstrates the importance of the
market  infrastructure  in  allowing  arbitrage  to  operate  effectively.  The  unsecured  market  can  rely
entirely  on  TARGET  for  settlement,  while  no  similar  integrated  system  exists  for  the  clearing  and
settlement  of  securities  and  for  managing  collateral  at  the  cross-border  level,  relevant  for  repo
transactions and for all securities transactions in general. For instance, there are currently 22 securities
settlement systems in the euro area, facing increasing demands for consolidation.
The broadening of the market size and increasing share of cross-border transactions has had a positive
impact on financial stability. If there were only a few market participants and the concentration of the
interbank liabilities were high, the likelihood of a bank failure having stronger repercussions on the
viability of other institutions  would be  greater.  In  addition, the  wider  euro  area  money  markets  can
now  absorb  liquidity  shortages  more  easily  than  before,  as  banks  can  borrow  more  readily  from
foreign institutions. However, if some banks should nonetheless enter into a distressed situation, the
probability of the problem spilling over to other euro area countries is significantly greater than before.
The  wholesale  market  is  a  major  channel  of  the  transmission  of  potential  financial  instabilities.
Moreover, the existence of a common framework for accessing central bank liquidity is tying together
euro area financial institutions to a much larger extent than usually recognised.
Let  me  now  turn  from  wholesale  activities  to  banks’  customer  businesses.  As  European  banks  are
typically universal banks, they combine at a single institution a wide range of products. The markets
for these products have varying degrees of integration - some are already global or European, while
others  have  remained  national  or  even  local.  At  least  the  major  banks  already  operate  in  strongly
internationalised markets for a number of their products and already have geographically diversified
activities.  This  makes  them  subject  to  various  influences  originating  from  outside  their  national
markets. Even if banks remain nationally based, they are increasingly subject to international market
developments and the national tendencies are increasingly influenced by international developments.
Hence,  the  usual  argument  that  cross-border  mergers  and  acquisitions  are  a  necessary  condition  in
order to achieve a more integrated and international banking system does not seem very strong.
In  particular,  many  of  the  asset  management  and  investment  banking  services  are  already  quite
internationalised, as the capital markets have taken strong steps towards integration and growth after
the introduction of the euro. Banks’ own securities holdings have also become increasingly diversified
across borders. The trend has been quite strong for government paper, as well as for corporate bonds.
The amount of instruments issued by other euro area governments rose by 38% in 1999, and those by
firms located in other euro area countries by 23% in banks’ portfolios.
To take an example of the financial services provided by banks in the capital market area, the leading
underwriters of bonds issued by European firms are the major European banks, alongside the largest
US  investment  banks.  The  “league”  in  which  these  players  compete  is  clearly  not  a  domestic  one.
Another example - which is especially telling of integration - can be drawn from the rapidly expanding
new  European  markets  for  technology  and  growth  companies.  Underwriting  the  Initial  Public
Offerings (IPOs) of this type of firm is the kind of service where we should expect the greatest degree
BIS Review 42/2000
2
of  national  segmentation,  since  the  companies  are  usually  accessing  the  capital  market  for  the  first
time - possibly as captive customers of local banks. However, the new listings during the first months
of the present year show that in most cases a foreign institution was present alongside a domestic one.
There  are  significant  economies  of  scale  associated  with  the  shift  in  the  dimension  of  the  capital
markets  from  national  to  euro  area-wide.  This  seems  to  have  already  been  one  significant  motive
behind the recent bank mergers and acquisitions, also in the case of the deals that have taken place
within national borders. Although most mergers have been domestic, cross-border deals also increased
in importance in 1999.
By  contrast  with  the  services  provided  to  other  financial  institutions  and  large  corporations,  retail
activities  referring  to  personal  customers  and  small  and  medium-sized  firms  are  still  quite  strongly
confined  to  national  borders.  Within  the  euro  area,  both  lending  and  deposit-taking  by  banks  are
largely conducted with domestic residents - 91% of loans and 87% of deposits still refer to domestic
counterparties.  Nevertheless,  internationalisation  is  also  progressing  in  this  area;  the  business  with
customers located in other euro area countries is growing faster than the domestic business in respect
of all major balance sheet items of banks.
Separation of central banking and supervision in EMU
I  should  like  to  discuss  next  the  relation  between  central  banking  and  supervision  in  the  new
institutional  framework  defined  by  the  Treaty.  As  I  mentioned,  the  third  stage  of  Economic  and
Monetary Union introduced a geographical separation of monetary policy and banking supervision - in
addition  to  the  possible  functional  separation  of  the  two  functions  that  already  existed  in  some
countries. This is the case because, for the euro area as a whole, banking supervision is now entrusted
to institutions that have no independent monetary policy functions (even if they are central banks) and
the Eurosystem has neither direct responsibility for supervising banks nor for banking system stability.
The main risk entailed in this institutional setting is the potential absence of an area-wide perspective
of the banking and financial sector for the euro area.
The national central banks continue to be strongly involved in the supervisory tasks: only in three euro
area countries - Belgium, Luxembourg and Finland - is the national central bank not directly involved
in banking supervision. In all other eight countries, they are extensively or even exclusively entrusted
with banking supervisory tasks.
Let me be a little more specific about the role and interests of the Eurosystem. One could say that the
Eurosystem plays the role normally reserved for the central bank in countries where it does not have
direct responsibility for supervision - such as the Bank of England after the creation of the Financial
Services  Authority.  In  this  context,  central  banks  still  maintain  a  vital  interest  in  a  stable  banking
industry and closely monitor its developments and major systemic risks. This stems from the fact that
the  banking  industry  is the  key  channel  for  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy,  the  counterpart  of
monetary policy operations, and the main provider of payment services, which all relate to the basic
central banking tasks.
Therefore,  the  Eurosystem  is  keen  to  see  its  actions  complemented  by  an  effective  conduct  of  the
supervisory function by the competent supervisory authorities. Central banks are keen to be sure that
supervision  is  conducted  in  such  a  way  as  to  ensure  that  banking  problems  do  not  jeopardise  the
conduct  of  monetary  policy.  This  interest  is  clearly  recognised  by  the  Treaty,  which  assigns  to  the
Eurosystem  and  the  ECB  some  tasks  relating  to  prudential  supervision  and  financial  stability.  The
Eurosystem  has  the  duty  to  “contribute  to  the  smooth  conduct  of  policies  pursued  by  competent
authorities relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions and the stability of the financial
system”.  Given  the  separation  between  monetary  and  supervisory  jurisdictions,  this  provision  is
clearly intended to ensure a smooth interplay between the two. In addition, the ECB must be consulted
on  any  draft  Community  and  national  legislation  in  the  fields  of  banking  supervision  and  financial
stability, and the ECB can provide, on its own initiative, advice on the scope and implementation of
the  Community  legislation  in  these  fields.  Central  banks  are  normally  involved  in  the  process  of
3
BIS Review 42/2000
drawing  up  legislation  relating  to,  for  example,  regulatory  standards,  safety  net  arrangements  and
supervision, since this legislation contributes crucially to the attainment of financial stability.
Moreover, in the event of a financial crisis, the possible provision of emergency liquidity assistance,
which is the responsibility of the competent national authorities, may have an effect on the common
monetary  policy,  which  is  the  direct  competence  of  the  Eurosystem.  To  limit  central  bank
interventions  and  the  associated  moral  hazard  problems,  it  is  necessary  for  crisis  prevention
mechanisms to be in good shape. Also for this reason, the Eurosystem needs to be assured of effective
banking  supervision  and  crisis  prevention.  In  general,  the  crucial  issue  is  that  the  risk  management
systems  of  individual  institutions  guarantee  their  safety  and  soundness,  and  the  supervisors  should
assure themselves of this fact.
Enhanced cooperation needed
At the moment, banking supervision relies on national arrangements that still show a wide range of
features.  Furthermore,  the  strategies  for  corrective  actions  in  cases  of  bank  fragility  vary  across
countries. Having supervision located at a national level - closest to the institutions that can give rise
to financial stability concerns - favours timely access to information and allows detailed monitoring of
banks’ activities. At the same time, the principle of cooperation between the responsible authorities is
forcefully  stated  in  the  EU  Single  Market  legislation,  and  several  Directives  establish  a  number  of
common regulations, in  order  to avoid  the  drawbacks  of  a  fully  decentralised approach  vis-à-vis  an
increasingly integrated market.
Hence,  we  could  say  that  cooperation  is  already  a  “second  pillar”  of  the  supervisory  framework,
alongside  national  competence.  Bilateral  cooperation  has  been  established  through  a  nexus  of
memoranda of understanding. In addition, supervisory forums for multilateral cooperation have been
set  up.  The  Banking  Supervision  Committee  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  is  the  key
present  forum  for  this  form  of  cooperation.  It  is  composed  of  the  representatives  of  the  banking
supervisory  authorities  of  the  EU  countries,  either  forming  part  of  the  respective  NCB  or  separate
bodies, and the ECB. The Committee facilitates cooperation among supervisors and the exchange of
information  between  supervisors  and  the  Eurosystem,  and  assists  the  Eurosystem  in  performing  its
duties in  this  field. The  Committee  has  already  established  its functions and  developed  activities  in
several useful fields. It has also published a number of reports dealing with the structural changes and
systemic concerns in the EU banking system. Another forum for dealing with multilateral cooperation
is the Groupe de Contact, a group of EU banking supervisory authorities which, for many years, has
also discussed individual banking cases in a multilateral way, but at a lower organisational level than
the high-level Banking Supervision Committee.
The need for multilateral cooperation has been strengthened by the introduction of the euro. In fact, I
am convinced that the only way the supervisory function is able to cope effectively with the increasing
integration  and  to  bridge  the  potential  shortcomings  arising  from  the  geographical  separation  of
monetary policy and banking supervision, is for the competent authorities to enhance their multilateral
cooperation.
What should be achieved through multilateral cooperation? Ideally, a situation should be reached in
which the group of European supervisors works collectively as effectively as a single supervisor, when
needed.  This  is  required  when  the  problems  involved  are  area-wide  -  because  of  the  institutions  or
markets involved - or there are concerns of systemic problems spreading across borders. Multilateral
cooperation can also enhance the quality of supervision by examining common trends in the financial
system that may not be revealed from the national perspective only.
We need to strengthen cooperation between supervisors and central banks to ensure that, if problems
at  a  major  bank  or  a  financial  group  have  contagion  effects  in  other  countries,  this  information  is
effectively distributed to the relevant authorities and - possibly - common solutions are sought. These
developments were seen as vital in the recent report on financial stability prepared by the Economic
and Financial Committee, which I have already mentioned.
BIS Review 42/2000
4
I see the Banking Supervision Committee as a natural forum for the deepening of cooperation along
these  lines.  It  allows  a  smooth  interplay  between  EU  authorities  involved  in  safeguarding  financial
stability  and  it  is  in  a  good  position  to  address  these  issues,  since  both  supervisory  and  monetary
authorities need to be involved in the cooperation. The Bank for International Settlements is currently
fostering the discussion of issues of common interest to supervisors and central banks from a global
perspective.
The  national  differences  in  the  tools  and  style  of  supervision  are  not  harmful,  as  long  as  there  is
effective  cooperation,  which  allows  supervisors  to  exchange  views  and  to  select  best  practices.  A
greater convergence of supervisory practices needs to be pursued in order to increase the effectiveness
of the instruments aimed at preventing instability in a more integrated market for banking services.
Another important tendency, which I  have  not  addressed  in  my  remarks,  is  the ever-closer linkages
and blurring differences between banking and other forms of financial activity. In some countries - but
not all - financial conglomerates have also gained important market positions. To this end, it is useful
and  reassuring  that  the  EU  Commission  has  started  work  in  the  area  of  regulation  of  financial
conglomerates.  Moreover,  it  has  facilitated  a  round  table  discussion  among  the  Chairs  of  the
Committees of the different disciplines: banking, securities market and insurance.
Finally,  it  is important that  the  ministries  of  finance  and  supervisory  authorities  regularly  exchange
views on the adequacy and necessary adjustments of financial regulation - as they already do - in the
context of the relevant European regulatory fora, as well as in the national context. Central banks also
contribute to this area of work, as I have already indicated.
To summarise, the present institutional setting for banking supervision in the euro area can cope with
the challenges brought about by the increasingly integrated banking and financial system, as well as
the  issues  raised  by  the  separation  of  monetary  policy  and  supervisory  functions.  However,
cooperation  between  competent  authorities  needs  to  be  further  stepped  up  in  order  to  ensure  the
effective supervision and preservation of financial stability. Will the extensive cooperation necessary
for the system to be effective actually materialise? I am confident that it will. Both supervisors and
central bankers are well aware of the new environment in which their tasks and responsibilities now
have to be performed.
5
BIS Review 42/2000
