T T Mboweni: A broadbrush picture of recent financial and economic
developments in South Africa
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  18th  Ordinary
General Meeting of shareholders, held on 29 August 2000.
 Introduction
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  has  once  again  met  the  many  challenges  posed  by  the  changing
domestic and international environment with great success during the past year. The Bank’s resilience
was  proven  without  any  doubt  in  coping  with  such  changes  as  the  implementation  of  an
inflation-targeting monetary policy framework, the information technology and other problems arising
with the new millennium, and maintaining financial stability during very volatile conditions. The Bank
also succeeded in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of internal administrative procedures and
completed a plan to effect employment equity in all occupational categories.
The domestic economy also adapted very well to volatile international financial markets and reversals
in capital flows. Developments in the rest of the world had both positive and negative effects on South
Africa. On the one hand, the economic recovery in many parts of the world, together with continued
low  inflation,  led  to  higher  international  commodity  prices  and  an  increased  demand  for  South
Africa’s exports. On the other hand, certain inherent weaknesses in the world economy had a negative
impact on domestic financial markets and, eventually, also on the recovery in domestic production.
The  external imbalances in  the  world caused  a realignment  of currencies,  with  the  dollar  becoming
notably stronger against the euro. Risks of sudden changes in market sentiment were exacerbated by
increases  in  share  and  property  prices.  Furthermore,  international  oil  prices  rose  steeply  when  the
Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and several other oil producers began to curb
production. Prices rose from about US$ 10 per barrel at the beginning of 1999 to levels in excess of
US$ 30 per barrel in the first half of 2000. This had a material impact on the import bill and prices in
South  Africa.  Despite these  developments,  South  Africa’s  balance  of  payments  remained  inherently
healthy, and the foreign reserves of the country increased substantially.
Developments  in  some  parts  of  sub-Saharan  Africa  unfortunately  had  an  adverse  influence  on
international perceptions of South Africa. Socio-political conditions in a number of countries remained
unstable, and conflicts continued in parts of the continent. Events in Zimbabwe preceding the general
election  affected  the  sentiment  of  many  investors  towards  the  region,  and  unjustifiably  raised
questions  regarding  South  Africa’s  economic  prospects.  The  understanding  by  non-residents  of  the
underlying  strength  of  the  South  African  economy  was  further  clouded  by  perceived  structural
weaknesses in Africa, the slow pace of skills development, inadequate health facilities, the prevalence
of  virulent  diseases  (including  HIV/AIDS),  and  growing  poverty  and  debt.  These  perceptions
disrupted domestic financial markets and real economic activity in South Africa during the first half of
2000.
A fundamentally sound balance of payments
The regional events, a shift of funds away from commodity-based countries to high-technology and
manufacturing-oriented  economies,  a  rearrangement  of  portfolios  as  a  result  of  the  surging  energy
prices,  and  higher  international  interest  rates  led  to  large  net  sales  of  domestic  securities  by
non-residents. After being net investors in South African bonds to the amount of R16.5 billion from
the  beginning  of  1999  until  the  end  of  January  2000,  non-residents  became  net  sellers  of  bonds
totalling R15.3 billion in the next six months up to the end of July 2000. Moreover, the net purchase of
1
BIS Review 71/2000
shares by non-residents on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange fell from R40.6 billion in 1999 to only
R6.8 billion in the first seven months of 2000.
At first an inflow of other capital was able to offset the net sales of domestic bonds by non-residents.
In  1999  the  net  inflow  of  capital,  including  errors  and  unrecorded  transactions,  amounted  to
R27.1 billion,  and  in  the  first  quarter  of  2000  to  a  still  satisfactory  R3.1  billion.  However,  in  the
second  quarter  of  2000  a  net  outflow  of  capital  was  recorded,  totalling  R5.9  billion.  The  more
permanent  inflow  of  capital  in  the  form  of  direct  investment  by  non-residents  in  South  Africa
remained positive, but was offset by portfolio and trade-related outflows and a further accumulation of
foreign assets by residents. Non-resident direct investment in South Africa amounted to R13.3 billion
in the eighteen months until June 2000. These direct investment flows, as in other emerging-market
economies, can be boosted by large one-off privatisations.
Although the current account of the balance of payments moved into a deficit from the second quarter
of 1999, the deficit remained relatively small. Throughout 1999 and the first half of 2000 the deficit
did  not  exceed  ½%  of  gross  domestic  product,  and  in  the  second  quarter  of  2000  a  surplus  of
R5.7 billion at a seasonally adjusted and annualised rate was recorded. This surplus was a remarkable
achievement  taking  into  account  the  substantial  increase  in  the  country’s  oil  import  bill  as  well  as
sharp increases in the volume of imports from the second half of 1999. The strong performance of the
current account can largely be attributed to the growth in merchandise exports. The favourable global
economic conditions, a rise in international commodity prices and a competitive exchange rate level in
South Africa, led to a considerable increase in both the value and volume of merchandise exports.
As  a  consequence  of  these  developments  on  the  current  and  financial  accounts  of  the  balance  of
payments, total net gold and other foreign reserves increased by nearly R28 billion from the end of
1998  to  March  2000,  before  declining  by  R4.4  billion  in  the  next  three  months.  At  the  end  of
June 2000 the gross gold and other foreign reserves of the country nevertheless stood at R69.8 billion,
which  is  the  equivalent  of  the  value  of  approximately  15  weeks’  imports  of  goods  and  services.
Moreover,  the  utilisation  of  foreign  credit  facilities  to  boost  gross  foreign  reserves  was  reduced  by
about R0.3 billion over the eighteen-month period until June 2000.
As  could  be  expected,  this  fundamentally  sound  balance  of  payments  situation  at  first  resulted  in
relatively stable conditions in the foreign exchange market. The nominal effective exchange rate of the
rand in fact increased by 0.6% from the end of 1998 to the end of 1999. At the beginning of 2000, the
external value of the rand began to depreciate in an environment of uncertainty in financial markets
arising  from  the  strength  of  the  United  States  dollar,  increases  in  oil  prices  and  concerns  about
socio-political developments in sub-Saharan Africa. The weighted value of the rand declined by about
8½% from the end of 1999 up to 30 May 2000.
Towards  the  end  of  May  the  behaviour  of  non-residents  in  the  secondary  bond  market  started  to
change and the United States dollar weakened somewhat on international foreign exchange markets.
Net  sales  of  South  African  bonds  by  non-residents  of  R17.3  billion  in  the  four  months  ended
May 2000  changed  to  net  purchases  of  R1.6  billion  up  to  22  August  2000.  The  nominal  effective
exchange rate of the rand accordingly, on balance, increased again to a level on 23 August 2000 that
was about 5% lower than at the beginning of the year.
Buoyant but volatile financial markets
The  depreciation  of  the  rand  was  one  of  the  factors  contributing  to  a  temporary  reversal  in  the
downward movement of long-term interest rates and yields in South Africa during 2000. The monthly
average yield on long-term government bonds fell from 18.3% in September 1998 to a daily average
of  13.3%  in  mid-February  2000,  influenced  by  the  strength  of  the  rand  during  that  period,  low
inflation, fiscal discipline and a positive assessment by international rating agencies of South Africa as
an investment destination.
Subsequently,  bond  yields  reacted  hesitantly  to  perceived  changes  in  financial  markets.  In  March
market sentiment deteriorated markedly owing to the weakness in the external value of the rand, rising
official interest rates in major financial centres and higher risk premiums on South African assets. The
BIS Review 71/2000
2
daily average yield on long-term bonds shifted upwards to reach a peak of 15.2% on 10 May 2000,
before  the  return  to  more  stable  financial  conditions  reduced  it  to  13.7%  on  22  August  2000.  The
monthly average inflation-adjusted yield on long-term government  bonds  amounted  to 5.5%  in July
2000, compared with 10% in September 1998.
Trading activity in the secondary bond market was boosted by the uncertainty in international markets.
A record annual turnover of R8.8 trillion was recorded on the Bond Exchange of South Africa in 1999,
followed by R6.2 trillion in the first seven months of 2000, which was about one-quarter more than in
the corresponding period of the preceding year. In the primary bond market more active borrowing by
private-sector companies compensated for a decline in the net borrowing of the public sector.
The  share  market  entered  a  long  and  difficult recovery  phase  after the financial  crisis in  1998.  The
daily average index of all classes of share prices fell by no less than 40% from the end of April 1998
to the end of August 1998, and then rose gradually to a new all-time high on 17 January 2000 of 10%
above  its  previous  peak  in  April  1998.  Rising  interest  rates,  the  depreciation  of  the  rand  and
corrections  on  major  international  bourses  resulted  in  a  decline  in  the  daily  average  index  of  share
prices  of  28%  until  17  April  2000,  when  it  began  to  recover  again.  On  22  August  2000  the  daily
average  index  of  all  classes  of  share  prices  was  nevertheless  still  9%  below  its  peak  on
17 January 2000.
The strong recovery of share prices throughout 1999 supported trading activity on the Johannesburg
Stock  Exchange.  The  value  of  shares  traded  in  the  secondary  share  market  rose  to  R448  billion  in
1999,  which  was  40%  more  than  in  1998.  Volatility  in  share  prices  fuelled  trading  activity  further
during 2000. The value of shares traded in the first seven months of this year was 25% higher than in
the corresponding period of 1999.
In contrast to the unstable conditions in the bond and share markets, interest rates in the money market
declined sharply during 1999 and remained largely unchanged during the first seven months of 2000.
For example, the call rate on interbank funds declined from 17.75% at the end  of  1998  to 9.5%  on
31 January 2000 and remained at that level in the ensuing period. Similarly the three-month bankers’
acceptance rate moved down from 17.53% at the end of 1998 to 9.95% on 21 January 2000 and then
fluctuated in a narrow range of between 9.83% and 10.25% up to the end of July 2000. The stability in
the money market during the first seven months of 2000 can mainly be ascribed to the monetary policy
stance pursued by the Reserve Bank.
As a result of the changes in long-term and short-term interest rates, the relatively flat yield curve at
the beginning of 1999 assumed a steep positive slope over the next eighteen months. This reflected an
easing of the monetary policy stance and, in the first five months of 2000, higher long-term yields and
interest  rates.  From  the  end  of  May  2000  the  differential  between  long-term  and  short-term  yields
began to decline again.
A slowdown in economic recovery
The South African economy showed clear signs of a vigorous economic recovery during 1999. The
annualised quarter-to-quarter growth in the seasonally adjusted real gross domestic product accelerated
from  1%  in  the  first  quarter  of  1999  to  3½%  in  the  fourth  quarter.  Moreover,  the  expansion  in
economic activity became far more widespread in the course of the year. Whereas the agricultural and
tertiary  sectors  had  been  mainly  responsible  for  the  initial  rally  in  production,  increases  in
manufacturing and other secondary sectors made a major contribution to output growth in the second
half of 1999.
Contrary to general expectations, the rate of expansion in the economy slowed down in the first half of
2000. Growth in real gross domestic product fell to 1% in the first quarter of 2000 and 1½% in the
second  quarter.  To  a  large  extent  this  was  due  to  a  decline  in  the  output  of  the  primary  sectors,
reflecting poor climatic conditions and an over-supply of coal on international markets. Manufacturing
output  was also  affected  by  negative  business  sentiment  related  to  the  depreciation  of  the  rand,  the
withdrawal of portfolio capital by non-residents and socio-political developments in some sub-Saharan
African countries.
3
BIS Review 71/2000
As  a  result  of  these  developments,  the  inventory  accumulation  moderated  in  the  second  quarter  of
2000. Domestic final demand continued to increase at relatively modest rates of between 1 and 2½%
in the four quarters until June 2000. Over this period the government reduced its final consumption
expenditure significantly as part of its efforts to maintain fiscal discipline. Public-sector fixed capital
formation  also  declined  throughout  1999  and  the  first  half  of  2000.  This  decrease,  together  with  a
reduction in private-sector investment, reduced total real gross fixed capital formation by 7% in 1999.
However, the rate of decline in total investment levelled off towards the end of the year. Fixed capital
formation  increased  at an  annualised rate  of  1½%  in the first  half of  2000  when private  companies
apparently  started  to  increase  capital  spending  in  anticipation  of  stronger  growth  in  domestic  and
export demand.
In  sharp  contrast  to  the  developments  in  other  expenditure  aggregates,  real  household  consumption
expenditure  rose  steeply  over  the  twelve  months  up  to  June  2000.  Consumer  confidence  was  high
owing  to  increases  in  personal  disposable  income,  a  fall  in  bank  lending  rates  and  a  lowering  of
effective  income-tax  rates.  Despite  this  optimism,  consumers  avoided  the  use  of  excessive  debt
accumulation in financing consumption. Household debt as a ratio of disposable income declined from
nearly  60%  in  the  first  quarter  of  1999  to  57%  in  the  second  quarter  of  2000.  The  reluctance  of
consumers to incur debt stems mainly from the volatility in real interest rates over the past two years.
The modest economic growth over the past eighteen months did not lead to meaningful employment
creation. Further reductions were recorded in employment in the non-agricultural private sector as well
as in the public sector, which were neutralised by increases in the informal sector. At the same time,
the growth in nominal unit labour costs slowed down significantly because of lower increases in the
labour remuneration per worker and a rise in productivity. The rate of increase in nominal unit labour
costs  declined  from  8.9%  in  1998  to  3.2%  in  1999  and  only  0.5%  in  the  first  quarter  of  2000,
compared with the same period in the preceding year.
Discipline in fiscal policy
Disciplined  fiscal  policies  and  efficient  public  administration  procedures  brought  the  public-sector
borrowing requirement down from R25.6 billion in fiscal 1998/99 to R10.9 billion in fiscal 1999/2000.
Over the past five years the public-sector borrowing requirement has been reduced from 5.8% of gross
domestic  product  in  fiscal  1994/95  to  only  1.3%  in  fiscal  1999/2000.  The  further  decline  in  the
borrowing  requirement  of  the  public  sector  in  the  past  fiscal  year  can  be  attributed  to  substantial
improvements  in  the  financial  position  of  the  national  government,  provincial  governments  and  the
non-financial public enterprises and corporations.
A  decline  in  investment  spending  by  public  enterprises  and  corporations  was  responsible  for
approximately 25% of the reduction in the public-sector borrowing requirement. The remaining 75%
saving  in  the  borrowing  requirement  was  largely  due  to  the  considerable  restraint  with  expenditure
allocations exercised by the national government and more efficient procedures for collecting income
and other taxes.
It is important to note, however, that part of the curtailment  in  expenditure  over the  past  five  years
may have been achieved at the cost of the development and maintenance of the economic and social
infrastructure  of  the  country.  There  is  a  delicate  balance  between  containing  expenditure  and
maintaining the infrastructure required for economic development.
Greater price stability
The  effective fiscal,  monetary  and  other  policy  measures  pursued  by  the  authorities,  in  conjunction
with lower international inflation, succeeded in creating greater price stability in South Africa. In 1998
and 1999 the rate of increase in the consumer price index excluding mortgage interest costs (CPIX)
averaged 7% per year. This rate of increase can be compared with inflation rates fluctuating around
15% in the 1980s and early 1990s.
BIS Review 71/2000
4
During 1999 the twelve-month growth rate in the CPIX slowed down from 7.3% in March 1999 to
6.5% in October, but then accelerated to 8.0% in July 2000. The rise in inflation was largely due to
shocks such as higher international oil prices, floods and volatile financial markets. When the effects
of the price rise in petrol, diesel and food are omitted from the CPIX, the rate of increase over twelve
months in other consumer prices fell from 6.8% in October 1999 to 6.7% in July 2000.
The year-on-year increase in the all-goods production price index accelerated from a low rate of 2.3%
in  March  1998  to  10.1%  in  April  2000.  This  rate  of  increase,  which  normally  precedes  changes  in
consumer prices, slowed down to 8.6% in July 2000 in line with the appreciation in the external value
of the rand.
Recent developments in monetary aggregates bode well for the inflationary outlook, provided that the
direct impact of external shocks wears off and that the secondary effects of the increase in oil prices
can be contained. The level of the broadly defined money supply (M3) at the end of June 2000 was
virtually the same as at the end of 1999, whereas M3 had increased at an annualised rate of nearly 19%
in the second half of 1999. Moreover, the decline in money supply growth was largely concentrated in
cheque  and  transmission  deposits  and  coin  and  banknotes,  ie  in  that  part  of  M3  reflecting  the
transaction demand for money.
Growth in bank credit extension, which had moved to single-digit levels in the second half of 1999,
remained below 10% in the first half of 2000. The demand for overdraft facilities was buoyant in the
first  six  months  of  2000.  Most  of  the  overdrafts  were  utilised  by  the  corporate  sector  to  finance
working capital. Mortgage advances, instalment sale credit and leasing finance also picked up with the
revival in the real-estate market and in expenditure on durable goods.
Monetary policy in a volatile environment
The volatility in financial markets had a significant influence on monetary policy during the past year.
At first, evidence that the emerging-market crisis of 1997/98 was abating made it possible to relax a
very stringent monetary policy stance. The repurchase rate of the Reserve Bank was allowed to decline
from  a  peak  of  21.85%  in  early  October  1998  to  approximately  12%  on  24  November  1999.  The
Monetary  Policy  Committee  then  announced  that  the  repurchase  rate  would  be  fixed  at  this  level
temporarily because of possible disruptions in liquidity relating to the computer problems expected to
arise  at  the  year-end  date  change.  The  marginal  lending  rate  of  the  Bank,  ie  the  rate  on  a  standby
facility to bridge the unforeseen liquidity needs of banks, was also reduced from 15 to 5 percentage
points above the repurchase rate.
In addition to these measures, the Reserve Bank deliberately eased liquidity conditions in the money
market  during  the  last  four  months  of  1999  to  allay  fears  about  the  millennium  change.  When  it
became apparent that no serious Y2K problems would be experienced, the Reserve Bank reinforced
the reserve dependency of banks on central bank funding. Bank liquidity was drained by increasing
reverse-repurchase transactions, issuing Reserve Bank debentures and by concluding foreign exchange
swaps  with  banks.  From  14  January  2000  the  Bank  began  to  resume  a  variable-rate  auction  in
accordance with the agreed signalling procedures with banks, and indicated that changes in short-term
interest  rates  at  that  stage  warranted  an  immediate  reduction  in  the  repurchase  rate  by  a  further
25 basis points.
From the middle of January 2000 the Monetary Policy Committee indicated that the repurchase rate
should remain at or around a level of 11.75%. The interpretation of this announcement by the banks
was that the Reserve Bank wished to keep the repo rate fixed at this level. They accordingly tendered
at  the  daily  auctions at exactly  this  rate.  While  the  Reserve  Bank’s  objective  was  to  achieve  stable
money-market interest rates in volatile financial conditions, this did not preclude moderate variations
in the repo rate around the 11.75% level.
Stable  money-market  interest  rates  were  regarded  as  desirable  to  restrain  volatility.  In  the
circumstances,  a rise in  rates  would  have  failed  to  counter  the  effects  of  the  supply-side  shocks  on
domestic  prices.  Moreover,  a  number  of  other  factors  indicated  that  the  upside  risks  for  inflation
would probably be short-lived. Developments such as modest increases in nominal unit labour costs,
5
BIS Review 71/2000
fiscal discipline, excess production capacity, low growth in money supply and bank credit extension
and a prudent monetary policy stance, pointed to a favourable long-term inflation outlook.
In  a  further  attempt  to  create  greater  certainty  about  the  ultimate  objective  of  monetary  policy,  an
inflation-targeting monetary policy framework was formally adopted in South Africa as part of overall
economic  policy.  This  was  announced  in  the  Budget  Speech  by  the  Minister  of  Finance  on
23 February 2000, with an annual average inflation target range of 3 to 6% for the year 2002 being set.
The new framework provides an anchor for the ultimate objective of monetary policy. It helps to focus
monetary policy, increases transparency and leads to a clear accountability of the Reserve Bank to the
citizens of the country. The successful application of inflation  targeting,  however,  will  depend  on  a
concerted, cooperative effort by the key stakeholders, such as government, labour and business.
The inflation target was specified as a range to allow the Bank some discretion in taking decisions on
the  monetary  policy  stance.  The  target  is  calculated  as  the  average  annual  increase  in  the  overall
consumer price index excluding mortgage interest costs in metropolitan and other urban areas for the
year 2002. A variant of the headline inflation rate was used, because the overall consumer price index
is affected directly by changes in the Reserve Bank’s repurchase rate. By including price changes in
metropolitan  as  well  as  other  urban  areas,  the  most  comprehensive  price  index  available  in  South
Africa  has  been  targeted.  The  year  2002  was  selected  because  of  the  long  lags  of  between  18  and
24 months before changes in short-term interest rates have an impact on inflation.
The  adoption  of  an  inflation-targeting  monetary  policy  framework  for  South  Africa  has  certain
important  implications.  Firstly,  the  numerical  inflation  target  becomes  the  overriding  objective  of
monetary  policy.  Monetary  policy  operational  procedures  are  concerned  overwhelmingly  with  the
attainment  of  this  objective.  The  objective  of  the  framework  is,  after  all,  to  achieve  the  target.
However, this does not mean that the central bank is left without any discretion. A rigorously applied
rule would deprive the central bank of its ability to deal with unusual or unforeseen circumstances.
Secondly, the pursuit of inflation targets does not mean that the Reserve Bank is not concerned about
the  achievement  of  sustained  high  economic  growth  and  employment  creation.  Monetary  policy
cannot  contribute  directly  to  sustainable  economic  growth  and  employment  creation.  However,  by
creating  a  stable  financial  environment,  monetary  policy  fulfils  an  important  precondition  for  the
attainment of economic development. Empirical evidence has shown that high and variable inflation is
bad for economic growth and that price stability is beneficial to a country’s performance.
Thirdly,  to  be  successful,  inflation  targeting  requires  nominal  exchange  rate  flexibility.  Trying  to
maintain  an  inappropriate  exchange  rate  may  be  costly  in  terms  of  domestic  economic  activity.
Unrealistically valued currencies may lead to large international capital flows with serious disruptive
effects on the domestic economy. In an inflation-targeting monetary policy framework, exchange rates
should  essentially  reflect  the  domestic  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  of  the  authorities  and  be
determined by the supply of and demand for currency in foreign exchange markets. This will result in
fluctuations in the exchange rate of the rand, but should at the same time promote domestic economic
stability.  The  Reserve  Bank  nevertheless  takes  cognisance  of  the  second-round  impact  of  exchange
rate movements on the inflation rate.
Fourthly,  inflation  targeting  is  a  forward-looking  approach.  Monetary  policy  is  based  on  the  likely
path of inflation. In any monetary policy framework a central bank has to decide how its current policy
stance  will  affect  future  price  movements.  The  difference  between  inflation  targeting  and  other
frameworks is that inflation targeting makes forecasting explicit and more transparent.
For this purpose econometric models are applied and changes in economic circumstances are carefully
analysed to determine the inflation outlook. With the assistance of a number of other central banks,
considerable effort has been made to improve the forecasting capacity of the Reserve Bank. A number
of small and simplified models have been developed to forecast inflation. In addition, the Bank has
initiated an inflation expectations survey to determine the expected level of inflation.
Econometric  modelling  is  only  one  of  the  tools  used  to  determine  the  monetary  policy  stance.
However, the real world cannot be encapsulated adequately by an integrated system of mathematical
equations. Econometric models over-simplify actual economic relations. Determining monetary policy
BIS Review 71/2000
6
requires  a  much  more  detailed  analysis  of  factors  that  may  have  an  impact  on  inflation.  Value
judgements  are  unavoidable.  The  determination  of  monetary  policy  in  an  inflation-targeting
framework therefore remains an art and does not become an exact science.
Finally, inflation targeting increases the transparency and accountability of monetary policy because
the objective of price stability is expressed as a numerical target to be achieved over a specific period.
The  public  announcement  of  explicit  targets  enhances  the  understanding  of  the  policy  objectives.
Good  governance  calls  for  the  Bank  to  be  accountable,  particularly  in  view  of  its  operational
independence in achieving the targets.
In order to further facilitate an understanding of monetary policy, the policy stance is explained in a
statement issued after every meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee, at Monetary Policy Forums
in major regional centres, in various publications of the Bank and in speeches and presentations to the
public  and  the  Parliamentary  Portfolio  Committee  on  Finance.  The  Reserve  Bank  also  intends  to
publish a six-monthly Monetary Policy Review to describe in greater detail the policies pursued and
instruments applied.
However, the Reserve Bank does not intend to publish the minutes of meetings of the Monetary Policy
Committee. The statement published after every meeting provides a good reflection of considerations
taken  into  account  at  the  meeting.  The  Bank  also  does  not  intend  to  publish  the  structure  of  its
econometric models at this stage because the functioning of these models needs to be evaluated over a
long period of time. Disclosure of the models could create uncertainty about policy decisions. Once
the models have been validated, the Bank will consider publishing them.
At present it is also the objective of the Bank to reduce its net oversold position in foreign currency
whenever circumstances allow. The foreign currency exposure of the Reserve Bank adversely affected
market sentiment and has increased the volatility in the exchange rate of the rand and in other financial
aggregates. Recognising this, a policy of gradually reducing the net open position in foreign currency
has been followed. By buying dollars in the market, the net open position in foreign currency of the
Bank was reduced from US$ 23.2 billion at the end of September 1998 to US$ 9.9 billion at the end of
July 2000. The reduction of the net open position in foreign currency to zero will remove one of the
risk factors in the economy.
The reduction in the net open foreign position has had the added advantage of reducing the foreign
currency exposure of the national government as a ratio of government debt from nearly 43% at the
end of September 1998 to approximately 24% at the end of July 2000. The comparable ratio for South
Africa’s  peer  group  was  some  46%  at  the  end  of  December  1999.  Were  the  Bank  to  succeed  in
reducing the net open foreign position to zero, the foreign currency exposure of the government as a
ratio  of  government  debt, at current  levels,  would  amount  to  only  6%.  This  low  currency  exposure
makes it easier to borrow funds abroad.
Maintaining stability in the financial sector
A stable financial environment requires not only low inflation, but also a sound financial sector. This
involves  stability  in  the  financial  markets  where  transactions  can  take  place  at  prices  reflecting
demand  and  supply  forces,  and  with  healthy  financial  institutions  capable  of  meeting  contractual
obligations without interruption or outside assistance.
Stability in the financial sector and price stability are inextricably interrelated. Failure to maintain one
form of stability creates an uncertain operating environment for the other, with causality running  in
both  directions.  A  lack  of  price  stability  could  lead  to  rapid  growth  in  credit  extension  and  higher
interest rates, with the danger that borrowers could default on loan commitments. Bank failures may
potentially  be  contagious,  which  would  render  monetary  instruments  ineffective  and  cause  higher
inflation. By contrast, stability in the financial sector enhances financial intermediation, improves the
allocation of real resources and provides an environment conducive to the implementation of monetary
policy.
7
BIS Review 71/2000
South  Africa  is  fortunate  to  have  a  well-developed  and  sound  financial  system.  Moreover,  the
domestic banking sector proved remarkably resilient during the global financial turmoil of 1997/98. In
the mature South African financial market with a moderate level of private indebtedness and a good
regulatory and legal framework, the major banks were able to cope efficiently with the effects of high
interest rates and exchange rate volatility.
In the past financial year, thorough preparations to avoid the possible impact of the transition to the
year  2000  ensured that  normal  operations  were  maintained.  Some  of the smaller banks  experienced
temporary liquidity problems  which  were  largely  solved  by  allowing  the  affected  banks  to  discount
their  cash  reserves  and  statutory  liquid-asset  portfolios.  The  funding  and  other  corrective  measures
enabled the affected banks to restore liquidity positions during the first quarter of 2000.
South  African  banks  are  well 
systems  and
corporate-governance  structures.  They  are  also  well  capitalised  and  had  an  average  risk-weighted
capital-adequacy ratio of 12.5% at the end of June 2000, compared with the required minimum ratio of
8% stipulated in the Basel Capital Accord. More than 60% of the banks had a capital-adequacy ratio of
at least 15% at the end of June 2000.
risk-management 
sophisticated 
run  with 
Although non-performing loans have increased since the international financial crisis, South African
banks have made greater provision for bad and doubtful debts. As a ratio of total loans and advances,
gross overdues in the banking sector came to only 4.6% in the second quarter of 2000. Provision for
doubtful  debts  amounted  to  about  60%  of  total  overdues  in  the  same  period,  which  is  far  more
conservative than the international norm of 40%. However, there are signs that the profitability of the
banking  sector  is  declining  somewhat.  Lower  income  combined  with  higher  operating  expenses
resulted in marginally lower returns on assets and equity in the first half of 2000.
The excess of short-term liabilities over short-term assets for banks stood at 16% of their total funding
requirements in June 2000. In view of the robust capital adequacy position of the banks and efficient
management procedures, this is not a cause for concern. South African banks in any event maintain
adequate  levels  of  liquidity,  with  liquid  assets  exceeding  the  regulatory  minimum  by  nearly  9%  in
June 2000.
The  Reserve  Bank  strives  to  ensure  that  effective  and  efficient  banking  supervision  is  in  place.  A
recent assessment undertaken by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank in terms
of  a  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Programme  found  that  South  Africa  complies  with  almost  all  the
Basel  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking  Supervision.  Where  some  requirements  do  fall  short,
proactive steps have already been taken to address them. The imminent promulgation of amendments
to the Banks Act and revised Regulations thereunder should further enhance the country’s status in the
regulatory environment.
In  view  of  the  complexity  of  the  financial  system  and  the  linkages  of  banks  with  other  financial
activity in the country, a Financial Stability Unit was established in the Reserve Bank in July 2000.
This unit will research and analyse ways of promoting and maintaining a stable financial system. The
aim  is  to  focus  on  overall  financial  stability  so  as  to  enhance  confidence  in  the  domestic  financial
system,  increase  South  Africa’s  attractiveness  as  a  regional  financial  centre  and  attract  foreign
investment.  Considerable  attention  will  be  given  to  strengthening  the  non-regulatory  aspects  of  the
financial regime such as incentive structures, market discipline and corporate governance. A priority
will be to help establish a deposit-insurance scheme for South Africa.
One of the most important functions of the regulator of banks is to authorise the establishment of new
banks. The power to grant licences provides the mechanism for preventing the entry of banks whose
presence might be prejudicial to the interests of depositors and the soundness of the banking system.
In South Africa our approach is to grant licences to all applicants that comply with a stringent set of
entry criteria. These criteria are that the establishment of a bank should be in the public interest; no
single shareholder should be able to dictate the bank’s direction without due regard to the interests of
its  depositors;  the  bank  should  be  governed  and  managed  by  directors  and  managers  with  proven
ability and integrity to pursue the interests of the owners without harming the interests of depositors;
the bank should establish operational and control systems commensurate with the complexity of the
BIS Review 71/2000
8
risks and exposures it takes; and the bank should be established with sufficient financial strength to
ensure adequate capital and sustainable profitability.
Banks are monitored continuously to ensure that they remain fundamentally healthy. This has mainly
been  done  through  quantitative  and  qualitative  off-site  assessments.  In  1999  the  Bank  began  the
preparatory  work  for  on-site  reviews  of  credit-risk  management  systems  and  evaluations  of  asset
quality. The process is expected to become fully operational in the second half of 2000. Substantial
progress has also been made with the development of consolidated supervision, ie in reviewing both
banking and non-banking activities conducted by a banking group domestically and internationally.
Despite  all  these  procedures,  it  is  not  possible  to  guarantee  that  banks  will  not  experience  some
difficulties from time to time.  In such cases, the policy of the Reserve Bank  is  to assist  only  banks
which  have  a  temporary  liquidity  problem,  whereas  insolvent  banks  are  allowed  to  exit  from  the
system in an orderly manner which does the least harm to the banking system and depositors. In all
cases of bank failure, the bank’s management is replaced and the individuals involved would normally
not be permitted to hold influential positions in banks again.
When a bank experiences funding difficulties on a short-term basis, lender-of-last-resort assistance is
provided  to  it.  Lender-of-last-resort  assistance  is  a  recognised  responsibility  and  practice  of  central
banks.  The  objective  of  such  assistance  is  to  enable  the  bank  concerned  to  implement  corrective
measures  and  to  prevent  the  contagion  effect  of  a  run  on  the  bank.  The  liquidity  under  the
lender-of-last-resort function is provided on a short-term basis only and has to meet certain important
preconditions. These preconditions include that the institution has to be solvent; sufficient collateral is
available; the institution has sought other reasonably available sources before seeking assistance from
the Reserve Bank; the shareholders of the bank have made a reasonable effort to support it; there is no
prima facie evidence that the management is not fit and proper, or that the liquidity problem is due to
fraud; and the institution has developed and is committed to the implementation of a viable plan of
appropriate remedial action to deal with its liquidity problems.
In an integrated world economy, it is essential to have close cooperation and that information is shared
internationally. This is becoming even more important with the increased foreign participation in the
South African banking sector. The Bank continues to develop relations with other banking supervisors
to meet the challenges posed by globalisation. At a regional level, the Bank participates actively in the
initiatives  of  the  East  and  Southern  Africa  Banking  Supervisors  Group  to  harmonise  the  banking
legislation  and  banking  supervisory  practices  of  member  states  and  to  share  information  on  matters
relating to banking supervision.
In  addition  to  the  banking  supervision  function,  stability  in  the  financial  sector  depends  on  the
availability of currency in circulation and the maintenance of an efficient national payment, clearing
and  settlement  system.  The  Bank  incurs  considerable  expense  annually  to  ensure  the  availability  of
high-quality currency in circulation in various denominations as a means to execute transactions. As a
precaution against possible Y2K problems and an increased demand for currency near the year-end, a
large  number  of  additional  banknotes  were  printed  during  1999.  No  difficulties  were  therefore
experienced in meeting the higher demand in the last few weeks of the year.
Considerable progress was made with the planning and preparations to take over the provision of bulk
cash  services  to  banks  from  SBV  Services  (Pty)  Ltd.  A  new  currency  management  strategy  was
adopted  by  the  Board  of  the  Reserve  Bank  in  February  2000  to  deal  with  this  matter.  As  a
consequence,  the  infrastructure  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  branches  will  be  adapted  to  provide  for  the
increased level of currency-handling activity.
Further  advances  have  also  been  made  in  the  national  payment,  clearing  and  settlement  system  to
achieve  same-day  settlement.  At  present  approximately  76%  of  all  payments  in  the  South  African
Multiple Option Settlement (SAMOS) system are already made on a same-day basis. In terms of the
principles  of  international  best  practice,  a  start  was  made  with  introducing  further  risk-reduction
measures in  the  Payment  Clearing  House  (PCH)  batches.  PCH  agreements  are  being  drafted  which
will assist  the industry  to remove  high-value  payments  from  inappropriate  payment  streams  and,  in
time, will enable all payments in the SAMOS system to be settled on a same-day basis.
9
BIS Review 71/2000
Another important challenge is the financing of small, medium and micro enterprises (SMMEs) which
do not have securities or other assets as collateral for needed funds. Because banks lend out money
that  they  receive  from  depositors,  rigorous  credit  requirements  have  to  be  maintained  under  all
circumstances. At the same time SMMEs are expected to make a major contribution to employment
creation and economic development. To achieve this, they will obviously require outside finance. The
Reserve Bank believes that the development of a microlending industry is essential for this purpose.
Microlenders are well placed to provide such finance to SMMEs as they normally have an intimate
knowledge  of  potential  customers.  Efficient  credit-risk  management  requires  an  understanding  of  a
customer’s business and the risks associated with loan financing.
The  Reserve  Bank  wants  to  actively  promote  the  microlending  industry  by  fostering  community
banking and exempting common-bond savings groups and village financial services cooperatives from
compliance  with  the  Banks  Act,  under  certain  conditions.  The  establishment  of  the  Micro  Finance
Regulatory  Council  (MFRC)  should  further  boost  the  already  rapid  growth  in  microlending.  Only
microlenders that are affiliated to the MFRC will be allowed to fund themselves by means of deposits
in South Africa and conduct their business within a self-regulatory framework.
Broadening of external relations
Following the normalisation of South Africa’s relations with the rest of the world, senior officials of
the  Reserve  Bank  have  become  more  involved  with  multilateral  financial  institutions,  other  central
banks and international private financial institutions. A number of meetings were attended at the IMF
and  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  in  the  past  year  where  discussions  were  held  with  other
central bankers on current economic and policy developments. The Reserve Bank took an active part
in the discussions about the new international financial architecture. Further headway was made with
the  enhancement  of  cooperation  among  the  central  banks  of  the  Southern  African  Development
Community (SADC). The Committee of Central Bank Governors in the SADC, chaired by the South
African  Reserve  Bank  and  assisted  by  a  secretariat  in  the  Bank,  is  implementing  projects  aimed  at
facilitating monetary and financial cooperation in the region. These projects include the convergence
of payment, clearing and settlement systems in the  region;  the  maintenance  of  a common  monetary
and  financial  database;  the  development  of  a  common  legal  framework  for  central  banks;  the
harmonisation  of  listing  requirements  on  stock  exchanges;  and  the  development  of  norms  for  good
banking practice in the SADC. Close cooperation in sharing experiences and skills was also achieved
in banking supervision, information technology, protective services and human resources development
and training.
As  custodian  of  South  Africa’s  foreign  reserves,  the  Bank  continues  to  manage  foreign  reserve
portfolios and foreign credit facilities. In order to increase the efficiency of reserve management, some
of the international reserves were handed over to external fund managers to manage on behalf of the
Reserve Bank. In this way the Bank expects to benefit in the form of training and technology transfers.
In  June  2000  syndicated  loan  facilities  amounting  to  US$ 1.5  billion  were  successfully  finalised  to
replace a similar loan that had matured.
Changes to internal administration
In  the  internal  administration  of  the  Reserve  Bank  a  focus  area  during  the  past  year  was  the
establishment  of  a  Budget  Committee  which  is  responsible  for  preparing  and  managing  the  Bank’s
operational and capital budgets. This committee gave considerable attention to the budgetary process
and  procedures  followed  in  the  Bank  and  established  definite  rules.  Roles  for  the  Governors’
Committee,  the  Budget  Committee,  the  Remuneration  Committee  and  the  Procurement  Committee
were clarified. The budget schedule was revised to synchronise with the strategic plans of departments
and to allow more time for the preparation of departmental budgets and the approval of proposals by
the Budget Committee.
The  Year  2000  project,  which  had  started in July  1996  and  culminated  in  the  transition  to  the  new
millennium, was completed successfully. This was replaced by a number of new projects to ensure the
BIS Review 71/2000
10
most  efficient,  cost-effective  information  technology  systems,  including  the  dissemination  of
economic data and the upgrading of foreign exchange information. Treasury bills were immobilised
and  assistance  was  provided  to  the  Strate  system  for  its  equity  dematerialisation,  clearing  and
settlement system.
A  paradigm  shift  in  exchange  control  is  under  investigation.  In  the  new  planned  philosophy  most
transactions will be permitted, except for certain specified exclusions. Emphasis will be placed on the
accurate  reporting  of  cross-border  transactions.  The  completion  of  this  study  should  improve  the
compilation  of  the  balance  of  payments  and  provide  more  details  of  transactions  in  services  with
non-residents. The first  stage  of  the implementation  of  this reporting  system  is  envisaged  for  2001.
Briefing sessions in this regard have already been held with authorised dealers in foreign exchange and
the other members of the Common Monetary Area.
Like many other central banks, the Reserve Bank is seeking to enhance its effectiveness and efficiency
by focusing on its core activities. To this end, considerable emphasis has been placed on the strategic
management  process.  Strategic  reviews  are  undertaken  more  frequently  by  the  governors,  and
participation  in  the  process  was  extended  by  involving  advisers,  all  heads  of  departments,  branch
managers and the managing directors of the subsidiaries. Feedback on the results of these discussions
was  given  to  the  Board  in  the  form  of  a  strategic  framework  document  which  provides  general
guidelines to departments on aligning departmental strategies and operational plans.
In addition, the Bank has embarked on the development of a long-term vision which will serve as the
framework for future planning. As part of this Vision 2010 a comprehensive human resources plan has
been  developed  that  forms  the  basis  for  effecting  employment  equity.  The  formulation  and
implementation  of  the  plan  underscore  the  Bank’s  commitment  to  transforming  the  institution,
eliminating past employment imbalances and making the staff more representative of the population of
the  country  in  terms  of  race,  gender  and  people  with  disabilities.  By  the  same  token,  the  Bank  is
cognisant  of  the  need  to  retain  the  necessary  corporate  memory  and  skills  within  a  transforming
environment.
The plan endeavours to achieve a staff complement comprising a minimum of 50% Black people and
33%  females  across  all  occupational  levels  by  2005.  The  achievement  of  these  targets  will  be
complemented  by  a  number  of  action  programmes,  which  include  a  special  drive  to  recruit  people
from the designated groups, accelerated management development and promotions, dedicated training
and development, early retirement and redundancy procedures, organisational restructuring, wellness
and disability management, and affirmative procurement.
The  Bank  continues  to  regard  the  development  of  the  skills  and  knowledge  of  its  staff  as  a  major
responsibility. Emphasis is placed not only on the proficiencies required in its daily activities, but also
on human resources development in such diverse fields as adult basic education, languages, business
presentations, the conduct of meetings, the power of positive imaging, the personal and professional
growth of women, financial and labour relations matters, management and preparing for  retirement.
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  College  concentrates  on  upgrading  the  central  banking  skills  of
individuals  to  the  highest  level.  The  college  plays  an  active  role  in  the  SADC  Training  and
Development Forum and presents courses to  staff  of the  Bank,  private-sector  and  tertiary  education
institutions in South Africa and to individuals nominated by central banks in the SADC region.
Concluding remarks and acknowledgements
Events during the past year again illustrate how interwoven South Africa has become in the integrated
world economy. Globalisation has many benefits for emerging-market economies. Capital movements
facilitate  the  efficient  allocation  of  saving,  channel  resources  into  productive  uses  and  promote  the
financing  of  international  trade  and  investment.  In  this  way  globalisation  creates  opportunities  to
increase international trade, economic growth, employment creation and welfare.
Unfortunately, like all good things in life, globalisation also has certain disadvantages. In particular,
the  integration  of  South  Africa  into  the  world  economy  has  made  the  country  more  vulnerable  to
external shocks. These can take the form of supply, demand and financial shocks. In such an uncertain
11
BIS Review 71/2000
environment  the  pursuit  of  financial  stability  has  become  even  more  imperative.  Although  stability
does  not  provide  unconditional  protection  against  reversals  in  international  capital  flows,  it  does
forestall uncertainties on the monetary front and can counter excessive volatility. The Reserve Bank
therefore remains determined to maintain financial stability in South Africa.
In conclusion, I wish to thank the President and Deputy President of the Republic of South Africa, and
the Reverend Frank Chikane, Director General of the Presidency, for their support for the work of the
South African Reserve Bank. In particular, I wish to express my heartfelt gratitude for their support for
the independence of the South African Reserve Bank. I also want to place on record my appreciation
to  Mr  Trevor  Manuel,  Minister  of  Finance,  Mr  Mandisi  Mphahlwa,  Deputy  Minister  of  Finance,
Ms Maria Ramos, Director General of National Treasury, and the staff of the National Treasury  for
their  cooperation  with  the  Bank  over  the  past  year.  A  word  of  appreciation  is  also  appropriate  to
Mr Alec Erwin, Minister of Trade and Industry, Dr Alistair Ruiters, Director General, and the staff of
the Department of Trade and Industry who have become important collaborators of the Reserve Bank.
Informative  meetings  were  held  with  the  Parliamentary  Portfolio  Committee  on  Finance,  which  we
found  very  helpful.  I  thank  my  colleagues  on  the  Board,  including  the  deputy  governors,  for  their
commitment and undivided loyalty to the Bank. Finally, a word of thanks is also due to the staff of the
Reserve Bank for their work during the past year and for their loyal support.
BIS Review 71/2000
12
