Mr Reddy gives a valedictory address with concluding
remarks on flexibility, autonomy and the regulatory refocus in banking
Valedictory  address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the
Conference of Chairmen of Banks at NIBM, Pune, on 7 January 2000.
 At  the  outset,  I  am  thankful  to  the  Institute  for  giving  me  an  opportunity  to  be  here  and  share  the
experiences and be a witness to the variety of sentiments and ideas. There is no prepared valedictory
address; and I deliberately decided not to have one, so that I can share with you my perception of what
happened in this Conference and incidentally make a few comments. This is a somewhat risky path for
a central banker, especially with the press being here. But, by and large, the press has been fair and, I,
therefore, continue to trust them. This is not a Machiavellian comment where “gratitude is only hope
of benefits to come”. It is a pretty straightforward and genuine comment.
The background papers have been excellent, and they really provide an overview of both the theory
and practice, as of today.
Inaugural session
For  convenience,  in  this  valedictory  address,  I  will  go  session  by  session.  Mr  Bhide,  in  his  broad
overview, referred to the Bhagwad Geeta and how Arjuna was confused and sought Krishna’s advice.
Perhaps Krishna is the most ancient consultant that we have. He never fought a war, but he always
advised. In fact, he offered his advice to both the parties and as some say, even managed to see that
they quarrel. Anyway, certainly the type of problems that we have are complicated and it does require
substantial input of expertise and international experience to solve them. From the Reserve Bank of
India, we are also in a similar search as Arjuna, and I can almost visualise that Arjuna who fought the
war must have known how difficult it is to operationalise an advice. That there could be problems in
actual implementation was evident from the response of the Chairmen present here, to various ideas.
Dr Ganti Subrahmanyam noted that this conference is  being  held  after  10  years.  As  you  are  aware,
substantial reform has occurred in the financial sector in the last 9 to 10 years. Obviously we have had
to undertake a lot of day to day fire-fighting as we moved ahead in the reform process. Perhaps now, it
is about time we really looked at the reform process more carefully.
Dr Jalan, in his inaugural address, put forward three important issues. Firstly, he said that banks are
one part of the financial sector and, therein lies a hint of the hard days ahead for banks. He hinted that
financial stability requires multiple financial intermediaries and not merely banks. He also indicated
that  the  development  of  financial  markets  is  an  extremely  important  element  and  that  the  focus  on
development of debt markets will continue. This implies that many of the corporates who  approach
banks now for loans, may directly go to the debt market more than ever before. Consequently, banks
will  have  to  contend  with  non-banks  as  well  as  developments  in  financial  markets,  apart  from
competition among banks themselves.
The  second  message,  which  Dr  Jalan  gave,  is  that  the  supervisory/regulatory  aspects  are  no  longer
matters of domestic interest alone since they are now evaluated internationally. This means that our
supervisory and regulatory standards will have to get aligned to global standards. This again is not a
very soft message from the Governor to the banking community.
The third message, which was more in the nature of a clarification, was that this new reality would
require banks to pay enormous attention to their internal management. And in internal management, he
did  recognise  that an  important  input that  banks  really  have  is that  of  human  resources.  Thus,  as  it
became evident in the discussion here with the Chairmen also, the crux of the problem and indeed the
crux of the solution, boils down to human resources coupled with technology.
1
BIS Review 18/2000
Basically my submission is that, in the Governor’s statement, behind his very pleasant, smiling  and
affectionate appearance, you could see that there are three hard messages which ought to be noted by
the banking community.
Technology
In the first session, the eminent scientist, Dr Vijay Bhatkar talked about the impact of digitalisation.
Normally, we have to have three sets of action plans; immediate or short-term, medium-term and long-
term.  Traditionally  for  us,  short-term  meant  one  year,  medium-term  five  years,  and  long-term
perspective  planning  meant  10-15  years.  But  after  listening  to  Dr  Bhatkar, the feeling  is  that  short-
term is one year or less, medium-term is one-and-a-half years and long-term is two to two-and-a-half
years. And this is not said in a flippant sense, because the way things have happened, and the speed
with which change is occurring, compression of time to change is the major message that we should
take from the discussions in the session.
The other critical point in the session that Mr Narayana Murthy of INFOSYS made is that technology
people in India are already prepared for the change. He made a point that “hardware, yes; software,
yes; we are available for both; we are already supplying these to the rest of the world”. All it means is
that our financial sector should learn how to use it, and use it sooner than later for its own survival.
Another important point that came out was that the technology is not anti-poor. Technology is at best
neutral and more probably pro-poor. Though unsaid, what came out from Mr Murthy’s exposition is
that the banks in future may have to be a lot more oriented to customer needs and not just paternalistic
in behaviour in the guise of assisting the poor. From the Reserve Bank of India, what I would like to
add to what Mr Narayana Murthy has said, is that we in the RBI are getting ready with technology and
we are already going ahead with computerisation of the Public Debt Office. In about 18 months, we
will be ready with a Real Time Gross Settlement System (RTGS). Thus, the central bank is providing
whatever technological infrastructure is required, particularly in terms of externalities for banks, and
so the ball will squarely be in the court of the commercial banking sector.
Human resources
In  the  second  session,  Dr  Sushil  Chandra,  a  management  expert,  made  an  excellent  presentation.
Among  the  most  important  points  he  made  are,  that  trade  unions  are  less  aggressive  now  and  that
changes  should  be  consensus  oriented.  In  my  view,  consensus  will  be  productive  under  two
conditions. One, when we share a common perception with regard to where we want to go and second,
those  who  are  involved  have  reasonable  symmetry  in  their  negotiating  strengths.  So  if  there  is  an
asymmetry  and  one  party  has  no  stake  in  consensus,  and,  in  fact,  has  a  stake  in  status  quo  than  in
change, then it is very difficult to achieve a consensus. A situation may, therefore, have to be created
where  every  party  crucial  for  consensus  suffers  losses  if  consensus  is  not  arrived  at.  Two,  in  this
context  it  becomes  necessary  to  address  some  of  the  basic  issues,  basic  building  blocks  of  an
environment, whether they are legal or attitudinal, that would facilitate consensus building.
In  this  regard,  there  are  some  broader  public  policy  aspects.  One  is  that  as  a  dominant  owner,  the
conduct of the Government will play an important part in these changes. Second, and more important,
the type of signals that are required to build a consensus with the trade unions will arise out of public
policy in general and public policy not necessarily restricted only to banks. In this context, how the
public  policy  aligns itself  towards  efficiency  and  incentive/disincentive  measures  becomes  relevant.
There is a need for a clear signal from public policy and we have to actively seek such an appropriate
policy. We must not hope that we will be in a position to fix things in an isolated manner for too long.
In a way fixing things in banking, especially restricted to a few banks, in an isolated manner may limit
or even jeopardise the extent to which we can move forward in the future.
A reference was also made by Dr Sushil Chandra to work practices. Once we accept the work force as
“given” in Indian conditions, I do not see a very practical way of telling a large work force that they
should simply “go home”. I strongly believe that the quality of human resource is very high in public
sector banks. There is hardly any banking system in the world which is so highly involved in retail
BIS Review 18/2000
2
banking and which has such high quality manpower as the Indian public sector banks. In a way, the
tragedy  is  that  the  work  atmosphere,  especially  work-practices,  have  not  been  very  conducive  to
efficiency. Between reduction in manpower and expansion of business, the latter is a better option; and
banks  have  to  create  an  environment  in  which  they  will  be  able  to  ensure  expansion  of  business
through more redeployment, more training and better incentives. If labour force is given, there is an
imperative  need  to  find  business  to  afford  their  wages,  and  so  public  sector  banks  may  have  to
diversify, namely, sell insurance policies, or sell private mutual fund certificates or do any permissible
non-fund based business. Since banks have the manpower, they have to learn to treat it as a resource
and ensure that it pays for itself. The whole issue again reverts to work practices and unless restrictive
practices  are  addressed  to  impart  flexibility  to  enable  rapid  expansion  of  business  through
diversification, there may be a threat of decay.
The flexibility and autonomy for each bank to find unique solutions is important because there is no
“fixed solution” for all institutions and all problems. For instance, I hear that there are opportunities
for increased deposit mobilisation activities in East India, where agriculture is developing fast and in
fact this could be an extremely important strength for the Calcutta based banks. These banks have both
the manpower and the branch network. In fact, there are very few organisations in the country which
have the reach or the presence in rural India and agriculture comparable to public sector banks. So one
goes  back  to  the  issue  of  flexibility  and  autonomy  that  is  required  in  managing  the  banks  and  in
managing the change.
Rural-banking
In  the  third  session  on  rural  banking,  several  important  issues  came  up.  One,  that  rural  banking  is
actually more than credit to agriculture; second, there was a consensus that the approach to subsidise
weaker  sections  has  been  expensive;  and  third,  priority  sector  lending,  by  and  large,  has  not  been
effective in its present form.
In my view, it may not be appropriate to state that directed lending in terms of a particular sector or in
terms  of  a  particular  area  would  necessarily  be  harmful  to  the  banking  sector.  There  are  many
countries and there are many systems where directed lending is found to be possible and useful. But
here, perhaps we are doing what we cannot afford to, which is to subsidise on a large scale. Further,
we  cannot  afford  to  separate  the  origination,  assessment  and  recovery  aspects  since  these  are
integrated functions of a banker and need to be fully exercised by bankers even in directed lending.
One could readily agree with the unanimous demand in this  Conference  to  make  the  priority  sector
lending more sustainable, more responsive, more efficient and more cost effective. That’s the message
we got and that is what Mr Guptaji, my predecessor, eloquently presented.
But, in addition, I would like to reiterate the point I made recently in my lecture on the Future of Rural
Banking. Banks have great advantage in delivering or handling financial services and so in future we
do  not  necessarily  look  at  somehow  delivering  credit  to  a  rural  area  but  really  look  at  providing
financial services to a rural area. This could be big business for banks; business in which banks have
comparative  advantage,  and  business  that  will  make  public  sector  banking  sustainable,  since  many
rural areas are ready for it. It is quite possible that, in some areas, banks may have to reach through
NBFCs  and  reach  input  suppliers  who  give  credit  for  commercial  agriculture  and  also  output
purchasers financing commercial agriculture. There are also districts which are prosperous and where
the agricultural labour may require consumption credit for four months when it gets into a seasonal
unemployment situation. There is no reason why banks should not provide such credit to creditworthy
agricultural labour if it can be done to credit card holders. With agricultural prosperity, many villages
are growing into semi-urban centres. Many studies have shown that the semi-urban areas are full of
commercial potential. One has to recognise the  increasing  rural-urban  continuum  rather than persist
with the old rural-urban divide and accordingly reorient the whole banking strategy.
3
BIS Review 18/2000
Regulation and supervision
On the next theme of regulation and supervision, my colleague, Mr Muniappan had apparently very
frank  discussions.  I  would  like  to  comment  briefly  on  the  issue  of  size  and  diversification.  The
worldwide trends are clearly towards large size but overall, it is extremely contextual, especially in our
country. It really depends on how a bank is able to transform the advantage or disadvantage of size. In
an  economy  which  is  aiming  a  7%  growth  rate  in  GDP,  there  is  enough  room  and  enough
maneuverability for all institutions including banking institutions to reposition themselves. So again, it
goes back to the issue of the type of flexibility and autonomy that is accorded to the various players in
the financial system including the banks, not only in operation but also in structural or organisational
transformation.
Corporate governance
In the session on Corporate Governance, Dr Y R K Reddy, an invited expert covered a number of very
important issues in the backdrop of both international and Indian experiences. There is only one basic
issue I would refer to: is there a separate pattern of corporate governance for banks compared to non-
banks in the financial sector? One is not sure whether there should be a separate corporate governance
approach  according  to  types  of  financial  institutions  or  merely  adaptation  of  general  principles  to
specific types would suffice. No doubt, the Bank for International Settlements has recently come out
with a paper on corporate governance in banks.
In my view, however, there is a more serious issue, and that is, whether the existing legal institutional
framework  in  respect  of  our  public  sector  banks  is  consistent  with  the  accepted  principles  of  good
corporate  governance.  Mr  Narasimham  wanted  that  public  sector  banks  be  genuinely  board-run-
companies so that the corporate governance related to the constitution and conduct of the board. The
alignment  of  the  existing  institutional  and  legal  structures  and  practices  with  good  corporate
governance,  especially  in the  public  sector, should  really  be  an area  of  attention.  This  may  warrant
radical legislative changes.
Restructuring
This morning we had a very interesting session with Mr Leo Puri, who gave us a sort of peep into the
future. Unlike Thailand or Korea, our bank restructuring will be a lot more domestically led and the
enabling environment will have to be created by the Government and the RBI. In the presentation on
bank  restructuring  in  India  in  terms  of  tables  and  graphs,  one  finds  both  banks  and  financial
institutions participating together. In other words, when we talk of restructuring in the banking system,
perhaps it is necessary to focus on restructuring in the financial sector and the financial system as a
whole and not look at the banking industry alone internally. Almost all the illustrations, which have
been presented, except the two cases of mergers, have such a mix and in future perhaps the coverage
would include the insurance sector, also to which a reference was indeed made.
Chairmen’s session
During the session, discussion of the Chairmen of banks, two major points or themes came up very
openly  and  one  more  not  so  openly.  One,  there  was  virtual unanimity  on  the  need for  flexibility  in
dealing with the staff, in dealing with issues, in dealing with operational procedures such as signing of
drafts, etc. The second theme was on the need for autonomy, especially in areas such as recruitment of
personnel.  The  most  critical  issue  obviously  is  to  ensure  the  necessary  operational  flexibility  and
autonomy, which are imperative if banks are to be in a position to face the future confidently. More
importantly, the implied suggestion was that in a very broad sense, both the Government and the RBI
as regulators, should attempt some sort of regulatory refocusing in the direction of greater flexibility
and autonomy.
BIS Review 18/2000
4
Concluding remarks
I will conclude by commenting a little more on these three aspects, namely flexibility, autonomy and
regulatory  refocus.  As  you  have  discussed,  be  it  the  use  of  IT  or  HR,  bank  managements  require
flexibility. The more one listens to the various discussions, the more one is convinced that most of the
suggestions fall under the category of flexibility.
Second, is the autonomy; and, one question here is how does a business executive operate with a small
degree of autonomy and compete with others in the non-public sector. This is operational autonomy,
which could be accorded by making the public sector banks genuinely board-run companies. The other
question,  and  a  more  important  one,  relates  to  autonomy  to  ensure  some  organisational
transformations.
For  instance,  there  was  a  hint  in  the  discussion  that  in  rural  areas,  existence  of  bank  branches,
cooperatives,  RRBs  and  local  players  results  in  avoidable  duplication.  In  my  view,  these  changes
should be allowed to evolve rather than prescribed from a centralised governmental or RBI decisions.
From  being  instruments  of  planning,  if  we  have  to  transform  them  into  business  entities,  necessary
maneuverability with regard to the ownership and the accountability will have to be allowed. In this
framework, the rehabilitation or restructuring should evolve with initiatives at the Board level and not
done  with  a  preconceived  notion  by  the  bureaucracy.  It  needs  to  be  recognised  that  there  are  basic
structural  impediments  in  public  sector  banks  and  RRBs  in  exercising  flexibility  and  autonomy  in
bringing about rehabilitation or restructuring. And these impediments will have to be sooner or later
removed.
I will now move on quickly to the regulatory refocus issue. We have, from the RBI, indicated from
time  to  time,  the  direction  of  regulation  in  that  its  basic  long-term  purpose  is  only  to  protect
depositors’ interests and ward off systemic threats; though in the interest of development, the RBI has
accepted  responsibility  for  provision  of  necessary  infrastructure  in  the  financial  sector,  both
technological  and  institutional.  As  Governor  Jalan  mentioned,  the  Regulatory  Review  Authority  is
reviewing  on  a  “zero  regulation”  basis  like  “zero  budgeting”.  We  welcome  specific  suggestions
indicating that a particular framework of regulation is justifiable or another one is not justifiable.
In the context of the future of the financial system, several issues have been raised in the document on
universal banking, which had been circulated to you. These relate to ownership and clear demarcation
of regulation vis-à-vis ownership. A view on these will have to be taken soon without which possibly
further progress in restructuring of the financial system will be rather difficult.
There has  been a  demand  that there is  a need to revisit  policies  such  as  the  priority  sector lending.
Given the objectives, say of priority sector, the issue is with regard to the instruments that we have
been  using  so  far  and  the  achievements.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  achievements  did  not  entirely
correspond  with  what  was  intended.  Since  the  total  socioeconomic  and  financial  environment  has
changed while the objectives of priority sector have not changed thorough re-examination of policies
relating to priority sector lending would be worthwhile. Earlier, the deposit mobilisation function was
virtually  a  monopoly  of  banks,  while  allocation  of  resources  was  through  an  administered  regime.
Today the banks are being asked to evaluate risk and price their product. It means that the allocation
function has been shifted from the government to the banks. Now we have to see how we can create an
environment, which will give incentive for banks to maximise the allocative efficiency while ensuring
that some of the social objectives continue to be served. This is a complex area and it will be better for
people  who  are  in  the  field  to  suggest  an  operationally  feasible  framework  to  us.  That  is  what
Mr Jagdish Capoor, Deputy Governor was hinting at when he sought your views on subsidy. On all
these aspects, some more concrete thinking is necessary, and in any case it is necessary to accept that
there are some objectives which must be met, that there is a new paradigm and that it is necessary to
redesign the instruments to meet such objectives in a changed situation.
Before  concluding,  I  would  like  to  mention  an  aspect  relating  to  privatisation  of  the  public  sector
banks.  I  will  only  repeat  what  I  had  said  in  another  gathering  last  year.  The  idea  that  “there  is  a
possible fiscal demand on the government to recapitalise banks and, therefore, you privatize and then
the whole world is happy”, is somewhat simplistic, because the health of the banking system is critical
for both macro-economic and fiscal stability. If the banking system, public or private is unhealthy and
5
BIS Review 18/2000
weak, the hit is on the fisc since the bail-out has to be publicly funded. We have seen it in East Asia,
we  have  seen  it  in  many  other  countries,  and,  therefore,  the  contention  that  merely  shifting  of  the
ownership from the public sector to the private sector will immunize the possible impact on the fisc is
not correct. Irrespective of the ownership, public authorities and the society at large have a stake in
ensuring that we have a very healthy financial system and in particular banking system. As Governor
Jalan mentioned, banking system collects non-collaterilized deposits, is highly leveraged and is very
critical for payment systems.
Perhaps I have  made all this  sound  more  complicated  than  necessary,  but thank  you  very  much  for
your patient listening.
BIS Review 18/2000
6
