David Clementi: The entrepreneurial economy - a collaborative approach
Speech by Mr David Clementi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, at the ICAEW Conference,
held in London, on 9 May 2000.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
I  am  delighted  to  have  the  opportunity  to  address  you  at  the  end  of - what  I  am  sure  has  been - a
thought-provoking day.
For the Bank, this conference has a two-fold importance.
First,  it  has,  we  hope,  helped  to  promote  discussion  and,  more  important,  action  to  strengthen
entrepreneurial activity in the UK economy.
But secondly, we are delighted to have this opportunity to work closely with the ICAEW, especially
given the important role of your President as Chairman of our Non-Executive Directors.
The Bank’s interest
A  good  place  to  start  my  remarks  might  be  to  ask  why  the  Bank  of  England,  as  a  central  bank,  is
interested in this subject. In fact the Bank has for many years taken a broad interest in the efficient
functioning of UK industry, and especially in the provision of finance to industry. This falls within the
third of the Bank’s three core purposes.
The first of our core purposes is to promote monetary stability in the United Kingdom. A huge number
of column inches in the press and elsewhere are now devoted to watching our conduct of monetary
policy,  as  the  MPC  seeks  to  meet  the  Government’s  Inflation  Target  of  2½%.  And,  of  course,  our
interest in low and stable inflation is not just to create Monetary Stability but more widely to create a
stable macroeconomic environment in which firms of all sizes have the confidence to plan ahead with
some certainty.
Thus there is a strong overlap between our monetary role and our second core purpose, which is to
ensure that the financial system remains stable and sound. Our MOU with the Treasury and the FSA
provides us with a responsibility for the financial system as a whole, requiring us to look for possible
shocks, emanating internally or from overseas, that might disrupt the stability of financial markets.
The  third  of  our  core  purposes  is  to  ensure  that  the  UK  financial  system  works  as  efficiently  and
effectively as possible in meeting the needs of the wider economy. One dimension of this is to try to
ensure that small and medium-sized businesses in the UK can obtain funding on a competitive basis.
In creating an entrepreneurial economy, small companies  continue  to  be  one  of the  vital engines  of
innovation and growth.
The background environment
Today you will have heard a great deal about what underpins an entrepreneurial economy. It involves
both the public and private sectors, and most importantly successful partnership between the two. A
prime  example  of  this  is  the  nurturing  of  an  enterprise  culture  through  an  alliance  of  the  higher
education system with initiatives, like business incubation, which often involve the private sector. You
have heard today of the important contribution that can be made by both formal and informal venture
capital, as well as the role of financial institutions such as the London Stock Exchange.
The accountancy profession itself also has a key role to play. As the Governor said in his speech to the
Institute’s Annual Dinner on 28 March - I hasten to add in the serious part - we could not do without
1
BIS Review 39/2000
accountants. The accountancy profession provides financial information and frequently more general
company advice to small firms. Alongside this there are various channels of government support. As
outlined  by  David Irwin,  the  Small  Business  Service - in  partnership  with  others - will  provide  this
service in England and Wales.
The role of small firms in creating the entrepreneurial economy
It  is  now  widely  acknowledged  small  firms  are  a  source  of  dynamism,  wealth  creation  and
employment. As such, they have not only made a significant and direct contribution to UK growth in
the last 10 years but also to the development of a more flexible labour market, and the introduction of
new technology and ideas.
Market  failures  in  the  provision  of  finance  to  small  firms  could  potentially,  therefore,  have  far
reaching  consequences  for  economic  performance.  All  firms  need  to  work  hard  to  overcome  the
information  asymmetry  which  is  inherent  in  any  bank  lending  relationship,  but  which  is  especially
challenging  perhaps  for  the  small  company  sector.  While  market  failures  in  provision  of  small
company finance will never wholly be removed, there is very little evidence to show that at least in the
United Kingdom they are important in practice today. Nonetheless, it can only be helpful to improve
the  flow  of  information  between  business  owners  and  finance  providers,  thereby  ensuring  a  better
appreciation by both of the relevant risks and rewards attached to particular business plans.
The  Bank  has  long  been  interested  in  the  financing  needs  of  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises.
Going  back  some  way,  an  example  of  the  Bank’s  early  involvement  was  our  instrumental  role
following  the  Second  World  War  in  the  formation  of  the  Industrial  and  Commercial  Finance
Corporation - which evolved into 3i. We would not have described that then as seeking to promote the
entrepreneurial economy, but that is precisely what it was. Our role has, of course, evolved since then,
in particular highlighting the importance of information sharing and increased understanding between
the relevant parties.
The Governor has, since 1993, hosted an annual meeting bringing together some of the key players in
the SME market. Finance providers, policymakers, business representatives and advisers join together
to discuss the key issues relating to the financing of small firms. The main themes to arise from these
meetings are published, under the editorship of Adrian Piper and his team, in our annual reports on
‘Finance for  Small  Firms’.  The  seventh  such  report  was  published  in  January  this  year.  One  of  the
most encouraging trends we have been able to report during these seven years has been the improved
relationship  between  banks  and  their  small  business  customers.  Research  by  the  Forum  Of  Private
Business  shows  that  the  performance  of  the  banks  had  improved  significantly  since  1992.  The
improvement  is  the  result  of  a  number  of  factors,  for  instance  the  implementation  by  the  banks  of
codes  of  practice  and  the  increased  emphasis  on  training  relationship  managers  to  understand  the
specific challenges faced by small businesses. There is, of course, always room for improvement, but
the increased degree of information sharing and trust has been notable. The reports have mapped other
positive developments - for instance, a changed balance between term lending and overdrafts.
The Three As
In monitoring finance for small firms, we have sought with others to ensure that the types of finance
on offer and the finance providers themselves are efficient and effective. We like to think of this in
terms of the three “As”: availability, appropriateness and accessibility.
In  many  cases,  the  availability  of  finance  is  a  bigger  issue  for  small  firms  than  its  actual  cost.
Availability  is likely  to  be  affected  by  a  number  of issues, above  all the  prevailing  macroeconomic
environment. Banks adjust their risk assessments of small firms as trading conditions alter: this  can
mean that in an economic downturn credit is rationed. There was evidence of this in the last recession.
However, more discerning lending policies have been pursued in the last few years, and this should
reduce the chance of a sudden reduction in credit during any future economic slowdown.
BIS Review 39/2000
2
Another feature of our work over the last seven years has been to emphasise the importance for small
businesses of using the most appropriate forms of finance - the second “A”. Many improvements have
been  observed. There  have  been  important changes in  the  provision  of bank  finance  and the use  of
non-bank finance has increased. It is now more widely accepted that a small business may not meet all
its needs  from  any  one  source  and  so  may  require  a  ‘package’  of  finance,  tailored  to  its  individual
requirements. This is particularly true for high growth firms.
The  characteristics  of  bank  finance  in  the  United  Kingdom  have  changed  considerably  during  the
1990s,  most  notably  the  decline  in  the  net  bank  indebtedness  of  the  small  firms  sector  and  the
continued growth of term lending at the expense of overdrafts. The ratio of overdrafts to term lending
has fallen significantly and now stands at 28:72, compared with early 1992 where it stood at 49:51.
Notwithstanding the recent rise in bank borrowing by SMEs, the net bank indebtedness of the SME
sector has continued to fall. The ratio of deposits to lending was 96% in December 1999, compared
with 56% in December 1992.
Small businesses have also, since the mid-1990s, gradually increased their use of fixed rate loans. In
December  1999  fixed  rate  loans  accounted  for  34%  of  term  lending  compared  with  just  28%  in
December  1996.  Fixed  rate  loans  provide  SMEs  with  greater  certainty  of  expenditure  streams,
assisting business planning and enabling businesses to operate in a more certain financial environment.
UK small businesses have also increased their use  of  non-bank  forms  of  finance,  such  as  factoring,
leasing and, more recently, equity finance. A recent survey showed that a higher proportion of SMEs
used asset based finance in the UK than in any other EU country except Ireland. This trend, to move
away from the reliance on short-term overdraft financing that prevailed in the early 1990s, towards a
wider variety of types and sources of finance, is to be especially welcomed.
It  is  widely  acknowledged,  however,  that rapidly  growing  businesses require  equity  as  well  as  debt
finance. The formal venture capital industry often finds it difficult to help at the very small end. That
makes  it  all  the  more  important  to  develop  the  informal  venture  capital  market,  including  the
considerable  potential  contribution  of  business  angels.  In  addition  to  their  ability  to  inject  smaller
amounts  than  are  viable  for  formal  venture  capital  firms,  business  angels  are  also  able  to  provide
considerable technical expertise and general management advice. Estimates from Mason and Harrison
suggest that business angels already invest £500 million per year: true, it’s a long way below the US
but it’s a significant contribution and one that should be encouraged.
I have mentioned that finance for small firms should be available and appropriate, but it also needs to
be accessible. UK banks and other finance providers have recognised this and have attempted to make
themselves  more  user-friendly  to  their  small  business  customers.  Banks  have  devoted  substantial
resources to increasing the awareness and skills of lending managers at the branch level. As a result,
many  small  firms  now  believe,  and  perception  is  important,  that  banks  understand  their  business
better.
In  recent  years,  the  NatWest/SBRT  Quarterly  Survey  of  Small  Business  in  Britain  has  consistently
found  that  access  to  finance  is  not  a  significant  problem  for  UK  small  businesses,  with  just  2%  of
respondents currently rating it as a key problem facing their business. The Cruickshank Review found
no evidence that small firms currently have difficulty obtaining bank finance. The Review, however,
did  highlight  some  barriers  to  the  raising  of  equity,  including - again - problems  of  asymmetric
information, the risk level associated with financing new firms with no established track record and
the costs for the investor in structuring finance. It also raised issues about conditions in the banking
market for SMEs; these have been referred to the Competition Commission.
Technology-based small firms
Perhaps I could conclude with some words about technology-based small firms.
Technology-based firms are vital to the UK economy in maintaining competitive advantage in global
markets. Technology-based firms are often themselves entrepreneurial. But just as they have a unique
role in the economy; they also have unique financing needs.
3
BIS Review 39/2000
The Bank has taken a particular interest in the financing of technology-based firms. In October 1996
we published a report, ‘The Financing of Technology-Based Small Firms’. The report acknowledged
that these firms often face a number of challenges distinct from those facing the general small business
population, particularly at start-up. The complexity of the technology, the intangibility of assets and
the unpredictability of cashflows, mean that they are perceived as being especially risky. The banking
sector in the United Kingdom is developing ways of better servicing the high technology sector, but
debt finance is not usually the answer, at start-up and early stages. Risk capital is often a more suitable
option.
The report identified the need for more assistance for early stage technology-based firms, particularly
in  developing  financial  and  other  management  skills.  As  we  have  heard  today,  the  newly  launched
Small Business Service will hopefully contribute to delivering this. Other important recommendations
included, first, encouraging the venture capital industry to review the opportunities as well as the risks
of  investment  in  early  stage-technology  based  firms,  secondly,  developing  closer  relationships
between  science  and  technology  departments  of  universities  and  business  schools;  and,  thirdly,
technology-based small firms taking responsibility for improving their human capital skills, including
presentational skills, to instil confidence in potential investors.
The Bank hopes to produce, before the end of the year, a follow up to the 1996 report. We expect to be
able  to  demonstrate  encouraging  progress  in  a  number  of  areas  (particularly  the  provision  of  seed,
start-up and early stage new capital).
Closing remarks
Much of the focus of today’s conference has been on high-growth, entrepreneurial firms - the gazelles.
It is important also to remember the great majority of small firms that are not intent on breaking speed
limits  and  are  quite  content  driving  in  the  middle  lane,  do  not  have  .com  in  their  names,  but  are
steadily contributing to output and employment.
These firms are important. Nonetheless, it is the high growth firms that will continue to remain at the
leading  edge  of  the  creation  of  an  entrepreneurial  economy.  Continued  public  and  private  sector
support for these  firms  is  vital. The  Bank  of  England  will  seek  to  continue to  play  its part,  both in
maintaining macroeconomic stability and in encouraging the better financing of growing businesses.
BIS Review 39/2000
4
