Christian Noyer: Presentation of the ECB Convergence Report 2000
Introductory statement by Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank,  at the
presentation  of  the  ECB  Convergence  Report  2000  to  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary
Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, on 3 May 2000.
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  have  the  opportunity  to  present  this  year’s  Convergence  Report,
prepared  by  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  to  your  Committee.  The  report  examines  in-depth,
with regard to Greece and Sweden, the achievement of a high degree of sustainable convergence, as
well as compliance with the statutory requirements to be fulfilled by national central banks in order for
them to become integral parts of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB).
In  producing  this  report,  the  ECB  fulfilled  the  requirements  of  Article 122 (2)  in  conjunction  with
Article 121 (1)  of  the  Treaty  to  report  to  the  Council  of  the  European  Union  on  the  progress  of
Member  States  with  a  derogation,  with  regard  to  their  obligations  concerning  the  achievement  of
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). It will now be up to the Council to decide, on the basis of the
Convergence  Reports prepared  by  the  European  Commission  and the  ECB, and  of  the  Parliament’s
opinion and a proposal from the European Commission, whether or not the current derogation status of
Greece and Sweden can be abrogated.
In view of the comprehensive assessment provided in our report, it goes without saying that I can only
touch upon its main conclusions. However, in the following discussion we should have an opportunity
to consider in more depth one or other aspect in which you might be particularly interested. I should
like,  first,  to  refer  to  our  assessment  of  economic  convergence  in  Greece  and  Sweden  and  then  to
address the requirements of legal convergence.
Assessment of economic convergence in Greece
I.
As far as economic convergence in Greece is concerned, it is noted that Greece achieved an average
rate of HICP inflation of 2.0% during the reference period (April 1999 to March 2000). This is below
the  reference  value  of  2.4%.  Looking  back,  a  clear  trend  towards  lower  inflation  is  discernible  in
Greece,  with  the  CPI  rate  falling  from  20.4%  in  1990  to  2.6%  in  1999.  Inflation  in  Greece  is  now
closer to a level which can generally be considered to be consistent with price stability. However, due
attention needs to be paid to the fact that the recent reduction in inflation rates is partly attributable to
temporary factors such as cuts in indirect taxes.
At  the same  time,  future  price  developments in  Greece  are  subject to  a  number  of  upward risks,  in
particular in 2001. Inflation rates will be influenced upwards as the recent cuts in indirect taxes will
cease to have a moderating impact. Moreover, an eventual alignment of Greek interest rates with those
in  the  euro  area  and  the  further  convergence  of  the  drachma  towards  its  conversion  rate  will  exert
upward pressure on prices.
Turning  to  fiscal  policy,  the  1999  general  government  deficit  ratio  was  1.6%,  well  below  the  3%
reference value. By contrast, the debt ratio was 104.4%, ie far above the 60% reference value. Looking
back  over  the  years  from  1990  to  1999,  the  deficit  has  been  reduced  considerably  and  in  2000  the
deficit ratio is forecast to decrease further to 1.3% of GDP, while the debt ratio is projected to decline
to 103.7%.
However, notwithstanding the efforts and the substantial progress made towards improving the current
fiscal situation, there is an ongoing concern as to whether the ratio of government debt to GDP will be
“sufficiently  diminishing  and  approaching  the  reference  value  at  a  satisfactory  pace”  and  whether
sustainability of the fiscal position has been achieved.
1
BIS Review 37/2000
Greece’s public debt is falling only slowly, despite high primary surpluses and privatisation receipts.
As  a  consequence,  substantial  primary  surpluses  and  persistent,  sizeable  overall  fiscal  surpluses
outperforming the targets of the updated Greek Convergence Programme are crucial if the debt ratio is
to be reduced to 60% within an appropriate period of time. Tight fiscal policy will also be needed in
order to contain the earlier-mentioned inflationary pressures.
As regards the development of long-term interest rates, which constitute another key variable within
the overall convergence assessment, their level reached 6.4% on average during the reference period
from April 1999 to March 2000. As a result, they stood 0.8%-point below the reference value for the
interest rate criterion of 7.2%.
With  regard  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  exchange  rate  criterion, it is  noted  that the  Greek  drachma  has
been  participating  in  ERM  and  subsequently  ERM  II  since  16  March  1998.  During  the  two-year
reference period (April 1998 to March 2000) the drachma traded significantly above its central rates.
Exchange  rate  volatility  declined  significantly  during  the  reference  period  and  the  significant
short-term interest rate differentials also displayed a gradual decrease from September 1998 onwards.
After  a  gradual  depreciation  during  most  of  1999  and  a  revaluation  of  the  central  rate  by  3.5%  in
January 2000, the drachma was traded on average 2.0% above its new central rate against the euro in
March 2000 and came closer to the central rate in April.
I  should  like  to  add  that,  throughout  the  reference  period  covered  by  this  report,  Greece  recorded
current  account  deficits  which  can  be  partly  interpreted  as a  result  of  the  country’s  need  to  finance
investments.
To  sum  up  the  findings  concerning  the  economic  performance  of  Greece,  the  report  identifies  a
number  of  positive  developments,  such  as  a  significant  reduction  in  HICP  inflation  and  substantial
progress towards improving the fiscal situation. However, continued efforts to support sustained price
stability are of particular importance for Greece. This implies an ongoing need for tight fiscal policies
and decisive structural reforms aimed at improving the functioning of product and labour markets. In
this context a speedier transposition of Single Market legislation into national law, further progress on
the  liberalisation  of  a  number  of  network  industries  and  determined  efforts  to  overcome  structural
rigidities  in  the  labour  market  are  warranted.  Furthermore,  increased  efforts  to  reform  the  social
security  system  are  needed,  while  further  progress  on  privatisation  would  reduce  liabilities  in  the
wider public sector.
Assessment of economic convergence in Sweden
II.
Turning now to Sweden, I should like to start with a brief review of price developments. The country
achieved an average rate of HICP inflation of 0.8% during the reference period, ie a level  which is
well below the reference value and consistent with price stability.
Recent trends and forecasts indicate, however, that there is increasing upward pressure on prices and
costs. This has to be seen, inter alia, against the background of a period of high growth in Sweden in
recent years, led predominantly by domestic demand. At the same time, the fiscal stance has become
more  neutral,  resulting  in  a  rapid  closing  of  the  output  gap.  As  a  result  of  these  and  other  factors,
forecasts indicate that inflation will be around 1.5% in 2000 and around 2% in 2001.
As  concerns  fiscal  policies,  Sweden  achieved  a  fiscal  surplus  of  1.9%  of  GDP  in  1999,  thereby
meeting  the  3%  reference  value,  and  the  outlook  is  for  a  surplus  of  2.4%  of  GDP  in  2000.  The
debt-to-GDP ratio stood at 65.5% in 1999, somewhat above the 60% reference value. With regard to
the sustainability of its fiscal position, the outlook is for a further decline in the debt ratio to 61.3% in
2000 and Sweden is expected to comply with the medium-term objective of the Stability and Growth
Pact of having a budgetary position that is close to balance or in surplus. Concerning the ageing of the
population,  Sweden  benefits  from  a  partly  funded  pension  system,  which  is  gradually  being
supplemented by a new system which will reduce pressures on public finances.
BIS Review 37/2000
2
Not least because of the improvement in the country’s public finances and the comparatively low rates
of inflation, the level of long-term interest rates in Sweden was 5.4% on average during the reference
period, ie well below the reference value for the interest rate criterion of 7.2%.
While  Sweden  has  been  successful  in  complying  with  the  aforementioned  convergence  criteria,  the
country does not participate in ERM II. In this context it should be noted that Sweden is a Member
State  with  a  derogation  and  does  not  have  a  clause  allowing  it  to  opt  out  of  Stage  Three  of  EMU.
Sweden is thus committed by the Treaty to adopting the euro, which  implies  that  it  has  to strive  to
fulfil all the convergence criteria, including the exchange rate criterion.
Throughout  1999  and  until  April  2000 the  development  of  the  krona  was  characterised  by  a  strong
appreciation  against  the  euro.  This  strengthening  reflects  a  normalisation  of  the  situation  after  the
global  crisis  in  autumn  1998  and  Sweden’s  stronger  than  expected  economic  performance.  In  this
context I should like to add that Sweden recorded current account surpluses, while maintaining a net
external liability position.
Assessment of legal convergence in Greece and Sweden
III.
With regard to the legal chapter of the Convergence Report, I should like to highlight the following
points.
The  report  focuses  on  the  compatibility  of  Greek  and  Swedish  national  legislation,  including  the
statutes  of  the  Bank  of  Greece  and  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  with  the  requirements  for  the  full
participation of Greece and Sweden in Monetary Union laid down in the Treaty and the Statute of the
ESCB.
While acknowledging that issues related to central bank independence were already resolved in 1998
and  do  not,  therefore,  need  to  be  addressed  again,  the  ECB  Convergence  Report  follows  the  same
approach  as  that  of  the  Convergence  Report  prepared  in  1998  by  the  European  Monetary  Institute
(EMI).
It addresses two issues:
• 
first, the legal requirements for the full legal integration of the Bank of Greece and Sveriges
Riksbank into the Eurosystem; and
 second,  the  adaptation  of  legislation  other  than  the  statutes  of  these  two  national  central
banks.
With regard to Greece it concludes that:
• 
the Statute of the Bank of Greece has been adapted and, on the basic assumption that the new
Statute  will  be  ratified  by  Parliament  and  will  enter  into  force  on  time  and  that  obsolete
provisions of a law dating back to 1997 (law 2548/1997) will be repealed, there will be no
remaining imperfections in the Statute of the Bank of Greece relating to the requirements of
the Treaty and the Statute of the ESCB for the full legal integration of the Bank of Greece
into the Eurosystem.
 the ECB also takes note that other legislation will be adapted by means of a law introducing
the euro.
With regard to Sweden, the conclusions of the EMI’s 1998 Convergence Report remain unchanged.
Swedish  legislation,  and  in  particular  the  Statute  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  does  not  provide  for  the
Bank’s legal integration into the Eurosystem and is not, therefore, compatible with the Treaty and the
Statute of the ESCB. As far as other legislation is concerned, the ECB notes that legislation on access
to  public  documents  and  the  law  on  secrecy  need  to  be  reviewed  in  the  light  of  the  confidentiality
regime set out in Article 38 of the Statute of the ESCB.
I should now be happy to answer any questions you may have with regard to the ECB’s convergence
assessment of Greece and Sweden.
3
BIS Review 37/2000
