Mr Yam on Europe and the euro: the view from Asia
Speech  by  Mr  Joseph  C  K  Yam,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  the
XII International Frankfurt Banking Evening, on 14 March 2000.
 Introduction
Mayor  Roth,  President  Welteke,  President  Duisenberg,  Governors,  Excellencies,  Ladies  and
Gentlemen,
There can be few things more irritating than foreigners coming to your country and lecturing you on
how much better things might be for you if only they were in charge. In my particular experience as a
central  banker  there  is  no  shortage  of  gratuitous  advice  on  how  one’s  monetary  and  exchange  rate
policies  might  better  be  conducted.  Of  course,  I  have  encountered  a  number  of  visiting  bankers,
businessmen  and  academics  coming  to  Hong  Kong  who  are  particularly  well  informed,  who  have
thought carefully through the issues, and whose advice is consequently much to be valued. But I fear
that they  may  be  in  the  minority.  So,  I  certainly  feel  a  bit  awkward  standing  here.  I  don’t  consider
myself  to  be  an  expert  in  matters  relating  to  the  European  economy  or  the  euro,  so  I  beg  your
forgiveness right from the start. My only defence is that you did actually invite me, so what I have to
say is not entirely unsolicited.
This  speech  is  going  to  be  largely  about  perceptions,  or  rather  misperceptions,  and  how  they  may
contrast with reality. Why? As I said, I am not an expert on the euro. But I can certainly tell you a lot
about how it is perceived from my part of the world. And when it comes to the behaviour of financial
markets we all know that perception is as important as reality.
Perception and reality - Hong Kong
Allow me to illustrate this point by starting first with Hong Kong, for I cannot resist the temptation to
take  advantage  of  this  opportunity  to  do  a  bit  of  advertising.  I  would  like  to  describe  some  of  the
negative perceptions which financial markets and analysts have had about Hong  Kong  over  the last
few years, and how these have compared with actual developments.
First was the belief that Hong Kong’s fixed exchange rate with the US dollar would not survive the
Asian  economic  crisis.  The  reality  is  that  it  has  survived,  and  the  Hong  Kong  economy  has  now
rebounded  strongly,  with  the  year-on-year  growth  rate  of  GDP  for  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year
recording  8.7%  and  the  forecast  for  the  year  2000  now  put  at  5%.  What  the  doomsters  refused  to
recognise, despite the compelling evidence of the preceding one-and-a-half decades of the same fixed
exchange rate system, was that Hong Kong has a highly flexible internal cost-price structure, which
can  quite  quickly  deliver  the  same  external  relative  price  adjustment  as  a  currency  devaluation.
Although the time profile of the  adjustment  process is different,  as  is  the  degree  of  short-term  pain
involved, internal adjustment arguably leaves the economy leaner and fitter than it would if everyone
could simply depend on depreciation to see them right.
The  second  flawed  perception  was  that  the  intervention  by  the  authorities  in  the  stock  market  in
August 1998 represented a fundamental reversal of traditional non-interventionist policy. The mistake
here  was  to  fall  into  the  trap  of  characterising  Hong  Kong  as  a  place  where  the  authorities  never
intervened. We have always made clear our preparedness to intervene for such purposes as promoting
efficiency  in  the  market  economy,  providing  infrastructure,  or  providing  necessary  support  for  the
most needy in society. But our emphasis has always been to keep intervention to the minimum. This
may  sound  uncontroversial  today;  indeed,  it  is  probably  an  attitude  shared  by  most  governments,
including those here in Europe. But you should remember that when Hong Kong was first vigorously
espousing this doctrine, perhaps 30 or 40 years ago, the vogue in most western countries was for the
1
BIS Review 23/2000
state to assume an expanding role in the economy. In keeping with Hong Kong’s principles, the stock
market intervention in 1998 was specifically directed towards improving the operation of the market
economy  rather  than  perverting  it:  it  was  designed  to  frustrate  market  manipulation  that  would
otherwise have led to serious market dislocation.
A  third  example  of  perceptions  being  at  variance  with  reality  was  the  prediction  that  the  Mainland
Chinese currency, the renminbi, would be devalued during 1999 and that the Hong Kong dollar would
inevitably be swept down with it. It is true that the economic performance of the Mainland was for a
time moving in a manner such that devaluation could have been judged a not unreasonable option. But
those who predicted such an event tended to give insufficient attention to the fact that the renminbi is
not a convertible currency, that the prevailing external position was strong, and that the authorities had
made it clear that they were not contemplating devaluation.
The  read-across  to  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  required  an  even  greater  leap  of  the  imagination.  Our
exchange  rate  had  never  been  dislodged  from  its  peg  by  previous  depreciations  of  the  Mainland’s
currency, which have amounted cumulatively to some 75% over the period since the establishment of
our  peg  in  1983.  Moreover,  any  reasons  for  expecting  a  devaluation  of  the  renminbi  to  have  a
knock-on effect on the Hong Kong dollar because of competitiveness considerations are weaker now
than  before,  because  Hong  Kong  has  evolved  much  more  as  a  complementary  economy  to  the
Mainland of China than as a competitor.
As a final example I might mention the various misperceptions which people have had more generally
about the relationship between  Hong  Kong  and  the  Mainland  of  China,  which  have  perhaps  caused
some volatility in financial market sentiment towards Hong Kong. I say “have” advisedly, rather than
“do”, because, now that we are in our third year of “One Country, Two Systems”, I am pleased to find
that  the  number  of  foreigners  that  I  encounter  who  still  seriously  misunderstand  our  system  has
dwindled away. I would not anyway criticise those who did, or still do, have mistaken understandings
of Hong Kong’s constitutional position. After all, Hong Kong is a small territory, a third of the way
round  the  globe  from  here,  and  it  would  be  conceited  to  assume  that  everybody  should  know  the
intimate details of our situation.
Anyway, for the avoidance of doubt, let me tell you that Hong Kong enjoys complete constitutional
autonomy in its monetary and financial policies. And I can assure  you  that  this  autonomy  has  been
fully respected by the Mainland authorities. They are, indeed, as anxious as I am to preserve a stable
and prosperous financial environment in Hong Kong.
I hope you will forgive me for spending all this time talking about Hong Kong and its currency rather
than about the euro. I have done so with a purpose, namely to illustrate the extent to which observers
may often be mistaken about the direction of policy or the status of a currency. This is the source of
much frustration to those of us trying to preserve financial and monetary stability. But we do have the
consolation of knowing that there is a good chance that those who have perpetrated or adopted those
misperceptions may have lost a lot of money as a result - if they were brave enough to put their money
where their mouth was.
Perceptions of the euro
I shall turn now to the euro.
I  would  be  deceiving  you  if  I  said  that  the  euro,  as  seen  from  Hong  Kong,  enjoyed  a  particularly
positive image at present. Arguably one could expect no better for a currency which has lost around
18% of its external value in little over a year, regardless of whether this was judged to be the result of
the strength of the US dollar rather than any intrinsic weakness of the euro itself. It is worth noting,
however, that the euro was  launched  at  a time  when  the  Euroland  currencies  were  particularly  firm
against the dollar - having climbed, in the case of the Deutsche mark, by almost  50%  since its  low
point  in  1985.  Against  this  background,  and  the  widening  of  interest  differentials  in  favour  of  the
dollar in recent months, the direction of the euro’s movement is, with hindsight, hardly surprising.
BIS Review 23/2000
2
The  depreciation  of  the  euro  is  of  course  a  fact,  and  it  is  perhaps  the  only  concrete  basis  for  the
scepticism that one hears being expressed about the euro. But, from what I gather as an observer from
afar, there are a number of other factors, less tangible, which also contribute to that scepticism. I shall
go  through  some  of  them  with  you,  noting  once  again  that  perception  from  many  miles  away  may
indeed be quite different from reality.
The first factor concerns structural rigidities, which appear to observers from my side of the world to
be  more  serious  in  Euroland  than  in  many  other  economies,  big  and  small.  The  severity  of  these
structural rigidities is seen to be undermining the ability and the efficiency with which Euroland can
respond to change. Of course, we recognise that some loss of adaptability may be the price that has to
be paid for a relatively stable society and a comfortable social safety net, and that the trade-off has
effectively been arrived at through a democratic process. But it is hard to believe, as an outsider, that
the  trade-off  is  an  optimal  one.  I  cannot  imagine,  for  example,  what  goal  of  social  stability  could
justify labour market and social security arrangements that  deliver  an  unemployment  rate  of  double
digits; or contribute to delaying, if not preventing, the arrival of the  “new  economy”  in  Euroland.  I
understand that some still do not believe that there can be a new economy, in which the technological
revolution  enables  productivity  gains  that  are  capable  of  sustaining  a  much  higher  rate  of
non-inflationary  growth.  Of  course,  we  should  always  question  and  critically  examine  any  unusual
phenomena,  rather  than  embrace  them  blindly.  But,  meanwhile,  investors  are  putting  their  money
where  this  unusual  phenomenon  is  allowed,  by  structural  flexibility,  to  be  manifested  in  full  force,
notably in the United States. This is seen to be a factor contributing to the strengthening of the dollar
and the weakening of the euro, and reinforcing the scepticism about the euro.
One thing that we have learned from the Asian financial turmoil is that global financial markets, made
highly  efficient  by  financial liberalisation  and  the  advance of information technology,  have  become
rather  intolerant  about  policy  mistakes.  Strengths  as  well  as  weaknesses  are  magnified  in  financial
market  behaviour to  a  disproportionate  degree  as  a  result  of  the  explosion  of  international  finance.
What until recently were considered to be small aberrations in policy can now be brutally punished by
the  market.  Even  those  who  have  been  particularly  prudent  can  be  tossed  around  rudely,  as  market
sentiment  sways  and,  occasionally,  succumbs  to  manipulative  forces.  So  far,  the  emerging  markets
have been the ones affected, overwhelmed by international finance, perhaps to an unjustifiable degree
relative to their economic fundamentals. Although they found the situation difficult to cope with at the
time, most of them pulled through and are now recovering strongly. The one common quality that they
possess,  which  is  responsible  for  this  rapid  turn-around,  is  structural  flexibility.  The  explosion  of
international finance is poised to continue, after the current lull, and will be made even more potent by
further  advances  in  information  technology.  Euroland  is,  of  course,  much  bigger  and  more
sophisticated  than  the  emerging  markets  in  Asia,  and  so  the  risk  of  Euroland  being  similarly
overwhelmed by international finance is distinctly lower. But, seen from Asia, even for the large and
sophisticated markets, the risk is not so low that it can be safely ignored. And if problems materialise,
structural rigidities that inhibit adjustment may exacerbate and prolong the pain and disruption.
I sense also that there are  still  doubts about  whether  Euroland  will  cope  well  with the  discipline  of
adjustment imposed upon it by currency union and therefore be able to realise fully the potential of
such a union. Let me draw your attention to an interesting and highly significant parallel between your
system of a unified currency across eleven countries and Hong Kong’s currency board system fixed to
the US dollar. We both depend to a very much greater degree than would otherwise be the case on
internal market flexibility as a mechanism of economic adjustment. As you are aware, Hong Kong has
always enjoyed a reputation as a flexible economy. It is precisely that flexibility in the labour, property
and other markets that has ensured the sustainability of Hong Kong’s high rate of economic growth
and currency stability over the nearly seventeen-year history of our currency board system. It is that
flexibility, involving sizable and quite swift price adjustments, accompanied by a considerable degree
of labour mobility within and between sectors, that has enabled Hong Kong to cope with economic
shocks.  But,  rightly  or  wrongly,  the  impression  from  afar  is  that  Euroland  is  some  way  from
possessing these necessary elements of structural flexibility. Consequently, there is concern whether
intra-Euroland  adjustment  between  disparate  regions,  when  the  exchange  rate  is  no  longer  an
3
BIS Review 23/2000
instrument and fiscal policy is supposedly constrained by Treaty criteria, will prove to be too painful
for some.
There are other structural features of Euroland, which also cause some concern to observers from my
side  of  the  world.  These  include  high  taxation,  stringent  regulation  and  cosy  corporate  governance
characterised  by  the  equity  of  major  businesses  being  closely  held  by  friendly  groups  of  long-term
investors,  including  one’s  bankers  and  associate  companies  -  or  Euroland’s  version  of  the  crony
capitalism for which parts of Asia have been so severely rebuked. From bitter experience, I know as
well as you do that the media tend to exaggerate the negative and overlook the positive. The vision of
Euroland which may consequently predominate in the sub-conscious of Asian readers might include
such  things  as  French  truckdrivers  blockading  autoroutes;  German  resistance  to  foreign  takeovers;
relatively high taxes and a heavy burden of social security contributions; and statutory ceilings on the
number of hours employees may work.
But let me refrain from venturing too far and turn to the financial system of Euroland. The perception
is  that  it  is  dominated  by  the  banking  sector,  which  is  in  turn  dominated  by  a  handful  of  huge
traditional  commercial  banks.  I  understand  that,  as  at  December  1999,  commercial  bank  assets  in
Euroland represented over half of total assets in the bank, debt and equity markets. The corresponding
figure in the United States is only 15.8%. It is true that the relatively greater dependence on banks in
financial intermediation in the main Euroland countries has served those countries remarkably well for
many  years.  It  provided  continuity  of  funding  and  support  for  long-term  strategies,  and  therefore
insulated them from the scourge of “short-termism”. But the pendulum appears to have swung in the
opposite  direction  over  the  past  10-15  years.  Competitive  equity  and  debt  markets  have  been  more
efficient at delivering the corporate restructuring and the funding for “new economy” activities in a
speedy manner in a world of particularly rapid technological change and a world where international
finance is highly mobile. Such efficiency, with globalised markets, coupled with a buoyant economy,
is seen to be attracting substantial capital to the US markets, and I understand that one major source
from where such capital comes is Euroland. Seen from Asia, this has been another important factor
contributing to the weakness of the euro.
These sort of images may explain why people talk of a reluctance of foreigners to invest in Euroland,
despite the very clear signs that the overall prospects for non-inflationary economic growth are now
quite encouraging. You may argue that these images are mistaken and flawed. You may well be right;
I am not in a position either to refute  or  to  verify  them.  Euroland  officials should  perhaps  consider
how  much  a  problem  there  is  of  substance  and  how  much  of  perception,  and  address  each  as
appropriate.
Another factor that may contribute to scepticism over the euro concerns monetary policy. But there is
not  a  lot  that  I  would  wish  to  say  on  the  subject.  You  will  appreciate  that  central  bankers  are  not
anyway the sort of people to make public assessments of one another! On the whole, I sense a feeling
of some sympathy for the European Central Bank. In the technical sense it appears to have done most
things right, in terms of keeping inflation under wraps and so preserving the internal purchasing power
of  the  euro,  but  it  has  nevertheless  had  to  preside  over  a  substantial  decline  in  the  euro’s  external
value. Given that Euroland as a whole is a relatively closed economy, the decline of the euro may have
caused  more  concern  to  outsiders  than  to  insiders.  It  has  certainly  influenced  international  investor
perceptions.
My  own  observation,  perhaps  slightly  cynical,  of  businessmen  and  investors  is  that  they  are  less
concerned about the technical content of monetary policy - provided that it is seen to be reasonably
disciplined - than they are about the conviction with which it is delivered. Thus, the so-called “strong
dollar” stance of the United States is clearly stated. It is not contradicted from anywhere within the
administration. It inspires confidence, even though it may lack precision - in fact what I think it means
is that the authorities will not stand in the way of a strengthening of the dollar, rather than that they
would necessarily resist a weakening. By contrast, different Japanese officials have over the past years
made rather different pronouncements about where the yen should be and what they might or might
not do to secure that. International sentiment towards the yen and investment in Japan appear to have
been damaged by such apparent vacillation.
BIS Review 23/2000
4
If these arguments are transposed to Euroland, they imply that the ECB must continue to develop its
own identity and assert its own policies. Emerging uncertainties over whether an exchange rate policy
is lurking somewhere in the background should be firmly resolved. Furthermore, national central bank
governors  and  finance  ministers  should  exercise  extreme  self-discipline  in  commenting  publicly  on
monetary  policy  if  their  views  in  any  way  diverge  from  the  official  ECB  line,  notwithstanding  the
withdrawal symptoms from which they may suffer. The problem was nicely summed up by the caption
beneath a photograph of G7 finance ministers in a recent edition of your German magazine, “Capital”.
It noted that there was just one minister each to speak for the dollar, yen and pound, but three who
debated with one another about the euro. This may be a scandalous misrepresentation of the true state
of affairs, but there are many readers who would, I am sure, have sensed a grain of truth there.
Another  cause  of  possible  scepticism  over  the  euro  relates  to  what  I  would  like  to  call  popular
acceptability. Let me explain what it is. No one has yet seen the euro in the form of cash. From Hong
Kong  we  cannot  witness  as  closely  as  you  can  here  in  Euroland  the  extent  to  which  the  euro  has
already become part of economic life. The separate national currencies are still quoted in Hong Kong
and any traveller knows that he can only take those and not the euro in banknote form on his journey.
There is a feeling that, whatever the law says, the euro will not really have arrived until it is there in
your pocket. The sceptics will go on to suggest that poor performance of the euro to date, coupled with
nationalistic resentment of the imminent loss of one’s own banknotes - to many an emotive symbol of
national  identity  and  sovereignty  -  might  yet  cause  a  wave  of  popular  opposition  to  the  euro  at  the
eleventh hour.
I should stress that this may not be a widely held viewpoint, and most international businessmen and
bankers have long since discarded the national currencies from their minds and books in favour of the
euro. But it is possible for just a few vocal doubters to have a disproportionate effect on the overall
mood. Plainly, the sooner the euro is in physical circulation the better, and I personally feel that the
plan of a three-year wait was a trifle generous.
I should add an associated observation concerning pride in one’s currency. A currency is unlikely to
win the widespread confidence of international financiers if nationals of the currency zone themselves
lack  pride  or  confidence  in  it.  It  is  fully  understandable,  though  nevertheless  unhelpful,  that  people
whom I meet here in Germany, for example, seem to have moved from pride in the Deutsche mark to
nostalgia for the Deutsche mark, rather than from pride in the Deutsche mark to pride in the euro.
So  much  for  possible  sources  of  negative  perceptions.  At  the  same  time  there  are  positive  aspects
about the emergence of the euro, although not all of them are necessarily clearly visible from Asia.
A  notable  achievement  has  been  the  establishment  of  the  euro  as  a  major  force  in  the  international
foreign  exchange  and  bond  markets.  High  degrees  of  liquidity  are  being  enjoyed,  and  in  the  bond
market  issuance  in  euro  quickly  overtook  the  combined  issuance  levels  of  the  former  component
currencies. In this sense the euro has already proved that it is greater than the sum of its parts, and has
succeeded in reaping those economies of scale which were advertised as one of the several benefits of
the single currency.
A related achievement has been the spread of usage of the euro for invoicing and financing trade, not
only  within  Euroland  but  also  by  firms  in  other  countries  trading  or  competing  with  Euroland  or
involved in supply chains leading there. This is a phenomenon that is perhaps less evident in Asia than
in countries nearer to you here.
Even  less  evident  to  us  in  Asia  is  the  impact  which  the  euro  may  be  having  on  competition  and
internal pricing within Euroland, now that the single currency has stripped away exchange costs and
other impediments to price comparison. I must emphasise that I have not had the opportunity to test
this thesis for myself, so I can only rely on what others tell me. Some claim that this will prove to be
one of the most emphatic benefits of the move to a single currency. I could well believe that, but I am
unsure what progress may yet have been recorded.
Thus, you will appreciate how in Asia we may not be aware of the various benefits that the euro is
delivering, whereas we are relatively well served by the sceptics. There may be a marketing job to be
done here. And it is one which, to carry conviction, must be performed as much by businessmen or
5
BIS Review 23/2000
bankers  who  actually  use  the  euro  and  experience  the  benefits,  as  by  central  bank,  government  or
European Commission officials, or by politicians and their aides.
The HKMA view
But  let  me  say  here  that,  insofar  as  the  perception  of  the  euro  within  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority (HKMA) is concerned, it is clearly a supportive one.
As I implied earlier, we have a keen interest in the euro and a quiet wish for its success. This should
demonstrate to the world that a fixed exchange rate (in your case more than a fixed rate - a unified
currency) vis-a-vis some or all of one’s trading partners is a viable option. There have been few other
“fixers” since the Bretton Woods system broke down in the early 1970s. But Hong Kong since 1983
and other more recent currency board countries, such as Argentina, Bulgaria and Estonia, have shown
that fixing is a viable strategy. It may indeed even be superior, given the discipline it imposes and the
salutary attention it focuses at the national level on structural efficiency and flexibility. Of course it
may  not  suit  all,  and  the  IMF,  for  instance,  continues  mostly  to  espouse  free  floating  in  its
prescriptions for individual countries. But the IMF does acknowledge that options at the other extreme
of  the  spectrum  from  free  floating  may  be  appropriate  in  some  circumstances,  and  in  its
pronouncements the IMF has given unflinching support to Hong Kong’s peg - as indeed it has to the
euro.
The  success  of the  euro  has  further  implications  for  the  Asian  region.  One  lesson  learned  from  the
experience of the Asian financial turmoil is that if we wish to reduce the vulnerability of the small and
open emerging markets in Asia to international finance we need, among other things, to build bigger
markets. One way of achieving this, if not the only way, is to follow the example of Euroland and go
for some form of currency union. Although the Euroland type of pre-conditions for currency union are
far from being satisfied in Asia at present, with so much diversity and fragmentation in the geography,
culture, stages of development and policies, this is an option that Asia can ill afford to ignore in the
long run. The experience of Euroland operating with the euro is therefore something that should be
watched in Asia, and is being watched in the HKMA, with keen, supportive interest.
Meanwhile, one way of reducing the short-term vulnerability of small and open markets in Asia to the
destabilising  influence  of  international  finance,  while  continuing  to  benefit  from  it,  is  perhaps  to
promote the greater and prudent use of foreign currencies in financial market activities. This is not an
advertisement for “dollarisation” - quite the opposite in fact. It is a suggestion for consolidating the
position of national currencies by sparing them from certain extraneous influences. This is particularly
relevant to Hong Kong as an international financial centre where non-domestic financial business and
movements  in  portfolio  capital  unrelated  to  economic  developments  intrinsic  to  Hong  Kong  are
abundant.  In  line  with  this  thinking,  we  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  we  need  to  develop  our
financial infrastructure to facilitate the use of foreign currencies in international financial transactions
in the Asian time zone. We have just started work on building a US dollar payment system and would
have a keen interest in doing the same, in due course, for the euro, if demand for such facilities in the
Asian time zone was evident. Hong Kong looks forward to and is ready to facilitate the greater use of
the euro in Asia.
For  Hong  Kong  the  emergence  of  the  euro  as  a  major  currency  alongside  the  US  dollar  is  also
welcomed  from  a  reserve  management  standpoint,  since  the  options  for  investment  are  broadened.
There is now a clearer alternative to the US dollar than before monetary union. And it is a time when
conservative, long-term investors are looking for such an alternative. As you are aware, there is in the
US increasing concern about inflation being rekindled, notwithstanding rapid, IT induced productivity
growth. Of course, prospects of tighter monetary policy tend to lend support to the dollar. But there is
the possibility that at some point the extent of interest rate hike needed to preempt inflation and the
associated fears for its consequences for the real economy are such as to scare investors away from US
financial  markets.  Another  reason  would  be  the  possibility  that  productivity  gains  arising  from  IT
investments may experience diminishing returns.
BIS Review 23/2000
6
In  the  HKMA,  we  certainly  are  putting  our  money  where  our  mouth  is.  I  have  personally  attracted
some  attention  in  the  foreign  exchange  markets  for remarks  I  have  made  about  the  management  of
Hong Kong’s Exchange Fund, which holds, among other assets, our foreign exchange reserves. Our
target exposure to European currencies (which may not necessarily mean the euro alone) is set at 15%
of  the  Fund  and  we  have,  over  the  past  few  months,  moved  from  an  underweight  position  to  the
neutral position of 15%. This target exposure may strike you as low. But we do hold some Hong Kong
dollar assets in the form of the Hong Kong dollar equities that we have acquired in 1998 and we are
obliged to hold US dollars one-for-one as backing for the monetary base under our currency board. If
we  exclude  these,  then  among  the  remaining  foreign  currency  assets  our  targeted  exposure  to
European currencies at present is effectively a little over 20%. Superficially, this may still seem on the
low side. But with our peg to the dollar we feel more comfortable having a substantial dollar reserve
which  covers  much  more  than  just  the  monetary  base,  even  though  we  do  not  formally  commit
ourselves to convertibility at the fixed rate for anything more than the monetary base.
In managing our foreign reserves we also tend to be averse to volatility. Thus, given our dollar focus,
we  have  naturally  been  worried  by  the  volatility  of  the  euro’s  exchange  rate.  Very  recently  we
informally  polled  ten  leading  financial  institutions  in  London.  Their  forecasts  for  the  dollar/euro
exchange rate by the end of this year ranged from $1.22 down to 90c. This is a considerably wider
spread than the trading range already experienced  and suggests  a  huge  measure  of  uncertainty,  to  a
horizon of only ten months.
Of course, one might argue that this represents uncertainty over the dollar as much as the euro. Yes
indeed, and I apologise for analysing things very much from a dollar base. Over time, all currencies
have experienced considerable volatility - the dollar, the yen, the euro and its ancestors, sterling and so
on. Yet in all of these, investors have been able to enjoy significant positive real rates of return over
the long term. That may not be good enough for everyone: some seek short-term gains; others may be
worried  by  mark-to-market  volatility  in the  short  term  even  if  they  are  there  for  the  long  haul.  But
long-term investors will give considerable weight to the overall economic and monetary management
of  the  economy.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  there  are  a  number  of  aspects  of  the  management  of  the
Euroland economy about which perceptions from Asia may be somewhat sceptical. As for monetary
policy, I would suggest that it is perhaps natural for outsiders to be rather hesitant in their assessments,
in view of the new infrastructure for monetary policy, but as the ECB beds down one would expect
confidence to grow.
Conclusion
My theme today has been that perceptions may be at variance with reality, but it is often perceptions
that  drive  financial  markets.  Economic  fundamentals  can  probably  explain  some  of  the  euro’s
weakness over the past 14 months, but not all of it. I have tried to be frank in my assessment of the
way in which the euro is viewed from Asia. I hope I have not been so frank  as  to be  discourteous.
Sentiment  does  appear  currently  to  be  somewhat  frail  and  the  outlook  uncertain.  I  derive  no
satisfaction at all from that - we are all in more or less the same boat when it comes to the vagaries of
the  markets.  And  as  the  manager  of  Hong  Kong’s  substantial  foreign  reserves,  I  am  also  held
accountable for the investment decisions taken. But I am confident that sentiment will improve  and
our investment in the euro will come good.
7
BIS Review 23/2000
