Eddie George: A snapshot of developments in the global economy
Speech by The Rt Hon Eddie George, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Lord Mayor’s Dinner
for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London at the Mansion House, on 15 June 2000.
 I spoke last year - somewhat hopefully, even optimistically for a central banker - about the still nascent
global  economic  recovery  from  the  Asian  crisis  and  its  aftermath.  But,  more  characteristically,  I
worried  about  the  international  imbalances  affecting  the  major  industrial  countries,  and  the  related
imbalance within our own economy.
The good news, my Lord Mayor, is that the global recovery has turned out to be rather stronger than
we dared to hope a year ago. The world economy is currently growing at around its long-term trend
rate - of 4% or rather more - and is expected to continue to grow close to that rate over the next couple
of years. Although global inflation has meanwhile so far remained generally subdued, monetary policy
in  the  major  industrial  countries  -  which  had  been  directed  to  stimulus  during  the  period  of  sharp
world economic slowdown - has, to varying degrees, reverted to being less accommodating with the
equally sharp recovery.
The  less  good  news  is that the  worrying  international  imbalances  within and  between  the  industrial
countries persisted through most of the past year - though just between you and me, my Lord Mayor,
and so long as you don’t breath a word to the Chancellor, there is a glimmer of a suggestion - no more
than that - that those imbalances may now be becoming somewhat less worrying.
In  the  United  States  evidence  of  a  sustained  improvement  in  the  rate  of  productivity  growth  has
persisted. We, in this country, must fervently hope that the seeds of this technological modification are
blown  in  our  direction  and  find  a  receptive  environment  here.  There  is  no  obvious  reason  why  we
should be immune from this highly desirable infection - though sadly the symptoms of contamination
are still hard to detect. In the meantime its supply-side effects in the United States imply that the US
economy can sustain faster growth than seemed possible before, without necessarily overheating - at
least for a time and up to a point. But the same developments have also helped to raise the temperature
on  the demand  side  of  the  US  economy,  and  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been  administering  monetary
sedatives  at  intervals  throughout  the  past  year.  But  finding  exactly  the  right  dosage,  and  the  right
timing,  to  keep  the  body  temperature  near  normal  in  present  circumstances  really  does  demand  the
wisdom of Solomon - or at least the wisdom of Greenspan. Notwithstanding some more encouraging
recent  signs,  there  is  still  a  possibility  that  continuing  imbalance  between  domestic  and  external
demand will need additional sedation or that it will eventually precipitate a sharp fall in the dollar and
US asset prices. But the dollar has come off its recent peak and some of the exuberance may now have
gone from equity prices - including some of the froth from the “new economy” sector, so the risks of
sharp correction may be less than they were.
Elsewhere, in Japan, after a long convalescence, there may now at last be some better prospect of a
gradual  but  self-sustaining  recovery  in  private  sector  demand.  And  there  has  been  more  substantial
evidence in recent months of strengthening domestic demand and output growth across the Eurozone.
That fully justified the European Central Bank’s gradual shift away from its  earlier  accommodating
monetary  policy  stance;  it  may  also  have  contributed  to  the  beginnings  of  a  recovery  of  the  euro
exchange rate towards a more comprehensible level.
We are certainly not yet out of the woods - there is a long way to go before anyone can feel confident
that we are in fact in sight of a more sustainable balance between the major industrial economies. But I
am more hopeful that we are now at least moving in the right direction.
And that is encouraging news for the UK.
On a macro-economic overview, our own economy remains in pretty good shape. In the year to the
first quarter total output grew by just over 3% while prices rose by 2.7% measured by the overall GDP
1
BIS Review 50/2000
deflator or by 2.1% on the Chancellor’s RPIX target measure. That is the fifth time in the past seven
fiscal years that output growth has exceeded the rate of inflation.
Since the recession of the early 1990s both output growth and inflation have averaged around 2¾%.
The number of people in employment - as we saw from yesterday’s figures - is at an all time high. The
rate of unemployment, on a claimant count basis is as low as it has been for 25 years. And interest
rates over the past few years have been more stable and just about as low as anyone can remember.
Now it’s true that there are uncertainties ahead - as there always are - which could make for a bumpier
ride.  The  welcome  weakening  of  sterling  -  which  had  risen  to  quite  unrealistic  levels  against  the
exaggeratedly  weak  euro  -  will  tend  to  reverse  the  downwards  pressure  that  it  had  previously  been
exerting  on  retail  prices.  Domestic  demand  growth  will  need  to  moderate  to  compensate  for  that  -
although  there  are  some  tentative  signs  in  the  recent  data  that  it  may  be  beginning  to  do  so.  The
sustained tightness in the labour market could still put upwards pressure on earnings growth and pay
settlements - though the latest data are somewhat reassuring for the time being. We can’t be confident
about the effects in this country of the new economy - though we remain open-minded. Nor can we be
confident  of  either  the  extent  or  the  likely  persistence  of  what  appear  to  be  exceptional  downward
pressures on retail margins. We don’t know for sure what is likely to happen to the oil price - and so
on.
We  will  -  in  the  best  central  banking  tradition  -  need  to  be  eternally  vigilant.  But  for  all  the
uncertainties, the overall prospect for the economy as a whole over the next couple of years - in my
view, but it is a view that I think is broadly shared by  most  of  the  other  members  of the Monetary
Policy  Committee,  is  for  continuing  steady  growth,  at  or  a  bit  above  its  longer-term  trend,  for
continuing high employment, and for continuing low inflation at around the Chancellor’s target.
And that, too, my Lord Mayor, is not a bad prospect either.
Our  problem  -  and  it  has  been  a  persistent  headache  over  the  past  two  or  three  years,  as  I  have
repeatedly tried to explain on earlier occasions - is the imbalance between the domestic sectors of the
economy, which have by and large been doing pretty well, and those that are heavily internationally
exposed. Those sectors have had a tough time over the past few years - what with the global economic
slowdown and particularly more recently with the seemingly remorseless rise of sterling against the
euro. That went well beyond constructive pressure to improve efficiency to destructive agony. We’ve
been only too well aware of that - we could hardly not have been; and we’ve not been insensitive to it
either. We have consistently taken account of the unexpectedly persistent strength of the exchange rate
in both our forecasts and in our monetary policy judgements. But when you come right down to it, for
as  long  as  economic  conditions  between  one  country  and  another  diverge,  whether  for  cyclical  or
structural  reasons,  there  is  a  choice.  Countries  can  either  aim  to  stabilise  their  respective  domestic
economies,  accepting  that  that  may  mean  exchange  rate  volatility,  or  they  can  aim  to  maintain
exchange rate stability, accepting that that may destabilise their respective domestic economies. These
are the horns of the uncomfortable dilemma we have been on.
I  have  no  doubt,  in  terms  of  the  macro-economy  as  a  whole,  that  we  have  been  right  to  persist  in
aiming to stabilise our domestic economy - the facts speak for themselves. It is possible - even perhaps
likely - that our dilemma may now become less acute, at least for a time as the euro strengthens to a
more sustainable level. Our best chance of maintaining that happier position - if indeed it occurs - is to
persist  in  domestic  stabilisation  and  structural  reform  alongside  our  European  partners,  but  it  is
difficult to be confident at this stage that the dilemma will not re-emerge.
BIS Review 50/2000
2
