Guy Quaden: Recent developments in the Belgian economy
Speech delivered by Mr Guy Quaden, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, on the occasion of
the celebration of the National Bank of Belgium’s 150th anniversary, Brussels, on 12 May 2000.
 Your Royal Highnesses, Ladies and Gentlemen, dear friends,
I should like to begin by telling you how delighted and proud I am, as are the other members of the
Board of Directors and the Council of Regency of our Bank.
First, I am delighted to see so many friends of the National Bank of Belgium coming to Brussels this
afternoon to celebrate the 150th anniversary of our institution with us. Friends who have come from
Belgium, elsewhere in Europe, the rest of the world; from the world of public and private finance, but
also from the political, economic, social and academic world.
Allow  me  to  express  my  special  thanks  to  my  colleagues  and  friends,  the  governors  of  the  various
groups to which the National Bank of  Belgium  belong:  the  European System  of  Central  Banks,  the
G10, the Belgian Constituency at the International Monetary Fund. All are present or represented here.
The world of central banks is exceptional because of its position at the boundary between the State and
the  markets,  between  action  and  deliberation,  and  between  tradition  and  modernity,  but  it  is  also
exceptional in the fellowship which prevails there. I am glad to be a part of that.
Next I would like to tell you how proud I am, how proud we are, of two things. First, we are proud to
be  the  guardians  of  a  long  and  illustrious  history,  the  history  of  an  institution  which,  as  the  Prime
Minister  reminded  us  in  his  speech  and  as  the  video  we  have  just  seen  also  showed,  has  made  a
positive and substantial contribution not only to the economic and financial history of Belgium, but
also to European unification and international monetary cooperation.
In particular, I would like to pay tribute to the three people who have preceded me at the head of our
institution,  whom  we  are  delighted  to  have  here  with  us  this  afternoon:  Cécil  de  Strycker,  Jean
Godeaux, Alfons Verplaetse.
In the second place, we are proud that, right from the start, the National Bank of Belgium has become
a member of the European System of Central Banks and more specifically the Eurosystem, which, in
managing  the  new  common  European  currency,  links  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  eleven
national central banks which are currently members. This represents the realisation of a great political
and  economic  dream,  and  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium  is  proud  to  have  contributed  to  it,  both in
planning the arrangements at European level and in ensuring that our country satisfied the conditions
for  membership.  It  was  vital  that  Belgium  should  meet  the  convergence  criteria:  the  fact  that  it
succeeded is, of course, due primarily to the effort made by its people, but also to the pursuit of an
appropriate economic, fiscal and monetary policy in which the central bank lent its assistance together
with the political authorities. We have also been successful in preparing with the sectors concerned for
the introducion of cashless transactions in euros.
There  has  been  a  marked  strengthening  of  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  in  general,  and  in
Belgium in particular, over the past year. Business and consumer confidence has now reached record
levels.  Of  course,  the  euro  cannot  take  all  the  credit  for  this  welcome  change  of  climate.  The
international environment has also improved. But the introduction of the euro has contributed to this
revival of growth by giving the area a stable internal environment, by irrevocably fixing the mutual
parities of eleven currencies, damping down inflation and curbing budget deficits. And the fact that
growth  is  strong,  confidence  buoyant  and  inflation  low,  also  proves  to  my  mind  that  the  monetary
policy of the new Eurosystem has not been inadapted.
The appreciable gain in stability brought about by the euro was particularly evident in Belgium. You
will  recall  that  in  the  middle  of  last  year  our  country  was  the  victim  of  a  localised  or  asymmetric
1
BIS Review 41/2000
economic  shock:  the  dioxin  crisis.  As  I  have  already  said,  it  is  thanks  to  the  euro  that  the  macro-
economic  cost  of  that  crisis  was  very  small.  Without  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency,  it  is
highly probable that the exchange rate of the Belgian franc and the level of interest rates in our country
would have come under pressure. The consequences of that crisis would have extended far beyond the
boundaries of the sectors directly concerned.
Here in Belgium, our motto is: strength in unity. At the National Bank of Belgium, we are certainly
not  nostalgic  for  a  monetary  sovereignty  which  in  any  case  had  become  largely  illusory  for  highly
integrated small and medium-sized economies. The switch to a single monetary policy, decided by the
Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  did  not  mean  any  loss  of  monetary  power  for
Belgium: on the contrary, since the Government and the Bank had decided ten years ago to peg the
Belgian  franc  to  the  most  stable  European  currency,  Belgium  was  in  reality  already  importing  its
monetary  policy  from  Frankfurt.  The  difference  is  that,  today,  our  monetary  policy  continues  to  be
decided in that same city, but around a different table at which there is at least one Belgian. Moreover,
the implementation of monetary policy is decentralised. And being closer to their respective national
territories,  the  affiliated  central  banks  retain  an  inimitable  role  in  their  contact  with  the  financial
players, and in communicating with the general public.
In  the  Eurosystem,  which  is  not  modelled  on  any  other  existing  central  bank,  the  principle  of
subsidiarity prevails; that is a principle to which we, and I imagine our other partners, too, are deeply
attached. It means that the European Central Bank has to be allocated all the resources which it needs
for  the  proper  performance  of  the  tasks  entrusted  to  it,  but  that  the  national  authorities  retain
competence over the tasks not assigned to it.
One  would  distort  the  character  of  the  monetary  union  if  one  tried  to  force  a  move  towards
centralisation contrary to the provisions of the Treaty and one would thus deprive the monetary union
of its democratic legitimacy. True, like any man-made edifice which aims to last, monetary union is
bound to evolve. But if we want this edifice to remain legitimate, any proposed changes must be set
out in totally clear terms, and on each occasion we shall need  to  check  that  the  citizens  approve  of
those changes.
Studying the national and international economic environment, issuing banknotes and coins, including
in  our  case  printing  banknotes,  and  controlling  and  sometimes  actually  developing  reliable  and
efficient payment systems are three activities closely linked with monetary policy, activities which the
National  Bank  of  Belgium  developed  long  ago  and  which  we  intend  to  continue  to  pursue  in
cooperation with our partners in the Eurosystem.
Moreover,  modern  central  banks  are  rarely  just  central  banks.  They  are  also  enterprises  providing
services for public authorities, the financial world and the national economy as a whole. However, the
National Bank of Belgium stands out from many of its colleagues in the diversity of the public service
functions  which  the  legislative  body  has  entrusted  to  it  for  various  reasons,  notably  the  Bank’s
acknowledged expertise. In passing, I would say that in view of this diverse range of activities, certain
hastily drawn comparisons concerning the number of staff used by each central bank are inapt.
The  National  Bank  of  Belgium  acts  as  the  State  Cashier.  In  its  Central  Balance  Sheet  and  Credit
Offices  it  gathers  and  processes  information  on  enterprises  and  individuals,  and  its  statistical  tasks
expanded  considerably  in  connection  with  the  modernisation  of  the  Belgian  statistical  system,
launched  in  1994;  in  particular,  since  that  time  the  Bank  has  been  responsible  in  particular  for  the
foreign trade statistics and for compiling the national accounts.
Two key features are characteristic of the recent evolution of many central banks including our own:
the  banks  have  to  contend  with  increased  pressure  of  competition  and  they  enjoy  greater
independence. These changes require us to modify our behaviour.
Most of our activities, be they connected with monetary policy or other functions in the public interest,
are naturally affected nowadays by the establishment of monetary union, but also by the spread of new
technologies  and  the  concentration  taking  place  in  the  financial  sector.  Having  long  been  sheltered
from competition, the central banks, too, are now inhabiting a more competitive environment. While
they still hold a monopoly on the issue of banknotes, notes are less and less predominant as means of
BIS Review 41/2000
2
payment.  Also,  membership of the  Eurosystem  is  naturally  encouraging  a  process  of  benchmarking
and emulation among the various member central banks.
The ethos of an enterprise such as ours has centred on optimum quality of service. This is an aspect of
excellence which we must, of course, preserve. But at the same time, greater attention is required to
the cost effectiveness of our service. The concern about our production costs is nothing new, but it has
increased.
Under the Maastricht Treaty, the countries of Europe also opted for the model of a European central
bank  alongside  national  central  banks  with  a  large  degree  of  independence.  According  to  this  idea,
once the central bankers have been appointed by the political authority - because, fortunately, they do
not coopt themselves - they act to the best of their knowledge and belief, without seeking or accepting
any  instructions,  in  taking  the  decisions  which  they  consider  most  appropriate  for  attaining  the
objectives assigned to them by the Treaty on European Union and the national laws.
Most people believe that such a system ensures the optimum credibility and effectiveness for monetary
policy, in particular making it possible to keep interest rates relatively low. But this greater autonomy
also  entails  greater  obligations  for  us:  we  are  aware  of  these  and  I  shall  pay  particular  attention  to
them. First, there is the obligation to be more conscientious than ever about ensuring objectivity and
total  impartiality  in  our  analyses,  decisions  and  recommendations.  Then  there  is  the  obligation  to
render  regular  and  clear  account  for  our  actions,  to  be  unflagging  in  explaining  our  actions  and,  if
possible, winning support, because the ultimate foundation of the independence of a central bank is
not  a  law,  nor  even  a  treaty,  but  the  acceptance  by  the  people  concerned  of  the  policy  being
implemented.
With  this  in  mind,  I  think  it  was  among  others  wise  to  keep  the  Bank’s  Council  of  Regency  in
existence,  even  if  it  has  finally  lost  all  monetary  power.  It  offers  an  irreplaceable  opportunity  for
dialogue between the directors of the central bank and  the  experts representing  the  main  spheres  of
Belgian society.
The Bank’s board of directors have duties towards the population; they also have duties towards the
staff of the Bank. The standards expected of the Bank and its staff are traditionally high and have been
accentuated  by  the  profound  changes  which  I  have  already  mentioned.  We  need  to  adapt  our
organisation  without  being  over-hasty  but  also  without  dragging  our  feet,  because  anticipating
probable developments is the best way of controlling them.
Our staff, thanks to whom the switch to monetary union, in particular, was successfully accomplished,
work hard and efficiently, and we still expect a great deal of them in meeting the challenges ahead and
fulfilling our ambitions. But we must also be able to define for our staff - and this must be done in
collaboration with our partners in the European Central Bank and the Eurosystem - clear prospects for
the foreseeable future, without which, we know, enthusiasm could give way to bitterness.
My  colleagues  on  the  Board  of  Directors  and  I  myself  have  held  a  strategic  reflection  aimed  at
increasing the quality of the Bank’s response to today’s challenges, and especially the challenges of
tomorrow. That reflection will shortly be extended, by degrees, to include all our staff. I have no doubt
that they will enrich the discussion and that together we shall be able to realise the objective of a bank
that is ever better equipped to meet the expectations of Belgian society, and to maintain its position in
the concert of Europe and in international cooperation.
We shall probably need to specialise more, perhaps giving up certain activities; we shall undoubtedly
need  to  adjust  the  scale  of  others,  but  we  shall  also  have  to  develop  our  action  in  fields  whose
importance is increasing. I will give two examples.
The National Bank of Belgium like all central banks, has since long shown an interest in the security
and  stability  of  the  financial  system.  But  due  to  its  integration  in  the  European  System  of  Central
Banks, the Bank has been given an explicit responsibility in this field and the Belgian law has recently
entrusted the Bank with the surveillance (or “oversight”) of payment systems and securities clearing
systems.
3
BIS Review 41/2000
To prevent excessive debts the Government has also decided in principle to set up a “positive” credit
centre, responsible for registering all credits taken out by households preventing default on payments.
The competence which it demonstrated in managing the Negative Centre, responsible for registering
cases  of  default  only,  and  the  commercial  neutrality  which  typifies  the  National  Bank  it,  seem  to
render her very well-suited for that function.
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium  is  150  years  old.  I  cannot  tell  you  what  will
have become of it in 50 years’ time, in 2050. But I will venture to tell you what it aims to  be  in  5
years’ time, in 2005.
In 2005 the euro will have been in circulation for three years in Belgium and in ten other European
countries in the form of coins and notes, some of which will have been printed by the National Bank
of Belgium’s printing department. The National Bank will continue to ensure the quality of the notes
and coins in circulation. There will be less branches but the Bank will maintain its presence in each
Belgian province. The National Bank of Belgium will be a faithful, active and appreciated partner in
the  Eurosystem.  The  Bank  will  also  have  maintained  the  quality  and  relevance  of  its  research  and
sometimes increased its originality. In its service activities, the Bank will endeavour to offer the best
in  terms  of  value  for  money;  it  may  develop  some  of  its  activities  with  similarly  reliable  partners.
External and internal communication will have been stepped up. The corporate ethos, centred on the
pursuit of excellence, will encourage creativity and initiative more than it does today. In our various
areas of activity, the National Bank will be able to recruit the best people. The entire population will
regard it as an independent, competent and accessible public interest institution which provides real
added value for Belgium’s economy and society.
Ladies and Gentlemen, we are proud of the Bank’s history and ambitious for its future.
BIS Review 41/2000
4
