Gordon Thiessen: The Canadian economy - finding the right balance
Speech  by  Mr  Gordon  Thiessen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Kelowna  Chamber  of
Commerce, Kelowna, British Columbia, on 15 June 2000.
 With  the  technological  revolution  that  is  currently  sweeping  the  globe,  dealing  with  change  is  a
growing challenge for businesses these days. This revolution is erasing national frontiers, intensifying
competition,  and  transforming  economies  everywhere.  The  rules  of  the  game  are  constantly  being
rewritten, and the issues facing businesses are multiplying rapidly.
To  survive  and  prosper  in  today’s  world,  businesses  need  to  keep  abreast  of  global  technological
trends, be  ready  to  innovate and  apply  new  technologies  to both their  production  processes and  the
development of new products and services for their clients.
From a broader perspective, in order to have a vibrant, dynamic economy, we count on the business
community  to  take  the  initiatives  that  increase  productivity  and  competitiveness  so  that  we,  as  a
nation, can benefit from rapidly changing technologies and increasingly open global markets.
What  business  people  need,  in  turn,  in  order  to  go  confidently  about  their  affairs  and  take  the
innovative,  and  sometimes  risky,  initiatives  we  expect  of  them,  is  a  supportive  economic  policy
environment.
Today, I would like to talk about what monetary policy is doing to foster such an environment.
Low and stable inflation is good for business
Now,  more  than  ever,  businesses  are  operating  in  a  changeable  and  uncertain  world.  The  Bank  of
Canada has been doing what it can by removing one major cause of uncertainty - high and variable
inflation.
Low and stable inflation is good for business, good for the consumer, and good for the economy as a
whole.
This is  not just  a trendy  central  bank  mantra. The  emphasis  that  central  banks  are  placing  on  price
stability these days is neither fanciful nor unstudied. It is pragmatic. And it has to do with reducing
uncertainty  about  the  future,  eliminating  the  inefficiencies  caused  by  inflation,  and  minimizing
economic ups and downs.
The  future  is  always  uncertain.  But  it  is  even  more  so  when  inflation  is  rising  because  the  pace  at
which prices rise is rarely stable or predictable. This uncertainty distorts and confuses the information
that consumers, entrepreneurs, savers, and investors rely on to make their economic decisions.
Not  only  that.  Businesses  and  individuals  end  up  spending  more  time  and  money  either  protecting
themselves against inflation or trying to benefit from it. And interest rates rise to compensate savers
and lenders for expected higher inflation and for the risks caused by uncertainty about future inflation.
None of this encourages productive investment. In the high-inflation days of the 1970s and 1980s, a
lot  of  economic  resources  were  instead  devoted  to  hedging  and  speculative  purchases.  And
inflationary booms - here and elsewhere - inevitably turned into busts.
We must not let this happen again. That is why the Bank of Canada and the Government of Canada
have agreed to an explicit target for inflation control. This target aims to hold inflation inside a range
of 1 to 3%.
Inflation-control  targets  also  ensure  that  monetary  policy  works  to  moderate  fluctuations  in  output,
employment,  and  incomes.  In  the  nine  years  since  the  targets  were  first  adopted,  not  only  has
1
BIS Review 50/2000
underlying  inflation  been  lower  than  in  the  previous  two  decades,  but  economic  growth  has
strengthened and has shown less short-term variability.
As  we  move  ahead,  we  must  ensure  that  this  situation  continues  and  that  we  avoid  the  boom-bust
cycles of the past. Granted, we will not be able to wipe out fluctuations completely. External shocks
will still buffet Canada’s very open economy every now and then. And we will get economic surprises
on  the  domestic  front  too.  But  in  the  past,  our  economic  ups  and  downs  were  often  amplified  by
outbreaks of inflation.
Keeping the economy on an even keel
So how is the Canadian economy performing these days and what is the Bank of Canada doing to help
keep it on an even keel?
Our economy has been expanding solidly for some time now - even through the Asian financial crisis
of 1997-98 - creating the conditions for the healthy gains in employment and incomes that we are now
seeing.
Since  mid-1999,  the  economy  has  outperformed  expectations  -  growing  in  excess  of  5%  at  annual
rates  and  with  an  underlying  rate  of  inflation  that,  excluding  fluctuations  in  energy  prices,  has
remained in the bottom half of our 1 to 3% target range. The Bank has raised its projection for growth
in 2000 to a range of 4 to 4.5% because of stronger demand for Canadian products from both domestic
and foreign sources.
When  it  comes  to  foreign  demand,  this  stronger  momentum  reflects  faster-than-expected  growth  in
several parts of the world, including Europe and the emerging-market economies that were in the eye
of the Asian storm. Even in Japan, where the outlook continues to be uncertain, economic conditions
should improve this year.
But by far the greatest source of this stronger external stimulus is the tremendous buoyancy of demand
in  the  United  States  -  a  market  that  absorbs  over  80%  of  our  exports.  Demand  in  that  country
continues to steam ahead and to push hard against the limits of production capacity. And signs of price
and wage pressures have become more visible. That is why the US Federal Reserve has raised interest
rates six times in the past 12 months to cool down the economy.
The  Bank  of  Canada  has  also  been  concerned  that  the  greater-than-expected  US  demand  for  our
exports, along with the strong momentum of spending by Canadians, could lead to undue pressure on
our  production  capacity  and consequently  on  future inflation  in  Canada.  With  US  monetary  actions
reinforcing our view about the risks of a buildup of demand and inflation pressures in that country - a
buildup  which  could  spill  over  into  Canada  -  we  have  raised  interest  rates  four  times  since  last
November.
In this connection, I would like to highlight a couple of important points that sometimes get lost in the
public commentary.
Monetary policy actions aim at future inflation
First, monetary policy is concerned with future inflation pressures.
Monetary policy works with relatively long lags. It takes between 18 and 24 months for a change in
interest rates to work through the economy and have an effect on inflation. For this reason, any actions
taken by the Bank of Canada today must be based largely on considerations about the economy and
inflation 18 to 24 months down the road - not on what is happening now and not on the current rate of
inflation (except to the extent that these factors colour our view of the future).
So, even though the underlying rate of inflation has been in the lower half of the 1 to 3% target range,
the Bank has to consider what is likely to happen to prices in the future.
BIS Review 50/2000
2
Monetary policy actions are based on economic prospects here at home
The  next  point  I  would  like  to  stress  is  that  Canadian  monetary  policy  decisions  focus,  first  and
foremost, on the economic outlook here in Canada.
So,  the  critical  element  is  the  Bank’s  assessment  of  the  balance  of  forces  at  work  in  the  Canadian
economy,  and  what  this  means  for  future  inflation.  If  domestic  demand  here  in  Canada  was  not
particularly  strong,  greater-than-anticipated  US  demand  for  our  products  would  be  a  compensating
element  and  hardly  an  issue.  But  if  domestic  demand  was  already  rising  rapidly,  and  the  Canadian
economy was operating at high levels, the spillover of strong US demand would have the potential to
strain our production capacity and lead to higher inflation in the future.
The  important  judgment  that  your  central  bank  must  make  -  every  step  of  the  way  -  is  how  these
domestic and external forces add up.
When the Canadian economy is generally in sync with that of the United States, and interest rates in
our two countries are moving in the same direction, I can appreciate that Canadian monetary policy
may be difficult to interpret. Some people may be persuaded to think that the Bank of Canada never
has any choice but to follow the US Federal Reserve. Or, for that matter, that the Bank must have a
target for the Canadian dollar that requires interest rates here to move in lock-step with US rates.
But that is just not so.
When  US  monetary  authorities raise interest  rates,  the  Bank  of  Canada  has  to  look  carefully  at  the
reasons  behind  the  move  and  decide  what  it  means  in  terms  of  our  ongoing  assessment  of  the
prospects for total demand and inflation in Canada.
Developments in the US economy will always be important to Canada. And moves in US interest rates
will always influence rates around the world, including ours. But that does not mean that we cannot
have different interest rates in Canada and that the Bank always follows the Fed. Sometimes we do,
and sometimes we don’t. It all depends on what we think is necessary to keep the Canadian economy
on a non-inflationary, and thus sustainable, growth path.
As  I  have  already  noted,  in  the  past  12  months,  we  raised  our  interest  rates  four  times  while  the
Americans have raised theirs six times. On those four occasions, including the most recent increase in
May, the Bank, after careful consideration, decided that the implications of US developments for our
economy justified higher rates here as well.
It is also important to remember that Canadian interest rates are still below comparable US rates for all
maturities - as they have been for the last few  years. This  basically  reflects the fact  that  we  have  a
lower rate of inflation than our US neighbours and that our economy has not been pressing as hard
against its capacity limits as theirs.
We need to keep demand and supply in balance
Through this discussion, I have talked mostly about total demand, but have not said much about our
economy’s ability to supply goods and services - except to suggest that a rapidly rising demand could
lead to pressures on capacity and inflation.
For the most part, we can be reasonably confident about assessing the various sources and strength of
demand in the economy.  But  estimates of the  production  potential of  our  economy,  are  much  more
uncertain these days because of major ongoing structural changes.
We  know  that  in  recent  years,  and  especially  since  1996,  Canadian  businesses  have  been  investing
heavily in machinery, equipment, and software, much of which embodies the latest technologies. This
should raise productivity in Canada and allow our economy to grow faster than it otherwise would.
But,  at  this  point,  it  is  difficult  to  tell  by  how  much,  whether  some  of  the  gains  are  already  in,  or
whether most are still to come. So far, our statistics yield little direct evidence of a substantial pickup
in productivity growth, although recent historical revisions to the National Accounts show somewhat
larger gains than before.
3
BIS Review 50/2000
Because of this uncertainty, the Bank is taking a cautious approach to projecting a permanently higher
rate  of  growth  in  our  economy’s  capacity  to  produce.  But  we  certainly  do  not  want  to  dismiss  this
possibility  either.  That  is  why  we  are  following  closely  a  wider-than-usual  range  of  indicators  that
could  tell  us  what  is  happening  on  the  supply  side  and  give  us  early-warning  signs  of  pressure  on
capacity  and  prices.  For  example,  we  watch  for  unexpected  movements  in  the  underlying  trend  of
inflation and for changes in expectations of future inflation. We also look at commodity prices, wage
settlements, reports of shortages in product and labour markets, the growth of money and credit, and
information from the Bank’s business contacts across Canada.
Take, for instance, our best estimate of the trend of inflation - what we call core inflation. This is a
measure that takes out of the consumer price index the fluctuations caused by the very volatile energy
and food components and the effects of changes in indirect taxes. By this measure, inflation has been
somewhat  lower  than  we  had  expected since  late  last  year.  This  very  favourable  price  performance
suggests that our economy has not been pressing as hard against capacity as we had thought. It gives
us  some  more  room  to  explore  where  the  limits  of  that  capacity  really  are.  And  this  should  give
businesses a greater opportunity to exploit their new equipment and technology to the fullest.
Nonetheless, we must not be lulled into thinking that the threat of inflation has disappeared. Given the
strong  momentum  and  high  levels  of  activity  in  our  economy,  and  given  the  time  that  it  takes  for
monetary policy actions to affect output and prices, the Bank must remain vigilant. Nothing will bring
the present expansion to an abrupt halt more quickly than an outbreak of inflation.
Assessing  the  balance  between  total  demand  and  supply  in  the  economy  and  the  implications  for
inflation  will  be  an  ongoing  challenge  for  monetary  policy.  I  can  assure  you  that  the  Bank  is  fully
committed to the task - because keeping inflation low and stable will help to provide an environment
in which the Canadian economy can enjoy solid growth and achieve its full potential.
BIS Review 50/2000
4
