Gazi Erçel: Globalization and international financial environment
Remarks by Mr Gazi Erçel, Governor of The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the General
Meeting of the 17th Asian Banking Association which was held in Istanbul on 22 September 2000.
 I  am  honored  to  participate  in  this  meaningful  organization  and  I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  the
opportunity to address this distinguished audience today.
I  would  like  to  begin  with  a  quick  review  of  the  recent  developments  in  the  international  financial
environment,  which  I  believe  will  give  a  clear  idea  why  the  issue  of  globalization  is  very  crucial,
interesting as well as challenging.
Beginning  with  an  evaluation  of  the  recent  financial  crises,  I  will  then  concentrate  on  the  growing
importance of globalization process and challenges brought by globalization.
Developments in the international financial environment
I.
The 1980s and 1990s witnessed significant changes in the international financial markets.
With  the  advent  of  globalization  and  rapid  integration  of  financial  markets,  the  world  we  live  in  is
getting  smaller  in  every  aspect  of  life.  Nowadays,  when  international  banking  systems  are
experiencing  significant  changes,  banking  is  being  discussed  at  a  global  level.  Therefore,  from  the
global  standpoint,  what  seems  to  be  important  for  banking  systems  is  not  the  size,  but  the  level  of
compliance with the internationally accepted rules and standards, and their functionality.
In  today’s  financial  environment,  dominated  by  a  dynamic,  aggressive  financial  service  industry,
banks  as  major  players  operate  with  greater  freedom.  Market  participants,  however,  are  exposed  to
greater financial risks than before due to the appearance of more complex and dynamic transactions
that have substantially increased uncertainties in the marketplace.
Furthermore, there exists more universal banking today than in the past. Advances in IT technology,
capital movements and geographical extension of banking business have become the new engines of
global integration.
The  increased  awareness  of  risk  concept,  together  with  the  higher  living  standards  and  rapid
technological development, has led to substantial change in the hedging strategies.
It certainly appears to be the case that the emergence of new markets, such as highly liquid foreign
exchange and derivative markets, has provided essential financial transactions and contributed to the
rapid expansion of global finance. However, the speculative uses of the new financial instruments in
these markets have increased the diversity of risks. Consequently, the availability of a wider range of
financial instruments and deeper financial markets has enabled banks, non-bank financial institutions,
institutional investors and companies to better manage their risks by using complex hedging strategies.
Globalization
II.
In  this  part  of  my  speech,  I  will  concentrate  on  the  opportunities  and  challenges  brought  by
globalization.
Opportunities and challenges
(A)
We  define  globalization  as  more  integrated  financial  markets,  economies  and  trade,  higher  factor
mobility,  and  spectacular  change  in  information  technology  leading  to  the  spread  of  knowledge
1
BIS Review 79/2000
throughout the world. I, personally, consider globalization to be both a beneficial and a challenging,
inevitable, irreversible process for the world economy and the international financial system.
Globalization  and  liberalization  of  financial  markets  bring  a  variety  of  changes,  presenting
opportunities as well as risks both in economies and financial systems throughout the world. One fact
is  quite  clear:  the  undeniable  benefits  of  globalization  are  only  available  to  the  countries  that  best
manage their economies.
(1)
(2)
One  obvious  benefit  of  globalization  is  that  active  international  capital  flows  improve  the
efficiency of the allocation of world financial resources. As the world market economy has
become more globalized, we have witnessed rapid growth in world trade, leading to a higher
standard of living during the 1980s and 1990s. In plain language, competition, productivity
gains, lower trade barriers and lower cost of external financing on a worldwide basis are the
key factors that have led to growth in world trade and rising standards of living.
Globalization  also  has  increased  and  enhanced  competition  worldwide.  There  are  several
factors behind this consequence.
(a)
Firstly,  the  integration  of  world  markets  and  rapid  technological  change  led  to
efficiency gains and growth driven by the lower transaction and information costs.
These  in  turn  increased  competition  through  lower  costs  and  higher  market
efficiency,  higher  productivity,  lower  barriers  to  entry,  and  new  investment
opportunities. Geographic distance is no longer a factor that limits the provision of
goods and services.
Hence,  competition  both  in  the  industrialized  and  developing  countries  has
reached  almost  the  same  level.  At  this  point,  it  is  worth  noting  that  many
developing  countries,  particularly  emerging  market  economies,  have  actively
participated in the world trade and global economy over the last two decades. The
presence  of  emerging  market  countries,  particularly  the  Asian  economies,  is
growing, and their share in world trade has increased significantly.
(b)
Secondly,  the  importance  of  non-bank  financial  institutions  in  the  financial
intermediation process has increased. The main examples of these institutions are
securities firms, insurance companies and mutual funds.
Therefore,  we  can  say  that  the  higher  the  level  of  international  competition,  the
higher the economic growth, the higher the income level, the higher the quality of
products and thus the higher the living standards the globalization process would
bring.
(3)
Globalization reorganized some concepts such as stabilization, risk-taking, supervision and
regulation  of  banking  systems,  market  discipline,  public  guaranty  on  deposit  and  moral
hazard.
As I mentioned earlier, parallel to the development of new financial instruments and markets
and  the  resultant  more  complex  and  dynamic  transactions,  risk  measurement  and  risk
management techniques have changed dramatically. Financial institutions have increasingly
been  using  internal  rating  and  other  risk  measurement  systems  and  models  such  as  VAR,
stress and back testing, and scenario analysis.
As  a  result  of  these  developments,  every  trading  institution,  including  central  banks,  has
become  more  exposed  to  changes  all  over  the  world  economies  and  financial  markets.
Indeed, the recent Asian financial crisis revealed that the financial and economic stability of
emerging market economies is extremely vital for global financial and economic stability.
(4)
Banking business and banking transactions have become very complex. Development of off-
balance  sheet  transactions  and  derivative  markets  had  an  enormous  impact  on  the  banks’
balance sheet structure, level and variety of risks to which they are exposed. Based on these
developments, the importance of derivative instruments in banks’ risk profile has increased.
BIS Review 79/2000
2
Risks arising from globalization
(B)
If we evaluate the risks arising from globalization, we realize that there are losers as well as winners in
the process of globalization.
It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  process  of  globalization  does  not  evolve  equally  worldwide.  Some
countries obtain great benefit from the process, mainly driven by their rapid integration into the global
economy relative to other countries. In other words, the integrated global economy does not guarantee
that the benefits of globalization are shared by the all countries involved in the process.
More  importantly,  opportunities  provided  by  the  globalization  process  are  not  always  beneficial,  as
shown  by  the  recent  crises.  Hence,  the  process  of  globalization  always  carries  social,  economic,
financial, cultural and even political risks in addition to the risk of contagion.
weak macroeconomic and financial policies implied;
There  are  several  reasons  for  this  situation.  Some  of  them  are  beyond  the  control  of  the  countries
involved such as external shocks and other unexpected changes in external environment. Indeed, most
of these reasons are due to:
• 
• 
• 
• 
higher  international  capital  mobility  (ie  higher  sensitivity  of  international  capital  flows
among economies);
increased vulnerability of national economies to external shocks;
inconsistencies in domestic policies;
 higher volatility of exchange rates due to integrated financial markets, which hits real sectors
of economies.
As countries’ economies become more vulnerable to external changes, they are exposed to shocks and
crises with severe consequences both in financial and real sectors, as well as facing heavy social costs.
In this context, I would like to emphasize the importance of the risk of contagion in highly integrated
global  financial  environment.  As  we  have  all  experienced,  instability  emerging  in  one  country  can
spread  almost  instantly  to  other  countries.  There  is  no  doubt  that  every  country  faces  its  own
challenges that are directly affected by their particular economic and social conditions.
Positions taken in one country are now being hedged in another and this so-called proxy hedging of
country risks spreads shocks and crises across national borders. As a result of this, even a country with
no direct exposure to  the  country  in  crisis could  find itself  in  deep  trouble.  In  fact,  the  most  recent
crises in East Asia and Russia have reminded us how rapidly and compellingly a financial crisis can
erupt.
At this point, I would like to briefly discuss the progress of Turkey, particularly the Turkish banking
sector in the globalization process.
During the last two decades, the banking sector, which plays a prominent role in the Turkish financial
system, has made significant progress in implementing structural changes towards a more financially
liberalized  Turkish  economy.  Combined  with  the  effects  of  restructuring  Turkish  economy  and  the
efforts  for  the  integration  to  the  modern  world  of  finance,  the  Turkish  banks  achieved  important
changes in their institutional structures on the one hand, and in the quality of services and products on
the other.
In  this  very  outward-oriented  and  closely  supervised  banking  environment,  the  need  for  highly
qualified managers  and  specialized  personnel is  obvious. With  this  in  mind, Turkish  Banks  became
more  effective  in  their  utilization  of  human  resources.  The  number  of  university  graduates  and
postgraduates in the banking sector has steadily increased over the last two decades, as has the level of
professional training.
The  increase  in  the  number  of  banks  and  qualified  personnel,  in  turn,  enhanced  competition  and
contributed to broad utilization of new financial instruments and techniques. Furthermore, the banks
were  motivated  to  attain  a  dynamic  structure  through  automation.  During  the  last  decade,  Turkish
3
BIS Review 79/2000
banks became more automated and efficient, along with their foreign counterparts. For example, the
number  of  ATMs  in  Turkey  has  increased  from  zero  to  over  8,000  in  the  last  decade.  Intense
competition and a desire to integrate with global financial markets has driven banks to improve  the
quality and the variety of services through information technology and international payment systems.
As a result of this, Turkish banks have started to provide interactive banking services to decrease their
costs  and  increase  efficiency  of  banking  transactions.  They  are  also  part  of  the  Electronic  Fund
Transfer system for their internal banking transactions and of S.W.I.F.T. for external transactions.
Parallel to the process of liberalizing the economy, Turkish banks have made significant progress in
investments and in organizations abroad. They opened branches abroad and took important steps to
increase their shares in international markets by acquiring financial participations and partnerships.
As of June 2000, Turkish banking sector, including branches abroad, operates with the total asset size
of USD 140.4 billion, more than 8,000 branches and almost 170,000 personnel.
The  Turkish  banking  sector  is  also  open  to  international  competition.  At  present  25  foreign  banks,
including  development  and  investment  banks,  constitute  31%  of  the  total  number  of  banks  in  the
sector. The share of foreign banks has also increased during the past few years. While their share was
5.8%  and  5.6%  as  the  end  of  1997  and  1998  respectively,  it  increased  to  6.7%  as  of  June  2000,
representing  the  total  asset  size  of  USD  9.4  billion.  The  majority  of  this  share  belongs  to  foreign
commercial banks.
41 branches in 10 different countries; and
83 financial subsidiaries in 24 different countries;
As of July 2000, Turkish banks have:
• 
• 
• 
At present, the Turkish banking sector has up-to-date technology and is equipped with highly qualified
personnel to compete in the international arena. The result is a more transparent and well-functioning
banking sector whose players have been progressively modernizing their operations in line with  the
developments in the global banking community.
62 foreign representative offices in 10 countries.
There is a significant growth potential in the Turkish banking sector. Banks will have to compete in an
increasingly  challenging  environment.  In 
technically
well-positioned banks will be able to utilize the growth potential of the sector. However, increasing
competition and  squeezed  profit  margins  are  expected  to force  banks  to  be  more  cost  conscious.  In
order to increase profitability and efficiency, mergers and strategic alliances with foreign banks will be
on the agenda of the sector.
the  coming  years,  strategically  and 
The  integration  process  with  the  EU  will  bring  new  challenges  for  Turkish  banks  to  increase  their
efficiency  and  quality  of  their  services  by  improving  their  distribution  channels.  Additionally,
increasing compliance with the internationally accepted standards and other structural changes made
in line with the integration process with the European Union will attract foreign banks, which in turn
will intensify the competition in the sector.
Another  significant  step taken  by  Turkish  authorities  was  the  introduction  of  the  recent  disinflation
program and the other restructuring efforts.
Turkey  has  suffered  from  chronically  high  inflation  for  years  and  our  economy  is  the  last
high-inflation  economy  among  the  OECD  countries.  High  level  of  public  deficits  and  fiscal
imbalances, together with self-fulfilling inflationary expectations are the main causes of the inflation
process.  Financing  of  these  deficits  has  accelerated  money  growth  and  stimulated  high  real  interest
rates.
The most recent developments are a reflection of the fact that Turkey has dedicated itself to solve the
above-mentioned problems. Turkey is fully aware of the fact that this chronic high inflation prevents
the  whole  economy  from  settling  on  a  sustainable  high-growth  path  and  from  integrating  with  the
global economy.
BIS Review 79/2000
4
structural reforms.
up-front fiscal adjustment;
a firm exchange rate commitment supported by consistent income policies; and
The ambitious disinflation program rests on three pillars:
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
This program has been supported by the structural reforms in four fundamental areas, namely banking
sector, social security and agriculture and public finance.
With the awareness of the fact that the soundness of the banking system is of vital importance in an
environment where banks are major players in the financial system and are involved in international
banking  activities,  Turkey  is  continuing  to  take  measures  to  improve  both  the  quality  and  the
effectiveness of banking surveillance system on basis of the EU directives and BIS principles.
The most radical change towards strengthening the supervision and financial structures of banks was
the establishment of Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency (BRSA).
Additionally,  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  has  pursued  the  most  independent  monetary  policy  possible.
More recently, the first priority of the Central  Bank has shifted  from  maintaining  financial stability
towards achieving price stability. Regarding the monetary policy implementation, the main pillars of
the  Central  Bank’s  approach  are its  transparency,  its  accountability  and  its  predictability.  We,  as  a
Central Bank, always favor a forward-looking approach.
Given  the  increasing  importance  of  its  economic  presence  and  close  relations  with  the  countries
worldwide,  it  is  crucial  that  Turkey  improve  its  domestic  markets  to  contribute  to  the  efficient
allocation of world resources. With this in mind, we will continue to implement structural reforms and
our disinflation program to realize robust economic fundamentals.
Final thoughts
In  closing,  I  would  like  to  comment  on  what  seems  to  be  important  in  building  a  more  robust  and
healthy global financial system and the world economy.
The ongoing process of globalization, along with the revolution in information technology, is likely to
continue  in  the  future.  One  consequence  of  this  trend  is  the  intensifying  competition  at  the  global
level. In this context, to benefit from this trend countries all over the world should react positively.
The  soundness  of  individual  financial  systems  clearly  affects  the  resilience  of  the  international
financial  system  as  a  whole.  We  should  devote  our  efforts  towards  creating  a  healthier  global
environment by minimizing the volatility of international capital flows and the risk of contagion.
More  effective  supervision  and  surveillance  of  banking  systems  is  of  the  greatest  importance  in
today’s  international  banking  environment  and  the  emphasis  of  the  recent  supervisory  changes  has
been moving from the “rules-based” method of supervision towards a “risk-focused” supervision.
Additionally,  the  globalization  of  financial  markets  led  to  difficulties  in  auditing  cross-border
transactions  mainly  due  to  lack  of  cooperation  between  supervisory  authorities.  However,  in  recent
years, care has been given to overcome inter-country problems and increase cooperation.
Success of countries in integrating into the global financial system and in fulfilling the requirements of
globalization  will  depend  on  deeper  international  cooperation  between  national  and  international
agencies.  At  present,  there  exist  several  countries  and  nations  that  are  not  yet  benefiting  from  the
globalization. Many obstacles stand in their way towards integration into the global economy.
In an increasingly globalized world economy, financial sector stability is most likely to be achieved
when prudent international standards are met and when markets operate competitively, professionally
and transparently, according to sound principles and practices.
Strengthening  the  supervisory  and  regulatory  framework  towards  achieving  a  sound  and  efficient
global  banking  system  should  be  a  universal  goal.  In  this  sense,  the  works  that  have  been
5
BIS Review 79/2000
accomplished  by  the  Basel  Committee,  FSI,  Financial  Forum,  etc  so  far  should  be  regarded  as
innovative and constructive in the process of harmonization of rules and standards internationally.
In my opinion, effective supervision combined with a multi-dimensional study of past experiences and
all the micro and macro level indicators, will help us to find ways to handle what globalization brings
us. I certainly believe that studies on platforms like the one we have here will help us to develop new
ideas and ways for responding promptly and correctly to the challenges of globalization.
We have to look for solutions in the regulations that we impose on the financial sector and try hard to
make them strict enough to prevent circumvention and excessive risk-taking. We must also make sure
that our system is liberal enough to promote innovation and growth.
I am sure that we will be able to confront the challenges brought by globalization in the new century if
we clearly acknowledge the two issues:
  first, what globalization means for economies and particularly for financial systems; and
secondly, how we, as public and regulatory and supervisory authorities, should react to the
challenge of globalization.
I am of the opinion that only in this way can we extend the benefits of globalization to wider parties
involved  in  the  process.  We  must  seize  the  opportunities  to  build  a  healthy  global  financial
environment. The challenges are great, but the ways to confront them are quite clear. I would like to
thank you for the invitation and your audience.
BIS Review 79/2000
6
