Mr George takes a look at the potential
volatility of private credit and investment flows
Speech given by The Rt Hon Eddie George, Governor of the Bank of England, to the Bankers Club
Annual Banquet at the Guildhall, London on 14 February 2000.
 In my remarks last year I  ventured to suggest that the darkest storm clouds might have lifted just a
little following the global financial upheavals of 1997 and 1998. It was a bold prediction for a central
banker.
But over the intervening period the skies have continued to clear as the clouds of financial instability
dispersed.  But  clouds  can  return  and  the  outlook  for  the  medium  term  is  for  sunny  periods  with
occasional  showers.  For  the  time  being,  though,  we  enter  into  the  new  millennium  with  the  world
economy as a whole basking in the glow of at least relatively warm sunshine.
The rate of world output growth which had fallen to only about 2% in 1998, about half its long-term
trend rate, and which was widely expected to fall further, is now expected to bounce back to around
trend over the next couple of years. And whereas, a year ago, many industrial countries were still in
the process of easing monetary policy, to offset the impact on world demand of the interruption of the
flow  of  credit  and  investment  to  emerging  market  countries  and  transition  economies,  we  have
recently seen a quite widespread increase in interest rates, designed to moderate the pace of domestic
demand growth. I don’t need to convince this audience that rising interest rates are a reflection of a
strengthening economy. And more even than that, we have all come through our technical examination
on Y2K transition with flying colours - I congratulate you all on that achievement.
But central bankers are not paid, Mr President, to look on the bright side of things.  We are paid  to
worry, to worry about what might go wrong and to anticipate the clouds coming over the horizon. We
don’t have to be particularly inventive to find  plenty  of  work  to  do!  I  should  like  to  share  some  of
those worries with you this evening relating in particular to the potential volatility of private credit and
investment flows.
Few  people  now  question  the  positive  role  of  free  private  financial  markets  -  nationally  and
internationally - as a powerful driver of economic growth. Markets may not be perfect but they are in
general  the  best  means  we  have  of  allocating  financial  resources  to  where  they  can  be  most
productively used. The debate is rather about the conditions that are necessary for financial markets to
function more efficiently. That would help to reduce the risks of, and limit the damage from, sudden
swings in market sentiment with their potentially disruptive effect on economic and financial stability.
It  is  certainly  not  a  new  debate.  But  it  becomes  increasingly  pressing  with  the  growing  scale  of
financial intermediation and globalisation. And it is of obvious importance not just for those of us in
the public sector concerned with the macro-economic effects, but equally for you who are engaged in
financial  intermediation  in  the  private  sector  concerned  with  managing  the  risks  in  your  individual
businesses.
The  most  immediate  challenges  relate  to  the  build-up  of  imbalances  within  and  between  the  major
industrial  countries.  Moving  into the  global  economic  recovery,  the  US  -  and  the  UK  -  are  already
operating close to overall capacity with ultimately unsustainable growth of domestic demand offset by
already  sizeable  external  current  account  deficits.  The  Eurozone  as  a  whole  may  have  more  spare
capacity  -  even  allowing  for  structural,  supply-side,  constraints  -  and  is  now  seeing  a  recovery  in
domestic  demand  growth.  Meanwhile  Japan  is  still  aiming  to  promote  a  self-sustaining  pick-up  in
domestic demand after a prolonged period of weakness, reflected in a large current account surplus.
Looking ahead - and we have to look ahead because macro-economic policies take time to have their
full  effects  -  I  suppose  that,  if  we  could  ordain  these  things,  we  might  choose  -  in  a  virtual  world
1
BIS Review 13/2000
economy - to seek to underpin a more obviously sustainable growth pattern - through a combination of
fiscal  and  monetary  policies  designed to  affect  the  relative  pace  of  domestic  demand  growth  in  the
different countries (somewhat slower in the US and UK and somewhat stronger in the Eurozone and,
particularly, in Japan), and to support relative exchange rates that would contribute to better balanced
external positions. No doubt we could program a computer to tell us precisely how to do it!
It  is  not  quite  so easy  in  the  real  world!  In  the  real  world  the  position  is  complicated  among  other
things  by  capital  flows.  Capital  is  clearly  flowing  out  of  the  Eurozone.  This  helps  to  explain  the
otherwise  puzzling  weakness  of  the  new  single  currency,  which  in  turn  is  adding  to  net  external
demand, and modestly so far, to domestic inflation. Capital is flowing into the US - on a net basis -
apparently attracted by productivity and prospective future earnings growth, and contributing to rising
financial asset prices, and associated wealth effects on US domestic demand. Capital is also obviously
flowing  into  this  country  -  for  reasons  that  I’m  bound  to  admit  are  less  apparent  so  far  in  the
macro-economic data. Capital also flowed back into Japan in the latter part of last year, giving rise to
sudden strong upward pressure on the Yen and putting at risk economic recovery.
What is not clear is how far these capital flows are a reflection of underlying economic factors and
how far they are likely to be sustained. It is possible - and I mean it really is possible - that they will
abate gradually, allowing a better balance between domestic and external demand to emerge. It is also
possible that the financial markets will overshoot and that we will then see a more abrupt adjustment.
There are limits to what policy can do directly to address these concerns. On the monetary side, we
can - and do - take account of the effects of changes in asset prices, and of exchange rate movements,
on overall demand and price pressures as best we can, both in our forecasts and in our interest rate
judgements. We can hope in this way to maintain reasonable stability - reflected in consistently low
inflation - in our economies as a whole; but we cannot easily avoid sectoral imbalances arising from
exaggerated capital flows or the disruptive effects if they are subsequently reversed. We can draw the
attention of financial market intermediaries to possible risks as we see them. And we can, through our
regulatory  and  supervisory  processes  try  to  ensure  that  individual  institutions  do  not  become
over-exposed  to  particular  market  risks.  But  it  would  be  a  serious  mistake  if  we  were  to  try  to  go
further and try to impose our views on the markets. We would almost certainly fail - given the weight
of private capital flows and diversity of channels through which they can move. And your collective
judgements are likely to be at least as good as ours, given that it is you who stand to lose directly if
your judgements turn out to be wrong.
Mr  President,  even  relatively  small  adjustments  among  the  industrial  countries  could  have  wider
repercussions in the rest of the world. And although the capital flow to emerging market countries and
transition economies is now recovering, it is clearly important that we keep up the momentum of the
extensive efforts made over the past two years both to reduce the risk of, and to improve our capacity
to manage, excessive volatility of capital flows in the wider international context.
In fact, although it often seems that the international debate moves forward at a snail’s pace, we are
making considerable progress towards reducing the risks.
on data dissemination,
on transparency of monetary and fiscal policies,
In particular a great deal of work has been done to produce codes of good practice
í 
í 
í 
all within the IMF;
í 
on the framework of financial and supervisory policies,
on  international  and  domestic  debt  and  liquidity  management,  in  the  Financial  Stability
Forum Working Group on Capital Flows,
í 
í 
on core principles for effective banking supervision, in the Basel Committee,
on core principles for systemically important payment systems, in the Basel Committee on
Payments and Settlement Systems,
BIS Review 13/2000
2
on auditing and audit practice, in the International Federation of Accountants,
on accountancy standards, in the International Accounting Standards Committee,
on cross-border insolvency law, in the UN Commission on International Trade Law,
í 
í 
í 
í 
The emphasis now has to be on implementation by national authorities, with the help where necessary
of  the  international  community.  And  although  that cannot  happen  overnight,  the  emphasis  must  be,
also,  on  transparency  and  validation  of  progress  towards  implementation  in  individual  countries.
These questions are being addressed by the IMF, and in both the Financial Stability Forum and in the
G20.
and on corporate governance, in the OECD.
Taken together all these initiatives should contribute to greater stability at the national level. But they
should  also  help  lenders  and  investors  better  to  assess  the  risks  of  lending  to  or  investing  in  one
country as against another, dampening potential volatility and, at the same time, giving the countries
stronger incentives to move towards best practice.
We are making good progress, too, in strengthening financial regulation in industrial countries.
í 
The  Basel  Committee  has  put  forward  proposals  for  revising  the  capital  accord,  and  has
issued a series of papers relating to credit risk management.
í 
í 
í 
IOSCO has made recommendations on dealings with highly leveraged institutions (HLIs),
and an FSF Working Group is looking more broadly at ways of reducing the destabilising
potential of HLIs.
Another FSF Working Group is looking at the implications for financial stability of offshore
financial centres.
The list could easily be extended - and no doubt will be. But all these initiatives represent significant
progress in terms of crisis prevention.
Where there has been less progress so far - despite a great deal of debate - is on crisis management.
We have not yet advanced much beyond the principles and tools set out in the G7 communiqué from
the Cologne summit in June.
Broadly, having emphasised the importance of not undermining contractual obligations, the principles
stress that all private creditors should accept responsibility for their lending and investment decisions
- without expecting to be underwritten by the official sector, and they encourage cooperative solutions
between the debtor country and its creditors, building on effective dialogues established in advance.
The tools link official support to efforts by the debtor country to obtain private financing - or maintain
existing exposures - on a voluntary basis, and provide for comparability of treatment within the Paris
Club,  of  all  categories  of  creditors  other  than  international  financial  institutions.  They  include
mechanisms that can be used to limit the use of official financing to fund external deficits or domestic
capital outflows or to repay private sector debt. And they provide ultimately for capital controls,  as
part of payments standstills, in conjunction with IMF programmes.
So we have the principles and we have the tools. The problem is that we don’t at this stage have a very
clear idea as to how they might be applied in any particular case. I agree that each case is different and
you  can’t  have  hard  and  fast  rules.  But  we  do  need  to  develop  some  kind  of  presumption  of  what
debtor  countries  and  their  creditors  might  expect,  before  the  next  crisis  hits  us  because  that  will
influence their behaviour in the meantime.
Of course it is very tempting to avoid what is a very difficult issue. In the case of a relatively mild
external liquidity shock the presumption is that a country maintaining prudent policies and which has
the correct defences in place could look to the IMF for support under the new contingent credit line
facility. This is designed to signal the Fund’s confidence in the country’s policies and see it through to
the point where it can regain access to financial markets.
3
BIS Review 13/2000
But that’s the relatively easy bit. The issues are more difficult when the circumstances are less benign.
What we all have to recognise is that the exceptional amounts of official funding committed during the
Asian crisis are far less likely to be forthcoming in future. And to the extent that official funding is
forthcoming,  conditions  may  well  be  attached  to  ensure  that  it  is  not  used  simply  to  re-finance
repayments of short-term debt to private sector creditors or to fund a resident capital outflow. Several
of the tools which the G7 communiqué identified are designed to have precisely this effect.
The  last  thing  that  the  official  community  wants  is  to  get  dragged  into  the  micro-management  of
relations between debtor countries and their creditors. But if that is not to happen, it seems to me that
borrowing  countries  and  their  major  creditors  -  above  all  the  short-term  lenders  -  would  be  well
advised to establish, during the good times but on an ongoing basis, arrangements for regular dialogue.
But  beyond  that,  we  do  need  a  broader  dialogue  on  the  pros  and  cons  of  an  orderly  suspension  of
external debt payments in more  extreme  situations.  In  principle  it  seems  to  me  that  this could  have
advantages for committed private sector creditors, as well as for the official community to prevent free
riders running for the exit, or seeking to attach assets, and provide time for orderly negotiations on the
provision of new finance, or for equitable debt rescheduling. It should enhance the prospective value
of  private  creditors’  claims  by, 
financing  and
internationally-endorsed policy actions to correct the underlying problems. That must be better than
sometimes hastily-considered unilateral action. The chances otherwise are that the  more  responsible
private creditors would find themselves in the position of official lenders, with their funds used simply
to finance a capital outflow.
in  effect,  “bailing 
in”  both  official 
Mr President, the debate - particularly on crisis management - still has a long way to run. But if we on
the official side do not engage with you in the private sector in that debate - facing up together to how
best  to  handle  the  really  hard  cases  -  during  the  present  period  of  relative  calm  in  global  financial
markets, then my fear is that when next the storm breaks - as it undoubtedly will at some point - we
will again find that we are making things up as we go along. I would hope that we might do better than
that.
My purpose in worrying aloud tonight has not been to keep you awake at night. My purpose has been
to draw your attention to some of the risks that we will undoubtedly have to contend with together in
the future, and to suggest that we have a mutual interest in working together now to minimise those
risks.
BIS Review 13/2000
4
