Eddie George: Sterling strength, the euro and UK monetary policy
Speech by the Rt Hon Eddie George, Governor of the Bank of England, to the Leeds and Bradford
Chartered Institute of Bankers and Bradford Chamber of Commerce, Bradford, on 11 April 2000.
 It’s a real pleasure to be here in Yorkshire and I am greatly honoured to have this opportunity to speak
to  such  a  large  and  distinguished  audience.  I  am  honoured  -  but  also,  I  must  confess,  somewhat
daunted.  I  am  acutely  aware  of  the  fact  that,  while  there  are  some  parts  of  the  region  that  are  -
economically  -  doing  extremely  well,  other  parts,  particularly  those  most  exposed  to  international
competition, are under the hammer. That’s true of course of the UK economy as a whole. I’m equally
aware that the suffering sectors ascribe their pain to the strength of sterling, particularly against the
euro, which is certainly a contributory factor; and that they ascribe the strength of the exchange rate to
our domestic monetary policy and to the Monetary Policy Committee.
I should like to address some of these concerns this evening and then go on to say a few words about
the great euro debate.
Let me begin with some comments on the very profound changes that have occurred, gradually over a
long period, in the approach to economic management in the  UK  and  in  our  more  recent  economic
performance.
For most of the first half of my own working life - through the 1960s and much of the 1970s - the
essential  emphasis  of  economic  management  in  the  UK  was  on  short-term  aggregate  demand
management, with too little regard to the structural, supply-side capacity of the economy to meet that
demand.  Monetary  and  fiscal  policy  were  used  in  combination  to  try  to  maintain  an  appropriate
balance between what were seen as conflicting objectives of growth and full employment on the one
hand  and  price  stability  and  balance  of  payments  equilibrium  on  the  other.  Slow  growth  and  high
unemployment were typically met with monetary and fiscal stimulus. As the symptoms of imbalance
inevitably  emerged  -  in  the  form  of  external  deficits  or  accelerating  inflation  -  attempts  were  made
initially  to  suppress  those  symptoms  through  various  forms  of  direct  control  (for  example,  foreign
exchange controls or credit ceilings or prices and income policies) but as demand pressures built up
macroeconomic policies had eventually to be thrown sharply into reverse. This was the go-stop policy
cycle  that  resulted  in  the  exaggerated  boom-bust  economic  cycle,  which  was  for  a  long  time  a
pronounced characteristic of British economic performance.
Such  macroeconomic  instability  was  disruptive  in  itself,  but  it  also  had  the  effect  of  encouraging
short-term  attitudes  to  both  financial  and  non-financial  investment,  with  a  corrosive  effect  on  our
longer-term,  supply-side  capacity.  And  the  pressures  within  the  economy  threatened  to  become
explosive, in that the rate of inflation increased from cyclical peak to cyclical peak, while the rate of
unemployment increased from trough to trough.
Over time we learned many lessons from this experience.
We learned first the importance of macroeconomic stability. We came to understand that there is in
fact  no  trade-off  -  in  anything  other  than  the  short  term  -  and  not  necessarily  even  then  -  between
growth and stability.
Emphasis  on  short-term  demand  management  gave  way  to  emphasis  on  the  creation  of  a  stable
longer-term economic environment, within which the private sector could operate more efficiently and
plan with greater confidence for the future.
In  terms  of  fiscal  policy,  this  meant  a  medium-term  framework,  with  tighter  control  over  public
expenditure, to ease the tax burden on the private sector and to limit the overall deficit and debt burden
to a sustainable level at which it did not pre-empt national saving and deter private investment.
1
BIS Review 33/2000
And  monetary  policy  -  which  is  inherently  more  flexible  -  was  assigned  the  particular  role  of
providing  a  stable  nominal  framework  for  economic  decision-taking,  with  the  immediate  aim  of
permanent effective price stability but as a means to the end of sustainable growth rather than as an
end in itself.
But we also learned to pay more attention to the structural, supply-side capacity of the economy and in
particular to the role of reform - and deregulation, subject to appropriate safeguards, of goods, capital
and labour markets, as the means of increasing the economy’s flexibility and the underlying rate of
growth that can be sustained.
We learned finally that these twin approaches - of macroeconomic stability and supply-side reform -
reinforce each other.
It is these understandings that lie at the heart of our present economic policy framework.
On  the  macroeconomic  side,  the  Government  has  enacted  legislation  which  requires  it  to  set  out
transparent rules for fiscal policy. For the current Parliament it has chosen to adopt two specific rules.
First, over the economic cycle, Government borrowing will be restricted to borrowing for investment,
and not to fund current spending; and
Secondly, net public debt as a proportion of GDP will be kept at a prudent and stable level over the
economic cycle.
These rules taken together are designed to ensure financial stability in the medium-term, but also allow
for automatic stabilisation in response to fluctuations in output growth in the short-term.
On the monetary side,  the  Government  has set  a  low,  symmetrical  target  for  underlying  retail  price
inflation as the objective of monetary policy; and it has devolved technical responsibility for setting
short-term  interest  rates  to  achieve  that  objective  -  on  average  over  time  -  to  the  Monetary  Policy
Committee  of  the  Bank  of  England.  Its  members,  individually  and  collectively,  are  publicly
accountable for the way in which that responsibility is exercised.
The supply-side agenda, under successive governments has inevitably been more diverse.
It  has  included  a  strong  commitment  to  free  markets  and  competition  as  the  motive  forces  for
productive efficiency, and as the essential means of allocating financial and real resources. It includes
an  equally  strong  parallel  commitment  -  both  regionally  within  the  European  Union  but  also  more
broadly - to international free trade in goods and services and to the global free flow of capital.
The  supply-side  agenda  has  included  an  extensive  program  of  “privatisation”,  bringing  market
disciplines to bear on commercial activities previously undertaken within the public sector, but often
involving new forms of regulation in areas of activity that might otherwise be dominated by natural
monopolies.
It has included extensive deregulation - for example in relation to financial services, including banks
and  building  societies,  though  this  has  been  accompanied  by  improvements  in  the  financial
infrastructure and by enhanced prudential supervision.
It has included measures of labour market deregulation and Trade Union reform. And it has included
increased emphasis on education and training; measures to encourage business enterprise - especially
among smaller businesses; and reforms to the welfare system to improve incentives to work. The list
could go on.
The  point is that  there  has been  increasing  recognition that it is the complex  interaction  of  policies
across the board - often involving difficult political judgements as to how best to reconcile economic
and other social objectives - that influences the supply-side capacity  of  the  economy.  And  it  is that
which determines the underlying rate of growth that can be sustained and sets the limits to what can be
achieved through macroeconomic demand management.
Against  that  background  our  recent  economic  performance  has  improved.  In  fact,  since  the  broad
monetary policy framework of inflation targeting was adopted in the UK some seven years ago, the
United Kingdom as a whole has in fact achieved the longest period of sustained low inflation we’ve
BIS Review 33/20009
2
known  for  a  generation.  Retail  price  inflation,  on  the  Government’s  target  measure,  has  averaged
around 2.7%.
But alongside low inflation we’ve had the lowest nominal interest rates that most of us can remember.
Short-term  rates  have  averaged  some  6¼%  compared  with  some  11¼%  over  the  preceding  decade.
And  10-year  government  bond  yields  have  fallen,  with  inflationary  expectations,  to  around  5¼%
which apart from a brief period last year is the lowest they’ve been for nearly 40 years.
Much  more  fundamentally  we’ve  enjoyed  the  longest  period  of  uninterrupted,  quarter  by  quarter,
economic  growth  since  records  began  some  45  years  ago  -  with  annual  growth  averaging  2.8%  -
between  ¼  and  ½%  above  most  estimates  of  our  underlying  trend  rate.  The  number  of  people  in
employment  is  the  highest  on  record.  And  unemployment  has  fallen  from  a  peak  of  10½%  on  a
claimant count basis at the beginning of 1993 to the present rate of 4%. That is the lowest for 20 years
in the UK as a whole, and just about the lowest in nearly every region. In Yorkshire and Humberside
unemployment is 4.7%, the lowest rate since June 1980.
Our problem - and it is a real problem, as we have recognised for some time - is the imbalance, within
the  overall  economy,  between  the  domestically-oriented  businesses  and  sectors,  and  those  that  are
most  internationally  exposed.  In  part  that  imbalance  is  a  hangover  from  the  slowdown  in  global
activity from the end of 1997 through to the start of 1999 - though the welcome recovery in global
demand means that this influence is now diminishing. The more important factor now is the persistent
weakness of the euro - not exclusively against sterling but equally against the dollar and the yen. The
impact is particularly severe on the UK because of the closer ties between our economy and that of the
Eurozone.
I’ve  not  heard  a  wholly  convincing  explanation  for  the  euro’s  persistent  weakness.  Many  analysts
relate  it  to  market  concerns  about  structural  rigidities  in  some  parts  of  the  Eurozone,  which  are
encouraging direct capital outflows attracted elsewhere by higher prospective earnings growth.
Whatever  the  cause,  few  of  those  I  talk  to  expect  the  weakness  of  the  euro  to  persist.  But  in  the
meantime, given that the problem is driven by perceptions of the eurozone, rather than any particular
strength of sterling, it is very difficult to see what we in the UK can do directly to resolve it.
The weak euro affects us at the macroeconomic level in two ways: it has a dampening effect on our
price level; and it reduces net external demand on our economy. To offset these influences - to prevent
overall  demand  growth  falling  short  of  underlying  capacity  growth,  causing  inflation  to  fall
significantly below our 2½% target - and I remind you it is a symmetrical target - we have had to keep
interest  rates  lower  than  would  otherwise  have  been  necessary,  in  effect  encouraging  stronger
domestic  demand  growth,  to  keep  the  economy  as  a  whole  on  track.  The  risk  in  this  approach,  of
course,  is  that  we  could  find  it  difficult  to  moderate  the  pace  of  domestic  demand  growth  to  a
sustainable rate as and when the euro recovers. But that’s a bridge we will need to cross when we get
there.
Now  some  of  you  involved  in  those  sectors  that  are  suffering  most  from  the  weakness  of  the  euro
would - from your own perspective - like us to go further and try more actively to drive the exchange
rate down. If I were in your shoes, I’d be tempted to argue that myself. Euphemistically it is suggested
that we should “pay more attention to the exchange rate” - than, as I’ve explained, we do already. In
practice what that would be likely to mean in our present situation is substantially lower interest rates:
the intended effect would be to stimulate external demand, but it would inevitably also involve further
stimulus  to  domestic  demand.  In  effect,  it  implies  that  we  should  acquiesce  in  increasing  overall
demand  pressure  leading  inevitably  to  faster  inflation.  That  might  conceivably  even  provide  some
relief  to  the  suffering  sectors  in  the  short  term.  But  increasing  demand  pressure,  including  labour
market pressure, and accelerating inflation would - as we’ve repeatedly seen in the past - ultimately
need  to  be  brought  back  under  control,  involving  a  more  abrupt  tightening  of  policy.  That  frankly
would not do the suffering sectors themselves much good at least for very long - and it would have a
potentially serious destabilising effect on the economy as a whole. That is precisely what we are trying
to avoid.
3
BIS Review 33/2000
The  more  hopeful  news  is  that  we  have  recently  seen  strong  signs  of  recovery  -  of  both  economic
activity and exchange rates - in a number of emerging markets and transition economies. And we are
seeing a strengthening of domestic demand and of output in the Eurozone, which may help the euro to
appreciate. To the extent that these trends persist, it will help to ease the exceptional pressures on the
most internationally-exposed sectors, and contribute to a better balance within the UK economy. But it
will need to be accompanied by corresponding moderation of the growth of domestic demand - after
the offsetting stimulus of a year ago - if we are to maintain overall stability. That essentially is why
interest rates in the UK have had to rise since last autumn.
We are now in a position where the economy as a whole is again growing above trend - after a pause a
year or so ago - while inflation is running - and has been running for nearly a year - slightly below the
Government’s 2½% target.
Looking  ahead,  there  is  the  tantalising  prospect  of  new  factors  that  might  help  to  hold  the  rate  of
inflation down, at least in the short term. There is evidence for example, although it is hard to evaluate,
of more intensive retail price competition, squeezing retail margins across the board, and that could
hold down prices, at least for a time. And this effect could intensify and extend further into the future
as  a  result  of  the  spread  of  e-commerce.  And  there  is,  on  the  supply-side  of  the  economy,  the
possibility  (though  so  far  sadly  not  much  actual  statistical  evidence)  that  the  spread  of  IT  will
accelerate  productivity  growth  across  the  economy  -  as  it  has  in  the  United  States,  raising  the
underlying rate of potential output growth at least for a time.
We certainly have not closed our minds to the possibility that these developments might allow us to
sustain for a time stronger growth consistently with meeting our inflation target. But we can’t afford to
gamble on that outcome either. The truth is that the jury is still out. What we have to do is to monitor
intensively all of the data as it becomes available to us, and draw what inferences we can as to how
those data affect the balance of risks around the inflation target looking ahead.
What  is  encouraging,  Mr  Chairman,  is  that  for  all  these  uncertainties  and  complications  the  broad
prospect  for  the  UK economy  as  a  whole  over  the  next  couple  of  years  is  for  continuing  relatively
strong  growth  -  at  or  above  trend  -  with  continuing  relatively  high  employment,  and  continuing
relatively low inflation. The monetary policy debate in the UK is a narrow one, it is about just how
strong the growth, just how high the employment and just how low the rate of inflation.
Against that background, let me finally say a few words about UK membership of the euro.
Let me make clear, from the outset, that monetary union is fundamentally a  political rather  than  an
economic issue. It necessarily involves the deliberate pooling of national sovereignty over important
aspects of public policy, in the interest not just of collective economic advantage, but of a perceived
wider political harmony within Europe.
As  a  central  banker,  I  have  nothing  to say  about  the  politics  of  monetary  union  -  that’s  for  elected
politicians. But it is also an economic issue and that is my concern.
So what are the economic pros and cons?
The  potential  economic  advantages  and  disadvantages  are  now  reasonably  well  defined  -  though
different opinions inevitably attach different weights to the respective arguments.
On the plus side, the crucial and unique economic advantage of monetary union is nominal exchange
rate  certainty  within  the  Eurozone  -  which  takes  over  half  UK  exports.  I’m  not  talking  just  about
reasonable  exchange  rate  stability  -  which  might  result  over  time  from  each  country  pursuing
disciplined macroeconomic policies in parallel. I’m talking about nominal exchange rate certainty for
the indefinite future.
That very real economic advantage is well understood in the UK - especially by businesses that trade
with, or compete with, businesses in the Eurozone. And on that ground alone many of them, who have
suffered  from  excessive  sterling  strength  against  the  euro,  would  see  our  joining  as  an  advantage
provided of course the exchange rate were initially fixed at an appropriate - and significantly lower -
level than at present. At the broader macroeconomic level the potential benefit of joining - as a result
BIS Review 33/20009
4
of greater transparency of costs and prices and lower transaction costs - leading to greater competition
and more efficient economic resource allocation is well understood.
Exchange rate certainty within Europe - even though it is nominal certainty rather than real exchange
rate certainty - would potentially enhance the benefits to be derived from the European Single Market.
The euro’s second very powerful advantage is the possibility it opens up for much broader and more
liquid  financial  markets.  It  will  mean  a  progressive  narrowing  of  spreads  between  borrowers  and
lenders - and that will be good news too for financial intermediaries as a group, because it will lead to
higher volumes of financial activity - though not every individual intermediary will benefit, of course,
in the more competitive environment. The City of London is already making an important contribution
to this process of financial euro-market integration.
So there are potentially powerful advantages. What then are the risks - the possible arguments against
our joining the euro?
Essentially the potential downside can be summed up as the risk that the single  -  one-size-fits-all  –
short-term interest rate within the Eurozone - which is the inevitable consequence of a single currency
-  will  not  in  the  event  prove  to  be  appropriate  to  the  domestic  monetary  policy  needs  of  all  the
participating countries.
Countries  may  have  divergent  cyclical  positions.  They  may  face  divergent  fiscal  positions  which
would affect their appropriate fiscal/monetary policy mix in different directions - though this should
be contained by the Growth and Stability pact. Or their domestic policy needs may diverge as a result
of  economic  shocks  of  some  sort  -  a  classic  but unique  example  being  German  unification,  but  the
recent global economic disturbance is perhaps another example.
So  the  risks  of  divergent  monetary  policy  needs  within  the  monetary  union  are  real.  They  are
essentially  similar  to the risks  of  sectoral  and  regional  divergences  within  a  national  currency  area.
And if there were to be material divergence within the Eurozone the tensions could be more severe
than  in  a  national  currency  area  because  alternative  mechanisms  -  labour  migration  or  fiscal
redistribution  through  a  central  budget  -  which  help  alleviate  regional  disparities  in  the  national
context - are less well developed at the Eurozone level.
Some  commentators  point  to  the  present  inflationary  pressures  in  Ireland  as  an  example  of  the
problems that could arise on the upside as it were - through I’m not sure how far one can generalise
from the Irish case.
The  fact that  the  UK  did  not join in  the  first  wave  of  EMU  was  a  disappointment  to  some  people,
including to some of our European partners - but it was also a considerable relief to them - we could
have been the elephant in the rowing boat! It was I must confess also a relief to me. If we had joined
EMU from the start - and had Eurozone interest rates over the past year or so it is very difficult to
envisage how we would have avoided an inflationary boom in this country. It is true that, to the extent
that  the  present  imbalance  within  the  economy  reflects  sterling’s  appreciation  against  the  euro,  we
would have been protected against that. But, with accelerating inflation in the economy as a whole, the
price  of  such  protection  of  the  suffering  sectors  would  have  been  tantamount  to  real  exchange  rate
appreciation, which would in any event have damaged their competitive position. And, it would not in
that case be possible to reverse that effect through exchange rate adjustment. Joining EMU from the
start would in fact, as things have turned out, have been a strong form of relaxing our objective for
consistently 
the
internationally-exposed sectors which I argued against a few moments ago. There are no easy answers
so long as our economies continue to diverge.
the  economy  as  a  whole 
the  pressures  on 
to  ease 
inflation 
low 
in 
Coping with such tensions as may emerge within the Eurozone - with or without the UK - is likely to
be  easier  in  a  context  of  structural,  supply-side  flexibility  and  adaptability  -  which  also,  as  I  say,
essentially  determines  the  underlying  rate  at  which  the  economy  can  expand  in  the  medium  and
longer-term.  The  Eurozone  started  with  chronically  high  unemployment.  Some  countries  still  have
very high ratios of public debt to GDP. And most face the prospect of an increasing burden on their
public finances with ageing populations.
5
BIS Review 33/2000
Some  people  in  the  Eurozone  acknowledge  these  concerns,  but  they  are  inclined  to  argue  that  if  a
country participating in the monetary union were to find itself in an unsustainable situation and given
that  it  would  have  no  macroeconomic  way  out  -  through  exchange  rate  adjustment,  or  independent
monetary  policy  action,  or  fiscal stimulus  beyond  the  limits  of  the  Growth  and  Stability  pact  -  and
given limited labour migration or fiscal redistribution at the pan-European level - then it would have
an  overwhelming  incentive  to  undertake  the  supply-side  reforms  which  have  proved  so  difficult  to
introduce up until now. One of my ECB colleagues in fact once put it to me that -  “when  we  have
closed off every other policy option, we will finally be forced to do the things we know that we should
have done all along!”
I hope that this proves to be right and that it does help ease the tensions. Supply-side flexibility within
Europe is crucial in my view not just to the success of the euro, but to the success of the European
economy in a much broader sense - to the resolution of Europe’s chronic unemployment problem and
to the contribution which a strong European economy can make to the whole of the world economy.
In all of this - in our pursuit of both macroeconomic stability on the one hand and structural reform on
the other - we share much the same basic philosophy as our partners in the European Union, though it
may  be  true  to  say  that,  at  least  as  a  matter  of  degree,  while  we  were  later  than  some  of  them  in
coming  to  macroeconomic  stability,  we  may  have  gone  further  in  the  direction  of  improving  the
supply-side flexibility of our economy through structural reform.
The best thing that we can do for the time being - on both sides - is to pursue this common approach in
parallel. That should help to bring about greater convergence between us, to reduce the risks of UK
membership  of  the  euro  and  to  help  meet  the  Government’s  five  economic  tests  for  joining.  In  the
meantime, ahead of any decision, it seems sensible to prepare in order to keep open the option to join.
BIS Review 33/20009
6
