Mr Macfarlane takes the opportunity to expand on the role
of monetary policy in managing an economic expansion
Talk by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Economic Society of
Australia, Victorian Branch, Melbourne on 11 February 2000.
 It is a great pleasure to be here speaking to the Victorian Branch of the Economic Society. I first spoke
before the Society in 1986 and have been back a few times since. On each occasion I have appreciated
the interest and attention you have afforded me. I hope that what I have to say today will again be of
interest to you.
I want to take the opportunity today to expand a little more on the role of monetary policy in managing
an economic expansion. This is a subject that I have spoken on in the past, but clearly there is more to
be said. On this occasion, I would not only like to restate the Reserve Bank’s position, but also deal
with some of the views that have been put forward following our recent raising of interest rates.
The current expansion, as you will all probably be aware, has now lasted longer than its predecessors
in the 1970s and 1980s, and has also reached a higher level relative to its starting point. This is shown
by  the  accompanying  graph,  which  puts  the  three  expansions  on  a  comparable  basis.  Another
interesting aspect of our current expansion is how similar it is to the much better known expansion in
the US economy. While the US expansion has been going for 36 quarters compared to 35 for our own
(measured up to the present quarter), our average GDP growth rate of 4.1% is higher than the 3.6%
recorded in the US.1
Diagram 1
Expansions in GDP
Cyclical trough = 100
1990s
1980s
1970s
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Years since trough
Index
140
135
130
125
120
115
110
105
100
95
Index
140
135
130
125
120
115
110
105
100
95
While it is satisfying to look back and see how far we have come, it is more useful to look ahead and
see what we have to do if we are to continue on this path. For some time now, the task of monetary
policy has been just that - to manage the expansion in such a way as to maximise its length. We do not
want to repeat the experience of earlier expansions which ended so unhappily, and therefore we must
ask ourselves what it is that we have to do this time to avoid that fate. This is the main subject of my
1 These  growth  rates  are  calculated  up  to  the  September  quarter  1999  -  the  latest  data  available  for  Australia:  i.e.  for
Australia average growth rate from 91 Q2 to 99 Q3, for US 91 Q1 to 99 Q3.
1
BIS Review 12/2000
talk today, but before I get into it, I would like to ask your indulgence to detour through the age-old
subject of the business cycle.
The business cycle
Economists have been analysing the business cycle for a century or more. From time to time after a
long expansion, a few feel emboldened enough to suggest that perhaps we have seen the end of the
business cycle. This happened in the very early-1970s, and a few people are canvassing the idea now
as part of the concept known as the “new economy” or “new paradigm”. While there is undoubtedly
substance in these ideas, some of you may be disappointed to know that I am not  a  member  of  the
school  that  thinks  the  business  cycle  has  been  banished,  although  I  am  happy  to  recognise  that
increased  productivity  growth  in  the  1990s  has  made  the  task  of  macro-economic  management
somewhat easier than formerly. The most obvious benefit of this from the monetary policy perspective
is that the overall rise in interest rates needed to prevent a potential inflationary situation developing
now seems to be a good deal smaller than previously.
There are two main mechanisms that lie behind the business cycle:
1. 
A  business  cycle  of  some  sort  may  be  the  inevitable  result  of  interactions  involved  in  a
complex dynamic system such as an economy. We know that cycles are the norm for such
natural  phenomena  as  the  weather  and  animal  populations,  and  some  tendency  in  this
direction  is  also  probably  intrinsic  to  economic  behaviour.  The  first  Nobel  Prize  in
Economics  was  awarded  to  Ragnar  Frisch  for  work  on  how  business  cycles  can  be
propagated  in  simple  models  of  the  economy,  and  others  such  as  Samuelson  and  Hicks
expanded on this.2 More recently, the Real Business Cycle3 school of economists have taken
this  in  a  new  direction  by  regarding  all  cycles  as  being  a  natural  result  of  changes  in  the
supply side of the economy. I do not want to take any of this too literally, but I would agree
with one conclusion that comes out of all this work, namely that it is probably unrealistic to
expect  a  dynamic  system  like  a  modern  economy  to  expand  in  a  smooth  line;  its  natural
progression is probably characterised by some element of cyclicality.
2. 
A business cycle may be viewed as resulting from policy mistakes. In this view,  policy  is
kept  expansionary  for  too  long  during  the  upswing,  resulting  in  the  build-up  of  serious
distortions or imbalances - principally inflation. Eventually something has to be done, but in
order to eliminate the by then well entrenched imbalances, the degree of tightening required
is  quite  large.  As  a  result,  the  economy  is  pushed  into  recession  and  unemployment  rises
sharply. This explanation essentially sees cycles as the result of a delayed monetary policy
reaction function.
In the popular discussion of economic developments over recent decades, it is the second type of cause
-  the  tendency  for  monetary  policy  to  contribute  to  booms  and  busts  -  that  has  been  the  focus  of
attention. Fortunately, it is also the type that we have most chance of avoiding if we play our cards
right. This would not mean that all cyclical behaviour would be removed, but a significant part of it
could be.
2
3
Frisch, R (1933), “Propagation Problems and Impulse Problems in Dynamic Economics”, in Economic Essays in Honor
of Gustav Cassel (London: George Allen and Unwin). Hicks, J R (1950), A Contribution to the Theory of the Trade Cycle
(London:  Oxford  University  Press).  Samuelson, P  A  (1948),  Foundations  of  Economic  Analysis  (Cambridge:  Harvard
University Press).
Plosser, C I (1989), “Understanding Real Business Cycles”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 3(3), 51-78.
BIS Review 12/2000
2
The avoidance of imbalances
The centrepiece of this approach is to act before the imbalances have had time to become entrenched.
If you are seriously aiming to maximise the length of the expansion, the tightening of monetary policy
comes  earlier  than  if  you  are  mainly  interested  in  a  high  growth  rate  for  the  year  ahead  and  less
concerned with the length of the expansion. Of course, this can sometimes make the explanation of
monetary policy moves more difficult, because those opposed to the move may be able to claim that
there was not sufficient hard evidence of imbalances to justify it.
It is instructive to look back over the past few decades to see how imbalances have built up towards
the latter part of economic expansions. No two expansions or their demise have been the same, nor is
it  the  case  that  a  single  imbalance  was  the  cause  of  the  problems.  In  all  cases,  there  were  several
imbalances whose interaction led to the build-up of an unsustainable situation.
Having said that, however, it must be recognised that the pre-eminent imbalance has been inflation. It
is now almost universally acknowledged that the maintenance of low inflation is the sine qua non of a
sustainable expansion. It was the rise of inflation, in one form or another, which spelled the death knell
of our previous expansions.
• 
In  the  long  expansion  which  began  in the 1960s  and  ended  in  1974,  inflation  had  already
risen to 10% by the September quarter of 1973, which was before the effects of OPEC I had
been felt. Following the rapid wage escalation of 1974, inflation then peaked at 17½% early
the following year.
  We  had  a  rather  weak  expansion  in  the  1970s,  which  received  a  boost  from  the  rises  in
commodity prices associated with OPEC II in 1979.  But  by  1981 another  wage  escalation
pushed inflation from a low point of 8% in 1978 to a peak of 12½% in 1982.
In  the  strong,  but  shorter-lived,  expansion  of  the  1980s  the  story  was  rather  different.
Although the increases in prices and wages were a good deal higher than we have become
accustomed  to  in  the  1990s,  there  was  no  sudden  acceleration  in  the  latter  stages  of  the
expansion as there had been in earlier episodes. It was a boom in credit-financed asset prices
and  the  associated  speculative  activity  that  did  the  damage.  At  some  stage  the  boom  was
bound  to  be  followed  by  a  bust,  whether  of  its  own  accord,  or  as  a  result  of  monetary
tightening. While asset price inflation is conceptually different to CPI inflation, and is further
removed from the ordinary operation of monetary policy, it is nevertheless a classic case of
the type of imbalance that can occur in the latter stage of an expansion and lead to its abrupt
and painful ending.
There are several other types of imbalances that often accompany the latter stages of an expansion and
that can be a warning of danger.  One  is  monetary  excess,  which  is  usually  manifested  as  excessive
provision of credit, and which often ends up financing speculative activity. I have already mentioned
this in relation to the 1980s, when the credit expansion was primarily to business and resulted in the
over-leveraging  of  that  sector.  It  is  also  possible  for  the  imbalance  to  show  up  as  over-lending  to
households, as happened in the UK in the late-1980s.
Another  imbalance  that  can  occur  is  in  physical  investment.  We  are  accustomed  to  thinking  of
investment as a good thing and only ever worrying about it if it is too low. But over-investment can
also be a problem at times in that it can lead to the build-up of over-capacity. This in turn can lead to a
subsequent dearth of investment, especially if demand has not been as strong as had been expected by
those  who  put  the  investment  in  place.  Part  of  the  severity  of  the  recent  Asian  recession,  and
particularly the Japanese one, is due to the earlier period of over-investment. Some of that effect also
occurred in Australia in the late-1970s/early-1980s during the so-called “resources boom”.
Looking  back  over  the  post-war  years,  particularly  during  the  fixed  exchange  rate  period,  the
imbalance that often played the decisive role was the current account of the balance of payments. If it
widened markedly, private capital inflow risked being insufficient to cover it, and interest rates would
have to be raised to attract more capital and to reduce the demand for imports. This would be a major
cause of the subsequent contraction, such as the “credit squeeze” of 1961. With a floating exchange
3
BIS Review 12/2000
rate, the current account is a less immediate constraint: it only becomes binding if the market begins to
worry about an escalating external debt to GDP ratio, or about the country’s capacity to service the
debt.
The current expansion
This  brings  me  to  the  current  expansion.  We  have  now  had  two  policy  tightenings  involving  a  net
increase in the overnight cash rate of ¾ of a percentage point. The tightenings were pre-emptive in the
sense  that  they  occurred  before  imbalances  developed  -  in  other  words,  before  there  was  clear
evidence of the economy generally overheating. As the foregoing discussion makes clear, we regard
these  tightenings  as  an  essential  component  of  a  strategy  which  is  designed  to  allow  this  economic
expansion to continue for as long as possible, and not be overwhelmed by the usual imbalances that
bring an expansion to an end. This approach to monetary policy is not unique to the Reserve Bank of
Australia; one can clearly see the same thinking behind the actions of other central banks. They too
have been bruised by the failures of the 1970s and 1980s and are determined to do better this time.
While I think this approach is generally well understood, there are obviously some who do not support
it. There is nothing like a rise in interest rates to bring out critics of monetary policy who hitherto had
been  silent.  Of  course,  everyone  has  a  right  to  express  their  views,  and  I  have  no  trouble  with  the
recent  debate.  I  can  also  see  why  the  public  expect  explanations  from  bodies  that  make  important
decisions,  and  we  are  conscious  of  the  need  to  meet  that  requirement.  As  well  as  the  explanation
contained in the press release that accompanied the monetary policy decision, we will be publishing a
detailed quarterly report on the economy next week, and I appeared in public before a Parliamentary
Committee two days ago. I will also take the opportunity in the remainder of this speech to address
these issues.
We have for some time been in a period characterised by good economic growth, low inflation and
low interest rates. It has been one of the better periods for the Australian economy, especially in light
of  the  turmoil  among  many  of  our  trading  partners.  I  think  there  has  been  a  tendency  for  some
observers to think this happy state of affairs could continue indefinitely provided we left it alone. A
common  theme  has  been  “don’t  meddle  -  just  leave  it  alone”,  or  a  related  one,  “are  you  afraid  of
growth?”.
These views seem to us to be very short-sighted - in essence, they boil down to the view that the best
way to manage an expansion is to keep interest rates at their low point for as long as possible, and only
raise them when things have gone off-track. We think that if we did this, we would look back in a few
years’ time and regret it, even though we might have been more popular in the short run.
We  also  think  that  this  approach  fails  to  recognise  just  how  expansionary  the  stance  of  monetary
policy was in 1999. In either nominal or real terms, interest rates faced by borrowers were very low, as
was shown by their eagerness to borrow.
This expansionary stance of monetary policy was designed to combat a specific set of circumstances
- weak world economy, expected domestic slowdown, and undershooting of the inflation target. When
these circumstances changed, it was only reasonable that monetary policy would also change. We have
tried to encapsulate the two changes taken together as a return to “neutrality” from a position that was
clearly expansionary. Of course, there will  always  be  considerable  measurement  uncertainties  about
the term neutrality - perhaps we should have referred to a return to the “neutral zone”. Be that as it
may, if you do not have some idea of the concept of neutrality, you run the dual risk of:
• 
being late by not changing monetary policy until overheating has actually occurred (or, in the
opposite direction, until a recession is staring you in the face);
then being forced into a large and abrupt adjustment to recover the situation.
• 
Both  of  these  outcomes  effectively  describe  a  “boom  and  bust”  monetary  policy,  which  is  the
approach we set out to avoid.
BIS Review 12/2000
4
Another variation of the argument that monetary policy should not have been tightened, or not by as
much,  is  the  appeal to  US  experience.  Proponents  of  this  view  claim  that  Chairman  Greenspan  has
been  doing  the  right  thing  by  letting  the  US  expansion  run  on,  and  not  being  deflected  by  more
conventional voices calling for monetary restraint to avoid future inflation. I certainly have no qualms
about  joining  the  chorus  of  praise  for  Chairman  Greenspan’s  and  the  Federal  Reserve  Board’s
performance during this expansion, but I would like to make two points. First, we should remember
that the Australian economy  has  actually  grown  faster than the  US economy  during  this  expansion.
Secondly, the Fed has been prepared to put interest rates up as well as down in its management of the
expansion. Interest rates were raised in 1994, again, although by only a small amount, in 1997, and
again in a third phase in 1999 and 2000. The US experience argues against a policy of leaving interest
rates at their low point for long periods in order to achieve a long expansion.
Diagram 2
US Federal Funds Rate During Current Expansion
 8
6
4
2
 0
l
l
l
l
1992
1994
l
l
1996
l
l
l
1998
2000
 8
6
4
2
0
There  is  another  argument  I  want  to  address  before  concluding.  For  various  reasons,  a  number  of
people  have  been  keen  to  put  forward  the  view  that  monetary  policy  was  tightened  because  of  the
impending GST. Some have done this for partisan political reasons, and others because they are still
adhering to the view that monetary policy should only be tightened if general overheating is present.
Since  it  is  not  present,  they  assume  there  must  be  some  ulterior  motive  that  has  been  hidden  and
therefore seize on the GST.
I have said on a number of occasions and will say so again today - monetary policy was not tightened
because of the GST. The tightening would have happened without the impending GST, just as it has in
the United States, the United Kingdom, New Zealand, the Euro Area, Canada, Sweden, etc. We at the
Reserve Bank are still operating on the assumption that the GST will affect prices only on a one-for-
one  basis,  and  that  wages  will  not  be  raised  to  compensate  for  the  GST.  The  second  assumption
reflects the fact that reductions in income taxes will more than offset the rise in prices due to the GST.
To  raise  wages  as  well  to  cover  the  GST  would  be  to  expect  “double  compensation”.  There  is  no
economic logic for this and, if it were to occur, it would be an example of the type of imbalance that
could threaten the end of the expansion, and therefore threaten the downward trend in unemployment.
Wage surges ended two of the past three expansions - it is important that it does not happen again this
time. I think good sense will prevail, and that anyone who is encouraging “double compensation” will
think again.
Conclusion
I think we have still got a long way to go in this expansion. It is already longer than its predecessors,
and if we as a community are sensible and do not allow short-term thinking to overcome our long-term
interests, it could rival in length the expansions of the 1950s and 1960s. As for monetary policy, we
think it can play a very important part in achieving that end. Inevitably, there will be those who agree
5
BIS Review 12/2000
and those who disagree with what we are doing. We think, however, that monetary policy should be
judged, not by any particular movement in interest rates, which will always be surrounded by some
element of controversy, but by its performance over the whole of the expansion.
BIS Review 12/2000
6
