Mr Noyer gives an address on the outlook
for the euro area economy and its financial markets
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the “Cérémonie de
remise des Victoires des SICAV”, Paris, on 24 February 2000.
 I am very pleased to address this distinguished audience of fund managers today and to witness the
presentation  of  awards  for  excellence  in  financial  innovation.  It  is  my  belief  that  the  process  of
financial innovation in general, as celebrated in today’s ceremony, deserves particular attention. This
is because improvements in the working of financial markets will eventually improve the allocation of
financial resources in the economy, which will in turn be beneficial for sound economic growth over
the medium term.
Trends in 2000 for the euro area economy
1.
In the first part of my address today, I would like to discuss the major trends in monetary, economic
and financial developments in the euro area in 2000. I will examine these trends within the framework
of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy.
The primary objective of the Eurosystem is  to  maintain  price stability  over  the  medium  term.  Price
stability is defined as a year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for
the euro area of below 2%. The assessment of risks to price stability in the context of the monetary
policy strategy is based on two pillars. First, a reference value of 4½% for the growth rate of the broad
monetary  aggregate  M3;  second,  a  broadly  based  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price  developments
and  risks  to  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  To  begin  with,  let  me  consider  the  first  pillar  of  the
strategy. In 1999, the three-month average of annual percentage growth rates of M3 was consistently
above the reference  value.  Over  recent  months,  both  money  growth  and the  growth  of credit  to the
private sector signalled generous liquidity conditions in the euro area and were seen as posing upward
risks to price stability.
Let me now turn to the second pillar of the monetary policy strategy, the broadly based assessment of
the  outlook  for  price  developments  and  risks  to  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  Various
macro-economic  indicators  available  for  the  euro  area  consistently  point  towards  a  strong  cyclical
upswing  in the euro area  in  2000. These  expectations  for  developments  in  economic  activity  in  the
euro area are supported both by external developments, as the outlook for global economic activity is
improving,  and  developments  internal  to  the  euro  area.  At  the  same  time  as  the  cyclical  upswing
started to materialise, however, increases in consumer prices over recent months were relatively large
and protracted. This reflected mainly the impact of increasing oil prices seen throughout 1999 as well
as, following the continued depreciation of the effective exchange rate of the euro, increases in import
prices. These increases in oil prices and in import prices led to a situation where there were increasing
risks of second round effects on consumer prices.
With respect to both the first pillar and the second pillar of the strategy, developments over the last
few months led the Governing Council of the ECB to raise interest rates. The main refinancing rate
was raised to 3% on 4 November 1999 and then to 3.25% on 3 February 2000. By raising interest rates
in  view  of  the  developments  that  I  just  described,  it  was  aimed  to  contribute  to  ensuring  that  the
cyclical upswing currently under way in the euro area will be both strong and sustainable, because it
will occur in an environment of price stability over the medium term.
Over the next months it is particularly important that social partners keep wage increases in line with
price stability as well as being supportive of further growth in employment. The rate of unemployment
in  the  euro  area  has  fallen  throughout  1999  but  still  remains  high.  A  lasting  reduction  in
1
BIS Review 17/2000
unemployment  could  be  achieved  only  if  further  progress  is  made  in  structural  reforms  aimed  at
promoting flexibility on the labour market, providing jobs to low skilled workers and facilitating the
return to the job market of the long-term unemployed. In addition, the growth prospects of the euro
area  over  the  medium  term  would  clearly  benefit  from  the  completion  and  further  deepening  of
structural reforms promoting competition on the markets for goods and services.
Euro area financial markets
2.
Also  for  the  financial  markets  of  the  euro  area,  structural  reforms  aimed  at  promoting  competition
appear to be necessary. These reforms will over time contribute to improving the working of financial
markets integrated at the area-wide level. Furthermore, the Eurosystem has an obvious interest in well
functioning and efficient financial markets because financial markets are  the  conduit  through  which
monetary policy decisions are channelled into the economy. Let me consider first the money market. In
1999, within the euro area cross-border operations constituted a large share of  all operations  on the
money market. The market has evidently benefited from the creation of a strong and secure backbone
of payment systems, including the real-time gross-settlement system operated by the European System
of Central Banks (ESCB). The money market of the euro has widely used daily reference indices for
interest  rates,  notably  EONIA  for  overnight  transactions  and  EURIBOR  for  transactions  at  longer
maturities. A full set of standard instruments is built upon these reference indices, in particular money
market futures and options contracts as well as short-term interest rate swaps. This leads to a situation
where  market  participants  are  able  to  manage  their  day-to-day  funds  in  an  efficient  manner  and  at
relatively  low  costs.  Important  progress  remains  to  be  achieved,  however,  in  particular  for  instance
with  regard  to  the  repo  market.  The  further  integration  of  the  repo  market  at  area-wide  level  will
benefit from the operation of common platforms for the clearing and delivery-settlement of securities
used as collateral in repo transactions.
If I now turn to the bond market of the euro area, observations made during 1999 also seem to indicate
that  the  market  is  already  relatively  well  integrated  at  the  level  of  the  euro  area.  As  shown  by  the
newly published ECB statistics in this field, there was a considerable increase in the participation of
private sector issuers in the bond market in 1999. To some extent, this development appears to have
been linked to higher mergers and acquisitions activity. Furthermore, the volumes of transactions on
both  the  secondary  market  for  bonds  and  on  the  markets  for  interest  rate  derivative  products  also
appear to have increased in 1999. In this context, the more sophisticated market participants seem to
be able to easily take positions at any point on the term structure of interest rates, thus contributing to
the formation of representative and reliable prices for the entire range of instruments available on the
euro area bond market. These observations tend to indicate that the bond market of the euro area has
attained a good degree of depth and liquidity.
Further progress towards the constitution of very efficient bond markets in the euro area can, however,
certainly still be made.
In the run-up to Stage Three of European Monetary Union, bond market participants in each country
of the euro area appeared to increasingly hold bonds issued in other countries of the euro area. This
development  reflected  notably  the  decline  in  spreads  linked  to  the  expected  removal  of  intra-area
exchange  rate  risks.  Following  the  creation  of  the  euro,  bond  market  investors  are  naturally  not
concerned with intra-area exchange rate risks any more. Instead, they seem to focus on an assessment
of the intrinsic credit quality of issuers. Thus, the assessment of credit quality and the development of
a  “credit  risk  culture”,  which  constitute  important  features  of  an  active  and  open  bond  market,  are
likely to develop further partly as a result of the creation of the euro. The activities of ratings agencies
make it possible to define common standards for the assessment and comparative ranking of the credit
quality  of  borrowers  and  issuers.  In  this  regard,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that,  in  1999,  the  share  of
relatively  low-grade  borrowers  in  new  bond  issues,  although  it  remained  small,  seemed  to  increase
somewhat. Over the medium term, in the context of the further development of a “credit risk culture”,
it can therefore be expected that the bond market of the euro area will become increasingly diversified,
in particular with regard to the range of participating issuers, and attract more private issuers.
BIS Review 17/2000
2
With regard to the stock market, similar observations may be made. In particular, the development of a
range of area-wide stock market indices is indicative of the progress made in the integration of euro
area stock markets. In particular, stock market participants seem to increasingly take into account the
economic factors common to the euro area as a whole. Furthermore, the integration of stock markets at
the euro area level means that issuers across the euro area have privileged access to a large number of
investors on a large and open market place. This perspective is certainly a supporting factor for the
development  of  segments  of  the  stock  market  dedicated  to  relatively  small  and/or  new  firms,  the
so-called “new markets”.
I would like to conclude this brief discussion of trends in euro area financial markets with a reference
to the - admittedly still timid - emergence of new market places operating on the internet. It appears
that internet market places have the potential to cover a broad range of activities, both on the so-called
primary  market  at  the  time  of  issue  of  new  securities  and  on  the  secondary  market.  One  of  the
advantages of these new  market  places is that  they  may  be  accessed  by  a  very  wide  range  of users
because  they  take  advantage  of  an  existing  communication  network  infrastructure,  the  internet.
Furthermore,  the  new  internet  market  places  also  seem  to  be  characterised  by  a  high  degree  of
automation  of  trading  processes.  These  factors  would  seem  to  make  it  possible  to  achieve  lower
transaction  costs  and,  more  generally,  contribute  to  further  improving  the  working  of  financial
markets.
3
BIS Review 17/2000
