Mr Thiessen converses on the conduct of monetary policy
in Canada under a floating exchange rate system
Speech by Mr Gordon Thiessen, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Canadian Society of New
York, New York, on 9 March 2000.
 The conduct of monetary policy when you live next door to a large neighbour
Both in Canada and elsewhere, much ink has been spilled over the past year on the pros and cons of
different exchange rate regimes and the implications for monetary policy.
Interest  in  the  subject  was  piqued  by  the  difficulties  experienced  in  1997-98  by  a  number  of
emerging-market economies in Asia - difficulties that had a lot to do with unsustainable exchange rate
arrangements. As well, the formation of a large single currency area in Europe, just over a year ago,
focused  attention  on  monetary  unions.  Canada’s  floating  exchange  rate  system  has  itself  been  the
subject  of  debate,  particularly  while  our  economy  was  adjusting  to  the  effects  of  falling  world
commodity prices.
There have been a number of changes in exchange rate regimes recently. Several Asian countries have
abandoned their fixed  exchange  rate  arrangements  for  more  flexible  systems.  Last  year,  Brazil  also
moved  to  a  floating  exchange  rate.  Conversely,  Argentina  was  seriously  debating  giving  up  its
currency  board  arrangement  and  adopting  the  US  dollar.  And  of  course  this  past  January,  Ecuador
embarked on the road to “dollarization” in an effort to restore political and economic stability there.
In a world of increasingly open markets for goods and services, burgeoning international trade, and
massive global capital flows, what can we say about the appropriate exchange rate arrangements and
the scope for independent monetary policies in individual countries?
I  believe  that  Canada  is  well  placed  to  offer  some  useful  insights,  living  next  to  a  much  bigger
neighbour, with whom we have forged very close economic and financial links over the years. And so
today, I would like to talk about the conduct of monetary policy in Canada under a floating exchange
rate system. I will end with a brief summary of the state of the Canadian economy.
Economic and financial links between Canada and the United States
No  two  other  countries  share  as  much  as  the  United  States  and  Canada  -  and  I  do  not  just  mean
hockey, baseball, or the longest undefended border in the world! Let us look at some basic economic
facts.
The  value  of  goods  and  services  that  cross  the  Canada-US  border  every  year  amounts  to  about
US$370 billion  -  40%  of  our  gross  domestic  product.  Canada  accounts  for  nearly  one-fifth  of  US
international trade in goods and services, while the United States accounts for close to four-fifths of
ours.
With the Free Trade Agreement (FTA) of 1989 and the addition of Mexico in 1994 to form the North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), tariffs between Canada and the United States have been
eliminated on a large number of goods.
Financial flows between our two countries have also generally been free of controls since shortly after
the  Second  World  War.  Today,  the  United  States  accounts  for  two-thirds  of  our  net  international
liability position and for approximately half of all Canadian gross international assets and liabilities.
1
BIS Review 22/2000
With this much economic and financial integration between our two nations, it is not surprising that
there are people who believe that Canada should be in some type of monetary union with the United
States (and perhaps Mexico) or that it should peg its currency to the US dollar.
Instead, the Canadian dollar has been floating against the US dollar for all but eight of the last 50 years
- the longest time that any industrial country has been on a floating exchange rate system. Indeed, this
coming September will be the 50th anniversary of our first move to a floating rate.
Canada’s floating exchange rate regime
The  main  reason for choosing  to  float  is  that  economic  shocks  affect  our  two  countries  differently.
Even when Canada and the United States are hit by the same shocks, the impact on our economies can
vary.  Movements  in  the  world  prices  of  primary  commodities  are  a  classic  example.  Although  the
share of primary products in total Canadian exports has fallen by nearly half since the 1970s - to about
30%  -  primary-producing  industries  are  still  important  to  us.  In  the  United  States  too,  the  primary
sector  is  significant.  But,  unlike  Canada,  the  United  States  is  not  a  net  exporter  of  commodities.
Indeed, it is a net importer.
So, when world commodity prices tumbled in 1997-98 in the wake of the Asian crisis, this actually
helped a vigorously expanding US economy, by reducing input costs and dampening upward pressure
on the general level of prices. In Canada, however, lower commodity prices caused a deterioration of
our terms of trade - the prices we receive for  our exports  relative  to  the  prices  we  pay  for imports.
Between mid-1997 and the end of 1998, the US terms of trade rose by about 3%, while ours fell by
close  to  5%.  This  had  a  negative  effect  on  both  our  national  income  and  the  profitability  of  our
primary sector.
When something like this happens, our floating exchange rate helps us  to  absorb the  consequences.
This is not to say that it eliminates the effects of a decline in commodity prices. But it does cushion
them, and it facilitates the necessary adjustments in the economy.
In this instance, the external value of the Canadian dollar fell by about 12% between mid-1997 and
late-1998,  reflecting  a  drop  of  some  20%  over  the  same  period  in  the  average  world  price  (in
US dollars) of the key primary commodities we produce. Because of this movement in our currency,
the price of these products in Canadian dollars fell by less than their world price in US dollars, thus
reducing the negative impact on our exporters of commodities. Even more important was the incentive
that the lower exchange rate provided to Canadian producers and exporters of non-commodity goods
and services to expand their sales abroad.
With the exchange rate moving in response to the commodity-price shock, the negative effects were
spread  out  more  evenly  across  the  economy  and  were  less  pronounced  overall  than  they  might
otherwise have been. Yes, real GDP growth slowed from 4% in 1997 to 3% in 1998. But it picked up
again to 4¼% in 1999. Moreover, employment has been rising, and unemployment has continued to
fall since 1997. And in response to the acceleration in economic activity and rising commodity prices,
the Canadian dollar has strengthened over the past year.
The other important characteristic of a floating exchange rate is that it allows us to have a monetary
policy that is separate from that of the United States. Typically, economists express this independence
as the ability to choose one’s own national objective with respect to inflation. I do not find this to be a
particularly useful way of looking at autonomy. And I most certainly would not want to suggest that
there are serious shortcomings with the present objectives and approach of US monetary policy that
would justify pursuing a fundamentally different policy in Canada. In fact, the objectives of monetary
policy in our two countries are very similar.
Monetary  policy  affects  the  level  of  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy  which,  in  turn,  leads  to  an
ultimate effect on prices and the inflation rate. The real essence of pursuing a separate monetary policy
is  having  the  option  and  the  ability  to  respond  to  fluctuations  in  demand  that  are  unique  to  our
economy. Let me give you an example from recent Canadian history. It goes back to the sharp fiscal
tightening that we had to implement in 1995 in order to turn around our large public sector deficits and
BIS Review 22/2000
2
mounting indebtedness. Of course, fiscal deficits also had to be reduced in the United States during the
1990s, but the relative tightening has been much less than in Canada.
In any event, the dampening effect on aggregate demand of this dramatic change in Canadian fiscal
policy called for easier monetary conditions. As progress was made in restoring fiscal credibility, the
Bank of Canada was able to lower its policy rate during 1996-97, to levels well below the comparable
US Federal Reserve rate. Both market interest rates and the exchange rate moved down in response,
helping to stimulate foreign and domestic demand and so  moderate the effects  of  fiscal restraint  on
economic activity.
For all these reasons, a flexible exchange rate has an important role to play in an open economy like
Canada’s.
Let me now turn to the framework for monetary policy that the Bank of Canada has adopted.
Inflation-control targets
The objective of Canadian monetary policy is to keep inflation low and stable. The Bank of Canada
pursues this objective by means of an explicit target for inflation control. This target has been the main
feature of our monetary order since the beginning of 1991. The current goal is to hold inflation inside
a range of 1 to 3%.
However, the Bank of Canada could not have targets for inflation control and be held accountable for
achieving them without the flexibility provided by a floating exchange rate regime.
But it is also true that a floating exchange rate system is more effective and reliable when there is a
firm commitment to targets for inflation control. And our ability to have short-term interest rates for
monetary policy purposes that are different from US rates is greater in those circumstances.
The Bank of Canada’s success in meeting the targets over the past nine years has helped to increase
public confidence that inflation will stay inside the target range. And this has been true even during
periods  of  turbulence  and  relatively  wide  fluctuations  in  the  external  value  of  the  Canadian  dollar.
Moreover, this increased confidence in the Bank’s commitment to low inflation has, in turn, helped the
operation  of  financial  markets  by  providing  a  strong  underpinning  to  the  valuation  of  the  Canadian
dollar.
This is a relatively new phenomenon for Canada. During the years of high inflation - the 1970s and
1980s - a depreciation of the exchange rate would, all too often, raise fears of still higher inflation,
which would then lead to further depreciation and higher interest rates.
Needless to say, it is only when expectations of inflation and of the future value of the Canadian dollar
are well anchored that an independent monetary policy is possible. For only then will movements in
the exchange rate permit adjustments in real (after-inflation) interest rates in Canada that are different
from those in the United States.
Put another way, monetary policy actions cannot bring about Canadian real interest rates that remain
below US rates for any significant length of time, unless markets have a fair amount of confidence in
Canada’s  commitment  to  prudent  macroeconomic  policies,  and  unless  there  is  a  reasonable
expectation of a real appreciation of our currency in the future.
In this context, I strongly believe that, without our inflation-targeting framework, we could not have
had interest rates in Canada generally below those in the United States, as we have in the past four
years. But  I  should  add that  neither  would this  have  been  possible  without  the  remarkable progress
made by Canadian governments during the second half of the 1990s to reduce budget deficits and to
bring down the amount of public sector debt relative to the size of our economy (debt-to-GDP ratio).
Now,  you  may  ask,  how  important  can  inflation-control  targets  really  be  if  the  United  States  has
consistently turned in a strong economic performance and low inflation without their benefit?
The key element here is monetary policy credibility. And credibility is not necessarily tied to inflation
targets. As US experience shows, a strong commitment to low inflation can do the job. But, where past
3
BIS Review 22/2000
price  performance  has  not  been  particularly  favourable,  inflation  targets  can  help  to  strengthen
confidence  in  the  central  bank’s  commitment  to  low  inflation.  From  the  early-1970s  to  the
early-1990s, on average, Canada had a somewhat higher inflation rate than the United States.
Other factors that matter are the size and importance of the US economy as well as the fact that the
US dollar is  the  pre-eminent  international  reserve  currency.  All  this  incites  considerable  investment
interest and greater market confidence in the US dollar compared with any other currency, especially
during turbulent times. The Canadian economy, by contrast, is much smaller and more open.
Because of these considerations, we in Canada have had to affirm our commitment to a more concrete
monetary policy objective in the form of explicit inflation targets.
The importance of credible macroeconomic policies
In  summary,  I  would  suggest  that  our  experience  with  a  floating  exchange  rate  system  and  a
“made-in-Canada”  monetary  policy,  despite  high  economic  and  financial integration  with  our  much
larger US neighbour, provides an interesting example for those exploring the gamut of exchange rate
and monetary policy options.
As I look at Canada’s exchange rate experience over the past few decades, however, one thing is very
clear to me. And that is the importance of credible domestic macroeconomic policies. Without a sound
fiscal policy and without a strong explicit commitment to inflation control, exchange markets will not
have full confidence in the underlying value of the currency. And the ability of a flexible exchange
rate  to  respond  to  shocks  and  to  facilitate  the  interest  rate  movements  needed  for  an  independent
monetary policy will be seriously compromised.
This in the end says it all. No exchange rate system is going to bail you out of bad economic policies.
And  that  is  equally  true  of  a  floating  exchange  rate  system,  as  it  is  of  the  alternatives  -  a  fixed
exchange  rate  or indeed  a  monetary  union,  even  if  that  monetary  union  is  with  the  world’s  largest,
strongest economy.
In  today’s  rapidly  changing,  increasingly  open  world  economy,  there  is  an  even  greater  need  for
flexibility than before. I believe that a flexible exchange rate regime continues to serve Canada well in
dealing with the challenges of this new economic reality.
The current economic situation in Canada
Let me finally say a few words about the current economic situation in Canada.
The Canadian economy had a good year in 1999.
Our export industries benefited from the strong US economy. And with global economic conditions
generally  improved,  primary  commodity  prices  rebounded.  The  resulting  gains  in  incomes  and
employment in Canada led to higher levels of domestic spending. Recently revised statistics now show
stronger economic growth in Canada during 1999 than previously estimated.
And  we  continue  to  see  strong  momentum  in  our  economy  so  far  this  year.  Indeed,  by  some
calculations, we could be operating at full capacity.
However,  as  has  been  the  case  in  the  United  States  for  some  time,  Canada  has  also  recently
experienced an increased level of investment in machinery, equipment, and technology. This should
lead to  improvements  in  productivity  and  in  our  economy’s  production  capacity.  But  we  cannot  be
sure by how much.
In light of this uncertainty, the Bank of Canada has been concerned about our economy picking up too
much speed. There is a risk that we could hit the capacity ceiling too hard, causing supply bottlenecks
and shortages that could lead to an ongoing increase in inflation.
To reduce this risk, the Bank of Canada increased its Bank Rate twice, in November and February,
following  similar  rate  hikes  by  the  US  Federal  Reserve.  The  latest  data  indicate  that  the  external
BIS Review 22/2000
4
demand for Canadian output, especially from the United States, is stronger than previously expected.
Under these conditions, it is essential for the central bank to be vigilant.
Moreover, in view of the  uncertainty  about the production  potential  of  our economy  at  this  time  of
structural change, the Bank is now monitoring a wide range of indicators for early-warning signs of
pressure on capacity and prices.
Up  to  now,  our  inflation  performance  has  been  somewhat  better  than  we  had  expected.  While  the
increase  in  the  total  CPI  over  the  past  12  months  to  January  was  2.3%,  our  core  rate  of  inflation
(excluding food, energy, and the effect of changes in indirect taxes), at 1.3%, remains in the bottom
half of the 1 to 3% target range.
This  good  inflation  performance  bodes  well  for  the  continued  expansion  of  the  Canadian  economy.
But what remains to be seen is whether this expansion will bring with it strong productivity gains for
Canada similar to those witnessed in the United States.
One thing is clear. The job of the Bank of Canada must be to keep inflation in Canada low and stable.
Without that, we will be risking both the economic expansion and the potential productivity gains.
5
BIS Review 22/2000
