T T Mboweni: The objectives of monetary policy with reference to the
independence of the South African Reserve Bank
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Free State Branch
of  the  Economic  Society  of  South  Africa  and  Chamber  of  Trade  and  Commerce,  Bloemfontein,  on
12 April 2000.
 Introduction
1.
The  task  of  macroeconomic  policy  is  the  promotion  of  economic  growth  and  development,  the
creation of more jobs and the employment of more people, the improvement of the living conditions of
all  the  people  of  the  country,  and  the  elimination  of  unjustifiable  discrepancies  between  average
incomes of various groups of participants in economic activity.
Monetary policy, being a part of macroeconomic policy, has but an intermediate role to  play  in the
implementation  of  overall  macroeconomic  policy.  It  is  expected  of  monetary  policy  to  create  and
maintain  a  stable  financial  environment  within  which  overall  economic  activity  can  be  expanded.
None of the above ultimate objectives of macroeconomic policy will be attainable in an environment
of  unstable  financial  conditions.  Although  overall  financial  stability  by  itself  cannot  guarantee  the
achievement  of  the  ultimate  macroeconomic  objectives,  it  is  an important  precondition  for  reaching
those goals.
In order to comply with its obligation and to meet its commitment, the central bank should pursue its
objectives with a medium and longer term view in mind. Financial stability should, for example, be
maintained  throughout  the  business  cycle  in  both  the  expansion  and  contraction  phases  of  the
economy,  and  should  in  the  democratic  political  system  of  periodic  elections,  stretch  beyond  the
duration  of  successive  governments.  It  is  inter  alia  for  this  reason  that  central  banks  need  some
autonomy for the execution of their duties.
Primary objective of the Bank
2.
The  primary  or  strategic  objective  of  the  Reserve  Bank  is  therefore  to  achieve  and  maintain  stable
financial  conditions  in  the  country.  This  objective  is  spelled  out  in  both  the  Constitution  of  the
Republic  and  in  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  Act.  In  these  acts  it  is  recognised  that  only  by
protecting the currency can balanced and sustainable economic growth be achieved.
The question may be asked what is meant by the term financial stability? In a broad sense financial
stability can be defined to include price stability as well as stable conditions in the financial sector as a
whole. Price stability is achieved when changes in the general price level do not materially affect the
economic decision-making  process.  Although  relative  price  movements  will  still  have  an  impact  on
production, consumption and investment, the rate of inflation or deflation is not an important factor in
the decisions taken by producers, consumers and the authorities under stable price conditions.
The stability of key institutions and markets in the financial system is achieved when there is a high
degree of confidence that the financial infrastructure of the economy is able to meet the requirements
of market participants. However, it is important to realise that financial stability does not exclude the
failure of individual banks or financial institutions. A financial institution can go bankrupt in  stable
financial conditions. It is only where systemic risks arise, i.e. where the financial  sector  as  a  whole
may be influenced by an incident, that the situation can be described as financially unstable.
The  two  elements  of  financial  stability,  i.e.  price  stability  and  stability  of  the  financial  sector,  are
closely  related.  Failure  to  maintain  one  of  these  elements  provides  a  very  uncertain  operating
environment for the other, with causality running in both directions. For example, high inflation can
lead  to  tighter  monetary  policy,  higher  interest  rates,  and  increase  in  the  non-performing  loans  of
1
BIS Review 34/2000
banks and a fall in asset and collateral values, which can cause bank and other failures in the financial
sector.  Conversely,  disruptions  in  the  financial  system  will  make  the  transmission  mechanism  of
monetary policy less effective and can materially affect changes in the general price level.
Why is it important to maintain financial stability?
3.
There  are  many  convincing  reasons  why  financial  stability  is  regarded  as  a  prerequisite  for  the
promotion and support of economic development. All modern market-oriented  economies  are  based
on the extensive use of money as a unit of account, as a means of exchange and as a store of value.
Money that changes in value all the time cannot fulfil these functions. Money must be trusted by the
public to be a constant yardstick of value, otherwise it will not be acceptable as a means of exchange,
and cannot continue to serve as a store of value.
The many disadvantages of inflation are well-known. High inflation distorts the allocation of resources
and favours investment in non-productive hedge assets. High inflation discourages saving and leads to
more  consumption.  High  inflation  erodes  the  competitiveness  of  local  manufacturers  and  other
producers  vis-à-vis  foreign  producers.  High  inflation  leads  to  an  unfair  redistribution  in  wealth  by
penalising  the  poor  more  than  the  rich.  High  inflation  leads  to  lower  growth,  fewer  jobs  and  more
unemployment.
There  can  be  no  rational  reason  for  the  support  of  inflation  in  any  country  except  by  those  few
financial wizards that have learned how to take advantage of inflation at the cost of their fellow human
beings.  This  may  even  include  the  managers  of  the  national  budget  who  have  learned  through
experience  that  taxation  through  inflation  often  meets  with  less  resistance  from  ill-informed  tax
payers. For the economy as a whole, however, inflation is always bad.
An argument is often made for a trade-off between inflation and growth based  on the  Philips-curve
analysis  in  terms  of  which,  at  a  low  level  of  inflation,  real  growth  can  be  stimulated  through  an
expansionary  monetary  policy,  even  if it should  create  some  higher  rate  of  inflation.  There  may  be
some truth in this for the short-term but it is easy to prove that a continuing expansionary monetary
policy  will  eventually  lead  to  an  acceleration  in  the  rate  of  inflation.  A  little  bit  of  inflation  once
started can easily gain momentum, get out of control and develop into hyper-inflation. It is also true
that with modern electronic forecasting techniques and increasing sophistication in the role of rational
expectations, the effective period for the trade-off has become very short.
How does the Reserve Bank achieve financial stability?
4.
Inflation is a monetary phenomenon, i.e. inflation cannot take place without a more rapid increase in
the  quantity  of  money  than  in  output,  provided  that  the  velocity  of  circulation  of  money  remains
unchanged. Although the causes of inflation are too wide for any individual institution to prevent it
from occurring, the Reserve Bank can at all times use the powers at its disposal to reduce inflationary
pressures by influencing the growth in money supply and bank credit extension.
The Reserve Bank can influence money supply and bank credit extension either by influencing overall
liquidity  in  the  banking  sector,  that  is,  by  influencing  the  supply  of  money  or  by  influencing  the
demand for credit emanating from the private sector. Liquidity in the banking sector can be influenced
through  various  operational  instruments,  such  as  changes  in  minimum  cash  reserves  for  banking
institutions,  open  market-operations  and  short-term  money  market  interventions  through  swaps  and
repurchase transactions.
The demand for bank credit is to an important extent interest rate driven. By influencing the general
level of interest rates, the Reserve Bank can exert some influence on the total demand for credit, and
therefore on the money supply. The main operational instrument in this case will normally be the repo
rate,  that  is  the  interest  rate  at  which  the  Reserve  Bank  provides  in  the  liquidity  needs  of  banking
institutions.
BIS Review 34/2000
2
In  its  objective  to  establish  and  maintain  financial  stability  another  important  responsibility  of  the
Reserve  Bank  is  to  encourage  and  support  the  development  of  sound  and  well-managed  banking
institutions. The objective of banking supervision is to ensure that banks manage their risks in such a
way that systemic risk in the banking sector is minimised, thereby ensuring the safety of depositor’s
money. Banking supervision is based to a large extent on the prudential regulation of banks, which is
aimed mainly, but not exclusively, at promoting the financial soundness of banks and of the banking
system as a whole.
In  order  to fulfil  the  responsibility  for systemic  protection  of  the  banking  system,  bank  supervision
must ensure the prudential soundness of participants in the banking system. As soon as a bank failure
could cause a systemic problem, the prudential and systemic measures pertaining to the supervision of
banks  converge.  If  a  large  bank  is  in  financial  difficulty,  the  expectation  of  losses  may  become  so
widespread that the public loses confidence in the banking system as a whole, causing withdrawals of
deposits and general liquidity problems in the banking system.
Financial stability also requires well-developed and efficient functioning financial markets. The basic
foundation  for  the  functioning  of  markets  is  the  provision  of  money.  It  is  therefore  an  important
function of the Reserve Bank to issue banknotes and coin in South Africa.
In any payment system there arises the need for clearance and settlement of claims of banks on one
another  because  cheques  drawn  on  any  particular  bank  will  in  many  cases  be  deposited  by  their
holders with other banks. This function of clearance and settlement has therefore been performed by
the Reserve Bank since 1921.
In  its  endeavours  to  maintain  financial  stability  the  Reserve  Bank  also  has  a  vested  interest  in  the
development and functioning of the money, capital and foreign exchange markets. Although the Bank
is not directly responsible for the development of the money and capital markets, considerable effort
has been made in the past to establish efficient markets in South Africa. For the efficient functioning
of  the  money  market,  daily  cash  shortages  in  the  banking  system  are  accommodated  by  the  Bank
through  the  extension  of  overnight  loans  against  suitable  collateral  to  banks.  As  custodian  of  the
country’s gold and other foreign reserves the Bank is also involved in the functioning of the foreign
exchange market. In recent years, the Bank in close cooperation with the Minister of Finance has made
considerable effort to gradually phase out exchange controls and to integrate South African financial
markets further with international markets.
The autonomy of the central bank
5.
In fulfilling its primary objective of creating and maintaining financial stability, it is generally argued
that the central bank should be able to do this relatively independently of any government interference
or in an autonomous way. The traditional argument in favour of a strong autonomous central bank is
that  the  power  to  spend  money  should  in  some  way  be  separated  from  the  power  to  create  money.
According  to  this  argument  politicians  generally  have  short-term  horizons  in  determining  economic
objectives. Many governments have accordingly given way to the temptation to reduce interest rates
ahead  of  elections.  This  may  boost  spending  and  employment  in  the  short  term,  but  ultimately  it
normally also causes higher inflation over the long term unless the capacity of the economy can meet
this higher level of demand. This higher inflation, however, only becomes apparent a couple of years
later. An incumbent government concerned about its immediate popularity is likely to be tempted to
go for the short-term gains from lower interest rates, even at the risk of promoting somewhat higher
inflation further down the road because some other political party may then have to pick up the pieces.
Central bankers normally operate on a longer term time scale than politicians and therefore do not face
the  same  temptation  to  relax  policy  to  achieve  short-term  objectives.  By  delegating  decisions  on
interest  rates  and  other  monetary  matters  to  such  an  independent  institution,  with  a  clearly  defined
mandate, society can then hope to achieve a better inflation outcome over the longer term.
The  main  criticism  against  making  central  banks  autonomous  entities  is  not  so  much  based  on
economic but rather on political arguments: it is that turning over decisions regarding interest rates,
exchange  rates,  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  system  and  other  monetary  matters  to  a  body  of
3
BIS Review 34/2000
unelected  officials  is  simply  “undemocratic”.  In  a  democratic  government  all  decisions  should  be
subject  to  scrutiny  by  the  elected  legislative  and  the  concept  of  an  autonomous  central  bank  is
therefore not acceptable.
Aside from the fact that there are plenty of other areas of national life in which decision making  is
delegated  to  independent  unelected  officials  -  the  judiciary  being  the  prime  example  -  there  is  a
fundamental confusion here between being autonomous and lacking accountability. No central bank
can be totally independent, in the sense that it is not answerable to any one. Even the most autonomous
central bank has to report in one form or the other to the legislative, which in any case also has the
ultimate  power  to  change  the  laws  relating  to  the  central  bank.  All  the  same,  there  is  a  difference
between a situation in which the policy decisions are under continuous scrutiny, and an arrangement
where the central bank reports to the legislative periodically.
An important precondition for central bank autonomy is therefore credibility. Central bankers that seek
autonomy must commit themselves and their institutions to a programme of action that will support
their  demands.  It  is  generally  believed  in  this  regard  that  they  should  fulfil  three  basic  conditions,
namely:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
Central  banks  should  have  a  clearly  defined  monetary  policy  framework  and  monetary
policy operational procedures. Monetary policy should clearly indicate what it is attempting
to  achieve,  how  it  will  achieve  it  and  in  what  manner  it  will  operate  to  reach  its  primary
objective.
Both the government and the public should on a continuous basis be informed regarding the
monetary policy stance pursued by the central bank.
An efficient institutional framework should exist within which decisions on monetary policy
can be made without undue interference by political functionaries. This involves  decisions
regarding the ownership of a central bank, the management of the bank and the responsibility
for monetary policy.
The final question then arises: does the South African Reserve Bank fulfil these conditions and what
degree of independence does the Reserve Bank have?
The  Reserve  Bank  in  the  past  has  always  clearly  indicated  what  monetary  policy  framework  and
monetary operational procedures it follows in the application of monetary policy. Only last week on
6 April  we  again  issued  a  statement  explaining  the  new  monetary  policy  framework  of  inflation
targeting to the public. In this statement we confirmed that inflation targeting would have no material
affect on our operational procedures which we have been applying since March 1998.
The South African Reserve Bank also fulfils the second condition for autonomy, namely transparency.
The  numerical  inflation  target  was  announced  explicitly  to  the  public  to  indicate  clearly  what  the
Reserve  Bank  should  be  held  accountable  for  and  to  make  the  application  of  this  framework  as
transparent  as  possible.  The  announcement  of  the  target  makes  the  intentions  of  monetary  policy
explicit. If targets are not met, the central bank has to explain what went wrong. Regular reporting on
the stance of monetary policy, as is the case internationally, are made to Parliament.
The  monetary  policy  stance  is  communicated  regularly  to  the  public.  This  is  done  by  means  of  a
monetary policy statement after the completion of every meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee.
A  Monetary  Policy  Forum  has  also  been established to  open  an  avenue  for  ongoing  discussions  on
monetary policy and general economic developments and to ensure that the views of interested parties
are taken into account in the determination of monetary policy. The Monetary Policy Forum will meet
twice  a  year  in  the  major  centres  of  South  Africa  to  allow  as  many  stakeholders  as  possible  to
participate in these discussions.
The Reserve Bank will also publish twice a year a Monetary Policy Review to increase transparency in
the  application  of  monetary  policy.  This  Monetary  Policy  Review  will  attempt  to  describe  in  more
detail the decisions taken by the central bank and will analyse developments in South Africa and the
rest of the world that could affect inflation.
BIS Review 34/2000
4
Finally, the present institutional framework in South Africa in the form of the South African Reserve
Bank  Act,  Act  No.  90  of  1989,  provides  the  Reserve  Bank  with  a  great  degree  of  autonomy  in  its
operations. The Reserve Bank’s functional independence on monetary and related policies is clearly
stated in Sections 10 and 35 of the South African Reserve Bank Act. Section 35 empowers the Board
of the Bank to make rules “for the good government of the Bank and the conduct of its business”. In
Section  10  the  powers  and  duties  of  the  central  bank  are  spelled  out  in  great  detail.  Most  of  the
functions described in this section are the normal functions that one would expect a central bank to
perform.  In Section 10(2) it is also clearly stated that “the rates  at  which  the  Bank  will  discount or
rediscount the various classes of bills, promissory notes and other securities, shall be determined and
announced by the Bank from time to time”, clearly giving the Bank the right to determine Bank rate in
an autonomous manner.
The personal dependence of the Reserve Bank is determined by Section 4 of  the  Act  indicating  the
conditions of appointment of the Governor, three deputy governors and other board members of the
Reserve Bank. This section clearly precludes any person actively involved in politics of becoming a
board member of the Bank. Seven of the directors, including the Governor and three deputy governors,
are appointed by the State President, while the other seven are elected by the shareholders. By means
of these appointments the government, of course, have an effective say in the policies of the Bank. The
governors  are,  however,  after  their  appointment  normally  allowed  to  operate  in  an  independent
manner.
The instrumental independence of the Reserve Bank is clearly spelled out in the Act and the Reserve
Bank is precluded in Section 13(f) of making excessive direct purchases of government stock. In this
last-mentioned section  it  is  stated  that  the  Bank  may  not  “hold  in  stocks  of  the  Government  of  the
Republic  which  have  been  acquired  directly  from  the  Treasury  by  subscription  to  new  issues,  the
conversion of existing issues or otherwise, a sum exceeding its paid-up capital and reserve fund plus
one-third  of  its  liabilities  to  the  public  in  the  Republic”.  This  section  therefore  restricts  the  direct
financing of government deficits.
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  is  also  financially  independent  from  the  government  because  of
adequate financial resources and complete control over its own budget.
Conclusion
6.
The South African Reserve Bank is therefore at present,  according  to all  distinguished  principles, a
fairly  autonomous  central  bank  and  fulfils  all  the  main  conditions  necessary  for  independence.  The
Constitution of the Republic of South Africa also formally recognises the independence of the Reserve
Bank. The Constitution namely states in Section 196 that: “The South African Reserve Bank shall, in
the  pursuit  of its  primary  objective  ....  exercise  its  powers  and  perform  its  functions  independently,
subject only to an Act of Parliament .... provided that there shall be regular consultation between the
South African Reserve Bank and the Minister responsible for national financial matters”.
5
BIS Review 34/2000
