Gill Marcus: Issues for consideration in mergers and takeovers
from a regulatory perspective
Speech by Ms Gill Marcus, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Institute for
International Research 9th Annual Conference held in Johannesburg on 18 July 2000.
 Introduction
1.
Mergers  and  acquisitions  in  the  financial  services  sector  are  receiving  a  great  deal  of  attention  at
present.  The  trend  is  toward  the  blurring  of  the  boundaries  that  separated  the  various  parts  of  the
financial sector, particularly commercial banking, investment banking and insurance. More recently,
we have been faced with the prospect of the formation of large financial conglomerates.
The ultimate objectives of a financial services institution whether it be a bank, insurance company or
securities firm, are, firstly, to be financially safe and sound; secondly, to obtain the confidence of and
show  fairness  to the users  of  its financial  services;  and,  finally,  to  be  efficient  and  effective.  These
objectives should always be consistent with the objectives of the regulatory authorities.
The objectives of the regulator are to:
• 
• 
Ensure a safe, sound and stable financial system.
Enhance the confidence of and fairness to investors, by eliminating  bad  business  practices
and ensuring healthy competition between financial institutions.
Ensure an efficient and effective financial system.
• 
It follows that the strategies adopted by banks as financial services institutions and the objectives set
by  the  regulator  have  to  be  consistent  with  each  other.  The  priorities  assigned  to  the  ultimate
objectives of a bank may, however, differ from those of the regulator. For instance, the bank may have
as its  primary  ultimate  objective  the  maximisation  of  shareholder  value,  as  measured  by  the  rate  of
return  on  equity. This  would  be in  conflict,  however,  with  regulatory  objectives  if  maximisation  of
shareholder value were to be achieved by the taking of excessive risks.
The  primary  objective  of  the  Registrar  of  Banks  and,  when  applicable,  the  Minister  of  Finance,
therefore, should be to ensure that a merger will not be detrimental to the public interest and also not
contrary to the interests of the banks concerned, their depositors or their controlling companies.
We  must  remember  that  the  responsibility  of  the  directors  is  to  act  in  the  best  interest  of  their
shareholders and, thereby,  improve  or  maintain the  wealth  of their  shareholders. The  interest  of the
public and depositors is thus not the primary concern or responsibility of the directors. It is, therefore,
imperative that the Registrar of Banks and the Minister of Finance protect the interest of depositors.
Suitable shareholders.
Adequate financial strength.
Our task, as regulators, is to ensure that, after a merger, acquisition, reconstruction or takeover, a bank
or banking group has:
• 
• 
• 
• 
We are sensitive to the fact that it  is  not  the  role  of  the  Bank  Supervision  Department  to judge  the
wisdom of management decisions and business strategies beyond ensuring that local and international
best practice regarding supervision and regulation are met.
A legal structure that is in line with the bank or banking group’s operational structure.
Management with sufficient expertise and integrity.
1
BIS Review 60/2000
Our philosophy is that market principles underlie all activities.
Regulatory concerns with regard to mergers and takeovers
2.
The  following  are  regulatory  concerns,  because  they  could  impact  on  the  stability  of  the  financial
system as a whole:
Contagion risk
2.1
In the case of a bank, contagion can best be described as the risk that a problem or problems in one or
more  associate  entities  contaminate  the  bank,  leading  to  negative  perceptions  of  the  bank.  In  some
cases, the implications could be so serious as to lead to the failure of the bank. As the potential for
contagion increases, so, too, increases the risk of individual financial failure. Although contagion risk
is extremely difficult to measure and quantify, it is a risk of which bank management constantly needs
to be aware.
Banks operate in a highly competitive environment, encouraged by the developments of new markets,
instruments and techniques. Although many of these changes provide the means of diversifying risks,
they also allow greater risks to be taken. These developments provide challenges to central banks in
attaining  the appropriate  balance  between  risk  and  stability  in  the  financial  system.  It  is  the  central
bank’s responsibility to provide a financial system in which the users of financial services can benefit
from  healthy  competition  between  financial  institutions,  but,  at  the  same  time,  to  ensure  public
confidence in the monetary system as a whole.
Systemic risk
2.2
Systemic risk is the possibility that the failure of one bank to settle net transactions with other banks
will trigger a chain reaction, depriving other banks of funds and, in turn, preventing them from closing
their positions. The consequence is frequently loss of confidence in the whole banking system.
The  effects  of  conglomeration  on  systemic  risk  may  not  be  viewed  lightly.  If  risk  is  not  managed
properly within a conglomerate, the repercussions could extend beyond a single institution and, even,
into  the  whole  financial  sector.  The  regulator’s  ability  to  monitor  and  supervise  the  group  risk-
management practices within banks and banking groups is therefore becoming increasingly important.
“Lender-of-last-resort” assistance
2.3
One of the  main  responsibilities  of  a  central  bank  is  to  prevent  financial  system  instabilities.  When
pressures  that  cannot  be  avoided  by  preventive  supervision  do  arise,  central  banks  should  try  to
contain these pressures through direct central bank intervention, acting as “lender of last resort”. This
should never be seen as an automatic facility available to all banks in distress, but should be used only
when the failure of a bank would pose a serious threat to the financial system as a whole. The primary
aim  of  the  “lender  of  last  resort”  facility  is  therefore  not  to  save  the  bank  in  distress,  but  rather  to
consider the effect that the failure might have on the system and what should be done to protect the
system from contagion.
A banking group, including the bank or banks in such a group, could also be contaminated by non-
banking activity. This could result in the central bank having to extend lender-of-last-resort assistance
to a wider range of activities. This, in turn, raises issues of competitive neutrality, since lender-of-last-
resort  assistance  is  not  made  available  to  specialist  suppliers  of  non-banking  services  provided  by
bank-based financial conglomerates.
“Too big to fail” factor
2.4
What  do  we  mean  when  we  say  a  financial  institution  is  too  big  to  fail?  This  term  might  best  be
applied to an institution that is so large that its activities make up a significant portion of a country’s
BIS Review 60/2000
2
payment  system,  credit-granting  process,  or  other  key  financial  roles.  As  a  result,  any  substantial
disruption  in  the  particular  institution’s  operations  would  be  likely  to  have  a  serious  effect  on  a
country’s financial markets, either preventing the markets from operating properly or raising questions
about their integrity. The consequence of the “too big to fail” factor is that countries extend protection
to large institutions and their customers that is not granted to others.
Although  the  new  banking  and  financial  conglomerates  may  pass  our  traditional  statutory  and
regulatory guidelines, such combinations require that we refocus our attention on a long-standing and
vexing  concern.  To  the  extent  that  institutions  become  too  big  to  fail  and  are  perceived  as  being
protected  by  implicit  guarantees,  the  consequences  may  be  serious.  Moreover,  under  these
circumstances, our current mix of market and regulatory discipline may tend to shift further away from
market discipline and, increasingly, toward regulatory discipline, resulting, perhaps, in a less efficient
industry.
Regulatory framework
3.
The regulatory framework within which supervision takes place, together with the authority, powers
and responsibilities of the regulator, is provided by:
• 
The Banks Act, 1990 (Act No. 94 of 1990 – “the Banks Act”), and the Mutual Banks Act,
1993 (Act No. 124 of 1993).
  The  Regulations  relating  to  Banks  and  the  Regulations  relating  to  Mutual  Banks  (“the
Regulations”).
The Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision (“Core Principles”).
The Banks Act
3.1
The sections of the Banks Act that have a bearing on reconstructions, mergers and acquisitions are the
following:
Section 37 – Restrictions on shareholding
In  essence,  Section  37  of  the  Banks  Act  provides  that  prior  permission  must  be  obtained  from  the
Registrar of Banks if a shareholder wishes to increase its shareholding beyond 15 percent of the voting
share capital of a bank or a bank controlling company. Permission is also required for further increases
beyond the predefined levels of 24 percent, 49 percent and 75 percent. The approval of the Minister of
Finance  must  be  obtained  for  increases  beyond  the  predefined  levels  of  49  percent  and  75  percent.
Permission for the acquisition of shares in a bank or bank controlling company is not given lightly and
is granted only if the Registrar of Banks and, when required, the Minister of Finance are satisfied that
the proposed acquisition of shares is not contrary to the public interest and is also not contrary to the
interest of the bank concerned or its depositors or the controlling company.
Section 38 – Nominee shareholdings
Essentially,  Section  38  of  the  Banks  Act  prohibits  a  bank  or  bank  controlling  company  from
registering its shares in the name of nominees. The objective is to identify the true power behind the
bank, because of the potential for the misuse of depositor funds by unscrupulous owners.
Section 42 - Restriction of right to control bank
Section  42  prohibits  a  person  other  than  a  bank,  or  an  institution  that  has  been  approved  by  the
Registrar  of  Banks,  to  exercise control  over  a  bank,  unless such  person  is  a  public  company  and  is
registered as a controlling company of such bank.
3
BIS Review 60/2000
Section 50 – Investments by controlling companies
In  terms  of  Section  50  of  the  Banks  Act,  the  aggregate  amount  of  a  bank  controlling  company’s
investments in the following may not exceed 40 percent of its capital and reserve funds:
• 
• 
Institutions that conduct business similar to the business of a bank in a country other than the
Republic of South Africa.
Undertakings other than banks.
Controlling companies.
• 
• 
It follows therefore that at least 60 percent of the bank controlling company’s capital and reserve funds
should be in banking-related business.
Companies of which the main object is the holding or development of property.
Section 54 – Mergers
Essentially,  Section  54  provides  that  no  compromise,  amalgamation  or  arrangement  that  involves  a
bank as one of the principal parties to the relevant transaction, and no arrangement for the transfer of
all or any part of the assets and liabilities of a bank to another person, shall have legal effect unless the
consent  of  the  Minister  of  Finance,  conveyed  in  writing  through  the  Registrar  of  Banks,  to  the
transaction in question has been obtained beforehand. The Minister shall not grant his consent unless
he is satisfied that:
• 
• 
• 
In the case of a transfer of assets and liabilities that entails the transfer by the transferor bank
of the whole or any part of its business as a bank, such transfer is effected to another bank or
a person approved by the Registrar.
The transaction in question will not be detrimental to the public interest.
The amalgamation is the amalgamation of banks only.
Section 55 - Reconstructions
Section  55  of the  Banks  Act  requires  that  any  reconstruction  of  companies  within  a  banking  group
requires the prior approval of the Registrar.
Section 80 – Shares in any registered insurer
Section 80 requires that no bank and no associate of a bank shall, without the prior written approval of
the  Registrar,  either  jointly  or  individually  acquire  or  hold  any  shares  in  any  registered  insurer  as
defined  in  Section  1  of  the  Insurance  Act,  1943  (Act  No.  27  of  1943),  to  the  extent  to  which  the
nominal value of those shares exceeds 49 percent of the nominal value of all the issued shares of such
insurer.
The Regulations
3.2
Regulation 36 of the Regulations deals with the information that should accompany an application for
permission to acquire subsidiaries, branch offices, other interests and representative offices of banks
and controlling companies.
Core Principles
3.3
The  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking  Supervision  were  issued  by  the  Basel  Committee  on
Banking Supervision in 1997. The particular principles that have a bearing on reconstructions, mergers
and acquisitions are the following:
BIS Review 60/2000
4
Principle 5 – Major acquisitions or investments by a bank
In terms of Principle 5, “banking supervisors must have the authority to establish criteria for reviewing
major acquisitions or investments by a bank and ensuring that corporate affiliations or structures do
not expose the bank to undue risks or hinder effective supervision”.
From a supervisory perspective, we need to determine whether the banking organisation has both the
financial and the managerial resources to fund the acquisition. We may also need to consider whether
the investment is permissible under existing banking legislations. Banking, by its nature, entails taking
a wide array of risks. We, as supervisors, need to understand these risks and need to be satisfied that
banks are adequately measuring and managing the risks.
Principle 20 – Supervision on a consolidated basis
Principle  20  states  that  “an  essential  element  of banking  supervision  is  the  ability  of  supervisors  to
supervise the banking group on a consolidated basis”.
This includes the ability to review both the banking and the non-banking activities conducted by the
banking  organisation,  either  directly  or  indirectly  (through  subsidiaries and  affiliates),  and  activities
conducted at both domestic and foreign offices. In this regard, it is important that we, as supervisors,
take into account that the non-financial activities of a bank or group may pose risks to the bank.
Principle 23 – Obligations on home-country supervisors
In terms of Principle 23, “banking supervisors must practice global consolidated supervision over their
internationally  active  banking  organisations,  adequately  monitoring  and  applying  appropriate
prudential norms to all aspects of the business conducted by these banking organisations world-wide,
primarily at their foreign branches, joint ventures and subsidiaries”.
From  the  above,  it  is  clear  that  we  should  take  responsibility  for  our  internationally  active  banking
organisations in the capacity of home-country supervisor. In  order to  assume  this  responsibility,  we
should  be  comfortable  with  the  risks  facing  these  entities  and  the  manner  in  which  these  risks  are
managed.
Regulatory principles
4.
The considerations that are taken into account by the Registrar when considering applications are the
following:
Shareholding/Ownership structure
4.1
With regard to the shareholding structure, the following aspects are of importance:
Structure
A bank must pay appropriate regard to the interests of its depositors. Therefore, no single shareholder
(or group) should be in a position to exercise undue influence over the policies and operations  of a
bank. The shareholding structure should not be a source of weakness and should minimise the risk of
contagion  from  non-bank  activities  conducted  by  shareholders  in  other  entities  within  the
conglomerate.
Transparency of legal structure
Banking  groups  vary  widely  in  terms  of  structure,  range  of  activities  and  complexity.  This  could
complicate  the  effective  supervision  of  banks  within  such  groups.  Furthermore,  users  of  banking
services must be able to make a proper assessment of the banking group’s activities and risk profile.
5
BIS Review 60/2000
Group structures
4.2
As regards group structures, the following are of importance:
Nature of business
The general philosophy behind the supervision and regulation of bank controlling companies and their
subsidiaries is to ensure that banking groups do not affiliate with companies engaged in undesirable
practices. Bank controlling companies should confine their activities to the management and control of
banks and companies engaged in activities considered to be closely related to banking.
Because  of  the  nature  of  their  business,  banks  tend  to  invest  more  in  companies  that  are  primarily
involved in financial activities. Therefore, financial activities should preferably be structured under a
bank, whereas non-financial activities are normally structured under the bank controlling company. In
the  supervision  of  financial  conglomerates,  the  primary  concerns  are  contagion,  transparency  and
autonomy.  When  liquidity  and  solvency  risks  manifest  themselves  in  any  member  of  a  group,  the
likelihood of contagion of the banks in a group is a major concern.
Pyramid structure
We are not very comfortable with pyramid structures. A pyramid structure weakens the control over a
banking  group  and  increases  the  complexity  of  the  group  structure.  The  complexity  of  a  group
structure also often reduces transparency. The enlarged group structure in a merger/acquisition should
have the fewest layers possible and should be as simple as possible. The group structure should clearly
indicate  which  shareholders  exercise  control  over  a  group  and  which  owners  have  the  financial
responsibility of providing the group with future capital.
Cross-shareholdings
Large intragroup holdings of capital increase the possibility of financial difficulties in one entity in the
group being transmitted more quickly to other entities in the group. Since intragroup capital does not
represent externally generated capital, intragroup capital should be excluded from the assessment of
group capital.
Parallel-owned banks
In the case of parallel-owned banks, a bank set up in one jurisdiction has the same ownership as a bank
in another jurisdiction, but neither of the banks is a subsidiary of the other. Normally, the controlling
companies  of  such  parallel-owned  banks  are  incorporated  in  unregulated  financial  centres.  There  is
thus a clear potential for abuse.
A working group of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision recommended that host-country or
home-country  supervisors should  be  vigilant  in  order  to  ensure  that  operations  of  this  kind  become
subject to consolidated supervision.
Shelf companies
A shelf company is a company that a bank establishes to keep on the “shelf” until such a company is
needed for a special purpose. We need to put into place procedures to close any potential supervisory
gaps.
Management structure
4.3
It is a known fact that by far the most common underlying cause for bank failure is bad management.
We  cannot  involve  ourselves  in  the  day-to-day  operational  decisions  or,  even,  strategies  of  a  bank,
since to do so would not only impair our objectivity in assessing the health of a bank, but would be too
costly  and  probably  too  restrictive.  It  follows  that  we  have  to  rely  heavily  on  the  competence  and
integrity of management. Therefore, the following aspects are of importance:
BIS Review 60/2000
6
Ability and integrity
Banks  and  banking  groups  should  be  managed  only  by  directors  and  management  with  a  proved
ability and integrity to pursue the interests of shareholders without harming the interests of depositors.
The  evaluation  of  the  competence  and  the  integrity  of  the  proposed  management  and  board  should
include  a  system  of  following  up  references,  enquiry  from  other  regulators,  accessing  publicly
available data and reportable offences.
Management should at all times put the interests of the organisation and depositors before their own
and should act in the best interest of depositors. It is important that the management of a merged entity
has the ability to identify the risks and to bed down the merger in the shortest possible time.
Experience and skills
The  proposed  management  and  directors  should  have  the  relevant  banking  experience  and  skills  to
conduct the proposed business. For example, if a bank proposes to trade in financial derivatives, the
senior  management  and  board  should  have  sufficient  specific  experience  in  the  management  of  the
risks arising from these products.
Corporate governance, audit and internal control
4.4
Aspects  relating  to  corporate  governance,  audit  and  internal  control  that  are  important  include  the
following:
Corporate governance
Corporate  governance  may  be  described  as  a  system  of  business  management  and  disclosure  of
information to stakeholders, within a paradigm of management accountability. The Bank Supervision
Department  regards  sound  corporate  governance  as  crucial.  Since  South  Africa  is  now  part  of  the
global markets, it is of the utmost importance that South African corporate-governance processes be
aligned with international trends.
After  a  merger  or  takeover,  a  banking  group  has  to  demonstrate  its  ability  to  maintain  appropriate
corporate governance, management, internal control and risk-management systems, including internal
audit and a compliance officer, in order to monitor and limit all the risk exposures of a banking group
as of the commencement of business.
The  merged  entity’s  internal  structure  should  be  sound  in  terms  of  generally  accepted  management
principles, and the proposed group structure should not be detrimental to the bank or to the effective
supervision of the bank.
Audit and internal control
Since management cannot be everywhere, management has to rely on systems of internal control to
ensure the smooth operation of a bank. It has to be possible for the Bank Supervision Department to
evaluate  these  established  controls  and  procedures  independently.  We  also  rely  on  the  independent
auditors of a bank to enhance the credibility of the qualitative and quantitative information on which
we base our opinion.
Capital
4.5
Several aspects relating to capital are relevant:
Importance of capital
Capital adequacy is a vital measure of the solvency of a banking group and a significant indicator of
the level  of  protection that  the  banking  group  has  against risks.  Ensuring  adequate  levels  of  capital
promotes public confidence in the particular banking group and the entire banking system. A merged
7
BIS Review 60/2000
entity  should  have  adequate  capital  to  meet  both  regulatory  requirements  and  its  own  internal
requirements, taking into account its risk profile.
Purposes of capital
It provides a permanent source of revenue for the shareholders and funding for the bank.
Capital serves the following four purposes:
• 
• 
• 
• 
It provides a base for further growth.
It is available to bear risk and to absorb losses.
It  gives  the  shareholders  reason  to  ensure  that  the  bank  is  managed  in  a  safe  and  sound
manner.
Capital adequacy
Minimum capital-adequacy ratios are necessary to reduce the risk of loss to depositors, creditors and
other stakeholders of a bank and to help us to pursue the overall stability of the banking system.
The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  recommends  that  supervisors  should  apply  the
minimum  capital  ratio  of  8  percent  to  all  internationally  operating  banks  on  both  a  solo  and
consolidated basis. In a merger or acquisition, any current or consequential cross-shareholding should
also be eradicated in order to avoid double counting of capital.
Availability of additional capital
We also have to assess the ability of the major shareholders of a merged entity to provide additional
capital should the bank or banking group experience financial difficulties.
Risk concentration
4.6
Safeguarding against excessive concentration of risk is one of the most important components in any
system  for  the  supervision  of  banking  groups.  Concentrations  of  risks  cannot  be  eliminated;
concentrations will arise through the specialisation of banks for reasons of competitive advantage and
expertise. The risk can and must, however, be contained by ensuring that the exposure of a bank or a
banking group is diversified.
Banks should manage their credit risk prudently to ensure that there are no undue concentrations of
risks to individual entities, associates, industries geographical areas, sectors or banking products. The
risks of a merged entity should not be more than the risks of the two stand-alone entities.
Increasing supervisory attention has to be paid to the credit exposures of the merged entity.
International standards
In  terms  of  international  standards,  a  bank  or  a  banking  group  may  not  incur  an  exposure  to  an
individual borrower or a group of closely related borrowers that exceeds 25 percent of the bank or the
banking group’s qualifying capital and reserves, and the total of all large exposures may not exceed
800 percent of qualifying capital and reserves of the bank or banking group.
Public-interest considerations
4.7
Any merger of two or more banks should be in the public interest. A proposed merger should therefore
add some depth to the local banking sector and make a worthwhile contribution to banking services
and the banking industry in South Africa.
As  mentioned  earlier,  competitive  markets  is  the  best  assurance  that  consumers  receive  the  highest
quality products at the lowest possible prices.
BIS Review 60/2000
8
In any merger of two or more banks, there are significant advantages and disadvantages which need to
be considered.
Risk-management profile
4.8
The emphasis on risk management is most critical at our largest, most sophisticated banks and most
internationally  active  banks.  Many  of  these  banks  use  advanced  economic  and  statistical  models  to
evaluate  their  market  and  credit  risks.  These  models  are  used  for  a  variety  of  purposes,  including
allocating capital on a risk-adjusted basis and pricing loans and credit guarantees.
Information technology system integration
4.9
Information technology systems should be able to provide management information that is accurate,
timeous and relevant to manage the bank’s risks. A bank’s system should be integrated, there should
be  minimal  manual  intervention,  and  the  risks  emanating  within  various  departments  or  divisions
should be consolidated in the management reports.
A  bank’s  systems  should  be  able  to  serve  the  needs  of  its  clients  adequately.  In  any  merger,  the
significant time taken to merge various systems can be seriously detrimental to the ongoing business
of the bank.
Implementation of information technology systems is one of the biggest risks for a merged entity, and
may have substantial negative impact on all stakeholders if all does not go well.
Merging of different cultures
4.10
The question of different cultures is prevalent in any merger. A “hostile” merger could increase the
difficulty of merging the cultures, especially at senior level. Perhaps the biggest mistake is to ignore
the impact  of a  merger  on  employees. Too  often,  employees  spend  more time  worrying  about  their
futures  than  they  do  serving  customers. Many  simply  leave,  taking  their  knowledge  and  experience
with them.
Competition/concentration in banking system
4.11
The issue of the optimal structure of a banking system has been much discussed in recent years within
banking, political and academic circles. The optimal structure of a banking system is discussed every
time that the possibility of a merger or a failure of banks is mentioned. Many arguments in favour of,
or against a merger between two banks can be put forward. Apart from taking these general principles
into  account  when  the  desirability  of  a  merger  is  discussed,  the  arguments,  conditions  and
considerations specific to a possible merger are just as important.
When any merger is proposed, one of the major concerns is that competitiveness of the sector could be
diminished.
Free competition within the banking system will improve the efficient allocation of resources in the
economy, thus enhancing society’s wealth and welfare. Increased competition in the banking system
may lead, for example, to undue risk taking and thus reduce stability in the banking system. On the
other hand, measures taken to increase stability in the banking system through mergers may lead to
reduced competition.
When a merger would cause a large concentration in a market that is, or becomes, highly concentrated,
we need to give special attention to the impact on  competition.  High  levels  of  concentration in  any
banking system could result in relatively high prices for banking services. It is, however, difficult to
compare  prices  before  and  after  a  merger  in  banking  because  of  other  factors  such  as  differential
central bank policy and inflationary expectations.
The banking system’s contribution to the efficient allocation of resources in the economy is reflected
by  its  managerial  ability  to  control  input  costs  (labour,  physical  capital,  deposits)  through  the
9
BIS Review 60/2000
utilisation of the returns of scale, scope and efficiency. Operating costs will eventually determine the
optimal structure of the banking system in terms of the number of banks, the size of the banks, the
number of branches of banks and possible mergers and acquisitions.
Competitive markets are our best assurance that consumers receive the highest quality products at the
lowest possible prices.
Recent developments causing banks to merge
5.
Throughout the world, banking industries are undergoing a rapid and sometimes startling process of
consolidation, spurred occasionally by hostile takeover bids, but, more often, by friendly mergers by
institutions  that  were  once  fierce  competitors.  Several  reasons  that  drive  banks  to  merge  can  be
identified:
Firstly, banks are tussling with the same technology, delivery and customer-service issues that have
become  pressing  for  major  international  banks.  Banks  are  feeling  forces  of  globalisation  and
technological change and must invest huge amounts in their own information technology systems. The
electronic  revolution  also  undermines  the  traditional  role  of  banks  as  intermediaries  between
borrowers and savers, in the process reducing banks’ profits. This, in turn, is forcing banks to cut costs
more urgently, and a merger with another bank becomes an attractive option for a bank.
Advances  in  information  technology  also  open  up  a  growing  array  of  delivery  channels.  Online
banking, in all its increasingly varied forms, is poised to become a key channel for transacting banking
business.  The  importance  of  physical  branches  in  a  cyber-world  may  decline  and  the  nature  of  the
services that branches provide will probably change. Technology is here to stay, and the challenge is
for bankers to embrace technology to their own and their customers’ advantage.
Secondly,  in  Europe,  economic,  monetary  and  financial  unity  has  implied  increased  competition
among banks and is forcing them to seek ways to cut costs and to increase market share.
Thirdly, it is believed that the banking and securities industry might in time consolidate into about 15
world  mega-firms  and  that the financial  institutions  that  do  not  merge  soon,  increase  their  size  and
obtain market share might be left in the cold.
Fourthly, it is believed that banks might become too small to compete effectively, except in niches,
either  in  terms  of  products  or  geographically.  In  several  countries,  governments  and  regulators  are
urging banks to merge not because the merger would make them better, safer or more profitable, but
because it would allow them to compete internationally with the main American and European banks.
What governments and regulators should keep in mind is that, very often, the best way to create local
banks that can compete internationally is to allow international banks to compete locally.
Fifthly, the choicest merger partners are taken up very rapidly. It is believed that if a bank does not act
soon, it might be left with an unattractive merger partner.
Disadvantages of bank mergers
6.
As long as barriers keep out international competitors, mergers may reduce competition and may hurt
consumers.
Bigger banks are not necessarily safer than smaller ones. In a report published recently by the Bank for
International  Settlements,  it  is  stated  the  current  restructuring  of  the  banking  industry  could  cause
constraints as competitive pressures interact with stubborn cost structures and heightened incentives
for risk taking. This trend is especially dangerous since bigger banks are more likely considered to be
“too big to fail”.
The international movement towards the consolidation of banking systems has held promise for more
efficient,  better  diversified  banks,  with  more  intense  competition  in  local  markets.  In  many  cases,
especially when acquirers paid a reasonable price and manage the resulting post-merger organisational
problems effectively, this promise has certainly come true. There is, however, accumulating evidence
BIS Review 60/2000
10
in surveys and empirical research that the promise has not always been fulfilled for retail customers in
local  banking  markets.  In  many  cases,  neither  greater  efficiency  nor  substantial  improvements  in
diversification appear to have been realised.
The Bank for International Settlements found, and several large banks are learning,  that  the  alleged
benefits of banks merging for reasons of profitability often prove to be illusionary. Bank profitability
has fallen in 12 countries despite a wave of consolidation, mainly because acquirers tend, on the one
hand, to overpay and, on the other hand, to underestimate organisational problems.
Lessons learnt from other mergers and takeovers
7.
Despite  the  continued  pace  of  merger  activity,  new  deals  are  meeting  with  increasing  scepticism
among investors. The reason is simple - most mergers have simply not delivered the benefits that were
promised. A study by the US Federal Reserve concluded that 50 percent of mergers by big banks in
the United States of America eroded returns, whereas only 17 percent produced positive returns.
Although  it  is  not  our  role  to  judge  the  appropriateness  of  any  particular  deal,  a  number  of  initial
lessons may be drawn. I would like to make three comments in this respect:
Improvement in profitability is not an automatic consequence of a merger
7.1
Some recent work has shown that the improvement in profitability has not necessarily been related to
size  and  that  the  definition  of  optimal  size  varies  according  to  the  type  of  institution,  activity  and
business conducted.
Beyond this observation, the restructuring can come up against significant obstacles. For example, the
compatibility  of  respective  information  systems  might  cause  specific  difficulties,  the  handling  of
which may turn out to be delicate. The increasing number of decision-making centres and structural
differences may affect the efficiency of internal control systems. Some deals have revealed problems
relating to the integration of different corporate cultures.
To be effective these deals need to be part of strategic plans
7.2
Another lesson from the American and European experience is that, from now on, credit institutions
can no longer contemplate their future without carefully thinking about the changes in their economic,
legal and financial environment.
Mergers and acquisitions will be successful when they are part of a strategy aimed at striking a balance
between the need to strengthen existing product lines (when the comparative advantage is in principle
at its greatest) and the diversification of activity, as part of medium-term plans aiming at extensively
reorganising both distribution channels and means of production.
7.3
The  emergence  of  trans-national  banking  groups  will  bring  new  risks,  requiring  closer
cooperation between national banking supervisors
Banking  supervisors  are  responsible  for  accompanying  the  restructuring  in  order  to  preserve  and
reinforce the integrity of the banking system as a whole, notably as regards, in particular, interbank
operations and payment systems. Banking supervisors must be vigilant to avoid any particular project
bringing additional risks. Risks can increase significantly should larger banks be tempted to conquer
new markets. The risk of contagion may  grow correspondingly, weakening the banking system as a
whole. It is therefore imperative that banking supervisors remain vigilant with regard to increasingly
complex operations.
Closing remarks
8.
The  reconstruction  of  a  banking  group,  or  mergers  within  a  banking  group,  or  the  acquisition  of
subsidiaries, joint ventures and branch offices by banks or their controlling companies should be in the
11
BIS Review 60/2000
interest of stability of the banking system as a whole. It must, however, be stressed that there are no
hard  and  fast  rules,  because  special  circumstances,  such  as  the  history  of  a  group  and  certain
practicalities, often necessitate a pragmatic approach.
As mentioned earlier, it is not our role, as regulators, to judge the wisdom of management decisions
and business strategies beyond ensuring that local and international best practice regarding supervision
and regulation are met.
The  restructuring  of  the  banking  industry  represents  a  challenge  for  bankers  and  for  regulators.
Besides the strengthening of supervisory arrangements, it is up to the regulators to support the wave of
restructuring by continuing to level the playing-field in the banking industry and by eliminating any
competitive distortions. This condition needs to be met for restructuring to have its full effects in terms
of economic efficiency and proper resource allocation.
BIS Review 60/2000
12
