Christian Noyer: Presentation of the European Central Bank Annual Report
Introductory statement by Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, to the
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 17 April 2000.
 It  is  my  pleasure  to present  today  the second  Annual  Report  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB).
Even though it is the second Annual Report to be drawn up under the ECB’s responsibility, it is also a
“first”  in  that  it  gives  an  account  of  the  Eurosystem’s  activities  during  the  first  year  since
responsibility  for  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  was  conferred  upon  the  Eurosystem  on
1 January 1999. Accordingly, it will come as no surprise to you that the substance of this second report
is  fundamentally  different.  The  focus  is  no  longer  on  blueprints  for  an  efficient  operational  and
institutional set-up of the Eurosystem and the European System of Central Banks (ESCB). Rather, it
comments  on  the  effective  implementation  of  instruments  and  procedures  as  well  as  on  the  actual
pursuit of the various tasks of the Eurosystem, notably the conduct of a single monetary policy for the
euro area.
Indeed, for the first time, this Annual Report gives a comprehensive account of the effective conduct
of  policies  under  the  responsibility  of  the  Eurosystem.  It  complements,  as  a  specific  instrument  of
accountability, the regular quarterly hearings before your Committee. However, at variance with this
regular dialogue, its main focus is not on topical issues, but rather on past developments. Indeed, the
Annual  Report  provides  a  comprehensive  account  to  the  European  Parliament,  as  the  only  directly
elected  European  institution,  and  to  the  other  addressees,  including  the  EU  Council,  the  European
Commission  and,  more  generally,  the  wider  public.  It  covers  the  full  range  of  activities  that  the
Eurosystem carried out in 1999 with regard to the fulfilment of the tasks assigned to it by the Treaty
establishing the European Community (the Treaty), with the maintenance of price stability within the
euro area at its core. Accordingly, the report comments in detail on the achievement of this primary
objective  and  the  monetary  policy  pursued  to  this  end  under  the  prevailing  overall  economic
conditions.  Moreover,  it  reports  quite  extensively  on  the  other  tasks  and  responsibilities  of  the
Eurosystem, for instance in the fields of payment and security settlement systems, financial stability
and prudential supervision, the preparation of the introduction of euro banknotes and the Eurosystem’s
role in European and international cooperation. We therefore hope that the Annual Report will be a
useful source of information for its readers on these and various other issues.
Review of developments in 1999 and the outlook for 2000
1.
I believe that we can justifiably look back on the first 15 months of the euro with  satisfaction. The
euro was launched successfully in January last year. The careful conceptual and technical preparatory
work conducted by the EMI and later the ECB, the national central banks and the financial institutions
of  the  euro  area  ensured  a  very  smooth  transition  to  the  new  environment  of  the  single  monetary
policy.  The  11  money  markets  of  the  countries  which  have  adopted  the  euro  from  the  outset  were
integrated into a single market right from the start. This swift adaptation to the reality of the single
currency was helped by the successful launch and operation of the TARGET payment system, which
has facilitated cross-border transactions between financial institutions across the euro area. The design
of the operational framework for the Eurosystem’s monetary policy also aided this rapid adjustment
process. The  successful launch  of  the  euro  has  also  been  evidenced  by  a  significant  acceleration  in
initiatives aimed at integrating the euro area capital markets and by a substantial deepening of these
markets during 1999 and in early 2000. Moreover, the euro has become increasingly important as an
international currency. I should like to come back to these issues in the course of this presentation.
We are particularly satisfied with the achievements of the Eurosystem’s single monetary policy thus
far. 1999 saw one of the lowest inflation rates, 1.1%, recorded in the countries of the euro area during
the past 50 years. While this was, given the lags in the transmission of monetary policy impulses, to a
1
BIS Review 35/2000
large extent a reflection of the monetary policies conducted in the run-up to Stage Three, the evolution
of all available forward-looking indicators up to now suggests that the Eurosystem has been successful
in continuing the previous policies and in maintaining a positive outlook for price stability in the euro
area. In this respect, the quantitative definition of price stability which the Governing Council already
published in late 1998 has certainly helped to anchor medium-term inflation expectations to below 2%
per year.
With  regard  to  the  Eurosystem’s  primary  objective,  the  maintenance  of  price  stability,  the  main
challenge for monetary policy is to assess the risks to price stability in the future. In this respect, the
use of a broad set of indicators, as reflected in the two pillars of the monetary policy strategy of the
Eurosystem, has successfully contributed to framing and giving an orientation to the  discussions  on
monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area.  The  Eurosystem  considers  the  experience  with  this  two-pillar
strategy to have been very positive, looking back on the first year of its operation.
The prominent role attributed to money, the first pillar, underpinned by the definition of a reference
value for the annual rate of growth of M3, has been an important signpost for the considerations and
decisions of the Governing Council, given the favourable empirical evidence that money is a leading
indicator of future price developments. Accordingly, the Governing Council confirmed in December
1999  that  it  would  continue  to  analyse  monetary  developments  against  the  reference  value  for
M3 growth of 4½%.
Similarly, the use of information from other, non-monetary indicators under the second pillar of the
monetary  policy  strategy  has  enabled  the  Governing  Council  to  cross-check  appropriately  and  to
complement  the  information  content  of  monetary  aggregates  and  to  take  into  account  relevant
information  from  various  other  sources  in  assessing  the  outlook  for  price  stability.  Given  the
uncertainty in which monetary policy operates - and this uncertainty is particularly relevant at the start
of Stage Three - the two-pillar approach is, in our view, the most appropriate way in which to exploit
the available information from both monetary and real indicators and thereby to provide a sound basis
for  monetary  policy  decisions.  Beyond  that,  this  is  probably  also  the  most  transparent  means  of
explaining these monetary policy decisions to the markets and to the public at large.
At  the  current  juncture,  the  outlook  for  the  euro  area  economy  is  very  favourable.  We  should,
however,  remember  that  the  situation  was  quite  different  at  the  start  of  Stage  Three.  The  financial
crises which occurred in several emerging market economies had significantly worsened the outlook
for economic growth in the euro area in late 1998. As the weakening outlook for economic activity
implied downside risks to price stability at a time when inflation rates were below 1%, the Governing
Council  decided  in  April  1999  to  reduce  the  ECB  interest  rates  in  a  precautionary  manner.  At  that
time, developments in M3 were only slightly above the reference value and, also taking account of the
uncertainties  related to the  analysis  of  monetary  developments  at  the  start  of  Stage  Three  of  EMU,
these developments were therefore not considered as pointing to upward risks to price stability.
In  the  following  months,  however,  the  subdued  climate  was  replaced  by  a  gradually  improving
economic  environment.  At  the  same  time,  upward  pressures  on  consumer  prices  arose,  mainly  as  a
result of the increase in import prices, driven by rising oil prices and the depreciation of the exchange
rate of the euro. In addition, the three-month average of annual M3 growth followed a gradually rising
path, approaching 6.0% as from the summer of 1999. In conjunction with strong growth of credit to
the private sector, at annual rates of around 10%, this indicated that liquidity was ample in the euro
area.  Against  this  background,  there  was  a  greater  risk  that  the  rise  in  import  prices  could  trigger
lasting effects on inflation and have an adverse impact on the outlook for price stability in the medium
term.
The Governing Council has responded to these upward risks to price stability over recent months, with
three successive increases in the ECB interest rates, which were effected in November 1999, and in
February  and  March  2000.  As  a  result  of  these  increases,  the  main  refinancing  rate  now  stands  at
3.50%, while the rates on the marginal lending facility and on the deposit facility have reached 2.50%
and 4.50% respectively. These decisions were taken in order to contain the risks to price stability in a
timely  and  pre-emptive  manner.  In  this  way,  they  have  also  contributed  to  the  achievement  of
sustainable, non-inflationary economic growth in the euro area.
BIS Review 35/2000
2
At present, the outlook for growth in the euro area is better than it has been for years. This positive
outlook can be largely attributed to the convergence process in the run-up to Stage Three of EMU, as
reflected in stable prices, a clear improvement in the public finance situation and a low level of interest
rates in the euro area.
However,  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  does  not  reflect  the  ongoing  improvement  in  the  domestic
fundamentals of the euro area economy. The depreciation of the euro in nominal effective terms over
the last months will, until reversed, put upward pressure on import prices and continue to affect the
risks to price stability.
Developments  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  thus  remain  a  concern  with  regard  to  future  price
stability. In addition, recent monetary and credit developments confirm that liquidity in the euro area
remains  ample.  In  the  light  of  the  favourable  prospects  for  economic  growth,  the  impact  of  these
developments on inflationary pressures is being monitored closely.
The Eurosystem will remain vigilant in assessing upside risks to price stability. It is in the interest of
the whole Community that, as and when required, the Eurosystem acts in a timely manner to maintain
a positive outlook for price stability and, in this way, to support lasting non-inflationary growth in the
euro area. There can be no doubt that a forward-looking monetary policy, which responds to risks to
price stability before they materialise, avoids the need for costly and painful inflation reduction at a
later stage, which would endanger the outlook for economic growth.
While  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  is  the  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to
sustaining  strong  economic  growth,  other  actors  also  need  to  play  their  part  if  we  are  to  turn  the
currently favourable prospects into a lasting period of economic growth and employment creation. In
this  respect,  the  continuation  of  moderate  wage  developments  will  be  a  crucial  factor  in  both
employment generation and the confinement of inflationary pressures.
At  the  same  time,  more  decisive  structural  reforms  in  the  euro  area  would  certainly  enhance  the
prospects for continued economic expansion. Only recently, the importance of structural reforms was
emphasised by the Lisbon European Council, the conclusions of which should be implemented in a
timely manner.
We are also encouraging governments to use the current favourable economic conditions to proceed
more  swiftly  towards  achieving  the  objectives  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  This  will  further
enhance  the  growth  prospects  of  the  euro  area  and  free  up  resources  which  could  be  used  by  the
private sector to finance new initiatives to create employment.
 Turning from the macroeconomic assessment to more technical aspects of the implementation of the
Eurosystem’s monetary policy, I should like to draw your attention to the smooth functioning of the
operational framework for monetary policy. The framework, which includes two standing facilities, a
minimum  reserves  system  with  an  averaging  provision,  and  regular  auctions  for  the  allotment  of
liquidity in the euro area, has proved to be highly efficient. It has allowed the Governing Council to
signal clearly its interest rate intentions through the rates set for the main refinancing operations. The
effectiveness of the framework has also been reflected in the low volatility of short-term interest rates
and the virtual absence of any fine-tuning operations on the part of the Eurosystem.
The  smooth  implementation  of  the  single  monetary  policy  has  been  closely  linked  to  the  rapid
transformation of national money markets into a single euro area money market. This process has been
significantly  supported  by  TARGET,  the  Trans-European  Automated  Real-time  Gross  settlement
Express Transfer system. TARGET, which is operated by the Eurosystem, commenced operations on
4 January last year and is currently the largest payment system within the EU, both in terms  of  the
value of transactions and of the volumes processed.
Any review of the first year of the Eurosystem’s operational existence would be incomplete without a
reference to the international role of the euro. During this time, the euro has assumed an increasingly
important role as an international currency, as evidenced by the strong issuance of euro-denominated
3
BIS Review 35/2000
debt securities by non-residents of the euro area. The euro has, from the very outset, been the second
most widely used currency at the international level, reflecting both the economic importance of the
euro area and the legacy of the former national currencies which it replaced.
In this context, I should like to emphasise that the development of the euro as an international currency
has been entirely determined by markets. The use of the euro by private agents both as an investment
and  financing  currency  and  as  a  payment  and  vehicle  currency  has  been  largely  supported  by  ever
more integrated, liquid and diversified euro financial markets. Moreover, the euro has benefited from
cross-border  trade,  investment  flows  and  the  overall  economic  stability  of  the  euro  area.  The
internationalisation of the euro is not an objective of ECB. However, it  is  evident  that  its  monetary
policy geared towards price stability plays an important role in inspiring investor confidence.
Comments on other activities of the Eurosystem
2.
Let me now move on to other tasks performed by the Eurosystem during 1999. In view of the broad
scope of these activities, I am only able to touch upon a few of them.
Starting with the Eurosystem’s activities in the field of prudential supervision and financial stability,
the  ECB  established,  in 1999, appropriate  channels  and  fora  for  ensuring  cooperation  with  national
supervisory  authorities.  The  main  forum  of  cooperation  in  this  regard  is  the  Banking  Supervision
Committee of the ESCB, which comprises high-ranking representatives of central banks and banking
supervisory authorities of the 15 EU Member States. The various issues dealt with included, inter alia,
an in-depth analysis of the overall soundness of and structural changes to the EU banking and financial
sector. Moreover, considerable attention was devoted to ways of further improving the effectiveness of
supervisory risk assessment systems.
As regards the  promotion  of the  smooth  functioning  of  payment  systems,  which is  a task  explicitly
entrusted to the Eurosystem by the Treaty, I should like to recall in particular the initiative taken by
the  ECB  in  September  last  year,  when it  published  a  report  on  ways  to  improve  cross-border  retail
payment systems in the euro area. The background to this initiative was the Eurosystem’s concern that
the service level, both in terms of speed of execution and of fees levied on customers, is still lagging
behind  the  expectations  of  many  European  citizens  and  businesses.  This  situation  is  clearly
unsatisfactory, since the efficient functioning of payment systems is crucial in order to reap the full
benefits of the Single Market. Therefore, the ECB decided to publish a number of objectives which the
banking and payment service industry is expected to fulfil by the time of the introduction of the euro
banknotes and coins. While the direct involvement of the Eurosystem in retail payment systems does
not seem to be justified at present, it will certainly act as a catalyst for change.
At this point, let me briefly refer to the issue of electronic money. As you are aware, the Eurosystem
has expressed several concerns from a monetary policy, payment system and prudential supervision
perspective  with  regard  to  the  draft  Directive  on the  establishment  of  electronic  money  institutions.
The support that this Committee has lent to the Eurosystem’s suggestions has indeed been appreciated.
However,  given  that  the  Directive,  in  its  final  version,  will  not  take  into  account  our  principal
concerns, the Eurosystem will remain extremely vigilant and closely monitor further developments in
this area.
The  preparation  of  the  changeover  to  euro  banknotes  and  coins,  which  will  take  place  on
1 January 2002, was another major task of the Eurosystem during 1999. In the course of the year, the
printing of a pilot series of euro banknotes was successfully completed, and it was therefore possible
to  start  production.  The  banknotes  will  be  printed  in  11  printing  works,  of  which  nine  had  already
begun production by the end of last year. Particular importance is attached to the quality management
for the euro banknotes.
In preparation for the changeover to euro cash, various measures were taken in the course of 1999 in
order to protect the euro banknotes and coins against counterfeiting. Among these measures, let me
highlight the ECB’s decision to set up a database to collect and store all technical and statistical data
on counterfeit euro banknotes and coins and to develop a counterfeit monitoring system. In addition,
the  ECB  is  liaising  with  the  European  Commission,  Europol  and  Interpol  in  order  to  ensure  an
BIS Review 35/2000
4
effective exchange of information in this regard. Finally, I should take the opportunity to inform you
that the ECB recently finalised the design and content of the EURO 2002 information campaign. You
may  be  aware  that  the  ECB  will  be  presenting  this  campaign  to  your  Committee  at  one  of  the
forthcoming meetings.
Another main area of our activities related to international cooperation. As one might expect, the ECB
closely  monitors  all  international  developments  that  may  have  a  bearing  on  the  achievement  of  its
tasks. Moreover, given the economic importance of the euro area and the euro’s role as the world’s
second  international currency,  the  ECB  is  a  major  actor  in  the  international  monetary  and  financial
system and certainly has a role to play in crucial fields such as the maintenance of financial stability
and the soundness of the global economic and monetary environment.
As a consequence, the ECB regularly participates in the meetings of various international institutions
and fora, such as the G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors, the G10, the G20 and the
newly created Financial Stability Forum. Moreover, the ECB has obtained permanent observer status
at  the  International  Monetary  Fund.  It  participates  in  all  meetings  of  the  IMF  Executive  Board  at
which issues related to euro area monetary and exchange rate policy are discussed and has established
a permanent representation in Washington D.C.
I should also point out that the ECB has started to closely follow the process of accession of new EU
Member  States.  In  this  context,  the  ECB  intends  to  maintain  close  contacts  with  the  European
Commission,  which  will  also  help  to  ensure  that  the  Eurosystem’s  views,  within  its  fields  of
competence,  are  duly  taken  into  account  during  accession  negotiations.  In  order  to  facilitate  the
adoption of EMU-related legal, operational and policy requirements, the ECB has initiated a dialogue
with the central banks of the accession countries, which was most notably reflected in the organisation
of a high-level seminar in Helsinki in November last year.
Naturally, the broad range of activities of the Eurosystem, of which I have tried to give you a concise,
albeit incomplete overview, has placed severe strains on personnel  resources.  In  order to  be  able to
cope with the increase in operational and policy competencies, the ECB had to recruit  further staff.
Having started from a level of 534 staff members at the beginning of 1999, the ECB currently employs
around 760 people. This number is set to increase to slightly above 1,000 employees by the end of the
current year. The rising staffing level has also necessitated extension of infrastructure and premises.
This brings me to the annual accounts of the ECB for 1999. I should like to report that the ECB made
an operating profit of EUR 666 million. However, the ECB was required to pay EUR 913 million to
the Eurosystem’s national central banks as remuneration for the foreign reserve assets, including gold,
which were transferred to the ECB at the beginning of 1999. Taking into account this remuneration,
the financial result of the ECB for 1999 was a loss of EUR 247 million. Detailed explanations on the
more complex factors behind this result are given in the Annual Report.
As you may be aware, the Statute of the ESCB contains precise provisions on the allocation of profits
and losses. In line with these provisions, the greater part of last  year’s loss  has been funded  by  the
national central banks of the Eurosystem.
5
BIS Review 35/2000
