T T Mboweni: Recent developments in South Africa’s financial markets
Address  by  Mr T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  Beeld/Investec
Guinness Flight Economist of the Year Banquet, held in Johannesburg, on 12 May 2000.
 Introduction
1.
The South African financial markets have been characterised by great uncertainty in the recent past,
leading  to  a  depreciation  in  the  external  value  of  the  rand,  a  decline  in  share  prices  and  a  rise  in
long-term interest rates and yields. Money market interest rates have remained relatively stable mainly
owing to the monetary policy stance adopted by the Reserve Bank. The  uncertain  conditions in  our
financial markets were to a large extent due to the strength of the United  States  dollar,  volatility  in
international  financial  markets,  changes  in  oil  prices  and  concerns  about  political  developments  in
Sub-Saharan  Africa  (SSA),  whereas  domestic  fundamental  economic  and  political  factors  remained
sound and could not be blamed for these episodes.
In my address tonight I want to discuss these developments in some detail and will concentrate on:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
the more important recent developments in the domestic financial markets;
the factors responsible for the greater uncertainty in the markets;
the underlying fundamental factors favouring strong financial markets; and
the monetary policy stance adopted by the authorities in these circumstances.
Developments in financial markets
2.
From  the  beginning  of  the  year  2000,  our  currency,  the  rand,  has  depreciated  sharply  against  the
United States dollar from a level of R6.15 to the dollar at the end of 1999 to more than R7.00 to the
dollar from  the first  week  of  May  2000. This  represents  a  depreciation  of  approximately  15%.  The
rand also depreciated considerably against the  United  Kingdom  pound  and Japanese  yen,  but faired
better  against  the  euro.  As  a  consequence,  the  weighted  average  value  of  the  rand  has  declined  by
about  7%  from  the  end  of  1999  to  11  May  2000.  This  is  nevertheless  a  significant  decrease  in  the
nominal  effective  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  which  was  well  in  excess  of  the  inflation  differential
between South Africa and its main trading partners and competitors. After adjustments for these price
differentials, the decline in the real effective exchange rate of the rand was probably between 3 and
4% in the first 4½ months of 2000.
The weakness of the rand was one of the factors responsible for a reversal in the downward movement
of  long-term  interest  rates  and  yields  in  South  Africa.  Domestic  bond  yields  moved  sharply
downwards in the last four months of 1999 as sentiment in the market for fixed interest securities was
positively  influenced  by  the  relatively  low  level  of  inflation,  the  fiscal  discipline  entrenched  in  the
budget of the government and the introduction of an inflation-targeting monetary policy framework. In
addition,  a  prominent  credit  rating  agency,  Standard  and  Poor’s,  upgraded  South  Africa’s
foreign-currency denominated debt to an investment grade in February 2000.
At the beginning of January 2000 this downward movement in the yield on government bonds came to
an end. The daily average yield on these bonds increased from a low of 13.12% on 18 January 2000 to
15.20% on 10 May 2000. The level of the yield curve shifted higher across the full maturity spectrum,
with  a  more  pronounced  upward  movement  at  the  longer  end  of  the  curve.  Despite  this  upward
movement in rates, the inflation-adjusted yield on long-term bonds rose only  marginally  because  of
the  rise  in  overall  consumer  price  inflation,  excluding  mortgage  interest  costs,  as  measured  for
metropolitan and other urban areas, the so-called CPIX (mu).
1
BIS Review 40/2000
Trading activity on the Bond Exchange of South Africa was boosted by the uncertainty in the market.
Turnover  in  the  secondary  bond  market  increased  from  an  already  high  average  quarterly  value  of
R2.2 trillion in 1999 to an all-time high of R2.8 trillion in the first quarter of 2000. In April 2000 the
value of transactions on the Bond Exchange amounted to R0.8 billion.
The  uncertainties  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  were  also  reflected  in  developments  on  the
Johannesburg Stock Exchange. The strong gains in share prices during the last three months of 1999
were followed by a consolidation phase which developed into a substantial correction in the current
year due mainly to events in the United States’ stock markets. The daily all-share price index declined
by  28%  from  a  record  level  on  17  January  2000  to  a  low  on  17  April,  i.e.  its  lowest  level  since
23 September 1999. Subsequently this index increased again by 14½% on 10 May 2000 as investors
saw increasingly good value for South African shares.
The general decline in share prices from mid-January was at first countered by increases in the share
prices of gold mines and information technology enterprises. The decline in the index at that stage was
driven by decreases in the share prices of financial institutions, non-gold-mining companies and the
industrial consumer sector. From February 2000, when the dollar price of gold fell below US$300 per
fine  ounce,  the  gold-mining  shares  declined  by  17%  up  to  the  end  of  April.  The  general  surge
internationally  in  the  share  prices  of  the  information  sector  at  first  supported  the  prices  of  these
industries  in  South  Africa,  but  information  technology  share  prices  weakened  markedly  from
mid-March.
Although  conditions  in  the  share  market  are  still  volatile,  price  movements  have  shown  a  distinct
upward trend since the middle of April 2000. The increases in share prices were discernible in most of
the main sectors. The volatility in the market was responsible for a further sharp increase in the value
of shares traded to an all-time high of R155 billion in the first quarter of 2000.
In contrast to the unstable conditions in the foreign exchange and capital markets, interest rates in the
money  market  were  largely  unchanged.  For  example,  the  bankers’  acceptance  rate  fluctuated  in  a
narrow range of between 9.83% and 9.92% from the beginning of March, while the rate on interbank
funds remained constant at a level of 9.5%. The stability in the money market can mainly be ascribed
to the monetary policy stance that the Reserve Bank pursued.
Factors responsible for uncertainties in markets
3.
The factors responsible for the uncertain conditions in our financial markets arose mainly outside the
borders  of  our  country  and  were  largely  related  to  perceptions  about  the  effect  on  South  Africa  of
developments in neighbouring countries as well as the strength of the US dollar. In the past week, I
have visited London and Basel. In the process, I met market participants in London and my colleagues
in the Central Banking fraternity at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel. Again and again, it
was  emphasised  that  political  conflicts  in  Sub-Saharan  Africa  were  harming  investor  sentiments,
which were not doing South Africa and the region any good at all. One person even referred to what
he called “the depressingly present African psychological factor”. Sentiment is an important ingredient
in  market  decisions  and  public  authorities  must  take  cognisance  of  this.  It  is  clear  therefore  that
conflicts  in  Sierra  Leone,  Ethiopia/Eritrea,  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo,  Angola  and  the
management of the land question in Zimbabwe have had a major impact on our financial markets. In
this connection, and in order to remove any doubts about South Africa’s position, the President of the
Republic  has  committed  South  Africa  to  supporting  the  peaceful  resolution  of  these  conflicts  and
lawful processes of land reform. He further assured everyone that South Africa’s land question will be
resolved through an orderly legal and constitutional process. And indeed this is how things should be
in open and democratic societies.
At  the  same  time,  our  foreign  exchange  and  capital  markets  were  also  seriously  affected  by  the
strength of the US dollar. The dollar has in particular strengthened considerably against the euro. From
the  beginning  of  the  year  up  to  11  May  2000,  the  euro  has  depreciated  by  about  10%  against  the
dollar.  The  dollar  has  also  been  exceptionally  strong  against  the  currencies  of  Eastern  Europe,
Australia and some of the Latin American countries. This strength of the dollar and the exceptionally
BIS Review 40/2000
2
high  and  sustained  economic  growth  in  the  United  States,  led  to  large  foreign  investments  in  that
country.  In  particular,  long-term  investments  from  Europe  and  Japan  contributed  to  the  continued
economic recovery in the United States.
Taking these circumstances into consideration, it is not surprising that non-residents became large net
sellers of South African bonds. After having been net investors in South African bonds to the tune of
R16.5 billion from the beginning of 1999 until the end of January 2000, non-residents’  net  sales  of
bonds amounted to R13.4 billion up to 10 May 2000. However, the greater proportion of these sales
were  financed  in  the  market  for  repurchase  transactions,  indicating  that  they  do  not  only  reflect
disinvestment by non-residents. The change in investor sentiment was echoed in the eurorand market
where the net proceeds of rand-denominated bonds issued by non-resident entities also reverted to net
redemptions  of  R0.5  billion  in  the  first  quarter  of  2000.  These  net  sales  of  bonds  by  non-residents
contributed in a significant manner to the depreciation of the rand.
Non-residents  generally  remained  net  purchasers  of  shares  on  the  Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange,
amounting  to  R40.6  billion  in  1999.  The  net  purchases  of  shares  by  non-residents  then  declined
considerably from nearly R7 billion in the fourth quarter of 1999 to R0.6 billion in the first quarter of
2000, before increasing again by R3.4 billion up to 10 May. These  purchases  continued  despite  the
reduced  South  African  weights  in  world  equity  indices  and  the  negative  market  sentiments  about
political  developments  referred  to  above.  The  continued  attractiveness  of  South  African  shares  is
related, amongst other things, to the sound economic fundamentals in the country.
Fundamental economic factors
4.
One of the most important factors that foreign investors take into consideration in their evaluation of
investment  in  a  specific  country  is  how  appropriately  the  currency  of  a  country  is  valued.  Any
suspicion that the currency is over-valued tends to be an important deterrent to the inflow of capital.
The nominal trade-weighted value of the rand has declined by 28% from 1995 to 1999, or on average
by about 7% per year. This depreciation exceeded the inflation differential between South Africa and
its main trading partners and competitive countries. In real terms, the average weighted value of the
rand has therefore declined by about 15% over the past four years. A part of these adjustments in the
real value of the rand reflected a worsening in the South African terms of trade and reduced import
protection  and  export  subsidisation.  In  September  1994  the  import  surcharge  was  lifted,  from  1995
exchange  controls  were  relaxed,  in  mid-1996  the  government’s  commitment  to  stepwise  tariff
reductions  was  announced  and  in  July  1997  the  General  Export  Incentive  Scheme  was  abolished.
Taking  these  developments  into  consideration,  as  well  as  the  continued  good  performance  of
manufactured exports, it can still be concluded  that the  rand  is  competitively  priced  and should  not
really be prone to a sharp correction on a trade-weighted basis.
This conclusion is also confirmed by South Africa’s healthy overall balance of payments position. The
deficit on the current account of the balance of payments amounted to a low of ½% of gross domestic
product in 1999. Moreover, trade figures for the first quarter of 2000 indicate that the current account
deficit has probably improved somewhat in the first quarter of 2000. Despite the substantial increase in
international  oil  prices  and  a  recovery  in  the  domestic  economy,  the  current  account  deficit  has
therefore  been  maintained  at  low  levels.  This  was  mainly  due  to  a  strong  export  performance.  The
favourable growth prospects for the world economy suggest that the demand for South African exports
should remain buoyant.
In addition to the low current account deficit, South Africa is attracting considerable funds from other
countries.  In  1999  the  net  inflow  of  capital  in  South  Africa  exceeded  R27  billion  and  direct
investments  of  non-residents  came  to  R8.4  billion.  Preliminary  information  for  the  first  quarter  of
2000  indicate  that  non-residents’  net  sales  on  the  Bond  Exchange  were  more  than  offset  by  other
capital  inflows  and  that  a  further  net  inflow  of  capital  was  recorded.  This  is  substantiated  by  an
increase in the gross foreign reserves of the Reserve Bank of nearly R5 billion from the end of 1999 to
the  end  of  April  2000  and  a  considerable  decline  in  the  foreign  loan  commitments  of  the  Reserve
Bank.
3
BIS Review 40/2000
The underlying soundness of the South African economy is confirmed by many other developments.
For  instance,  the  economy  has  moved  into  a  recovery  phase,  with  growth  in  real  gross  domestic
product  reaching  a  seasonally  adjusted  annualised  rate  of  3½%  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  1999.  This
growth  also  became  more  widespread.  Initially  it  was  mainly  concentrated  in  the  agricultural  and
tertiary sectors. In the second half of 1999 growth was recorded in nearly all the major sectors of the
economy.
Inflationary  pressures  were  well  contained  in  an  environment  of  rising  fuel  and  food  prices.  Large
productivity increases combined with a lower rate of increase in the earnings of workers brought the
growth  in  nominal  unit  labour  costs  down  to  a  level  of  only  3.5%  in  1999.  Growth  in  the  money
supply  and  bank  credit  extension  remained  subdued  and  there  are  no  signs  of  excessive  demand
pressures.
In addition, the fiscal picture is sound, with government expenditure concentrating on the social and
other needs of the community, and considerable effort being made to improve tax administration. The
discipline applied in expenditure allocations and the progress made with revenue collection, resulted in
a decline in the public sector borrowing requirement from 5.8% in the fiscal year 1994/95 to 1.7% in
the first nine months of the fiscal year 1999/2000.
Notwithstanding  all  these  positive  developments,  employment  creation  has  been  disappointing.
Considerable  effort  will  have  to  be  made  in  the  coming  years  to  address  this  serious  problem,  by
amongst others, driving through the process of the restructuring of state assets and the productive side
of the economy.
Monetary policy
5.
From the middle of January 2000 the Reserve Bank managed the daily liquidity requirement in such a
way that the repurchase rate remained at a level of 11.75%. As already indicated this led to relatively
stable money market interest rates in a climate of general uncertainty in the foreign exchange market
and in the domestic capital markets.
The question may be asked whether this was the right policy stance. Shouldn’t the Reserve Bank have
taken more restrictive measures to relieve the pressures on the exchange rate of the rand? Obviously
there may be different views on the stance adopted by the Reserve Bank. In the Bank we reasoned that
a monetary tightening would have been the wrong response to date. Although consumer price inflation
increased  moderately  towards  the  end  of  1999  and  during  the  first  three  months  of  2000,  this  was
mainly due to exceptional circumstances and there is little reason to expect that inflation may get out
of hand. In fact, economic fundamentals indicate a continued decline in the targeted inflation rate over
the medium to longer term.
In  these  circumstances,  it  is  important  for  the  Reserve  Bank  not  to  overreact  to  exchange  rate
weakness. Too quick a tightening of monetary policy could endanger the growth prospects of South
Africa and encourage an outflow of capital. This would put greater and more lasting pressure on the
exchange rate of the rand with important consequences for inflation. Besides, if the factors responsible
for the weakness in the exchange rate are taken into consideration it seems unlikely that a tightening of
monetary policy would have the desired effect of more stability in the foreign exchange market.
The  policy  stance  adopted  by  the  authorities  does  not  imply  that  the  value  of  the  exchange  rate  is
regarded as unimportant when setting monetary policy. On the contrary, the impact of exchange rate
changes  on  inflation  is  carefully  taken  into  account  when  managing  domestic  liquidity  and
determining  the  repo  rate.  If  signs  do  emerge  of  increased  inflationary  pressures  arising  from  a
depreciation of the exchange rate of the rand, the Reserve Bank will not hesitate to take appropriate
measures.
BIS Review 40/2000
4
Conclusion
6.
The  domestic  financial  markets  have  adjusted  in  a  mature  manner  to  the  rise  in  oil  prices,  adverse
developments in other parts of Sub-Saharan Africa, the strength of the dollar and heightened volatility
in  international  financial  markets  during  the  first  four  months  of  2000.  Had  the  Reserve  Bank
attempted  to  intervene  in  the  currency  market  in  order  to  slow  the  process  of  adjustment  to  these
events, the success of the intervention would have probably been thwarted if only by the strength of
the  dollar.  Moreover,  such  intervention  may  well  have  exacerbated  the  downward  pressure  on  the
value  of  the  rand.  The  Bank  accordingly  has  rather  attempted  to  maintain  stability  in  the  domestic
money  market.  In  view  of  the  sound  underlying  economic  conditions  in  the  country,  we  are  of  the
opinion  that  this  is  the  correct  approach  to  follow  and  should  eventually  lead  to  stable  market
conditions at the least cost to the country. The Bank will nevertheless carefully monitor any further
developments in the financial markets.
“We are indeed living in challenging times!”
5
BIS Review 40/2000
