Svein Gjedrem: Developments in the Nordic financial industry -
a central banker’s perspective
Address  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  the  Norges  Bank,  at  the  Nordic  Financial  Services
Conference, held in Stockholm, on 18 September 2000.
 Introduction
1.
What is the future of the Nordic financial services industry? Who are the winners in the consolidation
process? What is the potential of e-business and the Internet?
This  is  just  a  sample  of  the  important  and  challenging  questions  that  will  be  discussed  at  this
conference. Fortunately, it is the task of my fellow speakers - and not mine - to try to answer them.
Given  their  background  as  significant  market  participants,  I  am  sure  that  they  will  provide  us  with
some valuable insights.
Today, most central banks follow structural developments in the financial sector from the  sidelines.
This has not always been the case. The post-war period was characterised by heavy regulation. The
domestic authorities controlled market prices, financial flows and the structure of the financial sector.
There  was  little  foreign  influence.  Gradually,  markets  were  deregulated  and  became  more
internationally integrated. The central banks’ main instrument is now the setting of interest rates. The
main objectives of central banks have stayed the same: monetary and financial stability.
Although deregulation is now completed in the industrialised countries, its full impact on the financial
structure  remains  to  be  seen.  In  addition,  technological  developments,  internationalisation  and
increased focus on shareholder value are creating pressures for structural change.
Together, these forces are reducing the cost of providing traditional financial services and are paving
the way for new ways to channel savings and manage risks.
Structural developments in the financial sector can be important for monetary and financial stability.
Central bankers thus follow developments with great interest. Today I will examine some aspects of
the changes taking place and their potential consequences for monetary and financial stability.
Let me run through the structure of my speech. First, I’d like to touch upon some characteristics of the
Nordic  economies  as a  background to  the  financial sector  issues  I  will  discuss  later.  Second,  I  will
define the two stability terms that I have just introduced. Third, I will discuss the growing importance
of  securities  markets.  I  will  then  reflect  upon  cross-border  integration  in  the  banking  sector  and
consequences of the Internet. Finally, I will take a quick look at what challenges structural changes
may pose to the authorities, and then conclude.
Some characteristics of the Nordic economies
2.
The economies of the four largest Nordic countries  have  some  well-known  features  that distinguish
them from most other developed countries.
1
BIS Review 78/2000
For  a  start,  they  all  have  fairly  large  public  sectors,  as  illustrated  by  the  level  of  public  sector
employment.  Compared  with  Anglo-Saxon  countries,  the  differences  are  striking.  The  large  public
sectors are the result of a deliberate choice to ensure equal access to certain services like health care.
The  emphasis  on  equality  and  social  security  also  underlies  the  “cradle  to  grave”  public  welfare
systems in the Nordic countries. These systems require large public transfers.
Both  the  large  public  sectors  and  the  high  level  of  transfers  necessitate  a  high  level  of  taxes.  In
addition, the tax systems have been focused on redistributing income.
Another  Nordic  feature  is  the  high  share  of  labour  union  membership.  Wage  negotiations  have
traditionally been rather centralised and income is fairly equally distributed.
BIS Review 78/2000
2
There is a risk that these features of the Nordic societies weaken both incentives and competition. In
that sense, the Nordic countries clash with the “Anglo-Saxon model”. However, both the standard of
living and other general indicators of well-being are at the top internationally. Hence these countries
must  also  possess  growth-enhancing  characteristics.  The  most  important  is  probably  their  openness
both to trade and the exchange of know-how. We also like to think that the traditional working ethic of
the  Nordic  people  is  still  in  place  and  plays  an  important  role.  Nordic  enterprises  have  shown
flexibility  in  adapting  to  a  changing  market  and  technological  conditions.  The  restructuring  of  the
financial industry is a relevant example.
There are also differences between the Nordic economies. One such area is industry structure.
Sweden  and  Finland  both  have  relatively  large  manufacturing  sectors.  They  have  some  major
industrial and technological “locomotives”, in addition to a pool of small companies. Several of these
are suppliers to the larger companies.
Denmark has many small and medium-sized enterprises. Perhaps due to location and transport links,
Denmark is a centre for trade and the location for the Nordic headquarters of a number of international
companies. The Norwegian enterprise sector, on the other hand, is heavily influenced by our natural
resources.
3
BIS Review 78/2000
Monetary and financial stability
3.
I would now like to address the key objectives of most central banks: monetary and financial stability.
What do these two terms mean?
Monetary  stability  is  interpreted  somewhat  differently  in  various  countries.  The  most  common
definition is price stability - that is to say the stability of the internal value of money. Sometimes it is
interpreted as exchange rate stability - in other words the stability of the external value of domestic
money.
Finland, Sweden and Norway all experienced severe banking crises in the early 1990s. Most people in
these  countries  have  a  clear  idea  of  what  a  financial  crisis  is.  In  a  sense,  financial  stability  is  the
absence  of  financial  crises.  A  robust  financial  system  has  solid  cushions  that  reduce  the  risk  of
problems spreading from one institution or market to other institutions or markets, or across borders.
This risk constitutes a systemic risk, which is the risk of failure of the financial system.
Disturbances that might develop into a systemic risk can be transmitted through financial institutions
and financial markets. Robust institutions and stable markets are thus important.  Robust institutions
are  solid  institutions  that  enjoy  general  confidence.  Stable  markets  are  markets  where  there  are  no
“excessive” price variations.
Banks  are  in  a  special  position.  They  transform  short-term  deposits  into  long-term  loans.  They  are
responsible for payment settlements, and bank deposits serve as a means of payment. The volume of
amounts outstanding in the interbank market is sizeable. As a result, problems in one bank may rapidly
spread to other banks. The financial  strength  of  banks  is thus important for financial  stability,  even
more so in countries where banks are the main financial intermediaries.
Long-term  profitability  has  a  decisive  influence  on  financial  strength.  Obviously,  there  are  many
factors that can influence the future profitability of banks. The topics you will discuss during these two
days are of great importance.
Financial unrest spreads through payment and settlement systems. These systems can also be a source
of risk. This occurs when banks credit customers before they have received settlement from the payer
bank. Payment and settlement systems must thus be designed to reduce settlement risk. This is an issue
high on the agenda of most central banks.
Interdependence of monetary and financial stability
The objectives of monetary stability and financial stability are interdependent. High - and thereby in
practice varying - inflation and unstable exchange rates can threaten financial stability through several
channels.
First,  it  is  more  difficult  to  assess  the  risk  of  an  investment  project.  Inflation  makes  it  difficult  to
differentiate between a change in prices for goods or service and a change in the overall price level. It
makes it more difficult to determine the discount rate to be applied.
Second, fluctuations in the inflation rate are often accompanied by interest rate variations. A sharp rise
in  interest  rates  can  also  result  in  substantial  losses  on  financial  assets  such  as  bonds  and  equities.
Loans that have been granted against collateral in the form of such assets are even more exposed to
losses.
When  rising  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  necessitate  a  substantial  tightening  of  monetary
policy, a crisis may ensue. In several countries the financial system has been on the verge of collapse
during such a period of adjustment. This was the case in the US in the early 1980s and in the Nordic
countries around 1990.
Interest rates are the central banks’ most “direct” tool for contributing to both monetary and financial
stability. Financial stability primarily contributes to price and exchange rate stability by facilitating the
use of policy instruments for monetary stability purposes. Unstable institutions and markets constrain
the  use  of  interest  rates.  Tighter  liquidity  and  higher  interest  rates  may  increase  the  uncertainty
concerning the stability of the financial system.
BIS Review 78/2000
4
This  suggests  that  situations  may  occur  where  there  is a  conflict  between  the  two  objectives.  Asset
prices are an important link between monetary and financial stability. For example, a surge in property
prices, with a risk of a subsequent fall, may threaten to undermine banks’ collateral and increase loan
losses. This can put financial stability at risk. A surge in asset prices without accompanying pressures
on prices for goods and services raises a dilemma for central banks. There is no consensus on how to
handle this dilemma.  Central  banks  have  avoided targeting  specific asset  price levels.  Nevertheless,
history  provides  some  examples  of  when  more  emphasis  might  have  been  placed  on  asset  price
developments in the formulation of monetary policy.1
Structural changes in the financial sector have the strongest impact on monetary stability through the
way it may alter the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. For example, if structural changes
increase competition in the banking sector, banks may adjust their retail interest rates more rapidly in
response to changes in central bank and money  market rates. This means that monetary policy  may
influence savings and investment decisions more quickly.
Finland is part of the euro area;
Denmark is a member of ERM II;
Sveriges Riksbank targets inflation;
whereas Norges Bank focuses on long-term exchange rate stability.
The four largest Nordic countries have chosen different monetary policy regimes:
• 
• 
• 
• 
I want to emphasise that the objectives of monetary and financial stability can be achieved by different
regimes,  including  the  ones  chosen  by  the  Nordic  countries.  Denmark  has  for  several  years  run  a
successful fixed exchange rate regime. Denmark’s success must be seen in the light of a combination
of factors. First, ERM membership and Denmark’s long-term commitment to a stable exchange rate
have enhanced confidence in the current regime. Second, fiscal policy has successfully supported the
fixed exchange rate. For many other countries with less economic policy discipline, traditional fixed
exchange rate regimes have proved fatal. Internationally, there is a tendency of a shift away from the
traditional  fixed  exchange  rate  regime.  Countries  that  place  overriding  emphasis  on  exchange  rate
stability must bind themselves more firmly to the mast either by establishing a currency board or by
abandoning  their  national  currency.  Other  countries  allow  their  currency  to  float  and  establish  a
nominal anchor such as an inflation target.
The growing importance of securities markets
4.
Let  me  now  turn  to  an  important  structural  development  in  the  financial  sector:  the  growing
importance of securities markets.
1
Japan in the late 1980s has been mentioned as one example. Cf. Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler: Monetary policy and
asset price volatility, and Yamaguchi, Yutaka: Asset price and monetary policy: Japan’s experience, in New challenges
for monetary policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (1999).
5
BIS Review 78/2000
Chart 5 Swedish households’ gross
financial assets by instrument. Per cent
In most developed countries, securities markets are growing at the expense of financial intermediation.
In  the  Nordic  countries,  this  trend  is  most  obvious  in  the  savings  market.  Sweden  is  an  example.
Deposit savings have been reduced, whereas savings directly or indirectly in securities markets have
increased. This affects banks’ earnings and funding structure. The trend is similar in Norway.
In the euro area, there has been a sharp growth in issues of private securities after the introduction of
the single currency. This growth was to some extent expected, as the common currency creates a huge
investor base for security lending. One particular factor that contributed to the strong growth was the
considerable  number  of  business  takeovers  and  mergers  in  1999,  perhaps  influenced  by  the  euro.
Securities are a common form of financing such operations. A growing number of small, higher risk
companies could also make use of this market.
In  general, the euro is having  a  considerable  influence  on  the  development  of  securities  markets  in
Europe.  A  number  of  factors  are  improving  market  liquidity  and  efficiency,  for  example  the
elimination of exchange rate risk, greater price transparency, harmonisation  of  market  practices  and
changes in market infrastructure.
BIS Review 78/2000
6
In most European countries, credit has traditionally been channelled through financial intermediaries
such  as  banks.  The  structure  is  different  in  the  US,  where  the  securities  markets  are  larger  and  the
banking sector is smaller.
Among the Nordic countries, Finland has the largest stock market capitalisation relative to GDP. This
is mainly due to one company, Nokia. Sweden also has a comparatively large stock market. This can
perhaps be seen in connection with the structure of the enterprise sector in Sweden, which has been
dominated by some very large, export-oriented companies. This economic structure might also have
contributed to the development of Sweden’s relatively large and internationally active banks. Denmark
and Sweden have relatively large debt securities markets. This is mainly related to house financing.
Larger and more efficient  securities  markets  -  both  in  equities  and  debt instruments  -  provide  more
financing alternatives for companies and investment alternatives for savers. Companies financed in the
securities  markets  are  continuously  monitored  through  a  transparent  process.  Well-functioning
securities  markets  may  thus  increase  the  profitability  of  capital  and  hence  economic  growth,  by
making  sure  that  capital  is  allocated  to  the  best  new  investment  projects  and  by  facilitating  the
restructuring  of  existing  companies.  In  other  words:  competition  for  capital  contributes  to  creative
destruction.
In  my  opinion,  larger  and  more  efficient  securities  markets  will  also  reduce  the  risk  of  financial
instability.  Let  me  give  you  a  recent  example.  The  Long  Term  Capital  Management  crisis  in  1998
showed that banks and securities markets can complement one another in crisis situations. During the
crisis, the market for securities with credit risk dried up for a short period. Banks then increased their
lending, and thereby averted a more extensive shortage of credit. More frequently, financing through
securities markets has been used as a substitute for bank loans in the event of banking problems. The
goal of financial stability thus implies both well-functioning banks and securities markets. The optimal
balance between the two is difficult to define, but in most countries - including the Nordic countries -
the financial system would be more robust with larger, more developed securities markets than is the
case today. This could also enhance the growth prospects of the respective economies.
Developments in the banking sector
5.
Having discussed the relationship between banks and securities markets, I would now like to turn to
developments within the banking sector.
Competition  in  the  banking  markets  is  increasing.  Banks  face  competition  from  other  banks  and
financial institutions. As mentioned, there is also  increasing  competition from  securities  markets  on
both sides of the balance sheet. In addition, new operators are entering the market, either on their own
7
BIS Review 78/2000
or in cooperation with existing market operators. Distribution of financial services on the Internet is
one example. Joint ventures between supermarkets and banks is another.
Unless  the  banks  adapt  to  this  new  environment,  their  long-term  profitability  might  suffer.  The
restructuring  of  the  banking  industry  can  be  viewed  as  an  attempt  to  respond  to  these  competitive
pressures.
Cross-border integration
5.1
In the last few years we have experienced a wave of mergers and acquisitions in the financial industry.
Internationally,  consolidation  within  countries  has  been  predominant.  This  indicates  that  reducing
costs and strengthening market position are often the preferred strategies. However, the development
of “national champions” might be a run-up to increased cross-border activity.
The Nordic and Benelux countries are important exceptions to this international trend. The five largest
Nordic  banking  groups  -  MeritaNordbanken  and  Unibank  -  which  are  now  part  of  Nordic  Baltic
Holding - Handelsbanken, FöreningsSparbanken, Den Danske Bank and SEB - all define the Nordic
region  as  their  home  market.  They  have  established  branches,  cooperations  and  merged  with  or
acquired institutions in other Nordic countries. Some of them also focus on other countries in Northern
Europe,  such  as  the  Baltic  states,  Poland  and  Germany.  However,  their  business  strategies  vary
somewhat.
What  is the  reason behind this  Nordic  expansion?  It  is  easy  to  point to integrated  markets,  through
trade  and  direct  investment.  However,  this  cannot  be  the  only  explanation  as  there  are  also  other
neighbouring  countries  in  Europe  that  are  closely  integrated.  A  common  history,  small  cultural
differences  and  similar  languages  -  at  least  within  the  Scandinavian  countries  -  are  probably  of
particular importance to Nordic integration.
There  are  also  more  industry-specific  explanations.  Strategic  positioning  -  perhaps  as  a  defensive
measure against competition from non-Nordic institutions - is one explanation. It could also be that
Nordic  expansion  is  just  a  first  step  towards  further  international  expansion,  perhaps  in  selected
market segments. I’m sure there are people in the audience who are better qualified to predict future
developments than I am. I will instead focus on another important issue: production costs and the size
of markets.
Geographic expansion gives institutions an opportunity to sell existing products to new customers in
new markets. As a result, the institutions can spread their costs over a larger customer base. However,
one may question whether regional or national markets or even the Nordic market - at least in some
product  segments  -  are  large  enough  to  give  the  institutions’  production  activity  the  necessary  size.
BIS Review 78/2000
8
This  raises  the  question  of  whether  to  separate  production  and  distribution.  Many  institutions,
particularly  smaller  ones,  may  find  it  beneficial  to  distribute  other  companies’  products.  Different
cooperation agreements make it possible for small players to offer a broader product range than they
would have been able to on their own. We have seen several examples of this in Norway, particularly
among  savings  banks.  At  the  same  time,  some  larger  institutions  may  benefit  from  offering  their
products for distribution through other institutions.
This may contribute to keeping Nordic banks - both large and small - competitive in the retail market.
In the segment of large enterprises, however, production and distribution are perhaps more difficult to
separate. This may imply that many Nordic banks are too small to compete for the business of large
and advanced customers. Competition in this segment is perhaps more international than Nordic.
How does cross-border integration change the risk outlook for the financial system? If it improves the
long-term  profitability,  and  thus  the  robustness  of  institutions, it  is  clearly  advantageous.  Spreading
production  costs  over  a  larger  customer  base  may  improve  profits.  In  addition,  cross-border
competition might lead to efficiency gains and a spillover of best practices. However, there are also
counter-arguments. For example, increasing the size of operations may reduce management focus.
In  general,  more  integrated  financial  markets  can  spread  financial  unrest  between  countries  more
easily. This could have a negative effect on financial stability. On the other hand, banks with activities
in several countries should be in a stronger position to cope with a recession or a crisis situation in a
given  country  than  banks  whose  activity  is  confined  to  one  single  country.  This  is  positive  from  a
financial stability point of view.
The Internet as a distribution channel for financial services
5.2
Let me now turn to the impact of the Internet on the banking and financial services industry.
The  Internet  creates  new  opportunities  for  traditional  banks.  For  example,  banks  should  be  well
positioned to become key operators in trading on the Internet. They have a large customer base and
strong brand names, and can offer payment transmission services, advertising space and links on their
home  pages.  Internationally,  many  banks  have  agreements  with  Internet  or  telecommunication
companies for the development of Internet banking and marketplaces on the Internet. This is probably
just the beginning of a trend towards increased cooperation across industry boundaries.
The Internet poses great challenges as well. It is clearly intensifying competition in the industry. This
is partly because it is easier for customers to compare prices and terms and partly because it is simpler
for  new  operators  to  penetrate  the  market.  The  Internet  may  also  change  the  relative  positions  of
existing market participants.
Many Nordic banks have established some form of Internet banking. So far, most services offered on
the Internet are relatively simple, for example loan applications, bill payments and account transfers.
These are probably the most important services for the majority of customers. Several banks also offer
trading  in  shares  and  fund  units  on  the  Internet.  The  product  range  and  user-friendliness  can  be
expected to increase in the period ahead. I’m sure discussions during this conference will give you an
indication of future product developments.
9
BIS Review 78/2000
Nordic countries rank at the top globally in terms of access to the Internet. Nordic banks thus have a
unique opportunity to serve a substantial share of customers via the Internet. This also has relevance to
cross-border integration. Banks that focus on Internet distribution are perhaps particularly interested in
markets where there are many Internet users.
Although estimates vary, it is safe to say that the Internet will significantly reduce the banks’ variable
costs.  However,  substantial  IT  investments  may  be  necessary  to  keep  pace  with  technological  and
market developments. In isolation, this may contribute to increasing banks’ fixed costs.
As  a  result,  the  competitive  environment  may  change.  There  is  a  danger  of  over-investment.  Sunk
costs  account  for  a  large  share  of  overall  costs.  This  may  lead  to  marginal  pricing  as  the  fight  for
volume intensifies. This could have a negative effect on bank profitability.
Many  Nordic  banks  have  a  smaller  customer  base  for  distributing  fixed  costs  than  large  foreign
competitors.  As  mentioned,  some  banks  have  tried  to  compensate  by  entering  into  cooperation
agreements. However, it might be difficult to reduce total costs without a substantial reduction in the
costs of more traditional distribution. Banks are thus facing a challenge with regard to a further scaling
back of the physical distribution network.
In general, financial institutions are facing considerable challenges in adapting to new technologies,
intensified  competition and  globalisation.  Substantial investments  will  probably  be  required  to  keep
them  competitive.  Both  management  and  employees  will  have  to  devote  considerable  attention  to
these aspects. The wrong solution or approach could weaken banks’ competitive position, profitability
and  financial  strength.  This  may  also  have  negative  implications  for  financial  stability.  However,  I
don’t  want  to  give  you  the  impression  it’s  all  doom  and  gloom.  New  technologies  offer  great
opportunities for streamlining operations and improving efficiency. There should also be new business
opportunities.  Although  the  financial  sector  is  undergoing  fundamental  changes,  competent  market
participants should have every opportunity to thrive in a changing environment.
Consequences for the authorities
6.
Developments in the financial sector also pose challenges for the authorities. Let me give you a few
examples.
The  growth  of  complex  financial  conglomerates  represents  considerable  challenges  for  supervision
and  crisis resolution. The international trend  towards  one national supervisory  authority  is  probably
advantageous in this respect. The Nordic countries have led the way here.
The growth of institutions with a significant presence in several countries has increased the need for
cooperation between the authorities of different countries. Bilateral and multilateral memorandums of
BIS Review 78/2000
10
understanding are an important tool in this respect. The Nordic supervisory authorities have recently
signed a joint memorandum of understanding.
The  activities  of  central  banks  are  also  influenced.  If  systemically  important  domestic  institutions
expand abroad, central banks - with responsibility for financial stability - will have to assess the risks
involved. In addition, structural changes also influence central banks’ role as “lender of last resort”.
Although structural changes alter the risk profile of the financial system, they shouldn’t be viewed as
negative.  On  the  contrary,  these  changes  may  be  necessary  to  reap  the  benefits  of  more  efficient
intermediation  of  savings  and  better  risk  management.  Changes  are  thus  something  the  authorities
should  facilitate  and  adapt  to  -  through  high  quality  supervision  and  surveillance  and  through
regulatory  changes  if  necessary.  Currently  a  variety  of  regulatory  initiatives  are  being  discussed.
Important  examples  are  the  EU  Financial  Services  Action  Plan,  the  revision  of  the  Basel  Capital
Accord,  and  the  different  initiatives  gathered  under  the  heading  of  “New  Financial  Architecture”.
However,  as  the  current  wave  of  consolidation  progresses,  the  authorities  must  take  the  necessary
steps  to  ensure  an  adequate  level  of  competition.  While  executing  this  task,  the  authorities  should
recognise that the competitive environment of the financial sector has changed and will continue to do
so.
Furthermore, it is important that the market surveillance function is improved. Increased transparency
and harmonisation of regulation and industry practices are particularly important in this respect.
However,  enhanced  supervision,  international  cooperation  and  regulatory  changes  are  not  enough.
Improving institutions’ own risk management systems is a key challenge. It is vital that these systems
develop as the structure and activities of institutions change.
Conclusion
7.
Finally, I would like to make a few concluding remarks. Finland, Sweden and Norway all experienced
a severe banking crisis in the early 1990s. That taught us how costly financial crises can be, and how
important it is to prevent their recurrence.
In the last 20 years three-quarters of IMF member countries have experienced a banking crisis. Not
even  a  perfectly  healthy  macroeconomic  policy  and  an  effective  supervisory  system  constitute  a
guarantee against crises if participants in the financial sector behave imprudently. The most important
preventive measure is thus to promote prudent behaviour. The authorities will contribute to this end.
However, I would like to emphasise that responsibility for sound practices primarily rests with market
participants themselves.
Banks are at the core of the financial system, and will probably remain so in the foreseeable future.
However,  they  face  increasing  competition  from  several  quarters.  Unless  banks  adapt  to  this  new
environment, their profitability and financial strength might suffer and they may be tempted to engage
in unhealthy risk taking. The authorities should look at the restructuring of the banking industry with
an  open  mind.  Structural  changes  may  be  necessary  to  reap  the  benefits  of  factors  such  as  new
technology and globalisation.
11
BIS Review 78/2000
