Villy Bergström: The role of the Riksbank in Swedish society
Speech  by  Mr  Villy  Bergström,  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Fristående  Sparbankers
Förbundsstömma, held in Stenungssund, on 22 May 2000.
 In my speech today I would like to concentrate on the role of the Riksbank in Swedish society. I am
going to begin by trying to clarify the sometimes exaggerated idea about the meaning of the Riksbank
having an independent position in relation to our democratically elected representatives. Later in my
speech, I will take up issues relating to the Riksbank’s role in reducing the risk for financial crises and
the important function of the bank system.
The duties of the Riksbank
The  Riksbank  is  an  authority  subject  to  the  Riksdag.  The  areas  of  responsibility  that  have  been
delegated to us in one way or another involve ensuring that our money plays its part well in society. In
order for a modern economy to function efficiently, there must be access to money that is accepted by
everyone as a means of payment. It must also be possible to make payments for the enormous flows of
goods  and  services  in  a  developed  economy  in  a  secure  and  efficient  way.  Last  but  not  least,  it  is
important that the country’s currency functions as a store of value, a demand that is met if inflation is
low and predictable. Stable prices reduce uncertainty when agreements about future payments are to
be concluded, for instance pay agreements. Another benefit that is usually emphasised is that stable
prices  do  not  create  the  same  arbitrariness  in  income  distribution  between  savers  and  borrowers  as
high inflation does.
By ensuring that our money fulfils its functions, the Riksbank makes its best contribution to citizens’
welfare. This is the ultimate  objective  of  all economic  policy  and  monetary  policy  is  no  exception.
When  the  value  of  money  and  financial  stability  are  maintained,  we  contribute  to  creating  good
conditions for growth, which is usually considered to be an important part of welfare. However, the
funds the Riksbank has at its disposal cannot affect productivity growth in the long run. As there is
considerable  agreement  that  it  is  neither  possible  nor  desirable  to  use  regulations  as  a  normal
component  of  policy,  changes  of  the  shortest  interest  rate  are  normally  the  monetary  policy  tool
available to the Riksbank.
Our tasks have been formulated as follows; the Riksbank shall (1) maintain price stability, (2) promote
a safe and efficient payment system and (3) be responsible for the supply of banknotes and coins.
The core activity that the Riksbank is responsible for is stated and regulated in the Riksbank Act. A
new act came into force on 1 January 1999 and was occasioned by the demands made on the conduct
of monetary policy according to the so-called Maastricht Treaty.
The Riksbank in a democracy
When  Sweden  became  a  member  of  the  European  Union  and  the  Government  signed  the  so-called
Maastricht Treaty, this entailed, among other things, acceptance of the requirement that the Riksbank
was to have an independent position in relation to the Government and the Riksdag. However, many
regarded  it  as  a  controversial  demand,  not  least  in  the  Swedish  trade  union  movement  and  within
social  democracy.  It  is  hardly  surprising  that  there  were  strong  reactions  in  many  places  as  an
independent central bank is a quite new and unfamiliar element in Swedish public administration. It
meant that the conduct of monetary policy should be delegated to an authority that was only restricted
by  legislation. This  procedure can  be  most  closely  compared  with  the  independent  interpretation  of
laws by the courts.
1
BIS Review 44/2000
However, on closer inspection of the content of the new law and the practice established since then, it
can  probably  be  said  that  the  reactions  and  concerns  were  exaggerated.  Mention  is  often  made  in
general discussion of, for instance, “the independence of the Riksbank”, which may call to mind an
organisation that can carry out its policy wholly without control and parliamentary supervision. In fact,
in my view, what is involved is rather more a sensible arrangement, where the objective of monetary
policy, stable prices, has been established by law. In addition, the Act states that the Riksbank, without
prejudice  to  the  objective  of  price  stability,  shall  support  general  economic  policy  with  a  view  to
achieving  sustainable  growth  and  high  employment.  Furthermore,  when  the  new  Act  was  passed,
responsibility for general issues relating to foreign exchange policy was transferred from the Riksbank
to  the  Government  It  is  thus  the  Government  that  is  to  decide  on  the  krona’s  relationship  to  other
currencies.  This  means,  for  instance,  that  it  is  the  Government  that  shall  decide  whether  and  when
Sweden shall apply for participation in the European exchange rate mechanism, ERM2. However, the
Riksbank is responsible for setting the exchange rate at which the linkage shall be made in this case
and the width of the band in which the krona shall be allowed to vary. In practice, it is reasonable to
assume that this takes  place  in  consultation  with  the  Government,  not  least  because  Sweden  cannot
decide on this unilaterally.
Control is exercised in various ways to ensure that monetary policy is conducted in accordance with
the law and the intentions of the democratically appointed government authorities. What is involved
therefore is not at all complete independence. The Government authorities naturally exercise control of
how the Riksbank performs its work.
We on the Executive Board of the Bank have also responded to the consequences of this independence
by the way in which we have organised the monetary policy decision-making process. I shall here deal
briefly with the government authorities’ control of the Riksbank and the bank management’s response
to increased independence.
The control of the Riksbank by the government authorities
The government authorities exercise control of the Riksbank in at least four different ways:
1. 
The Riksbank is an authority subject to the Riksdag. The Bank was previously controlled by
the  Riksdag’s  standing  committee,  the  Governing  Board.  In  the  new  organisation  which
started on 1 January 1999, the Governing Council appoints the six members of the Executive
Board,  the  Governor  and  the  five  Deputy  Governors.  However,  these  appointments  take
place for different periods of time. This means that the Governing Council renews a mandate
or  appoints  a  new  Deputy  Governor  each  year.  In  this  way,  the  Riksdag’s  committee,  the
Governing  Council,  can  indicate  discontent  with  the  policy  carried  out  by  the  Riksbank’s
Executive Board each year.
2. 
3. 
4. 
The Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Governing Council take part as a rule in Executive
Board meetings. They have a right to speak but not the right to vote or make proposals. In
this way, these persons have a complete insight into the Riksbank’s work and can assess the
quality of the Executive Board’s work.
Twice  a  year,  the  Governor  of  the  Riksbank  and  sometimes  another  Executive  Board
member appear before the Riksdag’s Standing Committee on Finance to give a report on the
policy of the Riksbank. This  takes  place in  connection  with  a  written  report  on the  policy
carried out and the current state of the Swedish economy.
Finally, it is important to remember that the assignment to the Riksbank is given in the form
of an ordinary law. It is inter alia formulated that the Riksbank shall maintain stable prices.
This  means  that  the  Riksdag  can  at  any  time  reformulate  the  task  of  the  Riksbank  in  an
ordinary  law.  The  EU  Treaty  sets  limits,  however,  as  to  how  the  assignment  can  be
formulated.
BIS Review 44/2000
2
The bank management’s reaction to independence
When the new Executive Board met before the New Year in 1999 to draw up policy for independence,
the  starting  point  was  that  the  Bank  was  to  work  in  conditions  of  complete  openness.  A  very
substantial openness is required for the Riksbank’s monetary policy to obtain public confidence and
for the approach to an inflation target to be completely understood. This has been our lodestar when
planning our work.
1. 
The Riksbank’s target for stable prices is given as 2% inflation measured by the consumer
price index with a tolerance interval of 1% in each direction. When we consider that the CPI
has been affected by factors that do not permanently affect the CPI, we can, however, decide
to  disregard  these.  The  reason  is  that  if  we  try  to  counteract  these,  it  would  lead  to
unnecessary fluctuations in production.
2. 
3. 
4. 
The underlying material for the monetary policy decisions is published. Four times a year the
Riksbank produces a so-called inflation report. This is a detailed account of the state of the
Swedish economy, which leads to an assessment of inflation in the coming two years. These
assessments  are  based  on  the  development  of  GDP,  investments,  consumption,  public
expenditure, the  central  government  budget  balance,  foreign  trade  and  various  prices.  The
forecast horizon is adapted to the time period  that “the  Riksbank’s  weapon”,  the  so-called
repo rate, has an effect on the economy.
The morning after the Executive Board has made an interest rate decision, which normally
takes place 6-8 times a year, the decision is published with a motivation in a press release.
The Governor of the Riksbank, the Executive Board member responsible for preparing the
monetary  policy  decisions  and  some  of  the  Bank’s  economists  also  take  part  in  a  press
conference and answer questions when decisions have been made to change interest rates or
when the so-called inflation report is published.
A  few  weeks  after  the  Executive  Board  has  had  a  monetary  policy  meeting,  minutes  are
published from the Executive Board meeting where the submissions made by the different
Board members are presented anonymously but where any reservations against the inflation
report and/or majority decisions on the interest rate are reported stating names.
The Riksbank, together with the Bank of England, has a distinctive position among central banks with
regard to openness. In this respect the Bank of England has shown the way for the Riksbank. I dare
say that the Swedish general public know more about the Riksbank’s monetary policy now than when
it was controlled by elected politicians. And this is how it has to be. As I said before, openness is a
prerequisite for independence.
Sometimes,  I  come  across  fantastic  ideas  about  the  Bank’s  independence,  but  when  I  explain  the
situation, I often meet understanding for the Riksbank’s new position.
What I have talked about primarily concerns how we handle the duty to maintain price stability. The
changes that took place at the beginning of 1999 were, as I said earlier, occasioned by the demands
made  by  the  Maastricht  Treaty  on  the  monetary  policy  decision-making  process,  which  made
necessary a new Riksbank Act. The Riksbank’s conduct of monetary policy is also what usually gives
rise to discussion. As long as the payment systems function, financial stability is not threatened and
access to cash means of payment is good, there is no reason on the part of the general public and the
media to focus attention on this issue. The Riksbank will only be called to account if problems arise,
although the Bank devotes considerable resources to these areas under normal conditions too.
The Riksbank is responsible for the supply of cash
For about a year now, an independent subsidiary, PSAB, Pengar i Sverige AB, has been responsible
for the operational cash management in Sweden. The Riksbank still has overall responsibility for cash
supply, of course, but we now exercise this largely by carrying out supervision of PSAB.
3
BIS Review 44/2000
Financial stability leads to a secure payment system
An important component of the Riksbank’s task of promoting a secure and efficient payment system is
to monitor and evaluate developments in the bank system. Since the banks have a key role in provision
of banknotes and payment services to the general public, it is important that their activities function
well. A prerequisite for this is that financial stability is not threatened. Unlike many other countries,
the  Swedish  central  bank  does  not  have  the  role  of  supervisory  authority.  Here  instead  there  is  a
special authority, Finansinspektionen (the financial supervisory authority), that bears the responsibility
of  supervising  the  individual  institutions  while  the  Riksbank  focuses  its  supervision  on  detecting
systemic risks.
The Riksbank has decided to act with the same openness and clarity as regards the responsibility for a
secure efficient payment system that characterises the monetary policy decision-making process. An
important component of this strategy is the production and publication of a report on financial stability
a couple of  times  a  year. This report  goes systematically  through  the risk  factors that  could lead  to
major imbalances being created in the financial systems so  that financial stability  is threatened in a
broad  sense.  Since  the  Swedish  bank  system  is  concentrated  in  four  major  banks  which  have  large
exposures  to  one  another,  problems  in  one  bank  can  rapidly  spread  to  the  entire  bank  system.  By
pointing  out  the  risks  that  the  Riksbank  sees  and  publishing  our  assessments,  it  is  probable  that
conduct that could otherwise lead to systemic risks can be prevented. Openness can thereby be said to
constitute  a  means  in  our  monitoring  of  the  payment  system.  This  also  applies  to  monetary  policy,
where openness and clarity do not only have the function of creating understanding for the inflation
target but also probably affect and stabilise inflation expectations in the economy.
Stable prices reduce the risk of financial crises?
An issue that is highly relevant for the Riksbank is the extent to which monetary policy focused on
price stability reduces the risk for the incidence of financial crises. An  economic  policy  focused  on
price  stability  is considered to create  the  basis  for  macroeconomic  balance.  The  financial  crises  we
have seen to date have often been preceded by periods of strong credit expansion and building-up of
macroeconomic imbalances. Increasing asset prices have also commonly preceded a crisis. Borrowers
as  well  as  banks  seem  often  to  have  based  their  decisions  on  loans  and  lending  on  expectations  of
continued high asset prices and that the growth in wealth that rising share and property prices give rise
to would be permanent. When these expectations subsequently prove to have been exaggerated, this
initiates a process that in some cases has led to financial crises in the bank system.
The development in the U.S. economy has brought up the risk that financial imbalances can develop
despite stable prices and balanced government finances. As we know, demand and growth have been
high there for many years without inflation accelerating. Demand has been stimulated by high share
prices and the private sector’s financial balance has decreased markedly.
The  strong  credit  expansion that  preceded the  bank  crises in  Sweden  at the  beginning  of  the  1990s
took place at the same time as a strong increase in private consumption and investments, which led to
an  increasing  deficit  in  the  balance  of  trade,  considerable  overheating  and  high  inflation  in  the
Swedish economy. It is reasonable to assume that a large expansion in credit would create inflationary
pressure  now  as  well  that  would  motivate  restrictions  in  monetary  policy.  In  this  way,  the  credit
expansion should be dampened and the risk for problems in the bank system reduced. On the  other
hand, it cannot be excluded that situations will arise with strong credit expansion, for instance based
on  increasing  asset  prices  without  an  increase  in  inflation  being  anticipated.  Strong  international
competition combined with low, stable inflation expectations could possibly mean that inflation would
not accelerate despite increased use of resources. It is also possible to conceive of situations  with a
credit expansion driven by high turnover on the asset markets. It is thus far from self-evident that a
monetary policy based on stable prices would automatically be a guarantee against financial crises.
These are questions to which there are no certain answers although they are discussed and investigated
internationally as well as in Sweden. Purely hypothetically it is conceivable that the Riksbank would
increase  interest  rates  even  if  we  regard  it  as  most  probable  that  the  inflation  target  would  not  be
BIS Review 44/2000
4
threatened. In this case, the motivation would be that we make the assessment that the credit expansion
in the bank system risks threatening the stability of the system, for instance in the event of a large fall
in asset prices. An interest rate decision of this kind could probably also be motivated by the risk of
strongly falling inflation if the risk scenario is realised. In practice, it is probably only in retrospect
that it can be noted that financial assets and liabilities that have been built up have been an expression
for serious financial imbalances.
It is therefore normal that the interest rate weapon is only used if the inflation target is threatened.
The pressure for change creates challenges for banks and authorities
It is evident from everything that I have said that there are no sharp boundaries between the various
areas of responsibility of the Riksbank. The Riksbank’s analysis of the development of the banks also
serves as a basis for our assessments of stable prices  and  financial stability.  For  instance,  structural
changes in the financial markets probably affect the impact of interest rates on  the  economy,  at  the
same time as they change the risks banking activities are associated with.
As this meeting has been arranged by the National Association of Independent Savings Banks, I think
it is appropriate to highlight some development tendencies that entail major challenges for the banks
and the Riksbank.
Globalisation, deregulation and technical development have changed and will change the conditions
for  traditional  bank  activities.  The  role  of  the  banks  has  primarily  been  to  act  as  an  intermediary
between  savers  and  borrowers  and  to  make  available  payment  services  linked  to  liquid  deposit
accounts. Characteristic for a traditional bank portfolio is that lending is long or medium-term while
the bank’s deposits are quite liquid. This has, of course, meant that the banks have assumed a credit
and term risk.
Developments in recent decades have meant that competing alternatives have arisen to banks for both
lenders and depositors. The base that has made up the foundation for the growth in profits of the banks
has  therefore  tended  to  shrink.  There  have,  for  instance,  been  increased  opportunities  for  big
companies  with  credit  risks  that  can  easily  be  valued  to  use  the  security  market  to  finance  their
investments. At the same time, households have obtained considerably more alternatives to invest their
savings in and during recent years an increasing number of Swedish households have opted to invest
their savings in shares and share funds.
Deregulated financial markets have also entailed that price fluctuations in various financial assets and
also in properties seem to have increased. At the same time, an increasing proportion of lending by the
banks is to smaller enterprises and households, where the possibility of evaluating the credit risk in a
traditional way is poorer than for large companies. Altogether therefore considerably higher demands
are made on the banks’ risk management systems than previously. Major investments in knowledge on
modern financial economy and IT-based risk systems are required for instance. This development is
taking place at the same time as increased competition is tending to squeeze profits and information
technology is changing the conditions for provision of payment services.
When traditional bank activities shrink and change, the direction of activities has to be reviewed. The
banks can for instance opt to take part in the provision of capital in the securities market and generate
profits by charging fees for this activity. One strategy may be to offer businesses and private persons
all financial services such as advice, insurance and payment services. In order to be competitive, larger
banks are then often required, which is a driving force behind the increased frequency of bank mergers
and mergers between banks and insurance companies taking place.
Another alternative is of course to concentrate activities and become competitive within a particular
niche. Small and medium-sized enterprises need for instance to have access to capital via banks which
are able to obtain knowledge on the risks associated with lending to these. The possibility of turning to
the  securities  market  to  have  their  need  of  capital  satisfied  should  above  all  be  confined  to  large
businesses. The savings banks with their strong local implantation and closeness to and knowledge of
5
BIS Review 44/2000
customers should be able to play an important role here. Detailed personal knowledge is an unbeatable
weapon in competition.
In conclusion
With  my  speech,  I  have  wished  to  contribute  to  increasing  understanding  of  and  support  for  the
objectives and tasks delegated to us who have been appointed to manage the Riksbank. I believe it is
particularly  important  to  create  clarity  in  the  sometimes  exaggerated  view  of  the  import  of  the
Riksbank’s independent position. It is my definite view, given the control the government authorities
have over the Riksbank and the openness that characterises our activity, that the demands made in a
democracy on an authority responsible for a branch of economic policy are well satisfied.
BIS Review 44/2000
6
