European Central Bank: Press Conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement given by Mr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank,
and Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Press  Conference  held  in
Frankfurt, on 8 June 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are here to report on the outcome of today’s meetings
of the General Council and the Governing Council of the ECB.
The Governing Council took the following monetary policy decisions:
1. 
The  interest  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations  of  the  Eurosystem  will  be  raised  by
0.50 percentage point to 4.25% and applied in the two operations (which will be conducted
as fixed rate tenders) to be settled on 15 and 21 June 2000.
2. 
3. 
4. 
The interest rate on the marginal lending facility will be raised by 0.50 percentage point to
5.25%, with effect from 9 June 2000.
The interest rate on the deposit facility will be raised by 0.50 percentage point to 3.25%, with
effect from 9 June 2000.
Starting from the operation to be settled on 28 June 2000, the main refinancing operations of
the Eurosystem will be conducted as variable rate tenders, applying the multiple rate auction
procedure.  The  Governing  Council  has  decided  to  set  a  minimum  bid  rate  for  these
operations equal to 4.25%. This is the same rate as that which will prevail for the two fixed
rate tenders to be implemented following today’s decision.
Let me start by commenting on the reasons for this rise in interest rates, before the Vice-President says
a few words about the move to a variable rate tender procedure.
Over recent months the risks to price stability in the medium term have clearly continued to increase.
This assessment has been supported by the information from both the first pillar and the second pillar
of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy. With regard to the first pillar, strong growth of money
and credit throughout 1999 and the pronounced  expansion  of  money  and  credit  aggregates  over  the
first four months of 2000 have strengthened the view that liquidity conditions are ample. As for the
second pillar, in a phase of strong growth upward risks to price stability currently relate mainly to the
spillover of rising import prices to consumer prices, owing both to the lagged effects of the exchange
rate depreciation and to rising oil prices. In fact, most inflation forecasts have been revised upwards
over recent months. This is a matter of concern. Today’s increase in ECB interest rates is a decisive
step  to  address  these  upside  risks  to  price  stability  and  it  will  contribute  to  the  continuation  of
non-inflationary growth in the euro area.
Allow me to give you a more detailed overview of the main elements of our assessment of monetary,
financial market and other economic developments.
Let me start by addressing the latest monetary developments in the euro area. The three-month average
of  the  annual  growth  rates  of  M3,  covering  the  period  from  February  to  April  2000,  was  6.3%,
ie significantly  above  the  reference  value  of  4½%.  Thus,  the  most  recent  M3  data  confirm  that  the
liquidity  situation  in  the  euro  area  continues  to  be  very  generous.  M3  growth  deviated  from  the
reference value in 1999 and growth rates increased further in early 2000. This picture of very generous
liquidity conditions in the euro area is complemented by the rapid expansion of credit to the private
sector,  which  remained  close  to  or  above  10%  throughout  1999  and  exceeded  11%  in  April  2000.
Taken  together,  such  developments  would  clearly  point  to  upside  risks  to  price  stability  over  the
medium term, if not counteracted in time.
1
BIS Review 48/2000
Turning to the second pillar, we have to consider economic and financial market developments as well
as consumer price developments.
Looking at economic developments, the outlook for growth in the euro area has improved markedly
over the past few months. Overall, indicators for economic activity released since the end of last year
point to continued strong growth, following the upturn in real GDP growth in the second half of 1999.
All  the  forecasts  currently  available  from  major  international  organisations  and  private  institutions
now project real GDP growth to be above 3% this year and next year, which is significantly higher
than expected at the end of last year. This positive outlook reflects favourable domestic and external
conditions for growth. On the domestic side, expansion of private consumption and investment should
benefit,  in  particular,  from  ongoing  employment  growth  and  higher  rates  of  capacity  utilisation.
Domestic demand is also supported by high business and consumer confidence. On the external side,
the upturn of growth in the world economy appears to be stronger, faster and more broadly based than
was expected at the end of last year. Hence, euro area exports should remain strong.
Financial market developments also support the view that the economic expansion in the euro area is
set to continue at a fast pace. Moreover, the exchange rate of the euro appreciated at the end of May
and  in  the  first  few  days  of  June,  also  reflecting  expectations  that  robust  economic  growth  will
continue in the euro area. Notwithstanding the recent appreciation of the euro, the extent and duration
of its previous depreciation will still exert upward pressure on consumer prices.
Against  this  background,  the  outlook  for  consumer  price  developments  had  become  less  favourable
prior to today’s meeting. In April 2000 inflation - as measured by the Harmonised Index of Consumer
Prices (HICP)  - was 1.9%, following 2.1% in March. In the immediate future, the strong rise in oil
prices in  May  2000  is  pointing  to  renewed  short-term  upward  pressures.  Looking  further  ahead,  all
available forecasts for consumer price inflation for this year and next are now higher than they were at
the end of 1999. Current projections of a rate of inflation of around 2% in 2000 and 2001 are clear
warning signals.
In conclusion, with today’s decisions the Governing Council has acted in a forward-looking manner in
order  to  contribute  to  the  maintenance  of  favourable  conditions  for  a  lasting,  non-inflationary
economic  expansion.  This  should  help  other  economic  actors  to  rely  firmly  on  the  maintenance  of
price stability in the medium term. They are also called upon to contribute to price stability and growth
by means of appropriate wage settlements compatible with employment growth, structural reform and
fiscal  consolidation.  At  the  current  juncture,  they  are  especially  encouraged  to  press  ahead  with
structural reform, and governments are particularly urged to avoid a pro-cyclical loosening of fiscal
policies. This is particularly important in those countries where there is a risk of overheating.
Let me now give the floor to the Vice-President to say a few words about the decision to implement a
variable rate tender procedure as from the main refinancing operation to be settled on 28 June 2000.
The  switch  to  variable  rate  tenders  in  the  main  refinancing  operations  is  not  intended  as  a  further
change in the monetary policy stance of the Eurosystem. The new tender mechanism is a response to
the severe overbidding which has developed in the context of the current fixed rate tender procedure.
For the purpose of signalling the monetary policy stance, the minimum bid rate is designed to play the
role performed, until now, by the rate in fixed rate tenders. This change does not in any way rule out
the option that, in the future, the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem may be conducted in
principle  as  fixed  rate  tenders.  A  press  release  setting  out  a  comprehensive  description  of  the  new
tender procedure will be issued during the course of next week.
Turning to today’s other meeting, the General Council considered public finance developments in the
EU. The General Council also carried out its first annual review of the functioning of the ERM II, in
accordance with Article 16 of the ERM II Agreement.
Finally, let me draw your attention to the calendar for meetings of the Governing Council and General
Council in 2001. A separate press release listing  the dates  as  well  as  the  related dates for the  press
conferences will be made available to you this afternoon. In this context, I should also like to point out
that the press conference previously announced for 3 August 2000 has been cancelled.
BIS Review 48/2000
2
