Willem F Duisenberg: Economic and monetary developments
and other activities of the Eurosystem
Introductory statement delivered by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank,
at a hearing  before the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European  Parliament,
Brussels, on 12 September 2000.
 Today we shall continue our regular exchange of views on monetary policy and other activities of the
Eurosystem. I am glad to see that since our last meeting on 20 June the prospects for economic growth
in  the  euro  area  have  remained  very  favourable.  At  the  same  time,  upward  pressures  on  prices  had
emerged  which  needed  to  be  addressed  by  the  ECB  in  a  timely  manner  and  led  to  the  decision  on
31 August  to  increase  the  ECB  interest  rates  by  25  basis  points.  I  shall  start  my  remarks  by
commenting in detail on this step and on our assessment of the monetary and economic developments
in the euro area which underpinned our decision. Subsequently I shall address  some  other issues  of
topical interest, namely the preparation of the euro cash changeover, the current efforts to improve the
availability of statistical data in the EU and the role of the ECB in the oversight of payment systems. I
shall then be happy to answer your questions.
Economic and monetary developments
1.
Turning to the ECB’s decision to increase the ECB interest rates by 25 basis points on 31 August, I
should like to start my explanations by pointing out that, prior to the interest rate hike, upside risks to
price stability were evident from both pillars of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy.
Starting  with  the  first  pillar,  some  moderation  in  the  evolution  of  monetary  aggregates  has  been
gradually detectable over  recent  months.  This  could  be  related  to  the  increase in short-term  interest
rates in the euro area over the course of this year, which has had a dampening effect on the demand for
the  most  liquid  components  of  M3,  namely  those  included  in  M1  (currency  in  circulation  and
overnight deposits, both of which bear little or no remuneration). However, in spite of the deceleration
observed  recently,  M3  growth  has  remained  above  the  reference  value.  This,  in  part,  reflects  the
relatively strong increase in nominal GDP in the euro area. Furthermore, in order to assess the overall
liquidity situation in the euro area, we have to acknowledge that, owing to the protracted deviation of
M3 growth from the reference value which has occurred since the start of Stage Three of EMU, the
actual level of the stock of M3 is much higher than the level implied by the reference value. Therefore,
as also evidenced by the continued strong demand for credit in the private sector, liquidity in the euro
area continued to be ample until the early summer. Particularly in a phase of robust economic growth,
the continuation of ample liquidity conditions would constitute a risk to price stability.
As regards the information provided under the second pillar, the favourable picture of the economic
outlook of the euro area which we saw in June has been confirmed over the past few  months. This
applies in particular to the prospects for strong growth.
On the basis of available short-term indicators, euro area real GDP growth in the first half of this year,
compared  to the  second  half  of  1999,  can  be  expected  to  amount  to  around  3.5%  on  an  annualised
basis. This underpins the projections of strong growth of above 3% for this year and the coming two
years as contained in currently available forecasts. If anything, projections have been revised upwards
slightly in the past few months, reflecting the favourable conditions for domestic and external demand.
On  the  domestic side,  growth  should  continue  to  benefit  from  the  high  overall  level  of  confidence,
with  indicators  being  close  to  their  respective  record  highs.  Investment  growth  can  be  expected  to
remain strong on account of moderate wage developments and a high degree of capacity utilisation.
Growth of private consumption should also remain robust, supported in particular by ongoing strong
employment growth and a concomitant steady fall in unemployment. On the external side, the factors
1
BIS Review 73/2000
supporting  growth  are  the  ongoing  strong  expansion  of  the  global  economy  and  the  past  gains  in
competitiveness of the  euro  area,  reflecting  the  decline  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro.  Given  the
strength of the conjunctural indicators for domestic demand and exports, euro area growth this year
could turn out to be even stronger than anticipated in June.
Bond markets also continued to point to favourable prospects for economic growth in the euro area in
the period ahead. While the yield curve has flattened somewhat during the course of this year, this has
been  a  consequence  of  the  increase  in  ECB  interest  rates.  By  contrast,  long-term  bond  yields  have
been broadly stable this year, indicating continued financial market expectations of robust economic
growth in the future.
Turning  to  other  indicators  related  to  the  second  pillar,  developments  in  import  prices  have  clearly
been less favourable than expected in June 2000. As a consequence, July 2000 annual consumer price
inflation,  as  measured  by  HICP  increases,  stood at  2.4%.  This  was  above  the  level  which  the  ECB
regards as being compatible with price stability. At this juncture, the upward movement of consumer
price inflation mainly reflects the impact of oil prices on the energy price component of the HICP and
the  growing  pressures  on  prices  stemming  from  the  depreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro.
Overall, due to both oil prices and the exchange rate, consumer price inflation in the euro area is likely
to remain above 2% for some months to come.
Monetary policy cannot offset such short-term pressures on the HICP. However, it needs to make sure
that temporary deviations from the ECB’s definition of price stability do not spill over into long-term
inflation expectations, and to ensure that they do indeed remain temporary. In this sense, it is crucial to
make  sure  that  short-term  upward  pressures  from  import  prices  do  not  lead  to  a  more  protracted
increase in the HICP in a period of strong economic growth.
In  view  of  this  situation,  in  which  both  pillars  of  the  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  ECB  were
pointing to upward risks to price stability, the Governing Council of the ECB decided on 31 August to
increase  the  minimum  bid  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations  of  the  Eurosystem  by  25  basis
points, to 4.50%. The interest rates on the marginal lending and deposit facilities were also increased
by 25 basis points, to 5.50% and 3.50% respectively.
The change in the procedure for the allotment of liquidity in the main refinancing operations of the
Eurosystem, which I mentioned at our last meeting on 20 June, has proven to be very satisfactory. As
you may recall, the Governing Council decided on 8 June that, starting with the operation to be settled
on 28 June, the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem would be conducted as variable rate
tenders  with  a  minimum  bid  rate.  In  this  procedure,  the  minimum  bid  rate  took  over  the  role
previously performed by the rate in fixed rate tenders in signalling the monetary policy stance of the
Governing Council. Our current assessment is that market participants adapted smoothly to the new
procedure, and that the procedure has served its purpose very well.
The Governing Council will remain alert to all emerging risks to price stability. The maintenance of
price stability will continue to contribute to a favourable environment for growth. However, it cannot
increase  the  growth  potential  of  the  euro  area.  It  is  the  responsibility  of  other  actors  to  create  the
necessary conditions for sustained high growth in the euro area.
First,  favourable  wage  developments  will  be  one  key  factor  to  ensure  the  continuation  of  robust
economic growth and the reduction in unemployment in the medium term. In this respect, it is crucial
that forthcoming wage settlements be based on the ECB’s definition of price stability. Any attempt to
increase  wages  in  reaction  to  recent  oil  price  increases  would  be  highly  detrimental  to  the  current
favourable growth process, since monetary policy would need to react to the resulting upward pressure
on prices. It is a matter of fact that recent oil price increases have deteriorated the terms of trade of the
euro area, and thus also reduced real income. This fact needs to be accepted by all parties concerned.
Second,  some  of  the  main  challenges  for  the  governments  of  the  euro  area  countries  relate  to  the
conduct  of  fiscal  policy.  At  present,  one  major  impediment  to  an  increase  in  the  long-term  growth
potential  in  the  euro  area  is  the  high  level  of  social  contributions  and  of  taxation  on  labour  and
corporate income.  While a  reduction  in taxes  and  social  contributions  would certainly  be  beneficial
from an economic point of view, it is essential that such a course of action remain compatible with the
BIS Review 73/2000
2
long-term  sustainability  of  public  finances.  Therefore,  reforms  on  the  taxation  side,  which  we  very
much welcome, should be accompanied, or even preceded, by a reduction in the level of expenditure at
present and in the future.
Taking into account the gradual ageing of the population in the euro area, reforms of pension systems
should  not  be  delayed.  Such  reforms  are  necessary  in  order  to  achieve  long-term  sustainable  fiscal
positions and, at the same time, avoid the risk of having to impose an excessive burden on workers and
enterprises in the future. While some progress has been made by governments over the past few years,
further efforts will be essential in order to support the long-term growth prospects in the euro area.
Moreover,  fiscal  reforms  should  be  accompanied  by  further  progress  in  other  areas.  In  particular,
reforms in the field of labour and product market regulations are essential for the economy of the euro
area to take full advantage of the opportunities created by the introduction of the single currency, the
process of globalisation and the availability of new technologies. Enhanced labour market flexibility
and increased competition in product markets will be key factors in contributing to a higher growth
potential in the euro area. In several countries notable progress has been achieved in some respects.
However, there is still much to be done when looking at the area as a whole.
Finally,  let  me  also  say  a  few  words  about  recent  exchange  rate  developments.  From  a  monetary
policy point of view, they are clearly a cause for concern as they add to upward pressure on consumer
prices  in  the  euro  area.  Furthermore,  they  do  not  appear  to  be  appropriate  when  looking  at
fundamentals.
As  you  are  aware,  we  already  expressed  this  concern  for  some  time.  In  the  meantime,  we  have
witnessed  a  considerable  improvement  in  the  economic  growth  prospects  for  the  euro  area.  At  the
same time, as a result of measures taken by the Governing Council of the ECB, the outlook for price
stability in the euro area remained intact. At present, inflation in the euro area is among the lowest in
the world. The fact that the euro has continued to depreciate in recent months is not in line with these
strong economic fundamentals of the euro area. Recent global exchange rate developments are also not
in line with international balance of payment positions.
Other activities of the Eurosystem
2.
Let  me  now  turn  to  other  activities  of  the  Eurosystem,  starting  with  several  decisions  which  were
taken with regard to the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins on 1 January 2002. The ECB,
together with the other European institutions and the Member States, is paying closest attention to this
crucial event, which will mark the final step in the completion of Economic and Monetary Union. As
you  are  aware,  the  ECB  has  launched  an  information  campaign  on  the  2002  cash  changeover,  on
which my colleague, Mr. Domingo Solans, reported to you in May. I should like to recall that the ECB
shares the Parliament’s view that a coordination of the various information campaigns conducted  at
the European and national levels is essential in order to  provide clear and  consistent information  to
markets and the general public.
Moreover,  several  measures  have  recently  been  taken  by  the  ECB  in  order  to  facilitate  further  the
changeover  process  for  market  participants  and  the  general  public.  In  July  the  Governing  Council
defined the general principles of the framework for the euro cash changeover, including the financial
modalities for credit institutions. Moreover, 1 September 2001 was fixed as the starting date for the
frontloading of euro cash to credit institutions in the euro area. This implies that credit institutions may
also  commence  the  sub-frontloading  of  euro  cash  to  retailers,  the  vending  machine  industry  and
cash-in-transit companies in September 2001.
Given  that  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  will  become  legal  tender  only  as  of  1  January  2002,  the
Eurosystem will retain the ownership of all frontloaded euro cash until then. Credit institutions will be
obliged to arrange appropriate coverage of the risks of anticipated public use, as well as of destruction
or theft. In addition, sub-frontloading shall be performed by credit institutions against the delivery of
appropriate collateral to the national central banks.
3
BIS Review 73/2000
As regards the cross-border exchange of national banknotes within the euro area, you may recall that
the ECB decided, back in 1998, that each national central bank of the euro area has to provide for at
least  one  location  where  an  exchange  of  such  national  banknotes  can  be  effected  at  the  official
conversion  rates.  Originally,  it  was  envisaged  that  this  exchange  facility  would  expire  on
31 December 2001. Now the Governing Council of the ECB has decided to extend this period  until
31 March 2002 in order to expedite the changeover process. For the sake of completeness, I should
like  to  add  that  the  exchange  of  national  banknotes  at  the  respective  national  central  bank  after
1 January 2002 will be possible for a much longer period (at least ten years). However, according to
current planning in Member States, the time span for the exchange of national coins will, at least in
some countries, be considerably shorter, ranging from one year after the coins have ceased to be legal
tender up to an indefinite period.
The  Governing  Council also  reviewed  the  number  of  euro  banknotes  which  will  have  to  be  printed
before  the  end  of  2001,  and  decided  to  increase  the  launch  stock  of  euro  banknotes  from
13 to 14.5 billion. In doing so, the Governing Council took into account the participation of Greece, a
higher than expected increase in banknotes in circulation within the euro area, an anticipated strong
demand  for  low-denomination  banknotes  and  the  slower  than  anticipated  progress  in  the  use  of
electronic money. The total nominal value of euro banknotes will amount to EUR616 billion.
Another  important  issue  to  which  the  ECB  continued  to  pay  considerable  attention  relates  to
improvements  needed  in  the  field  of  EU  statistics.  In  conducting  monetary  policy,  the  ECB  uses  a
wide range of statistics - broadly speaking: those published in the 60 pages of tables in our Monthly
Bulletin. Two sets of statistics of particular importance to us, namely the monthly monetary data and
the HICP (Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices) covering the euro area, compare well in quality and
timeliness with corresponding data elsewhere. This is also true for some other areas, such as balance
of payments and securities issues. However, in some areas the timeliness and quality of data available
for the euro area is still disappointing.
In  August  the  ECB  published  a  report  entitled  “Statistical  requirements  of  the  ECB  in  the  field  of
general economic  statistics”,  which  outlines  the  requirements in this  area.  In  broad  terms,  the  areas
where  improvements  have  the  highest  priority  relate  to  quarterly  national  accounts,  harmonised
quarterly  public  finance  statistics,  labour  market  statistics,  conjunctural  statistics  and  the  quicker
availability of data on trade outside the euro area.
The  European  Commission,  in  coordination  with  the  ECB,  is  currently  preparing  an  action  plan
covering  priorities  for  rapid  improvement.  According  to  current  planning,  the  action  plan  is  to  be
endorsed by ECOFIN ministers at the end of this month, giving the work the highest possible level of
political support.
I should now like to refer briefly to issues concerning the area of payment systems. As already stated
on  several  occasions,  efficient  euro  payment  and  settlement  systems  are  essential  for  the  smooth
implementation of monetary policy and for the stability of financial markets. This close relationship is
reflected by the fact that the Treaty has assigned to the ESCB the responsibility to promote the smooth
operation of payment systems, which implies an oversight function and includes the possibility for the
ECB  to  issue  regulations  in  this  area.  Moreover,  the  ECB  is  also  concerned  with  the  security  of
payment  instruments,  which  is  crucial  for  public  confidence  in  the  single  currency.  As  part  of  its
communication policy and in order to give guidance to markets and the public at large, the ECB issued
a statement in June which explains in detail the objectives and activities of the Eurosystem in this area,
especially as regards the execution of its oversight function.
The focus of the ECB, however, is not restricted to the efficient processing of large-value transactions.
The ECB also has a clear interest in the smooth functioning of cross-border retail payment systems.
This  interest,  which  the  ECB  shares  with  the  European  Parliament,  is  reflected  by  its  initiative  of
September last year concerning the improvement of cross-border retail payment systems. Since then,
the ECB has been in close contact with the European banking industry in order to explore practical
ways  and  means  of  enhancing  the  efficiency  of  cross-border  retail  payments  systems.  You  may  be
interested to know that a progress report, providing an assessment and recommendations of the ECB in
this area, is close to being finalised and will be published soon.
BIS Review 73/2000
4
As concerns retail payments, I should also like to draw your attention to one particular issue, namely
the costs caused by balance of payments reporting requirements. The ECB shares this concern and has,
together  with  the  Commission,  national  central  banks  and  other  statistical  authorities,  undertaken
efforts  to  reduce  such  costs,  in  particular  by  establishing  a  common  exemption  threshold  of
EUR12,500, which will come into effect as from 1 January 2002. This means that banks will not have
to report their customers’ cross-border payments and receipts if the amount is below the threshold. The
implementation  of  a  uniform  exemption  threshold  constitutes  a  major  breakthrough  in  reducing  an
administrative  burden  which  is  specific  to  cross-border  payments.  As  a  consequence,  reporting
requirements can no longer serve as a justification for high customer fees for cross-border payments
below  the  threshold.  Furthermore,  a  list  of  harmonised  economic  codes  is  being  prepared,  which
should further facilitate the automation of reporting.
To  conclude  my  remarks,  let  me  briefly  mention  the  ECB  Occasional  Papers,  a  new  series  of
publications which was launched in July as a further refinement of the ECB’s communication tools.
The  ECB  Occasional  Papers  will  be  drafted  by  ECB  staff  members  and  published  under  their  own
responsibility. They will address various policy-relevant issues and make available to the public data
and analyses used within the ECB and the Eurosystem.
5
BIS Review 73/2000
