Mr Latter looks at the implications of e-commerce
for the banking and monetary system in Hong Kong
Speech  by  Mr  Tony  Latter,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  a
conference on China and the New Millennium: WTO, Entrepreneurs and New Technology for Global
Trade, held in Nansha, Guangdong Province, People’s Republic of China on 24 March 2000.
 The internet has quite suddenly multiplied by a remarkable degree the number of potential suppliers
and  customers  with  whom  we  can  do  business,  and  the  number  of  avenues  through  which  we  can
perform financial transactions. This opens up all sorts of opportunities, but it also attracts all sorts of
warnings  -  about  needing  to  know  the  identity  of  those  with  whom  we  are  dealing;  about  needing
somehow to satisfy ourselves, remotely, as to the quality of the products or services on offer; about
needing to be sure of the financial standing of counterparties, be it their ability to pay or to provide
credit which concerns us; and so on.
Speaking as a central banker, I begin to have a specific interest in the development of e-commerce at
the point where payment has to be made for the goods or services that are traded via the internet, or
where people deposit money into internet accounts. But I also have a broader interest relating to the
overall stablity and integrity of the financial system. The internet undoubtedly brings us the prospect
of greater choice and efficiency in financial deals, but it also sparks certain concerns. These fall under
two headings: consumer protection, with worries about scams, transparency, security, accountability,
legal  recourse,  and  so  on;  and  systemic  stability,  with  questions  as  to  whether  the  financial  system
might become more vulnerable to crisis as a result, for example, of a major technical failure or of a
massive herd movement of money in a particular direction.
This is a vast subject, so I need to narrow down my focus today. I want to discuss some of the issues
which businesses or individual members of the public may face in relation to electronic money on the
internet. And I then want to discuss some points which a central bank has to address in the monetary
policy context when confronted with electronic money.
In fact there are two types of electronic money: that which is held on the internet and that which is
held  in  stored-value  cards.  Multi-purpose  stored-value  card  schemes  have  been  slow  to  become
established, despite quite lengthy pilot projects in a number of countries. Hong Kong was nevertheless
one  of  the  first  places  to  introduce  regulations  governing  the  issuance  of  such  cards.  Meanwhile,
limited-purpose cards have proved more successful; we have a particular example in Hong Kong with
the Octopus card, used to pay for public transport, which is hugely popular. Today, however, I want to
devote the limited time available to talking about electronic money within the internet itself, so I shall
not be discussing card-based money any further.
Many  people  speak  of  the  arrival  of  the  internet  era  as  a  revolution  in  business  practice.  From  the
particular  viewpoint  of  making  payments,  I  prefer  to  regard  it  as  a  step  along  an  evolutionary  path
rather than as something revolutionary. Our distant forefathers were sceptical about the introduction of
banknotes in place of metallic tokens and coins; and our more recent forefathers were worried as to the
reliability of cheques as a substitute for cash when they first appeared. Even during the span of my
own working life I can recall initial resistance by some to credit cards and debit cards on suspicions
about the security of the arrangements, as well as opposition to autopay and direct debit schemes for
fear of granting to a third party too general an authority to debit one’s bank account.
But each of these innovations has, in the event, been assimilated and has taken its place in the range of
accepted payment instruments. I would expect e-banking to follow suit, as just another step along the
evolutionary path. But it is perhaps worth pausing to consider whether there is anything intrinsically
different about e-banking which demands special attention from the central bank.
1
BIS Review 28/2000
Let me begin by examining the question from the central bank’s stance as guardian of the integrity of
the  payments  system  and  as  banking  supervisor.  I  believe  there  are  perhaps  two  characteristics  of
e-banking which may deserve some vigilance here.
The first is the technical security of access and messaging. This  is  a  matter  of  accuracy,  safety  and
secrecy. If we use the internet to move our money, or to hold our money, we expect messages to arrive
at their destination without error or interception; we expect the system to be safe from fraudulent or
unauthorised  access;  and  we  expect  to  enjoy  the  same  degree  of  customer  confidentiality  as  with
conventional  banking  arrangements.  We  want  to  be  assured  not  only  that  the  execution  process  is
reliable and secure, but also that there are adequate controls on any “read only” access facilities.
How  can  we  obtain  these  assurances?  Perhaps  some  of  you  mirror  my  own  feeling  of  personal
inadequacy in matters of electronic technology. Inevitably we are dependent on the experts. They have
devised sophisticated methods of electronic signatures, encryption, certification, firewalls and the like.
One way or another, by obtaining appropriate professional advice, by applying rigorous standards of
compliance and computer audit, and so on, those within an organisation should be able to deliver the
necessary assurances to customers, and the regulatory or supervisory authorities will need to satisfy
themselves as to the dependability of such assurances. The financial authorities within countries, and
on a collective basis internationally, may also have a role to play in developing recognised common
standards in these arenas of technology and security.
The second characteristic deserving our special attention is the nature of the person or company which
is offering us banking or payment services over the internet. If we are merely using electronic services
provided by our usual bank, which we know to be sound and to be supervised by an acknowledged
regulator in a known jurisdiction, then we should be in no more danger of losing our money than we
would be by banking with the same bank in the conventional manner, provided of course that both the
bank and the regulator have kept pace with the requirements of internet banking, such as in respect of
the security aspects discussed already.
But  it  is  quite  a  different  story  if  we  are  tempted  to  part  with  money  to  some  organisation
masquerading  as  a  bank,  or  which  actually  is  a  bank  but  is  registered  in  a  jurisdiction  with  lower
supervisory standards than those to which we are accustomed. In Hong Kong, in order to protect the
public we already have legislation governing usage of the word “bank”, and governing the advertising
for deposits within our boundaries by anyone not authorised to take deposits in Hong Kong. But we
cannot  protect  people  from  the  possible  consequences  of  clicking  onto  a  website  in  a  far-off  place
which is luring them to part with their money. The message is clear: make sure that you  know  and
trust your banker.
In  Hong  Kong  there  has  been  some  talk  of  new  banks  being  established  for  the  sole  purpose  of
conducting  internet  banking.  In  deciding  whether  to authorise such  a  bank,  the  Monetary  Authority
would expect to apply very much the same criteria as for a conventional bank, but would need to pay
particular attention to the business plan in order to ensure that it reflected realistic assumptions  and
prudent banking principles. We intend in the near future to issue guidelines for any such applications.
Already, as the supervisory body for existing banks, the Monetary Authority needs to take account of
any  particular  risks  that  pertain  to  internet  banking  and  to  be  sure  that  banks  who  conduct  such
business do themselves properly appreciate and allow for such risks. I would mention in particular the
strategic risk, in that venturing into a new business arena may not always be assured of success; the
operational risk, of dependence on IT networks, and the associated security considerations to which I
have  already  referred;  and  any  additional  banking  risks  which  may  arise  if  internet  transactions  are
deemed  to  be  potentially  more  volatile  or  unpredictable,  or  customers  less  reliable,  than  in  normal
banking business.
The  need  to be  confident  about the intermediaries  with  which  you  are  dealing  is  also  very  relevant
when  we  examine  schemes  for  so-called  digital  cash  or  a  cyberpurse.  There  have  been  some  false
starts and business failures in this field, but some potentially more durable systems are now emerging
in  a  number  of  countries,  albeit  still  mostly  in  only  embryonic  form.  The  concept  is  of  a  storage
location  -  or  account  -  somewhere  in  cyberspace,  into  which  you  transfer  funds  from  your  bank
account  or  credit  card, just  as  you  would draw cash from  the  bank  and  store  it  in  your  wallet.  The
BIS Review 28/2000
2
schemes are designed essentially for the retail shopper, who can then make payments from the purse
for items purchased over the internet: the purse operator responds to your instructions by transferring
funds from your purse to an account of the seller.
You may wonder what the advantage of such schemes is supposed to be. Why not simply pay for each
transaction  by  an  electronic  instruction  to  your  bank  or,  more  typically  in  the  case  of  most  retail
internet purchases, by credit card? The answer is that digital cash purports to offer three advantages.
First,  it  may  be  cheaper  than  other  means  for  a  series  of  relatively  low  value  retail  transactions.
Second, it can be used by those who cannot or do not have a credit card - for instance teenagers. Third,
it offers a degree of anonymity and perhaps a stronger feeling of security, in comparison to using a
bank account or credit card, since account-related personal data need not be passed on to the individual
sellers of the goods or services.
However, people should exercise some caution before utilising such cyberpurse facilities. Regardless
of how the system  may be presented, the purse operator is in effect acting very much as a bank, in
particular by holding your money in a sort of deposit. Even if you initially acquired the digital cash or
credit  for  free  (through  a  loyalty  or  bonus  point  scheme,  for  example),  the  accumulated  “savings”
represent value which you would doubtless wish to protect. Customers will want to be assured that the
money or credit points are in safe hands. Regulators, too, may desire to verify that no banking activity
is taking place that is unlawful, although they will first need to ascertain the location of this virtual
operation (a task which is itself almost a contradiction in terms) so as to identify what is the applicable
jurisdiction. Although in most of these schemes the maximum sum which anyone may hold in a purse
may, for the moment, be quite modest, and so the scale of potential losses limited, we need to establish
the foundations of prudent behaviour and regulation in preparation for the time when the sums may be
much larger.
Thus  far  I  have  been  looking  at  the  phenomenon  of  e-banking  and  e-payments  largely  from  the
regulatory  point  of  view.  I  would  like  to  turn  now  to  examine  whether  there  are  any  noteworthy
implications for the key central bank responsibility of monetary policy.
I  want  first  to  consider  possible  implications  for  the  physical  currency.  Central  banks  or  their
government  shareholders  enjoy  a  steady  stream  of  profit  from  the  issue  of  currency  in  the  form  of
notes and coin - the so-called seignorage. It is noteworthy that the public’s demand for currency has
been much less affected over the years than one might have expected by the emergence of successive
new forms of non-cash payment such as cheques and cards. And personally I would doubt whether the
development  of  cyberpurses,  cybercash  and  cyberpayments  would  have  much  impact  on  cash  in
circulation,  at  any  rate  in  the  near  term.  But  suppose  I  am  wrong.  Suppose  there  is  a  complete
revolution  such  that  cybercash,  including  electronic  stored-value  cards,  substantially  displaces
physical currency within a few years. How should central banks react?
In such circumstances, central banks would lose an important source of income and would have to find
ways of replacing it. Perhaps some central banks would lose their financial independence and become
dependent - or more so than hitherto - on subvention from the government budget. But in a broader
sense  they  should  welcome  the  development  because  it  would  be  evidence  that  the  economy  as  a
whole was enjoying a more efficient and less expensive means of money holding and transmission.
With  regard  to  operational  aspects  of  monetary  policy  in  pursuit  of  the  general  macroeconomic
objective of stability in the value of the currency, the advent of this new means of payment would, if it
caught on to a significant extent, have some impact on the public’s allocation of money holdings as
between physical currency, various forms  of  deposit  and,  now, electronic  forms.  This in turn  might
affect  the  monetary  statistics  and  their  interpretation.  However,  any  changes  would  only  occur
gradually.  Besides,  nowadays  there  are  scarcely  any  central  banks  which  rely  single-mindedly  and
exclusively upon measures of money supply to guide their monetary policy decisions. Therefore I do
not believe that there is anything much to worry about on this front.
Next,  it  has  been  suggested  that  internet  banking  in  its  various  manifestations  could  introduce
additional and unpredictable volatility into world financial markets by enabling millions of people to
switch  funds  between  investments  or  between  currencies  at  the  click  of  a  mouse.  In  general  I  am
sceptical about such worries. Global financial markets have already been exploiting the IT age with its
3
BIS Review 28/2000
immediacy of information and electronic dealing for some years. Capital is already hugely mobile in
both scale and speed. I doubt whether the inclusion of new players at the retail level would have much
of an additional impact.
In particular cases where monetary policy is supported by capital controls, however, internet banking
may make enforcement of such controls more difficult, since it would be operationally easier for those
wishing to evade regulations to maintain offshore bank accounts. Of course, every bank in reputable
jurisdictions has in place rigorous procedures to combat money-laundering, but these procedures do
not normally result in customers being turned away if they are merely trying to escape capital controls
or the tax regime in their home countries.
Similar  considerations  lead  some  observers  to  enquire  whether  the  internet  might  encourage
substitution  out  of  the  national  currency,  resulting  in  dollarisation  and  also  perhaps  weakening  the
central bank’s influence over domestic monetary conditions. If internet facilities enable or encourage
people either to economise on the usage of money (for example by netting payments due among two
or  more  parties  or  by  practising  barter)  or  to  reduce  the  frequency  of  movements  of  money  (for
example  by  leaving  export  receipts  in  an  internet  account  in  order  to  pay  for  imports,  rather  than
repatriating them first), then there may be a prospect of a general reduction in transactions traffic in all
currencies. The usage of some may fall more than others. I do not, however, see anything particularly
sinister in such developments, except to the extent that the internet might facilitate avoidance of rules
on remittances. The survival of the national currency and its acceptability to the public will continue to
depend on the central bank carrying out a responsible monetary policy which protects the value of the
currency.  Discharge  of  this  duty  should  not  be  materially  affected  or  impeded  by  technological
developments  in  payment  methods.  The  central  bank’s  ability  to  influence  interest  rates  or  the
exchange rate through its market operations will not be diminished.
I conclude that, all in all, there are few concerns for the central bank in its monetary policy role that
arise  from  the  development  of  e-commerce;  where  there  is  an  impact  it  is  likely  to  be  gradual  and
central banks should be able to adapt to it as readily as they have to other structural changes in the
financial sector over the years. For the reasons discussed earlier, however, the challenge to the banking
regulatory side of the central bank is likely to be rather greater.
BIS Review 28/2000
4
