Mr Gjedrem discusses various aspects of monetary policy,
financial markets and the welfare state in Norway
Annual address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank, the Norwegian central bank, at the
meeting of the Supervisory Council of Norges Bank, held in Oslo on 17 February 2000.
 We have just marked the turn of the millennium. Norway can look back at a century of upheaval - the
dissolution of the union with Sweden in 1905, social conflict in the interwar period and the emergence
of the welfare state. At the beginning of a new century it is natural to examine some of the threads
running through our economic history. This may also shed light on the choices Norway is now facing.
We have experienced periods of inflation and periods of deflationary recession. Vast changes in the
world economy have led to shifts in monetary policy and financial markets. Technology has broken
down  regulations.  Patterns  of  funding  and  ownership  are  changing.  This  creates  unrest  and
uncertainty, but also offers new opportunities for growth and welfare. The welfare state is facing major
challenges  as  a  result  of  the  ageing  of  the  population  and  tax  competition  among  countries.  In  this
year’s  annual  address  I  will  discuss  various  aspects  of  monetary  policy,  financial  markets  and  the
welfare state.
Historical perspective
One of the first endeavours of the Storting (Norwegian parliament) after its establishment in 1814 was
monetary reform. In 1816 Norges Bank was founded. The specie daler was Norway’s first monetary
unit.
From the mid-1800s an increasing number of countries chose to link the value of money to gold. The
central banks were under the obligation to convert their currency at a fixed rate into gold on demand.
At the same time, there were no import or export restrictions on gold. This gradually resulted in the
establishment of an international fixed exchange rate system based on a gold standard.
Chart 1
1
BIS Review 14/2000
Norway switched from the silver standard to the gold standard in 1874. The krone was introduced as a
currency unit and we formed a monetary union with Sweden and Denmark. The gold standard and the
monetary union were successful. The world economy and the Norwegian economy were expanding.
Price  levels  were  stable.  In  the  1900s  periods  of  nominal  stability,  i.e.  price  and  exchange  rate
stability, have also coincided with periods of steady and solid economic growth.
Chart 2
The experience of the last century shows that consumer price inflation is ultimately associated with
high  growth  in  the  money  supply.  However,  the  causal  relationship  between  money  supply  and
inflation may be unclear.
Norway has experienced four episodes of high inflation in the last century: during and after the two
world wars and the Korean War, and a 15-year period from the first half of the 1970s to the second
half of the 1980s.
During the First World War inflation accelerated sharply. The British war effort was partly financed
by printing money. Price inflation accelerated in most countries, also in Norway. The gold standard
was suspended.
The krone’s value against gold and pound sterling fell sharply in the boom during and after the First
World  War.  Price  inflation  soared,  accompanied  by  a  speculative  bubble  with  rising  asset  prices.
When the bubble burst the boom came to an end, followed by deflationary recession and a banking
crisis.  The  recession  was  probably  exacerbated  by  the  so-called  parity  policy  pursued  at  that  time,
which aimed at returning the krone exchange rate to its pre-war value against gold.
Inflation also accelerated during the Second World War. But unlike the interwar period, the years after
1945 were not marked by recession. With the exception of a few years of high price inflation during
the Korean War, the postwar period featured low and stable inflation and buoyant economic growth.
BIS Review 14/2000
2
Chart 3
Chart 4
3
BIS Review 14/2000
Chart 5
The fourth period of high inflation was different from the three previous ones. In the 1970s and 1980s
inflation gradually increased. Although inflation rates were not as high as during the two world wars,
inflation remained high for a longer period.
The postwar fixed exchange rate system - the Bretton Woods System - collapsed in 1971. A few years
later, the Yom Kippur War broke out and OPEC countries suspended oil deliveries, triggering the first
oil crisis. The sharp rise in oil prices led to a recession in the western economies. Moreover, inflation
took  root  in  most  countries.  In  Europe,  only  Germany  and  Switzerland  were  able  to  keep  inflation
more or less at bay.
In Norway, the welfare state and support schemes were rapidly expanded partly based on expectations
of large future oil revenues. Economic policy was oriented towards building a bridge over what was
expected to be a temporary downturn in the world economy. This led to a tug of war for real resources
between the business sector and the public sector - between the exposed and sheltered sector.
Chart 6
BIS Review 14/2000
4
The  cost  level  in  manufacturing  industry  was  driven  upwards.  At  the  same  time,  the  slowdown  in
growth proved to be permanent. The sheltered sector continued to expand, while industries exposed to
international competition experienced deteriorating profitability and a relative decline. The recession
at the end of the 1980s was followed by a period of low wage growth and gains in competitiveness.
This may help to explain why the decline in manufacturing employment came to a halt in the 1990s.
However,  wage  costs  increased  again  in  the  late  1990s.  The  relative  wage  level  in  manufacturing
industry compared with trading partners is now back at the level in the 1970s.
Two  forces  were  behind  economic  developments  from  the  beginning  of  the  1970s.  First,  the
deterioration in competitiveness was caused by  the  expansion  of  the  Norwegian  welfare  state  and  a
transfer  of  real  resources  from  the  exposed  sector  to  the  sheltered  sector.  Second,  inflation
expectations  took  root  as  a  result  of  low  administered  interest  rates  and  competitive  devaluations.
Nominal interest rates were kept low although price inflation and the value of tax-deductible interest
expenses rose. Frequent devaluations in the period from 1976 were ultimately ineffective with regard
to preventing a relative decline in manufacturing industry. On the contrary, the devaluations proved to
be self-reinforcing.
Chart 7
Over a period of 15 years from 1973 to 1988 consumer prices in  Norway  rose  twice as  much  as in
Germany. In the same period, the value of the krone was virtually halved against the Mark. While we
paid around 2 kroner for one Mark in 1973, 15 years later we had to pay close to 4 kroner. Since then
the krone has remained relatively stable against the Deutsche Mark. Today the exchange rate is around
4 kroner and 10 øre.
The last devaluation came in 1986 after the fall in oil prices. Thereafter, the krone exchange rate was
fixed. The Norwegian economy had to go through a severe economic turnaround. Confidence in the
krone had to be restored in order to avoid persistent inflation. This required very high interest rates.
The  Norwegian  economy  entered  the  worst  recession  experienced  since  the  interwar  period.
Unemployment  rose  from  about  2%  in  1987  to  almost  6%  in  the  winter  of  1992/1993.  Many
companies went broke and households were faced with debt problems. The financial sector was hit by
crisis.
The fixed exchange rate regime led to a gradual decline in price inflation, but not to deflation as was
the case in the 1920s. An improved wage-setting process, in conjunction with an active fiscal policy,
contributed to curbing the real economic costs. Hence, the experience of 1986 and the beginning of the
5
BIS Review 14/2000
1990s  probably  provides  a  realistic  picture  of  the  minimal  costs  associated  with  stamping  out  high
inflation. At the same time, an active fiscal policy enhanced the credibility of monetary policy because
it led to lower unemployment than would have been the case otherwise.
In  Norway,  high  inflation  is  a  war  phenomenon  and  phenomenon  of  the  1970s  and  1980s.  In  the
aftermath of high inflation, we experienced substantial real economic losses and financial instability.
The cost of inflation has been high.
History shows that lower unemployment cannot  be achieved  in exchange  for  higher inflation  in  the
long run. A monetary policy that fuels inflation does not generate economic growth. On the contrary,
the result is booms and speculative bubbles, which are the precursors of recession and unemployment.
In  the  absence  of  nominal  stability,  employment  and  production  will  not  show  stability  either.  The
economy must be endowed with a nominal anchor. This is the task of monetary policy.
The  Norwegian economy  was  lacking  a  nominal  anchor  during  the  period  of  low  interest  rates  and
devaluations in the 1970s and 1980s. This led to rising inflation and instability. From 1986 the fixed
exchange rate regime restored confidence in monetary policy and subsequently laid a foundation for
more stable economic developments.
Chart 8
Through the 1990s, inflation has been on a par with or below inflation in Europe. While the average
annual rise in prices was a good 8% in Norway in the 1970s and 1980s, the annual rise in consumer
prices has been confined to 2 1/4% in the 1990s. The subdued rate of increase in consumer prices has
coincided with a strong expansion. In 1999, the number of employed was 200,000 higher than in 1990,
i.e. an increase of 10%.
We  had  to  abandon  our  fixed  exchange  rate  policy  in  December  1992,  primarily  as  a  result  of  the
system’s  inherent  weaknesses  in  a  world  of  free  flows  of  capital  and  deep  international  financial
markets.  When  the  fixed  exchange  rate  policy  was  formally  abandoned,  there  was  a  risk  that  the
Norwegian economy would again lose its nominal anchor. However, the krone exchange rate showed
little change and quickly found a new trading range.
BIS Review 14/2000
6
Chart 9
In the first years the krone exchange rate was very stable, also on a daily basis. When we now look
back at developments in the Norwegian foreign exchange market in the 1990s, we see no significant
change in 1992. On the contrary, we witnessed a pronounced shift in January 1997. It was from this
point in time that daily quotations and month-to-month variations in the exchange rate show that the
krone is floating.
Wider  fluctuations  in  the  exchange  rate  have  improved  the  functioning  of  the  options  market  and
forward  contracts  in  Norwegian  kroner.  At  a  premium,  businesses  can  hedge  against  short-term
fluctuations in the krone exchange rate. The fluctuations are not greater than in other countries with a
floating exchange rate.
In  1996  and  in  the  autumn  of  1998,  Norges  Bank  attempted  to  attenuate  movements  in  the  krone
exchange  rate  through  exchange  market  interventions.  On  both  occasions,  interventions  prompted  a
game  situation  between  the  central  bank  and  market  participants,  as  was  also  the  case  during  the
currency crisis in the autumn of 1992. When a central bank trades its own currency, market operators
make a play for profits on the premise that the exchange rate does not reflect market fundamentals. In
a world where capital flows freely, this game situation can quickly trigger large capital movements.
The experience of the 1990s shows that Norges Bank does not have the instruments to fine-tune the
krone exchange rate.
Today’s monetary policy
The objective of monetary policy is exchange rate stability against European currencies, defined as the
euro  from  1 January.  Norges  Bank’s  mandate - which  is  the  Exchange  Rate  Regulation - takes  into
account that the krone may remain outside its normal range. The Exchange Rate Regulation states that
“in the event of significant changes in the exchange rate, monetary policy instruments will be oriented
with  a  view  to  returning  the  exchange  rate  over  time  to  its  initial  range”.  The  concept  “significant
changes”  is  not  quantified  and  must  be  given  an  economic  content.  Norges  Bank  interprets  a
“significant” change in the exchange rate as a change that fuels expectations of price and cost inflation
to the extent that the change in the exchange rate becomes self-reinforcing.
7
BIS Review 14/2000
Monetary policy can counter such a self-reinforcing movement in the exchange rate by contributing to
low and stable inflation without recession. In its conduct of monetary policy, Norges Bank therefore
places  emphasis  on  fulfilling  the  fundamental  preconditions  for  exchange  rate  stability  against  the
euro: monetary policy instruments must be oriented towards bringing inflation down to the level aimed
at by the Eurosystem. At the same time, Norges Bank must prevent monetary policy from contributing
to a deflationary recession as this may weaken confidence in the krone.
The  experience  of  the  1970s  and  1980s  shows  that  monetary  policy  cannot  in  the  long  run  steer
competitiveness  or  the  size  of  the  exposed  sector.  If  we  attempt  to  do  so,  monetary  policy  only
contributes  to  instability.  Such  real  economic  fundamentals  may  on  the  other  hand  be  influenced
through fiscal policy and cooperation between the social partners. Norges Bank cannot with open eyes
contribute to higher inflation or a deflationary recession. This would contribute to an unstable krone.
Hence,  there  is  no  conflict  between  gearing  monetary  policy  instruments  towards  low  and  stable
inflation and the objective of a stable krone exchange rate over time.
Although monetary policy cannot be used to steer competitiveness, changes in the krone exchange rate
may provide an early warning of a weakening - or strengthening - of the exposed sector in the tug of
war  for  real  resources.  A  successful  fiscal  policy  and  a  well-functioning  wage  formation  process
provide  a  sound  basis  for  a  stable  krone  exchange  rate.  The  main  difference  between  Norway  and
countries  that  have  adopted  an  inflation  target  for  monetary  policy  lies  in  the  interaction  between
monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy.  The  oil  economy  and  capital  exports  through  the  Government
Petroleum Fund are also features that are specific to the Norwegian economy.
The most important factor that influences the krone exchange rate is confidence in nominal stability. If
such  confidence  exists,  short-term  fluctuations  in  the  krone  exchange  rate  may  vary  without
consequences  for  the  exchange  rate  level  over  time.  However,  confidence  depends  on  a  number  of
factors, such as the authorities’ will to pursue nominal stability. Under the fixed exchange rate regime,
we  tied  ourselves  to  the  mast  by  stipulating  an  exchange  rate  band  for  the  krone.  With  a  floating
exchange  rate  regime  and  wider  scope  for  discretion,  transparency  concerning  analyses  and  policy
response  pattern  can  contribute  to  bolstering  confidence  in  the  nominal  anchor.  However,  this
presupposed that the announced policy response pattern is actually followed.
Fluctuations  in  domestic  activity  may  induce  changes  in  the  exchange  rate.  For  instance,  strong
demand for labour could push up wages and weaken competitiveness. If there is confidence in nominal
stability, the deterioration in competitiveness may result in an appreciation of the krone in the short
term. A lack of confidence in nominal stability may result in a depreciation of the krone. Both cases
may entail fluctuations in the exchange rate.
A shift in public expenditure growth - or one-sided tax cuts - will have an impact on domestic demand,
thus prompting movements in the exchange rate. When fiscal policy is used to smooth fluctuations in
domestic demand, it will contribute to a stable exchange rate.
International business cycles and financial market unrest may have an impact on the krone exchange
rate.  Exchange  rate  variations  among  major  currencies  may  influence  the  krone  exchange  rate
measured  against  individual  currencies.  Over  the  last  year  the  euro  has  depreciated  against  the
US dollar,  the  yen  and  pound  sterling.  The  krone  has  appreciated  against  the  euro.  The  effective
exchange rate has been more stable.
A situation may arise with a significant shift in economic fundamentals in Norway. A shock of this
nature  may  be  due  to  a  permanent  change  in  growth  prospects.  This  may  also  imply  a  permanent
change  in  the  krone  exchange  rate.  Our  experience  suggests  that  this  seldom  occurs.  A  sharp  and
sustained shift in oil prices, as witnessed in 1973 and 1986, may imply that the use of oil revenues will
have to change. This may in itself have an impact on the exchange rate.
Fiscal policy and the Government Petroleum Fund have proved to be effective in terms of sheltering
the mainland economy from more normal variations in oil revenues. A permanent change in the krone
exchange  rate  will  occur  only  if  there  is  an  increase  in  the  use  of  oil  revenues  through  a  shift  in
expenditure growth. In this context, instruments  other than  those available  to  Norges  Bank  must  be
used to return the krone to its initial range.
BIS Review 14/2000
8
Interest rates influence the exchange rate through two channels. The interest rate differential against
other currencies has some effect on the exchange rate. The exchange rate is further influenced via the
impact  of  interest  rates  on  domestic  price  and  cost  trends.  The  isolated  effect  of  the  interest  rate
differential on the exchange rate may be of little consequence compared with other factors. According
to Norges Bank’s calculations, the current interest rate differential against the euro area impacts the
krone exhange rate in the order of 20 øre against the euro in the short term. On the other hand, the
effect of the interest rate on the exchange rate through the channel of domestic demand and price and
wage inflation may in many situations be considerable.
The Norwegian economy may be exposed to shocks or disturbances that both reduce domestic activity
and weaken the Norwegian krone. In response, interest rates should not be increased. An increase in
interest rates will result in higher  unemployment  and  mounting  instability  in the  domestic  economy
and the exchange rate. Our economy may also be exposed to disturbances that both increase domestic
activity and strengthen the krone. Interest rates should then not be lowered.
In response to the prospect of a downturn in the Norwegian economy, Norges Bank reduced interest
rates in the winter of 1999 when the krone was weak against the euro. This contributed to stabilising
the  Norwegian  economy  and  hence  also  the  krone  exchange  rate.  Along  the  same  lines,  a  situation
may arise with growing pressures in the economy and signs of higher inflation where interest rates will
be increased when the krone is strong in relation to the euro.
Chart 10
Over the last 15 years, the business cycle in Norway has been desynchronised in relation to cyclical
developments  in  most  European  countries.  The  output  gap  provides  a  rough  indication  of  capacity
utilisation in the economy. The chart shows a specifically Norwegian upturn in the mid-1980s and a
subsequent  downturn.  While  the  downturn  bottomed  out  in  Norway  in  1990,  other  European
economies were booming. Subsequently, cyclical developments have  remained desynchronised. The
cyclical  fluctuations  in  Norway  can  to  some  extent  be  traced  back  to  the  disturbances  in  the
Norwegian economy in the  1980s  and the  economic  shock  in  Europe  in the  wake  of  the  fall  of  the
Berlin Wall.
The  cyclical  desynchronisation  is  the  main  reason  behind  the  inflation  differential  between  Norway
and euro area countries. The very low rate of inflation in Europe primarily reflects the downturn in the
9
BIS Review 14/2000
1990s. A fundamental precondition for exchange rate stability against the euro is that the inflation rate
in  Norway  is  brought  down  to  the  level  aimed  at  by  the  Eurosystem.  In  recent  years,  the  rate  of
increase in prices has been higher in Norway than among euro area countries, which is reflected in the
interest rate differential between Norway and the euro area.
If we were to lower interest rates to the level prevailing in the euro area in the current environment,
inflation would rise rapidly in Norway accompanied by exchange rate volatility. Any movements in
the  krone  exchange  rate  will  be  thoroughly  analysed  by  Norges  Bank.  A  policy  response  pattern
involving automatic changes in interest rates in response to movements in the exchange rate, as a fixed
exchange rate regime would imply, is inappropriate.
A century of growth
Chart 11
At the turn of the last century GDP per capita was around NOK 20,000 in present-day value. Today
the  average  is  around  NOK 250,000,  or  about  10 times  higher  than  100 years  ago.  For  purposes  of
comparison, the increase was barely twofold between 1820 and 1900.
Economic growth in Norway was particularly strong in the first 30 years following the Second World
War,  as  a  result  of  the  introduction  of  new  technology  from  the  US  and  new  products  in  Europe.
Europe has gradually caught up with the US thanks to the import of technology from the US, effective
restructuring  and  the  expansion  in  global  trade.  This  explains  why  welfare  gains  have  been
substantially higher in Norway and other European countries than in the US in the postwar period.
BIS Review 14/2000
10
Chart 12
Growth in productivity in mainland Norway was high in the 1960s and 1970s. Since 1980 productivity
growth has been more in line with growth in the US. By then we had reached a high level of income. It
follows that there was less to gain than earlier from the import of new technology.
Chart 13
In  spite  of  the  boost  provided  by  Norway’s  oil  resources,  there  is  a  difference  in  income  between
Norway and the US. The income differential is probably to a large extent ascribable to differences in
11
BIS Review 14/2000
working  hours  and  employment.  Labour  participation  is  slightly  higher  in  Norway  than  in  the  US,
while  the  average  working  time  in  Norway  is  almost  30%  below  the  US  average.  Many  people  in
Norway work part time. But even a full person-year amounts to a good 10% fewer hours than the US
average.  The  income  differential  primarily  reflects  that  Norwegians  have  preferred  leisure  to  long
working hours.
However,  the  income  level  in  Norway  is  high  compared  with  other  European  countries,  which  is
attributable to Norway’s petroleum revenues and high level of employment. The relatively high level
of income indicates that we have to a large extent closed the technological gap between Norway and
the US. This means that we cannot expect  growth  rates  on a  par  with  that of the  1950s and  1960s,
i.e. annual growth rates of up to 5%.
A new economy
New technology  may be a driving force behind structural changes in the  economy  and  lead to  high
growth rates.
Chart 14
The trend in the postwar period, with stronger growth in productivity in Norway than in the US, may
have  been  reversed.  Productivity  growth  has  tended  to  move  on  a  weaker  trend  in  Norway,  while
rising in the US. Both Norway and the US have enjoyed a long period of sustained expansion in the
1990s. At this stage, productivity growth tends to be low. Signs of higher growth in the US may thus
suggest a new trend.
It is probably too early to draw any definite conclusions. We also know that there may be considerable
statistical  sources  of  error.  However,  the  new  growth  trend  is  supported  by  evidence  of  a  more
anecdotal nature. Major changes are taking place in the US business sector through processes such as
mergers and acquisitions. There is an exceptionally rich supply of capital in the stock market. The new
technology  companies  dominate  stock  exchange  developments.  In  Europe,  Sweden  and  Finland  are
leaders  in  developing  new  technology  environments.  Norwegian  companies  may  also  be  at  the
forefront of developments in some areas.
BIS Review 14/2000
12
Securities markets have been a vital force behind these changes. In the course of the last 20 years, a
revolution  has  taken  place  in  global  financial  markets.  Capital  restrictions  have  been  removed.
Companies around the world are experiencing a wave of mergers, acquisitions and demergers. These
transactions reflect a higher required rate of return among all companies and all areas of a business. At
the  same  time,  there  is  an  increased  willingness  to  take  risk,  with  a  soaring  number  of  start-up
companies. This trend has been particularly evident in the US, but European countries are also part of
this process.
Increased possibilities for using information improves financial markets’ ability to act as a catalyst for
profitable  restructuring  and  growth.  Companies  financed  through  equities,  bonds  and  commercial
paper  are  continuously  monitored  through  a  transparent  process.  Owners  and  potential  investors
follow company performance closely. There are ever-stricter requirements concerning information. A
poorly performing enterprise can be acquired by others who feel they can either run it more profitably
or use its resources more effectively elsewhere.
One may be sceptical with regard to these developments, which seem to have created a situation where
a few keyboard operations can lead to wealth and losses. Financial markets are driven by forces and
psychological  mechanisms  that  may  result  in  extreme  volatility.  Financial  bubbles  fuelled  by
unrealistic optimism may lead to the darkest pessimism and fears. The so-called new economy may be
a bubble. The concept “new economy” was first introduced prior to the stock market crash in 1929.
The authorities carry a particular responsibility for monitoring financial stability and ensuring that the
rules of the game are followed.
The alternative to open securities funding is bank credit. This type of financing is traditionally based
on  a  close  relationship  between  banks  and  borrowers.  Banks  gain  access  to  extensive  information
concerning the borrower and often exert influence over business decisions.
This type of arrangement has long been preferred in many European countries as it was very difficult
to  obtain  adequate  information  about  individual  companies  and  time-consuming  to  analyse  the
information that was available.
This situation has changed with the advent of new information technology. Financial markets are now
more effective in terms of channelling capital to investments that yield the highest returns.
Germany is the country in Europe where banks and borrowers have been the most dependent on each
other. In addition to providing loans, banks have large shareholdings in companies and big companies
have a large stake in private banks. The tax system has locked in this cross-ownership. Owners have
had to pay about 50%  in taxes  on  capital  gains  on share transactions. The  German  government  has
announced that this tax will be eliminated from 2001. This is expected to prompt a restructuring, first
in the ownership of German banks and enterprises and subsequently in production.
The business sector is dependent on both a smoothly functioning securities market and banks with a
close relationship to borrowers. Small and medium-sized enterprises are particularly dependent on the
expertise  and  guidance  offered  by  banks.  Funding  in  securities  markets  is  too  expensive  for  the
smallest enterprises.
The securities market plays less of a role in Norway compared with other European countries and the
US. The market for equity capital is particularly small in Norway. Norwegian companies often rely on
foreign funding for new projects. The thin market for securities capital in Norway may be an obstacle
to the development of the business sector.
This means that it is essential that the banking system function smoothly.
When  they  function,  the  strength  of  financial  markets  lies  in  their  transparency  and  adaptability.
Capital which is tied up in unprofitable activity can be freed up for other activities. Competition for
capital contributes to creative destruction.
13
BIS Review 14/2000
Chart 15
Structural changes also take place within individual companies. One example is NOKIA. Thirty years
ago, the forerunners of the world’s leading producer of cellular telephones were primarily producing
telephone cables, rubber boots and tyres. At that  time,  the  electronics  division  accounted for 3% of
NOKIA’s turnover and employed 460 persons. However, research and product development led to a
wider range of products. In 1988 NOKIA was the third largest producer of television sets in Europe
and the largest producer of cellular telephone equipment in the Nordic area.
NOKIA  experienced  a  deep  crisis  in  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  as  did  many  Finnish  companies.
NOKIA decided to concentrate on telecommunications. The split-up of the group was initiated from
within  the  company.  Non-core  activities  were  spun  off  and  sold.  This  allowed  NOKIA  to  free  up
capital  for  the  most  profitable  activities  of  the  company.  Today  the  company  has  more  than
50,000 employees. At the end of last year, the market value of NOKIA was about NOK 1,700 billion,
which is four times the market value of all the companies listed on the Oslo Stock Exchange.
The economy needs creative destruction to develop. The tendency may have been for the Norwegian
authorities to provide various types of support to businesses and industries that have existed for some
time. When the government intervenes, the authorities tread a fine line between business development
and conservation. It is thus important to tread carefully, so that capital and labour are not tied up in
less profitable activity.
The required rate of return and the need for restructuring in the business sector often conflict with the
need for stability and security for the individual employee. Local communities may suffer. The answer
is  not  to  oppose  restructuring.  The  best  solution  is  to  develop  and  take  advantage  of  skills  and
expertise. This also requires extensive adaptability and labour mobility.
The welfare state
The restructuring that we are facing in the Norwegian public sector is hardly of less significance than
the changes in the business sector. During the last decades the Norwegian welfare state has expanded
BIS Review 14/2000
14
rapidly. Household income and consumption have also shown steady and strong growth. We have also
witnessed a sharp expansion in the production of services in both the public and private sector.
Chart 16
Employment  growth  in  the  service  industries  increased  while  declining  in  primary  industries  and
manufacturing, with a redistribution of real resources between sectors. The transfer is the result of a
steeper increase in demand for services than for goods when income rises.
Taxes were increased to finance the expansion of the welfare state. Excluding the petroleum sector, the
tax level has increased from 41% of mainland GDP in 1970 to around 48% today.
Chart 17
The tax burden in mainland Norway is among the highest in the OECD countries. Only Sweden and
Denmark have a higher tax burden. There are many reasons why further tax increases would put the
15
BIS Review 14/2000
Norwegian  welfare  state  in  jeopardy.  Tax  competition  among  countries  is  intensifying.  Several
countries have attracted new business by reducing taxes. Enterprises, capital and labour choose their
location based on tax considerations.
In principle, it is conceivable that higher taxes only affect the household sector, so that the business
sector is not exposed to a heavy tax burden. However, it is difficult to find direct or indirect taxes that
do not also affect the business sector. Higher direct and indirect taxes may lead to demands for higher
income, which will be easier to achieve the tighter the labour market is. However, companies exposed
to strong international competition have limited scope for passing on higher costs to households.
A  high  tax  level  is  particularly  dependent  on  an  efficient  tax  system.  High  tax  rates  promote  tax
planning and hamper the growth capacity of an economy. Low, broad-based tax rates are preferable to
high tax rates with a narrow base. Norway made headway with the tax reform of 1992. There is still
room for considerable improvement in the Norwegian system.
Many  public  services  are  of  considerable  economic  importance.  Infrastructure,  education,  sound
legislation  and  a  solid  judicial  system  are  necessary  for  the  economy  to  function  and  grow.  Public
services may be important in order to secure equality and security. At the same time, the public sector
is so large that it affects the economy at large. This means that requirements concerning efficiency and
adaptability must also apply to the public sector.
Chart 18
Over a twenty year period, the number of employed in the health, care and education sectors increased
by  240,000,  which  account  for  about  60%  of  the  increase  in  overall  employment  in  Norway.  The
number of employed in the health and care sector has more than doubled in 20 years. More people are
now working in this sector than in the whole of manufacturing.
Nevertheless, every day we  receive  reports  of  personnel  shortages at  hospitals, in elderly  care  or  at
schools.  The  authorities  constantly  signal  increases  in  appropriations  in  order  to  remedy  these
problems. Norway imports labour from other countries to cover its resource shortages. What are the
reasons behind this situation?
BIS Review 14/2000
16
Chart 19
Demand for health and care services rises sharply when incomes increase. The chart shows income on
the horizontal axis, and health expenditure on the vertical axis. Norwegian health service expenditure
is  on  a  par  with  or  higher  than  in  that  of  other  western  countries,  with  the  exception  of  the  US,
Germany and Switzerland. However, as a percentage of income, health expenditure in Norway is still
not particularly high.
A further reason for the situation outlined above might be the composition of the population. We know
that  in  a  few  years  health  expenditure  will  rise  sharply  because  of  an  ageing  population.  However,
current demographic trends do not indicate particularly strong pressures.
The  challenges  will  increase  considerably  in  the  years  ahead.  Continued  growth  in  incomes  and  an
ageing  population  will  boost  demand  for  health  and  care  services.  Moreover,  it  will  be  possible  to
offer services and forms of treatment that are not available today.
All this has to be provided for within tight personnel and budget constraints. The increase in  social
security  expenditure  on  pensions  will  lay  claim  to  a  steadily  increasing  share  of  overall  central
government  expenditure.  Even  with  sizeable  government  financial  assets,  these  resources  will
primarily  be  used  to  finance  the  increase  in  pension  expenditure  associated  with  the  ageing  of  the
population. Taxes cannot be increased unaccompanied by a weakening of the position of the business
sector. Therefore, it would be inappropriate to base policy decisions on the assumption that growth in
public expenditure items other than pensions can exceed GDP growth.
Allow me to illustrate this. The chart shows Norges Bank’s estimate for public purchase of health and
care  services.  The  estimate  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  public  sector  will  finance  the  same
share  of  public  services  as  today.  The  source  for  the  estimate  for  public  consumption  is  the
Government’s Long-Term Programme, and the estimate is, among other things, based on unchanged
tax rates.
The  fundamental  problem  is  that  demand  for  health  and  care  services  is  growing  faster  than  tax
revenues. There will  be  a limit  on the  extent  to  which the  state  can reduce appropriations  for  other
important social objectives such as education, research and the judicial system. Something has to give.
17
BIS Review 14/2000
Chart 20
Even after all the structural changes of recent years, there is probably still room for efficiency gains in
the health and care sector. However, this is hardly sufficient to fully address the challenges. Users may
therefore  have  to  finance  a  substantially  greater  share  of  these  services,  whether  the  services  are
provided by public or private operators. There are limits to the extent to which the public sector should
and  can  impose  user  fees  without  creating  unacceptable  distributional  effects.  A  private  insurance
system is not a fail-proof solution.
It seems obvious that there is a need for a clearer definition of the public sector’s core activities in the
health and care sector, and in other areas. There is a need for delimiting what the public sector should
finance based on tax revenues.
The main challenge
At this time last year, oil prices stood at USD 10 a barrel. The Norwegian economy had experienced a
turnaround, with a risk of a deflationary recession. Indeed, this particular risk now would seem less
prominent.  Oil  prices  have  risen  to  almost  USD 30  a  barrel.  The  period  of  sluggish  growth  now
appears to be transient. European economies are expanding while the US economy is still booming.
Even after a year of slower growth, economic activity in Norway is still high.
Over the last decade, inflation has been subdued in Norway. The economy has  expanded at a  rapid
pace  and  the  business  sector  and  public  enterprises  have  created  new  jobs.  Technology  and  the
competition  for  capital  are  engendering  structural  changes,  unrest  and  uncertainty,  but  also  provide
opportunities for renewed growth. At the same time, the stock market shows some features that may
prove to be a source of future instability.
Economic  policy  must  draw  on  the  lessons  of  the  boom  and  bust  cycles  of  the  past.  The  most
important task of monetary policy is to secure a nominal anchor for the economy. Fiscal policy and
monetary policy must be complementary. Fiscal policy determines the distribution of labour and other
real resources between the business sector and public sector activity - between exposed and sheltered
industries.
BIS Review 14/2000
18
Norway’s  state  finances  are  solid  and  will  be  further  strengthened  in  the  years  ahead.  However,
government  savings  will  hardly  exceed  the  requisite  level  implied  by  pension  expenditure  over  the
next decades. Considerations relating to the business sector and the supply of labour set limits on how
fast the public sector can expand. Given the current structure and pricing of public services - and the
many tasks assumed by the public sector - it will become increasingly difficult as each year goes by to
make ends meet in both central and local government budgets in an environment of growing demands
and  expectations.  This  probably  represents  the  greatest  challenge  to  economic  policy  in  the  years
ahead.
19
BIS Review 14/2000
