Mr Brash: Will the Reserve Bank choke the recovery?
Address  by  Dr  Donald  T  Brash,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  Auckland
Regional Chamber of Commerce & Industry, Auckland, on 21 March 2000.
 Introduction
Ladies and Gentlemen,
I was invited to give this address after a number of pretty aggressive attacks on the Reserve Bank, on
monetary policy, and on me personally in the Auckland media in late January and early February, after
the Bank increased the Official Cash Rate from 5 per cent to 5.25 per cent in the middle of January.
Who  does  Don  Brash, an  unelected  bureaucrat  whose  name  appeared  on  no  ballot  paper in the  last
election, think he is, to be making such important decisions?
Why does Don Brash refuse to engage publicly with any of the media on the issue?
Why is New Zealand the only OECD country that “persists in intervention to fuel another self-induced
recession”  (this  from  the  Auckland  Chamber  of  Commerce  itself,  using  the  same  words  after  our
increase in the Official Cash Rate in January, and again after the further increase last week)?
Wouldn’t life be much better if we simply did away with such intervention, and allowed pure market
forces to determine interest rates?
Hasn’t the Reserve Bank, and the way in which it has run monetary policy under the Reserve Bank
Act  of  1989,  caused  New  Zealand’s  huge  balance  of  payments  deficit,  and  won’t  pushing  up  the
Official Cash Rate simply make matters worse?
Why did the Bank increase the Official Cash Rate as the economy was just beginning to emerge from
the recession?
Surely  it  was  inappropriate  to  tighten  policy  when  the  Government  Statistician  has  shown  that
inflation in the latest year was below the mid-point of the 0 to 3 per cent inflation target?
Why does the Reserve Bank claim the right to be the sole judge of how fast the New Zealand economy
can grow?
Isn’t it possible that New Zealand, like the United States and other developed countries, can now grow
faster than before without inflation?
These and other questions poured forth – and this despite the fact that January’s modest increase of
25 basis points had already been fully priced into financial markets (as indeed last week’s adjustment
to the OCR had been also)!
Some questions based on misunderstanding
I welcome the opportunity to respond to these questions this morning. Some of them raise important
issues, though I think it is fair to say also that others simply reflect misunderstandings.
For example, and contrary to the view once expressed by former Prime Minister David Lange, there is
no  sense  in  which  Don  Brash  has  huge  or  unfettered  power.  Parliament  has  made  it  clear  that  the
Reserve  Bank  must  use  its  ability  to  influence  monetary  conditions  to  maintain  price  stability.
Parliament  has  made  it  clear  that  what  price  stability  means  has  to  be  the  subject  of  a  formal
agreement between the Government and the Bank’s Governor. And of course, that agreement currently
requires me to keep the CPI inflation rate between 0 and 3 per cent (with some qualifications). The
Government has made it clear that that is what I have to deliver, and under the Reserve Bank Act the
1
BIS Review 25/2000
Government has the right to change that target, unilaterally if they wish to do so, provided that any
change is made public.
So any decisions which Don Brash makes are tightly constrained, are based on the best information
which  my  colleagues  can  gather,  and  are  made  to  achieve  an  objective  which  Parliament  has  laid
down. In no sense am I an unconstrained bureaucrat.
The  suggestion  that  I  am  reluctant  to  engage  in  debate  with  the  media  arose,  I  suspect,  because  in
January we issued a press statement announcing and explaining the increase in the Official Cash Rate
but  then  declined  to  answer  further  media  questions.  It  is  always  a  difficult  judgement  about  how
frequently the Bank should comment on monetary conditions “on the record”. On that occasion, I felt
that had I given an interview to one journalist I would have had to give interviews to quite a number,
and I was reluctant to run the risk of sending a multiplicity of messages which might have confused
more  than  it  enlightened.  In  general,  however,  we  are  more  accessible  to  the  media  than  any  other
central  bank  that  I  know  of,  and  no  central  bank  is  more  transparent  about  the  rationale  for  its
decisions.
And have we been the only central bank in an OECD country to adjust monetary policy in a tightening
direction  in  recent  times?  Hardly.  In  the  last  six  months,  the  central  banks  of  Australia,  Canada,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, the United States and the European Monetary Union have
all tightened monetary policy on several occasions. That in itself does not make it sensible for us to
tighten policy, of course, but at very least it makes it clear that what we have been doing is typical of
what is happening in many parts of the world.
But why not let “pure market forces” determine interest rates? As somebody who has a great deal of
confidence in market forces, it feels a bit strange to have to disagree with those who advocate letting
market forces be the sole determinant of interest rates. Of course, market forces do determine interest
rates to a very large degree. Central banks really have a strong influence only on short-term interest
rates. But why do we need central banks at all? This is not the place to give a comprehensive answer
to this question.1 But it might be worth noting that, to the best of my  knowledge, no country in the
world currently operates without the services of a central bank. In other words, all countries that I am
aware of have their own central bank, or effectively use the services of another country’s central bank
(through  using  that  other  country’s  currency,  or  tying  their  own  currency  to  that  of  some  other
country). And all of those central banks intervene, as we do, by influencing short-term interest rates.
What about the balance of payments? Surely, the Reserve Bank and its obsession with price stability
have been a major contributor to the large current account deficit which New Zealand has experienced
over the last decade? Well, actually no. New Zealand has had a current account deficit in every year
since 1974, through a range of monetary policy regimes. Indeed, the largest deficit experienced over
that 25 year period, relative to GDP, was in the mid-seventies, with another very large deficit in the
mid-eighties.
I am myself absolutely persuaded that, even if the Reserve Bank Act were amended to make the Bank
responsible for reducing the balance of payments deficit, monetary  policy  has  no  ability  to  produce
any  sustainable  reduction  in  that  deficit.  Indeed,  I  do  not  even  know  whether  reducing  a  current
account deficit would involve tightening monetary policy (which would push up the exchange rate but
slow  down  domestic  spending)  or  easing  monetary  policy  (which  would  tend  to  push  down  the
exchange rate but accelerate domestic spending).
But surely it was daft for the Reserve Bank to tighten policy just as the New Zealand economy was
emerging from a recession? Well, it might have been daft to do that if that is what we had done, but of
course  we  did  not.  New  Zealand  experienced  a  brief,  mild,  recession  in  the  first  half  of  1998,  in
significant part because of the impact of the Asian crisis and of a severe drought. But the economy
1 But  see  “Monetary  policy  and  the  free-market  economy”,  an  address  to  the  Auckland  Manufacturers’  Association,
22 February 1996.
BIS Review 25/2000
2
started growing again in the third quarter of 1998, and despite a few wobbles has been growing with
increasing vigour since that time.
Most commentators believe that over calendar 1999 the economy grew by over 4 per cent, and that is
in  line  with  our  own  estimate.  (We  know  that  the  economy  grew  by  3.1  per  cent  in  the  first  three
quarters of the year, and our Monetary Policy Statement published last week suggested that December
quarter GDP grew by a further 1 per cent. Many commentators are already suggesting that that 1 per
cent estimate will prove to be too low.) It also seems very clear that as a result of that growth the small
amount of excess productive capacity which existed in the economy through much of 1998 and 1999
has now been largely, or perhaps completely, used up. A tightening of monetary policy over the last
four months has been entirely appropriate.
So those are the questions and comments with which it is pretty easy to deal.
More fundamental questions
But there are some fundamental questions which must be taken more seriously, questions about the
relationship between inflation and growth which go to the heart of monetary policy decision-making.
How fast can the New Zealand economy grow without generating inflation? What does 1999 tell us
about the answer to that question? Let me try to answer those questions, while acknowledging that in
some  areas  we  ourselves  do  not  have  answers.  Before  doing  that,  it  may  be  helpful  to  explain
something about the way we look at this issue.
This is best illustrated in a graph.
3
BIS Review 25/2000
The straight line A/B represents the gradual growth in the economy’s capacity to deliver goods and
services without inflation. If demand exceeds the line A/B, then prices will have a tendency to rise. If
demand falls short of that line, then prices will have a tendency to fall. (I say “have a tendency to rise”
and “have a tendency to fall” because of course there are many other things which have an influence
on prices, including changes in international prices, changes in government charging policy, changes
in tariff policies, and similar factors.)
The slope of the line, in other words the trend rate of growth in the economy’s capacity to supply, is
largely driven by factors like the growth in the labour force, the quality of the education system, the
quality  of  management  decision-making,  the  openness  of  the  economy,  the  quality  of  the  judicial
system,  the  quality  of  the  industrial  relations  framework,  and  so  on.  Monetary  policy  can  help  by
delivering price stability, because that helps people interpret relative price changes more easily than
they  can  do  in  the  presence  of  high  and  variable  inflation,  and  avoids  the  distortions  which  the
interaction of inflation with the tax system often creates. But the main factors affecting trend growth
are the other ones I have mentioned. Monetary policy helps at the margin by keeping prices stable.
In  practice,  of  course,  A/B  is  not  a  straight  line  –  it  varies  in  response  to  a  whole  raft  of  factors,
including things like changes in net migration.
Like the capacity to supply, demand also tends to fluctuate – in response to changes in international
conditions, in response to changes in public confidence, in response to changes in government policy,
in response to the introduction of new inventions, in response to changes in wealth, in response to a
whole host of things – and yes, in response to changes in monetary policy.
The key point to note is that when demand falls short of the economy’s capacity, as at points C and E,
it  is  possible  for  the  economy  to  grow  rapidly  while  at  the  same  time  inflation  is  low  or  falling.
Conversely,  when  demand  exceeds  the  economy’s  capacity,  as  at  D,  it  is  perfectly  possible  for  the
economy to grow very slowly, or indeed even to shrink somewhat, while at the same time inflation is
rising.  It  seems  to  me  that,  conceptually  at  least,  point  C  represents  the  state  of  the  New  Zealand
economy  in  the  early  nineties  (with  very  rapid  growth  but  low  inflation  despite  a  big  fall  in  the
exchange  rate);  D  represents  the  state  of  the  economy  in  1996  and  1997  (with  growth  slowing  but
inflation pushing up to and beyond the top of the then 0 to 2 per cent target range); and E represents
where  we  have  been  over  the  last  couple  of  years  (with  the  economy  first  contracting  briefly,  then
growing quite strongly, but with inflation low or falling).
Seen in this light, we should perhaps not have been surprised that there was very little inflation in the
second half of 1999, despite the fact that growth in that half of the year probably ran at an annualised
rate of over 6 per cent; or that inflation in the year as a whole was just 1.3 per cent, despite growth in
the whole year of at least 4 per cent. As already mentioned, other factors influence the inflation rate in
the short-term of course – things like international oil prices, changes in government pricing policies,
and so on – but the trend inflation which is the proper focus of monetary policy is basically a function
of the relationship between demand and the economy’s capacity to supply.
But  of  course  this  tells  us  nothing  about  how  fast  the  New  Zealand  economy  can  grow  without
generating inflation. What is that “sustainable growth rate”? What, in other words, is the slope of the
line  A/B?  Nobody,  and  certainly  not  the  Reserve  Bank,  knows  the  answer  to  that  question  with
certainty. But because the answer to the question is so fundamental to our decisions about monetary
policy, we can not avoid making an estimate of that sustainable growth rate. We are forced to reach a
judgement on the matter.
At  the  present  time,  we  estimate  that  the  sustainable  growth  rate  of  the  New  Zealand  economy  is
around 3 per cent per annum. Of course, the economy can grow faster than that for a time if it starts
from a situation of excess capacity, as was the case in the early nineties and was the case in mid-1998.
But when that excess capacity is used up, the economy needs to slow to about the sustainable growth
rate or risk inflation beginning to pick up.
Some people worry that the Reserve Bank can do considerable damage to the economy by assuming
too  low  a  sustainable  growth  rate,  by  assuming,  say,  a  3  per  cent  growth  rate  where  in  reality  the
economy could grow at 4 or 5 per cent if only the Bank would allow demand to expand more rapidly.
BIS Review 25/2000
4
But if the economy is really capable of growing at 5 per cent and the Bank runs monetary policy on
the assumption that it is only capable of growing at 3 per  cent, then  quite quickly  demand  will  fall
below capacity to supply, there will be a strong tendency for prices to fall, and the inflation rate gets
pushed  down  towards  the  bottom  of  the  0  to  3  per  cent  target  range.  And  since  we  take  not  going
through the bottom of the target as seriously as we take not going through the top, we are forced to
ease monetary policy to let demand expand. In other words, we can’t avoid making a judgement about
sustainable growth, and we can’t get it wrong for too long before we are forced to adjust our estimate.
Indeed,  we  had  a  rather  higher  estimate  of  the  sustainable  growth  rate  of  the  economy  in  the
mid-nineties but revised it down as we found inflation  consistently  pushing  up towards,  and  briefly
beyond,  the  top  of  the  target  range.  Whenever  any  new  piece  of  data  comes  out  about  inflation  or
GDP, we look again at whether our current estimate of sustainable growth is still reasonable.
What about the “new paradigm”? As discussed in our Monetary Policy Statement last week, there are
those  who  believe  that  recent  US  experience,  with  rapid  growth  and  low  inflation,  points  towards
some new ability for modern economies operating with the latest technology and in competition with
producers  from  all  over the  world to  grow  more  rapidly  than  previously  believed  without  inflation.
Local optimists argue that New Zealand too could see more rapid growth with low inflation if only the
Reserve Bank were not so cautious.
Others suggest that, even in the US, the conjunction of low inflation with rapid growth has reflected in
large  part  the  disinflationary  impact  of  some  one-off  factors,  such  as  the  recent  weakness  in  world
commodity prices, and the recent strength of the US dollar. They note that there is not yet any strong
evidence  in  New  Zealand  to  suggest  that  there  has  been  a  significant  increase  in  the  trend  rate  of
productivity growth of the sort which might be required to justify a belief in the “new paradigm” in
New Zealand.
As our Statement last week noted, we are not yet persuaded that there is evidence of any fundamental
change in the relationship between growth and inflation in New Zealand. But we are open-minded on
the issue, and will continue to examine the data for evidence of such a change. Indeed, a whole section
of the Statement was devoted to acknowledging that, while we have no doubt about the need to reduce
the stimulus which monetary policy has been providing to the economy in recent times, there is much
less certainty about how far monetary policy will need to tighten beyond the next few months.
Conclusion
And this is my main message to you today. All the evidence suggests that, after a very brief recession
two years ago and growth of 3 to 4 per cent per annum since the middle of 1998, the excess productive
capacity in the economy is largely gone. (In other words, referring back to my graph, we have passed
point E and the demand line is very close indeed to the supply line.) It was appropriate that monetary
conditions were stimulatory while demand fell well short of capacity. If we are right that demand and
supply are  now  close  to balance,  however  – and there is  now  a  large  body  of  official statistics  and
unofficial  anecdotes  supporting  this  view  –  it  is  high  time  that  this  stimulus  was  removed.  And  of
course  that  is  what  we  have  been  seeking  to  do  with  the  increases  in  the  Official  Cash  Rate  in
November,  January,  and  now  in  March.  We  project  that  we  will  need  to  continue  this  reduction  in
stimulus, this easing back on the accelerator, over the next few months.
But  will  we  need to  step on  the  brakes,  and  if  so, how  hard?  The  answer,  as  so  often  in  economic
matters, is “it depends”. Our Statement projects some need for monetary policy to become restrictive,
to apply the brakes, over the next year or two. But at this stage this seems likely to involve a rather
milder tightening in monetary conditions than has been the case historically.
One of the reasons for this belief is that New Zealanders now carry a lot more debt, relative to their
incomes,  than  they  did  a  decade  ago.  We  are  assuming  a  relatively  moderate  rate  of  growth  in
household sector expenditure in the next few years as a result. In particular, we are assuming that the
rate at which new debt is taken on will slow down as compared with the nineties, and that increases in
interest rates will have a bigger impact on consumption expenditure and even on new house-building
than in the nineties.
5
BIS Review 25/2000
Of course, we could be wrong on this assumption, in either direction. There is not much evidence yet
that increased debt levels have encouraged a slow-down in the rate at which consumption is growing,
so it is possible that demand arising from the household sector will be stronger than we now project,
requiring firmer monetary conditions than we now project.
Conversely, debt levels may be such that even small increases in interest rates induce a slow-down in
consumption spending and in house-building, requiring monetary conditions to be rather easier than
now projected.
Another  important  area  of  uncertainty  is  the  exchange  rate.  At  the  present  time,  the  New  Zealand
dollar is close to its lowest level ever, on a trade-weighted basis. There are many reasons for this. New
Zealand  short-term  interest  rates  have  been  lower  than  those  in  several  other  English-speaking
countries,  providing  little  inducement  to  foreigners  to  invest  in  New  Zealand  dollar  assets.  The
commodity prices of greatest relevance to New Zealand seem to be recovering rather more slowly than
do some other commodity prices. There has been some nervousness about the political environment,
among investors both here and abroad. New Zealand has a large current account deficit, which looks
likely to improve only slowly.
To the extent that the exchange rate is weak because of low commodity prices, we know that offsetting
the stimulus of the low exchange rate is the disinflationary effect of weak export prices. This would
suggest no need for monetary policy to react.
On the other hand, to the extent that exchange rate weakness simply reflects other factors, such as the
current  account  deficit  or  nervousness  about  the  political  environment,  the  Bank  may  well  need  to
adjust monetary policy to avoid the total demand pressures on the New Zealand economy exceeding
the country’s capacity to supply. In this event, of course, interest rates may need to rise by more than
projected in our Statement last week, as I noted at that time.
But  of  one  thing  you  can  be  absolutely  certain.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  absolutely  not  the  slightest
interest  in  choking  off  the  recovery.  All  the  evidence  suggests  that  the  economy  has  been  growing
with  increasing  vigour  over  the  last  couple  of  years,  and  most  commentators  expect  it  to  continue
growing at between 3 and 4 per cent per annum for at least the next couple of years. All the evidence
suggests that, in these circumstances, it is high time to ease off the accelerator and ponder whether to
touch the brakes.
As Ian Macfarlane, the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, said recently, an alternative way of
describing the objective of a central bank committed to safe-guarding price stability is to say that the
central  bank  wants  to  let  the  economy  “grow  as  fast  as  possible  without  breaking  the  inflation
objective, but no faster”.2 That is exactly how I see the mission of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Price stability is not an end in itself. Rather, it has always been the best contribution which monetary
policy can make to allowing the economy to grow at its maximum sustainable pace.
2
Speech by Mr Ian Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the CEDA annual general meeting dinner,
Melbourne, 28 November 1996.
BIS Review 25/2000
6
