Tony Latter: Bond markets - where are we heading?
Speech by  Mr Tony  Latter,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  to  the
conference  “The  Credit  Revolution:  Charting  Change  in  the  Asian  Debt  Markets”,  at  the  Conrad
International, Hong Kong, on 12 July 2000.
 A notable feature of the world’s leading national bond markets over the past couple of years has been
the  adjustment  required  of  both issuers  and  investors  to  the  often  remarkable  shifts  into  surplus,  or
much  reduced  deficit,  that  have  occurred  in  the  financial  positions  of  governments  in  most  major
economies - with  the  notable  exception  of  Japan - as  a  result  of  the  successful  application  of  fiscal
discipline, assisted in some cases by favourable economic growth or a beneficial cyclical position.
This  has  led  to  significant  net  retirement  of  government  debt,  notably  in  the  United  States  and  the
United  Kingdom.  For  example,  in  January  the  US  Treasury  projected  buy-backs  of  $30  billion  this
year,  and  some  observers  now  expect  that  figure  to  be  exceeded.  The  design  of  debt  retirement
strategies has itself posed some unfamiliar, though perhaps not entirely unpleasant, challenges for the
authorities, as they search for the most cost-effective means in terms of prospective interest savings,
grapple with the novelty of reverse auctions, or consider how best to  sustain and  possibly  reinforce
liquidity of the key remaining benchmark issues.
There  are  a  number  of  significant  consequences  of  this  transformation  of  government  finances  for
markets more generally.
First, the yield curve for government bonds may become distorted and lose its normal relationship to
other yields. This has been especially noticeable in the United States, where the concentration of buy-
backs  in  the  longer  dates  has  caused  an  inversion  of  the  Treasury  yield  curve  which  has  not  been
paralleled in, for instance, the swap curve.
As a result of this distortion of the historic pricing relationship between government issues and the rest
of the market, that yield differential may become less well representative of intrinsic credit spreads, so
that investors may have to discover or devise new benchmarks in other parts of the credit spectrum.
Next, one might expect the reduction in the  stock  of  government  debt to  open  the  way  to  so-called
“crowding-in” of private sector debt issuance. Indeed, in the US and the international markets there
has been quite a surge in corporate bond issuance. But the process is not so smooth or straightforward
as one might imagine. Because investors in government paper are typically those who are the more
risk averse, they would expect to earn a suitable risk premium as compensation for moving down the
risk ladder into corporate paper - at any rate a better return than typical existing holders of such paper
would  be  content  with.  Consequently,  although  top-rated  corporate  paper  may  benefit  from  the
scramble  for  quality,  lesser  ratings  may  face  a  rather  inelastic  demand  for  any  additional  issuance.
Thus,  although  overall  private  sector  issuance  may  increase  as  a  means  of  closing  the  sector’s
financing gap, there is some evidence - perhaps not conclusive - that this may be at the cost of some
hardening of yields relative to government yields, at least for lesser names. Of course, in some cases
the increase in yields may just be the more straightforward consequence of a rising level of corporate
gearing. There are also indications that increased debt market activity may have been more evident in
the  floating  rate  sector  than  for  longer-dated  fixed  rate  issues,  where  it  may  have  been  difficult  to
establish appropriate new benchmarks.
Thus,  although  crowding-in  may  be  occurring,  the  process  is  more  complex  than  the  simple
like-for-like substitution of corporate for government paper.
Another  consideration  for  certain  investors  is  that  they  increasingly  have  to  accept  that  a  strategy
based  simply  on  purchasing  the  paper  of  top-rated  issuers  such  as  governments  or  multinational
organisations may no longer be feasible or economic. Yet, if they are going to embrace lesser-rated
paper in their portfolios, they may need to shift their approach towards a somewhat more sophisticated
1
BIS Review 57/2000
portfolio strategy, which permits the holding of lower-rated paper at prices which appropriately reflect
the risks, with the risks balanced across the whole portfolio. This may necessitate changes in the ways
in which fund managers are instructed to address their task and in the tools which they need to perform
it.
Given  these  developments,  the  role  of  credit  rating  agencies  may  assume  a  still  higher  profile  in
guiding investors.
I have mentioned these global trends in order to illustrate how even those markets which are regarded
as  mature  have  to  adapt  continually  to  changing  circumstances;  and  I  haven’t  even  mentioned  the
potential role of internet trading, virtual exchanges and the like, which may pose still greater strategic,
managerial and operational challenges.
If we turn now to consider the debt markets specifically in this part of the world, we encounter at least
as great an array of challenges, albeit in somewhat different circumstances: for example, in a number
of Asian countries government issuance has still been on the increase.
Last year saw something of a milestone for regional markets with the publication, by a working group
under the chairmanship of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, of the APEC compendium of sound
practices to facilitate the development of domestic bond markets. This comprised a comprehensive list
of  recommendations  covering  topics  such  as  government  involvement  in  the  market,  level  playing
fields, consistent tax policies, sound regulation, clarity of responsibilities, transparency, robustness and
efficiency of market systems, and so on.
Crucial  though  these  considerations  may  be  for  the  foundation  of  sound  markets,  they  are,  by  and
large, just the basic tenets. Even when  they  have  all  been  observed  or  put  into  practice, there  is  no
certainty that active debt markets will emerge. In other words, whilst these may be a set of more or
less necessary conditions for market development, they are unlikely to prove sufficient. However good
the  infrastructure  may  be,  it  is  the  issuers,  investors  and  financial  intermediaries  which  eventually
determine whether there is a active market or not.
Here in  Hong  Kong  the  debt  market  has  grown  significantly  in  the  recent  past,  and  the  increase  in
issues by non-financial corporates has been encouraging. But we cannot escape the fact that we are
still a relatively small market and that, despite the increases in primary issuance, secondary activity
remains subdued.
“So”, people ask me, “what is the Hong Kong Monetary Authority going to do about it?” In fact I am
not particularly comfortable with the implied presumption that we should be the first port of call when
any  problems  or  deficiencies  are  identified.  Thus,  while  I  should  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to
explain what we are in fact doing or  intending  to  do,  I  want  also  to  indicate  what,  in  my  view,  we
cannot or should not do.
We are involved in the working group established by the Securities and Futures Commission to review
Hong  Kong’s  laws  and  regulations  relating  to  offers  of  securities.  Over  the  years,  several  of  the
procedures have become outdated or have failed adequately to accommodate market innovations. In
some instances they are an obstacle to bond market development. There are some complex legal and
administrative issues here, which will take time to address. The next step in the process is likely to be
the issuance by the SFC of a consultative paper.
Another area which we are looking at is taxation. We acknowledge that there are serious anomalies in
the current arrangements for taxing interest income in Hong Kong but, given the uniqueness of Hong
Kong’s overall tax structure, and the conflicting aims of retaining international competitiveness on the
one hand and preserving fiscal revenue on the other, there is no very easy solution. What we are doing
is to sponsor, under the auspices of the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research, a fundamental
study  of  the  taxation  of  financial  intermediation  in  Hong  Kong.  This  study  will  hopefully  further
inform the debate on this tricky subject. I would not at this stage wish to guess as to the direction in
which our advice will eventually point.
BIS Review 57/2000
2
We  are  also  overseeing  the  development  of  a  US  dollar  payment  clearing  system  for  Hong  Kong,
which will provide an enhanced framework within which the market in US dollar debt securities could
develop if issuers and investors so wished.
There are  also  two initiatives  on  which  we  are  actively  engaged  in  collaboration  with  others  in  the
region, though each is still very much in its early stages.
One is the question of a possibly wider role for credit rating agencies. I am not referring here to any
desire to usurp the role of those global agencies which are household names to us, even though we
may sometimes feel that their understanding of economics and business in this part of the world could
be  deepened  and  the  rating  process  itself  made  more  transparent.  They  focus  mainly  on  rating
internationally traded paper. What this region may need is better arrangements for rating domestic and
regional issues. How and by whom this might be effected is for discussion. Plainly, it is essential that
the investor community has confidence in the expertise and integrity of rating agencies. A more local
focus by established agencies, perhaps operating via joint ventures, might ensure such confidence. If
that is achieved, then the broader application of ratings may help expand the investor base, notably to
embrace  those  institutional  or  individual  investors  who  cannot  themselves  afford  to  make  credit
assessments of every issue but who are favourably disposed towards bond investment in principle.
The other initiative in hand is to study the potential for more activity in credit enhancement. In some
other centres, notably the United States, there exist insurance or guarantee corporations, typically of
triple A status themselves, whose business is to sell their backing to the bond issuance of a lesser name
so that the latter will be attractive in the market. There has hitherto been only limited activity of this
sort in this region, although there were signs of it building up before the Asian financial crisis struck.
One of the difficulties faced in trying to encourage this business is that the major providers, such as
the  so-called  “monoline”  insurance  corporations  in  the  United  States,  may  not  find  it  profitable  to
work  on  what  for  them  may  be  relatively  small,  plain  vanilla  deals,  when  compared  to  the  fees
available  from  larger  and  more  complex  deals  in  North  America.  Another  problem  is  that  such
companies  tend  not  to  look  to  enhance  securities  with  original  ratings  below  triple B.  This  in  turn
raises questions about fundamental credit quality in the region as well as about the potentially wider
role for rating agencies.
Another area where we might expect to see further innovation is the securitisation of pools of assets
such as mortgages or receivables. We have recently witnessed the resurgence of the mortgage-backed
security market in Hong Kong, spearheaded by the Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation. This  market
has the potential to develop even further if the property market recovers buoyancy. But there is also
probably scope for more activity in the securitisation of such things as credit card receivables, leasing
receivables and the like. These could form attractive debt securities, although, as we have seen with so
many  issues  of  securities,  the  existence  of  the  securities  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  there  is  an
active market in them after the initial placement or sale.
Thus, we are by no means standing still. But, speaking for the Monetary Authority itself, we see our
role as confined largely to that of a catalyst for innovation or a provider of public goods in cases where
market mechanisms are unable to respond effectively to an evident need - although it may in practice
be difficult to define particular situations in quite such clear-cut terms. It was, for example, partly in
that catalytic role that we first issued Exchange Fund paper a decade ago as a means of kick-starting
the debt market and supplying high quality assets for liquidity management purposes, accompanied by
the  establishment  of  the  Central  Moneymarkets  Unit  as  a  centralised  electronic  depositary  for  debt
instruments.
More recently the CMU has established electronic links with Euroclear, Clearstream and some other
national  depositaries  in  our  own  region.  In  some  of  these  developments,  as  in  the  emergence  of
initiatives to develop internet trading in bonds, we may be seeing the beginnings of a more global and
potentially more liquid and transparent market than has hitherto been typical for debt instruments.
Returning to the matter of the Monetary Authority’s role, we do not seek to coerce any parties to use a
particular market; nor without very sound reason to stimulate activity artificially; nor to take a lead as
issuer,  investor,  arranger  or  market-maker  when  others  should  be  equally  capable  of  fulfilling  such
3
BIS Review 57/2000
functions; nor ourselves to subsidise activities the viability of which ought clearly to be left to market
determination.
It is against this background that we have, for example, resisted suggestions that we raise the volume
of Exchange Fund paper issuance in  order  merely  to  satisfy  the  market’s  appetite.  We  would  much
prefer  to  see  other  issuers  coming  forward.  We  are  anyway  constrained  by  our  currency  board
arrangements  only  to  increase  the  outstanding  quantity  of  Exchange  Fund  paper  to  reflect  interest
payments or in response to enduring inflows into Hong Kong.
Another aspect of debt market development  which  merits  some  discussion  is the potential  for  retail
activity.  It  is  worth  reminding  ourselves  that,  although  in  several  countries  retail  investors  have
historically  been  loyal  direct  holders  of  government  or  municipal  paper,  invariably  for  long-term
investment rather than trading, only in the United States has there been much direct retail interest in
the corporate paper market. We have been happy in Hong Kong to provide the means for the small
investor to access Exchange Fund notes or Mortgage Corporation notes by listing them on the Stock
Exchange,  but  one  should  acknowledge  that  bond  markets  as  a  whole  tend  to  be  dominated  by
professionals, trading on an over-the-counter basis, and we should not be surprised, therefore, if retail
activity is relatively modest.
This  does  not  mean,  however,  that  the  man  in  the  street  has  no  need  in  his  wealth  portfolio  for
instruments in this  section  of  the  risk-reward  spectrum.  Rather,  because  of  the  difficulty  of  making
individual  credit  assessments  and  the  probably  relatively  high  transaction  cost  facing  the  small
investor, he is more likely to have indirect exposure to the debt market through collective investment
schemes, pensions, etc, or to keep money in a bank deposit while the bank invests in debt instruments
- a growing feature of bank balance sheets nowadays as an alternative to conventional lending.
Mandatory provident funds are one example of such collective arrangements, and their advent in Hong
Kong may be expected to add to the demand for good quality debt instruments. The prospect of an
additional  channel  of  demand  should  to  some  extent  stimulate  interest  in  issuance  from  the  supply
side.
In  sum,  there  are  many  opportunities  for  innovation  and  development  in  our  debt  markets.  I  have
mentioned rating agencies, credit enhancement, more varieties of asset-backed securities, potential for
more channelling through collective investment vehicles, the important though perhaps modest role of
the direct retail investor, opportunities relating to MPFs, and so on. These are, by and large, activities
for  players  in  the  banking  and  finance  industry  to  follow  through  themselves  if  they  see  the
commercial justification. I am sure that at least some of you here today are already giving attention to
at least some of these topics. I hasten to add that not every bright idea necessarily results in a viable
business proposition.  But  I  would  expect  that there is enough  potential  here  to  ensure  that  the  debt
markets  in  Hong  Kong  as  well  as  in  the  wider  region  continue  to  develop  and  prosper  as  we  look
ahead.
BIS Review 57/2000
4
