Andrew Crockett: Marrying the micro- and macro-prudential
dimensions of financial stability
Remarks  by  Mr  Andrew  Crockett,  General  Manager  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and
Chairman of the Financial Stability Forum, before the Eleventh International Conference of Banking
Supervisors, held in Basel, 20-21 September 2000.
 This biennial event, which on this occasion the BIS has the honour of co-hosting, bears witness to the
remarkable progress made by the supervisory profession over the last quarter of a century. Unforeseen
by  most,  except  perhaps  the  visionary,  the  failure  in  1974  of  a  little-known  medium-sized  bank,
Bankhaus  Herstatt,  was  to  mark  the  beginning  of  a  long  journey  in  the  field  of  international
co-operation  among  banking  supervisory  authorities.  The  Basel  Concordat,  the  original  Capital
Accord and the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision are but a few of the landmarks that
have set an example for regulators in the rest of the financial sector.
From  its  early  beginnings  in  the  Basel  Committee,  this  process  has  progressively  extended  its
geographical and institutional scope, embracing an increasing number of banking supervisors around
the globe and, slowly but surely, involving securities and insurance supervisors as well. More recently,
reflecting the growing prominence of financial stability objectives in the international policy agenda,
banking regulation and supervision  have  become  a  core  component  of  the  reform  of  what  has  been
somewhat grandiosely called the “international financial architecture”.
And  yet,  impressive  as  the  road  travelled  is,  the  journey  has  probably  just  begun.  The  task  of
addressing financial instability is far from over. It is widely recognised that further progress is called
for in the design and implementation of policies. The current efforts to revise the Capital Accord so as
to heighten its sensitivity to risk and those to strengthen the geographical reach in implementing the
Core Principles are vivid illustrations of this awareness. Moreover, the goalposts never stay still.
Where will the journey take us? In sketching the challenges ahead in the 21st century, as befits today’s
theme, I would like to share with you some personal reflections on a possible future direction. I shall
argue that in order to build most productively on past achievements in the pursuit of financial stability,
we should strive for a better marriage between the micro-prudential and macro-prudential dimensions
of the task. We should, in other words, consolidate a shift in perspective that is already taking place,
complementing  the  micro-prudential  perspective  with  increased  awareness  of,  and  attention  to,  the
macro-prudential facet.
Banking  supervisors  have  a  key  role  to  play  in  this  endeavour,  and,  indeed,  have  already  taken  an
active  part  in  its  early  stages.  But  other  authorities  are  inevitably  involved.  Consolidating  the  shift
implies  a  greater  consensus  on  diagnosis,  remedies  and  allocation  of  responsibilities  than  exists  at
present. My remarks are intended simply as a small contribution to the building of that consensus. The
changes in regulatory perspective I will discuss parallel to those in the evolution of economic thinking
in  the  20th  century,  which  saw  the  emergence  of  macroeconomics  as  a  separate  discipline  and,
subsequently, a movement towards a longer-term horizon in policy making.
In  what  follows,  I  will  first  try  and  be  very  precise  in  defining  the  micro-  and  macro-prudential
dimensions  of  financial  stability,  terms  which  are  increasingly  used  but  have  eluded  a  clear
categorisation. I will then elaborate on the reasons why a further shift is in my view justified in the
light of the nature and costs of financial instability. After tracing the implications for regulatory and
supervisory policy, I will conclude by identifying broader policy co-ordination issues. You will excuse
me if I am deliberately provocative, in the interest of sharpening the issues and encouraging a broader
debate.
1
BIS Review 76/2000
The micro- and macro-prudential dimensions of financial stability
I.
Promising  discussions  are  often  derailed  by  lack  of  precision  in  the  definition  of  terms,  when
interlocutors think they share the same understanding but, in fact, do not. Arguably, the debate on the
micro- and macro-prudential dimensions of financial stability is one such example.
For the sake of clarity, therefore, I will put forward two intentionally stylised definitions of the terms
so as to highlight their differences. As I will portray them, they sketch the extremes of a conceptual
spectrum along which the perspectives of supervisors and other authorities can then be located. While
it is common to associate supervisors  with  the  micro-prudential  dimension, it  will  become  apparent
that, according to my definition, supervisory perspectives inevitably include elements of both, and that
the  macro-prudential  element  has  been  gaining  ground  in their thinking  in recent  years.  Indeed, the
mix differs within the supervisory profession and may even vary with the context of the discussion.
The  distinction  between  the  micro-  and  macro-prudential  dimensions  of  financial  stability  is  best
drawn  in  terms  of  the  objective  of  the  tasks  and  of  the  conception  of  the  mechanisms  influencing
economic outcomes. It has less to do with the instruments used in the pursuit of those objectives. Let
me elaborate.
The  macro-prudential  objective  can  be  defined  as  limiting  the  costs  to  the  economy  from  financial
distress, including those that arise from any moral hazard induced by the policies pursued. One could
think of this objective as limiting the likelihood of the failure, and corresponding costs, of significant
portions of the financial system. This is often loosely referred to as limiting “systemic risk”.
In  contrast,  the  micro-prudential  objective  can  be  seen  as  limiting  the  likelihood  of  failure  of
individual institutions. Again, loosely  put, this  means  limiting  “idiosyncratic risk”.  So  defined, this
objective is in turn probably best rationalised as a means of protecting depositors.
An  obvious  implication  is  that  the  macro-prudential  dimension  focuses  on  the  risk  of  correlated
failures, pays great attention to those characteristics of an institution, such as size, that determine its
significance  for  the  economy,  and  regards  peer-group  analysis  as  less  relevant,  or  potentially
misleading, unless tied to an institution’s systemic role. After all, deviations from average behaviour
assume  that  the  average  is  correct.  The  micro-prudential  dimension,  by  contrast,  considers  each
institution  in  its  own  right,  is  thus  not  concerned  with  correlations  per  se  and  views  peer-group
analysis as a natural monitoring tool.
To bring out the contrast, think of the financial system as a portfolio of securities, ie the individual
institutions.  The  macro-prudential  perspective  would  focus  on  the  overall  performance  of  the
portfolio;  the  micro-prudential  vision  would  give  equal  and  separate  weight  to  the  performance  of
each of its constituent securities.
Compare,  for  instance,  the  solvency  standard  that  might  be  appropriate  from  a  macro-prudential
perspective with that which would be consistent with the micro-prudential objective I have sketched.
By solvency standard I mean, for simplicity, a target probability of insolvency.
First,  the  macro-prudential  solvency  standard  for  individual  institutions  would  be  calibrated  with
reference to their systemic significance; its micro-prudential counterpart would be uniform for all.
Second, the macro-prudential standard for the system as a whole would be derived from a top-down
approach,  based  on  a  view  of  the  likelihood  and  costs  of  a  systemic  crisis.  This,  in  turn,  would
inevitably imply a judgement about the possible correlation of financial difficulties among institutions.
The corresponding micro-prudential standard would be derived from a bottom-up approach, from the
aggregation of the uniform solvency standard that would apply to a “representative” institution.
As a corollary, the acceptable probability of a systemic crisis implicit in a macro-prudential standard
would be lower than the acceptable probability of distress for any individual institution, because of the
higher costs in terms of output. On the other hand, the overall level of capital in the system could be
either higher or lower, depending on the size of the institutions and the correlation of exposures, which
determine the effective degree of diversification in the system.
BIS Review 76/2000
2
In  terms  of  conceptions  of the  functioning  of  the  economy,  the  macro-prudential  dimension  can  be
defined as viewing system outcomes as critically determined by the collective behaviour of individual
institutions; in economic jargon, as “endogenous”. Correspondingly, the micro-prudential dimension
can  be  seen  as  regarding  those  outcomes  as  “exogenous”  or  given  to  the  individual  firms.  As  a
corollary,  so  defined  it  also  disregards  any  feedback  of  collective  actions  on  the  condition  of
individual institutions.
It  follows  that  the  macro-prudential  paradigm  stresses  the  possibility  that  actions  that  may  seem
desirable or reasonable from the perspective of individual institutions may result in unwelcome system
outcomes. This is a logical contradiction in the micro-prudential vision as defined here.
Illustrations of such fallacies of composition are not hard to find. For instance, for a single bank it is
only  natural  to  tighten  lending  standards  in  a  recession,  but  if  all  banks  do  the  same  the  resulting
impact on economic activity can lead to a further deterioration in the credit quality of its portfolio. The
mirror image during the upswing could generate an unsustainable lending boom, sowing the seeds of
subsequent  financial  instability.  Likewise,  cutting  exposures  as  market  prices  fall  can  deepen  the
decline  in  those  prices,  leading  to  a  drying  up  of  liquidity  and  exacerbating  financial  distress.  And
similar  mechanisms  explain  why  the  aggregation  of  short-maturity  credits  on  a  single  counterparty
might actually increase the risk profile  of the individual exposures  compared  with  portfolios  with a
longer maturity.
The quintessential micro-prudential dictum is that “financial stability is ensured as long as each and
every institution is sound”. From a macro-prudential perspective, two objections can be levied against
this, on the surface, compelling statement. First, it may strive for too much; second, it may deliver too
little.
It may strive for too much, because the occasional failure of individual institutions is not the problem.
Trying  to  avoid  such  outcomes  risks  providing  excessive  protection,  with  the  result  that  market
disciplinary and allocative mechanisms are weakened.
The statement may deliver too little, because while at one level it is a truism, how the soundness of
each individual institution is pursued is crucial. Unless the authorities take into account the impact of
the collective behaviour of institutions on economic outcomes, they may fail to monitor risks and take
remedial action appropriately.
Where does the perspective of supervisors fit along this intentionally stylised micro-/macro-prudential
spectrum? In principle, it could be located anywhere. In practice, I suspect that the micro-prudential
elements still predominate.
To be sure, an increasing number of supervisors would feel quite comfortable with being associated
with the task  of limiting  systemic  risk.  Certainly,  references  to the systemic  costs of  failures  in  the
rationalisation of policies are common.  And,  as  I  will  argue later,  the  macro-prudential  facet  of the
supervisors’  task  has  indeed  been  receiving  greater  attention  in  recent  years,  especially  in  the
monitoring of potential vulnerabilities in the financial system and in the calibration of the supervisory
review process to the nature of institutions.
Nevertheless,  the  use  of  the  instruments  at  their  disposal  and  the  conception  of  the  mechanisms
underlying economic outcomes arguably reveal a greater degree of comfort with the micro-prudential
perspective. For given risks, minimum capital standards do not differentiate among banks according to
their significance for the economy. And a supervisor would hardly recommend not to tighten lending
standards  at  an  individual  bank  for  fear  that  the  end-result  at  system  level  would  be  a  further
deterioration in the credit quality of portfolios.
Most  likely,  the  comparatively  greater  micro-prudential  focus  of  supervisors  reflects  in  no  small
measure depositor (“consumer”) protection objectives. Indeed, it is common for this objective to  be
enshrined in their statutes. In addition, it may result in part from an understandable tendency to map
tools,  which  necessarily  operate  on  individual  institutions,  into  goals.  But,  as  I  shall  argue  shortly,
neither  of  these  two  conclusions  is  inevitable.  Consumer  protection  objectives  could  be  pursued
through  other  means  and  even  by  other  authorities,  while  supervisory  tools  can  also  be  oriented
towards macro-prudential objectives.
3
BIS Review 76/2000
The costs and nature of financial instability
II.
Strengthening  the  macro-prudential  orientation  of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  is
important  because  of  the  costs  and  nature  of  financial  instability.  The  main  costs  take  the  form  of
output losses. The nature of the processes generating instability puts a premium on a macro-prudential
conception of economic behaviour. Let me expand briefly on each of these points.
We care about financial instability because it is wasteful. The asset price misalignments that typically
precede  and  accompany  financial  instability  can  profoundly  affect  consumption  and  investment
decisions, misallocating resources across sectors and over time. Distress in financial institutions and
markets severely impairs the channelling of funds from savers to ultimate users and can destroy the
capacity of the financial sector to generate credit. The resulting impact on economic activity can be
severe  and  long  lasting,  and  undermine  the  effectiveness  of  traditional  macroeconomic  policy  tools
such as monetary and fiscal levers.
The direct costs of banking crises are high: above 10% of GDP in more than a dozen cases in the past
15 years, according to IMF estimates. The indirect costs, including the impact on economic activity
over time, would obviously be higher. The recent experience in Japan bears witness to the power of
the forces at work, capable of hobbling even the largest and most mature industrial countries.
In  a  narrow  sense,  depositors  may  have  been  paid  back.  But,  wearing  a  different  hat,  they  hardly
escaped the much more insidious and higher price tag of financial distress.
A macro-prudential conception of economic processes is essential to understand the nature of financial
instability, and hence to monitor and address it. Of course, the episodes of financial distress that imply
significant costs to society can result from the knock-on effects of the failure of a single institution due
purely to firm-specific factors. However, more often than not, they arise from the exposure of groups
of institutions to common risk factors. In turn, these common factors may sometimes be exogenous to
financial processes (eg, a sudden supply-induced change in the price of oil). But they are typically the
consequence  of  endogenous  forces  within  the  financial  system  that  tend  to  amplify  the  economic
cycle.
A review of the instances of financial instability would reveal some shared stylised elements. There is
first  an  over-extension  phase  during  which  financial  imbalances  build  up,  accompanied  by  benign
economic conditions. In this phase, asset prices are buoyant and their surge tends to feed, and be fed
by,  rapid  credit  expansion,  domestically  or  internationally.  Leverage,  in  overt  or  hidden  forms,
accumulates in balance sheets, masked in part by the favourable asset price developments. The trigger
for a reversal is essentially unpredictable. It can originate either in the financial sphere (eg, an asset
price correction) or in the real economy (eg a spontaneous unwinding of an investment boom). The
process then moves into reverse. Ex post, a financial cycle is evident.
Behind this recurrent pattern are serious difficulties in measuring underlying risk, and a structure of
incentives that hinders an  appropriate behavioural  response  to  changes  in  risk,  even  when  these are
correctly identified. Indicators of risk tend to be at their lowest at or close to the peak of the financial
cycle,  ie just at the point  where,  with  hindsight,  we can  see that  risk  was  greatest.  Asset  prices  are
buoyant, credit spreads are narrow and loan loss provisions low.
The tension between the micro- and macro-prudential perspectives is obvious both with respect to the
measurement of risk and the behavioural response to it.
As  regards  measurement,  economic  agents  and  markets  appear  reasonably  good  at  assessing  the
relative risk of instruments, debtors and  counterparties. They  seem  to  find it considerably  harder to
evaluate  the  absolute,  undiversifiable  risk  associated  with  the  financial  cycle.  This  requires  a  more
sophisticated  understanding  of  correlations  and  their  evolution  through  time.  In  turn,  a  proper
evaluation of the robustness of any historical relationship can only be based on some theory about the
forces  driving  the  economy  and  the  interaction  between  the  financial  and  real  sectors.  And  such  a
theory  would  need  to  recognise  the  impact  of  the  collective  behaviour  of  institutions  on  financial
distress.
BIS Review 76/2000
4
The contrast between this perspective and current methodologies for assessing market and credit risk
is  striking.  Typically,  current approaches  are  based  on  some  form  of  short-term  extrapolation  or,  at
best,  time-invariant  historical  averages.  Consider,  for  instance,  the  mechanical  inputs  used  in
calculating VaR for market risk. At bottom, approaches to measuring credit risk are not very different.
This view has important implications for how we think of risk evolving through time. The received
wisdom is that risk increases in recessions and falls in booms. In contrast, it may be more helpful to
think  of  risk  as  increasing  during  upswings,  as  financial  imbalances  build  up,  and  materialising  in
recessions. The length of the horizon here is crucial. I will return to this point in a moment.
As  regards  behavioural  responses,  incentive  structures  in  financial  markets  can  compound  the
problems arising from difficulties in measuring risk. Diversified shareholders with comparatively short
investment  horizons  can  demand  overly  ambitious  returns.  Competitive  pressures  encourage  risk
taking. The typical features of contracts and remuneration schedules for traders and money managers
can  have  a  similar  effect.  The  same  is  true  of  “herd  instinct”,  namely  the  tendency  to  conform
behaviour  to the norm,  or  to  the  presumed  better  informed,  for  fear  of being  left  behind and  in  the
hope  of  limiting  blame  in  the  event  of  failure.  And  perceptions  of  official  “safety  nets”  can  play  a
similar role.
In  different  ways  and  to  varying  degrees,  all  of  these  forms  of  behaviour  share  a  common
characteristic: they may seem reasonable, even compelling, when considered in isolation, but they can
result in undesirable outcomes once the system-wide impact of collective action is taken into account.
Implications for regulatory and supervisory policy
III.
A  strengthening  of  the  macro-prudential  orientation  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework
would have implications for the relative weight assigned to different objectives, for the treatment of
different  institutions  at  a  point  in  time,  and  for  the  assessment  and  mitigation  of  risk  over  time.
Consider each of these in turn.
In  terms  of  objectives,  a  strengthening  of  the  macro-prudential  orientation  would  call  for  a  further
broadening of focus away from narrow depositor protection and towards systemic concerns. Its main
benefit would be to permit a better balance between official intervention and market discipline. In turn,
this could be conducive to sounder individual institutions too. At least in the public’s eye, the failure
of individual institutions tends to be identified with the failure of supervisors to perform their duties.
This considerably complicates their task, encouraging forbearance rather than orderly exit.
Implementing the shift requires that specific means be in place to protect depositors in the event of
failure, relieving public pressure to forbear and adding to the credibility of the exit  threat. Targeted
deposit insurance schemes can play a useful role in this context.
In terms of the treatment of different institutions at a point in time, the shift in focus would imply the
calibration  of  regulatory  and  supervisory  arrangements  to  the  institutions’  systemic  significance.
Higher  costs  of  failure  for  the  system  call  for  a  higher  degree  of  comfort  in  the  soundness  of  the
institutions  that  generate  them.  The  greater  difficulties  in  ensuring  ex  post  their  orderly  exit  further
supports this view.
One way of implementing a calibrated approach would be through the supervisory review process. In
fact, in several supervisory jurisdictions the authorities are already paying particular attention to the
larger  and  more  complex  institutions,  a  step  consistent  with  the  shift  suggested  here.  The  planned
strengthening of Pillar II can be a powerful instrument in this connection. A second, no doubt more
complicated and controversial, possibility would be to consider extending the calibration to regulatory
capital  and  other  tools  as  well.  Obvious  concerns  about  level  playing  fields  would  need  to  be
addressed in the process.
In  terms  of  the  measurement  and  mitigation  of  risk  over  time,  the  key  challenge  is  to  take  better
account  of  the  financial  cycle  that  underlies  financial  instability.  If  risk  increases  in  upswings  and
materialises in recessions, it stands to reason that defences should be built up in upswings so as to be
relied  upon  when  the  rough  times  arrive.  This  would  strengthen  institutions’  ability  to  weather
5
BIS Review 76/2000
deteriorating  economic  conditions,  when  access  to  external  financing  becomes  more  costly  and
constrained.  Moreover,  by  leaning  against  the  wind,  it  could  reduce  the  amplitude  of  the  financial
cycle, thereby limiting the risk of financial distress in the first place.
The reasoning is very familiar to macro-economists. It underlies, for instance, the operation of built-in
fiscal  stabilisers:  tax  revenue  automatically  rises  as  income  increases  and  falls  as  income  declines,
dampening  expenditures  in  booms  and  encouraging  them  in  recessions.  But  it  can  equally  apply  to
financial stability  objectives,  whether couched in  terms  of individual institutions  or  the  system  as  a
whole.
A  crucial  element  of  this  perspective  is  the  length  of  the  horizon  over  which  risk  is  measured  and
managed.  The  horizon  is  clearly  longer  than  one  year,  a  common  yardstick  for  current  banking
practices  in  the  area  of  credit  risk,  in  line  with  the  calendar  rhythm  for  accounts  and  taxes.
Conceptually, it should span whatever time is needed for a cycle to unfold. And because the timing of
downswings  is  exceedingly  hard  to  predict,  the  approach  implies  a  focus  on  measuring  the
vulnerabilities that build up in the upswing and on the more recurrent features of cycles. We may not
know exactly when the rainy day will come, but we can be pretty sure that it will. It is not wise to
decide on policies or business strategies on the assumption that it will not, or that we can predict its
timing with sufficient foresight.
Translating the basic logic of the argument into a set of practical arrangements raises a host of difficult
issues.  What  instruments  could  be  employed?  The  range  is  potentially  quite  large,  including
provisioning  rules,  regulatory  capital,  loan-to-value  ratios  and,  more  generally,  other  tools  that  can
influence  risk  and  pricing  practices  through  the  supervisory  review  process  or,  perhaps,  disclosure
standards.  On  what  basis  would  those  tools  be  adjusted?  Issues  such  as  the  relevant  aspects  of  the
financial cycle to focus upon, the role of stress testing and the balance between rules and discretion
come  to  mind  here.  More  generally,  any  specific  proposal  would  need  to  be  assessed  on  its  own
merits,  including  an  evaluation  of  any  unintended  side  effects,  such  as  its  impact  on  regulatory
arbitrage and competitive conditions.
These issues, however, are no different from those that pertain to any modification in regulatory and
supervisory arrangements. In fact, in some supervisory jurisdictions changes in provisioning practices
more  in  line  with  the  logic  outlined  here  either  have  been  implemented  or  are  being  given  serious
consideration.  Likewise,  the  increasing  use  of  stress  testing  and  current  efforts  devoted  to  the
development  of  macro-prudential  indicators  are  conceptually  consistent  with  the  same  approach.  A
greater awareness of the significance of the questions raised here is gradually emerging.
Policy co-ordination
IV.
A  strengthening  of  the  macro-prudential  orientation  of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework
would also highlight a number of policy co-ordination issues. As the previous analysis makes clear,
and  supervisors  are  well  aware,  addressing  financial  stability  is  a  multifaceted  task.  It  involves  a
number  of  authorities  with  different  perspectives  and  responsibilities.  Indeed,  some  of  the  policy
levers lie in the hands of authorities whose main task is not to address financial stability at all, even
though their tools and decisions can have a significant impact on the process. The risk is that, in the
absence  of  a  consensus  on  diagnosis,  remedies  and  allocation  of  responsibilities,  certain  potential
weaknesses  in  our  defences  might  remain  unaddressed.  Let  me  elaborate  on  these  points  with  two
illustrations: safety nets and the financial cycle.
I  mentioned  earlier  that  one  potential  source  of  distorted  incentives  for  market  participants  are  ill-
designed safety nets, defined here to encompass those mechanisms aimed at containing the disruptive
consequences  of  financial  distress  once  it  arises,  thereby  also  instilling  confidence  in  the  financial
system.  Typical  building  blocks  of  safety  nets  include  emergency  liquidity  assistance,  deposit
protection schemes and exit policies. As highlighted by experience over the last twenty years or so, ill-
designed  safety  nets  can  be  a  significant  cause  of  financial  instability  if  they  fail  adequately  to
counteract the loss of market discipline that they induce (the “moral hazard” problem).
BIS Review 76/2000
6
A macro-prudential orientation in financial stability policies requires safety nets whose structure and
functioning  address  systemic  risk.  The  role  of  targeted  deposit  insurance  schemes  in  permitting
supervisors credibly to focus on systemic risks is just one example; all aspects of exit strategies and
assistance to institutions in distress play a part. Given the close interrelationship between the various
components  of  a  safety  net,  agreement  is  necessary  on  the  basic  objectives,  characteristics  and
operation of its building blocks among a broad spectrum of official authorities. At a minimum,  this
would  include  supervisors,  central  banks  and  ministries  of  finance.  Those  countries  experiencing
widespread  financial  difficulties  have  typically  followed  this  approach  under  pressure  from  events.
Ideally, a more far-sighted decision making process would be desirable.
Likewise,  most  of  the  steps  needed  to  address  the  risks  associated  with  the  financial  cycle  would
require a dialogue with, and often the approval of, authorities with different perspectives. Changing
provisioning practices, for instance, can raise eyebrows with tax authorities, the accounting profession
and even securities regulators. More generally, discretion to alter valuation methods is generally not in
the  hands  of  supervisors.  And  a  potentially  powerful  instrument  to  influence  the  financial  cycle,
interest rates, is controlled by central bankers. After all, credit expansion is the life-blood of the build
up of financial imbalances.
Conclusion
To conclude, supervisors and other authorities are still facing major challenges in coming to grips with
financial instability. To my mind, part of the solution to our shared concerns is a strengthening of the
macro-prudential orientation in supervisory and regulatory arrangements. But that shift will need to be
supported and complemented by consistent policies on the part of other authorities as well. We need to
build a clearer consensus on diagnosis, remedies and allocation of responsibilities.
In some respects, the proposed shift in perspective parallels the evolution of economics thinking in the
20th  century.  Economists,  too,  had  initially  developed  a  view  of  the  world  in  which  the  processes
driving  the  economy  as  a  whole  were  simply  a  replication  of  those  in  individual  markets,  as  if  the
same image was blown up in scale. It was only in the 1930s, not least due to the writings of Keynes,
that they clearly understood that the laws for the economy as a whole did not necessarily coincide with
those for its individual components. Macroeconomics was born as a discipline in its own right, and has
survived until the present day. It took a major world depression, in which incidentally financial crises
played a prominent role, to spur that kind of thinking.
Likewise, after the failure of overly ambitious policies in the 1960s and 1970s, aimed at controlling
short-term  movements  in  output,  we  learnt  the  value  of  long-term  horizons  in  policy  making.
Excessive focus on forecasts in economic variables over short horizons can, and often do, lead their
users astray. We are simply not very good at forecasting the timing of peaks and troughs and have too
little  knowledge  about  the  time  pattern  of  the  influence  of  our  instruments  on  economic  activity.
Intended stabilisation may result in unintended destabilisation.
While the context and details are different, the basic lessons of this evolution in economic thinking can
be of help to those whose task is to measure and manage risk. This includes not just official agencies
but,  crucially,  market  participants  themselves,  as  the  regulatory  framework  is  gearing  itself  to  rely
increasingly on their own risk assessments. After all, anchors are no better than the soil in which they
are planted. And that soil could, at worst, turn  out to  be quicksand,  if it  consists  of  inadequate  risk
perceptions and inflated asset values.
My remarks today are intended simply as a small awareness-raising step in what, if pursued, is likely
to be a long road. In making them, I am encouraged by the fact that the proposed shift is by no means
a new departure. Rather, it represents a strengthening of a process that has already begun. I also draw
comfort  from  the  remarkable  achievements  of  supervisors  over the last  quarter  of  a  century.  I  have
little  doubt  that  you  will  be  building  on  those  successes  in  the  future  with  the  same  energy  and
determination  with  which  you  tackled  the  initial  challenges.  In  doing  so,  you  have  provided  an
excellent example to the rest of the official community.
7
BIS Review 76/2000
