David Carse: Banking in Hong Kong after the Asian crisis
Speech  by  Mr  David  Carse,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  a
Luncheon Meeting of the Ginyukai, held on 21 August 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
I  am  very  pleased  to  be  here  to  address  this  luncheon  meeting  of  the  Ginyukai.  Although  I  meet
Japanese banks on an individual basis quite frequently, I see them as a group less often than I used to
before the Asian crisis. In my earlier days in Hong Kong, we used to meet regularly at the numerous
opening ceremonies and receptions of Japanese banks who were setting up new offices in Hong Kong.
Over the last two years however I have been dealing with the voluntary revocation of the licenses of
many of these same banks as they depart the Territory. This is  a  much  sadder  task  than cutting  the
ribbon at an opening ceremony.
The figures tell their own story. In March 1997, there were 91 Japanese authorised institutions in Hong
Kong. This includes some banks with multiple authorisations, for example as licensed banks and as
deposit-taking companies. By June of this year, the number of authorised institutions had dropped to
35, a decline of 60%.
The  reasons  behind  this  decline  are  varied.  Some  of  the  Japanese  banks  were  forced  to  cut  their
overseas  operations,  including  those  in  Hong  Kong,  because  of  critical  balance  sheet  problems  and
heavy losses. Equally, it has to be said that a number of the regional banks who came to Hong Kong in
the 1990s lacked a clear business rationale for doing so and found it difficult to make money. Given
the difficult economic climate back in Japan, it was probably right for these banks to cut their losses
and go home.
Even the Japanese banks that stayed have cut back on their lending here. Between March 1997 and
June 2000, the total lending of the Japanese banks in Hong Kong fell from just over HK$2,000 billion
to HK$643 billion, a decline of almost 70%. This has reduced the Japanese banks’  market  share of
total loans in Hong Kong from 51% in 1997 to around 25%.
Of course, I am aware that these figures are a bit misleading, as Mr Kato of Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi
recently  pointed  out  to  the  press.  Most  of  the  decline  in  total  loans  was  accounted  for  by  euro-yen
loans. These are yen loans to Japanese borrowers that were formerly booked offshore in Hong Kong
for  a  variety  of  reasons,  including  funding  costs  and  domestic  regulations.  A  change  in  these
regulations now makes it more feasible to book these loans onshore in Japan, hence the sharp decline
in the amounts booked in Hong Kong.
Having said that, the Japanese banks’ loans for use in Hong Kong have also fallen during the Asian
crisis, though to a lesser extent. Japanese banks currently account for about 8% of total loans for use in
Hong Kong, compared with 12% before the crisis. However, there have been welcome signs that the
decline  in  the  Japanese  banks’  domestic  loans  in  Hong  Kong  has  been  levelling  off  this  year.
Moreover,  in  the  Hong  Kong  syndicated  loan  market,  it  appears  that  the  Japanese  banks  have
recovered some of their appetite for lending. According to the figures collected by Basis Point, in 1998
the  Japanese  banks  had  dropped  to  8th  place  in  the  league  table  of  completed  loans,  with  deals
amounting  to  only  US$288  million.  In  the  first  half  of  2000,  however,  the  Japanese  banks  had
completed loan deals amounting to almost US$2 billion and had climbed to 3rd place in the league
table.
I  hope  that  this  is  a  trend  that  will  continue.  Japanese  banks  have  in  the  past  made  a  significant
contribution to promoting the growth of the Hong Kong economy and I am sure that they will be able
to resume this role in the future. This may, however, involve less reliance on straightforward lending
than in the past and a greater focus on capital market activities.
1
BIS Review 65/2000
The Japanese  banks  have  been through  difficult  times  due  to  the  collapse  of  the  boom  economy  in
Japan  and  the  impact  of  the  Asian  crisis.  Things  are  now  looking  brighter.  The  banks  have  been
addressing  their  bad  debt  problems  and  have  been  assisted  in  this  by  capital  support  from  the
Government; two of the weakest banks have been nationalised and subsequently sold back into private
ownership; and four mega-mergers have been announced which offer the banks concerned the chance
to improve their competitiveness at home and abroad.
However,  you  will  be  more  aware  than  I  am  that  important  challenges  lie  ahead  for  the  Japanese
banks.  The  domestic  environment  within  which  they  are  operating  is  still  uncertain.  Although  the
Japanese  economy  is  showing  signs  of  recovery,  the  IMF  has  recently  pointed  out  that  the  pickup
remains “fragile and subject to downside risks”. Consumer confidence is still weak and the corporate
sector remains under some strain as shown by the rise of 21% in corporate bankruptcies in the year to
July.  The  recent  termination  of  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  zero  interest  rate  policy  has  led  to  fears  that
corporate finances may be put under further pressure.
This is a difficult environment in which the Japanese banks are embarking on their mergers. From my
discussions  with  the  banks  concerned  it  is  clear  that  they  know  what  needs  to  be  done  in  order  to
achieve  the  desired  synergies  and  economies  of  scale.  But  it  all  depends  on  the  quality  of  the
implementation. Unlike the case with some past Japanese mergers, the banks will need to achieve full
integration in their operations, technology, management and culture as quickly as possible, and jobs
will have to be lost. There must be a much greater focus than in the past on return on capital and on
the generation of shareholder value rather than on pursuit of size and market share for its own sake.
This  is  something  in  which  we  all  have  an  interest.  It  is  important  for  the  stability  of  the  world
financial system and for the economic development of the Asian region that the banks of the world’s
second  largest  economy  are  fully  restored  to  health  and  can  resume  their  major  role  in  financial
intermediation at home and abroad. I wish you therefore all the best in your efforts.
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  Japanese  banks  have  been  and  will  remain  an  important  part  of  the
financial system in Hong Kong. They also of course have a similar role to play in relation to Mainland
China. I am aware that the Japanese banks felt particularly disappointed and aggrieved at the collapse
of Gitic and the subsequent debt problems that afflicted other Mainland window companies. I do not
intend  to  go  over  the past  history  of  this  episode  that is  hopefully  now  coming  to  an  end.  But  it  is
possible to see some good coming out of it if it helps, as I hope it will, to restore financial discipline
within  China.  It  has  also  served  as  a  useful  reminder  to  both  domestic  and  foreign  banks  in  Hong
Kong  not  to  engage  in  name  lending  and  not  to  rely  on  implicit  guarantees.  While  financial
transparency  among  Mainland  companies  is  by  no  means  perfect,  lenders  are  now  at  least  better
equipped to identify those companies that have sound underlying businesses and good management.
The long saga of GDE is now drawing to a close. The banks have, I believe, managed to negotiate the
best  deal  possible,  and  the  last  remaining  step  is  for  the  banks  to  review  and  sign  the  detailed
documentation to put the restructuring into effect. I understand that when the documentation is sent to
the banks, they will have plenty to read. But I hope that they will try to do this as quickly as possible
and that we can avoid any last minute problems and delays. There is unlikely to be any opportunity for
renegotiation of the  deal,  and if  it  were  to  collapse  at  the  final  stage,  the  banks  would  certainly  be
worse off.
So far I have been concentrating on the position of the Japanese banks. Let me now review the more
general state of banking in Hong Kong after the Asian crisis.
The  first  point  to  make  is  that  the  local  Hong  Kong  banks  have  survived  the  crisis  in  good  shape.
Although  one  or  two  banks  lost  money,  most  banks  remained  profitable  and  actually  managed  to
improve  their  capital  ratios  during  the  period  as  their  risk  assets  declined  and  their  capital  base
expanded. No banks required financial assistance from the Government during the crisis, in contrast to
the situation in some of our Asian neighbours where the cost to the public finances of bank rescues
and restructuring could reach as much as US$100 billion.
The rapid recovery in the Hong Kong economy is now helping to improve the banks’ performance and
to bring down bad debts. In the first half of this year, the pre-tax operating profits of the local banks
BIS Review 65/2000
2
from their Hong Kong operations rose in aggregate by more than 50% over the same period of last
year. Admittedly, much of this was due to the reduction of 58% in the bad debt charge, which will be a
temporary factor in improving profitability. But even at the pre-provision level, profits grew by about
15%  compared  with  1999.  Surprisingly,  after  the  publicity  about  declining  margins  on  mortgage
lending,  the  growth  in  profits  was  helped  by  an  increase  in  the  overall  net  interest  margin.  This
reflected the fact that funding costs remained low during the period.
The position of the local Hong Kong banks is therefore looking better than at any time since the Asian
crisis.  However,  like  the  Japanese  banks,  the  banks  here  are  also  faced  by  a  number  of  important
challenges, albeit on a smaller scale than those in Japan.
Foremost  amongst  these  is  increasing  competition.  This  is  being  displayed  most  obviously  in  the
decline in lending margins already mentioned, particularly on residential mortgage lending which is a
major part of the loan portfolio of most of the local banks. The margin has recently reached a new low
of 2.25% below prime compared with the pre-crisis level of 1.25% above prime. To some extent this
reflects the temporary conditions of a depressed property sector, sluggish loan demand and plentiful
liquidity. As loan demand picks up, as inevitably it will, the decline in margins will stabilise and may
even reverse somewhat. But lending margins are unlikely to get back to where they were before the
crisis.
Competitive pressures will be further intensified on the funding side when we deregulate current and
savings  accounts  next  year.  This  is  due  to  take  place  at  the  end  of  June  2001,  and  will  only  be
postponed if the prevailing economic and financial conditions are clearly unfavourable, which we do
not expect to be the case. The banks therefore need to prepare for the pressure on margins that this will
cause and to be able to quickly introduce new deposit products like interest bearing current accounts.
If they do not do so, their competitors will.
How do the local banks need to respond to these challenges? Most obviously, the challenges raise the
issue of consolidation of the banking sector, through either merger or take-over. This is the trend we
have seen happen in other financial centres, including in Japan. It has been slow to take off here, but it
is going to come, sooner rather than later, as competition gathers pace. Events such as the sale of the
Chase retail banking business, the restructuring of the Bank of China Group and the renewed interest
of  some  foreign  banks  in  acquiring  an  increased  presence  in  Hong  Kong  will  help  to  alter  the
competitive balance and could act as catalysts for change.
Banks  also  need  to  respond  by  properly  harnessing  the  power  of  new  technology,  including  the
internet, to bring down costs and increase their ability to cross-sell a wider range of products. They
may find it easier to finance the necessary investment, and obtain the skills and human resources they
need, as part of larger units - which is a further argument in favour of consolidation.
Finally, I strongly believe that banks in Hong Kong and elsewhere must become more aware of, and
responsive to, consumer needs. This not only means supplying the products that customers want but
also  providing  them  with  easy  to  understand  information  about  the  terms  and  conditions  of  these
products,  including  the  fees  and  charges  that  attach  to  them.  Hong  Kong  banks  have  not  been
sufficiently transparent in this respect, as a recent Consumer Council report on credit card charges has
demonstrated. This is something that we will be aiming to put right in the current review of the Code
of Banking Practice.
What does this mean for the Hong Kong Monetary Authority? Clearly, we also have to upgrade our
own  skills  and  methods  in  our  role  as  banking  regulator  to  try  to  ensure  that  we  can  keep  up  with
developments in the market. This is most obviously the case with the new technology that requires us
to devise new policies on innovations like virtual banking and internet security. This means that we
need  to  find  and  train  staff  who  understand  the  technicalities  and  are  capable  of  assessing  through
onsite examination the adequacy of the banks’ controls over the new technology. As you will know
yourselves, people with this expertise are in short supply.
This emphasis on technology is however only part of the process of trying to make our supervision
more risk-based. This is the same approach that is being adopted by the FSA in Japan. It aims to focus
on  the “self-responsibility”  of  the  banks  themselves  in  ensuring  that  they  have  adequate  systems  to
3
BIS Review 65/2000
identify, measure, monitor and control the whole range of risks with which they are faced. The role of
the supervisor is then to assess the quality of the banks’ own systems in relation to the quantity of the
risks they are running, and to require improvements if these are necessary.
We have been developing this new approach for the last year with the help of the consultant seconded
from the US Federal Reserve. So far the main focus has been on the local banks, but we hope to roll it
out  to  the  foreign  banks  next  year.  Hopefully,  by  focussing  on  the  key  risk  areas,  it  should  reduce
some of your regulatory burden.
We recognise that this process has to be transparent, in that we need to explain to the banks what the
new supervisory framework involves and what standards are expected of the banks. The examination
checklists issued by the Japanese FSA are a good example of this approach. I know that some of the
Japanese banks feel that the HKMA could do more along these lines in the area of transparency, and
this is something that we have very much in mind. We will be publishing soon a framework document
that  explains the risk-based  approach,  and  we  are  currently  engaged  in  the  major  rewrite  of  all  our
supervisory guidelines. The aim is to put them into a common format and to make the text more user
friendly and easier to  read.  This is  a  big  task  that  will take  about  a  year  to complete in full.  In  the
meantime,  all  our  existing  guidelines  are  available  on  our  website,  and  individual  guidelines  in  the
new format will be added as they are produced.
I hope that you have found useful this assessment of the state of the Hong Kong banking sector, and
the  current  position  of  the  Japanese  banks  within  it.  Let  me  stress  again  that  we  greatly  value  the
presence of the Japanese banks in Hong Kong. While this presence may have diminished over the last
two years, Hong Kong remains an important market for the Japanese banks and I am sure that you will
continue to demonstrate your commitment in the years to come.
BIS Review 65/2000
4
