Hervé Hannoun: The Banque de France’s view on gold
and comments on the euro
Speech by Mr Hervé Hannoun, First Deputy Governor of the Banque de France, at a dinner organised
by Goldman Sachs on the occasion of the Financial Times Gold Conference held on 26 June 2000.
Introduction: silver and gold
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is a great pleasure and privilege for me to be speaking here in the Hôtel des
Invalides in front of such a distinguished audience. The organisers gave you the opportunity to visit
Napoléon’s tomb. So let me, as an introduction, highlight some historical facts, which may not be so
far away from the topics I intend to discuss later. Two hundred years ago, the First Consul Napoléon
Bonaparte created the Banque de France with himself as one of the shareholders. At the same time,
Napoléon built a monetary regime based on a bimetal system (a combined gold and silver standard)
that prevailed throughout the 19th century.
At that time, many currencies in the world were based on a gold standard, while a few had a silver
standard.  France  had  defined  the  Germinal  franc - which  remained  absolutely  stable  for  almost
120 years - with respect to its weight in both silver and gold. One Germinal franc was equivalent to
5 grams of silver and to 322 milligrams of gold; the famous 20 franc coin, called the Napoléon, was
issued  at  that  time  (with  a  weight  of  6.45  grams).  As  the  country  with  the  largest  circulation  of
banknotes  and  coin  in  the  bimetal  system,  France  played  a  key  role  in  this  complex  system  at  the
international level. Things are rarely as simple as they seem. The 19th century is often depicted as a
time when the international system was based on a single metal currency. However, this was not the
case. Until 1873, it worked with a complex bimetal system, based on gold and silver.
Let me turn now to today’s financial and monetary world. I will first present the Banque de France
view on gold and follow with comments on the euro after 18 months of its existence.
I.
A.
• 
• 
• 
Gold
The Banque de France’s view on gold is based on three main pillars:
We are in favour of gold holding
We are against gold selling
We have a very prudent and conservative approach to gold lending
Gold holding
1.
The Banque de France is a major gold holder (with more than 3,000 tons). The creation of the single
currency has in no way modified our policy and motivations for holding gold, which remains in our
view an important reserve asset.
Let us review the reasons why central banks want to hold gold. What is the rationale for holding gold,
a non-interest bearing asset, given that there is no more official role for gold since the collapse of the
gold exchange standard?
 First, security: the absence of any credit risk is an intrinsic quality of gold: gold offers full
security as long as it is properly stowed in central banks’ vaults.
1
BIS Review 61/2000
  Second, liquidity: in situations of political turmoil or high global inflation, gold’s liquidity is
unchallenged. Certainly, in circumstances of orderly financial markets, gold is not the most
liquid of assets (even though it is probably the most liquid of commodities). But its liquid
quality becomes apparent and increases as uncertainty grows. In this regard, the absence of a
return on gold can be viewed as the price of its “option component”: contrary to most other
assets, gold prices go up when things go wrong.
Third motivation for holding gold: diversification.
Gold  bears no  interest  coupon.  If  lent,  the  lending  rate  is  relatively  modest.  Then  there  is
usually a cost of carry for gold holdings. This is partially offset by the “option component” I
mentioned before. But gold is also a very good diversification instrument. Indeed in the long
run, the price of gold has shown a very low and even a negative correlation with the dollar
(the first-ranking reserve currency) and with US Treasuries. So gold is very useful to build a
diversified portfolio as it enables you to improve your risk/return profile.
On the whole, I would say that gold is an asset of last resort par excellence and that recent market
developments have in no way altered its intrinsic qualities. There is still a rationale for central banks to
hold gold.
Gold selling
2.
After having listed all the good reasons for holding gold, you will not be surprised if I reiterate that we
have no plans to sell gold!
The  leading  official  holders  of  gold  have  not  changed  their  attitude  in  this  respect.  Neither  the
American  Federal  Reserve  System,  nor  the  German  Bundesbank,  nor  the  Bank  of  Italy,  nor  the
Banque de France have any plan to sell gold.
Gold lending
3.
Concerning  gold  lending,  the  Banque  de  France,  as  most  of  you  probably  know,  is  definitely  not
among the active players in the market. Quite the contrary, alongside the other major holders, it has
refrained from an active management of its gold holdings. The Banque de France has always adopted a
very prudent and rather conservative approach, acknowledging the fact that the issue of gold lending is
a matter of common interest to the major holders.
Two main reasons are traditionally put forward to justify gold lending:
  The first one refers to a question of principle. Foreign currency assets are actively managed.
Why  not  extend  this  management  to  gold  insofar  as  gold  is  considered  to  be  part  of  a
country’s external reserves?
The second reason is that central banks obviously have to take into account profit and loss
account  considerations.  From  this  standpoint,  gold  should  provide  a  return  just  like  other
assets.
But the reasons for prudent management of gold reserves by central banks are, in our view, of utmost
importance.
Central banks are typically “risk averse” when investing their foreign assets on the financial markets;
as  far  as  gold  management  is  concerned,  an  even  more  cautious  attitude  is  required  because  of  the
characteristics of the gold market.
Central banks must be aware that their deposits may favour the financing of speculative gold sales.
In other words, for a speculator (or a producer) who wants to take a position against gold, it would be
very easy to be short because he can easily borrow from the official sector, which is a potential lender
on this market. The result of this policy then would be a drop in the price of gold.
BIS Review 61/2000
2
Furthermore, lending is even more delicate for a big holder: what is the use of lending if, at the same
time, you are depreciating the value of your holdings? This question is effectively not the same when
you hold 3,000 tons as when you hold 300 tons.
Consequently, our policy regarding gold lending could be expressed as follows: a responsible holder
must have a responsible approach to management. This means that the Banque de France has to and
does pay due attention to the trade-off between its own interests (ie enhancing the return on its assets)
and the impact on the market.
The gold market characteristics described earlier call for a cautious and coherent attitude.
B.
This Banque de France view is now widely shared by the central banking community
Concerning gold holdings:
1.
The ECB’s decision in July 1998 to hold 15% of its reserves in gold, taken from the gold stocks of the
national central banks, was generally seen as a positive signal in a market hitherto inhibited by fears
that governments might decide upon new gold sales.
This was evidence that gold remains an important element of global monetary reserves.
Concerning gold selling and gold lending:
2.
The Banque de France and the Bundesbank have been a driving force behind the 1999 joint statement
on gold, which is fully consistent with our traditional position. And I quote:
   “The  undersigned  institutions  will  not  enter  the  market  as  sellers,  with  the  exception  of
already decided sales.
The  gold  sales  already  decided  will be  achieved  through  a  concerted  programme  of  sales
over the next 5 years. Annual sales will not exceed approximately 400 tons and total sales
over this period will not exceed 2,000 tons.
The signatories of this agreement have agreed not to expand their gold lendings and the use
of gold futures and options over the period.” (End quote.)
The so-called “Washington Agreement” has clarified the intentions of the Eurosystem as well as of the
Sveriges  Riksbank,  the  Swiss  National  Bank  and  the  Bank  of  England  with  respect  to  their  gold
holdings.
First, it has re-emphasised the role of gold in stating that (I quote) “Gold will remain an important
element  of  global  monetary  reserves”.  Second,  it  has  provided  the  market  with  some  reassuring
guidance concerning the sensitive issue of central banks’ gold sales and lending.
Far from destabilising the market, the Washington Agreement brought more transparency to the gold
market, and helped foster sounder conditions in the price formation process by reducing uncertainty
and overall volatility.
It is true, however, that the initial market reaction to the joint statement was extreme. The immediate
impact of the Washington Agreement was all the more dramatic as a number of market participants
(gold  mines,  hedge  funds)  had  accumulated  big  and,  I  would  say  in  some  cases,  excessive,  short
positions. The fact that the short sellers had to rapidly square their positions induced a brief period of
higher volatility, but also created the conditions for a more orderly market and thus, during the last
months, gold prices have fluctuated in a relatively narrow range.
On balance, I do think that the joint statement has had a stabilising effect on the gold market thanks to
enhanced transparency and clarity concerning central banks’ intentions.
Let me now turn to the second topic of my speech: the euro after 18 months.
3
BIS Review 61/2000
II.
The euro after 18 months
Some  years  ago,  the  possibility  of  a  single  currency  in  Europe  was  met  with  complete  scepticism,
especially in the United States. Numerous pundits explained that the euro would not come into being,
then, that it would not be launched on schedule and, finally, that it would not work.
A year and a half after the introduction of the single currency, it is worth assessing the results and the
prospects of this major change in Europe.
A successful launch
The euro is already a great technical and operational success
A.
• 
The changeover to the euro was an enormous technical challenge. It proved to be a total success. From
the  early  morning  of  the  very  first  day,  everything  went  smoothly:  the  euro  money  market,  the
decentralised  implementation  of  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  and  the  functioning  of  the
large-value payment systems.
A clear, efficient and flexible operational framework
• 
The Eurosystem’s monetary policy is based on robust arrangements, mainly involving the use of three
instruments:
   weekly tenders (or “main refinancing operations”);
overnight marginal lending and deposit standing facilities;
sizeable amounts (more than   billion) of interest bearing minimum reserves which exert
a stabilising effect.
This well-designed framework has in practice confirmed its efficiency and flexibility to accommodate
various market situations and liquidity configurations.
A successfully decentralised implementation of the single monetary policy
• 
The Eurosystem’s operational framework is based on decentralisation. The decision-making power is
held by the ECB’s governing bodies, while monetary policy is implemented in a decentralised manner
by the National Central Banks (NCB).
Within its own remit, each NCB carries out the regular tenders orchestrated by the ECB and grants
refinancing  within  the  framework  of  these  periodic  auctions  of  central  bank  money.  The  NCBs
manage the settlement accounts of credit institutions, hold the standing facilities for overnight credit
and  deposits,  and  also  monitor  minimum  reserves.  They  are  in  constant  contact  with  the  ECB  and
supply it with all the daily data essential to the conduct of effective monetary policy.
A rapid integration of the national money markets
• 
It was crucial to enable liquidity to circulate smoothly from one financial centre to another in the euro
area  so  that  operators  could  conduct  the  necessary  arbitrage  between  the  different  centres,  thus
ensuring a single euro interest rate for each maturity. The TARGET system is the key component of
this unification. Right from the start of 1999, it enabled credit institutions to effect large-value, cross-
border transactions with same-day value all day long, thus allowing the interbank market to function
as a single market right away.
The integration and efficiency of the euro money market is measurable through various indicators such
as:
  high trading volumes (around   billion per day in the overnight interbank market);
virtually non-existent quotation differentials between financial centres;
BIS Review 61/2000
4
  a high proportion of cross-border transactions, be it on the “unsecured” deposit market, the
repo markets or the interest-rate swap market;
minimal  recourse  to  the  Eurosystem’s  standing  facilities  (which  means  that  liquidity
adjustments are mostly made on the market).
Rapid growth of the euro-denominated bond markets
• 
While full integration has clearly been achieved on the money market, obstacles  still remain  on the
bond  market,  partly  reflecting  differences  in  tax  regimes  and  in  market  organisation  and  practices,
although a good deal of harmonisation has already taken place. However, issuers have rapidly shown
great interest in the euro as illustrated by the fact that issuance in euros exceeded issuance in dollars in
1999. The important point to highlight on this subject is not so much that the level of issuance in euros
surpassed the amount in dollars, but that the new-born euro bond market has been able to absorb such
an increased volume without any disruption.
The euro is already a technical and operational success. I will now try to demonstrate that the euro
has the potential to also be a complete strategic success in the future.
B.
1.
The euro has the potential to also be a complete strategic success in the future
The euro has the potential to become a major reserve currency as an alternative to the
US dollar
The  euro  is  already  the  second  most  widely-used  international  currency  in  the  global  monetary  and
financial  system.  But,  18 months  after  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency,  it  is  fair  to  say  that
while the euro has become the first financing/issuing currency in the world, it has not so far made the
same progress as a reserve/investment currency. The low level of interest rates in continental Europe
has fostered the international financing role of the euro (euro-denominated bonds accounted for some
45% of new issues in 1999 which, as I mentioned earlier, somewhat exceeds the market share of new
USD-denominated bonds). Conversely, these relatively low remuneration rates have reduced the role
of  the  euro  as  a  reserve  currency  (in  central  bank  portfolios)  or,  more  generally,  as  an  investment
currency  (in  private investors’  portfolios).  Since the launch  of  the  single  currency,  the  low  level  of
interest  rates  in  the  euro  area  and  the  continuous  depreciation  of  the  euro  have  temporarily  slowed
down the emergence of the euro as a major reserve currency.
This leads me to say a few words on the depreciation of the euro in the past 18 months.
The euro exchange rate misalignment
2.
Let me first recall what the Eurosystem’s position on exchange rates is:
• 
The Eurosystem rejects both activism and neglect  vis-à-vis  the  exchange  rate  and believes
that the pursuit of stability-oriented monetary and fiscal policies is the main prerequisite for
reasonably stable exchange rates.
   The exchange rate is not the objective of the single monetary policy, but it is an important
indicator included in the second pillar of the ECB’s monetary strategy.
So  while  the  ECB  does  not  target  a  Euro  exchange  rate  vis-à-vis  the  dollar  or  any  other
currency,  it  would  be  wrong  to  imply  that  it  pursues  an  attitude  of  benign  neglect  or  is
indifferent to the exchange rate.
A strong euro is in Europe’s interest. The more stable it is at home, the better its prospects on
the international stage.
Since January 1999, the euro has significantly depreciated against most currencies (by 20% against the
US  dollar  and  25%  against  the  yen).  We  know  that  exchange  rates  can, from  time  to  time,  diverge
from  economic  fundamentals.  This  sort  of  divergence  or  misalignment  can  considerably  distort
5
BIS Review 61/2000
relative prices and alter financial asset choices. You know that we are not satisfied with the current
level of the exchange rate of the euro.
Most commentators recognise that the euro is now significantly undervalued and that the tide will turn.
The tide will turn
3.
An orderly reversal of the euro’s exchange rate will take place as a result of a triple narrowing.
• 
Narrowing  of  the  growth  differential  between  the  United  States and  the  euro  area.  This  is
because the current extraordinary growth rate of the United States is probably not sustainable
in view of the widening of the external deficit. Euro area growth is well balanced, while the
US economy is affected by imbalances. This will be progressively taken into account by the
markets.
  A narrowing of the interest-rate differential as a consequence of the narrowing of the growth
differential.
Narrowing  of  the  “restructuring  differential”  between  the  United  States  and  the  euro  area
economies. It seems to us that although corporate restructuring in Europe was lagging behind
the United States a few years ago, we are now observing a catching-up process.
This  leads  me  to  my  last  point:  the  undertaking  (and  speeding  up)  of  structural  reforms  is  a  major
condition for the euro to be a complete success.
4.
The conditions for the complete success of the euro: sound macroeconomic policies and
structural reforms
In this regard, the Lisbon European Council meeting last month can be viewed as a further important
step towards the necessary medium-term strategy for structural reforms in the Union.
The labour market has become much more flexible in the past few years in Europe.
While Europe has long had a strong tradition of economic regulation, it must be acknowledged that
deregulation is well underway in most countries. The change is particularly noticeable in several key
sectors such as telecommunications (mobile phones, long distance calls), transportation (particularly
airlines) and the power-supply industry (electricity and gas) to mention only a few.
Major countries have embarked upon an ambitious overhaul of their public sectors. In countries with a
large public sector, such as Italy or France, ambitious privatisation programmes have steadily reduced
the number of state enterprises. In addition to privatisation, state enterprises are changing; companies
that remain government-owned are becoming more profit-minded (particularly airlines, railways, etc).
Tax reforms should accompany the reduction of fiscal deficits within the framework of the Stability
and Growth Pact. They have already been initiated in several key countries, especially Germany and
France.
European firms are restructuring and becoming more internationally competitive.
European firms are going through a deep restructuring process. Mergers and acquisitions have hit new
records  as  companies  seek  to  create  national,  regional  or  global  champions  (M&As  close  to
USD 1,500 billion in 1999 compared with USD 500 billion in 1997). Venture capital and start-ups are
booming  as  investors  and  entrepreneurs  become  more  convinced  that  Europe  can  compete  with
America in knowledge-based industries. Heavy industries and large conglomerates are restructuring as
never before. Finally, new rules on corporate governance are spreading.
The outflows of foreign direct investment merely mirror the dynamism of European firms. European
firms were lagging behind US firms in terms of foreign direct investment and they are now catching
up.  European firms  have  entered a  “globalisation process”  whereby  they  aim  to  reach  a  global  size
through acquisitions.
BIS Review 61/2000
6
Conclusion
Allow me to conclude.
The  euro  area  has  adopted  a  sound  macroeconomic  policy  and  has  embarked  upon  a  fairly
comprehensive  programme  of  structural  reforms.  These  reforms  will  still  take  time  to  be  fully
completed. But they are well underway and have already boosted economic growth, job creation and
corporate restructuring. This move has been triggered by the creation of a monetary union and a vast
unified  financial  market.  I  am  impressed  by  what  has  been  achieved  during  the  past  years  and  the
National Central Banks as well as the ECB are strongly encouraging governments and businesses to
foster structural reforms in the future.
The  euro  exchange  rate  is  clearly  misaligned  relative  to  euro  area  fundamentals  (robust  domestic
growth,  steady  implementation  of  the  single  market,  abundant  domestic  savings,  healthy  external
accounts). This is the reason why we consider that the euro has a strong potential for appreciation.
The Eurosystem, which is the guardian of the euro on behalf of the people of Europe, knows that our
fellow citizens want the single currency to be at least as solid as their previous national currencies. In
France, to give but one example, 96% of the population want the euro to be at least as solid as the
franc. Needless to say that it is the same in Germany and in all the other countries of the Monetary
Union. For this reason, we all fully subscribe to the recent declaration of the President of the ECB,
Wim  Duisenberg:  “European  citizens  can  be  assured  that  the  future  of  the  euro  is  that  of  a  strong
currency, based on price stability and the strength of the European economy”.
7
BIS Review 61/2000
