Ian Plenderleith: Current issues in UK monetary policy
Speech  by  Mr  Ian  Plenderleith,  an  Executive  Director  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the  Aberdeen
Chamber of Commerce on 26 July 2000.
 If you look at the performance of the UK economy as a whole, there is a great deal from which we can
draw  encouragement.  Since  the  early  1990s,  we  have  enjoyed  what  by  any  standards  has  been  an
impressive period of continued growth in output, employment and living standards.
The sustained growth in output has been achieved despite the  downturn  in  Asia  in 1997-98,  which,
accentuated by the crisis in Russia, spread to the emerging market economies as a whole and produced
a  sharp  weakening  in  external  demand  felt  by  all  the  industrialised  countries.  With  the  help  of  the
rapid steps we took then to cut interest rates, we have  seen  a  strong  recovery  in  activity  in the  UK
economy last year and continuing growth this year.
Equally, we can draw encouragement from the steady rise in employment that has accompanied this
sustained  growth  in  output.  The  improvement  has  been  shared  right  across  the  UK:  rates  of
employment vary from region to region, but all regions have shared a rise in employment rates. What
is particularly encouraging is that this substantial rise in employment rates has been achieved in the
face  of  considerable  changes  in  the  business  environment  -  for  example,  shifts  in  demand  and  in
consumer  taste,  advances  in  technology  and  intensified  competition.  Industry  and  commerce  has
proved  extremely  effective  in  creating  new  jobs  to  offset,  and  more  than  offset,  jobs  lost  as  the
business environment has changed.
What is particularly notable about this impressive growth in output and employment is that it has been
sustained  over  a  period  of  years  and,  importantly,  there  is  every  prospect  that  we  can  continue  to
sustain it looking ahead. This element of sustainability is, above all, what translates periods of strong
output and rising employment into permanent improvements in living standards. Sustainability means
having  in  place  a  framework  to  provide  a  basis  of  stability  on  which  the  economy  can  continue  to
grow. Alongside the stable framework the government has put in place for fiscal policy, the Bank of
England’s contribution to stability is to deliver price stability - specifically, to meet the low inflation
target  the  government  has  set  of  2½%  on  the  RPIX.  Perhaps  the  most  encouraging  feature  of  the
strong  economic  performance  I  have  described  is  that  it  has  been  achieved  consistently  with  low
inflation, and it is through maintaining that commitment to low inflation that we can best ensure that
the economy continues to grow over time in line with its potential.
Against the background of this encouraging overall picture, we face two main areas of uncertainty at
present.
The first is the impact of the strong exchange rate for sterling. The strength of sterling in recent years
has impacted on virtually all areas of the economy - agriculture and some service industries as much as
manufacturing.  But  the  effects  have  undoubtedly  been  felt  most  severely  by  manufacturing.  The
frustration  felt  by  those  who  have  built  up  efficient  and  competitive  businesses,  only  to  find  their
market position threatened by a rise in the exchange rate over which they have no control, is entirely
understandable. In our judgments on interest rates, we consider it extremely important to take account
of  differences  in  the  conditions  that  different  sectors  of  the  economy,  and  different  regions  of  the
country, may be facing. For that reason, our 12 Agents, located around the country, keep closely in
touch  with  local  business  and  provide  us  with  a  continuous  and  very  up-to-date  feedback  on  local
business conditions.  Visits  like  my  own  today  provide  valuable  opportunities  for  MPC  members  to
supplement at first hand the feedback we get from our Agents. The message we get - that the rise in
sterling  has  been,  and  is,  causing  severe  strains,  comes  through  loud  and  clear  and  we  give  that
considerable weight in our judgments about interest rates.
1
BIS Review 62/2000
The difficulty we face is that, while some part of sterling’s rise in the past few years probably reflects
underlying  strengths  in  the  UK  economy  -  the  sustained  growth  in  activity  in  recent  years  and  the
more flexible and competitive structure of the economy  - it is very likely that sterling at its present
levels is unrealistically high, and that this is principally a reflection of the persistent weakness of the
euro over the past year or so rather than factors directly related to sterling. To compound the difficulty,
it is in fact very hard to see why the euro has remained relatively weak at a time when growth in the
euro-area economies as a whole has recovered strongly. For the moment, in judging the appropriate
level of interest rates, we take very carefully into account the weakness of the UK’s external sector,
and the impact particularly on manufacturing, as an immediate factor off-setting in part the buoyancy
of domestic demand. But we also have to take into account the possibility further ahead that,  if  the
exchange rate moves back to more realistic levels, as we expect, the boost that could bring to external
demand  could  only  be  accommodated,  without  strain  on  the  supply  capacity  of  the  economy  as  a
whole, if domestic demand has moderated. Looking ahead, given that it is hard to explain the relative
weakness  of  the  euro,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  it  may  in  due  course  recover  to  more  realistic
levels; and there has indeed been some welcome movement in that direction since the spring. Whether
that will continue is hard to judge, but it would be enormously helpful both to the balance of the UK
economy as a whole and to the individual businesses most directly affected.
The other major area of uncertainty we face is the encouraging and exciting, if somewhat tantalising,
prospect that the UK may come to enjoy, or indeed may already be beginning to enjoy, some of the
benefits  evident  in  the  US  arising  from  the  “new  economy”.  The  advances  we  are  seeing  in
information and computer technology, when combined with the greater flexibility and adaptability our
economy has shown in recent years and the wider trading opportunities and greater competitiveness
flowing  from  the  globalisation  of  the  world  economy,  are  potentially  very  exciting  because  they
represent scope for improvements in the supply side of the economy: they hold out the possibility that
the economy might be able to grow faster than recent historical experience without jeopardising price
stability. The dilemma is that, while the benefits these developments can bring are undoubted, if and
when they manifest themselves in enhanced economic performance, the evidence of their doing so in
the UK is, so far, piecemeal rather than conclusive. Assessing whether these developments are in fact
delivering concrete gains requires cool heads and careful judgment. My own view is one of pragmatic
optimism.  There  are  promising  portents,  but  relatively  little  concrete  evidence  as  yet,  of  the  UK
achieving the improvements in productivity that have so benefited the US economy in recent years.
That does not mean that it will not happen here. But it does mean that we need to be both vigilant to
avoid the pitfall of anticipating the gains before they arrive, and alert to capitalising on them if and
when they begin to come through.
Overall, then, the prospect we face is an immensely encouraging one. We need to remain vigilant, but,
provided we take no risks with the progress we have made in recent years in maintaining low inflation,
the prospect is for continuing growth overall on a basis that can be sustained into the medium term.
For the Bank of England, our first, and continuing priority, has to be to continue to deliver the stable
monetary framework - of interest rates directed at maintaining low inflation - as a platform on which
commerce and industry throughout the country can continue to build their business and generate the
sustained  growth  in  output  and  employment  that  will  provide  permanent  improvements  in  living
standards.
BIS Review 62/2000
2
