Urban Bäckström: Some reflections on financial and monetary stability
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of
Directors and President of the Bank for International Settlements, at a seminar in Bangkok hosted by
the Bank of Thailand, on 24 August 2000.
 Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,
I would like to thank my dear colleague, Governor Sonakul at the Bank of Thailand, for the invitation
to visit Bangkok and for the opportunity to address this distinguished audience this evening.
In recent years, significant progress has been made in putting the global economy on a path towards
sustainable growth. The world economy entered the year 2000 in considerably better shape than many
of us would have expected just a year ago. And after recovering to near its long-term average in 1999,
global growth is forecast to go on accelerating in 2000.
It  is  especially  noteworthy  that  performance  has  improved  in  almost  every  region  of  the  world.
Southeast  Asia,  Russia  and  Brazil  have  all  rebounded  from  their  recent  crises  more  strongly  than
expected.  Many  of  the  world’s  poorest  countries,  including  some  in  Africa,  are  posting  respectable
growth rates. The US economy is enjoying its longest recorded expansion ever. Growth in continental
Europe is picking up - especially in the larger economies where growth had been relatively weak. And
there are signs of an incipient recovery in Japan.
It  is  an  indication  of  how  far  we  have  come  that  the  weaknesses  and  uncertainties  which  so
preoccupied policymakers and market participants in 1997, 1998 and early 1999 have given  way  to
concerns  about  overheating  in  some  parts  of  the  world.  The  acceleration  in  global  growth  has
refocused attention on inflationary pressures and on sustaining the  monetary  stability  that  economic
policymakers have strived so hard to achieve in recent years.
Steps  are  also  being  taken  nationally  and  internationally  to  improve  the  working  of  the  financial
system. Ensuring financial stability has indeed become an important task in the light of events in the
past  decade  -  years  that  saw  financial  problems  in  a  number  of  European  countries  as  well  as  in
Mexico and Asia, the devaluation of the rouble and suspended payments in Russia, the collapse of the
hedgefund Long Term Capital Management, considerable turbulence in western financial markets and
financial unrest in Brazil. The crisis in the international financial system developed, to cite President
Clinton,  from  being  “just  a  few  small  glitches  in  the  road”  into  “the  worst  financial  crisis  in  fifty
years”.
Although the momentum of the world economy and the policy actions taken to date to ensure financial
and monetary stability give grounds for optimism, there are still challenges ahead  of  us.  In  my  talk
tonight I will discuss a few of these challenges.
Financial stability
The transition to a more global financial system has certainly not been free from problems. It should
not be forgotten that extensive capital regulations entail a mispricing of risks. Deregulation then leads
to desirable price adjustments. But it is during these transitional corrections that financial problems are
liable to  occur.  Changes  have  often  outstripped  the  ability  of  the  system,  including  the  institutional
infrastructure,  to  keep  pace.  In  most  cases,  neither  the  banks  nor  the  public  authorities  had  the
necessary  prerequisites  for  adapting  to  the  new  conditions  that  a  freer  capital  market  created.  The
expansion  of  lending  had  too  free  a  rein  in  many  countries  and  the  authorities  did  not  adequately
monitor what was happening at either micro or macro level.
1
BIS Review 65/2000
Due to a rapid expansion of credit, the deregulation and opening up of the domestic financial system
was  often  followed  by  economic  overheating.  Asset  prices  rose  sharply  and  imbalances  developed.
Furthermore, in countries with a fixed exchange rate system, extensive short-term borrowing abroad
was stimulated. A large proportion of these funds was often channelled through the domestic banking
system and rendered this rather vulnerable. When capital flows subsequently reversed, the adjustment
was often dramatic. Production fell, unemployment rose and both the currency and the banking system
faced an acute crisis.
Although  several  factors  may  have  played  some  part  in  the  run-up  to  recent  financial  crises,  it  is
important to bear in mind that a deregulated financial system with free capital movements is not the
basic  problem.  Modern  international  financial  markets  have  possibly  contributed  to  an  earlier
appearance of crises and to their spread, but financial crises almost always originate in an unsuccessful
domestic economic policy and in the structure and regulation of the domestic financial system.
It is striking that several countries most affected by financial turbulence in the 1990s were relatively
new participants in the international financial system without having first established a sound domestic
financial  system  and  a  sound  economic  policy.  That  applies  to  my  own  country,  Sweden,  which
experienced a severe crisis in the early 1990s.
One  obvious  insight  is,  and  I  quote  Fed  Chairman  Alan  Greenspan,  “that  participation  in  the
international financial system with all its benefits carries with it an obligation to maintain a level of
stability and a set of strong and transparent institutions and rules if an economy is to participate safely
and  effectively  in  markets  that  have  become  highly  sensitive  to  misallocation  of  capital  and  other
policy errors”.
To say that the key to avoiding future crises in emerging markets must be found in domestic reforms is
not  to  deny  that  part  of  the  solution  may  still  lie  in  measures  that  change  the  way  in  which
international  financial  markets  sometimes  operate.  While  financial  liberalisation  and  international
financial integration bring unquestionable benefits, they can also be subject to episodes of excessive
risk-taking. In recent years, there does seem to have been imprudent lending, and not just to emerging
market economies but also to borrowers within the industrial world.
In  part  this  has  been  spurred  by  competitive  forces.  That  such  forces  will  diminish  as  financial
restructuring  accelerates  seems  unlikely.  Information  asymmetries  lie  at  the  heart  of  market  failure,
and the market's way of resolving them can give rise to unpredictable outcomes. Ensuring that markets
have  adequate  information  about  national  economies,  the  strength  of  financial  systems,  aggregate
positions and the financial standing of counterparties is important. Equally important, if not more so, is
to ensure that market participants' approach to risk management reflects the full balance of costs and
rewards implied in their decisions.
Given the costs and the difficulties of managing the successive crises over the past decade, we must
continue to devote considerable efforts to avoiding future crises and try hard to understand the kinds of
vulnerability  that  lie  behind  them.  The  work  now  being  carried  out  in  various  international  fora  is
thorough and can be summarised under three headings: crisis prevention, crisis containment and crisis
resolution.  Much  of  this  work  involves  international  institutions  like,  for  instance,  the  International
Monetary  Fund,  the  World  Bank,  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  the  Basel  Committee  on
Banking Supervision, and the OECD, as well as the Financial Stability Forum.
However, it is with national authorities that the often hard work of implementing policies and codes
lies.  The  measures  will  contribute  to  better  financial  stability  only  if  countries  actually  adopt  and
implement them. A crucial ingredient in achieving this is of course to involve countries, formally or
informally,  in  the  development  of  the  policies,  codes  and  standards.  But  even  if  that  is  achieved,  I
know from my own experience how difficult the actual implementation sometimes can be, not least for
political reasons.
The  events  of  the  past  decade  have  made  it  clear  that  greater  efforts  are  needed  to  strengthen  the
functioning  of  markets.  I  would  like  to  make  the  point  that  today’s  favourable  trends  in  the  world
economy should not lead us to conclude that the danger is over. We have witnessed too many crises in
the  last  decade  not  to  know  that  market  confidence  can  suddenly  shift.  Instead,  policymakers
BIS Review 65/2000
2
throughout the world must continue to work on forestalling new problems both because some evident
threats  to  international  financial  and  economic  stability  still  remain  and  because  there  may  well  be
vulnerabilities that are less evident. But the chances of the global economy continuing along the path
towards sustainable growth without disruptive financial instability can be enhanced by implementing
appropriate reforms.
Monetary stability
Let me now turn to monetary stability. In the last decade a growing number of countries have chosen
to conduct monetary policy with an explicit target for inflation. One reason behind this choice has no
doubt been these countries’ poor experience with a fixed, but adjustable, exchange rate regime.
The first country to formally adopt a policy of targeting inflation was New Zealand in 1990. Canada
did the same in 1991, followed by the United Kingdom, Sweden and Australia. Other countries have
also introduced some variant of inflation targeting since then.
It is interesting to note that before the 1990s the predominant view was that a floating exchange rate
regime  was  not  suitable  for  a  small  open  economy.  Today,  I  believe  that  experience  has  been
exceptionally  good  among  those  countries  that  are  targeting  inflation.  In  fact,  even  some  emerging
market countries are now building the same kind of regime. In recent years countries such as South
Africa,  Brazil,  the  Czech  Republic,  Poland  and  Thailand  have  been  inspired  to  introduce  a  similar
strategy. Consequently inflation targets are now introduced in quite a number of countries.
Let me take this opportunity to commend the Governor of the Bank of Thailand and the bank’s staff
for the first excellent Inflation Report that was presented in July. The report is very impressive and it
has given me quite a few new ideas.
The  challenge  during  the  1990s  for  the  inflation  targeting  countries  has  been  to  build  a  rigorous
framework  around  the  new  regime.  Questions  like  the  choice  of  rate  and  index  to  be  targeted,  the
usefulness of bands around the target and the degree of transparency all needed to be answered.
It  has  also  been  important  to  formulate  a  monetary  policy  reaction  function,  that  is,  to  define  the
balance between inflation variability and output variability. The reason why central banks do not aim
for maximum short-term stability in either inflation or output is that attaining only one of the targets
would be costly for the economy.
On  the  one  hand,  the  central  bank’s legitimacy  among  the  general  public  could  suffer  if  short-term
interest rates have to move sharply, causing output to fluctuate widely while inflation is held stable
and  exactly  on  the  target.  Maximum  stability  in  output  could,  on  the  other  hand,  result  in  sharp
fluctuations  in  the  rate  of  inflation  and  erode  the  credibility  of  the  monetary  regime.  A  point
somewhere midway between the two extremes must therefore be found.
Let  me  also  stress  the  importance  of  central  bank  independence.  In  order  to  be  successful  with  the
implementation of an inflation target approach, the central bank must be able to act independently of
day-to-day  party  politics  and  to  set  interest  rates  continuously  according  to  the  specified  inflation
target. Otherwise a credibility problem arises because it will be hard for policymakers to convince the
general  public  of  monetary  policy’s  long-term  nature.  Lack  of  credibility,  in  turn,  means  that  the
central bank has to set its interest rates higher than otherwise would have been the case.
Looking ahead, I believe there are at least two major questions that central banks have to address more
thoroughly.
First, how should monetary policy react to asset prices, such as equity and/or real estate prices? We
know from history that the development of asset prices can have a significant impact on both inflation
and real economic activity. We need to establish whether or not there are actions that central banks can
and  should  take  to  minimise  the  likelihood  of  macroeconomic  instability  arising  from  extreme
fluctuations in asset prices.
Second, how should monetary policy react to structural changes in the economy?
3
BIS Review 65/2000
Monetary policy and asset prices
Let  me  start  with  the  question  of  monetary  policy’s  response  to  movements  in  asset  prices.  This
depends in turn on how the central bank chooses to use the information contained in asset prices.
In  a  regime  that  explicitly  targets  inflation,  asset  prices  are  taken  into  account  via  the  effects  on
aggregate demand. Rising share prices increase household wealth and that would raise consumption
for a given level of income if these increments to wealth are considered to be of a permanent nature.
At  the  same  time,  consumer  confidence  boosted  by  higher  share  prices  could  potentially  make
individuals more prone to spend their increased wealth.
An increase in share prices also makes investment more attractive to firms since it increases collateral
values  and  lowers  the  cost  of  new  capital  relative  to  existing  capital.  If  share  prices  predict  higher
expected output growth, this could also lead to more investment.
If  the  asset  prices  on  which  households  and  firms  base  their  consumption and  investment  decisions
prove  to  be  too  optimistic,  this  would  create  inflationary  pressure  in  the  short  term.  An  important
question  in  this  context  is  how  sensitive  households’  and  firms’  consumption  and  investment
responses are to changes in asset prices.
Via the effects on inflation, asset prices  are  thus taken  into  account in  the  formulation  of  monetary
policy, although they do not feature explicitly in the target variable.
However, the simple use of financial asset prices as indicators is not a panacea for the central banks’
forecasting problems. Asset prices can move for a variety of reasons. Understanding those reasons is
important  in  determining  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  response.  For  example,  if  a  rise  in  share
prices  stems  from  increased  productivity  and  thus  from  expectations  of  higher  future  profits,  the
implications for monetary policy would be very different from a case with no such fundamental reason
for the higher share prices.
This raises a number of questions. One pertains to the relative informativeness of different kinds of
asset  prices.  Another  is  how  to  integrate  the  information  obtained  from  asset  prices  with  other
macroeconomic  information.  Notwithstanding  the  empirical  evidence  of  the  indicator  properties  of
asset  prices,  the  causal  relationships  between  asset  prices  and  real  macroeconomic  variables  have
proved  to  be  more  difficult  to  understand  and  model.  But,  as  I  have  just  illustrated,  the  answers  to
these  questions  can  be  very  important  for  monetary  policy.  It  seems  quite  clear  that  central  banks
cannot afford to adopt a view of asset markets as merely “side-shows”.
There can be  other,  sometimes  less  straightforward,  situations  where  monetary  policy  has  reason to
react to movements in asset prices even though the effect on inflation is negligible. One such reason is
the central bank’s responsibility for the financial system’s stability.
If asset prices have been driven up to unsustainable levels that do  not  correspond to the  underlying
fundamentals, we are faced with a special kind of problem. We know from experience that speculative
asset  price  bubbles  eventually  burst.  When  they  do,  collateral  values  will  fall  and  balance  sheets
deteriorate,  potentially  threatening  the  stability  of  the  banking  system.  To  avoid  this  kind  of
development, the central bank needs to closely monitor the potential for excessive credit growth and
the possibility of asset price bubbles building up.
It  seems  that  historically  the  forming  of  speculative  price  bubbles  has  been  closely  linked  to  an
excessive  expansion  of  credit.  But  we  need  to  operationalise  both  the  concept  “excessive”  and  the
difficult concept of an asset’s “fundamental value”. As history has shown us, judging to what extent
rising asset prices reflect strong fundamentals, rather than the “irrational exuberance” of investors, is
easier said than done.
Nevertheless, certain important risks related to asset prices need careful watching in today’s world.
The first risk is that imprudent lending could fuel unwarranted asset price increases - as so often in the
past. Although there is little evidence to date of a general lowering of credit standards, credit growth
has been very rapid and loans to finance equity purchases have risen sharply in some countries.
BIS Review 65/2000
4
Ensuring  that  investors  are  not  sheltered  from  the  consequences  of  their  sometimes  misguided
investments is important for maintaining prudent lending standards. It is important that the message
from central banks is clear: investors should not count on monetary policy underwriting any particular
valuation of equity markets.
A  second  and  related  risk  is  that  high  asset  prices  might  lead  to  complacency  about  debt  levels.
Household and corporate balance sheets may look healthy when asset prices are stable or increasing,
but what if prices fall? Similarly, debt servicing ratios for some emerging market countries may look
sustainable when market access is improving, but what will happen if interest rates rise?
Rising levels of household and corporate indebtedness in some industrial countries, as well as rising
levels of external indebtedness in a number of emerging market countries, are based on expectations of
continued  strong  growth  in  income  and  production.  Earlier  I  remarked  that  the  momentum  of  the
world economy and the policy actions taken to date give reason for optimism. However, volatility is
intrinsic  to  financial  markets.  Our  experience  during  the  1990’s  clearly  demonstrates  the  danger  of
basing  decisions  solely  on  a  single  central  scenario,  rather  than  on  a  range  of  possible  -  including
worst case - scenarios.
Monetary policy and structural changes
Let me now briefly touch upon the question of how monetary policy should react to structural changes
in the economy? Quite a lot of thinking has already been done on this issue, both among academics
and policymakers. Nevertheless, I believe that more must be done in this field, especially since at least
some parts of the world economy have seen something of a productivity shock in recent years. I am
deliberately avoiding the buzzword “new economy” here, since history has  been  full  of expressions
like that ever since the turn of the 19th century.
The discussion about monetary policy and a productivity shock is taking place mostly in the United
States, in the light of the impressive economic performance there and the acceleration in the rate of
productivity growth. So one could certainly ask: what about the rest of the world? The possibility of a
productivity breakthrough also in other parts of the world cannot of course be ruled out.
Higher - or accelerating - productivity growth does indeed pose new challenges for monetary policy. It
could set in motion a complex of effects on aggregate supply and demand, on inflation, equity prices
and interest rates. Just to give a few examples, let me briefly mention the following effects.
First,  a  positive  productivity  shock  raises  the  economy’s  potential  growth  rate.  It  also  affects
aggregate  demand  through  new,  profitable  investment  opportunities,  higher  equity  prices  and
expectations  among  households  of  higher  permanent  income.  One  question  for  policymakers  is
whether  the  demand  effects  are  so  powerful  that  they  have  the  potential  to  outpace  the  growth  of
aggregate supply in the short and medium perspective.
Second,  there  could  be  temporary  disinflation  effects  at  work  if  the  increase  in  productivity  is
unexpected initially. If wages are slow to adjust, higher productivity growth lowers unit labour costs
and thereby reduces price inflation. Here again there are important questions for policymakers. Should
this effect be allowed to result in a temporary reduction of price inflation or unemployment?
Third, an increase in the trend rate of productivity growth could also result in a higher equilibrium real
interest rate, when the output gap is closed, in order to balance saving and investment. Fiscal policy
and the development of public financial balances could at least partly offset this effect, as could the
economy’s degree of openness.
All  this  implies  that  monetary  policymakers  could  face  quite  a  few  challenges.  One  of  them  is  to
identify  structural  changes  and  distinguish  these  from  cyclical  variations.  Another  challenge  is  to
detect the magnitude of the effects. Furthermore, looking ahead in monetary policy is hard when the
economy  is  going  through  major  changes  that  make  it  difficult  to  forecast  the  future  path  of  the
economy and inflation.
5
BIS Review 65/2000
It is quite clear that this demands a great deal of forecasters as well as of those who construct macro
models.  The  forecasts  concern  inflation  one  to  two  years  ahead,  which  calls,  for  instance,  for
reasonable precision in the measurement of the output gap and the relationship between the output gap
and inflation.
It  is  already  evident,  for  example,  that inflation  forecasts  were  frequently  on  the  high  side in  many
countries in the 1990s. I believe that the best we can do, at least at this stage, is to pay close attention
to  incoming  data  in  the  forecasting  process,  and  examine  how  consistent  they  are  with  historical
relationships.  We  have  to  deal  more  successfully  with  the  fact  that  forecasts  of  economic
developments can never be completely accurate and still allow monetary policy to be forward looking.
Final words
Let me now conclude. When discussing financial and monetary stability, we must remember that we
have  come  a  long  way.  The  world  economy  shows  strong  growth  coupled  with  low  inflation  and
monetary  policy  has  contributed  to  this  development.  However,  there  are  interesting,  though
somewhat difficult, challenges ahead that must be met if we are to preserve this bright picture of the
world economy.
BIS Review 65/2000
6
