Sakuya Fujiwara: Recent financial and economic developments
in Japan and the euro area
Keynote Speech by Mr Sakuya Fujiwara, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Fourth Paris
EUROPLACE Financial Forum, held in Paris on 27 November 2000.
 Introduction
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is my great honor to be given this opportunity to speak again at this Paris EUROPLACE Financial
Forum.  I  also  understand  that  this  is  a  forum,  where  exchange  of  views  among  distinguished
participants of different experiences is of special importance. Therefore I reserve the right to ask for
your opinions on such interesting topics as recent developments in capital markets and the impact of
information technology in the euro area.
Now,  with  respect  to  my  duty  today,  I  have  three  topics  in  my  mind.  First,  I  will  discuss  Japan’s
economy  and  the  challenges  it  faces.  Then,  I  will  turn  to  recent  developments  in  the  euro  area,  a
subject  which  is  of  particular  interest  to  myself.  Here,  I  dare  to  introduce  my  observation  on  the
economic  structural  reform  recently  underway  in  the  euro  area.  And  last,  I  will  briefly  touch  on
enhanced interrelations between the euro area and Japan.
Japan’s economy and the challenges it faces
1.
Compared with a year ago, when I gave a speech at this forum last year, Japan’s economy has shown
notable improvement. The recent economic recovery is mainly driven by the corporate sector, where
we witness the increases in production and corporate profits. Against such background, business fixed
investment has been increasing, especially in the IT and telecommunications fields. Although the pace
of  recovery  remains  sluggish  in  the  household  sector,  positive  developments  are  observed  in
employment  and  income,  reflecting  the  recovery  of  business  activity.  In  sum,  Japan’s  economy  is
recovering gradually, with business fixed investment continuing to increase.
At the same time, however, we cannot ignore the fact that Japan has yet to solve structural problems in
the  economy.  In  this  context,  Japanese  firms  and  banks  continue  to  suffer  from  balance  sheet
problems, the aftereffects of the bursting of the bubble in the 1990s. And, while the world economy,
especially the United States, has registered high growth by exploiting the benefits of new technology
supported  by  salient  entrepreneurship  as  well  as  the  vibrant  capital  market,  Japan  has  somewhat
lagged  behind  in  its  ability  to  adjust  itself  to  such  new  environment.  With  a  nascent  recovery  now
underway  in  Japan,  constant  efforts  are  necessary  to  continue  to  tackle  the  remaining  structural
problems head on, which in turn should be the prerequisite for sustainable growth.
Important progress has already been observed, though, in the financial sector. Bank capital base has
been  strengthened  by  the  injection  of  public  money.  There  has  also  been  a  progress  in  reinforcing
safety  nets.  On  top  of  that,  the  consolidation  of  financial  institutions,  especially  large  ones,  is  in
progress, something which Japan has never experienced since the end of the World War II. I sincerely
hope these changes will beef up the profitability and competitiveness of financial institutions, thereby
enhancing the efficiency and stability of the financial system as a whole.
Meanwhile, ongoing corporate restructuring process may exert downward pressure on the economy in
the  short  run.  But  I  believe  this  should  facilitate  efficient  allocation  of  resources  to  high-growth
industries, contributing to sustainable growth in the long run.
To  accelerate  such  structural  change,  determined  efforts  on  the  part  of  policy  makers  are  also
important. Such efforts should include deregulation, tax reform and improvement of accounting and
1
BIS Review 108/2000
legal  systems.  The  Bank  of  Japan,  as  a  central  bank,  must  contribute  to  ensuring  a  stable
macroeconomic  environment  through  appropriate  monetary  policy  measures,  which  will  form  the
basis for creative and future-oriented corporate activity. In addition to this, the Bank of Japan assumes
important responsibilities in improving the financial market and payment  system  infrastructure. The
start of real-time gross settlement of fund transfers and government bond transfers from the beginning
of next year is one of such efforts.
Dynamism of the euro area economy
2.
When I think about structural reforms in the Japanese economy, I always think of the experiences of
the euro area economy on this front.
Today, nobody doubts the importance of structural reform, but it is difficult to achieve a social and
political consensus as to the most practical approach. Reform is accompanied by pain, and also takes a
long time to bear fruit. But once the direction is set, reform calls for further reform, thereby generating
autonomous momentum. Developments in the euro area economy have considerable implications and
are encouraging to us. I realize it may sound too simplistic but the essence of reform lies in market
integration.
I say this because market integration leads to intensified competition. In the euro area, mergers and
acquisitions are a driving force for corporate restructuring and industry reorganization. This increase
in M&A, which started from around 1997, was no doubt sparked by the introduction of the euro. In
addition, firms are being forced to change their management strategy so  that they  can  survive  amid
global competition and keep up with technological innovation. Indeed, firms  are increasingly  aware
that  efficient  management  and  higher  profitability  are  more  important  today  than  ever,  and  such
recognition  is  evident  in  recent  M&A  examples. These  days  firms  are  not  expanding  their  business
fields, but rather streamlining businesses that they have little competitive edge in, and beefing up the
ones that are strategically important.
Market  integration  in  the  euro  area  has  also  brought  about  dynamic  changes  in  the  economic
infrastructure, including transportation, electric power, telecommunications, and finance. In the area of
finance, some examples of positive developments include the creation of new payment systems, such
as  TARGET  (Trans-European  Automated  Real-time  Gross  Settlement  Express  Transfer),  the  rapid
expansion of capital markets, and the merger and integration of stock exchanges. In addition, the euro
area has begun to review tax systems and labor practices.
Amid the sea change of market integration and the introduction of the euro, deregulation and market
infrastructure consolidation are being seen. And the private sector is making the most of resources, so
to strengthen competitiveness. Thus, market integration accelerates momentum for competition, and in
turn stimulates momentum for reform in other areas of the economy and finance. I believe that every
economy has the potential for growth. The problem is how to realize such potential. Structural reform
seems to be a trigger in this regard.
I know that some are skeptical about the euro area economy. Such voices often argue that the weak
economy is the reason for the weak euro. For example, they say that structural rigidity of the euro area
economy, or the difference in productivity between the United States and the euro area, has induced
the massive outflow of capital to the United States thus causing the euro to weaken.
The mechanism behind exchange rates is very complex, and as a central banker, I ought not to make
any careless remarks on this delicate subject. However, I have to say we should not hastily assume that
the weak euro merely reflects a weak economy. Capital outflows across the Atlantic could be the result
of  intensified  global  competition  that  has  stimulated  various  types  of  strategic  alliances  across  the
border.
Integration of the European markets and the introduction of a common currency are historically the
most remarkable events since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system nearly  thirty  years  ago.  As
such, they can be characterized as part of a project which has the potential to dramatically change the
BIS Review 108/2000
2
landscape of the world economy. With this in mind, I will continue to keep a close watch on economic
developments in the euro area.
Interrelations between the euro area and Japan
3. 
Lastly, I would like to give my view on interrelationships between the euro area and Japan, focusing
on capital flows. As I have mentioned, in the euro area, monetary union has triggered various kinds of
structural change, bolstering the development of the overall economy. The impact is so large that it has
affected not only the euro area itself, but also Japan.
An example of the effect is direct investment. Direct investment from western Europe to Japan soared
more  than  tenfold  in  a  year,  from  about  100  billion  yen  in  1998  to  over  1  trillion  yen  in  1999.
Investment from France was especially large, which reflects the capital collaboration that was seen in
the automobile industry. Direct investment from Japan to the euro area is also on the rise. The increase
in direct investment will promote the reallocation of management resources, technology transfer, and
competition, resulting in boosting both economies.
The increase in capital flows between the two economies is well evidenced in portfolio investment. In
1999, Japan’s portfolio investment in the euro area exceeded that in the United States. Japan’s foreign
portfolio  investment  in  France,  Germany,  the  Netherlands,  and  Luxembourg,  the  four  euro  area
countries for which individual data are available, totaled almost 5.6 trillion yen in 1999. On the other
hand, Japan’s portfolio investment in the United States was 1.4 trillion yen. This is rather noteworthy,
because,  in  international  capital  markets,  the  United  States,  with  its  huge  current  account  deficit,
absorbs  a  lot  of  funds  provided  by  the  euro  area  and  Japan.  Despite  such  a  situation,  capital  flows
between the euro area and Japan are surging, and both economies are growing more interdependent in
international capital markets.
In  the  increasingly  integrated  global  market,  the  euro  area  and  Japan  are  becoming  more  and  more
dependent. I hope today’s forum will contribute to bringing the two economies closer, and serve as an
opportunity to enhance communication between the private sector of the euro area and that of Japan. I
know this forum will be a success.
3
BIS Review 108/2000
