T T Mboweni: Global competitiveness - is South Africa ready?
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Black Management
Forum Conference 2000 in Gauteng on 13 October 2000.
 Introduction
1.
Financial markets around the world are being integrated into a single global market and, whether we
like  it  or  not,  emerging  and  developing  countries  are  being  drawn  into  this  process.  The  growing
economic interdependence of countries worldwide can be seen in the greater  volume  and  variety  of
cross-border  transactions  and  in  the  faster  and  more  widespread  diffusion  of  technology.
Technological  progress  has  improved  transportation  and  communications,  enhanced  information
awareness and information processing, and set the stage for new products and innovations.
Although these markets still do not form  a  single  global  village,  they  are  already  so  interdependent
that they have altered the environment in which the provision of financial services takes place. One of
the  most  important  results  of  globalisation  has  been  the  huge  upsurge  in  cross-border  financial
transactions. This, in turn, has meant that shocks in one “national” market are quickly transmitted to
other  “national”  markets  with  the  speed  never  thought  of  decades  ago.  The  contagion  effect  of  the
recent crisis in East Asia is a good example.
Another consequence of globalisation, is increased competition. Financial liberalisation, the removal
of controls and the breakdown of international barriers, make it possible for new entrants to participate
in markets which were previously closed to them. In  view  of  the  size  of  these  enterprises  and their
involvement  in  many  countries  in  the  world,  they  are  usually  well-placed  to  provide  specialised
services  to  clients  at  relatively  low  costs.  The  increased  competition  makes  new  demands  on  old
established enterprises and they must either adapt or die.
Globalisation and financial institutions
2.
Financial  institutions  all  over  the  world  have  responded  to  these  changes  in  different  ways.  Some
entered into strategic alliances with foreign or domestic enterprises. Others positioned themselves by
specialising  in  the  provision  of  certain  specific  services.  Yet  others  chose  to  consolidate  and  form
large  groups.  This  approach  led  to  takeovers  and  amalgamations  of  financial  activity  in  new
companies that provide a broad spectrum of financial services to consumers.
In South Africa the financial system has also been undergoing major modernisation and strengthening.
The impetus for this change came after 1994 when foreign financial institutions began to participate
directly  in  the  South  African  market.  The  policy  followed  by  the  authorities  of  gradually  removing
exchange  controls,  opened  up  new  opportunities  for  the  diversification  of  investments.  As  a  result,
foreign financial institutions set up large numbers of subsidiaries, branches or representative offices in
South Africa. At first the domestic financial institutions felt the impact of increased competition, but
they  now  seem  to  have  adapted  well  to  the  changed  circumstances  and  have  introduced  various
measures to improve their efficiency.
The depth, breadth and stature of South Africa’s financial markets has been increased by a number of
important developments in recent years. The development of a eurorand bond market, the introduction
of  primary  dealers  in  bond  auctions  and  the  successful  launching  of  a  domestic  medium-term  note
programme deepened the South African bond market. Financial instruments have also been diversified
and aligned more closely with developments in international capital markets.
The  Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange  has  been  restructured  to  provide  for  electronic  screen  trading,
corporate  and  non-resident  participation,  negotiated  commissions  and  dual  capacity  trading  by
brokers.  The  stock  exchange  has  also  successfully  forged  links  with  other  exchanges  in  Southern
1
BIS Review 92/2000
Africa,  and  now  shares  with  the  Namibian  Stock  Exchange  a  system  for  trading,  clearing  and
settlement.  Electronic  clearing  and  settlement,  the  phased  dematerialisation  of  shares  and  their
registration in a central securities depository, are currently being introduced. The objective is to reduce
settlement  risk  through  delivery  against  payments  linked  to  the  National  Payment,  Clearing  and
Settlement System.
It  is  important  to  realise  that  institutions  that  have  greater  international  distribution  and  delivery
capacity can compete better on a global basis. While merger and acquisition activity continues to grow
rapidly in the world, the South African market has been relatively quiet in this regard since the market
crash of September 1998. Although the past years have seen high-profile listings on the London Stock
Exchange  of  South  African  Breweries,  Old  Mutual,  Anglo  American  and  Didata,  there  have  been
relatively few new listings or rights issues on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange. Moderate growth in
share prices has tended to slow merger and acquisition activity, but cross-border acquisitions by South
African companies have entrenched South Africa as part of the global economy and highlighted the
need to be globally competitive.
The world of competitive global finance clearly favours players with a global scale and reach. This
means  that  financial  institutions  must  have  research  facilities  to  keep  them  up  to  date  with
international developments, they must have access to global markets and they must have products that
can be marketed internationally. For many South African institutions, this implies a complete change
in culture and in the behaviour of their staff, and probably also a realignment of their organisational
structures.
Financial institutions in a global environment will, in particular, rely heavily on information to target
potential  clients,  assess  their  needs  and  objectives,  manage  their  portfolios,  construct  investment
strategies and allocate assets. In this regard the Internet has emerged as a key competitive arena for the
future of financial services. Web-based commerce has added new complexity and unpredictability to
the  world  of  commercial  and  retail  banking,  mutual  funds  and  brokers,  back-office  processors  and
financial software providers.
Institutions that do not have a clear strategic focus will find it increasingly difficult to maintain their
positions as competition gets tougher. They will have to identify a specific focus for their business,
because  it  may  become  difficult  to  compete  successfully  in  all  the  various  fields  and  instruments.
Careful  planning  and  organisation  are  needed  in  this  integrated  world  to  ensure  that  the  needs  of
clients  are  well  served.  Clients  have  become  increasingly  performance  sensitive.  This  makes  it
essential to monitor structures and products to keep performance inconsistencies to a minimum.
Globalisation and financial regulation
3.
Greater global competitiveness also poses new challenges to financial regulation for ensuring financial
stability.  The  recent  experience  in  a  number  of  countries  has  clearly  indicated  that  there  is  a  real
danger  of financial  instability from  globalised  financial  markets  and  large  and  volatile  international
capital  flows.  The  Asian  crisis  was  magnified  by  bad  loans,  weak  balance  sheets  and  lack  of
transparency  in  financial  reporting.  Research  shows  clearly  that  emerging  markets  with  sound
financial systems are better able to manage the effects of international financial crises.
Partially in response to some negative effects of globalisation, several international institutions such as
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the World
Bank  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  have  done  studies  on  reforming  the  international
financial architecture.
The cooperative global efforts on reform have been concentrating on five major areas. The first area is
to make timely, reliable statistical data available to the market and the public, as well as information
about economic and financial policies, practices and decision-making. Important progress in this area
includes the establishment of the Special Data Dissemination Standard of the IMF and the release of
Public Information Notices following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation process between
the IMF and member countries. It is agreed that greater transparency will enhance the understanding
BIS Review 92/2000
2
by  the  public  of  economic  policy  measures  of  government,  strengthen  credibility  and  make  market
participants less uncertain in their decision-making.
The second area is the creation of internationally accepted practices. Key progress in this area includes
the development of the Code of Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency, the Code of Good Practices
on  Transparency  in  Monetary  and  Financial  Policies  and  guidelines  concerning  financial  sector
soundness.  Adherence  to  these  international  best  practices  and  codes  should  help  to  ensure  that
economies function properly.
The  third  area  is  the  strengthening  of  the  financial  sector.  The  assumption  is  that  banks  and  other
financial  institutions  need  to  improve  internal  practices,  including  risk  assessment  and  risk
management. At the same time the official sector needs to upgrade the supervision and regulation of
the financial sector to keep pace with the modern global economy. To achieve these  objectives,  the
Basel  Committee  has  developed  the  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking  Supervision,  while  the
Committee on Payments and Settlement Systems has drawn up the Core Principles for Systemically
Important Payment Systems. Universal principles for insurance as well as security market regulation
have also been developed.
The fourth area of financial sector reform concerns involving the private sector in crisis prevention.
The  involvement  of  the  private  sector  should  limit  moral  hazard,  strengthen  market  discipline  and
improve the repayment of loans.
The  fifth  area  of  reform  concentrates  on  the  prevention  of  systemic  instability.  Most  of  the
international best practices and codes have been established to minimise the effects that the insolvency
of a financial institution may have on other institutions. In addition, the IMF has created a Contingent
Credit  Line  facility  as  a  precautionary  defence  for  countries  with  strong  economic  policies.  This
facility  has  been  designed  to  prevent  the  balance  of  payments  problems  that  could  arise  from
international financial contagion.
South Africa has been actively involved in discussions on the new international financial architecture.
We recently also participated in a Financial System Stability Assessment undertaken by the IMF and
the World Bank. The report on South Africa has not been published, but found that the South African
financial  system  is  robust  and  that  the  financial  sector’s  legal  framework  is  impressive.  The
assessment was further that South Africa is in broad compliance with recognised best practice in the
fields  of  security,  insurance  and  banking  regulation  and  that  we  are  making  substantial  efforts  to
ensure transparency. Despite this favourable assessment, we must nevertheless continue to strive for
sufficiently  accountable,  transparent  and  effective  cooperation  between  the  various  agencies  for  the
smooth  running  of  South  Africa’s  financial  markets.  This  should  instil  public  confidence  in  the
financial system.
The Banks Act and the regulations governing the activities of the banks have been amended to bring
them  into  line  with  international  developments.  In  addition,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  established  a
Financial  Stability  Unit  (FSU)  to  focus  on  the  overall  stability  of  the  financial  sector  and  its
preparedness  for  global  competition.  One  of  the  functions  of  the  FSU  is  to  keep  abreast  of
international  developments  as  far  as  stability  issues  are  concerned.  The  unit  should  ensure  that  the
South African financial system remains resilient in an environment of global competition. It has also
been created to ensure effective cooperation with the Financial Services Board.
The Reserve Bank’s Financial Stability  Unit  will  continuously  assess  developments in  the  domestic
financial system to ensure that we obtain early warnings of any signs of a potential crisis. The FSU
will also investigate the  overall design  of  the  financial regulatory  regime,  with  special  emphasis  on
aspects of regulation that  are  difficult to  implement.  Its  aim  will be to  strengthen  structures,  ensure
better management of risk in financial institutions and improve corporate governance. The work of the
unit will cut across a number of other areas, including the need for improved disclosure and how to
foster more effective cooperation among players in the financial system.
The establishment of the Financial Stability Unit further demonstrates that South Africa is increasingly
being equipped to become an international financial centre. A large part of the unit’s work since its
establishment  has  consisted  mostly  of  information  gathering  and  follow-up  work  arising  from  the
3
BIS Review 92/2000
agenda  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  of  the  Group  of  Seven  industrial  countries.  The  Financial
Stability Forum aims to bring together the regulators from the Group of Seven countries to exchange
ideas on how to achieve greater soundness in financial systems. It has produced guidelines on deposit
insurance and key standards for sound financial systems, as well as on implementing these guidelines
and standards. Although South Africa is not a member of the G7, representatives of our country have
participated in meetings of the Forum’s working groups.
Globalisation and monetary policy
4.
Globalisation  and  increased  competitiveness  have  also  created  additional  challenges  for  monetary
policy. The internationalisation of investment decisions has made South Africa more prone to volatile
capital  movements.  This  was  clearly  illustrated  by  the  behaviour  of  portfolio  investments  by  non-
residents  in  recent  years.  For  example,  the  net  purchases  of  South  African  bonds  by  non-residents
amounted to R16 billion in the first four months of 1998. This was followed by a reduction in their
holdings of R26 billion in the last eight months of 1998. From the beginning of 1999 until the end of
January 2000 they again became net investors in South African bonds to the amount of R16.5 billion.
Subsequently, from February to August, they again sold domestic bonds on a net basis totalling R12.5
billion.
In  seeking  to  ensure  stability  in  the  overall  balance  of  payments  position  of  South  Africa,  volatile
capital movements are making it imperative for South Africa to reduce inflation. The pursuit of price
stability  and  the  success  achieved  by  many  countries  in  bringing  their  inflation  rates  down  to  low
levels have left South Africa with no other alternative than to bring our inflation in step with that of
the  rest  of  the  world  and  to  keep  it  there.  If  this  is  not  achieved  in  the  coming  years,  market
adjustments  will  take  place  to  compensate  for  the  inflation  differential.  Such  adjustments  could
include  large  disruptive  capital  outflows,  a  depreciation  in  the  external  value  of  the  rand  and  high
interest rates.
The  thrust  of  monetary  policy  in  the  new  globalised  financial  environment  must  therefore  be  the
pursuance of price stability. Fortunately the Reserve Bank has already chosen to follow this course and
success in bringing inflation down is within  our  grasp.  Unfortunately  such a  policy  stance  does  not
provide  unconditional  protection against  speculative  capital outflows. The  decisions  of  international
investors are based on international interest rates, exchange rates and such factors as political stability.
These factors are beyond the control of the central bank. The only approach that the Reserve Bank can
follow  is  to  do  its  important  bit  for  stability,  growth  and  employment  creation,  and  that  means
establishing and maintaining financial stability.
However, the way in which this objective is pursued, is in the hands of the Reserve Bank. Recently an
inflation-targeting  monetary  policy  framework  was  adopted  for  this  purpose.  Inflation  targeting  has
been used in many other countries with great success. With the adoption of this approach to monetary
policy in South Africa, the authorities attempted to create greater certainty about what monetary policy
wants  to  achieve.  No  one  is  left  in  the  dark  any  longer.  Everyone  should  know  by  now  that  the
Reserve Bank’s ultimate objective is an annual average inflation target range of 3 to 6% for the year
2002. This new framework has helped to focus monetary policy, has promoted transparency and has
led to a clearer public accountability of the Reserve Bank.
Globalisation and increased international competition have made it important for the Reserve Bank to
adopt  inflation  targeting  as  its  policy  approach.  International  capital  flows  and  liberalised  financial
markets obscure the relationship between money supply, interest rates and inflation. In an integrated
world  economy  the  money  supply  becomes  a  less  reliable  anchor  for  monetary  policy,  forcing  the
authorities to take a different approach.
A  fixed  exchange  rate  system  would  also  be  a  difficult  monetary  policy  framework  to  pursue  in  a
world  experiencing  large  and  volatile  capital  movements.  This  was  clear  from  the  developments  in
Mexico  during  the  tequila  crisis  and  in  Thailand,  Malaysia  and  Indonesia  during  1998  when  large
amounts of capital were withdrawn from emerging-market economies. However, some countries, such
as Hong Kong and Argentina, have applied a system of fixed exchange rates with some success, while
maintaining price stability. Their success was due to consistent monetary policies and well-regulated
BIS Review 92/2000
4
financial  systems.  Flexible  exchange  rate  regimes  nevertheless  seem  to  shelter  countries  more
effectively from the exogenous shocks that are typical of greater economic integration.
Trying  to  maintain  an  exchange  rate  target  may  be  costly  in  terms  of  less  activity  in  the  domestic
economy.  In  an  inflation-targeting  framework,  exchange  rates  are  generally  allowed  to  reflect  the
supply of and demand for currency in foreign exchange markets. By allowing the exchange rate to be
flexible, interest rates become more stable and reversals in international capital flows do not disrupt
domestic economic activity as much. This does not mean that large exchange rate changes do not have
serious  effects  on  production.  Naturally  they  have  a  direct  impact  on  the  country’s  international
economic activity. Depending on the importance of the external sector they could also have a serious
impact on domestic production growth, job creation and inflation. However, large changes in interest
rates generally have a larger impact on domestic activity than exchange rate adjustments. The art of
central banking is to make these essential adjustments to the economy with the least harm to domestic
economic activity and job creation.
Conclusion
5.
Globalisation  and  greater  competition  pose  interesting  challenges  on  a  micro  and  macro  level  for
enterprises  and  the  public  authorities.  Financial  institutions  and  markets  need  to  make  many
adjustments to cope with this changed environment. Similarly, public authorities face new problems
without easy answers. These issues have led to a considerable effort by international organisations to
improve the world’s financial architecture. At the same time, national public authorities had to apply
their minds to the policy approaches that the integrated world economy require. Financial institutions,
financial markets and the monetary authorities in South  Africa  have  adapted in  a flexible and  well-
considered  manner  to  changes  in  the  world  economy.  We  seem  to  have  made  the  correct  changes
under  the  circumstances,  and  these  changes  should  contribute  to  sustainable  high  economic  growth
and job creation in the medium to long term.
5
BIS Review 92/2000
