Tanya Sirivedhin: New challenges for finance and capital markets
Speech  by  Ms  Tanya  Sirivedhin,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Conference  on
“Thailand-Finance and Capital Markets”, held in Bangkok, on 28 September 2000.
 Today’s conference is very timely, in view of the increasing role that finance and capital markets are
likely to play in the future Thai financial scene.
I have identified several aspects of the challenges of “Finance and Capital Markets” which  I  would
like  to  share  with  this  audience.  I  hope  that  the  open  discussion  of  these  challenges  will  be  an
important input into the work of the Thai authorities, and what we envisage to be the vision for our
industry.
I shall frame the challenges in three dimensions:
First, the challenges from rebuilding and strengthening the business and financial industry.
Second, the challenges from the adoption of best international practices.
Third, the challenges from the race to catch up with the new technological frontier of e-commerce and
electronic trading.
Rebuilding and strengthening the financial industry
The  1997  economic  and  financial  crisis  brought  to  light  many  weaknesses  in  Thailand’s
macroeconomic  and  financial  management.  In  its  aftermath,  measures  were  undertaken  speedily  to
shore  up  the  currency  and  to  restore  confidence  in  the  viability  and  sustainability  of  firms  and
businesses,  both  in  the  financial  and  non-financial  industry.  Through  the  implementation  of  these
measures, there were inevitably many casualties. For example, as many as 56 finance companies were
closed down permanently while others, as well as the weak banks, were taken over by the authorities
or  consolidated.  Businesses  caught  short  by  the  depreciation  of  the  currency  or  the  austere  belt
tightening environment which lifted interest rates to historically high levels, had to be closed down or
consolidated.
It became of utmost urgency to improve confidence, strengthen the operations of financial institutions
and enable them to improve and resume their intermediation role. In the view of the Bank of Thailand,
the only way to bring about sustained recovery of the economy which was affected by the liquidity
crunch situation, and by the concern over counterparty credit risks in the midst of the crisis, was to
tackle head-on the issue of non-performing loans.
In  June  1998,  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  in  cooperation  with  five  associations,  namely,  Thai  Bankers’
Association,  Foreign  Banks’  Association,  Association  of  Finance  Companies,  Board  of  Trade,  and
Federation  of  Thai  Industries,  set  up  the  Corporate  Debt  Restructuring  Advisory  Committee
(CDRAC).  This  was  aimed  to  oversee  and  facilitate  the  out-of-court  debt  restructuring  process.  Its
mandate  was  to  help  push  ahead  complicated  debt  restructuring  cases  through  a  framework  of
negotiation. The Committee also pushed through many initiatives to eliminate legal and tax obstacles
to debt restructuring.
Consequently,  NPLs  in  the  financial  system  have  fallen  progressively  from  a  peak  of  47%  of  total
loans in May 1999, to the present level of about 31% of total loans. The decline is partly the result of
debt  restructuring,  as  well  as  transfers  of  non-performing  loans  to  Asset  Management  Companies
(AMCs).  As  at  the  end of July  2000, restructured  debt  totalled  281,222  cases  with  a  corresponding
credit outstanding of 1.7 trillion baht, while cases in the process of restructuring totalled 22,906 with a
corresponding credit outstanding of about 773 billion baht. With cleaner balance sheets, banks are in a
better position to start lending.
1
BIS Review 85/2000
Now that the situation has stabilized, post-crisis rebuilding and reconstruction in the banking system
must be pursued vigorously, both through policy-induced means as well as through individual firms’
initiatives. To reduce reliance on bank credit, the capital market must be developed as an alternative
channel  for  funding.  This  will  help  rectify  an  important  weakness  of  the  past  whereby  firms  relied
excessively  on  bank  borrowing  and  were  not  able  to  access  funds  directly  from  the  capital  market.
Among  initiatives  to promote  the  capital  market  which  are  being  pursued  by  the authorities  are  the
development  of  the  domestic  bond  market,  the  corporatization  of  the  Stock  Exchange  of  Thailand
(SET) to widen membership and participation, as well as acceleration of the privatization process to
increase the supply of new listings on the SET.
Looking ahead, competition facing the financial industry  will  come  not  only  from  the  entry  of  new
participants,  especially  foreign  players,  but  from  competition  across  industries  or  frontiers  such  as
between banks and securities firms.
Operational boundaries are becoming more and  more  blurred  with  the  much  debated  argument  of  a
universal  versus  a segregated banking  system.  Yet  the future  landscape  of the  industry  in  regard  to
business  operations  of  financial  institutions  is  increasingly  more  challenging  as  technological
competition encroaches on all fronts. Electronic trading platforms for bonds, accessible to both banks
and  securities  houses,  will  gradually  erode  the  role  of  these  intermediaries.  Customers  can  easily
access  a  trading  platform,  searching  for  the  best  quotation  to  serve  their  needs  and  investment
horizons. These electronic trading platforms can easily service the traditional customers of banks and
securities firms, such as pension funds, provident funds, mutual funds and insurance, without the need
for  an  intermediary  network  of  dealers.  Traditional  dealers,  accustomed  to  the  OTC  market  trading
environment and relationship with their customers will need to prepare themselves for a new market
niche  for  the  future.  These  could  include  upgrading  their  research  capabilities  to  provide  better
research materials for their customers, enhancing efficiency of operation, so as not to be marginalized
in the new competitive environment.
No doubt processing simple loan applications and bank lending will remain the bread and butter of the
financial  industry  for  some  time,  but  competition  will  inevitably  be  stronger  with  new  entries  and
market participants.
The challenge of adoption of international practices
When a country plunges into a serious crisis, which I may say in the case of Thailand was a crisis of
both macroeconomic imbalance and of confidence, drastic measures have to be imposed on all fronts.
As  such  we  found  ourselves  pursuing  austere  macroeconomic  policy,  which  worked  to  curtail
excessive  spending  and  restrain  aggregate  demand,  thereby  improving  Thailand’s  external  accounts
and stemming capital outflows. At the same time, we had to adopt stricter prudential standards to raise
confidence in our financial institutions. Banks inevitably had to scramble to raise capital in order to
meet the provisioning requirements under our new and stricter definition of “non-performing loan”.
In  addition  to  the  adoption  of  international  best  practice  with  regard  to  asset  classification  and
provisioning, other banking practices had to be upgraded. For example the industry has had to get used
to a new way of doing business, pursuing good corporate governance, improved disclosure, stronger
accountability and better risk management and control. These are indeed significant changes from the
traditional  way  business  had  been  conducted  in  the  past,  and  in  turn  will  need  commitment  of
management and staff, inputs and resources to bring the industry to full compliance with international
best practices, not to mention a new supervision framework for the authorities.
The new financial institution law, pending consideration by Parliament, will provide the BOT with a
clear  mandate  and  accountability  to  regulate  and  supervise  financial  institutions  under  a  new
framework,  including  such  procedures  as  prompt  corrective  action,  and  reduced  scope  for  use  of
judgment, among other things.
On our part, the central bank has also gone through a process of self-examination. We have mapped
out  a  clear  strategic  direction  to  ensure  that  our  operational  framework  focuses  on  the  primary
responsibility of achieving financial and monetary stability. Among the major changes being proposed
BIS Review 85/2000
2
in the new Bank of Thailand Act is the adoption of inflation targeting as a framework for monetary
policy.  This  is  aimed  to  provide  a  clear  and  transparent  rule  of  operation  and  signaling  to  market
participants. The proposed amendment of the Bank of Thailand Act clearly states that the overriding
objective of the central bank is price stability. To implement this, a Monetary Policy Committee has
been  set  up,  the  results  of  whose  deliberation  are  to  be  disclosed  regularly  to  the  public,  and  an
Inflation Report is to be published quarterly. As for our supervision function, we are moving towards a
risk-focused  supervision  and  improved  disclosure  and  accountability  system.  The  formal  policy
framework  is  to  be set  by  the  Financial  Institution  Policy  Committee  which  similarly  has  members
from outside the BOT.
May I add that to expedite the promotion of transparency, we have set up these two committees even
before the new law has come into effect. Thus highly respected and well qualified outside persons now
have a say in the deliberations on both monetary policy and financial institution policy.
The technological challenge
The 1997 crisis set back economic and financial development in Thailand by many years. These have
to  be  made  up  through  speedier  reforms  and  a  catching  up  process.  In  addition  financial  market
participants  as  well  as  regulators  are  facing  the  global  challenge  of  the  new  economy  and
technological revolution.
The new technological revolution is pushing for change everywhere in the world, and with no concern
for  those  in  need  of  time  to  heal  the  wounds  inflicted  by  crisis.  It  has  become  an  inevitable
development which needs to be embraced with the right attitude, mindset and understanding.
The  new  economy  in  itself  poses  challenges,  not  exclusively  to  financial  service  providers,  but  to
regulators, business operators and the financial industry as a whole. The challenge, on this last aspect,
is particularly crucial to the government sector; for they need to make sure that the legal, regulatory
and  supervisory  framework  are  there  to  create  the  right  competitive  environment  and  operating
conditions.  This  is  to  ensure  that  when  their  own  private  operators  are  ready  for  the  technological
challenges  of  E-banking,  internet-broking  and  the  electronic  trading  platform,  then  the  appropriate
legal and regulatory framework is there, rather than becoming an obstacle to development - by which
time we may no longer be able to catch up with major global players.
In the world of E-commerce and trading, banks have become important intermediaries as the operator
of the payments system, to facilitate the payment for the goods and services which are being traded
on-line. As regulator of the commercial banking business, the Bank of Thailand is working in earnest
to support the development of the country’s payment system, by both the public and private sectors.
This  is  to  ensure  that  the  country’s  overall  payment  system  is  fully  integrated  and  contributes
positively to the overall efficiency of trade and commerce within and outside the country. This in turn
will enhance the country’s capacity to face competition and challenges in the international financial
and  investment  environment,  at  the  regional  and  global  levels.  Nevertheless,  while  information
technology proceeds at the speed of light, the corresponding legislative reforms take time. The Bank
of Thailand, along with other government agencies, is working hard to push forward for the enactment
of crucial legislations such as the Electronic Transaction Act, Electronic Digital Law, Electronic Fund
Transfer, to name but a few.
Technological revolution in the banking and financial world, such as the advent of E-money, have had
an  impact  on  fundamental  central  banking  concerns,  particularly  on  the  definition  of  “money”,  the
transmission mechanism of monetary policy and the traditional intermediation function of banks and
deposit  taking  institutions.  These,  in  turn,  will  likely  make  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  more
difficult and challenging. Monetary authorities will need to stay on top of these developments.
Finally, let me conclude by hoping that I have left you with some food for thought for your further
deliberation and discussion. May I also take this opportunity to thank the organizers of the Conference
on Finance and Capital Markets for inviting me here today.
3
BIS Review 85/2000
