Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy’s role and contribution
Address by Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank, at the Norwegian Savings Banks Association’s
Conference Society and Economics 2000 held in Oslo on 13 October 2000.
 The long-term task of monetary policy is to provide the economy with a nominal anchor. Economic
agents must be relatively certain of the future value of money. Agreements relating to purchases and
sales, loans and interest rates are concluded in nominal terms. The decentralisation of decisions both in
the public and business sector is based on nominal budget limits. The tax system is in nominal rates.
When prices fluctuate widely, it is impossible to foresee the content of such agreements and budgets in
real  terms.  Unexpected  price  variations  could thus  easily  result in  undesired  fluctuations  in  the  real
economy.1
A credible and consistent monetary policy provides enterprises, households and institutions with the
confidence that the value of the krone will be stable over time. This confidence is the best contribution
monetary policy can make to employment, economic growth and welfare.
This also prevents monetary policy from having arbitrary distributional effects. We thereby avoid high
and varying inflation and boom periods that are followed by recessions.
Norges Bank’s main monetary policy instrument is the interest rate. This instrument must be oriented
towards the long-term objective of nominal stability in the economy.
1  See Rødseth (1987).
1
BIS Review 92/2000
The objective of monetary policy
Norway has a tradition of having a fixed or stable exchange rate, although we cannot say that we have
had  a  high  degree  of  continuity  in  monetary  policy.  On  the  contrary.  In  the  1970s  and  1980s,  the
economy lacked a nominal anchor. Interest rates were low in nominal terms and they were politically
determined. Frequent devaluations were used to redress the negative effects of high price  and  wage
inflation  on  competitiveness.  The  average  rate  of  increase  in  prices  between  1973  and  1987  was
almost  10%.  The  value  of  the  Norwegian  krone  against  the  German  mark  was  nearly  halved  from
1973 to 1987. We paid about 2 kroner for a mark in 1973 and close to 4 kroner in 1987.
The low interest rate and devaluation policy collapsed in the mid-1980s. Following a shift, which can
now perhaps be said to have occurred in 1986, monetary policy has created nominal stability. Through
the 1990s inflation in Norway was on a par with the level elsewhere in Europe. At the same time, the
value of the krone against European currencies is about the same today as it was in the early 1990s.
The exchange rate against the German mark is still around 4 kroner.
BIS Review 92/2000
2
Norway abandoned a fixed exchange rate system in 1992 in the wake of heavy speculation against the
krone  during  the  period  of  turbulence  in  European  foreign  exchange  markets.  The  krone  was  very
stable  in  the  first  years  following  this  episode,  with  small  daily  fluctuations  in  the  exchange  rate.
Looking back at developments in the Norwegian foreign exchange market in the 1990s, it appears that
no significant change really occurred in 1992.
However, there was a marked shift in January 1997. From that time, daily and monthly variations in
the krone exchange rate show that the krone is floating.
Monetary policy is oriented towards stability in the value of the krone. The Exchange Rate Regulation
- which  is  the  mandate  assigned  to  Norges  Bank  by  the  political  authorities  -  states  that  monetary
policy shall be aimed at maintaining a stable krone exchange rate against European currencies. Since
1 January 1999, Norges Bank has defined European currencies as the euro.
3
BIS Review 92/2000
The Exchange Rate Regulation takes into account that the krone exchange rate may remain outside its
normal  range.  In  the  event  of  significant  changes  in  the  exchange  rate,  Norges  Bank  shall  orient
instruments  with  a  view  to  returning  the  exchange  rate  over  time  to  its  initial  range.  Norges  Bank
considers an exchange rate change to be significant if it influences expectations concerning price and
cost developments to the extent that the change in the exchange rate becomes self-reinforcing.
In  its  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  Norges  Bank  places  emphasis  on  satisfying  the  fundamental
preconditions for exchange rate stability against the euro: Instruments must be oriented with a view to
reducing price and cost inflation to the level aimed at by the European Central Bank (ECB). At the
same time, monetary policy must not in itself contribute to deflationary recessions as this may weaken
confidence in the krone.
The Regulation’s requirement with regard to returning the krone exchange rate to its initial range may
- if stretched - imply too strong an element of parity policy. For example, in a scenario with a sharp
and  prolonged fall in  oil  prices, the  krone  exchange  rate  may  remain  outside  the  initial  range  for  a
longer period. If Norges Bank responds by raising interest rates in order to force the krone back to its
initial range, monetary policy could trigger a recession of a type that will undermine confidence in the
krone. Similarly, after an appreciation a situation may arise whereby interest rates must be set at such a
low level to return the krone exchange rate to the initial range that this results in higher inflation. The
basis for exchange rate stability is weakened in both cases. Hence, Norges Bank cannot with open eyes
orient policy instruments in such a way that they fuel inflation or lead to a deflationary recession.
If a situation arises whereby Norges Bank is not able to return the krone to its initial range without
such consequences, the Bank will inform the government authorities that measures  other  than  those
available to the Bank are required. This may involve recommendations concerning fiscal measures that
make it possible to return the krone exchange rate to its initial range and to stabilise it. In the event of
pronounced  and  prolonged  shifts  in  the  economy,  fiscal  policy  and  wage  determination  must
contribute to restoring balance in the economy. However, if fundamental and permanent changes have
taken place in the framework conditions for the  Norwegian economy,  it  may  also  be  appropriate to
change the guidelines for monetary policy.
According to the Maastricht treaty, the main objective of the ECB is the maintenance of price stability.
The ECB has defined price stability as inflation of 2% or lower.
BIS Review 92/2000
4
Inflation in Norway cannot remain higher than inflation in the euro area year after year without any
consequences  for  the  exchange  rate  between  the  Norwegian  krone  and  the  euro.  If  price  and  cost
inflation remains higher than the rate of increase aimed at by the ECB over a long period, the krone
will depreciate against the euro sooner or later.
Even if instruments are oriented with a view to stability in the krone exchange rate against the euro,
cyclical  differences  will  result  in  inflation  differentials  between  Norway  and  euro  area  countries.
Business  cycles  have  been  desynchronised  over  the  last  15  years.  Because  of  the  stagnation  in  the
1990s,  inflation  has  been  particularly  low  in  Europe  in  recent  years.  Norway,  on  the  other  hand,
experienced a long period of economic expansion in the 1990s. Since 1997, price inflation in Norway
has been higher than in euro area countries, which is reflected in the higher level of interest rates in
Norway compared with the euro area.
The effects of monetary policy
In theory, Norges Bank has two monetary policy instruments: the interest rate and exchange market
interventions.  However,  in  Norges  Bank’s  experience,  extensive  and  sustained  exchange  market
interventions to influence the exchange rate have yielded poor results. Interventions can often lead to
game situations where market operators perceive the central bank’s attempt to influence the exchange
rate as an interesting opportunity to make a profit. Events in autumn 1992, at the  start  of  1997  and
autumn 1998 show that exchange market interventions cannot stem the pressure on the krone.
Norges Bank does not want to intervene in such a way that these game situations arise. However, the
Bank may use interventions to a limited extent if the krone exchange rate moves substantially out of
line  with  what  we  consider  to  be  reasonable  based  on  fundamentals  or  in  the  event  of  exceptional
short-term  volatility  in  thin  markets.  In  such  situations,  there  is  less  risk  of  ending  up  in  a  game
situation against exchange market operators.
We  have  also  experienced  game  situations  in  which  one  or  more  major  operators  were  behind  the
krone exchange rate fluctuations and at the same time took speculative positions in the capital market
in the expectation that Norges Bank would raise its key interest rate to defend the krone. If we focus
too  narrowly  on  the  exchange  rate  when  setting  interest  rates,  we  are  liable  to  end  up  in  game
situations. Speculators have little to gain from such game situations if Norges Bank proceeds gradually
and avoids abrupt shifts in the setting of interest rates.
5
BIS Review 92/2000
In  practice,  the  interest  rate  is  the  only  monetary  policy  instrument  available  to  Norges  Bank.  The
interest  rate  can  influence  the  exchange  rate  directly  through  the  differential  between  domestic  and
foreign interest rates, and indirectly through inflation expectations.
Higher interest rates normally make krone positions more attractive. An increase in the interest rate
will therefore result in an appreciation of the krone, and a lower interest rate will weaken the krone.
However, this relationship presupposes that the market is confident that monetary policy provides the
economy  with  a  nominal  anchor.  In  some  situations,  interest  rate  changes  may  have  the  opposite
effect. A higher interest rate can weaken the krone if it contributes to a deflationary recession, and a
lower interest rate can strengthen the krone if it contributes to preventing a deflationary recession. The
interest rate only has a predictable effect on the krone exchange rate when it influences price inflation
in the right direction.2
Historically, it has often been the case that the central bank has raised its key rate when confidence in
monetary  policy  has  declined,  and  the  currency  has  been  exposed  to  depreciation  pressure.  This  is
probably  one  of  the  reasons  why  it  has  proved  difficult  to  find  empirical  support  for  a  direct
relationship between the interest rate and the exchange rate.
The  impact  of  the  interest  rate  on  the  krone  exchange  rate  will  depend  on  how  uncertain  krone
positions are perceived to be and the size of the risk premium required for these positions. The Bank’s
analyses3 indicate that the krone exchange rate is also affected in the short term by uncertainty in the
global economy and international financial unrest. Volatility in international foreign exchange markets
may explain short-term fluctuations in the krone exchange rate, particularly since 1997. This may be
because international operators are more aware of the Norwegian krone as a speculative object.
The direct relationship between the interest rate and the exchange rate is therefore not stable, and the
exchange rate level in itself provides limited information for the setting of interest rates.
It  is  essential  to  take  into  account  that  the  Norwegian  economy  is  small  and  very  open.  Norway’s
foreign trade is substantial. All capital controls have been removed. Our financial market is becoming
increasingly  integrated  into  the  international  economy.  Significant  structural  changes  took  place
during the 1990s. Household savings are now to a large extent invested abroad through life insurance
companies  and  funds.  Changes  in capital flows have  a  greater  impact  on  exchange  rate  movements
than  payments  for  exports  and  imports.  Capital  flows  can  easily  be  influenced  by  events  in  other
2  See Mussa (2000) and Stiglitz (2000) for two opposite views on this question.
3  See Bernhardsen and Røisland (2000).
BIS Review 92/2000
6
countries and by changes in expectations concerning developments in the Norwegian business sector,
Norwegian prices, costs and interest rates.
In the long term, a country’s exchange rate tends to move in line with developments in domestic price
and cost inflation compared with other countries. This is the hypothesis  of  purchasing  power  parity
between countries. If the level of prices in one country rises at a faster pace than in other countries,
that country’s currency will tend to depreciate to the same extent over time. Empirical evidence has
been found for these effects for a number of countries even though the effects are relatively weak in
the short term. However, substantial medium-term convergence in purchasing power parity has been
found between Norway and its trading partners.4
I have described a foreign exchange market with a market-determined krone exchange rate. Normally,
we cannot influence price formation in this  market  through  direct  interventions.  In  other  words,  we
have a floating currency not only formally but also in reality.
The formal Regulation (from 1994) and its interpretation reflect the limitations of monetary policy as a
result of developments in foreign exchange markets and the structure of the Norwegian economy.
Price and cost inflation is influenced by monetary policy through a number of channels. When interest
rates rise, it becomes more profitable to save and to postpone consumption. This reduces growth in
household  consumption.  At  the  same  time,  a  higher  interest  rate  may  increase  the  required  rate  of
return, thereby reducing business investment.
In  addition  to  the  direct  effect  on  demand,  a  rise  in  interest  rates  may  moderate  demand  through
reduced  access  to  liquidity,  a  decline  in  asset  values  and  a  stronger  exchange  rate.  Moreover,  a
stronger exchange rate will reduce the rise in prices for imports, which account for 40% of goods and
services in the consumer price index.
An increase in interest rates may also have an effect through inflation expectations. Expectations of
lower future inflation will increase the real interest rate, and may therefore in itself have an impact on
the real economy. Inflation expectations may also influence price and wage formation as well as the
exchange rate.
4  See Akram (2000).
7
BIS Review 92/2000
However,  the  relationships  between  the  interest  rate,  expectations,  demand  and  inflation  must  be
expected to be unstable. Analyses have been published showing how changes in interest rates affect
the  economy  in  various  countries.  In  December  1999,  Norges  Bank  presented  an  analysis  based  on
calculations  which showed  that  an interest  rate rise  of  1  percentage  point  reduces  GDP  growth  and
price  inflation  by  just  under  half  a  percentage  point.  A  considerable  portion  of  the  effect  on  price
inflation is due to effects via the exchange rate, where it was assumed that the krone exchange rate
moved  in  line  with  uncovered  interest  rate  parity.  The  central  banks  of  England  and  Sweden  have
published calculations that show effects of roughly the same magnitude.
In view of the uncertainty concerning the effects of the interest rate on economic developments, it is
not possible to fine-tune price developments and the exchange rate. However, it is possible to conduct
a monetary policy that reinforces confidence in nominal stability.
The experience of Norway and other countries shows that monetary policy can be effective, as seen by
developments before and after the shift in economic policy in 1986. A monetary policy that results in
an interest rate that is too low will unleash strong forces in financial markets. An inappropriate interest
rate will generate erroneous price signals to households and financial institutions in the housing and
property market. With interest rates that are too low and nominal price pressures, the buyer and seller
will find it more difficult to discover the real change in value, and they will buy and sell on the basis
of erroneous price signals. Similarly, those extending loans will find it more difficult to assess the real
value of collateral security and the borrower’s wealth. This situation must be corrected sooner or later,
and when bubbles burst the risk of debt crises and financial instability is high. We have seen examples
of this in Norway and in other countries. If we allow imbalances to develop in the domestic economy,
this may trigger major capital movements with wide fluctuations in the exchange rate and long-term
rates.
Distributional effects of monetary policy
The  distributional  effects  of  changes  in  nominal  interest  rates  figured  prominently  in  discussions
concerning interest rate policy in the 1970s. There is probably a basis for saying that the consideration
of  distributional  effects  was  an  important  reason  behind  the  low  interest  rate  policy.  However,  as
developments were to prove, this was not the right approach. The low interest rate policy contributed
to increased disparity.
People are affected in different ways by a change in interest rates. Households with considerable debt
will,  ceteris  paribus,  be  adversely  affected  by  an  increase  in  interest  rates  because  they  must  use  a
higher proportion of their income to service the debt. However, the increase in interest expenditure in
BIS Review 92/2000
8
relation to household income is about the same for all income groups. This is because households with
high  income  generally  have  a  higher  level  of  debt.  If  we  also take  into  account  capital  income,  the
picture is somewhat different because the highest income group owns relatively more financial assets
than other households.
Asset and debt positions nevertheless have a clear profile over a life cycle. Younger households often
have  large  mortgages  and  student loans. These  loans  are  repaid  during  a  working  life.  Most  people
save for their old age. The immediate effect of an increase in interest rates will be a reduction in the
disposable  income  of  households  in  a  start-up  phase,  while  pensioners  record  an  increase  in  their
disposable income.5
However, such a static analysis of who stands to benefit and who stands to lose from an increase in
interest rates does not provide an adequate indication of the distributional effects of monetary policy.
Over time, interest rates rise and fall. For example, Norges Bank’s interest rates fell from 12% in 1992
to 3½% in 1997. A typical mortgage rate was as high as 14-15% at the beginning of the 1990s and was
down  to  5%  at  the  lowest.  The  households  that  lose  when  interest  rates  are  raised  are  the  same
households  that  benefit  when  interest  rates  are  lowered.  Hence,  monetary  policy  does  not  have
systematic distributional effects.
Households can hedge against interest rate fluctuations. Fixed-rate loans  are  now  offered  widely,  at
least for a period of up to 3-5 years. By choosing a fixed-rate loan, households with a large net debt
have more predictable expenses for servicing their debt.
The more long-term distributional effects of monetary policy are completely different. If interest rates
are kept at a low level over a longer period, price and cost inflation will eventually pick up and long-
term interest rates will rise. Rising wage and price inflation reduces the real value of assets and debt.
In isolation, this will naturally benefit individuals and enterprises that have a high debt, while others
will see a decline in the value of their savings. At the same time, low interest rates could lead to a rise
in property prices and other asset prices. A sharp rise in house prices and advances in stock markets
imply a substantial shift in favour of those who are already well positioned in these markets. Many
young people will find that the price of entering the housing market is too high.
5 
Income less net interest expenditure.
9
BIS Review 92/2000
Cyclical  fluctuations,  income  developments  and  asset  prices  will  show  greater  volatility  in  an
economy without a nominal anchor. The policy of devaluation and low interest rates in the 1970s and
the  beginning  of  the  1980s  contributed  to  pronounced  cyclical  fluctuations  and  sharp  variations  in
property prices.
The winners and losers as a result of such instability are to some extent arbitrary. Some will always
manage to come out ahead; those who take their profits in boom periods will also be able to secure and
withdraw from exposed positions in time. Others - who do not use resources for these activities to the
same  extent  -  are  often  the  losers.  The  economic  downturn  and  unemployment  which  often  follow
when the bubble bursts will primarily affect the most vulnerable segment of the labour force and have
very negative distributional effects.
Monetary policy cannot and shall not steer price developments in the housing market or other asset
markets, but a monetary policy that inspires confidence will curb wealth effects because the potential
for the emergence of bubbles is reduced. Nominal stability  is  the  best contribution  monetary  policy
can make to the distribution of income and wealth.
Interplay between economic policy components - the role of monetary policy
The basis for achieving stable economic growth is created through a successful interplay between the
various  components  of  economic  policy,  ie  between  fiscal  policy,  monetary  policy,  the  system  for
income  settlements  and  other  measures  aimed  at  improving  the  functioning  of  the  economy  -  often
referred to as structural policy. The Norwegian economy is vulnerable to abrupt shifts in the global
economy.  We  cannot  fully  shield  ourselves  against  external  shocks,  but  we  can  curb  the  effects  to
ensure that economic developments are optimal in the long term.
Fiscal  policy  in  Norway  has  had  an  important  role  in  stabilising  demand  and  production.  The
Petroleum  Fund  shelters  the  mainland  economy  from  the  effects  of  oil  price  fluctuations  to  some
extent. Developments in the real economy are of importance to price and cost inflation and hence for
Norges Bank’s setting of interest rates. At the same time, changes in the interest rate and exchange rate
may influence developments in the real economy in the short run. This means that fiscal and monetary
policy have a combined effect on the overall level of activity in the economy.
With large and to some extent varying budget revenues, the basis for determining central government
expenditure  and  taxes  from  one  year  to  the  next  may  easily  be  impaired.  If  budget  expenditure
fluctuates to a large extent in step with oil prices, the result will be abrupt shifts and instability in the
Norwegian economy. Changes in oil prices may then quickly influence wage and price expectations,
the  exchange  rate  and  long-term  rates.  In  that  case  it  will  be  very  demanding  to  achieve  nominal
stability. Short-term interest rates will have to be changed frequently and sharply, and long-term rates
will  reflect  a  high  risk  premium  for  the  Norwegian  krone.  It  is  therefore  important  that  the  annual
budgets are anchored in a long-term strategy that takes sufficiently into account that oil revenues can
fluctuate  from  one  year  to  the  next.  It  is  advantageous  if  fiscal  policy  can  also  be  used  to  counter
fluctuations in demand and production. The political assessment has also been that a countercyclical
fiscal policy provides the best basis for sound developments in the distribution of income and wealth.
If  fiscal  policy  is  used  to  smooth  fluctuations  in  demand  and  production,  it  will  also  contribute  to
stability in the krone exchange rate and in the competitive conditions for the business sector.
If fiscal policy lacks a long-term anchor, the interplay in economic policy will not function and the
result will be a more unstable krone exchange rate and wider cyclical fluctuations. This will also result
in poorer use of our resources, partly because strong fluctuations in domestic activity and long-term
interest rates and the exchange rate will prompt investment decisions that are made on a very uncertain
basis.
BIS Review 92/2000
10
Concluding remarks
Allow me to conclude where I began. I would like to highlight two points.
First,  the  main  function  of  monetary  policy  is  to  contribute  to  nominal  stability.  This  is  the  best
contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to  a  sound distribution  policy,  to  employment,  to  economic
growth and to welfare.
Second, history has shown that monetary policy can be effective. If we set interest rates at a level that
is too low, we may trigger strong forces in the credit market, as witnessed in other countries and as we
experienced in Norway in the mid-1980s. If we allow imbalances to develop in the domestic economy,
this could also lead to sizeable capital movements, accompanied by wide fluctuations in the exchange
rate and long-term rates. These are strong latent forces that are far too easily forgotten.
References
Akram, Q F (2000): “PPP despite real shocks: An empirical analysis of the Norwegian real exchange
rate”. Working Paper 2000/7, Norges Bank, Oslo.
Bernhardsen, Tom and Øistein Roisland (2000): “Which factors influence the krone exchange rate?”,
Economic Bulletin 2000/4 (to be published). See also box in Inflation Report 2000/3, pages 16-17.
Mussa, M (2000): “Monetary policy to Resist Excessive Depreciation” in Bisignano, J R, Hunter, W C
and  Kaufman,  G  G  (eds.)  “Global  Financial  Crises:  Lessons  From  Recent  Events”,  Bank  for
International Settlements and Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Rødseth, Asbjørn (1987): “Stabiliseringspolitikk på godt og vondt” (Stabilisation policy for better or
worse), in Full sysselsetting og økonomisk vekst? Festskrift til Eivind Erichsen (Full employment and
economic growth? Festschrift for Eivind Erichsen), Tano forlag.
Stiglitz, J E (2000): “Lessons from the Global Financial Crises” in Bisignano, J R, Hunter, W C and
Kaufman, G G (eds.): “Global Financial Crises: Lessons From Recent Events”, Bank for International
Settlements and Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Kluwer Academic Publishers.
11
BIS Review 92/2000
