Willem F Duisenberg: The euro - a new currency for Europe
Dinner speech delivered by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, at the
Bank of Thailand on 19 December 2000.
 Ladies and gentlemen, distinguished guests. May I first say that it is an honour to be invited to say a
few words to you this evening about Europe’s new single currency, the euro. I have to admit that one
would not normally think of a currency as being a particularly likely or interesting subject for a dinner
speech.
For the euro, however, I think  I am correct in saying that this is  not  the  case.  Indeed, the  euro  is a
currency quite unlike any other. It is not a national currency. Instead it is a supra-national currency
created by a monetary union of 11, soon to be 12, sovereign member states creating the second largest
monetary area in the world. It is also a very new currency, still less than two years old. It does not yet
circulate in the form of banknotes and coins. Not surprisingly, therefore, the euro does indeed attract a
great deal of public attention.
It is notable, however, that different observers seem to perceive the euro in very different ways. Some
focus  their  attention  almost  exclusively  on  the  exchange  rate,  overlooking  the  fact  that  the  ECB’s
principal aim is to maintain price stability and not a fixed exchange rate. Others seem to consider the
euro purely in terms of a political or economic experiment. They fail to notice that it is already a fully
functioning single currency.
This only serves to convince me that, even two years after its introduction, there is still a need for the
euro to be explained to the public at large. And, this is perhaps all the more so outside Europe where
understanding  of  European  integration  and  policy-making  is,  not  surprisingly,  more  limited.
Therefore, I very much welcome this opportunity to say a few quite general words to you about what
the euro is, how it works, and what it means, both for the euro area and for the world at large.
 Let  me  first say  that  one  should  never  try  to  understand  Europe’s  new  currency  in isolation  or as  a
currency  which  was  merely  introduced  on  1  January  1999.  In  fact,  the  euro  is  just  one,  albeit  an
important, part of the process of creating an economic as well as a monetary union in Europe. This
process began already a decade ago. Similarly, this "Economic and Monetary Union" is itself part of a
much  broader  process  of  European  economic  and  political  integration.  Therefore,  in  order  truly  to
understand  the  euro  one  should  in  fact  consider  it  first  in  the  context  of  the  European  integration
process that began already five decades ago.
From  the  beginning,  the  purpose  of  this  process  was  to  bring  the  countries  of  Europe  and  their
economies closer together and, in so doing, create an area of peace, prosperity and stability. I suppose
these motivations are by no means dissimilar to those which lie behind the various other regional links
which have since been formed in other parts of the world, including here in Asia.
The European experience in working towards this goal has been one of gradual progress, even though
with  numerous  ups and  downs.  Nonetheless,  the  main  objective  remained  ever  intact.  As  economic
integration  progressed  further  and  further,  as  we  overcame  ever  more  subtle  barriers  to  trade,  it
became  increasingly  apparent  that  one  substantial  barrier  to  the  creation  of  a  truly  pan-European
economy remained. I refer of course to the persistence of exchange rate fluctuations  which  resulted
from the existence of separate national currencies governed by independent monetary policies.
In short, European policy-makers had to face up to the fact that, over extended periods of time, you
cannot simultaneously maintain free trade, unrestricted capital movements, fixed exchange rates and
independent monetary policies. A choice had to be made and ultimately the time arrived when most
1
BIS Review 115/2000
European  countries  deemed  it  more  advantageous  to  firm  up  the  European  "Single  Market"  than  to
maintain their national currencies.
 I should add that, beyond this more fundamental motivation, there were other important developments
which probably influenced the decision to adopt a common currency. The end of the Cold War set new
political parameters for the integration of western Europe. Regional integration and the creation of a
large  economic  area  have  also  come  to  be  seen  as  even  more  necessary  in  order  to  prosper  in  an
increasingly globalised world economy.
From  the  point  of  view  of  a  central  banker,  the  evolving  consensus  as  to  the  appropriate  role  of
monetary policy and of a central bank was particularly important in laying the foundation for a viable
single currency. Moreover, an increasing awareness that using monetary policy directly to stimulate
growth  and  employment  was  not  working  and  was  even  proving  counterproductive,  might  have
strengthened the perception that, in an already deeply integrated Europe, there was little to lose from
giving  up  autonomous  monetary  policies.  By  contrast,  a  good  deal  could  be  gained  by  removing
exchange  rate  fluctuations  and  by  establishing  an  independent  European  Central  Bank  with  a  clear
objective to maintain price stability.
 But the evolving consensus to which I  refer  did  not just apply  to the  field  of  monetary  policy.  Nor
would  it  be  correct  to  say  that  consensus  on  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  sufficient  for  the
creation of a successful monetary union. The euro becoming a reality also depended on the consensus
which evolved on the need for sound economic policies more generally. This made it possible for all
of  the  countries  which  have  now  adopted  the  euro  to  develop  and  agree  on  the  overall  economic
framework needed to complement and support a monetary union.
Like the process of European integration itself, a framework for co-ordinating economic policies has
developed  gradually  and  over  a  considerable  period  of  time.  The  result  is  a  flexible  framework  in
which national policies are appropriately co-ordinated rather than centralised. And this is indeed quite
appropriate. In a monetary union it is even more necessary than before for economic policies to take
national differences into account.
On  the  other  hand,  we  do  see  a  need  to  ensure  that  national  policies  take  into  account  the  shared
responsibility  of  participation  in  the  single  currency.  This  is  why,  in  the  area  of  fiscal  policy,  co-
ordination does take quite a strong form with national policies being subject to binding rules. In this
context, governments have committed themselves to what is called the Pact for Stability and Growth
in order to reduce government deficits to close to balance or even to create surpluses in their budgets.
And indeed over the past years, government finance positions in Europe have improved remarkably. In
other  policy  areas,  however,  the  countries  of  the  euro  area  continue  to  co-ordinate  their  policies  in
more  subtle  ways.  They  exchange  ideas  and  information;  they  agree  general  guidelines  and
recommendations; and they regularly monitor and share assessments of each other’s policies. In this
way,  economic  co-ordination,  in  all  its  various  forms,  promotes  and,  where  necessary,  ensures  that
national  policies  are  appropriate  and  consistent  with  participation  in  the  single  currency.  In  strictly
legal  terms  the  euro  may  be  a  "currency  without  a  state".  In  practice,  like  any  other  currency,  it  is
embedded in a well-developed and comprehensive economic policy framework.
Of  course,  the  one  area  of  policy  which  is  now  completely  centralised  is  monetary  policy.  The
countries which have adopted the euro now share a common currency, a single exchange rate and a
single  monetary  policy.  The  responsibility  for  conducting  this  policy  has  been  given  to  the
ECB/Eurosystem, with a clear mandate to maintain price stability. Like the Federal Reserve System in
the  United  States,  Europe’s  central  bank  is  organised as  a federal  system.  In  the  centre is the  ECB,
based in Frankfurt am Main, Germany. The national central banks (NCBs) of the countries which have
adopted the euro are also part of what we call the Eurosystem. Monetary policy decisions are made by
the Governing Council of the ECB. This Council comprises the six members of the ECB’s Executive
BIS Review 115/2000
2
Board  and  the  Governors  or  Presidents  of  the  NCBs  of  the  countries  which  have  adopted  the  euro.
Decisions are made on a one person/one vote basis. This reflects the fact that they always have to be
made in the interest of the euro area as a whole. Therefore, members of the Governing Council do not
represent their country  or  even  their  NCB.  They  have  been  appointed  in  a  personal  capacity.  Their
mandate is to maintain price stability in the euro area as a whole. The Eurosystem is an independent
entity. This is enshrined in the Treaty establishing the European Community, which has been ratified
by all the 15 Member States of the European Union.
And let me just say that I am quite proud of our achievements so far. The ECB’s monetary policy and
its strategy have worked well, in spite of the initial uncertainties associated with the changeover to the
single  currency.  Price  stability  is  being  maintained,  even  if  recent  price  increases  have  temporarily
exceeded our target, mainly as a result of the almost tripling of oil prices. Moreover, the markets seem
to have confidence in the ECB and its policies, as is shown by the level of long-term interest rates. In
the euro area, these have remained persistently at or below US levels.
 But let me move on, since the euro also has implications extending well beyond the euro area which I
should also briefly touch upon. As I mentioned earlier, the euro is the currency of the world’s second
largest monetary area. The euro/dollar foreign exchange market is the largest in the world and around
40%  of  international  debt  securities  issued  over  the  past  two  years  have  been  in  euro.  The  euro  is
already an international currency, second only to the US dollar, and businesses and investors around
the world need to take this into account.
In this regard, however, let me just say that some of the speculation about the international role of the
euro, and especially the suggestion made by some that the euro would soon rival the dollar, has not
been particularly helpful. I prefer to refrain from making such predictions. Rather, I believe that the
attractiveness of a currency depends crucially on the underlying policies for economic growth in the
country, or countries, concerned.
What I can say with confidence, is that the euro is playing and will continue to play a role in offering
new  and  good  investment  opportunities,  including  for  investors  based  outside  the  euro  area.  In  this
regard,  the  euro  is  already  acting  as  a  catalyst  for  the  development  of  a  fully  integrated  European
capital  market.  This  market  will  be  more  efficient  and  more  liquid  than  the  segmented,  national
markets which preceded it. Ultimately, however, and I repeat, the extent to which this translates into
actual  inward  investment  will  depend  on  the  market’s  perception  of  economic  policies  and  growth
potential in the euro area.
And this brings me to another important role of the euro, namely, it acts as a catalyst for economic
reform. Among other things, the adoption of a single currency means that euro area governments no
longer  have  national  currencies  which  they  can  devalue  in  times  of  need  to  protect  inefficient
industries. Instead, other ways have to be found to maintain competitiveness, both within the euro area
and internationally. I believe it is no coincidence that policy-makers across Europe are now focusing
more than ever before on how to overcome the economic rigidities which, in recent years, have tended
to  hold  Europe  back  in  terms  of  economic  growth.  Indeed,  I  would  not  even  be  that  surprised  if,
looking back some years from now, it is as a catalyst for reform that the euro will be deemed to have
had its most profound effect.
I should also add that a lot of progress has already been made. In addition to low inflation, economic
growth  in  the  euro  area  is  higher  than  it  has  been  for  a  decade  and  unemployment  is  on  a  clear
downward  trend.  Budgets  have  been  consolidated  and  structural  reforms  are  under  way.  If  this
development continues, I am confident that the euro has a very promising future.
 3
BIS Review 115/2000
In the meantime, however, another "euro changeover" will occur. One which, for ordinary euro area
citizens, will not only have a profound but also an immediate and clearly perceptible impact on their
daily lives. I refer to the introduction, in a year’s time from now, of euro banknotes and coins.
As  any  of  you  who  have  travelled  to  the  euro  area  recently  will  have  noticed,  even  though  our
currency is now officially the euro, we are still continuing to use our national banknotes and coins for
the time being. In just over a year, however, all this will change. You will then be able to travel some
3,000 kilometres or so from Lapland in the north of Finland to Andalucia in the south of Spain without
needing to visit a single bureau de change. No doubt, this is one implication of the single currency that
at least the more mobile citizens of the euro area, myself included, as well as visitors from abroad, will
very much appreciate.
BIS Review 115/2000
4
