Lars Heikensten: EMU - cohesion or diversity?
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riskbank,  to  The  Swedish
Institute of International Affairs, Stockholm, on 10 November 2000.
 First a word of thanks for inviting me to speak. I greatly appreciate the opportunity of talking about
matters to do with European integration to an audience outside the circles in which I normally move.
This is all the more stimulating given that there is little more than a month to go before Sweden takes
over the presidency of the EU Council of Ministers.
I intend to begin by saying something about the history and principles behind the European Monetary
Union  and  how  they  can  be  related  to  our  theme  today:  cohesion  or  diversity.  Although  EMU  was
fully launched so recently, I must then comment on what has happened to date, as regards economic
developments as well as the economic policy cooperation. I shall then briefly conclude with my view
of the future for EU’s economic policy cooperation.
Political as well as economic grounds for a monetary union
Let  us  bear  in  mind  that  none  of  the  things  we  are  discussing  today  are  entirely  new.  Common
currencies were in use more than a century ago and some of them were valid throughout the continent
of Europe. A joint standard and a rapidly growing economic exchange were already seen as natural
goals  around  the  turn  of  the  19th  century.  The  Great  War  broke  that  trend,  however,  and  both  the
Scandinavian and the Latin monetary union were dissolved.
The EEC, predecessor of the European Union, was established after World War Two primarily as a
project  for  peace.  Political  integration  was  the  objective,  to  be  achieved  in  large  measure  with
economic means. When the Treaty of Rome, which established the EEC, was signed in 1957, there
was already talk of a need to supplement the economic integration with a monetary union. When these
ideas  found  expression  in  the  1970  Werner  Plan  for  economic  and  monetary  union,  monetary  and
fiscal  policy  cooperation  were  equally  prominent.  According  to  the  Plan;  EMU  would  become  a
catalyst for the development of a political union without which it cannot ultimately survive.
The currencies of Europe had already been linked up by the Bretton Woods agreement on international
monetary cooperation. The Werner Plan extended this with the prospect of a single monetary policy
and, in time, a single currency. In the present context it is worth noting that the Plan’s primary thrust
was for increased economic coordination, above all the notion of harmonising the member countries’
stabilisation policies in order to avoid tensions. Pierre Werner, prime minister of Luxembourg, and the
central  bank  governors  on  his  committee  proposed  an  economic  policy  centre  that  would  control
national budgets, regional, structural and social policies. The whole process would be crowned by the
single currency.
When the  Bretton Woods  system  collapsed  and  the  oil  crises  erupted,  national  considerations  put  a
stop to the Werner Plan. With the advent of the EU’s internal market in the 1990s, however, the issue
of a common currency was revived. National currencies came to be seen as the last major barrier to the
internal market’s full impact, which would pave the way to even greater European integration.
To a large extent, the driving force behind the Werner Plan and the Maastricht Treaty was political.
Experience  has  taught  us  that  institutionalised  economic  cooperation  can  be  an  antidote  not  just  to
trade  conflicts  but  even  to  war.  A  common  currency  is  a  strong  political  symbol  that  can  render
cooperation durable in the daily economic round. Instead of being just a topic for solemn speeches on
television,  European  cooperation  with  a  single  currency  could  be  something  real  that  people  carry
around in their purses and pockets.
1
BIS Review 102/2000
But  the  Maastricht  Treaty  was,  of  course,  also  backed  up  by  the  strong  economic  forces  that  lay
behind previous attempts at monetary union. By reducing exchange risks for firms, a single currency
facilitates cross-border trade and investment. It also helps to integrate capital markets, rendering them
larger and deeper, which aids the supply of corporate capital in Europe.
These considerable effects are accompanied by others that we ought not to underrate. In the present
situation,  moreover,  they  are  likely  to  be  enhanced  by  the  internet  and  other  new  information
technology. Not the least of these is that the monetary union eliminates the psychological barrier that
different currencies raise when we try to compare prices in different countries. The result is greater
transparency and stronger price competition. Price differences in Europe today are twice as large as in
the United States. The price of a small car, for example, can vary more than 50% between EU member
states.
Risk of countries getting out of step
However, the road to greater cohesion is not necessarily smooth.  In a monetary union, forces are at
work  that  may  cause  member  states  to  develop  in  different  directions  instead  of  converging.
Discussions about EMU often raise the topic of asymmetric shocks, a technical term that stands for
something  quite  simple.  The  conditions  for  the  countries  involved  differ  initially  as  regards  their
economic  structures,  for  example  the  corporate  sector,  the  level  of  technical  development,  wage
bargaining systems and competitive pressure. Economic shocks will therefore affect them differently.
Problems  may  also  arise  if  economic  policy  in  one  country  is  markedly  different  from  the  general
direction. In Sweden, for example, the economic differences from the EU countries in the 1970s and
1980s were in large measure a consequence of self-imposed stabilisation problems.
If  a  shock  does  hit  a  single  country,  a  monetary  union  eliminates  the  possibility  of  mitigating  its
effects by adjusting the exchange rate. Neither can this be done by implementing a national interest
rate policy. Instead, wages and prices need to be as flexible as possible so they adjust and counter the
impact of the shock. Wage formation is accordingly of major importance for enabling the countries in
a monetary union to harmonise their business cycles without being hit by unemployment.
Another type of problem in a monetary union can come from differences in the construction of fiscal
policy.  A  national  currency  and  interest  rate  are  no  longer  available  as  clear  indicators  of  market
confidence  in  a  country’s  economic  policy.  This  means  that  a  part  of  the  forces  which  previously
tended to discipline pressure for fiscal expansion and counter unduly large budget deficits no longer
acts. That applies in particular to small countries, in that their mistakes can be concealed, at least for a
time,  in  the  overall  development  of  the  monetary  union’s  exchange  rate  and  interest  rates.  The
opposite applies if the large countries commit economic policy mistakes - the consequences are liable
to hit the entire union.
In  theory,  perhaps  problems  of this  kind  should  not  be  all  that  grave.  If  a  euro  country’s  budget  is
markedly underbalanced and money is distributed to the inhabitants, they ought to be prudent enough
to set aside some income to cope with the strains that are bound to come when, sooner or later, the
government finances have to be consolidated again. But things don’t work like that in practice, at least
not sufficiently so. Short-term budgetary expansion therefore normally leads to increased consumption
and that in turn is liable to result in higher inflationary pressures throughout the  euro  area.  All  else
equal, the end result will be that the ECB is forced to tighten its stance a little more. In that way, a less
disciplined policy in one or more member states to some extent hits all the countries in the union. In
the  extreme  case,  it  is  conceivable  that  a  country  might  deliberately  refrain  from  managing  a  debt
problem and, when the crisis becomes acute, try to shift the payments onto the other countries.
Problems of another type have come to the fore with the past year’s weakening of the euro. When the
mood  is  negative,  every  potential  problem  gets  an  airing  regardless  of  its  weight  in  practice.
Difficulties in small countries, for example in connection with inflation being considerably higher than
in the core countries, can then be presented as a threat to the whole, with consequences for the euro’s
exchange rate.
BIS Review 102/2000
2
Rules and processes for promoting cohesion
All  the  problems  and  risks  I  have  mentioned  were  essentially  well-recognised  and  thoroughly
discussed before the EMU was formed. Various rules were therefore constructed to prevent what is
called destructive diversity.
The  Maastricht  Treaty,  for  instance,  includes  rules  to  prevent  excessive  government  debt  being
dumped onto others. This is explicitly prohibited by the ban on government financing in the central
bank. The Treaty also rules out privileged access to bank loans as well as bail-outs by other countries
or the EU as a whole.
The most important concrete instrument for promoting cohesion is, of course, the EU’s convergence
criteria for EMU participation: low inflation, low interest rates, a stable exchange rate and balanced
government finances. Much has been said and written about these criteria. I have already suggested
that  perhaps  it  is  not  just  these  criteria  as  such  that  are  the  key  to  a  monetary  union  that  functions
properly,  although  the  part  they  have  played  in  disciplining  policy  in  a  number  of  member  states
should not be underestimated. But I do believe they have had the important effect of contributing to a
greater consensus than before on issues of stabilisation  policy.  The  Maastricht  Treaty’s  institutional
requirements concerning formal central bank independence and the legal infrastructure of the financial
sector have also contributed to the consensus that has been achieved and which I believe is central for
the proper functioning of EMU.
A remarkable degree of economic convergence throughout the EU was achieved in the second half of
the 1990s. If one excludes Greece, the gap between the highest and lowest rates of inflation among EU
countries narrowed from 10 percentage points in  1990  to  1%  point in  1997.  In  1995  the  gap in  the
public finances extended from a deficit of almost 8% of GDP in Sweden to a deficit of 2.3% of GDP
in Denmark. By 1997 the gap had narrowed to a 0.1% surplus in Denmark and a 3.0% deficit in Spain.
The EMU process also led to more similar levels of interest rates. In many countries the instrumental
rate moved down from 10% in 1995 to Stage Three’s initial rate, which practice was set already on
22 December 1998 when all the future euro countries lowered their instrumental rates to 3%.
To ensure that the fiscal goals enshrined in the convergence criteria would continue to guide policy in
the  monetary  union,  in  1997  the  EU  member  states  concluded  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  This
Pact’s best-known requirement is that a general government deficit is not to exceed 3% of GDP and
that if it does, sanctions will be applied. I should like to remind you, however, that the Pact is also
intended to promote a balanced development of government finances over the business cycle. All EU
member states are required to present annual stability programmes (in the case of non-euro countries,
convergence programmes) that are first discussed in the Economic and Financial Committee and later
in the Ecofin Council.
In  addition  to  these  processes  for  testing  that  every  country  adheres  to  the  rules,  Broad  Economic
Policy Guidelines are drawn up annually. This document can be said to represent a common general
approach to economic policy - a budget statement for the EU area.
Last  but  not  least,  there  are  processes  for  guiding  countries  along  the  road  towards  creating  more
efficient markets  for  goods,  services,  capital  and labour. These are  complex issues  and  the  member
states  tend  to  differ  considerably  in  their  initial  positions  as  well  as  their  attitudes.  But  an  intense
dialogue  has  now  started  on  structural  issues  at  extraordinary  Council  meetings,  such  the  coming
meeting in Stockholm, as well as in more regular processes such as the Luxembourg process for better
employment policies and the Cardiff process for more efficient product markets.
The EMU to date
It must then be asked, of course, how well this framework is working now that EMU is a reality. It is
certainly too early to draw definite conclusions about these matters but I can offer some observations.
The first point worth noting is that we are now reaping the benefits of the convergence process and of
the consensus on stabilisation policy that has, in fact, been established. Europe is now experiencing an
3
BIS Review 102/2000
economic  upswing  in  which  macroeconomic  conditions  are  more  stable  and  inflation  expectations
lower than for many decades.
Since  the  move  to  EMU,  there  have  been  no  clear  signs  of  asymmetric  shocks  that  might  hit  a
particular country or group of countries, although the Asian crisis and the subsequent unrest did affect
the member states somewhat differently. And we do not know what would have happened during the
tempestuous  autumn  of  1998  if  Stage  Three  had  not  been  well  on  the  way.  Perhaps  exchange  rate
developments  in  Europe  would  have  been  considerably  more  dramatic  and  disruptive.  It  will  be
recalled  that  the  Swedish  currency’s  deviation  from  a  reasonable  long-term  level  was  considerably
greater than that of, for example, the Finnish markka.
Inflation’s  convergence  in  the  run  up  to  Stage  Three  has  been  checked,  however,  and  recently  the
spread has even become wider. This is hardly surprising in itself, neither is it a major problem. The
process known as catching up means that countries with a below-average level of prosperity initially
will  benefit  from  technological  and  organisational  advances  elsewhere  and  accordingly  grow  faster
than the rich countries, which in turn can lead to higher inflation. Furthermore, countries with strong
export-led  growth  can  experience  upward  wage  pressure  in  other  sectors,  too,  leading  ultimately  to
higher inflation. So there are reasons why growth rates as well as rates of inflation can diverge in a
monetary union without this being unnatural or a problem for either the countries in question or the
union as a whole.
It seems fairly evident that elements of this kind of “more innocuous” inflation are around at present.
The  clearest  example  is  Ireland,  with  catch-up  effects  and  a  number  of  years  of  exceptional
productivity growth. But even there the picture is not unambiguous and when inflation now increases
in a number of member states, questions arise about the formation of stabilisation policy.
This is definitely not a problem that can be tackled with measures of monetary policy. The function of
monetary  policy  is  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  union  as  a  whole,  a  mandate  that  seems  to  be
generally supported and understood. Neither is there any cause to criticise how monetary policy has
been conducted in practice. There has been a clear endeavour to counter the upward price tendency. In
my opinion, however, it would have been an advantage if management of the exchange rate had been
clearly assigned to the central bank, instead of the leaving the responsibility to so many.
As regards fiscal policy, experience has  not  been  entirely  positive.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  in Stage
Three  of  EMU  the  Stability  Pact  is  monitored  with  annual  stability  programmes.  This  process  has
worked  fairly  well  in  exerting  peer  pressure  on  countries  with  large  deficits:  no  country  has  yet
exceeded the Pact’s lower limit. But assessments of individual countries have tended to differ without
there always being factual grounds for this. Neither has particularly good use been made of the golden
opportunity  that  Europe’s  present  economic  upswing  provides  for  faster  budget  consolidation.
Countries should now be making the most of the chance of quickly turning a deficit into a surplus but
that is not happening. This may prove to be unfortunate further ahead and it runs counter to the spirit
of the Pact. Peer pressure has evidently not been strong enough. Examples of short-run considerations
gaining  the  upper  hand  in  this  respect  were  evident  when  the  dramatic  oil  price  rise  led  several
countries to cut petroleum taxes or subsidise oil-intensive industries, which is hardly sustainable in the
longer run for either the economy or the environment.
Before concluding I should also like to say something about financial stability in the EU area. As I
indicated  earlier,  EMU  is  leading  to  more  integrated  financial  markets.  In  the  absence  of  national
monetary policies, this accentuates the need of joint systems and standards for financial oversight. It
also increases the need of readiness for the joint management of financial crises. Work in this field is
now in progress in a variety of fora.
Concluding remarks
Internationalisation in general, with growth in trade and factor mobility, has brought the EU member
states closer together and increased their interdependence. Politically motivated changes such as the
internal market and the new monetary union have served to promote this trend.
BIS Review 102/2000
4
As regards government finances, various processes, including a system of sanctions, have been set up
to test national policies. This is because of the risk that individual member states would otherwise be
able to pursue a policy that could harm the others. Processes have also been established in other policy
areas  to  highlight  key  issues  in  the  European  debate,  to  point  to  good  examples  and  to  exert  peer
pressure. This should not be belittled: we know from Swedish experience that  comparative  analysis
and in-depth debate can push things in the desired direction.
So  what  should  we  expect  in  the  future?  I  have  briefly  touched  on  a  number  of  situations  where
cooperation and coordination could lead to a better EU policy. However, even if there are rewards to
be  earned  from  coordination,  it  will  probably  be  some  time  before  the  EU  member  states  are
sufficiently mature to take further big leaps. Ultimately it now boils down to the sensitive issue of how
much  power  should  be  placed in  European  rather than  national hands.  But there is  no  doubting  the
strength of the tension between the single monetary policy and the remainder of economic policy that
is  still  handled  at  national  level.  In  this  tension  lies  the  seeds  of  continued  economic  policy
coordination in Europe.
5
BIS Review 102/2000
