Gazi Erçel: The role of the euro from the Turkish standpoint
Speech by Mr Gazi Erçel, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, made during the
6th International Financial and Economic Forum, held in Vienna on 9 November 2000.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
I would like to thank the organizers of this conference for inviting me to share my thoughts on the euro’s
role as seen from the Turkish point of view.
Of  course,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  is  affecting  not  only  the  economies  that  are  members  of  the
European  Union  but  also  non-member  economies  that  have  close  links  with  members.  These  include
emerging  market  economies  much  of  whose  trade  and  financial  transactions  is  with  European  Union
members.  Those  whose  external  debt  is  largely  denominated  in  European  Union  currencies  will  be
affected the most.
Even though Turkey is not yet a member of the European Union, it has close ties with countries that are.
Not  only  does  Turkey  carry  on  a  large  volume  of  foreign  trade  with  EU  members,  it  is  also  the  only
candidate for membership that has entered into a customs union with the EU, signed at the end of 1995.
Turkey’s  close  relationship  with  EU  countries  and  the  present  role  of  the  euro  in  the  Turkish
economy are illustrated by the following:
• 
Europe is Turkey’s largest trading partner. In 1999, 54% of Turkish exports - $14.3 billion - and
53% of Turkish imports - $21.4 billion - went to or came from EU countries.
    About 54% of Turkey’s official reserves consists of Euro - 11 currencies and the euro itself.
The foreign exchange deposits belonging to Turkish workers in other countries and held in the
Central Bank of Turkey amount to about 11 billion euros, almost 93% of which is in the form of
deutsche marks.
Our external debt totals about US$106 billion, 34% of which consists of Euro - 11 currencies
and the euro itself.
Since 1 January 2000 the Turkish Treasury has borrowed via bond issues in the international
capital markets a total US$7.5 billion, 37% of which is denominated in euros.
During the last five years, 60% of direct foreign investments in Turkey came from Europe.
Of the 9.3 million foreign tourists who visited Turkey during the first ten months of this year,
5.1 million came from Europe.
Given the breadth and depth of Turkey’s relationship with the European Union, it is no wonder that the
euro and the creation of a European currency will powerfully affect the Turkish economy from now on.
Assuming that the euro is accepted by the international financial markets as a stable reserve currency, the
medium  and long  term  will see  the  euro’s share in Turkey’s financial  accounts  continue  to  increase.  I
personally think that acceptance  of the euro in daily  life  and  financial  transactions  will  come  faster  in
Turkey than in other countries, for three reasons: the large numbers of Turkish citizens living in Europe,
the large volume of trade and tourism transactions with Europe, and the consistent stability of the deutsche
mark for 20 years and more. The introduction of the euro has reduced transaction costs and removed the
risks connected with more volatile currencies, increasing the incentives for European capital markets to
rely more on direct financing. A deep, liquid, and efficient euro bond market will be welcomed by Turkish
sovereign  and  private  bond  issuers.  Moreover,  the  volume  of  transactions  in  the  euro  bond  market  is
expected to be much larger than today.
1
BIS Review 109/2000
Increased acceptance of  euros in Turkish trade  and  financial  transactions,  of  course  combined  with  an
environment of low inflation, will make direct investments in Turkey more attractive to European firms.
Turkey’s presently very small total of direct foreign investments from European investors would surely be
encouraged to grow by the disappearance of foreign exchange risks.
Under such circumstances, both Turkish and European banks could be expected to increase their merger
and acquisition activities.
For the short term, the most important goal is to promote the euro as an international currency. Success
will crucially depend on the new currency’s acceptance by the people of the EMU countries and other
countries as well. The faster this acceptance can be achieved, the greater will be the euro’s strength as a
currency  in  the  medium  and  longer  term.  Unfortunately,  we  cannot  say  this  has  already  happened.  Its
depreciation against the US dollar has not promoted increased confidence in the euro.
This is probably a good moment to  describe  how the fluctuations in  the  euro/dollar exchange  rate
have affected the Turkish economy. A low valuation of the euro would affect our economy through
two channels: first, through the euro’s role in our new exchange rate system; and second, through the
large share of EU countries in our foreign trade.
At the beginning of the year 2000, Turkey launched a comprehensive disinflation program based on a pre-
announced path of the Turkish lira against a currency basket consisting of “1 US dollar plus 0.77 Euros.”
Mainly  by  taking  advantage  of  the  remarkable  pass-through  of  the  exchange  rate  to  price  levels,  this
program  has  brought  about  a  considerable  lowering  of  the  inflation  rate.  Unfortunately,  the  rapid
appreciation of the US dollar against the euro in the international markets has somewhat weakened the
effect of the exchange rate basket on inflation. During the first ten months of this year, the Turkish lira
depreciated by an average 26.5% against the US dollar, but by  an  average  6.5% against the  euro. The
operation of the pass-through mechanism to price indices in Turkey is much stronger for the dollar than it
is  for  the  euro,  or  previously  was  for  the  deutsche  mark.  Turkish  inflationary  expectations  have  been
following  the  behavior  of  the  US  dollar.  Under  these  circumstances,  inflation  outcomes  have  lagged
above the targeted level. In addition, due to the preannounced depreciation path of the Turkish lira against
the currency basket, the continuous depreciation of the euro against the dollar has resulted in a loss of
competitiveness  of  Turkey  vis-à-vis  Europe.  Due  to  this  chain  of  events,  the  total  value  of  Turkey’s
imports from the EU countries has risen 29.6% in the first half of the year, while the value of Turkey’s
exports  to  EU  countries  has  grown  by  only  3.4%.  In  other  words,  the  depreciation  of  the  euro  has
contributed  to  Turkey’s  growing  trade  deficit,  which  was  initially  mistaken  for  a  side  effect  of  the
disinflation program. In this situation, the correction of the euro’s value against other major currencies
will  have  a  beneficial  effect  on  Turkey’s  current  account  balance,  in  addition  to  the  offsetting  of  the
negative effects of the weak euro provided by the high productivity of our manufacturing sector and the
diversified nature of our exports.
The weak euro has also led to a portfolio shift in the Turkish economy. At the end of September, total
foreign  exchange  deposits  in  Turkish  commercial  banks  amounted  to  US$43  billion.  Of  this  27%
consisted  of  euros,  which  have  decreased  in  value  by  38.5%  since  the  end  of  1998.  The  share  of  US
dollars gradually increased during the same period from 58% to 71%.
At the Central Bank, we have also shifted the currency  composition  of our reserves from euros to  US
dollars. The share of euros in our reserves has fallen from 73% to 54%, and there has been a parallel shift
in the composition of our foreign exchange liabilities.
Now let me point out two major positive effects of introducing the euro into the Turkish economy.
The first positive effect is that elimination of the transaction costs arising from a multitude of European
exchange rates has encouraged the use of the euro as a unit  of currency. Between  1994 and  1998, the
euro’s share in the current account’s foreign exchange receipts averaged 37% and in its foreign exchange
expenditures averaged 32%. Eighteen months after the introduction of the euro, these figures have barely
changed: the respective shares are 40% and 33%.
The second positive effect is that the Convergence Criteria of the Maastricht Treaty, and the Copenhagen
Criteria, require economies seeking to join the EU and EMU to become efficient market economies and
achieve a high degree of verifiable convergence with the EU. As we all know, the requirements include
BIS Review 109/2000
2
price stability, low market-based interest rates, stable exchange rates, and sustainable public finances. And
whether or not it is considered immediately important for Turkey to become a member of EMU, these
convergence criteria can give us an effective means of disciplining our economy.
This  is  why  we  have  launched  a  comprehensive  disinflation  program  aimed  at  reaching  single-digit
inflation  and  eliminating  macroeconomic  imbalances  by  the  end  of  2002.  Winning  for  Turkey  the
possibility of membership in the EU and EMU is one of the main goals of our program.
The ideal of independent central banks is a core issue for the countries of the European Union. We are
currently in the process of examining our Banking Law to determine what must be done to bring it up to
the standards promulgated by the European System of Central Banks. New modifications are planned to
make price stability the principal goal of monetary policy. Debt monetization will no longer be allowed.
The new Law will also grant more independence to the Central Bank.
Before ending these remarks, I want to point out that introducing a single currency and reaping the full
benefits  of  doing  so  is  a  long-term  endeavor.  For  the  time  being,  Turkish  monetary  policy  is  directed
towards a single transparent objective, that of price stability. Price stability will serve as a link between the
initial expectations about the euro area and the potential economic benefits of a single currency system.
The reforms and changes executed up to now will provide a base for ambitious future policies that will
broaden the area of integration and encourage the faith of economic agents that the area offers additional
benefits  such  as  greater  price  transparency,  improved  efficiency,  growing  investments  and  economic
activity, and a more competitive environment. And no doubt the world economy will also have a share in
these benefits.
3
BIS Review 109/2000
