The Rt Hon Sir Edward George GBE: New economy - same old problems
Speech  by  The  Rt  Hon  Sir  Edward  George  GBE,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  CBI
National Conference, held in Birmingham, on 7 November 2000.
 Thank you, Mr President. I’m honoured to have been invited back to address your annual conference.
I remember very vividly my earlier visit to your conference in 1996.
I  remember  reporting  to  you  that  the  British  economy  was  then  into  its  fifth  consecutive  year  -  its
nineteenth consecutive  quarter  -  of  relatively  steady  growth  at an  annual  average  rate  of  2.6%; that
unemployment had fallen, pretty well month by month for most of that time, to below 7½%; and that
inflation had averaged 2¾% over the previous four years - compared with over 10% on average in the
preceding two decades.
The question then was could we keep up - or even improve upon - that performance. And my answer
was a cautious yes - provided we met three conditions: a continuing firm grip on inflation; continuing
prudent and sustainable fiscal policy; and continuing structural, supply-side flexibility.
Well, that cautious optimism was amply justified. Today, we are well into our ninth consecutive year -
our  thirty-third  consecutive  quarter  of relatively  steady  growth  (despite  having  to  absorb  the  global
emerging  markets  financial  shock  of  a  couple  of  years  ago)  at  an  annual  average  rate  of  2.8%;  the
number  of  people  in  employment  has  risen  to  an  all-time  high;  the  rate  of  unemployment,  on  a
claimant count basis, has fallen to 3.6%, which is the lowest rate for 25 years for the UK as a whole
and the lowest rate for 20 years in every individual region of the UK; and retail price inflation on the
target RPIX measure has now averaged 2.7% over the past eight years, and on the standardised HICP
measure is currently the lowest rate in Europe.
And if you ask me today the same question - can we keep up that performance, my answer is still a
cautious yes - on the same three conditions - low and stable inflation, fiscal prudence and supply-side
flexibility.
Now I am very well aware that some of you - perhaps many of you - thinking of your own businesses -
may conclude that I’m living on a different planet.
Beneath the surface of these encouraging macroeconomic data, there is - and has been for some time -
a serious imbalance, with some parts of the economy doing very well (including many of the services
sectors  and  some  manufacturing  activity)  while  other  parts  of  the  economy  (including  much  of
agriculture, many manufacturing businesses and even other services sectors such as inward tourism)
face the toughest business conditions that many of them can remember.
To  take  just  manufacturing,  total  output  has  risen  by  only  2%  over  the  past  two  years,  and  it  has
actually  fallen  by  0.9%  if  you  exclude  the  so-called  “high  tech”  sectors  (ie  computers,  office  and
telecommunications equipment and electronic components).
Total employment in manufacturing has fallen over that period by some 230,000, of which 200,000
were outside the “high tech” sectors. For what it’s worth there is a similar imbalance in the US, where
total manufacturing has increased by 10½% over the past two years, but by only about 1½% similarly
excluding the hi-tech sectors; total employment in US manufacturing has fallen by some 435,000, but
by nearly 600,000, outside the “high tech” sectors.
There  is  no  single  explanation  for  these  developments.  They  result  partly  from  continuing  and
unavoidable long-term structural adjustment of capacity to market demand; it results also partly from
the effect of increasing global economic integration, inducing the relocation of manufacturing capacity
in response to shifts in comparative productive advantage. But there is  no  doubt  that some  of  these
effects  have  been  aggravated  by  exaggerated  changes  in  foreign  exchange  rates  -  including  the
1
BIS Review 98/2000
progressive weakening of the euro. That is a particular problem for the UK because of the relatively
large  proportion  of  our  economy  exposed  to  competition  from  the  euro  zone  (both  in  terms  of  our
bilateral trade and competition in third countries). Even as a central banker I can understand why many
euro-exposed businesses feel hard done by in present circumstances. And I can understand why they in
particular might urge the Monetary Policy Committee to signal that UK short-term interest rates have
peaked.
They make a seductive case. But in fact it’s not as straightforward as it sounds.
If  the  intention  is  that  by  signalling  that  our  interest  rates  have  peaked  we  might  weaken  sterling
against the euro, it is not at all obvious that it would in fact have that effect. Today’s exchange markets
between  the  major  currencies  are  apparently  being  driven  primarily  by  massive  longer-term  capital
flows - direct and portfolio investments - which, for the time being, are overriding more conventional
“fundamentals”.  Those  longer-term  capital  flows  in  turn  appear  to  be  driven  more  by  investors’
perceptions of structural, supply-side differences, and their implications for relative future corporate
earnings growth, than by relative macroeconomic policies. No doubt at some point such perceptions
will change - or the anticipated differences in future earnings growth be discounted by the change in
asset prices, including the effect of exchange  rates. There  are  some  tentative  signs  that this  may  be
beginning  to  happen.  But in the  meantime  it  is  not  at  all  clear  that  there  is  much  that  we  could  do
- even if we wanted to - to weaken sterling against the euro by marginal changes in short-term interest
rates. As it is our interest rate differential over the euro zone has halved since the euro started, while
our exchange rate against the euro has appreciated by around 15%.
We  do  already,  of  course,  take  full  account  of  the  exchange  rate  -  and  other  prices  -  in  both  our
forecasts  and  our  policy  decisions.  Indeed,  it  was  partly  to  avoid  pushing  sterling  higher  and  so
aggravating the imbalance within the economy, when we were not wholly convinced that we needed to
take  that  risk  in  order  to  achieve  the  inflation  target,  that  the  Committee  refrained  from  further
monetary tightening over the past eight months.
But looking ahead the risks and uncertainties are such that it would be unrealistic to suppose that we
can altogether exclude the need for further tightening at some point.
Leaving  on  one  side  possible,  though  not  necessarily  likely,  international  developments  outside  our
control - a hard landing in the US, for example, or a precipitate realignment of exchange rates, or a
further spike in the oil price - there are two major uncertainties.
The first is the familiar uncertainty relating to the path of overall demand growth. On almost any basis,
we  start  from  a  position  in  which  the  economy  as  a  whole  is  operating  close  to  capacity.  That  is
reflected  in  the  evident  tightness  of  the  labour  market,  including  increasing  evidence  of  skills
shortages. If we are to avoid a potentially sharp reversal in earnings growth and accelerating inflation,
we need to see a slowdown in the rate of domestic private sector demand growth to accommodate not
only  the stabilisation  of  our  external  current  account  balance  but  also  the  public  sector  expenditure
growth which the Chancellor has already announced, not to mention whatever he may be planning to
announce  tomorrow.  There  are  signs  that  this  slowdown  in  private  sector  demand  growth  may  be
beginning to happen, but that is certainly not yet assured - and over-generous tax cuts would not help.
I must tell you that I am surprised by the billions of pounds that some commentators have suggested
the Chancellor could safely give away tomorrow.
Going in the opposite direction, we have recently seen a more benign relationship than we might have
expected between developments in the real economy and earnings and price pressures - the nominal
side  of  the  economy.  In  part  the  explanation  for  this  encouraging  development  may  lie  in  the
dampening effect of the strong exchange rate or in the lower and more stable inflationary expectations
we are now seeing. But other possible explanations include exceptional competitive pressure in goods
markets, structural changes in labour market behaviour or an underlying improvement in productivity
growth, or in some combination of all three. Whatever the underlying cause, it is possible that, at least
for a time, we can sustain a higher rate of growth of overall demand and output without inflationary
pressure than we could in the past. The jury frankly is still very much out on all of this. The difficulty
is that most of these possible developments cannot be directly observed in the data, and, even if they
could be, we would still not know whether or not, or for how long, they might persist.
BIS Review 98/2000
2
We  certainly  have  not  closed  our  mind  to  a  continuation  of  such  benign  “new  economy”  effects,
indeed we make conscious allowance for them as best we can in our projections. But we cannot bank
on them. All we can - and do - do is, continuously and meticulously, to monitor the evolving evidence.
We watch it, in fact, like a dove.
What that means is that while we can’t realistically rule out further interest rate increases, we don’t
rule out the possibility that the next move will be downwards either.
In the final analysis, Mr President, we have a choice. We could, in principle, go further than we have,
and deliberately aim off in our monetary policy, in order to try to relieve the immediate pressure on the
euro-exposed sectors. But that would necessarily involve taking more risk with our inflation target and
with continuing stability in the economy as a whole. That is not consistent with our mandate. And it is
not something that most business people I speak to - even from the suffering sectors - would want us
to do.
3
BIS Review 98/2000
