Bodil Nyboe Andersen: The role of monetary policy in Denmark
Speech  by  Mrs  Bodil  Nyboe  Andersen,  Governor  of  Danmarks  National  Bank,  at  the  Annual
Conference of Danish Industries, held in Copenhagen, on 26 September 2000.
 Thank you for the invitation to speak on the role of monetary policy. Traditionally, this topic has not
drawn much attention in Denmark. Some might claim that this is because Denmark does not in fact
pursue  a  monetary  policy  as  such.  In  normal  times  we  just  shadow  the  euro  area,  and  before  that,
Germany.  However,  in  conjunction  with the debate on  whether  Denmark  should  adopt  the  euro  the
design of monetary policy has attracted greater interest.
Price stability
In all countries the primary task of monetary policy is to contribute to price stability. The approach is
either direct inflation targeting or more indirect control by maintaining a stable exchange rate against
another  currency  which  is  characterised  by  price  stability.  Price  stability  is  defined  as  very  low
inflation, preferably below 2%.
The prevailing view in the postwar period was that a certain element of inflation helped the economy
to function more smoothly. In recent decades there has been growing recognition that this is not the
case.
Instead of an inflation rate of 10-12%, low, stable inflation at no more than 2-3% has proved to be a
better  way  of  ensuring  sound  and  steady  economic  growth.  Even  moderate  inflation  increases  the
uncertainty  of  long-term  economic  decisions  and  entails  inappropriate  redistribution  of  resources  in
society.
In  the  years  around  1980  Denmark  had  high  inflation  and  high  interest  rates  and  the  krone  was
devalued on every possible occasion. This course  was  stopped in  1982  and  from  that time  inflation
was  reduced  significantly  by  means  of  a  consistent  fixed  exchange  rate  policy.  This  strategy  was
supported by the trade union movement, which during the 1980s came to realise that inflation did not
benefit its members. Some very different groups in society were the real winners of the inflation game.
But moving from high to low inflation had its price. Most of us can remember a lot of problems in the
years around 1990. They were the result of far too many inappropriate economic decisions during the
inflation years.
As  stated,  during  the  1980s  the  benefits  of  low  inflation  were  generally  acknowledged  in  Europe.
Germany became the role model. Although this was probably the result of many different factors in
Germany,  the  prevailing  view  became  that  the  low  inflation  rate  was  especially  attributable  to  the
Bundesbank’s successful monetary policy, of which the main objective was keeping down inflation.
A  basic  assumption  of  the  negotiations  prior  to  the  Maastricht  Treaty  was  that  a  single  European
currency  and  a  single  monetary  policy  should  be  based  on  the  objective  of  price  stability.  This
objective was therefore incorporated in the Treaty.
Independent central banks
It was also decided to make the European Central Bank independent of the political system in order to
assure this objective the greatest possible credibility. Since the 1980s central bank independence has
been a global trend. It is stipulated in the Treaty that all EU central banks must be independent of the
political system. This meant that Sweden, for example, had to amend the Act on Sveriges Riksbank,
even though Sweden is outside EMU. The United Kingdom is subject to a special exemption from the
1
BIS Review 83/2000
Treaty  requirements,  but  it  has  nevertheless  been  decided  to  give  the  Bank  of  England  operational
independence.
The  Danish  central  bank  is  independent  by  long-standing  tradition,  as  set  out  in  the  Danmarks
Nationalbank  Act  of  1936.  In  view  of  this  statutory  provision,  no  amendment  was  necessary  as  in
Sweden’s  case.  However, legislation  will  have  to  be  amended  should  Denmark  decide  to  adopt  the
euro, since a number of provisions would have to be adjusted to be in line with our participation in the
single monetary policy.
Subject to the shared objective of price stability, there is great variation in the structure of monetary
policy in respectively a floating and a fixed exchange rate regime. I would first like to point out certain
characteristics  of  monetary  policy  in  a  floating  exchange  rate  regime  and  then  proceed  to  the  fixed
exchange rate policy and Denmark’s experience.
Inflation management
In a floating exchange rate regime monetary policy is used as an instrument to influence inflation via
the impact of interest rates on economic activity and on expectations.
The effect of interest rates on the economy - what the economists call the transmission mechanism - is
not  immediate,  but  takes  place  over  time.  It  is  therefore  not  the  inflation  rate  here  and  now  that  is
managed. Inflation in the medium term, typically two years, is the anchor of monetary policy.
Moreover,  economists  by  no  means  agree  on  how  effectively  monetary  policy  can  influence  the
economy’s course.
Central banks which have an inflation target can choose between various monetary policy approaches.
However, irrespective of the approach, it is the same economic fundamentals that are considered.
An  estimate  of inflation  two  years  ahead can  be  made  on  the  basis  of  various  economic  indicators,
including money supply, market interest rates, consumer expectations, raw materials prices, etc. This
estimate takes the current monetary policy as its starting point.
Should future inflation calculated in this way be outside the central bank’s target range, it should also
be calculated how monetary policy should be adjusted to achieve a successful result two years ahead.
Inflation forecasts
Some  central  banks  have  published  their  forecasts  and  then  explained  their  decisions  based  on  the
forecast results. The United Kingdom and Sweden have opted for this approach. This is not yet the
approach of the European Central Bank, but its President, Wim Duisenberg, has officially stated that
the ECB plans to publish its forecasts.
In its first years the ECB has faced the specific problem that it is difficult to construct a reliable model
based on statistics and trends from the period before the introduction of the single currency. This adds
to the challenges faced by the model designers and is probably the reason that the ECB prefers to try
out various models before a model-based forecast that can be released to the general public is chosen.
Presentation  of  a  model-based  forecast  has  obvious  benefits  since  it  summarises  a  number  of  the
factors influencing inflation. This gives a better overview of the process - to outsiders - but does not
disguise the fact that even the best model cannot provide precise mechanical answers on what action to
take.  It  must  be  supplemented  with  assessments.  The  “human  factor”  will  therefore  always  be  in
strong demand - irrespective of the model-based results.
Decision forum
Once the basis for decision is in place, decisions are most often made by a group of people - a board of
governors or a monetary policy committee.
BIS Review 83/2000
2
In many cases it used to be committees of directors of central banks comprising a majority of political
representatives. With certain exceptions this model has now been abandoned in favour of a council of
independent  representatives.  These  may  be  governors  or  part-time  members  of  the  council,
ie individuals with a “neutral job”.
The idea of a group as the decision-making forum is a natural consequence of the fact that the outcome
cannot be calculated. It must be supplemented with evaluations. There is reason to assume that these
evaluations will be more exhaustive when made by a group of people with various backgrounds, but
all with the required professional expertise.
Presentation of decisions
How decisions, and the basis for decision, are communicated to the general public varies considerably,
however. This variation is often taken to reflect differences in content and ways of thinking, but this is
not necessarily the case.
One model is the well-known Bundesbank approach, which is also applied by the European Central
Bank. It is also the practice in Norway. According to this model a press conference is held where the
chairman of the council, the central bank governor, presents the decision with a detailed explanation of
the  background  to  the  decision.  In  certain  cases  a  press  release  is  issued  instead  of  the  verbal
presentation  at  a  press  conference.  This  is  then  supplemented,  typically  on  a  quarterly  or  monthly
basis, with the central bank’s evaluation of the economic development, with special emphasis on the
financial situation.
The other members of the decision-making council may make statements in various fora, at lectures
and  in  interviews,  but  the  chairman  makes  the  official  presentation  of  the  collective  decision.  As  a
result the chairman is very much in the spotlight, and sometimes people may wrongly believe that he
more or less makes the decisions alone.
The  other  model  is  used  in  such  countries  as  the  United  Kingdom  and  Sweden.  The  views  of  the
individual  members  are  emphasised,  since  edited  minutes  of  the  decision-making  meetings  are
published, subject to a certain time lag. This can lead to excessive interest in each member’s views,
and  particularly  in  whether  they  change  their  minds.  Since the  whole  idea  of  discussion  in  a  group
forum is that you can learn from listening to the arguments of the other members it should be perfectly
all right to change your mind.
The Federal Reserve also publishes minutes of the meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee.
This has been the Federal Reserve’s practice for years, although it has not prevented the widespread
misunderstanding that Alan Greenspan alone makes the monetary policy decisions.
Fiscal policy
Although the central bank is responsible for managing inflation, this does not imply unlimited scope to
design fiscal policy. An inappropriate fiscal policy - eg a very expansionary policy in a situation with
full capacity utilisation - can be a serious obstacle to the work of the central bank. This is taken into
account in the structure of EMU, since the provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact ensure that a
sound fiscal policy is pursued. This not only  applies to  the  euro  area,  but  to all  EU  member  states,
including Denmark.
In countries with no formal restrictions it is nevertheless essential that politicians understand the need
for  a  prudent  fiscal  policy.  Otherwise  the  financial  markets  may  respond  with  rising  interest  rates,
showing in this way how they feel about the fiscal policy.
It is therefore no coincidence that in speeches and articles central bank governors often emphasise an
appropriately balanced fiscal policy as the background to the central bank’s price stability task.
3
BIS Review 83/2000
Fixed or variable exchange rates
If a central bank’s task is to manage price development via its monetary policy the latter cannot be
used to  manage  the  exchange  rate. This  is  the  lesson  learned  by  the  British  business  community  in
recent years. The Bank of England has pursued a tight monetary policy in order to contain inflation.
But in certain periods this led to a strengthening of sterling, which presented problems for the export
sectors.
The European Central Bank has witnessed how the markets have strongly traded down the euro, which
is found to be out of line with the economic fundamentals. Last week the European Central Bank took
the  initiative  with  the  USA,  Japan,  the  United  Kingdom  and  Canada  to  intervene  in  the  currency
market in support of the euro. The authorities of these countries shared a concern about the potential
implications of recent movements in the euro exchange rate for the world economy.
Just as it was not the Bundesbank’s task to design monetary policy for management of the D-mark’s
rate against the dollar, it is not the European Central Bank’s responsibility to manage the euro/dollar
rate via its interest rate policy. The European Central Bank has to react by raising interest rates only if
price stability is threatened by the exchange rate’s development. In view of the size of the euro area,
most of its trade is internal. This considerably reduces the significance of the exchange rate to price
trends compared to smaller countries with extensive foreign trade.
If  the  purpose  of  monetary  policy  is  to  ensure  low  inflation  it  cannot  also  be  used  to  manage  the
exchange rate. On the other hand, if a fixed exchange rate policy is pursued, the monetary policy must
be  designed  accordingly.  This  rules  out  a  further  objective  to  adjust  interest  rates  to  domestic
economic trends.
Fixed exchange rate policy
A fixed exchange rate regime entails a political decision to maintain a stable exchange rate vis-à-vis
another - typically  major - currency.  This  decision  is  made  in  order  to  create  stable  exchange  rate
conditions for the business community. The currency chosen is therefore usually one which is of great
significance to the country’s foreign trade.
However,  a  further  consequence  is  that  the  country  in  question  indirectly  pursues  a  policy  of  price
stability, since the fixed exchange rate policy is only sustainable if the country’s inflation is generally
equivalent to that of the country whose currency it shadows.
Denmark’s  fixed  exchange  rate  policy  dates  back  to  1982.  It  is  widely  agreed  that  this  policy  has
served  Denmark  well  and  has  promoted  understanding  of  the  necessity  of  the  stability-oriented
economic policy, ie a policy which keeps the economy on track. It is also clear that Denmark’s fixed
exchange rate policy has achieved a high degree of credibility.
Firstly, the Danish authorities, ie the government and the Nationalbank, have stated on every possible
occasion that devaluation is out of the question and that this instrument is not even considered as an
option. Over time this view has gained the widespread support of the general public and among the
political parties.
Secondly, for many years Denmark has shown the willingness and the ability to adhere to the rules and
conventions of the fixed exchange rate policy.
Monetary policy shadows anchor currency
In  “normal”  times  monetary  policy  must  be  designed  to  match  the  monetary  policy  of  the  country
whose  currency  is  shadowed.  For  Denmark,  until  1998  this  country  was  Germany.  As  from  1999
Denmark  has  pursued  a  fixed  exchange  rate  policy  vis-à-vis  the  euro.  This  means  that  when  the
European  Central  Bank  adjusts  interest  rates,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  follows  suit.  However,
Denmark’s level of interest rates is slightly higher than the euro area level, as it was previously vis-à-
BIS Review 83/2000
4
vis D-mark interest rates. The greater the credibility of our fixed exchange rate policy over the years,
the narrower Denmark’s interest rate differential to the anchor currency.
A sudden event may upset this state of affairs - and not necessarily an event in Denmark. When the
international financial crisis arose in September 1998 many investors preferred to move their assets to
bigger currencies such as the dollar and the currencies which were then about to become part of the
euro.
Such a situation can exert pressure on the Danish krone. In the first instance, in order to maintain a
relatively stable exchange rate, the Nationalbank has to support the krone by selling foreign exchange
from its reserve. If intervention is extensive it can be necessary to raise interest rates. In September
1998 the discount rate was thus raised by ½% and the Nationalbank’s lending rate by 1%. Bond yields
also rose.
The  Nationalbank’s  monetary  policy  is thus  completely  bound  by  the  development  in  the  exchange
rate,  even  though  formally  we  pursue  a  separate  monetary  policy.  In  a  stable  exchange  rate
environment  we  pursue  exactly  the  same  monetary  policy  as  the  European  Central  Bank,  but  with
slightly higher interest rates. In the event of exchange rate unrest we have to raise interest rates, only
to normalise them as the markets return to stability.
This  monetary  policy  stance  also  makes  it  very  clear  that  special  Danish  requirements  of  higher  or
lower interest rates due to employment or price trends cannot be accommodated.
In reality these are the same terms as apply to the euro area member states: neither Finland nor Ireland
is free to adjust its interest rates to fit the country’s own economic situation.
Requirements of fiscal policy
A fixed exchange rate policy also imposes the requirement that fiscal policy be designed to ensure the
balance in the economy which is a precondition for maintaining the credibility of the fixed exchange
rate  policy.  Inflation  may  not  significantly  exceed  inflation  in  the  euro  area,  and  excessive  current
account deficits must be avoided. It will therefore be necessary to dampen excessive economic growth.
The two best-known examples of fiscal policy measures to stabilise the exchange rate are the October
1986 package of economic measures, the  “potato-diet”  and the  Whitsun  1998  package  of economic
measures. These examples are only the best-known of many as consideration of the requirements set
by the fixed exchange rate policy is always an element of fiscal policy planning.
Even if Denmark adopts the euro, fiscal policy will still be used to stabilise the domestic economy.
However,  the  special  consideration  of  the  balance  of  payments  and  the  foreign  exchange  market,
which today are basic conditions, will no longer apply.
Euro participation or fixed exchange rate policy
Adopting the euro would widen the scope of economic policy compared to the situation where a fixed
exchange rate policy is pursued. We would gain a share of influence on Europe’s monetary policy and
we would have a little more room for manoeuvre in fiscal policy.
There is widespread agreement in the euro debate that Denmark must chose between a fixed exchange
rate policy and adoption of the euro. Changeover to the euro would be a natural continuation of the
fixed exchange rate policy which is so well established in Denmark.
Under the fixed exchange rate policy first the D-mark and then the euro has been a fixed element of
business enterprises’ foreign exchange transactions. The euro is by far the most important currency to
Denmark’s  foreign  trade  and  Danish  business  enterprises  have  learned  to  handle  the  fluctuations
against other currencies.
I  do  not  think  anybody  seriously  wants  Denmark  to  reintroduce  a  devaluation policy  since this  had
such negative consequences in the 1970s and the early 1980s.
5
BIS Review 83/2000
It  is  important  to emphasise  that  one-off  devaluation  of  the  Danish  krone  would  not  be  in  our  best
interests now or at a later time. Damage to the credibility of our fixed exchange rate policy would take
many  years  to  repair.  Nobody  would  believe  our  assurances  that  such  a  devaluation  was  a  one-off
measure, never to be used again.
A  variable  exchange  rate  is  the  natural  choice  for  large  countries  and  currency  areas,  but  in  small
countries  with  extensive  foreign  trade  a  floating  exchange  rate  exposes  the  business  community  to
greater uncertainty.
Experience  shows  that  many  small  and  medium-sized  countries  that  today  have  floating  exchange
rates were forced to let their currency float because their fixed exchange rate regime was destroyed by
speculation. Such a shift was often associated with considerable costs. We are therefore naïve if we
believe that Denmark easily and painlessly would be able to switch to a floating exchange rate. This
would eliminate the fixed currency foundation for the planning of the business community, which they
have been accustomed to for almost the last 20 years.
In  conclusion  I  would  therefore  like  to  emphasise  very  strongly  that  there  must  be  no  doubt
whatsoever that the fixed exchange rate policy will not falter should Denmark decide not to adopt the
euro. In that situation we must not embark on any monetary or exchange rate policy experimentation.
If Denmark chooses to adopt the euro most of the strategies for economic policy will be well known
from Denmark’s many years with a fixed exchange rate policy.
BIS Review 83/2000
6
