Jean-Claude Trichet:
The economic situation in France and the euro area
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, Governor of the Banque de France, at the press conference of the
Monetary Policy Council of the Banque de France on 20 December 2000.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
Allow me to welcome you on behalf of the Monetary Policy Council of the Banque de France. As the
euro stands on the threshold of its third year, I shall discuss in the name of our MPC the economic
situation in France and the euro area, before commenting upon the latest monetary policy  decisions
made by the Eurosystem.
Activity advanced at a sustained pace in the euro area
The  upturn  experienced  by  the  euro-area  economies  in  the  first  half  of  1999  continued  and
strengthened throughout 2000. Foreign trade contributed significantly to the rebound. In addition, the
euro area  benefited  from  a  marked  improvement  in  domestic  demand,  with  household  consumption
increasing at a fast clip before stabilising at a high level in the third quarter. At the same time, good
borrowing conditions and the prospect of robust demand, coupled with a substantial increase in the use
of  production  capacity  and  improved  corporate  profitability,  gave  investment  a  strong  boost.
According  to  the  most  recent  estimates,  the  conjunction  of  these  auspicious  developments  should
translate into 3.4% growth in euro-area GDP in 2000.
Given the prevailing wage moderation, this acceleration in activity has been particularly propitious for
job  creation:  the  euro-area  unemployment  rate  has  declined  by  one  percentage  point  since  October
1999 and stood at 8.9% in October 2000.
Surging oil prices and the depreciation in the euro’s effective exchange rate have fuelled a marked rise
in inflationary pressure since the autumn of 1999. Inflation as measured by the Harmonised Index of
Consumer Prices (HICP) thus rose above the 2% threshold in the twelve months to February 2000. In
November 2000, the year-on-year increase amounted to 2.9%.
There have also been increasing signs of pressure on the productive system, with the appearance of
production bottlenecks and rising capacity utilisation rates throughout the euro area. The latter work
out to 84.7% for the fourth quarter of 2000, i.e. almost three points above their long-term average of
81.8%.
In addition, the value of imports rose substantially under the combined impact of buoyant economic
activity, an almost two-fold increase in oil prices and the euro’s depreciation. As a result, the current
account, which had shown a surplus, shrank to a slight deficit.
Robust growth for the French economy
Following  the  trend  initiated  in  1999,  the  French  economy  enjoyed  robust  growth.  Although  the
growth rate levelled off somewhat in the third quarter, it should remain sustained given the renewed
confidence  expressed  by  households  and  the  business  prospects  of  the  industrial  sector,  where  our
surveys indicate that order books are well-filled. Under these conditions, GDP is expected to grow by
3.2% in 2000, and perhaps by roughly 3% in 2001.
All components of GDP were favourably oriented, in particular corporate investment, which grew by
about 6%. Household consumption also made a significant contribution to growth despite the strong
rise in retail prices during the year, which were impacted in particular by raw material and oil prices.
Foreign trade made strong headway and generated a current account surplus that was still substantial
1
BIS Review 115/2000
despite  the  oil  shock,  reflecting  in  particular  the  continued  buoyancy  of  service  trade.  The  current
account surplus for the first nine months of 2000 amounted to EUR 23.6 billion.
The  labour  market  benefited  from  the  continued  growth.  According  to  INSEE  (France’s  national
institute of statistics and economic studies), some 485,000 net salaried positions were created in the
market sector during the year. The unemployment rate according to the ILO definition stood at 9.4%
of the labour force in October, down by 1.6 point year-on-year.
The  sharp  increase  in  the  prices  of  imported  goods,  due  chiefly  to  oil  price  developments  and  the
depreciation of the euro, translated into a sharp acceleration in the consumer price index, with a year-
on-year increase of 2.2% in November. These developments call for vigilance, particularly since the
underlying  index, excluding  energy  and  food  prices,  also  quickened  steadily  throughout  the  year  to
reach a year-on-year increase of 1.4% in November, compared with 0.7% in December 1999.
At the same time, the pressures on the productive system appeared to be particularly strong in France.
The Banque de France’s surveys indicate that the production capacity utilisation rate of over 87% is
almost three points higher than its long-run average. Recruitment has become increasingly  difficult:
according to the INSEE surveys, 53% of industrial companies reported difficulty in hiring new staff in
October 2000,  against  39%  in  January 2000  and  32%  in  October  1999.  This  was  the  information
available to me on 20 December 1999 when I commented on monetary policy developments in 1999.
It is the highest level ever recorded in these statistics. These pressures on the productive system have
been corroborated by the sharp increase in imported capital goods and manufactured products.
Price stability: the monetary policy decisions of the Eurosystem
The  recent  decisions  should  be  assessed  against  the  price  stability  objective  assigned  to  the
Eurosystem by the Treaty on European Union. In its pursuit of transparency and accountability, the
Governing Council of the European Central Bank decided in October 1998 to give a precise definition
of price stability as being a year-on-year increase in the euro-area HICP of below 2%. Its success in
meeting this objective, which is the same as that adopted by the Monetary Policy Council for French
monetary policy when the Banque de France became independent, should be assessed in the medium
term.
In order to meet its primary objective of price stability, the Governing Council has based its monetary
strategy on two pillars, which were already part of the strategy of the Banque de France. It has pursued
this strategy steadfastly.
The first  pillar  assigns  a  prominent role to  money,  signalled  by  the  announcement  of a  quantitative
reference value for M3 growth, the euro area’s broad monetary aggregate.
At  its  meeting  on  14  December  2000,  the  Governing  Council  reviewed  its  reference  value  for
monetary growth. It decided to reconfirm  this  value,  namely  an  annual  growth rate  of 4.5%  for  the
broad M3 aggregate.
The  monetary  authorities  also  wanted  to  be  able  to  base  their  decisions  on  all  of  the  information
available.  Hence  the  second  pillar,  which  makes  it  possible  to  assess  present  and  future  price
developments using a broad range of non-monetary indicators.
These indicators stem from a wide range of sources: macroeconomic data, financial market indicators,
exchange rates, survey findings and projections, etc.
After a co-ordinated reduction in the key rates of the future euro area in December 1998 and a further
cut in April 1999, which reduced the rate of the Eurosystem’s main refinancing operation to 2.5%, the
Governing Council has raised the Eurosystem’s key rates in several stages since November 1999 for a
total increase of 2.25 points. These moves were made in response to signals from the two monetary
strategy pillars, which pointed to deteriorating risks to price stability.
With  regard  to  the  first  pillar,  i.e.  monetary  developments,  the  euro  area  has  consistently  enjoyed
ample liquidity conditions. Measured in terms of the moving three-month average, the M3 aggregate,
which started the year with a growth trend of above 6%, began to show signs of slowing in the second
BIS Review 115/2000
2
quarter of 2000, due in particular to the hikes in the key rates. It worked out to 5.5% for the August to
October 2000  period,  that  is,  one  point  above  the  4.5%  reference  value.  Although  M1  growth
(banknotes and coins, overnight deposits) has slowed considerably, it was still very sustained with a
year-on-year  increase  of  5.8%  in  October.  Overnight  deposits  alone  rose  by  6.6%.  This  dynamism
reflects the need for high cash balances in a brisk economic environment, despite the increase in the
opportunity cost of holding such balances.
In October, the annual growth rate of credit granted by monetary financial institutions to the private
sector was 10.8% and that of loans 9.7%, while financing extended in the form of securities purchases
grew by 21.2% year-on-year. This strong growth in credit to the private sector underlies the marked
expansion  of  M3.  The  dynamic  trend  in  the  credit  to  euro-area  residents  counterpart  to  M3,  which
reflects  the  good  performance  of  the  economy,  can  also  be  explained  by  the  increasing  borrowing
requirements of telecommunications operators, surging property prices in certain euro-area countries,
and the spread of mergers and acquisitions.
However, external transactions have had a restrictive impact on M3 growth, albeit to a lesser extent
than in 1999.
In France, credit to the private sector continued to advance at a sustained pace, posting a year-on-year
increase of 9.3% in October. The annual growth rate of total domestic debt was 5.7% in October.
In the course of the year, the various components of the second pillar signalled upside risks to price
stability.  This  was  true  for  the  indicators  for  supply  and  labour  markets,  the  continuing  rise  in  oil
prices and the protracted depreciation in the euro’s exchange rate, which have exerted or continue to
exert upward pressure on import, production and consumer prices.
As regards the exchange rate of the euro, which is an important monetary policy indicator, both the
Monetary Policy Council and the ECB Governing Council are convinced that the external value of the
euro does not reflect the euro area’s favourable situation and future prospects.
This sentiment is shared by the Eurogroup, which agreed with the European Central Bank in Versailles
that "a strong euro is in the interests of Europe". This phrase is the most concise and clear statement
of Europe’s position with respect to the external value of the euro.
Moreover,  the  G7  also  concurs  with  the  Eurosystem’s  analysis.  On  23  September,  following  the
concerted intervention on foreign exchange markets on 22 September, the G7 expressed "the shared
concern  of  the  Finance  Ministers  and  the  Governors  about  the  potential  implications  of  recent
movements in the euro for the world economy".
Financial stability
In Europe, price stability is the statutory responsibility of the central banks, that is, the Eurosystem.
Not just because that is how one safeguards the purchasing power of our fellow citizens, in particular
of the most vulnerable amongst them, who have the least protection against price increases. But also
because  price  stability  allows  us  to  create  the  conditions  for  sustainable  growth  and  dynamic  job
creation, and to combat unemployment effectively.
In  today’s  world,  however,  financial  stability,  for  which  price  stability  is  a  prerequisite,  is  of  great
value.  We  must  unremittingly  endeavour  to  create  conditions  for  the  international  economy  that
minimise  misalignments  in  asset  prices,  excessive  volatility,  purely  speculative  phenomena  and
dangerous herd behaviour. This is the underlying message in central banks’ repeated calls for prudence
and caution. Nothing is more conducive to economic euphoria than ample monetary liquidity, but the
after-effects  can  be  very  painful,  with  the  formation  of  speculative  bubbles,  sharp  swings  in  asset
prices,  and  the  herd  behaviour  of  huge  capital  flows.  A  monetary  policy  based  on  stability  is  the
indispensable  complement  to  the  remarkable  efforts  undertaken  these  past  years  to  improve  the
international financial architecture.
 3
BIS Review 115/2000
The  economy  of  the  euro  area  has  the  favourable  monetary,  financial  and  competitive  conditions
necessary to contribute to the pursuit of growth that is sustainable because non-inflationary. But as the
Monetary Policy Council has indicated these past years, monetary policy needs to be relayed by the
other main components of economic policy. Four conditions would appear necessary to preserve and
reinforce the complete success of the single currency.
Firstly, national fiscal policies should contribute to maintaining the framework of stability
The  single  monetary  policy  cannot,  by  itself,  ensure  price  stability  in  the  best  possible  conditions.
Fiscal policies must respect the letter and the spirit of the Stability and Growth Pact.
In the absence of a significant Community budget, the close co-ordination of national fiscal policies
and careful peer surveillance within the Council of the Eurogroup and the Ecofin Council—consisting
of the Finance Ministers of the 15 member countries—are indispensable for there to be an appropriate
policy mix for the euro area as a whole.
This surveillance is all the more necessary as Monetary Union introduces a degree of interdependence
in  fiscal  matters.  While  the  short-term  macro-economic  effects  of  an  excessively  expansionary
national fiscal policy remain fairly restricted to the domestic economy involved, the costs in terms of
risk premia on interest and exchange rates are borne by all members of Monetary Union. Under these
circumstances,  the  Pact  allows  well-managed  economies  to  avoid  unwarranted  risk  premia  by
organising a system for sanctioning excessive deficits, thus helping to prevent such deficits.
Furthermore, the purpose of the Pact is to allow national automatic stabilisers to come into play where
necessary. Its medium-term objective, which stipulates that public finances must be close to balance or
in  surplus,  encourages  the  Union's  Member  States  to  re-establish  as  fast  as  possible  the  leeway
allowing them to cope with cyclical swings or any asymmetrical shocks affecting one of them without
exceeding the 3% deficit ceiling.
Consequently, more than ever, the Member States should take advantage of the improved economic
conditions in the euro area to step up their consolidation efforts.
Concerning France in particular, the Monetary Policy Council notes that, as in previous years, public
spending  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  is  too  high.  According  to  the  European  Commission,  it  stood  at
53.9% in France in 1999, compared with an average of 49.1% for the euro area as a whole and less
than 40% for the G7 countries. An initial decrease in this ratio to less than 50% of GDP is necessary to
maintain the low medium and long-term market interest rates that are propitious for growth and the
fight  against  unemployment,  and  to  create  the  conditions  for  a  gradual  and  lasting  reduction  of
compulsory levies.
Secondly, implementing adequate structural reforms
The effectiveness of economic policies is not merely the result of a good mix of fiscal and monetary
policies. Structural policies also have a major role to play. This is particularly true in France and all
the  large  economies  of  the  euro  area  in  which,  according  to  all  international  organisations,
unemployment  stems  largely  from  structural  factors,  i.e.  it  is  unfortunately  maintained  by  our  own
regulations and approaches.
The  importance  of  structural  reforms  in  the  effective  fight  against  unemployment  was  explicitly
recognised by the European Council meeting in Nice after those of Luxembourg and Cardiff.
It is not the Banque de France’s role to take the place of the relevant authorities by issuing a list of
recommendations  for  reforms  in  the  fields  of  education  and  training,  the  functioning  of  the  labour
market  or  social  welfare.  However,  as  far  as  methods  are  concerned,  the  Monetary  Policy  Council
believes that a benchmarking principle for structural issues could be adopted in the euro area, namely
convergence  towards  best  practices,  as  we  did  in  monetary  and  fiscal  matters  with  the  Maastricht
criteria.  Why  not  reverse  the  burden  of  proof  in  the  field  of  structural  reform  by  asking  euro  area
countries  why  they  do  not  introduce,  in  their  own  countries,  reforms  that  have  been  successfully
BIS Review 115/2000
4
implemented  in  another  euro  area  country?  The  choice  of  such  reforms  should  depend  on  three
criteria: first that they have been decided on the basis of a political consensus, second, that they have
been  implemented  on  the  basis  of  a  social  consensus  and  third,  that  they  have  been  successful  in
combating unemployment. A large number of reforms pursued within the euro area meet these criteria.
Thirdly, maintaining economic competitiveness: making France an attractive business location
in an equally attractive euro area
In  the  new  environment  created  by  Monetary  Union  and  the  single  currency,  cost  and  price
competitiveness  is,  more  than  ever  a  key  indicator  of  the  conduct  of  national  economic  policies.
European  policies  must  place  the  emphasis  upon  this  aspect  of  competitiveness.  Before  the  euro,
national economic policies were based on the close monitoring of several indicators such as the trade
balance,  the  balance  of  payments,  the  exchange  and  interest  rates.  Policymakers  thus  constantly
received information on the markets’ main reactions to shifts in economic policy and were strongly
encouraged to take them into account where relevant.
With  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  some  of these  indicators have  either  disappeared  at  the  domestic
level or their impact has been severely limited. Of course, the indicators continue to exist for the euro
area as  a  whole,  hence  the  importance  of  the  Treaty's  provisions  on  the  co-ordination  of  fiscal  and
economic policies.
Nevertheless, the rules of the market economy continue to apply to each Member State of Monetary
Union as well as to the Union as a whole. At the national level therefore, economic policymakers need
to be even more vigilant than before regarding the indicators of competitiveness. These data, which
focus  on  trends  in  unit  labour  costs,  the  quality  of  the  regulatory  and  tax  framework  and,  more
generally,  an  economic,  legal  and  tax  environment  conducive  to  the  creation  and  dynamism  of
companies, represent the main indicators shaping monetary domestic policies in the Monetary Union.
The level of unit production costs is of primary importance. It would be a serious mistake to forget this
in  the  context  of  a  buoyant  economy.  It  is  mainly  because  the  French  economy  has  preserved  and
strengthened  its  competitiveness  over  a  long  period  that  we  have,  in  the  past  four  years,  enjoyed
growth  that  is  robust  and  more  rapid  than  that  of  the  other  large  European  countries,  while  also
maintaining  a  large  current  account  surplus.  The  multipartisan  strategy  of  low  inflation  and
competitiveness,  conducted  consistently  and  tenaciously  over  a  long  period,  must  be  steadfastly
pursued in the single currency context.
Fourthly, the gradual change in the mindset governing our perception of economic phenomena
The  objective  of  durable,  sustained  and  non-inflationary  growth,  which  could  force  unemployment
down to its low tidemark, could be more easily achieved if Europe and France gradually adopted an
open  attitude  towards  the  important  “factors  of  production”,  namely  labour,  capital  and  technical
progress. For a long time, persistent mass unemployment, the structural causes of which were poorly
understood,  led  to  the  adoption  of  certain  neo-Malthusian  attitudes:  efforts  to  reduce  the  available
workforce in order to curtail unemployment, spurning productivity-enhancing investment thought to
contribute to higher unemployment and, finally, wariness towards technical progress, which was seen
as a potential destroyer of jobs.
Little wonder that after seeking to limit the available workforce, capital stock and technical progress,
Europe and France saw that their non-inflationary growth potential was still not as high as they would
have wished, despite the significant advances made in recent years. Fortunately, a profound change in
perspective is underway in Europe and France, and we are discarding neo-Malthusian attitudes. This
change has been prompted notably by the new information and communication technologies and by
the  realisation  that  the  spread  in  Europe  of  pre-inflationary  bottlenecks  is,  in  itself,  an  obstacle  to
growth that is robust and sustainable because it is non-inflationary. To entrench this change in attitude,
our strategy should move in three directions to:
5
BIS Review 115/2000
   ease  the  constraints  on  labour.  Some  53%  of  companies  currently  report  that  they  are
facing  serious  recruitment  difficulties,  notwithstanding  the  9.4%  unemployment  rate.  It  is
therefore  necessary  to  step  up  the  education,  training  and  integration  of  people  hitherto
excluded  from  the  workforce.  Companies  in  particular  must  increase  their  efforts.  As  the
Monetary Policy Council has been recommending for the past three years, a more extensive
use of overtime should be accepted, especially in sectors where there is a labour shortage.
More generally, the increase in Europe’s employment rate from the current 61% to 70% in
ten years’ time, an objective which was confirmed by the European Council meeting in Nice
and  which  aims  at  expanding  the  available  workforce,  is  particularly  timely  and  reveals  a
profound change in attitude;
invest  massively  and  loosen  the  constraints  on  capital.  Investment  is  essential  in  our
economy in which the capacity utilisation rate is currently at a historic high, and where an
increasing proportion of companies—41% today, as opposed to 30% at the end of 1999—are
experiencing  production  bottlenecks.  The  latest  Banque  de  France  survey  shows  that  the
capacity  utilisation  rate  has  reached  a  record  high.  This  state  of  affairs  makes  the
recommendation issued by the Council over the past four years more appropriate than ever:
“Now is the time to invest”.
lastly,  actively  seek  improvements  in  productivity,  which  lie  at  the  very  heart  of
economic  growth  by  embracing  technical  progress,  the  digital  revolution,  the  new
information  and  communication  technologies,  biotechnology  and  material  sciences  and  by
promoting  a  high  level  of research  and  development  in  the  productive  sector  in  France  as
well as Europe. This openness to technical progress and rapid productivity enhancement is
one  of  the  keys  to  maintaining  low  inflation  and  a  long-lasting  growth,  which  is  vibrant,
sustainable and creates jobs.
 This,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  is  what  I  wished  to  say  about  monetary  policy  and  the  French  and
European economies as we stand on the verge of the year 2001. May I draw your attention to the press
kit  that  will  be  handed  out  to  you.  It  contains  documents  that  should  prove  very  useful  to  a  sound
understanding  of  the  economic  and  monetary  situation,  in  particular  the  charts  on  production
bottlenecks and recruitment difficulties. I would also like to point out the one hundred questions-and-
answers  on  the  changeover  to  the  euro.  These  should  provide  individuals,  professionals  and  the
specialised  press  with  clear  and accurate information on  any  questions that  may  arise regarding  the
challenging  events  that  await  us  in  the  years  2001  and  2002.  This  document  will  be  available  by
tomorrow on the Bank's web site at www.banque-France.fr, and it will be constantly updated.
Thank you for your attention.
BIS Review 115/2000
6
