The Rt Hon Sir Edward George GBE: Some thoughts on the coexistence of
affluence and poverty in the United Kingdom
Text  of  the  St  Paul’s  Cathedral  Lecture  by  The  Rt  Hon  Sir  Edward  George  GBE,  Governor  of  the
Bank of England, held in London on 28 November 2000.
 I  have  to  confess  that  for  me,  as  a  banker  -  even  if  I’m  a  central  banker  rather  than  a  commercial
banker  -  to  be  invited  to  address  this  audience  in  the  magnificent  setting  of  this  cathedral  is  a
somewhat daunting experience. But if it’s a daunting experience, I recognise that it is a great honour,
which  I  very  much  appreciate;  and  I  welcome  the  opportunity  it  gives  me  to  share  with  you  this
evening  some  thoughts  on  the  age-old  question,  which  continues  to  trouble  right-minded  people
everywhere - how can we explain, let alone justify or tolerate, the coexistence of obvious affluence
and well-being cheek by jowl with equally obvious poverty and deprivation.  It’s  a  question  of  very
broad relevance, with personal, local, national and international dimensions. It’s a question to which
great minds have applied themselves across the centuries. I should like, more modestly, in my remarks
to offer some reflections, based upon my nearly forty years experience of working at the Bank, on the
relevance, first, of monetary and broader economic policy to that question; on the relevance, secondly,
of  the  activity  of  the  City  financial  institutions;  and  on  the  relevance,  finally,  of  the  work  of  the
international financial institutions with which the Bank of England is involved.
But let me at the outset identify a common theme that underlies my remarks on all three of these areas.
Don’t think that the root of the problem is that people generally simply don’t care. The harsh reality is
that, with the best will in the world, we do not have - personally as far as most of us are concerned but
certainly,  collectively  -  locally,  nationally  or  internationally  -  sufficient  resources  to  satisfy  all  our
aspirations. And since those aspirations are continuously increasing as standards do in fact gradually
rise, I don’t suppose we ever will have that capacity. So we are obliged to make choices: if we devote
resources to this or that purpose we will not have resources to devote to this or that other purpose -
however desirable in itself that other purpose may be.
An absolutely fundamental issue is, of course, how and by whom such collective decisions are taken. I
imagine that, while we could no doubt argue about some of the details, all of us would accept that a
genuine  democratic  process  -  based  on  universal  suffrage  and  underpinned  by  transparency  and
accountability, and supported by freedom of speech, including freedom of the press, is a sine qua non.
Within that framework, there is plenty of room for ongoing debate about the role of government, at
different  levels,  in  striking  a  balance  between  protecting  the  interests  of  society  as  a  whole  and  of
particular groups within society, on the one hand, and preserving individual freedoms on the other. In
the  economic  field  the  debate  can  become  polarised  between those  who favour free  markets,  in the
interests  of economic  efficiency  and  growth,  and  those  who  favour  government  intervention,  in  the
interests  of  social  protection.  In  fact  I  don’t  think  I  know  many  people  actually  involved  in  public
policy issues who do not see general economic prosperity as the ultimate objective; and I don’t know
many people either who do not recognise the need for government intervention to maintain at least the
minimum standards necessary for the effective functioning of free markets. So the real debate it seems
to  me  is  a  narrower one:  it  is  about  means rather  than  ends;  and  the  real  issues  are  typically  about
matters of degree rather than absolute matters of basic principle.
Against that background let me talk first about overall economic policy - and its relevance to the issue
of poverty.
For  many  years  after  the  second  world  war  in  this  country,  during  the  1960s  and  1970s,  macro-
economic policy - overall fiscal policy and monetary policy operating together and with various forms
of  direct  control  -  was  aimed  at  juggling  what  were  seen  as  the  conflicting  objectives  of  economic
growth  and  falling  unemployment  on  the  one  hand  and  limiting  inflation  and  maintaining  a
1
BIS Review 110/2000
manageable  balance  of  payments  position  on  the  other.  Essentially  the  policy  levers  would  be  set
initially at go, to stimulate demand and encourage growth and employment, until the evidence of over-
heating  became  intolerable,  when  the  levers  were  thrown  abruptly  into  reverse,  to  bring  about  a
juddering economic slowdown. This was the infamous go-stop economic policy cycle which led to the
boom-bust  economic  cycle.  While  the  objective  was  no  doubt  to  ensure  that  we  never  again
experienced the depression and mass unemployment of the inter-war period, the effect was to induce
uncertainty and short-term economic decision-making, with an increasingly damaging impact on our
overall  economic  performance.  And  the  situation  became  progressively  worse  from  one  economic
cycle to the next as each peak produced higher and higher inflation and each trough higher and higher
rates  of  unemployment  -  with  the  peaks  becoming  progressively  shorter-lived.  It  became  a  classic
example of more haste less speed.
We  eventually  learned  from  that  experience  that  there  really  is  no  trade-off  between  growth  and
employment and inflation, except possibly in the short term, and that stability, defined as consistently
low  inflation  -  and  achieved  by  keeping  overall  demand  continuously  broadly  in  line  with  the
underlying  structural,  supply-side,  capacity  of  the  economy  to  meet  that  demand  -  is  a  necessary
condition for sustainable growth. We learned that governments cannot sensibly seek to achieve their
social objectives - however worthy they may be - by simply borrowing, or “printing”, the money to
finance  their  expenditures,  but  need  to  balance  their  current  receipts  and  expenditures  over  the
economic cycle, borrowing only to finance productive investments. And we learned that the task of
shorter term economic stabilisation was most appropriately left to the operation of monetary policy.
That, very broadly speaking, is today’s macro-economic orthodoxy not just across a broad part of the
political spectrum in this country but in most of the rest of the world.
Now  many  people  were  initially  sceptical  about  this  change  of  emphasis  -  no  doubt  some  still  are.
Fiscal  responsibility,  including  tight  control  over  all  forms  of  expenditure,  for  example,  on  social
security  and  pension  provision,  and  on  health  and  education  -  and  monetary  policy  directed
specifically at consistent stable, low, inflation - all sounds somewhat austere. What in particular does it
mean in terms of its impact on the poorer sectors of our society?
Well I don’t for a moment suggest it is the solution to all our problems. But it certainly has helped us
to  achieve  a  significantly  better  macro-economic  performance  over  the  past  few  years,  and  that  in
itself has helped in addressing at least some of our social problems.
Over  the  eight  years  or  so  since  the  last  recession  in  the  early  1990s  retail  price  inflation  -  on  the
Government’s target measure - has averaged some 2¾%. That’s a lower rate for longer than anyone
can remember.
This  much  greater  degree  of  price  stability  is  a  “good  thing”  in  itself  -  economically  because  it
contributes to more rational, longer-term, decision making, but also socially, because it is typically the
poorer,  less  financially  sophisticated,  sectors  of  society  -  for  example  those  living  on  low  fixed
incomes - that suffer most from inflation.
But low inflation is not simply an end in itself. The real benefit is that alongside sustained stability we
have experienced the longest period of quarter-by-quarter growth since quarterly records began. Over
the whole period annual output growth has averaged a little over 2¾% which is significantly higher
than the earlier trend rate of around 2¼%. But more even than that, employment has increased steadily
by nearly 2½m people over the same period, so that the number in work is today the highest on record.
And unemployment has progressively fallen almost month by month on a claimant count basis (though
with a slight setback last month) and the rate of unemployment is just about the lowest rate we’ve seen
for about 25 years in the UK as a whole. And, notwithstanding the legitimate debate about the North-
South divide, unemployment is at around its lowest rate in every individual region of the UK for some
20 years. It’s not the Holy Grail but there’s no doubt that things are better than they were.
But  sadly  that  is  not  -  indeed  cannot  be  -  true  for  everyone.  Even  in  a  stable  macro-economic
environment, economic progress depends upon structural change with some industries and individual
businesses declining while others develop to take their place. That process of structural change is, of
course I understand, immensely painful for those businesses that run down and for those people who
lose their jobs  as a  result, even  if they  are  able to find new  activity  or  employment  in an  economy
BIS Review 110/2000
2
operating  close  to capacity.  What  is  more,  these structural  pressures  have  been  aggravated  over the
past few years by the strength of sterling’s exchange rate against both a range of weakening emerging
market currencies following the financial crisis which started in Asia three years or so ago and against
the weakening euro. The hard choice - and it is a hard choice - for macro-economic policy, or more
specifically  for  monetary  policy,  in  this  context  is  could  we  -  or  should  we  -  seek  to  protect  the
suffering sectors or failing businesses even if that meant consciously putting at risk the stability of the
economy as a whole? Few people - even in the suffering sectors - argue that we should - not because
of insensitivity to the economic and social distress that can result for those communities that are most
affected,  but  because  of  the  more  extensive  damage  that  it  would  be  likely  to  cause  to  the  wider
community.
I  said  a  moment  ago  macro-economic  stability  depends  upon  keeping  overall  demand  growth
continuously broadly in line with the underlying structural, supply-side, capacity of the  economy  to
meet that demand. There is not a lot frankly that macro-economic policy itself can do directly to affect
the  supply  side  which  is  obviously  crucial  in  determining  the  rate  of  growth  we  can  sustain.  That
depends fundamentally on the ability of management and the skills of the workforce, though it can be
importantly affected by the whole range of government policies beyond overall fiscal and monetary
policy. These policy choices are far more complicated than the more technical choices at the macro-
economic level - and they are way beyond my area of competence. But they are essential to the present
debate so let me offer a view, as it were from the sidelines.
A  key  issue  in  this  area  concerns  the  respective  roles  of  government  on  the  one  hand  and  private
markets  on  the  other.  And  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  tide  has  recently  been  flowing  in  favour  of
private markets - certainly as far as direct government involvement in the processes of production is
concerned.  The  extreme  example  is  of  course  the  collapse  of  communism  but  the  global  spread  of
privatisation, for example, is part of the same phenomenon. This change may have less to do with a
sudden dramatic  shift  in  philosophical  conviction  than  with a  broadly-based,  pragmatic, recognition
that  the  incentives  of  private  ownership  within  a  market  economy  make  for  greater  productive
efficiency and greater sensitivity to changing consumer demands. In other words, whether we like it or
not,  the  market  economy  is  seen  as  the  most  effective  mechanism  we  have  for  allocating  scarce
resources to where they can be most productively employed in meeting the needs of consumers as a
whole - and in that sense raising the underlying productive potential of the economy.
But of course that presumption is not absolute.
No  one  questions  the  role  of  government  in  meeting  the  collective  needs  of  society  as  a  whole,  in
relation to defence or law and order, for example, or in providing public heath and education services
or social security protection.
Nor  do  many  people  seriously  question  the  need  to  constrain  purely  free  market  behaviour  through
some  degree  of  regulation  of  employment  practices,  health  and  safety  standards,  or  competition  or
consumer protection law. The debate is about questions of degree.
All forms of government intervention involve costs - direct expenditures have to be paid for through
taxation and the costs of complying with regulation are born directly by the private sector, which is
why of course we hear so much about “red tape”. The net effect of particular forms of intervention
may enhance the capacity of the private sector to create wealth and employment - I imagine that most
people would generally regard public health and education services, for example, in this way, or forms
of regulation that enable markets to function  more  effectively.  But  even  then  there  are  questions  of
degree. And other forms of intervention may be more likely to reduce the wealth-creating capacity of
the  private  sector  by,  for  example,  blunting  incentives  either  to  provide  or  to  take  up  employment.
That is not, of course, to say that they are in any sense necessarily wrong, merely to point out that here
again  choices  to  be  made,  the  difficulty  often  being  to  know  where  to  strike  the  balance  between
conflicting objectives.
The question of relieving poverty needs to be addressed within this framework. Our social conscience
may  say  that  we  should  lean  more  towards  redistribution  in  favour  of  the  poorer  sectors  of  our
community generally, or in favour of those who are particularly disadvantaged in one way or another -
and goodness knows there are endless causes that in themselves are worthy of our collective support.
3
BIS Review 110/2000
But it is important to recognise that in doing so, we could reduce the wealth and income generating
capacity of the economy as a whole, and so reduce our ability to provide rising living standards to all
sectors of society, including rising absolute living standards of the poorer sectors we were seeking to
help. In other words, in trying to divide up the cake more equally we could, if we are not careful, end
up reducing its overall size. The trick it seems to me is to find ways of having our cake and eating it -
which some forms of government intervention can, as I say, achieve. But that’s a great deal easier said
than done. I only thank my lucky stars that I am not a politician!
Where then do the financial institutions of the City fit in to all of this? Well, money changers have
never been exactly popular. That is partly because of a perception that while the rest of the community
earn their living making things, bankers simply make money - and what’s more they make money by
using  “our”  money.  But  it  is  partly  because  of  a  perception  that  people  who  work  in  the  financial
services industry are pretty heartless people anyway.
In fact financial intermediation is a critically important component of a market economy. Behind the
popular - or perhaps unpopular - image of erratic and speculative, short-term, financial market trading,
which is in fact an important element in the process of price discovery - the essential role of financial
intermediation is to gather together our collective financial resources - our savings if you like - and to
direct their investment  into  those  activities  in  which  they  can  be  most  productivity  employed.  That
underlying activity - based upon expert and objective assessment of prospective profitability relative
to potential risk, clearly can, in itself, make a significant difference to the productive capacity  -  the
sustainable rate of growth - of the wider economy.
In addition, of course, financial intermediaries provide essential banking, insurance and other services,
without which the non-financial economy would find it impossible to function.
Of course it is true that financial intermediaries are motivated by profit. Prospective profitability is the
measure by which they decide how to direct resources to their most productive use, which is, as I say,
their  essential  economic  function.  Moreover,  they  are  for  the  most  part  lending,  or  investing,  or
advising  on  the  investment  of,  funds  which  ultimately  belong  to  others,  and  they  have  to  aim  to
maximise the return on those funds in the interest of their customers, as well as on their own account,
if they are to stay in business for the longer term.
Recent international history is littered with instances in which misallocation of financial resources to
non-productive  investment,  followed  by  disruption  of  the  financial  system,  has  resulted  in  massive
economic and consequent social damage. It was a major factor, for example, behind the Asian crisis
and its aftermath. As with other forms of economic activity the financial services sector is subject to
government intervention; indeed because of the sector’s critical importance such intervention - in the
form  of  regulation  and  supervision  of  both  the  prudential  behaviour  and  the  business  conduct  of
financial intermediaries - is more intrusive than in many other areas. And in this case, too, there is a
need to strike a balance between the needs of social protection in its various relevant forms and market
efficiency. Here, too, there are certainly areas where these objectives run in the same direction: market
regulation can, for  example,  improve  user  confidence  in  the  market  and  contribute  to  its  depth  and
liquidity; and minimum capital and liquidity standards applied to individual financial institutions can
protect not just the depositors or investors with that institution but the stability of the financial system
as a whole. But clearly intervention can - if we are not careful - go too far, imposing excessive costs or
reducing effective competition, which can impair the ability of the system of financial intermediation
to fulfil its essential purpose. It is a particular - if rather special - case of the general proposition which
I made earlier.
Statutory regulation is not, of course, the only means of seeking to reconcile free market and social
concerns.  In  many  areas  -  including  the  financial  services  sector  -  dialogue  and  persuasion  can  be
effective  complements  or  even  alternatives.  I  am  impressed,  for  example,  by  the  extent  to  which
sexual and racial equality is increasingly - even if not yet sufficiently - seen as a business issue - we
simply cannot afford, collectively or in the context of our individual business activities, to neglect any
sector of the community, if we  want  to improve  our  productive  capacity.  And in  the  context  of  the
financial  sector  more  specifically,  I  have  been  encouraged  by  the  progress  -  through  a  process  of
dialogue in which the Bank of England has been involved - towards a better understanding between
BIS Review 110/2000
4
the banks and other finance providers on the one hand and small and medium-sized businesses on the
other, which is certainly in my view contributing to the more effective functioning of this sector of the
market with positive social as well as economic results. I am hopeful that similar dialogue between
finance providers and users can contribute to better outcomes in other areas where there appear to be
deficiencies, including, for example, the financing of ethnic minority businesses, or the financing of
excluded  or  deprived  communities,  where  the  mainstream  financial  providers  need  to  work  closely
with community development financial institutions. Such dialogue is not only valuable in itself, it can
form a useful part of the process helping government to identify better-targeted means of encouraging
a closer alignment between social and economic objectives.
I am also encouraged  that  City-based  organisations are  becoming  increasingly  directly  involved  not
simply in a financing context with deprived communities - including those on our own doorstep. The
City has a long history of  charitable and  community  involvement.  But it is  my  impression  that this
involvement has been increasing in recent years, with many businesses recognising that it can not only
have an important impact on the communities that they are supporting, but a powerful impact, too, on
the motivation and morale of their own staff engaged in community projects. It is to encourage those
City organisations already active in this field, and, by drawing attention  to  it,  to  stimulate  others  to
become  more  actively  engaged,  that  the  Lord  Mayor,  Sir  Howard  Davies  of  the  FSA  and  I  have
together recently launched the “Heart of the City” project, which Andrew Buxton is now directing -
and which will culminate in a day of celebration of the City’s community involvement in June next
year. The positive response we have received from the City - including the churches of the City - and
our surrounding boroughs leads me to hope that this might become a regular event.
Let me finally, Chairman, turn to the international dimension of all this, where I know only too well,
from  first-hand  experience,  that  there  is  deeply-felt  concern,  sometimes  sadly  expressed  in  violent
protest, at aspects of the general economic approach which I have described, particularly as it bears on
the developing world through “globalisation”.
The protesters, it must be said, form something of a rainbow coalition. Some - at the violent end of the
spectrum  -  appear  to  be  pure  anarchists  who  are  clearly  against  the  present  system  but  offer  no
coherent alternative. Others - of whom there appear to be many more - seek to make either the more
general  point  that  the  present  international  financial  system  operates  unfairly  in  relation  to  poorer
countries or does not take adequate account of wider social concerns like poverty or the environment,
or they make particular points about the burden of third-world debt or particular development projects
which they see as having unacceptable social or environmental impact on the countries in which the
project is to be undertaken.
Many  of  these  issues  are  essentially  the international  dimension  of  issues  that  I  have  touched  upon
already  in  our  own  domestic  context  -  though  the  contrast  between  poverty  and  affluence  at  the
international level is of course even starker. And there is a good deal of underlying sympathy within
the  international  official  community  with  many  of  the  points  the  protesters  are  seeking  to  make  -
perhaps  more  than  they  appreciate.  As  a  matter  of  fact  I  can’t  remember  a  time  when  poverty
reduction has been higher on the agenda of the international financial institutions. But the same harsh
constraint - that we do not collectively have the resources to address all of these problems however
much  we  would  wish  to  do  so  -  applies.  There  is  the  same  need  therefore  to  make  hard  choices
between alternative means, and the international process for making those choices is inevitably more
complicated than in our national environment.
To take some examples, there is substantial evidence that increasingly free world trade and increasing
freedom of international capital flows are contributing to unprecedented rates of growth in the global
economy  as  a  whole  and  more  rapidly  rising  living  standards  in  almost  every  region  of  the  global
economy. It is certainly possible to argue even so that the free trade playing field remains tilted against
poorer countries, or that it should be tilted more in their favour: distinguishing between self-interested
protectionism and “fairness” or equality of competition is not wholly straightforward. But there would
be a real cost to all of us, including particularly the poorer countries, if we were to be tempted to throw
the baby out with the bath water and retreat behind trade barriers.
5
BIS Review 110/2000
Similarly  we  have  recently  seen  all  too  clearly  the  damage  that  can  be  caused  by  the  volatility  of
international capital flows - but we need to set that against the positive benefits - in terms of potential
growth rates - that had previously resulted from massively greater private sector capital investment in
many of the emerging markets, and which has now resumed. Certainly we need to reform the system
to try to ensure greater stability - and a great deal of effort has been expended on precisely that over
the  past few  years  -  by  developing  standards  and  codes  of  best  practice  by  national  authorities,  for
example,  designed  to  help  them  to  help  themselves  to  take  greater  advantage  of  the  opportunities
presented by globalisation. More certainly needs to be - and is being - done, recognising the particular
problems  facing  different  countries  at  different  stages  of  development.  But  it  would  be  a  terrible
mistake  to  turn  the  clock  back  and  retreat  from  “globalisation”  into  a  world  of  nation  states  linked
together predominantly by official financing. None of the poorer countries themselves are arguing for
that, yet that is what some of the protests seem to imply.
And  so  it  is  with  some  of  the  more  specific  issues  -  like  pushing  for  higher  labour  standards  in
developing countries, which is fine up to a point, but if pushed too far could mean lower activity and
higher unemployment in those countries; or debt forgiveness not tied to programs designed to improve
the lot of the people living in the debtor countries; or the appropriateness of particular development
projects and so on - we cannot simply focus on particular aspects of the problem in isolation, we need
to examine both the pros and the cons in each case to try to find the best means to what is quite likely
to be an agreed end. And dialogue in my view is likely to be a better and more productive approach to
that than attempts at direct action.
Mr  Chairman,  it  is  absolutely  right  that  not  just  the  Church  but  anyone  with  a  sense  of  humanity
should  react  against  the  extent  of  the  inequality  that  we  see  around  us  locally,  nationally  and
internationally. It is, however, wrong in my view to attribute that inequality simply to the nature of the
financial system. No doubt that system has its deficiencies which we need continually to address. But
by  and  large  it  is  the  best  system  that  we  have  -  or  indeed  that  we  have  had.  Within  it  we  have
collectively  to  make  all  kinds  of trade-offs  between  what  may  be  seen,  at  least  in  the  short  run,  as
conflicting objectives. In that process we must all be free to follow our consciences and express our
concerns. But I hope that my remarks this evening may have persuaded some of you at least that there
are rarely - in this field as in many others - obvious and absolute right answers. We are fortunate, I
believe, in having a democratic process through which our concerns can be weighed in the balance.
BIS Review 110/2000
6
