Bank of Japan’s October report of recent economic
and financial developments1
Bank of Japan, Communication, 16 October 2000.
 The Bank’s view2
Japan’s  economy  is  recovering  gradually,  with  corporate  profits  and  business  fixed  investment
continuing to increase.
With regard to exogenous demand, public investment is starting to decrease since the implementation
of  the  supplementary  budget  for  fiscal  1999  has  peaked  out.  Net  exports  (real  exports  minus  real
imports)  continue  to  follow  a  moderate  upward  trend  due  to  steady  developments  in  overseas
economies. As regards domestic private demand, business fixed investment is on an increasing trend.
The  recovery  in  private  consumption  continues  to  be  weak  as  a  whole  through  lack  of  notable
improvements in employment and income conditions, although there are somewhat positive signs in
some indicators. Housing investment is mostly unchanged.
Reflecting such developments in final demand, industrial production is increasing. Corporate profits
and  sentiment  continue  to  improve,  and  the  number  of  firms  that  take  positive  action,  such  as
increasing  the  amount  of  fixed  investment,  is  increasing,  especially  in  high-growth  sectors.  Income
conditions  of  households still  remain  severe but regular  and  overtime  payments  as  well  as  new  job
offers  continue  to  increase  in  line  with  the  recovery  in  corporate  activities,  and  compensation  of
employees has stopped decreasing.
As  for  the  outlook,  public  investment  is  expected  to  decrease.  While  the  expansion  in  overseas
economies is likely to continue, the increase in exports is likely to slow down as restocking activity in
Asian economies has peaked out. Meanwhile, imports are projected to continue increasing, particularly
for  those  of  information-related  goods.  Therefore,  real  exports  will  level  off  for  a  while.  In  the
corporate sector, firms still strongly feel that they have excess equipment and that they should reduce
their  debts  to  restore  financial  soundness.  However,  it  is  very  likely  that  fixed  investment  in  high-
growth  sectors,  including  those  related  with  information  technology  services,  will  increase  as
corporate  profits  continue  to  recover.  Moreover,  an  improvement  in  corporate  profits  will  increase
household  income  and  this  in  turn  is  expected  to  boost  private  consumption.  However,  the  pace  of
recovery in household income will be modest for the time being, since firms’ perceptions of excess
employment still persist, and thus significant changes have not been observed in their efforts to reduce
personnel expenses. Overall, the economy is likely to recover gradually led mainly by business fixed
investment,  while  the  developments  in  crude  oil  prices  as  well  as  foreign  and  domestic  capital
markets, along with their effects on the economy, need careful monitoring. In addition, the favorable
financial  environment  created  partly  by  the  Bank’s  sustaining  easy  monetary  stance  is  expected  to
continue underpinning the economy.
With regard to prices, import prices are rising, reflecting an increase in international commodity prices
such as crude oil prices since April. Domestic wholesale prices, notwithstanding the rise in prices of
petroleum products reflecting the increase in crude oil prices, are mostly unchanged mainly due to the
decrease in prices of electric machinery. Meanwhile, consumer prices continue to be somewhat weak
1 This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting was
held on 13 October 2000.
2 The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy
Meeting held on 13 October as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review 88/2000
owing  to  the  decline  in  prices  of  imported  products  reflecting  the  past  appreciation  of  the  yen,
although  prices  of  petroleum  products  and  electricity  increased  from  the  rise  in  crude  oil  prices.
Corporate service prices are still falling slowly.
As for the outlook on prices, downward pressure on prices stemming from weak demand is declining
significantly  while  an  economic  recovery  is  expected  to  continue  moderately.  Upward  pressure  on
prices is likely to arise temporarily from the increase in crude oil prices. On the other hand, in addition
to the declining trend of machinery prices due to technological innovations, the decline in prices of
consumer  goods  arising  from  the  past  appreciation  of  the  yen  and  the  streamlining  of  distribution
channels  will  exert  downward  pressure  on  prices.  Thus,  prices  overall  are  expected  to  be  stable  or
weak somewhat.
In  the  financial  market,  the  overnight  call  rate  is  generally  moving  around  0.25%.  The  amount  of
funds outstanding in the call money market has increased slightly.
As for interest rates on term instruments, those on contracts maturing beyond the year-end have risen
somewhat. The Japan premium remains negligible.
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  are  generally  moving  in  the  range  of  1.8-1.9%.  The  yield
spread between private bonds (bank debentures and corporate bonds) and government bonds remains
mostly unchanged as a whole.
Stock prices dropped from early October and are recently moving around the lowest level since the
beginning of this year.
In  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  yen  depreciated  gradually  from  the  end  of  September  and  the
yen-dollar exchange rate temporarily rose to ¥109-110. The yen is currently being traded in the range
of ¥107-109 to the US dollar.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks continue to be more active in extending loans mainly
to blue-chip companies, while carefully evaluating the credit risks involved.
On the other hand, the improvement in economic activities has not stimulated corporate demand for
external funds, since firms’ cash flow is at a high level in parallel with recovery in profits. Moreover,
firms continue to reduce their debts as part of their balance-sheet restructuring measures. As a result,
credit demand in the private sector has continued to be basically stagnant.
In view of this, the underlying tone of private banks’ lending remains sluggish. Recently, however, the
expansion in the year-to-year decline seems to be ceasing. Issuance of corporate bonds and CPs has
been steady.
Money stock (M2 + CDs) grew faster in September compared with the previous month on a year-on-
year basis.
Recently, funding costs for firms are somewhat increasing, due to the rise in money market rates after
the termination of the zero interest rate policy.
In  this  financial  environment,  there  seem  to  be  no  substantial  changes  in  the  lending  attitude  of
financial institutions and easing of corporate financing conditions.
BIS Review 88/2000
2
