Willem F Duisenberg: The international role of the euro
Keynote speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, at the European
Banking Congress, held in Frankfurt on 17 November 2000.
 First of all, I should like to thank the organisers of this European Banking Congress for inviting me to
speak  before  such  a  distinguished  audience.  I  intend  to  deal  with  the  two  major  topics  of  today’s
discussion,  namely  European  integration  and  international  financial  market  developments,  by
addressing the role of the euro as an international currency.
The title of this session, “the euro second to one” or “second to none”, is certainly appealing, although
it might be more apt for a beauty contest than for a cool-headed assessment of the role of the euro. It is
true  that,  in  the  past,  some  economists  advocated  a  Darwinian-style  competition  among  privately
issued currencies, resulting in the survival of the fittest.
However,  developments  so  far  have  confirmed  that  the  use  of  currencies,  both  domestically  and
internationally,  remains  very  closely  associated  with  state  sovereignty.  This  holds  true for the  euro,
which has been described by some as “a currency without a state”. I shall return to this aspect later in
my  presentation.  Given  this  link  to  sovereignty,  the  use  of  a  currency  is  very  much  influenced  by
public policies, even in the current market-friendly environment created by increasing globalisation. It
is true that public policies are subject to constant scrutiny by the financial markets, which introduces
an  element  of  competition  among  these  policies.  I  personally  see  this  market  discipline  as  a  sound
incentive to pursue the right policies. As such, one could consider the international use of the euro as
one  yardstick  among  others  against  which  to  measure  the  appropriateness  and  credibility  of  public
policies conducted in the euro area.
I should like to concentrate on these policy aspects in the first part of my presentation. Then, although
statistical evidence remains scarce at this early stage of the euro’s development, I should like to review
briefly the international use of the euro by the private and official sectors.
Does the international role of the euro matter?
The  first  question  I  should  like  to  address  concerns  the  ECB’s  policy  stance  with  regard  to  the
international use of the euro. This is a legitimate question, especially as some countries have tended to
promote the internationalisation of their currency in the past. Such a promotion policy was motivated
by  several  factors,  including  increased  income  from  seigniorage,  easier  financing  of  balance  of
payments  deficits  and  enhanced  opportunities  for  the  development  of  domestic  financial  markets.
Nevertheless, these potential advantages should not be overrated. The additional seigniorage revenue
generated  by  the  international  use  of  a  currency  remains  limited.  For  the  most  widely  used
international  currency,  the  US  dollar,  seigniorage  originating  from  the  use  of  the  dollar  by
non-residents  is  estimated  at  around  1%  of  GDP.  As  for  balance  of  payments  financing,  the
international use of a currency may alleviate the external constraint for some time, but it cannot free an
economy from market discipline. Finally, the development of the domestic capital market can be seen
as a precondition as much as the outcome of the international use of a currency.
There are also historical examples of countries that resisted the internationalisation of their currency,
particularly in view of increased uncertainties in the conduct of macroeconomic policies in general and
monetary policy in particular. For its part, the ECB has adopted a neutral stance. It considers that the
use  of  the  euro  as  an  international  currency  is  and  should  remain  the  outcome  of  economic  and
financial developments and policies inside and outside the euro area. The ECB holds the view that it
would  be  neither  feasible  nor  desirable  to  directly  promote  or  hinder  the  internationalisation  of  the
euro.
1
BIS Review 103/2000
This should not be interpreted as implying that the international dimension of the euro is irrelevant to
the ECB. Indeed, there is at least one reason to monitor the international use of the euro, namely to
take into account potential spillover effects on monetary policy. In particular, one can imagine that the
internationalisation of the euro may have an influence on monetary policy transmission mechanisms.
International developments in the use of the euro can enhance the breadth, depth and efficiency of euro
area financial markets and lead to a reduction in transmission lags. It is also possible to imagine that
monetary  aggregates  may  become  more  difficult  to  interpret  when  part  of  the  money  stock  is  held
outside the euro area.
However,  the  impact  of  the  internationalisation  of  the  euro  on  monetary  policy  should  not  be
overemphasised. First, economic theory and historical experience suggest that the international use of
a currency tends to change only very gradually over time. Second, the ECB’s monetary policy strategy
is sufficiently robust to take into account and accommodate potential implications of the international
role of the euro.
Apart  from  its  monetary  policy  implications,  the  international  use  of  the  euro  may  also  provide  a
yardstick with which to assess the appropriateness and credibility of public policies conducted in the
euro area. Of course, the euro can in part rely on the track record of its 11 legacy currencies. At the
same time, the euro is a new currency used in the second largest economic area of the world. This size
factor, particularly as far as the euro area capital markets are concerned, may influence cross-border
uses  of  the  euro,  both  by  residents  and  non-residents.  The  internationalisation  of  the  euro  will  be
affected by the soundness and credibility of the economic policies pursued in the euro area.
This  leads  me  to  touch  upon  the  notion  of  the  euro  being  “a  currency  without  a  state”,  which  I
mentioned in my introduction. In this respect, one has to recognise the uniqueness of the overall policy
framework in the euro area. It combines monetary policy conducted at the Community level with other
macroeconomic  and  structural  policies  that  remain  national  competencies.  I  do  not  see  this  unique
policy  framework  as  a  factor  which  potentially  hampers  the  acceptance  and  use  of  the  euro
domestically and internationally. Such a framework is consistent with the current level of institutional
and political integration in the Community. Even if it may arguably be improved, it has already shown
its effectiveness, based on some basic principles. I should like to recall just three of those principles
that are of relevance to my presentation today. First, a clear assignment of policy responsibilities, both
in  terms  of  well-defined  objectives  and  appropriate  means  to  fulfil  them,  is  required  on  grounds  of
efficacy, transparency and accountability. With regard to monetary policy, this is ensured through the
ECB’s  independence  in  defining  and  implementing  the  euro  area’s  monetary  policy  and  related
functions.  Second,  there  is  a  need  for  the  coordination  of  fiscal  and  structural  policies  that  are
conducted at the national level. In this respect, and without prejudice to their sovereignty, the Member
States are increasingly taking into account a euro area-wide perspective when preparing their national
policies.  Third,  this  coordination  should  be  based  on  best  practices  through  the  selection  of  those
elements  of  national  policies  that  are  commonly  regarded  as  being  most  efficient.  This  approach  is
broadly similar to the one used to design the ECB’s monetary policy framework, drawing on the track
record of the national central banks.
Evidence of the international use of the euro by the private sector
Turning to less policy-related and more factual considerations, I should now like to recall briefly some
developments  in  the  international  role  of  the  euro  since  its  introduction  at  the  start  of  1999.  I  shall
begin with private sector use and shall then turn to the public sector. At the outset, let me make two
preliminary points. The first is that my overview will only be partial, as statistical information is not
available for all international uses of the euro. The second is that the flamboyant rhetoric used in some
quarters to present the euro as the competitor of the US dollar may have generated false expectations
that  the  international  role  of  the  euro  would  develop  dramatically  from  the  date  of  its  creation.  As
emphasised from the beginning by the ECB, these expectations were unjustified. History teaches us
that the internationalisation of a currency is a gradual process.
Starting with the overview of private uses, I would consider that the role of the euro in financing and
investment operations by non-residents is one of the most interesting aspects. Moreover, it is of direct
BIS Review 103/2000
2
relevance  to  today’s  audience,  which  consists  of  many  prominent  participants  in  the  international
financial markets.
The most complete data are available for the financing side. Statistics on international debt securities
show that net issuance by non-residents denominated in euro doubled between 1998 and 1999. It was
particularly  strong  in  comparison  with  other  currencies.  Figures  for  the  first  half  of  2000  indicate
continued  strong  activity  in  euro-denominated  securities  issuance,  although  there  was  a  moderate
decline  from  the  peak  reached  in  1999.  This  compares  with  fairly  low  issuance  of  Japanese
yen-denominated  paper.  Interestingly,  euro-denominated  debt  securities  issuance  had  a  variety  of
origins,  with  approximately  75%  of  borrowing  originating  from  non-euro  area  advanced  economies
such as the United States, the United Kingdom, Sweden and Japan. The remaining 25% of issuance
stemmed  from  emerging  market  economies.  Moreover,  both  private  and  public  sector  issuers  were
active.
Developments have been more subdued in the banking sector, where euro-denominated liabilities in
total cross-border liabilities witnessed a moderate increase, with a share of around 20%. Here again,
the euro comes second to the US dollar, in which more than 50% of outstanding  cross-border bank
liabilities are denominated. The yen ranks third with a share somewhat below 10%.
Turning to the assets side, we come to the use of the euro as an investment currency. Unfortunately,
statistical evidence is generally limited here. An analysis conducted by the ECB indicates that there
was  some  growth  in the  use  of  the  euro  as  an  international  investment  currency  over  the  course  of
1999.  In  the  banking  sector,  the  volume  of  international  assets  denominated  in  euro  increased  only
slightly, roughly in line with developments on the liabilities side.
One might try to examine the link between the role of the euro in international financial markets and
recent trends in the euro area’s balance of payments. Of course, there is no one-to-one correspondence
between the two concepts. Nevertheless, one can observe a correlation, or co-movement, between the
international role of the euro in financial markets and the euro area financial account. In particular, the
euro area capital outflows in 1999  are consistent  with  indications  that the  euro  was  used  more  as  a
financing  than  as  an investment currency.  Likewise,  smaller  net capital  outflows in  the first  half  of
2000  would  also  appear  consistent  with  a  more  balanced  use  of  the  euro  as  a  financing  and  an
investment  currency.  These  findings  are  still  preliminary,  but  they  confirm  the  relevance  of
developments reflecting the international use of the euro.
Let me now touch upon some other international private uses of the euro. Examples are the role of the
euro  as  a  payment  currency  in  the  exchange  of  goods  and  services,  as  an  invoicing  currency  in
international trade, as a vehicle currency in foreign exchange markets and as a quotation currency in
international  commodities  markets.  Despite  the  scarcity  of  reliable  statistical  evidence,  a  few
observations can be made. First, the US dollar continues to play a leading role in these areas. Second,
rapid changes cannot be expected, as these functions of an international currency are driven by scale
and  network  effects  and  therefore  tend  to  develop  only  slowly  over  time.  Third,  the  euro  has  a
prominent role in those transactions that directly involve euro area residents.  For  example,  the  euro
tends to be used for invoicing or payments linked to trade flows to or from the euro area.
Rounding  off  this  overview  of  the  international  use  of  the  euro  by  the  private  sector,  I  should  also
mention  foreign  currency  cash  holdings  in  a  number  of  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries,  in
which the Deutsche Mark takes the lion’s share. These cash holdings will be converted into euro as the
banknotes  and  coins  are  introduced  in  a  year’s  time.  The  stability  of  the  euro  indeed  makes  it  an
attractive medium of exchange and store of value for the general public in countries that have a history
of unstable prices. Nevertheless, as confidence grows in the domestic monetary policies conducted in
these countries, this specific international role of the euro should not develop further.
Evidence on the international use of the euro by the public sector
Not only the private sector, but also the public sector may use the euro as an international currency.
This  encompasses  the  use  of  the  euro  for  official  reserve  holdings  and  as  a  reference  currency  for
exchange  rate  arrangements.  Statistics related  to  official  reserves  were  published in the  most  recent
3
BIS Review 103/2000
International Monetary Fund Annual Report, and indicated that the share of the euro was around 13%
at the end of 1999. This is comparable with the weight of the legacy currencies one year earlier. The
fact that stability is prevailing is consistent with the notion that central banks tend to be conservative
in managing their reserve holdings.
Remaining  in  the  sphere  of  international  official  reserves,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  has
recently decided on a new valuation method for the special drawing rights (SDRs), which comes into
force  on  1  January  2001.  The  SDR  basket  traditionally  comprised  five  currencies  of  individual
countries,  including  the  Deutsche  Mark  and  the  French  franc.  The  weight  of  each  currency  in  the
basket was determined on the basis of trade and financial data of these countries. In order to reflect the
new economic area resulting from the introduction of the euro, the SDR basket will henceforth include
the  euro,  instead  of  the  Deutsche  Mark  and  the  French  franc.  Its  weight  will  be  based  on  the
importance of the euro area as a single economic entity. Similarly, the EURIBOR will be substituted
for the German and French national interest rates in the determination of the SDR’s interest rate. These
modifications underscore how the official international financial community is gradually adjusting to
the new reality of the euro.
As a last point, let me deal with the use of the euro as a reference currency for exchange rate regimes
adopted by third countries. Today, over 50 countries are managing exchange rate arrangements  that
include  a  reference  to  the  euro.  This  involves  a  variety  of  regimes,  ranging  from  very  tight  pegs
(ie currency boards) to managed floating policies. Geographically, these countries are located on the
European and African continents. This is a difference with the US dollar, which is also used by a few
countries outside the Western Hemisphere. The intensive trade and financial links with the euro area
are the main factor behind the choice of the euro in the definition of exchange rate policies. For some
countries, the European Union accession process provides an additional impetus to select an exchange
rate arrangement based on the euro. I should highlight that the choice of a euro-based exchange rate
arrangement is a unilateral decision, and does not involve any commitment on the part of the ECB.
However,  this  use  of  the  euro  as  a  reference  currency  may  be  seen  as  a  sign  of  confidence  in  the
stability-oriented macroeconomic policies of the euro area.
Conclusions
Summarising  almost  two  years  of  experience  with  the  euro,  one  might  consider  that  it  has  started
playing an international role in line with the economic and financial size of the euro area in a rather
smooth manner.
As  I  have  highlighted  today,  developments  in  the  international  use  of  the  euro  are,  of  course,  only
gradual.  Nevertheless,  looking  ahead,  one  can  expect  the  international  role  of  the  euro  to  develop
further. An established track record of the Eurosystem with reference to its primary objective of price
stability and continuing integration of financial markets in the euro area will undoubtedly contribute to
the further internationalisation of the euro.
BIS Review 103/2000
4
