Urban Bäckström: Swedish economy in transition
Speech by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Board of
Directors  and  President  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Independent  Academy  of
Building & Construction, on 2 October 2000.
 Thank you for inviting me to talk with you this evening about the  Swedish  economy  and  monetary
policy. The issues I have chosen to consider are why the Swedish economy is performing so well and
what can be done to ensure that this continues.
As  you  know,  output  and  employment  are  rising  rapidly  at  present.  Annual  output  growth  has
averaged 3% over the past six years and the current rate seems to be somewhere between 3 and 4%.
Unemployment has come down and is still falling to levels that few had believed possible some years
ago,  particularly  in  view  of  the  high  European  rate.  At  the  same  time  we  have  seen  that  even
comparatively low nominal wage increases can result in higher real wages. As a matter of fact, the real
wage increases have exceeded most people’s expectations and been higher than for many years.
Moreover,  inflation  has  remained  low  in  spite  of  all  this.  But  monetary  policy  may  still  have
challenges to face as resource utilisation in the Swedish economy becomes increasingly strained. The
current situation also contains a number of risks that have to be assessed.
Stable economic policy interacts with structural changes and IT
In order to see why the Swedish economy is doing better than it has been for a very long time, we need
to consider how economic policy has been realigned in the past decade and a half.
Credit and currency markets have been deregulated, the tax system has been reformed, components of
the system of transfers have been modified and competitive pressure has increased. All this has helped
to improve the workings of our economy.
Moreover,  price  stability  is  now  monetary  policy’s  statutory  objective  and  it  has  been  explicitly
assigned to what has become even a formally independent central bank. Low inflation is admittedly
not an ultimate objective for economic policy in general. It serves instead as an instrument. All those
who experienced the economic situation in Sweden in the 1970s  and  1980s  know  that  inflation can
never  be  associated  with  an  economic  development  that  is  lastingly  favourable.  That  is  why  price
stability  is  an  integral  part  of  any  economic  policy’s  strategy  for  rising  prosperity  and  high
employment.
In  order  to  provide  a  stable  and  credible  framework  for  the  new  direction  of  economic  policy,  the
government  budget  was  successfully  consolidated.  Difficult  political  considerations  and  decisions
were  involved  in  this  process  and  opinions  may  differ  about  particular  items  or  aspects  of  the
consolidation policy; but that does not detract from the main impression of a successful outcome in the
sense that economic policy’s commitment to stability was rendered credible.
A further component of economic policy’s new direction was Sweden’s membership of the European
Union  in  1995.  Sectors  that  had  previously  been  protected  were  now  exposed  to  international
competition. Stronger competition in a number of fields meant that prices for some goods and services
began to be adjusted downwards towards European levels. This process may continue in the years to
come, though we cannot take that for granted. There are a good many goods and services for which
prices in Sweden are higher than elsewhere in Europe.
The point I want to make is that in many respects the favourable economic trend in recent years stems
from the economic policy realignment that began in the 1980s and has been in progress ever  since.
This conclusion has two positive implications.
1
BIS Review 84/2000
One is that the measures which have been taken have most probably contributed to what is happening
now.
The other is that a continued policy orientation on stability and credibility can yield even better results
in the future.
In the 1990s the new direction of economic policy was accompanied by rapid, worldwide advances in
the new information technology, which is being adopted  successively  in  various  sectors in  Sweden.
This has lowered the thresholds for establishing and running companies. Existing production processes
can be made more efficient. The internet has made information more accessible and many firms can
cut transaction costs. There is less need to tie up capital by holding large stocks.
The same applies in principle to consumers, who can search the internet quickly for inexpensive goods
and  services.  It  is  still  the  case,  however,  that  the  price  difference  between  products  sold  on  the
internet and in shops is relatively small. But this will probably change as the internet is developed and
more people use it.
Sweden, spearheaded by the telecom company Ericsson, is one of the countries where the IT sector is
large. This sector is also contributing a growing share to our annual output. Sweden is, moreover, one
of the countries that is spending most on the introduction of new information technology in various
economic sectors.
The  introduction  and  development  of  information  technology  in  Sweden  is  facilitated  by  a  capital
market  that  is  efficient,  particularly  as  regards  the  supply  of  venture  capital.  I  mention  this  to
underscore the part that the deregulation of capital and currency markets in the 1980s is playing for the
path of growth today. Another crucial factor has been the removal of transaction taxes on equity and
bonds after an experimental phase in the late 1980s; that, too, is worth recalling as the old idea of a
Tobin tax is being revived in some quarters.
Improvements in productivity and flexibility
National accounts data from Statistics Sweden suggest that our economy is now capable of growing
faster than in recent decades. It looks as though the higher productivity growth is not only attributable
to  rising  activity.  In  the  period  from  1974  to  1993,  for  example,  productivity  growth  averaged  less
than 1.5% a year, while since 1994 the average rate has been almost 2%. This is what lies behind the
common,  though  not  yet  entirely  certain,  estimate  that  the  potential  rate  of  GDP  growth  is  now
between 2 and 2.5%.
At  the  same  time  it  should  be  noted  that  there  are  still  no  clear  signs  of  an  accelerating  rate  of
productivity growth such as we have seen in the United States. I say this even though I believe that
one cause of the difference between the United States and Europe in this respect has to do with how
the statistics are obtained. Such a process could conceivably come about in the Swedish economy, too,
but  I  suggest  we  wait  until  that  happens  before  incorporating  it  in  our  expectations  and  policy
decisions. Our economy is developing favourably enough as it is.
Given  certain  assumptions,  there  are,  in  principle,  two  ways  in  which  labour  productivity  can  be
increased.
Firstly, the growth rate of total factor productivity can rise. Total factor productivity seems  to  have
been  on  an  upward  trend  since  1993,  which  implies  a  successive  improvement  in  production
technology.  That  in  turn  may  mean  that  information  technology,  for  example,  has  been  gradually
increasing its contribution to output.
Secondly, labour productivity can be affected by changes in capital intensity. A rising input of capital
equipment  per  employee,  for  instance,  means  that  each  person  can  produce  more.  Historically,
increased  capital  intensity  has  often  been  a  characteristic  of  periods  when  the  growth  of  labour
productivity was notably high.
During the present upswing, however, capital intensity has been more or less constant. So, at least to
date,  this  mechanism  cannot  account  for  our  increased  productivity  growth.  It  is  not  the  case  that
BIS Review 84/2000
2
business investment has been sluggish. On the contrary, investment growth, excluding the real estate
sector,  has  been  higher than for  a  long  time.  But  as  employment  has  risen  equally  strongly,  capital
intensity has been unchanged so far. But it would not be surprising if investment growth, and thereby
growth of the capital stock, were to accelerate as the labour market becomes more and more strained
and the utilisation of capital resources becomes high.
A growth process driven by rising investment and productivity can result in good circles.  Increased
demand  generated  from  the  supply  side  leads  to  a  favourable  composition  of  demand  that  tends  to
strengthen the supply side even more. Let me mention some examples.
One effect of higher productivity growth is an upward adjustment of future profit expectations and that
often  leads  to  rising  share  prices.  Higher  corporate  values  stimulate  the  companies  in  question  to
invest still more and also make it possible for new establishments to raise venture capital for continued
expansion.  Meanwhile,  shareholding  households  see  an  appreciation  of  their  net  assets,  at  least  on
paper.  Increased  wealth  and  optimistic  expectations  of  the  future  lead  to  a  stronger  growth  of
consumption.
Another consequence of higher productivity growth is that inflation tends to be held back in that unit
labour costs are curbed. Labour costs are the dominant item of expenditure in the economy as a whole.
Everything suggests that the higher productivity growth in Sweden has contributed to the favourable
economic development since the end of the crisis in the early 1990s. But there are other explanations,
too.
Labour market working better than expected
One is the workings of the labour market. Many studies have shown that, at least in a formal sense,
Sweden’s labour market is characterised by more or less the same rigidities as continental Europe. So
there was every reason to suspect that after the crisis in the early 1990s, unemployment would also
stick at a high level in Sweden. Here are some of the grounds for this:
• 
Labour demand  is liable  to  be  low  in a  labour  market  that  is  heavily  regulated.  Firms  are
reluctant to recruit because of uncertainty about being able to cut costs if economic activity
were to decline.
 Labour supply may be affected after unemployment has risen as steeply as it did in the early
1990s.  People  are  excluded  from  the  labour  market.  Long-term  unemployment  may  leave
competence out of line with what firms are now looking for. The determination to find a job
can  be  affected  both  by  a  long  period  of  unemployment  and  by  the  structure  of
unemployment insurance.
To  date,  however,  the  economic  upswing  in  Sweden  suggests  that  the  labour  market  is  functioning
better than one might expect. That in itself is a sign that the output gap has been larger than estimated
earlier, so that our economy has coped for a time with higher GDP demand.
It is conceivable that the crisis in the early 1990s taught firms that they can, in fact, cut costs if they
need to. That  may  mean  that  their propensity  to recruit  now  that  demand  for  goods  and  services  is
rising  is  stronger  than  might  have  been  feared.  Moreover,  various  labour  market  measures,  the
willingness  of  the  parties  to  improve  the  wage  bargaining  system  and,  not  least,  the  real  wage
increases  in  recent  years,  may  have  strengthened  the  propensity  to  look  for  work  as  well  as  the
possibility of finding it.
Of course, this process cannot continue for ever. Sooner or later, shortage figures will show that there
is  simply  no  additional  labour  available.  To  date  this  year  the  number  in  employment  has  risen  by
70,000 from the year before, which is over 50,000 persons more than the underlying increase in labour
supply.  Unemployment  is  accordingly  falling  and  more  and  more  persons  who  did  not  seek  work
actively before are now available in the labour market. While that is a good thing, the time will come
- though when that will be is not certain - when the available supply of labour is smaller than the jobs
3
BIS Review 84/2000
that are vacant. Then, if not before, wage costs are likely to accelerate and pull the rate of inflation up.
That must not happen, of course, and in good time the Riksbank will do what it can to prevent it.
Certain  signs  of  shortages  are  already  evident  in  some  industries  and  occupational  groups  in  some
regions. Moreover, the matching process in the labour market is now working a little less smoothly
- filling job vacancies is taking somewhat longer. In general, however, the Swedish economy does not
yet  appear  to  have  reached  a  situation  where  labour  shortages  are  widespread.  At  the  same  time,
experience from our Nordic neighbours has shown that in an economic upswing such a situation can
arise relatively quickly. So this calls for heightened attention from the Riksbank.
Inflation held back this year by deregulations and competition
Besides higher productivity growth and a more efficient labour market, other positive supply shocks
have helped to achieve the rapid output growth without generating inflationary impulses. A positive
supply  shock  is  one  that  tends  to  lower  the  price  level - slowing  the  rate  of  inflation  more  or  less
temporarily - at the same time as it stimulates demand. A single change’s impact on both inflation and
GDP growth is normally transitory. All else equal, inflation moves up to the earlier rate and demand
growth falls back when the shock has subsided.
Higher productivity growth due to new technology is an example of a positive supply shock. In recent
years, however, similar effects have come from the deregulation of electricity and telecom markets, as
well  as  from  the  EU’s  agricultural  reform.  Meanwhile,  the  temporarily  lower  rate  of  inflation  has
meant  that  real  wage  growth  has  exceeded  expectations  and  thereby  acted  as  a  general  demand
stimulus. Strictly speaking, as I mentioned, the latter effects fade away, even in the case of a series of
positive shocks that last for some time.
This is countered by the oil price increases, an example - at least in part - of a negative supply shock. It
should be added, however, that a part of the process which the rising oil price represents has to do with
the better global activity, which normally leads to a general increase in commodity prices. The higher
oil prices accordingly tend to push prices up and curb output. But so far the combined impact of all the
supply shocks seems to be positive: temporarily lower inflation and stronger demand growth.
A third factor that has contributed to the favourable price trend is the general increase in competition.
This  has  made  it  difficult  for  firms  to  raise  their  prices  in  order  to  improve  profit  margins  as  they
usually do in this phase of the business cycle. To some extent this may also be because firms know
that price impulses from that quarter will inevitably cause the Riksbank to raise the instrumental rate.
To achieve a reasonable return on capital, firms are obliged instead to make production more efficient
and that tends to result in better productivity.
Many  factors  have  accordingly  contributed  to  our  economy’s  good  performance  in  recent  years.  A
number of favourable circumstances have coincided, making it possible to combine high growth with
price stability.
Demand must be adjusted to growth sooner or later
Looking  ahead,  most  things  suggest  that  the  rapid  growth  can  continue  for  a  time.  But  in  the  end
- though it is not clear when - demand for goods, services and labour will have to slacken and move
more in line with what the long-term  growth  trend can sustain.  Letting  demand  be  too high  for  too
long  raises the  prospect  of  accelerating  inflation  and  ultimately  a recession,  with  falling  output  and
rising  unemployment.  The  Riksbank  must  therefore  do  its  utmost  to  avoid  marked  fluctuations  in
economic activity and endeavour to create conditions for sustainable growth.
Demand can come into line with long-term growth as a result of a spontaneous economic slowdown,
for instance in connection with a slackening of growth in the rest of the world. It can also result from a
fall-off  in  household  demand  for  durables  after  the  high  procurements  in  recent  years.  A  further
possibility is that the positive supply shocks fade, which would admittedly involve some increase in
inflation but also a downward effect on demand.
BIS Review 84/2000
4
But  interest  rate  increases  by  the  Riksbank  may  also  be  needed  to  assist  demand’s  adjustment  to
long-term  growth.  With  the  past  and  present  upheavals  in  the  Swedish  economy,  however,  it  is
particularly  difficult  to  be  clear  about  the  exact  timing.  The  Riksbank  should  naturally  not  raise
interest rates too early but not too late either. In my opinion, the time for another increase is coming
closer, at least as long as demand growth remains strong. But today I find it hard to envisage a main
scenario that unequivocally threatens price stability in the period of one to two years ahead that is our
main concern.
The  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  discussions  this  autumn  will  clearly  deal  with  conceivable
threats  to  continued  price  stability.  The  risk  spectrum  has  consequences  for  the  formulation  of
monetary policy. It may include the future development of labour shortages and how wage trends are
affected  in  alternative  scenarios.  Although  wage  development  has  been  stable  to  date,  we  must  of
course bear in mind that the labour market has not been tested in earnest. New wage negotiations will
begin during the autumn. As always, the Riksbank will be following them closely to divine whether
the labour market situation in general constitutes a threat to price and wage stability.
Our discussion may also dwell on any risks to inflation in Sweden in connection with the rising dollar.
Will the dollar remain high against the euro, as well as against the Swedish krona? Could that then
have some impact on the feasibility of continued price stability in Sweden?
Yet  another  risk  is,  of  course,  that  the  international  price  of  crude  oil  does  not  fall  back  as  most
observers expect. It is not the oil price as such that is primarily important for the analysis but rather
any impact it may have on other prices in the economy, for example wage increases. The discussion in
the euro area has, moreover, highlighted the international crude oil price’s interaction with exchange
rates.
Risks  of  these  types  have  to  be  weighed  against  the  probability  of  a  faster  correction  of  existing
imbalances  in  the  world  economy,  for  instance  the  US  current  account  deficit,  the  level  of  stock
markets  and  the  dollar’s  exchange  rate.  Assessing  the  likely  course  of  such  adjustments  is
exceptionally difficult. Instead of attempting to predict such a course, which may be impossible, one
needs to be alert to signs that it is appearing.
Concluding remarks
The picture I have painted of the Swedish economy is fairly bright but it is accompanied by a number
of clearly identified risks. It looks as though the favourable trend can continue but our economy is now
in the cyclical phase that calls for heightened attention. The conceivable risks have to be assessed and
weighed up by us on the Executive Board. Regardless of whether we conclude that the repo rate must
be increased soon or that it can be left unchanged for somewhat longer, the Riksbank’s commitment to
price stability is intended to make a contribution to a path for output and employment in Sweden that
remains stable.
5
BIS Review 84/2000
