Ernst Welteke: Regulating European financial markets
Speech  by  Mr  Ernst  Welteke,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Frankfurt  European
Banking Congress, held in Frankfurt, on 17 November 2000.
 I
Ladies and gentlemen,
“What are the essential features of an efficient regulation of the financial markets in Europe?” That is
a  question  which  cannot  be  answered  in  a  single  sentence.  Nevertheless,  it  is  possible  to  specify
elements which form an indispensable part of a modern regulatory framework. These include:
1. 
Rules for the markets and the participants - rules which are in line with market conditions
and, at the same time, underpin the stability of the financial system.
2. 
3. 
Organisational forms of financial market supervision which should mirror market structures,
but not run ahead of them.
Supervisory  practices  which  -  especially  in  Europe  -  have  to  be  harmonised  even  more
closely in order to improve and safeguard the “level playing field”.
A sufficient quantity of highly qualified experts in the field of supervision.
4. 
Globalisation, technological progress and international competition are the trends that are shaping all
the financial markets - and, of course, the stock markets in Europe. The stock markets are engaged in
fierce competition with each other. Issuers and investors want a liquid market that is efficient, secure
and as cost-effective as possible in terms of both trading and settlement. Alliances or even mergers are
strategic options for strengthening competitive positions. These changes are taking place in a setting
where there is comparatively little harmonisation in the regulatory environment provided by securities
and stock exchange law. Relatively new competitors have recently been entering the field in the shape
of  electronic  communication  networks  (ECNs).  These  are  electronic  trading  platforms  but  are  not
licensed stock exchanges. In terms of turnover, these ECNs do not play a major role at present but,
even so, there arises the problem of competition between licensed and regulated stock exchanges and
the scarcely regulated ECNs. In my view, it is very important for a “level playing field” to be created
in this area.
Given this dynamic setting, analysing the present system of securities and stock exchange supervision
in Europe is both prudent and necessary. The group of financial experts under the direction of Baron
Alexandre Lamfalussy has presented an interim report which is to be discussed in the near future by
the ECOFIN Council. Without wishing to pre-empt that discussion, a gradual approach appears to me
to be a solution that is both prudent and feasible. That is also what is stated in the report by Baron
Lamfalussy.  As  a  matter  of  priority,  the  regulatory  gaps  should  be  filled  in  and  the  process  of
harmonisation in the stock exchange and securities sector should be accelerated. One example is the
“European Passport” for issuers. The Forum of the European Securities Commissions (FESCO) will
be presenting a proposal on this shortly.
At  present,  the  creation  of  uniform  regulations,  combined  with  an  intensification  of  cross-border
cooperation in committees represents a better course of action than a “Big Bang”. Centralised stock
exchange and securities supervision would scarcely be able to function without a European regulatory
framework. Effective stock exchange supervision depends on being particularly close to the markets.
National bodies possess such market proximity in a more or less natural way.
1
BIS Review 107/2000
II
The  appropriateness  of  the  present  supervisory  structures  in  Europe  is  being  studied  by  banking
supervisors,  too.  The  report  commissioned  by  the  ECOFIN  Council,  known  as  the  Henk  Brouwer
Report,  has  confirmed  that  the  existing  structure  of  European  banking  supervision  is  -  without  any
reservations - doing its job properly. Even so, the report states that practical cooperation among those
involved  in  banking  supervision  still  has  to  be  further  optimised.  Among  other  things,  that  finding
reflects a development that attracts little attention from the general public: banking supervisors have
been continuously adapting themselves to the trend towards  cross-border  activities. They  have  been
pursuing their own internationalisation strategy. The present system of banking supervision in Europe
essentially rests on three pillars:
• 
• 
• 
Bilateral cooperation is based on memoranda of understanding between the supervisory bodies. Added
to  this,  at  the  multilateral  level  there  is  the  Banking  Supervision  Committee  at  the  ECB.  This
committee is filled by senior representatives of the supervisory authorities and central banks of all the
15  EU  member  states  and  facilitates  the  exchange  of  information  and  cooperation  both  among  the
national supervisors themselves and with the ESCB.
bilateral and multilateral cooperation.
national regulatory competence; and
harmonisation of the regulations;
One  main  area  of  the  BSC’s  work  consists  of  macro-prudential  studies  on  the  stability  of  the  EU
banking  systems.  This  includes,  for  example,  the  study  on  “Asset  Price  Inflation  and  Banking
Stability”, which has also been published. The committee thereby makes a major contribution to crisis
prevention. In the converging European financial market, systemic crises are becoming an increasingly
important issue. Central banks, in particular, have a special interest in safeguarding the stability of the
financial  system.  The  prevention  of  crises  has  to  be  the  paramount  consideration.  Nevertheless,  we
also have to be prepared for the worst. What has to be done in the event of cross-border crises? Who
has to be informed? Where can we meet? Naturally, responsibility initially rests at the national level. I
believe, however, that the BSC, in which central bankers and regulators are already represented, is a
suitable  platform  for  multilateral  crisis  management.  Proximity  to  the  ECB  is  proving  to  be  an
advantage, since the ECB can provide the required infrastructure. Central banks can play a major role
in crisis management - something which is also shown by the example of the New York Fed in the
case of LTCM.
Another  area  of  current  relevance  in  the  work  of  the  BSC  -  as  well  as  of  other  supervisory  bodies
within  the  EU  -  is  the  convergence  of  supervisory  practices.  Great  progress  has  been  achieved  in
harmonising  banking  supervisory  law.  Even  so,  there  still  exist  noticeable  differences  in  practice.
Furthermore,  mention  should  also  be  made  of  the  (informal)  Groupe  de  Contact  and  the  Banking
Advisory Committee in Brussels. These bodies that already exist are doing a good job. They could be
pacemakers  for  the  ongoing  harmonisation  of  prudential  regulations  and,  above  all,  of  supervisory
practices which still diverge too widely in some cases.
A centralised European banking regulatory body is not necessary for that purpose, nor would such a
body be able to cope with the requirements of the present financial market structures. Why?
• 
The  national  supervisors  are  more  intimately  acquainted  with  the  economic  and  legal
framework  in  which  their  own  banking  systems  operate.  Even  with  a  centralised  solution,
they  would  have  to  continue  to  perform  their  present  duties  in  order  to  prevent  losses  of
efficiency in the regulatory process.
 Despite  the  tendency  to  convergence,  the  national  banking  systems  will  continue  to  differ
from each other for the foreseeable future.
In other words, the integration of the European banking systems is not yet far enough advanced for
policymakers  to  respond  with  institutional  reforms  at  present.  Regulators  should  follow  the  market
structures  as  they  develop.  They  should  not  attempt  to  steer  the  market  structures  in  a  particular
BIS Review 107/2000
2
direction.  Europe  is  not  yet  sufficiently  integrated  politically  for  it  to  be  possible  to  ensure  the
effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  a  centralised  European  supervisory  body.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine
centralised  banking  supervision  in  Europe  without  having  first  achieved  a  political  union  in  major
areas  such  as  taxes  or  legal  and  fiscal  policy.  Sovereign  interventions  on  the  part  of  a  centralised
authority involving, say, the closure of a bank or a decision on the use of national taxpayers’ money,
for example, are unlikely to meet with much approval. At the moment, it is not possible to tell whether
policymakers  are  prepared  to  take  such  comparatively  far-reaching  steps.  As  I  see  it,  the  objective
should not be a “Big Bang” but rather the creation of better coordinated regulations and supervisory
practices.
III
I  wish  to  talk  now  briefly  about  insurance  supervision.  In  this  area,  too,  the  differences  in  the
regulations  in  Europe  are  probably  still  too  great  for  a  Europe-wide  centralisation  of  insurance
supervision  to  appear  an  appropriate  solution.  But  the  debate  is  even  going  beyond  that  -  in  the
direction  of  a  European  “one-stop”  financial  supervisory  authority.  Given  the  problems  in  the
individual  financial  sectors  that  I  have  just  outlined,  I  do  not  believe  that  this  would  be  a  suitable
organisational model for Europe in the foreseeable future.  Moreover, “one-stop” financial supervision
is not a familiar regulatory model in Europe. It would therefore probably be difficult to implement.
IV
Therefore, my conclusion is that it is necessary to close the remaining regulatory gaps, to harmonise
the  existing  regulations  and  supervisory  practices  and  to  intensify  cross-border  and  cross-sector
cooperation among the supervisors. I believe that new institutions in Europe are not practicable at the
moment.  The  existing  bodies  should  be  strengthened  instead.  Ensuring  an  appropriate  system  of
regulation for the European financial system remains an ongoing task. More than ever, this calls for a
flexible response from policymakers and regulators.
3
BIS Review 107/2000
