Lee Hsien Loong: ASEAN post-crisis - rebuilding confidence and prosperity
Speech by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and Chairman of the Monetary
Authority of Singapore, at the Bank of Thailand, Bangkok, 30 November 2000.
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,
 Introduction
I  am  honoured  to  be  here  today  to  deliver  this  lecture  organised  by  the  Bank  of  Thailand  in
conjunction with the 72nd birthday celebrations of His Majesty the King. On this joyous occasion, on
behalf of Singapore and its citizens, I wish His Majesty good health and many happy returns of the
day.
The topic of my talk today is, “ASEAN post-crisis: rebuilding confidence and prosperity”. The Asian
crisis is past, but its consequences are still  with  us.  I  propose to review  the  post-crisis  environment
which ASEAN faces today, and discuss some of the lessons to be drawn from the crisis. Then I will
focus on what ASEAN and its member countries should do to restore confidence, long-term  growth
and prosperity in the region.
Passing of the crisis
The  financial  crisis  swept  through  ASEAN  economies  like  a  tidal  wave.  Between  1997-99,  the
combined  GDP  of  the  original  five  ASEAN  members  fell  about  one-fifth,  in  US$  terms.
Unemployment rose, businesses folded, and governments and societies came under stress.
Three years after the crisis struck, the region is stabilising. The worst passed much sooner than many
expected.  The  recovery  initially  depended  on  expansionary  fiscal  policies,  and  strong  exports
especially of electronics products. But it has now broadened. Intra-regional trade is buoyant. In most
countries, consumer spending has rebounded, and private investment has picked up.
Challenging conditions remain
The recovery has given the Asian economies breathing space to tackle the problems uncovered by the
crisis. But these problems have not gone away. Post-crisis ASEAN faces major challenges. North East
Asia seems to be doing better than South East Asia. And continuing political and economic difficulties
in South East Asia, plus the perceived weakness of ASEAN as an organisation, are strongly colouring
the views of analysts and investors.
North East Asia
The thaw in relations between North and South Korea bodes well for North East Asia. South Korea,
one of the crisis countries, has recovered  quickly  and  strongly.  Under  President Kim  Dae  Jung,  the
government pushed hard for economic reforms, restructuring the chaebols and cleaning up the banking
sector. Last year South Korea recorded the fastest growth in Asia - 10.7%.
South Korea’s reforms are now running into difficulties. The actual task of breaking up and selling off
pieces of the chaebols is encountering stiff union resistance. But North East Asia continues to attract
interest. Other than South Korea, another major reason is China.
China has weathered the economic crisis much better than many analysts had expected. Its economy
slowed  down  but  did  not  falter,  and  is  now  growing  strongly  again.  China  is  continuing  with  its
1
BIS Review 111/2000
economic  reforms,  improving  its  investment  environment  and  offering  attractive  long  term
opportunities for investors.
China’s imminent entry into the WTO is a major plus for China’s economic development. Asia will
benefit  from  China’s  continued  stability  and  prosperity.  But  China’s  entry  will  also  mean  stronger
competition  for  ASEAN  countries,  particularly  those  which  depend  on  labour  intensive  industries.
ASEAN’s exports will be affected, as will its foreign direct investments.
South East Asia
In South East Asia, many countries are still tackling economic and political issues. Economically, the
broad view is that progress in reforming the banking and corporate sectors has been slow, causing the
region to remain vulnerable to any softening of external demand.
Politically, Indonesia is in the midst of a wrenching transition, with the final resolution still unclear. In
the  Philippines,  the  political  unrest  and  now  the  impeachment  and  trial  of  President  Estrada  has
affected the peso, the stock market, and the economy. In Malaysia, UMNO is striving hard to win back
the  Malay  ground,  and  is  fending  off  a  strong  challenge  from  PAS,  the  opposition  Islamic  party.
Thailand is preparing for general elections.
ASEAN
The crisis has also raised doubts about ASEAN’s credibility and relevance as a regional organisation.
ASEAN appeared divided and slow in responding to the crisis, and even now is seen as weakened and
drifting.
The expansion of ASEAN to 10 members has made it harder for the organisation to maintain focus
and  reach  consensus.  From  a  long  term  geopolitical  perspective,  this  expansion  is  crucial  for
ASEAN’s strength. But in the short term it has added to doubts about ASEAN’s viability.
Regional and international journals have portrayed ASEAN as drifting apart. Analysts doubt whether
ASEAN countries can get together to pursue economic cooperation, lower trade barriers and restore
prosperity and confidence. As one analyst said on BBC TV:
“A lot of these issues are more or less on hold. … there’s very little impetus for
really substantial change in the past few years and ASEAN hasn’t coped well with
the various political and economic crises that the region has seen.
If  you look at investment,  it’s really  shifted to Korea, to China and it’s  going  to
probably get much more competitive when China joins the WTO. In many ways, a
lot  of  Southeast  Asia  has  lost  its  competitive  edge.  The  political  problems,
economic problems have really hurt the region. So, what you are seeing now is a
lot of investors really reassessing their view of this region and moving much more
towards the north east of Asia.”1
Falling behind
The figures confirm this. Since 1996, Foreign Direct Investments (FDIs) to the North have continued
to rise, whereas FDIs to the South have fallen to about  half  pre-crisis levels.  As  a result,  Southeast
Asia’s share of total FDIs to East Asia (excluding Japan) halved, from 33% in 1996 to just 15% in
1999.
In equity markets, Southeast Asia’s weight has declined, while Northeast Asia’s has increased. Before
the  crisis,  Southeast  Asian  markets  had  more  than  twice  the  weight  of  Northeast  Asian  markets
1 Robert Templer of Strategic Intelligence, interviewed on Asia Business Report, BBC TV, 22 November 2000.
BIS Review 111/2000
2
(excluding  Japan)  in  Morgan  Stanley’s  MSCI  Asia  Free  index.  Now  the  position  has  been  totally
reversed.
Lessons from the crisis
ASEAN  countries  must  not  allow  this  situation  to  continue.  They  should  strengthen  themselves
individually,  and  also  work  together  to  sustain  their  long-term  prosperity.  Then  they  can  dispel  the
perception of a region in distress, restore confidence and get on the move again.
Sound fundamentals
What  lessons  should  ASEAN  countries  draw  from  the  crisis?  First,  that  despite  the  upheaval,  the
transformation of East Asia over the last two decades was no mirage. The Asian miracle was real - the
halving of poverty rates, the dramatic improvement in living standards, literacy and health standards,
and  the  modernisation  of  the  economies.  Asia’s  prolonged  boom  had  been  underpinned  by  sound
economic  fundamentals.  These  remain  a  vital  positive  factor,  which  can  help  ASEAN  to  prosper
again.
However, many economies had significant structural weaknesses. Financial regulation and supervision
were weak, transparency was lacking, and there were serious shortcomings in governance and public
administration. “KKN” - the Indonesian acronym for corruption, collusion, and nepotism - was often a
problem. These weaknesses may or may not have caused the crisis, but they certainly contributed to its
severity. The weaknesses must be resolutely tackled, otherwise even if economic growth resumes, the
fundamental problems and vulnerabilities will remain.
Capital account risks
Second, the crisis exposed the risks of opening up capital accounts prematurely. A free flow of capital
can  provide  countries  with  much  needed  funds  to  develop  their  economies.  But  countries  have  to
liberalise  their  capital  regimes  in  step  with  the  strengthening  of  their  domestic  economy  and
institutions. If they open up before their corporate sectors and financial systems are ready, they run the
risk of being swamped by volatile capital flows, both inwards as well as outwards.
Bank financing risks
Third, the crisis highlighted the dangers of relying too heavily on bank financing. Capital markets in
most  ASEAN  countries  are  relatively  under-developed.  Before  the  crisis,  many  firms  borrowed
short-term in foreign currencies, in order to finance long-term projects earning revenues denominated
in  local  currencies.  These  mismatches  exposed  the  borrowers,  the  lenders,  and  the  entire  system  to
considerable  risks.  When  the  crisis  struck  and  currencies  plunged,  there  was  a  vicious  spiral.
Businesses were saddled with a massive increase in debt burden from their foreign currency debts, and
ran  into  difficulties.  This  got  the  banks  into  trouble,  which,  in  turn,  left  firms  with  no  alternative
avenues  to  raise  working  capital  to  stay  afloat.  Countries  therefore  need  to  develop  their  capital
markets, so as to diversify their sources of funding and reduce their dependence on bank lending.
The international financial system
Beyond these domestic factors, the crisis has also uncovered weaknesses in the international financial
system, and raised questions about the roles of the IMF and World Bank. Several international groups
are  examining  these  issues.  They  have  made  useful  proposals  and  recommendations  to  improve
aspects of the global financial architecture, although some issues still remain contentious, such as how
to regulate hedge funds. The task now is to implement without delay those reforms on which broad
consensus has been reached. The reforms will not prevent all future crises or mishaps. However, they
should  make  financial  systems,  especially  in  emerging  markets,  more  robust  and  less  vulnerable  to
contagion effects when the next crisis strikes.
3
BIS Review 111/2000
Rebuilding confidence and prosperity
Given  these  conclusions,  what  should  ASEAN  do  to  rebuild  investor  confidence  and  achieve
prosperity?
Accepting globalisation
First,  countries  have  to  accept  that  globalisation  is  a  reality.  They  should  take  advantage  of
globalisation,  and  not  fight  against  it.  It  is  a  powerful  trend  that  can  bring  benefits  to  their  people.
Before the crisis, ASEAN had prospered by riding the wave of globalisation. Their take off had been
fuelled  by  strong  investments  by  MNCs,  buoyant  exports  and  freer  trade  and  economic  policies.
Within  ASEAN,  the  most  open  economies  were  also  the  fastest  growing,  whereas  isolation  led  to
stagnation.
Against this backdrop, the crisis came as a profound shock, which could easily have caused a backlash
against globalisation. Had countries turned their backs on foreign investments and exports, it would
have impoverished them and weakened the region. Fortunately this has not happened.
There have been understandable nationalistic sentiments against selling distressed companies at low
prices to foreigners. But all ASEAN countries continue to seek foreign investments and trade. Their
people are eager to learn English, and to exploit the internet. They know that plugging into the global
economy is still the best way to sustain growth, and to  create jobs  and  prosperity  for their citizens.
They also know that competition has become keener, and that they have to make their economies more
attractive  to  foreign  investments.  As  Malaysian  Finance  Minister  Daim  Zainuddin  acknowledged  in
his recent Budget speech:
“In  a  borderless  world, large  international  conglomerates  have  greater  choices  in
their investment decisions.”
Accepting globalisation means progressively deregulating and liberalising ASEAN economies, easing
rules on foreign ownership and participation, and opening up hitherto protected sectors. By exposing
their  economies  to  the  winds  of  change  and  the  pressures  of  global  competition,  countries  will
strengthen their own players, who will learn to hold their own without crutches or protection.
Of course the process has to be managed. Sudden deregulation of a controlled economy may lead to
chaos and collapse, as happened in Indonesia in 1998, when the IMF pressed the Suharto government
to dismantle everything overnight. But properly implemented, opening up will lead to substantial long
term benefits and prosperity, despite the short term social and economic costs.
Globalisation  does  not  mean  that  ASEAN  countries  should  allow  themselves  to  be  swamped  by
foreign  companies.  It  is  a  legitimate  ambition  for  countries  to  want  to  build  up  their  own  strong
companies.  But  the  companies  need  to  be  internationally  competitive;  it  is  not  viable  for  them  to
depend on protected home markets. Companies which cannot hold their own domestically will find it
very difficult to compete abroad.
Furthermore, governments must understand what industries they have the best chance of building up,
given the nature of the global marketplace. In many industries technology and economies of scale have
led  to  a  worldwide  wave  of  mergers  and  consolidations.  For  example  in  banking  and  auto
manufacturing  the  scale  has  become  global,  with  a  few  large  players  dominating  the  worldwide
market. In these industries, the most promising approach for small and medium countries is to seek
investments from these major players, not to build up their own national champions to compete against
the giants. This is what Thailand has done with the auto industry.
Globalisation has its downside. The competition is intense, the environment is constantly and rapidly
changing, restructuring and upgrading are endless tasks, and unpredictable disasters strike from time
to time. All this brings disorientation, new insecurities, and a sense of loss of control. But governments
have to manage these problems and risks. They need to cushion the social impact of globalisation, to
help industries that are no longer viable make the change, to equip the population with the necessary
skills for the new economy, and to provide a social safety net for those at the bottom. There is no real
alternative to accepting globalisation in order to improve the lives of our people.
BIS Review 111/2000
4
ASEAN economic cooperation
It  is  also  important  for  ASEAN  countries  to  work  together,  both  to  strengthen  cooperation  among
themselves, and to address international issues of common concern to all of us.
ASEAN  economic  cooperation  was  progressively  gaining  momentum  before  the  crisis.  Major
initiatives  had  been  launched,  especially  the  ASEAN  Free  Trade  Area  (AFTA)  and  the  ASEAN
Investment  Area  (AIA).  These  promised to  increase  significantly  the  flow  of  trade  and  investments
among ASEAN countries.
However  the  crisis  has  caused  some  countries  to  hold  back,  in  order  to  give  struggling  domestic
industries  more  breathing  space.  These  pressures  are  real,  but  in  their  anxiety  to  protect  individual
industries,  countries  should  not  lose  sight  of  the  wider  benefits  of  ASEAN  cooperation  to  their
economies as a whole.
It  is  therefore  important  for  ASEAN  members  to  reaffirm  their  commitment  to  regional  economic
cooperation  and  integration,  and  implement  AFTA  and  the  ASEAN  Investment  Area  in  letter  and
spirit. The ASEAN members which are doing relatively better, such as Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore
and Brunei, should take the lead, and work together to put ASEAN cooperation on track again.
At last week’s 4th ASEAN Informal Summit in Singapore, ASEAN leaders launched an Initiative for
ASEAN  Integration  or  “IAI”.  It  is  intended  to  narrow  the  divide  between  the  older  and  newer
members  of  ASEAN  and  enhance  ASEAN’s  competitiveness  as a  region.  It  is  a  framework  for  the
more developed ASEAN members to help those members that most need help, and in so doing make
ASEAN prosper. To kick it off, Singapore is offering a package of IT training and assistance in human
resource  development  to  Myanmar,  Laos,  Cambodia  and  Vietnam,  while  China,  Japan  and  South
Korea have also offered assistance that falls within IAI’s broad framework.
Of course, ASEAN’s future depends as much on external factors as it does on these direct initiatives to
promote  intra-ASEAN  trade  and  investment,  and  build  up  the  economic  strength  of  individual
members. Our economies are highly dependent on international trade, and it is in our interest to work
together actively for a freer, more stable and secure global trading environment.
ASEAN therefore needs to support an open, stable multilateral trading system under the WTO, and the
early  launch  of  a  new  round  of  trade  negotiations.  Strong  multilateral  rules  are  the  foundation  for
world  trade,  and  protection  against  anarchic  bilateral  and  unilateral  trade  policies.  Small  countries
could  not  survive  without  them;  even  large  economies  would  be  much  poorer  off  in  a  tit-for-tat
environment. Hence ASEAN strongly supported the candidacy  of  Dr  Supachai  Panitchpakdi  for  the
Director Generalship of the WTO.
Besides  the  WTO,  ASEAN  and  its  members  need  to  take  full  advantage  of  APEC,  supporting  its
concept of “open regionalism”, and its goal of free trade and investment in the Asia Pacific region.
ASEAN  also  needs  to  explore  links  with  other  regional  groups,  for  example  with  North  East  Asia
through a possible free trade area with China, Japan and South Korea. At the Informal Summit, the
ASEAN  plus  three  countries  clearly  recognised  that  it  is  not  in  their  own  interest  for  the  divide
between Northeast and Southeast Asia to continue widening. The “plus three countries” want to work
with ASEAN, to develop closer and deeper linkages between the two sub-regions.
The  way  to  strengthen  ASEAN  economic  cooperation  is  by  participating  actively  in  these  external
fora, and not by opting out of them. This will send a strong signal to the world that ASEAN remains
an  open  and  outward  looking  organisation,  with  its  members  welcoming  competition  and
strengthening  themselves  as  a  group.  It  will  help  restore  ASEAN’s  credibility  as  a  vigorous  and
effective organisation that plays a responsible, relevant role on the international stage.
Corporate sector restructuring
The third area on which the crisis countries have to focus attention is their corporate sectors. Insolvent
and  non-viable  companies  have  to  be  restructured,  to  set  growth  on  a  firm  basis  and  restore
confidence. The problems differ from country to country, but some fundamental issues are common.
5
BIS Review 111/2000
First,  the  huge  outstanding  debt  owed  by  the  corporate  sector  must  be  resolved,  as  cleanly  and
expeditiously as possible. Governments need to step in to push the process through, and in extremis to
take over insolvent firms and do the clean-up themselves. Clear and enforceable bankruptcy laws are
needed  to  deter  prolonged  default  by  debtors,  and  give  creditors  incentives  to  settle.  And  for  the
future, there must be more transparency in terms of corporate governance and reporting.
For  example,  Thailand  passed  new  bankruptcy  and foreclosure  laws  last  year,  and  I  understand  has
just  passed  a  new  Accounting  Act.  Among  other  things,  the  new  laws  will  stipulate  minimum
qualifications  for  auditors,  and  ensure  that  directors  take  greater  responsibility  for  the  accuracy  of
financial statements. Investors and analysts will view these steps positively, especially if foreclosure
cases brought under the new laws and now before the courts are fairly and speedily settled.
Second,  many  private  sector  firms,  particularly  family-owned  companies,  need  to  upgrade  and
modernise their management.
Family  businesses  and  conglomerates  are  a  feature  of  many  Asian  economies.  These  were  built  up
through the business acumen and drive of their founders, and still account for a sizeable component of
the economies.
But the world has changed. Capability and competence are now at a premium, and relationships count
for less. Family companies need to segregate clearly ownership rights and management functions, and
bring in other significant shareholders and external capital. Their challenge is to evolve into modern
corporations that are more than family companies. They need to be run professionally by the best man
for the job, and not by heirs who may or may not have inherited the business skills and acumen of the
founder.
Third, governments need to untangle the complicated and deeply-entrenched ties between state, banks
and  industry,  which  exist  in  many  Asian  countries,  like  the  chaebols  in  South  Korea,  or  the
state-owned enterprises in China. Such industries and enterprises often account for a significant share
of  GDP,  but  they  are  neither  subject  to  market  discipline,  nor  driven  purely  by  economic
considerations. They often find it difficult to operate as efficiently as private sector firms. Banks fail to
apply  normal  criteria  in  approving  loans,  because  of  political  pressure  or  implicit  state  guarantees.
Employees enjoy de facto life-time job security. Well-connected persons help themselves to privileges
at  the  companies’  expense.  And  governments  find  it  politically  impossible  to  close  down  the
operations, no matter how unsuccessful.
It  is  essential to speed  up  restructuring  and  reforming  these  unproductive  enterprises.  In  China,  the
government is making a massive effort to reform its SOEs. In South Korea President Kim Dae Jung is
pushing chaebols to rationalise and consolidate, and change their traditional ways of doing business.
ASEAN countries must not lag behind, or else it will affect confidence in their investment climate.
Banking sector reforms
Besides  pursuing  corporate  restructuring,  ASEAN  economies  must  persevere  to  clean  up  and
recapitalise  unsound  banks,  and  strengthen  the  banking  sector.  Banks  play  a  critical  role  in  every
economy.  For  ASEAN  economies  to  continue  to  grow,  they  will  need  new  investments.  These
investments will require financing, by sound banks able and willing to lend to sound borrowers.
The  immediate  priority  is  to  speed  up  the  resolution  of  the  non-performing  loans  (NPL)  within  the
banking  system.  The  process  is  underway,  but  is  far  from  complete.  Even  today,  NPLs  in  some
ASEAN  countries  remain  well  above  20%.  As  in  the  case  of  corporate  restructuring,  effective
bankruptcy laws are essential. Asset Management Companies (AMCs) need sufficient power to deal
expeditiously  with  debts  which  are  unrecoverable.  Otherwise  the  banking  problems  will  infect  the
whole economy, and drag countries into the same deep-seated malaise as Japan.
Finding  new  money  and  writing  off  bad  loans  is  the  relatively  easy  part.  It  is  more  difficult,  but
equally  important,  for  banks  to  put in  place  proper systems,  structures,  and  prudential  standards,  to
prevent the same problem from happening again. They need to establish rigorous credit cultures. They
BIS Review 111/2000
6
must  lend  based  not  on  personal  relationships,  but  on  objective  assessments  of  the  borrowers’
creditworthiness.
Many countries are encouraging bank mergers and consolidation as part of their plans to strengthen
the financial sector. Mergers can help to strengthen the commercial banks, and give them the scale to
compete in the globalised financial industry. However, mergers by themselves are insufficient. Unless
mergers are accompanied by other measures to improve corporate governance, we will merely create
one large weak bank out of several small weak ones.
Financial sector reforms also have to include strengthening of the supervisory system and institutions.
Had  supervision  been  adequate  in  the  first  place,  the  problems  would  not  have  become  so  grave.
Professional  and  independent  supervisory  authorities  will  tighten  standards  of  acceptable  banking
practices,  and  over  time  instil  rigour  and  rectitude  among  all  participants  in  the  system.  The
supervisors  have  to  set  standards,  penalise  errant  lenders,  and  remove  implicit  guarantees.  Credit
discipline will foster the emergence of stronger companies, and provide the basis for sustained growth.
Political and social preconditions
All these policies - accepting globalisation, fostering ASEAN economic cooperation, restructuring the
corporate sector, and reforming the banking sector - are essential for countries to recover. But to be in
a position to implement and make such economic policies work, countries must first create the right
political and social preconditions.
Investors, both domestic and foreign, will adopt a wait-and-see attitude until they know how political
uncertainties  are  resolved.  Their  views  are  coloured  by  past  experiences,  and  they  will  look  for
evidence of a clear break with the past.
A stable political climate is essential to foster confidence, investment and growth. Governments must
put their houses in order, bring corruption under control, and install men and women of integrity and
competence  to  key  positions  within  the  top  leadership.  As  Mr  Anand  Panyarachun,  former  Prime
Minister of Thailand and now President of the Thai chapter of Transparency International, said:
“The  very  basis  of  a  non-corrupt culture  is  integrity.  …  It  is  a  state  of  mind,  an
attitude. You can be corrupt without taking any money.”2
The values, norms and business environment of ASEAN countries cannot be transformed overnight. It
is  more  than  enacting  new  laws  and  regulations.  It  means  changing  deeply  established  social
relationships  and  norms  which  vary  from  country  to  country.  Businessmen,  civil  servants  and
politicians used to operating in one way for years will not suddenly abandon or condemn old practices
as soon as a new law is passed. Mom Rachawong Chatu Mongol Sonakul put it aptly:
“What we are doing is a very long process. We’re not talking of months or years.
We are talking in, maybe, decades or generations. We’re not changing our way of
working. We actually try to change our way of life.”3
These are matters that each country has to resolve for itself, in its own way. External inputs can be
helpful,  but  may  also  be  counter-productive.  For  example  in  Indonesia  the  IMF  sought  drastic
economic reforms, which inevitably had far-reaching political implications. The result was a complete
collapse of the Suharto government. But creating a new order to follow this is now a challenge which
only  Indonesia’s  people  and  leaders  can  resolve.  Foreign  advice  and  assistance  now  play  only  a
secondary role.
2 Asiaweek, 3 November 2000.
3 Keynote  address  during  a  seminar  organised  jointly  by  the  Bank  of  Thailand  and  the  World  Bank  entitled  “Good
Governance for Financial Institutions” on 10 June 2000.
7
BIS Review 111/2000
There  are,  therefore,  no  one-size-fits-all  solutions.  Each  country  will  have  to  pick  up  from  the
experiences of others, and adapt these experiences to their own conditions. Each will have to judge for
itself the right balance and speed of changes to suit its own needs and circumstances. Nobody else has
the same stake in the outcome.
Conclusion
The crisis has been a major setback for ASEAN and its member economies. Many external observers
and investors still consider our economic prospects doubtful, and see ASEAN as an ineffective sunset
organisation.  These  perceptions  are  political  facts  which  can  define  political  reality.  If  ASEAN
economies do not deliver by way of structural reforms and strong, sustained economic recovery, and
North East Asia continues to pull ahead, international investors will relegate us to the sidelines, and
we will be marginalised.
Perceptions, however, can be proved wrong. The best answer to them is real action and change. We
must strengthen our economies and make ourselves more competitive, while safeguarding ourselves
against external shocks. We must press on with economic cooperation among ourselves, and with the
rest  of  the  world.  And  each  country  must  set  its  own  house  in  order,  by  creating  the  political
preconditions, restructuring its corporate sector, and reforming its banking system. Then the resilience
of individual members will result in a strengthened ASEAN as a whole.
ASEAN  and  its  members  have  overcome  many  difficult  challenges  over  the  past  three  decades.
Despite the crisis, we are much better off today than we were before the economic take off. The road
ahead is indeed difficult. But the ingredients which fuelled  our  rapid  growth  in  the  past  are all  still
there. Given the political will and the right policies, I am confident that in time ASEAN will recapture
the lost ground, and thrive and prosper into the new century.
BIS Review 111/2000
8
