Willem F Duisenberg: Recent developments and trends
in world financial markets
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the
75th anniversary of the Banco de Mexico, Mexico, 14 November 2000.
 Introduction
I  should  like  to  thank  the  Bank  of  Mexico  for  inviting  me  to  this  conference  commemorating  the
Bank’s 75th anniversary.
The theme of this panel discussion is a topical one. In recent years, financial markets have undergone
some of the most rapid and extensive changes in any markets. We have witnessed dramatic events in
global financial markets, including the Asian crisis, the Russian crisis, and the near-collapse of Long
Term Capital Management (LTCM), which was a highly leveraged hedge fund with enormous trading
positions. More recently, we have seen remarkable developments in stock prices around the world, and
in particular in stocks in the telecommunications and internet sectors. Many of these so-called “tech.
stocks”, which experienced sharp price increases in late 1999 and early 2000, have seen their market
capitalisation cut substantially in recent months.
However, apart from market events such as these, global financial markets have also undergone major
structural change in recent years. In particular, the speed and scope of such developments in the euro
area  following  the  introduction  of  the  new  currency  have  been  remarkable.  I  should  like  to
concentrate, today, on these structural issues, first of all considering global developments in brief, and
then looking at recent developments in the euro area.
Recent trends in global financial markets
Perhaps  foremost  among  recent  changes  in  world  financial  markets  has  been  their  accelerating
integration  and  globalisation.  This  development,  which  has  been  fostered  by  the  liberalisation  of
markets,  rapid  technological  progress  and  major  advances  in  telecommunications,  has  created  new
investment and financing opportunities for businesses and people around the world. Easier access to
global  financial  markets  for  individuals  and  corporations  will  lead  to  a  more  efficient  allocation  of
capital, which, in turn, will promote economic growth and prosperity.
Apart  from  this  ongoing  integration  and  globalisation,  world  financial  markets  have  also  recently
experienced  increased  securitisation.  In  part,  this  development  has  been  spurred  by  the  surge  in
mergers and acquisitions and leveraged buy-outs that has taken place in markets of late, not least in the
euro area. One aspect of this securitisation process has been the increase in corporate bond issuance,
which  has  also  coincided  with  a  diminishing  supply  of  government  bonds  in  many  countries,
particularly in the United States.
Other  interesting  developments  in  world  financial  markets  include  the  continued  broadening  and
expansion of derivatives markets. The  broadening  of  these  markets  has largely  come  about  because
rapid  advances  in  technology,  financial  engineering,  and  risk  management  have  helped  to  enhance
both  the  supply  of  and  the  demand  for  more  complex  and  sophisticated  derivatives  products.  The
increased use of derivatives to adjust exposure to risk in financial markets has also contributed to the
rise in the notional amounts of outstanding derivatives contracts seen in recent years, in particular in
over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives markets with interest rates and equities  as underlying  securities.
While the leveraged  nature  of  derivative  instruments  poses  risks  to  individual  investors,  derivatives
also provide scope for a more efficient allocation of risks in the economy, which is beneficial for the
functioning of financial markets, and hence enhances the conditions for economic growth.
1
BIS Review 100/2000
Among  the  many  changes  in  global  financial  markets,  developments  in  the  euro  area  have  been
particularly striking.
Recent trends in euro area financial markets
The  launch  of  the  euro  on  1  January  1999  was  a  historic  event.  Eleven  national  currencies  were
converted into one single currency overnight. It marked the start  of  a  period  of  profound  change in
Europe’s financial landscape. The successful launch of the euro, which is a key element in the creation
of a stable, prosperous and peaceful Europe, has also boosted the integration of financial markets in
the  euro  area.  This  process  of  integration  in  European  financial  markets  coincided  with  the  trend
towards globalisation. Both these factors help to explain current developments in Europe’s financial
markets.
The main catalyst behind the huge changes that have taken place, and continue to take place, has, of
course,  been  the  arrival  of  the  single  currency.  In  January  1999,  foreign  exchange  and  interbank
markets  immediately  switched  over  to  the  euro.  At  the  same  time,  a  single  monetary  policy  was
established, with a uniform policy implementation framework for all euro area countries. Furthermore,
a  unified  payment  system  was  introduced,  providing  for  real-time  gross  settlement  transfers
throughout the euro area.
As regards euro area banks, the transparency brought about by a single currency and a single monetary
policy  makes  it  easier  for  customers  to  compare  bank  products  and  costs.  This,  in  turn,  will  foster
competition among banks. Although this increased competition will lead to lower bank margins, it will
promote  restructuring  and  consolidation  among  banks  in  the  euro  area,  which  will  help  them  to
compete globally. In fact, these events are already happening: banks all over Europe are merging or
forming  alliances  on  an  unprecedented  scale,  thereby  drastically  changing  the  national  banking
environment  and  creating  international  networks.  Hence,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  not  only
provided  banks  with  a  market  large  enough  to  support  their  efforts  in  global  competition,  but  also
pressured them to undertake the restructuring and consolidation they need in order to be successful in
an increasingly global market.
In addition to these changes in the banking sector, the advent of the euro also provided the basis for a
Europe-wide  securities  market.  The  euro  area  money  market  underwent  a  wide-ranging  process  of
integration and standardisation  following  the introduction of the single  monetary  policy  framework.
The  unsecured  deposit  markets  and  the  derivatives  markets  became  fully  integrated  in  early  1999.
Moreover, the need to redistribute liquidity among euro area countries, including liquidity provided by
the  Eurosystem  as  part  of  its  refinancing  operations,  fostered  the  development  of  area-wide
transactions in the money market. TARGET, the new area-wide payment system which constitutes the
major settlement system for payments in euro, has played a key role in facilitating the redistribution of
liquidity  across  the  euro  area.  In  addition,  by  encouraging  greater  arbitrage  activity,  TARGET  has
facilitated an equalisation of prices prevailing in the various segments of the money market throughout
the euro area. While there has been less integration in other segments of the euro area money market,
such  as  the  repo  markets  and  the  short-term  securities  markets,  I  am  convinced  that  the  integration
process will continue in these areas, given the favourable conditions provided by European Economic
and Monetary Union.
Another sector in which impressive changes have taken place following the introduction of the euro is
the euro-denominated bond market. There was a marked rise in private bond issuance in the euro area
in 1999, which has continued broadly unabated in 2000. Following the introduction of the euro, the
euro-denominated  component  of  international  bond  markets  played  a  far  larger  role  than  the
predecessor currencies of the euro had hitherto. In other words, the whole has turned out to be much
greater than the sum of the parts. Apart from this, it also became clear that various characteristics of
newly  issued  debt securities  were  changing.  In  particular,  the  average  size  of  new  bond  issues  rose
considerably in 1999, as the number of very large issues, of EUR 1 billion or more, grew significantly.
These changes show that the newly created euro-denominated bond market, by virtue of its size and
high degree of openness, is more able to absorb very large issues than the individual bond markets of
the predecessor currencies of the euro. Hence, the introduction of the single currency has resulted in
BIS Review 100/2000
2
more  efficient  and  well-functioning  markets,  which  benefit  not  only  euro  area  residents,  but  also
market participants outside the euro area. Furthermore, this market still has great potential since the
use of securities finance by the corporate sector, relative to bank finance, is still only about half that of
its counterpart in the United States.
The single currency also appears to be a catalyst for restructuring the European corporate sector, and
for the emergence of new companies. The ongoing integration process of the national stock exchanges
has  also  been  supportive  in  this  respect.  Primary  issues  of  European  equities  have  reached  record
highs,  with  whole  new  markets,  such  as  the  Neuer  Markt  in  Frankfurt,  becoming  prominent
internationally.  These  developments  can  only  favour  those  companies  which  may  have  found  it
difficult in the past to finance themselves, but which will now be able to raise equity more easily. In
addition,  a  number  of  Europe-wide  equity  indices  have  been  established,  thereby  contributing  to
extending  the  trading  possibilities  and  the  position-taking  opportunities  for  investors.  Alliances
between  stock  exchanges  should  also  foster  the  integration  of  stock  market  infrastructures.  These
changes are bound to intensify competition and make European markets more resilient and fit for the
global economy.
Conclusion
To conclude, the introduction of the euro has acted as a catalyst for promoting integration of financial
markets in Europe, and provides an opportunity to create a Europe-wide securities market. The result
will be more efficiently functioning markets which, in turn, will mean a reduced cost of capital and
improved investment opportunities for businesses and individuals. This process will also enhance the
depth and liquidity of financial markets, which in turn will promote stability.
The  European  Central  Bank  contributes  to  this  stability  by  pursuing  a  credible  and  transparent
monetary policy. In fact, a consistent monetary policy that is committed to price stability is the best
contribution that the ECB can make to the smooth functioning and integration of European financial
markets. Such a policy will be beneficial, as it will minimise the adverse effects of inflation and high
inflation  uncertainty,  thereby  creating  conditions  for  steady  and  sound  economic  growth  in  the
medium  term.  A  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  thus  contributes  to  the  smooth  functioning  of
financial markets and to economic prosperity as a whole.
3
BIS Review 100/2000
