Robert T Parry: Monetary policy in a new environment - the US experience
Speech by Mr Robert T Parry, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco, at the Joint Bundesbank/BIS conference on “Recent developments in financial systems
and the challenges for economic policy”, held in Frankfurt, 28-29 September 2000.
 It’s a pleasure to have this opportunity to give you a US perspective on the challenges of conducting
monetary policy in an environment of structural change. In the US, there is, of course, no modern-day
parallel to the historic events in the financial sector here in Europe. The formation of a monetary union
and a multinational central bank poses precedent-setting challenges for policy. At the same time, the
US has seen massive and rapid  changes  in  its financial  sector.  I’ll  argue,  however, that  while these
changes in the US financial sector have posed challenges, they have not posed significant problems for
the Fed’s conduct of monetary policy for quite some time.
Of  course,  financial  change  was  a  major  issue  in  policy  20  years  ago.  At  that  time,  financial
deregulation and innovation undermined the stability of the monetary aggregates, which were a central
part of Fed policymaking. Since that history is probably familiar territory to you, I plan to review it
only briefly. The bottom line is that by the mid-1980s, we had relegated the monetary aggregates to a
minor role. Since then, the Fed has been able to accommodate ongoing deregulation and respond to
shocks in the financial sector by focusing on adjustments in the federal funds rate.
More recently, the challenges for the Fed have been on the real side of the economy - and here I’m
referring  especially  to  a  technology  shock.  While  a  technology  shock  that  boosts  productivity  is  a
wonderful thing, it also has created uncertainty about the proper course for policy. As I understand it,
productivity growth rates have not yet begun to accelerate in Europe. However, it would seem to be
only a matter of time before the ECB will face the challenge of responding to a comparable technology
shock.  In  any  event,  I’d  say  that  our  recent  experience  makes  a  good  case  study  in  conducting
monetary policy in the face of great uncertainty - an issue of importance to any central bank.
Let me start with a brief look at the history of our experience with financial change. In the late 1970s,
the buildup of US inflation pushed nominal interest rates up against the legal interest rate ceilings on
most  bank  deposits.  As  a  result,  the  market  began  to  circumvent  the  ceilings  by  creating  new
instruments, and pressure began to mount to remove them altogether. In 1980, the Monetary Control
Act did just that by phasing out the ceilings. Importantly for monetary policy, the act also permitted
banks to pay interest on some checking accounts.
Once deposit interest rates began to vary with market rates, the demands for M1 and M2 - the primary
guides to monetary policy - became unstable. So, by the early 1980s, the Fed had de-emphasized M1.
And  by  the  mid-1980s,  M2  had  met  the  same  fate.  In  the  1990s,  we  continued  to  establish  annual
ranges for these aggregates, as we were required to do by law, but they played almost no role in our
deliberations. The legal requirement to set ranges expired this year, and in late June we decided to stop
setting ranges.
This step was taken with some reluctance, because using interest rates as the main policy  tool  does
pose well-known dangers. But in the absence of reliable monetary aggregates, the Fed has operated
reasonably well in an environment of significant ongoing financial deregulation and sizable financial
shocks.
Let  me  give  you  some  examples.  In  terms  of  deregulation,  barriers  to  interstate  banking  were
eliminated,  and  recently  a  new  financial  modernization  law  allowed  depositories  to  expand  into
activities like insurance and investment banking. In terms of shocks, we dealt first with the so-called
credit crunch in the late 1980s - which was due in part to the collapse of many savings and loans - then
with the turmoil set off by the Asian currency crisis in 1997-98, and finally with the unexpected run-
up in equity values in the second half of 1990s.
1
BIS Review 82/2000
During this period, the Fed has looked at a large number of economic and financial indicators in an
attempt  to  control  inflation  and  smooth  the  business  cycle.  And,  as  I  said,  the  Fed  responded
reasonably well to these events with fairly modest changes in its interest rate settings. Many among
you are in a much better position than I am to know how much the US experience applies to Europe. I
do  want to  mention,  however, that  an economist  at  our  Bank,  Glenn  Rudebusch, recently  did  some
research with Lars Svensson that questions the usefulness of monetary targeting.1
Now  let  me  turn  to  the  challenges  for  US  monetary  policy  over  the  past  five  years  or  so.  As  I
mentioned, these have been primarily on the real side of the economy. And while the developments in
the  US  economy  have  been  quite  favorable,  they’ve  also  been  unanticipated,  which  has  added
substantially to the uncertainty we face as policymakers. The current economic expansion is now in its
tenth year. It has lasted longer than any other in US history, and it has been remarkably strong. Real
GDP  growth  averaged  4½%  over  the  past  four  years  and  6%  over  the  past  four  quarters!  The
unemployment  rate  continues  to  hover  around  4%,  near  its  lowest  level  in  thirty  years.  And  core
consumer inflation has averaged between 1¾ and 2½% over the past four quarters, depending on the
measure used. Finally, US productivity has been truly remarkable. After averaging about 1½% from
the 1970s to about the mid-1990s, productivity growth has increased sharply. Over the past year and a
half, it averaged around 4%!
These developments have raised challenges for the Fed in conducting monetary policy because there’s
more  than  one  plausible  explanation  for  what’s  been  driving  economic  events.  One  obvious
explanation for the combination of strong output and low inflation is  that there  has  been  a surge  in
aggregate supply due to technological change. Supporting this view is the fact that firms have been
investing heavily in information processing equipment and software. For example, annualized growth
rates in real investment for this category have ranged from 15 to 30% over the past five years. And
there’s  certainly  no  shortage  of  examples  of  technological  developments  that  have  improved
efficiency.
At  the  same  time,  it’s  also  likely  that  events  have  been  driven  by  a  strong  demand  shock  -  in  part
because of the incredible gains in the stock market over the last few years that may have generated a
large  wealth  effect.  In  the  US,  consumer  spending  has  advanced  at  a  phenomenal  pace,  and,  as  a
consequence, the personal saving rate is at a record low. Add strong business investment to this, and
we  have  total  private  domestic  spending  that  has  been  large  enough  to  produce  a  strong  economy,
even  while  fiscal  surpluses  and  a  growing  trade  deficit  have  put  a  drag  on  demand  for  domestic
product. Normally, a demand shock risks igniting inflation. But some important developments besides
the technology shock held prices in check. First, import prices were held down by a strong dollar and
weakness in some of our trading partners. In addition, from late 1997 through early 1999, oil prices
were falling.
Even though there’s uncertainty about which of the two shocks has been dominating, we do know with
more  certainty  that  interest  rates  would  have  had  to  rise  sooner  or  later  in  either  case.  If  we  were
dealing mainly with excess demand, of course, the reason for tightening is obvious. But even if  we
were dealing mainly with a technology shock, the Fed still would have had to raise the federal funds
rate eventually.
I would point to three reasons for eventually raising the policy rate in response to a technology shock.
The first reason has to do with the  effect  of  higher  productivity  growth  on  equilibrium  real  interest
rates. Since higher productivity growth raises the rate of return on investment, it also raises the level of
equilibrium real interest rates. Thus, just to maintain the stance of policy, interest rates would have to
rise.  In  simple  models,  there is a  one-to-one  relationship  between  the  increase  in trend  productivity
growth  and  the  increase  in  the  equilibrium  real  interest  rate.  Of  course,  things  are  not  usually  this
simple.  For  example,  in  the  US  economy  today,  two  developments  have  tended  to  mitigate  the
1 Glenn D Rudebusch and Lars E O Svensson. 2000. “Eurosystem Monetary Targeting: Lessons from US Data”. FRBSF
Working Paper # 99-13. http://www.frbsf.org/econrsrch/workingp/wp99-13.pdf
BIS Review 82/2000
2
increase  in  equilibrium  rates.  The  large  federal  budget  surplus  has  increased  the  supply  of  national
saving, while the rising trade deficit was matched by an increased supply of capital from abroad. But
overall, it appears that we would have been contributing to an inflationary monetary policy if we had
tried to hold real rates at their old levels.
The other two reasons support an actual tightening of the stance of policy. Inflation tends to decline
initially when productivity accelerates in response to a technology shock, because increases in labor
compensation tend to lag behind increases in productivity growth. Eventually, though, the shock wears
off,  as  the  rate  of  productivity  growth  stops  increasing  and  wages  accelerate  to  catch  up.  So  a
technology shock is a “golden opportunity” - initially, it gives us lower inflation without a slowdown
in growth or a rise in unemployment. However, to lock in the benefits and keep inflation at the new
lower level, monetary policy would have to tighten. After all, in the end, inflation is determined by
monetary policy, not by productivity growth.
The final  reason has to  do  with  the  “permanent income  hypothesis”.  A  technology  shock  raises  the
prospect that incomes will continue to be higher in the future: in other words, permanent income may
increase.  This  could  mean  that  we  will  see  an  increase  in  spending  before  the  additional  capacity
comes  on  line.  In  addition,  a  technology  shock  also  may  give  a  boost  to  stock  prices  by  raising
expectations about future corporate profits. As a result, a wealth effect also may stimulate spending
before the economy’s capacity to produce has expanded.
To sum up, we know that the funds rate had to increase to contain inflationary pressures, regardless of
whether the economy was being dominated by demand effects or supply effects. But the uncertainty
arises when we have to decide how much to tighten and when to start. This uncertainty boils down to
the  question  of  where  FOMC  actions  should  be  along  the  spectrum  of  approaches  ranging  from
strongly  pre-emptive  based  mainly  on  forecasts  of  future  developments  -  to  more  cautious  -  based
mainly on emerging data.
Ideally, policy should tend more toward the pre-emptive end of the spectrum because of the long lags
between policy actions and their effects on inflation. If a central bank reacts early and correctly to an
inflationary  threat,  it  can  alter  inflation  expectations  and  cut  off  the  rise  in  inflation  before  it  gets
started.  It  looks  like  that’s  what  happened  in  the  US  in  1994.  At  that  time,  we  were  dealing  with
forecasts of higher inflation that were based not only on increasingly tight labor markets but also on
low short-term real interest rates. So the Fed responded by raising interest rates substantially. In that
case, inflation didn’t take off, and the economy moved smoothly into the favorable environment we’ve
enjoyed in recent years.
But when there’s a high degree of uncertainty about forecasts, it could be best to tend toward the more
cautious end of the spectrum - because a somewhat delayed action could be preferable to running the
risk of tightening when it’s not warranted. Therefore, since most forecasts of output and inflation have
been off the mark for several years, it has made sense to place less weight on the forecasts than we
normally  have  in  the  past.  It’s  true  that  we  began  tightening  policy  before  we  saw  any  upward
inflationary trend, and in that sense we were pre-emptive, in part because we knew interest rates would
have to go up to some extent regardless of whether a demand shock or a supply shock was dominating.
But the tightening phase started only a little more than a year ago, even though many forecasts have
predicted rising inflation for several years. Moreover, we’ve been fairly cautious in raising rates by a
total of only 175 basis points.
I’d like to conclude by touching briefly on the issue of central bank credibility because I believe it’s
been an enabling factor in our taking a cautious approach. Over the last twenty years, the Fed has built
a reasonably good reputation for containing inflation. This credibility has allowed us some flexibility
to  delay  raising  interest  rates  -  despite  many  forecasts  that  inflation  would  soon  rise.  Without  this
leeway,  we  might  have  faced  a  jump  in  inflation  expectations  with  adverse  reactions  in  financial
markets. Going forward, we intend to maintain our credibility by continuing to keep inflation under
control.
3
BIS Review 82/2000
