The Rt Hon Sir Edward George GBE: The progress of the euro
Speech by The Rt Hon Sir Edward George GBE, Governor of the Bank of England, at the Cercle de
L’Union Interalliée in Paris on 24 October 2000.
 Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am grateful to the French Section of the Franco-British Council for giving
me this opportunity to address this distinguished audience here in Paris, and I am delighted to share
this public platform with my dear colleague, Jean-Claude Trichet.
You have invited us to speak about the progress of the euro. I am very happy to do so from my British
perspective - at least for the time being - as a keenly interested observer. My perspective you might
expect  would  be  very  different  from  that  of  Jean-Claude,  who  was,  and  is,  one  of  the  principal
architects of and a major driving force behind the process of European monetary union - one of the
true founding fathers. In fact you will find that our analysis and assessment of the euro’s progress so
far is very similar. I hope that will not come as too great a disappointment to you!
We  would  certainly,  I  think,  agree  that  the  preparations  for  and  introduction  of  the  euro  at  the
beginning of last year were a technical triumph. The euro-payments infrastructure is generally working
well and has underpinned the integration of the euro money market which is an essential precondition
for the effective implementation of Eurozone monetary policy. And there has from the beginning been
clear evidence of the anticipated broadening and deepening of euro financial markets more generally,
reflected, for example, in increasing issuance of euro-denominated commercial paper, corporate bonds
and equities. (If you would like chapter and verse on all this I commend to you the Bank of England’s
half-yearly  publication,  “Practical  issues  arising  from  the  euro”  -  available  free  from  our  public
information department.)
I am happy to say that the City of London has played a positive role in this process of euro market
integration: it is in fact the greatest contribution that we can make to the success of the project from
outside the Eurozone. And it runs in parallel with the distinct, but closely related, pressure for broader
international integration of financial markets which is currently reflected in a whole series of market
initiatives to unify trading platforms and both clearing and settlement systems, in which both London
and  Paris  are,  of  course,  very  much  involved.  I  have  no  doubt  that  increased  financial  market
efficiency has an important part to play in improving overall economic efficiency - the question is how
best we can bring it about.
Jean-Claude and I would also agree, I suspect, that the introduction of the euro has contributed to the
increasingly positive macro-economic performance of the Eurozone economy, taken as a whole, over
the past couple of years. The need to satisfy the Maastricht criteria for entry to the euro served as a
strong incentive to a number of the present member countries to pursue disciplined, stability-oriented,
macro-economic policies in the run-up to monetary union; and - despite the dampening after-shock of
the global financial crisis of two or three years ago - that macro-economic stability has provided the
platform  for  the  Eurozone’s  subsequent  strong  macro-economic  performance.  Looked  at  in  its  own
terms  that  performance  is  impressive  -  with  relatively  strong  growth,  currently  and  prospectively;
falling unemployment, albeit from a painfully high level; and a broad balance between overall demand
and underlying supply growth reflected in both broad balance in the Eurozone’s current account and
low and stable core consumer price inflation.
By  any  conventional  standards  that  is  a  pretty  good  performance.  I  must  confess  that,  measured
against that performance, I find some of the popular criticism I read in the media - of lack of political
coherence at the Eurozone level, of lack of co-ordination between fiscal and monetary policy, and of
shortcomings in the conduct and presentation of policy - greatly exaggerated if not wholly misplaced.
The problem, of course, has been the weakening of the exchange rate of the euro since its introduction
- particularly against the dollar. This was not at all what most people had predicted - given the earlier
1
BIS Review 92/2000
widespread  fears  of  an  overheating  US  economy  and  the  progressive  widening  of  the  US  current
account deficit - and most conventional analysis has for some considerable time now suggested that,
on “the fundamentals”, the euro has become increasingly undervalued. I share that view.
Why then has the euro weakness persisted? Frankly I’m not at all sure that anyone really knows the
answer to that question.
What I think we were all somewhat slow to recognise was the impact of the remarkable acceleration of
productivity  growth  in  the  US  economy  -  not  just  faster  productivity  growth  but  accelerating
productivity growth on the latest data up to the second quarter of this year. This has allowed the US
economy  to  continue  to  grow  faster  than  before  without  generating  inflationary  pressures  -  though
there is clearly a limit to how far that can go. But accelerating productivity growth has also increased
prospective returns on investment in the US which has contributed to a huge net inflow of capital - in
the form of both direct and portfolio investment - which has much more than financed the US current
account deficit.
The numbers are truly massive. In the 18 months since 1 January 1999 when the euro was introduced
the  US  current  account  deficit  was  something  over  $500bn  compared  with  net  long-term  capital
inflows of nearly $750bn. Meanwhile the Eurozone was in small current account surplus but saw net
direct investment and portfolio outflows of some $275bn. The conventional “fundamentals” - which
one would still expect to reassert themselves in due course - have been overridden for the time being
by these massive international capital flows.
To the extent that the capital flows have indeed been driven by an improvement in prospective rates of
return  in  the  US  associated  with  the  productivity  “shock”  -  and  I  freely  acknowledge  that  this
explanation  may  be  oversimplistic  -  one  would  expect  that  at  some  point  it  would  be  discounted
through a change in relative asset values, including the change in the exchange rate. The problem is
that we simply do not know how close we are to that point - or indeed whether we have already passed
it. Putting that question to the market was, for me, the real point of the recent G7 intervention. We all
need  to  understand  much  more  about  the  nature  of  the  capital  flows  and  in  particular  about  what
motivates the market participants who initiate them. My immediate point, however, is that on the basis
of  what  we  do  know  it  seems  unlikely  that  the  euro’s  weakness  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  is
pushed by any obvious macro-economic failure in the Eurozone. It is much more likely that it reflects
the magnetic attraction of the US at present as a destination for long-term investment. And while that
may partly reflect relatively greater flexibility on the supply-side of the US economy, it does not have
much to do, as far as I can see, with the introduction of the euro.
Of course, whatever the cause, the euro’s weakness complicates the task of monetary policy within the
Eurozone. It adds to inflation in itself and amplifies the inflationary effect of the rise in oil prices. The
ECB is rightly concerned to ensure that these effects do not feed through into an increase in the rate of
core inflation.
Given the importance of the Eurozone as far and away our major trading partner, the weakness of the
euro, in this case more specifically its weakness against sterling, also, of course, complicates our own
monetary policy task in the UK.
Looking at the aggregate economic data the UK has had a rather good run now for the past seven or
eight years. We have grown fairly steadily quarter by quarter at an average annual rate over that period
of  some  2¾%,  which  is  well  above  our  longer  term  trend  rate  -  usually  estimated  at  around  2¼%.
Employment has risen steadily so that the number of people employed is the highest on record. And
the rate of unemployment is as low as it has been for about twenty years. Meanwhile inflation on our
inflation target measure has also averaged some 2¾% over the past seven or eight years. Helped by the
dampening effect on UK inflation of the weakness of the euro against sterling, we have been below the
2½% target now for the past year and a half, and currently - on the standard HICP measure - we have
the lowest rate of inflation in Europe at around 1%.
Our problem in the UK is the imbalance within the overall economy between those sectors that are
competing with producers in the Eurozone, who are under considerable pressure, and the rest of the
economy,  which  is  doing  relatively  well.  Believe  me,  we  are  very  conscious  of  the  desirability  of
BIS Review 92/2000
2
exchange  rate  stability  with  our  partners  in  the  single  market  -  even  though  we  recognise  that
membership  of  the  euro  provides  only  nominal,  rather  than  real,  exchange  rate  certainty,  and  is,  of
course, limited to the Eurozone.
Why then do we hesitate? The answer - in terms of the economics of the euro - it seems to me - and
here I differ from Jean-Claude - is quite straightforward - not a bit paradoxical or bizarre! It is because
to join the euro we would have to live with the single monetary policy. It may be that in time we could
expect to do so relatively comfortably. But had we joined at the outset the presumption must be that
over the past two years we would have lived with both a lower exchange rate and lower interest rates
during a period when we have in any case been operating close to productive capacity and growing at
above  trend.  The  likelihood  therefore  is  that  we  would  then  have  experienced  something  of  an
inflationary boom - as they have, for example, in Ireland though I am not sure one can generalise from
the Irish experience.
The subsequent weakening of the euro since the beginning of last year has not made things any easier
for us. Just as, I suggested earlier, the euro is substantially undervalued in terms of the medium-term
“fundamentals”, so in the same terms sterling is on most calculations substantially overvalued against
the euro. To lower sterling to a more sustainable level in present conditions would again require an
easing  of  monetary  policy  which  would  destabilise  our  overall  domestic  economy;  and  this  in  turn
would tend to set in train a process that would lock in a subsequent real UK exchange rate appreciation
within the Eurozone (albeit from an initially less uncompetitive level). That might help reduce sectoral
imbalances  in  the  short  term,  only  for  them  to  re-emerge.  And  in  the  meantime  the  whole  of  the
economy would have been exposed to accelerating inflation, which we would be powerless to address
through national monetary policy. Frankly it is not clear to me that this is a risk which it would be in
the interests of either the UK or the Eurozone to take in today’s conditions.
For the time being our best bet, it seems to me, is for both the Eurozone and the UK to continue to
pursue  macro-economic  -  both  fiscal  and  monetary  -  stability  in  parallel,  and  to  hope  that  the  euro
recovers, as I continue to expect that it will. That strikes me as a more reliable path to the sustainable
convergence  which  the  British  Government  has set  as the essential  economic  criterion  on  which its
decision to move ahead to a referendum on UK entry to the euro will be based.
3
BIS Review 92/2000
