Willem F Duisenberg: Business conditions and the
economic outlook in the euro area
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the
75th anniversary of the International Chamber of Commerce Deutschland, Berlin, 26 October 2000.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 Introduction
1.
We have come together to celebrate the 75th anniversary of the International Chamber of Commerce
Deutschland. Early in the last century, the founders of the International Chamber of Commerce were
convinced that trade was a powerful force for peace and prosperity. Although dreadful years were to
come, I think they were right. In a way, Europe has built up on this very same idea over the past half
century, from the start of the European Coal and Steel Community to later developments such as the
single market and, as a corollary of that, the introduction of the single currency. In this respect, there
have thus  been clear  parallels  in  thinking  among  policymakers  and  entrepreneurs. The  International
Chamber  of  Commerce  of  today  still  stands  for  the  principle  of  open  international  trade  and
investment in a free market economy. That this principle has been promoted in Germany for 75 years
now, is indeed worth a “Festakt”.
The  topic  of  my  speech  today  is  “Business  conditions  and  the  economic  outlook  in  the  euro  area”.
While I cannot give you any golden rules on how best to conduct business in the euro area, I can say
something about the environment in which business is conducted. This environment can be split into
two  characteristic  parts,  both  of  which  are  highly  important  for  doing  business:  first,  the  structural
economic environment  and, second,  the  conjunctural  economic  environment.  I  shall  talk  about  both
today.  Regarding  the  structural  environment,  I  shall  focus  on  those  developments  in  the  euro  area
which  make  it  increasingly  one  large  integrated  market.  On  the  conjunctural  environment,  I  shall
discuss the outlook for the economy of the euro area.
The main message is that, from my point of view, the prospects for doing business in the euro area are
favourable,  as  the  structural  environment  is  clearly  changing  for  the  better  and  the  conjunctural
economic environment is good.
The structural environment
2.
Let me start with reviewing the structural economic environment.
Given that we are celebrating a 75th anniversary, allow me to dwell somewhat on history. It was just
after the Second World War that western Europe began its process of integration. It started in 1948,
after  the  countries  receiving  Marshall  Aid  set  up  the  Organisation  for  European  Economic
Cooperation, which later became the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. Soon
afterwards,  plans  were  made  for  more  far-reaching  forms  of  economic  cooperation,  looking  for  the
possibilities for free trade. One of those plans, the so-called Schuman plan, was a  French initiative,
which was welcomed by Germany, Italy and the Benelux countries. In 1952, the six nations concerned
created the European Coal and Steel Community, the first common market, albeit only for a limited
number  of  products.  Plans  to  eliminate  more  trade  barriers  began  to  emerge  and,  in  1957,  the  six
countries  signed  the  Treaty  of  Rome  establishing  the  European  Economic  Community  (EEC).  The
EEC  was  to  become  a  customs  union  for  industrial  products,  without  any  custom  duties  for  trade
within  the  Community  and  with  common  tariffs  for  trade  outside  the  Community.  The  subsequent
broadening  and  deepening  proves  the  success  of  this  Community.  Developments  in  the  last  decade
have further promoted free trade.
1
BIS Review 95/2000
First, the foundations of a level playing field were laid with the creation of the Single Market in 1992.
This enhanced the possibilities for business  by  extensively  reducing  the regulations  on cross-border
trade within Europe. Second, this Single Market project was supplemented by the single currency, the
euro,  which  has  been  introduced  in,  thus  far,  11  of  the  15  Member  States  of  the  European  Union.
Economic and Monetary Union has created a “zone of stability” in Europe, by eliminating exchange
rate fluctuations between these eleven countries, by establishing a common monetary policy aimed at
price stability for the area as a whole and by the commitment of the fiscal authorities to the Stability
and  Growth  Pact.  A  stable  public  policy  environment  is  expected  to  foster  business  activity,  as  it
lowers the risk premia paid either implicitly or explicitly in many transactions. The clearest example
of a reduction in the risk premia resulting from Monetary Union is the fact that there is no longer any
need for currency hedging in transactions across the countries of the euro area.
Through  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency,  the  euro  area  of  today  can  thus  increasingly  be
perceived as one large market. It is a market that extends from Lisbon to Helsinki and - in the near
future - from Dublin to Athens, as Greece will be joining Monetary Union as from 1 January 2001. In
terms of its population, the euro area market is even larger than that of the United States - it has about
300  million  inhabitants,  some  10%  more  than  the  United  States,  and  it  is  expected  to  grow  even
further, as more countries will probably join in the future.
The euro area thus constitutes one large market. Of course, that market is still evolving and has not yet
reached its ultimate state of development. For example, the euro as such currently exists only in the
financial markets and, to some extent, in the business sector. Consumers still calculate and pay in their
own national currency unit, which is a handicap for increasing awareness of the euro. This will end
with the cash changeover in 2002, which tends to be perceived by the general public as the true start of
Monetary Union. In itself, the cash changeover is a gigantic logistic operation. Moreover, there will be
a period in which both the old national currency units and the euro will circulate simultaneously.
The cash changeover will also achieve one of the main advantages of the single currency: transparency
of prices in all markets. This will further facilitate the emergence of a truly single market, because it
will be increasingly difficult to maintain price differentials for the same or similar products between
countries. Even though market segmentation may occur for various reasons, such as the particular tax
situation  or  different  technical  specifications,  pressure  will  increase  on  both  entrepreneurs  and
regulators,  as  consumer  and  large  retail  organisations  will  become  increasingly  aware  of  the  price
differences.
But there are more things to do to further integrate the euro area markets. There still exist structural
rigidities  in  many  countries,  which  affect  the  proper  functioning  of  product  and  labour  markets.  A
continuation  both  of  moderate  wage  settlements  and  of  structural  reforms  will  be  essential
contributions to a further improvement of the functioning of European markets. The introduction of
new technology requires flexibility of other factors, including labour, if production processes are to be
reorganised most efficiently. If there are limits and restrictions to the adjustment to the most profitable
combination of productive factors, the levels of investment in the new technologies will accordingly
be affected negatively.
It  must be noted that the introduction  of the  euro has contributed  to  the  awareness  of  policymakers
throughout  Europe  that  structural  reforms  are  needed.  And  although  many  reforms  have  yet  to  be
implemented, substantial progress has nonetheless been made. Governments have acted in the field of
product markets in order to make them more competitive to the benefit of consumers. The favourable
impact that opening up sectors to competition has on prices, growth and employment has become clear
in  the  telecommunications  and  energy  sectors.  The  challenge  now  is  to  further  reduce  the  level  of
regulation so as to stimulate activities in other sectors of the economy.
With regard to the fiscal position, there is a relatively high tax burden and there are still a number of
countries  with  a  very  high  debt  ratio.  Fiscal  policies  must  thus  be  firmly  committed  to  the
requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact in order to enhance the soundness of public finances.
However, it is important to remember that the Treaty, supplemented by the Stability and Growth Pact,
reflects a broad agreement and provides for basic principles in the field of fiscal policy. In particular, it
requires that countries in the EU, and especially those that have adopted the euro, respect a common
BIS Review 95/2000
2
code  of  fiscal  conduct  that  is  expected  to  uphold  discipline  in  the  management  of  government
finances.
In this respect, a remarkable evolution can already be seen. The fiscal position of euro area countries
could, on average, show a substantial improvement this year. In part, this is due to stronger growth and
substantial one-off windfall gains from mobile telephone licences. But it is also the reward for many
years  of  fiscal  reform,  which  started  in  the  run-up  to  Monetary  Union.  In  several  Member  States,
major tax reforms are planned. The ongoing and planned tax reductions  are  welcome  steps  towards
reducing distortions in the economy and producing positive supply-side effects. However, they should
be fully offset by primary spending cuts to prevent a pro-cyclical loosening of fiscal policy.
As  regards  the  financial  markets,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  led  to  a  unified  money  market
throughout the euro area. Before the start of Economic and Monetary Union, criticism was sometimes
heard  to  the  effect  that  the  decentralised  monetary  policy  framework  was  bound  to  become  too
complex  and  inefficient.  However,  from  a  technical  point  of  view,  highly  developed  information
technologies  make  decentralisation  entirely  feasible.  Consequently,  after  almost  22  months  of
experience with this system, such criticism is no longer heard. There seems to be almost unanimous
agreement that it works well. Indeed, the rapid integration of the euro area money market,  with  the
crucial support of an integrated payment systems infrastructure, in particular the “TARGET” system,
was a precondition for the successful implementation of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy.
There still remains a need to further develop financial markets in Europe - especially with regard to the
provision  of  risk  capital.  However,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has,  in  fact,  involved  a  process  of
integration  of  national  financial  markets,  which  is  increasing  the  size  and  liquidity  of  the  financial
market  and  fostering  its  depth  and  breadth.  The  European  financial  system  is  changing  rapidly.
Although it is still predominantly bank-oriented, the change is clearly in the direction of a greater role
for  markets.  There  has,  for  example,  been  a  rapid  growth  of  the  euro-denominated  private  bond
market. The euro did not cause this trend, but it has given it a major impetus.
The  process  of  monetary  policy-making  and  its  implementation  has  functioned  efficiently.  The
evolution both of external inflation forecasts and of inflation expectations derived from the analysis of
long-term  interest  rates  (in  particular,  index-linked  bonds)  indicates  that  the  financial  markets  and
economists widely expect medium-term price developments that are in line with the ECB’s definition
of  price  stability.  Obviously,  bond  yields  and  many  external  forecasts  incorporate  expectations  of
future policy changes and therefore  offer  a judgement  on  prospective  monetary  policy  decisions,  as
well  as  on  decisions  taken  in  1999  and  2000.  As  such,  they  provide  a  positive  assessment  of  the
overall monetary framework. Actual inflation in 1999 stood at 1.1%, compatible with price stability.
Although inflation has increased this year, it is still relatively low, both historically and compared with
the United States, for instance.
Above all, as indicated earlier, Monetary Union has proven to be a catalyst for major improvements in
the structural economic environment. In this respect, there is thus also reason to expect that the euro
area  could  benefit  over  time  from  the  advances  in  the  new  technologies,  as  the  United  States  has
apparently been doing already.
Europe is thus changing and much has already been achieved. The advances are noteworthy, although
they are not always appreciated, not even by Europeans themselves. There remains a great deal to be
done  in  order  to  further  upgrade  the  structural  environment.  However,  this  in  itself  creates
opportunities for the future as there is a large potential to be exploited.
Outlook for euro area economy
3.
Let me now turn to the conjunctural side of the economic environment.
Where economic growth is concerned, the euro area economy has impressively overcome the negative
mood prevailing in early 1999, recovering to reach a state of affairs not seen for more than a decade.
Real  GDP  growth  in  the  euro  area  has  shown  a  strong  performance  since  mid-1999,  with  four
consecutive quarters of 0.9% growth, quarter-on-quarter, and the forces underlying sound growth in
3
BIS Review 95/2000
the medium term remain in place. The external environment remains favourable. Domestic demand is
expected to continue to be strong as well. Consumption is benefiting from high consumer confidence
and  further  increases  in  employment,  and  investment  is  being  stimulated  by  higher  corporate
profitability and increasing rates of capacity utilisation. Domestic financing conditions are also good.
This  positive  outlook  for  growth  is  confirmed  by  available  forecasts  from  international  institutions,
such as the IMF and OECD, as well as by Consensus forecasts, which project growth in the euro area
in the next one to two years to be higher than in 1999, with an increase from close to 2½% last year, to
above 3% this year and the next.
It  is  true  that  recent  indicators  suggest  that,  following  the  period  of  acceleration,  the  economic
expansion may now be levelling-off, albeit at a robust pace. Growth in industrial production excluding
construction  has  decelerated  somewhat  recently.  The  Purchasing  Managers’  Index  declined  in  the
course  of  the  summer,  which  would  indicate  that  a  turning  point  may  have  been  reached  in
year-on-year  growth  of  industrial  production.  At  the  same  time,  however,  the  index  still  points  to
continued strong rates  of  growth  after  the  first  half  of  this  year.  Moreover, sustained  high  levels  of
industrial  confidence,  as  shown  by  the  EC  survey,  suggest  that  growth  remains  robust.  Although
consumer confidence fell in September, it remained clearly above its long-term average.
However, the possibility cannot be ruled out that the significant increase in oil prices observed in the
past months may temporarily dampen growth dynamics over the short term. Thus far in October, oil
prices - measured in terms of UK Brent - have remained above USD31 per barrel. If oil prices were to
develop according to futures prices for the remainder of this year, the oil price increase for 2000 as a
whole would amount to more than USD10, compared with the average price in  1999. The  oil  price
increase has caused the terms of trade of the euro area to deteriorate, and has thus also had a certain
negative impact on the growth of real income for the economy as a whole. However, it can be noted
that the reduced oil dependence since the first oil shock in 1973 limits the overall impact of any price
rise. Against the background of a generally favourable economic outlook, the increase in oil prices can
be seen as occurring at a point in time when euro area economic activity should not be overly sensitive
to shocks of this kind.
The  oil  price  increases  have  influenced  recent  price  developments  and  still  continue  to  do  so.  The
same holds true of the depreciation of the euro exchange rate. Overall inflation, as measured by the
Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices  (HICP),  may  well  remain  above  2%  for  a  more  protracted
period than expected earlier. We are currently seeing the direct effects of such external developments
on the HICP rate of inflation, which was 2.3% in August and 2.8% in September. Looking at the HICP
excluding energy, the rise in September was 1.6%.
The  ECB  has  as  its  primary  objective  to  maintain  price  stability.  Price  stability  is  defined  as  a
year-on-year increase of below 2% in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices for the euro area over
the medium term. The main tool which the ECB has for maintaining price stability is the control of
short-term interest rates. However, interest rate changes only impact prices after some lag. The ECB
thus aims at maintaining price stability over the medium term. The current oil price and exchange rate
developments cannot be remedied by monetary policy in the short term. However, it is imperative that
medium-term upward pressure on prices be contained.
The ECB has increased its interest rates in steps by a total of 225 basis points since November 1999.
The  gradual  tightening  of  monetary  policy  was  needed  to  preserve  the  prospects  for  price  stability,
thereby contributing to sustainable output and employment growth in the medium term. A monetary
policy  committed  to  price  stability  is  the  best  way  to  ensure  that  monetary  policy  makes  its  full
contribution  to  overall  economic  welfare.  By  pre-emptively  responding  to  threats  to  price  stability,
both sharper increases in interest rates at a later stage and pronounced swings in economic activity can
be avoided.
The  challenge  is  to  translate  the  current  cyclical  upswing  into  a  sustained  period  of  robust
non-inflationary growth. The key to a lasting increase in the growth potential of the euro area lies in
the continuation of structural measures to enhance the flexibility of the labour and goods markets and
in the maintenance of sound public finances. Governments must avoid the mistakes of the past, when
fiscal policies were relaxed in response to the effects stemming from the increases in energy prices. At
BIS Review 95/2000
4
the  current  juncture,  fiscal  policies  should  avoid  any  pro-cyclical  bias  and  should  aim  at  reaching
sustainable  fiscal  positions  in  the  medium  term  more  quickly.  In  addition,  it  will  be  important  for
social partners to continue to act as responsibly as they have done in the recent past. Wage moderation
has made an important contribution to the progress observed thus far in job creation and in reducing
unemployment. Indeed, employment has grown by 1.8% in 1999 and by over 2% in the first half of
2000.  And,  since  the  start  of  Monetary  Union,  unemployment  in  the  euro  area  has  fallen  by
1.5 percentage points, although it still remains relatively high at a rate of 9%. Any attempt for wages
to  catch  up  in  reaction  to  recent  oil  price  increases  would  be  highly  detrimental  to  the  current
favourable  growth  prospects,  since  monetary  policy  would  need  to  react  to  the  resulting  upward
pressure on prices.
Conclusion
4.
Let me conclude at this point. The structural environment is clearly changing. Over the past decade or
so, there has been a drive to integrating markets in Europe. The euro area, with its single currency, will
increasingly be perceived as one large market. This creates many opportunities for business within the
euro area. It also creates challenges as competitive forces increase. These will no doubt intensify after
the physical introduction of the euro. This will make consumers and enterprises increasingly aware of
the existence and benefits of the common currency and will focus the spotlight on still existing price
differences in the euro area. The structural environment also poses challenges for policymakers, as the
economy  is  still  facing  structural rigidities  and a  relatively  high  tax  burden.  However,  the  potential
offered by the large euro area market is clearly already there to be exploited.
Given  the  changes  for  the  better  on  the  structural  side,  I  am  confident  that  the  euro  area  offers
excellent opportunities  for  doing  business. The  current  growth  prospects  are  favourable  and  Europe
can rely on a central bank which is firmly committed to maintaining price stability. This will serve to
further promote what the founders of the International Chamber of Commerce had in mind: peace and
prosperity.
5
BIS Review 95/2000
