Otmar Issing: Should we have faith in central banks?
Speech by  Professor  Otmar  Issing,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,
held at St Edmund’s College Millennium Year Lecture, Cambridge, on 26 October 2000.
 Ultimately, trust must be earned, it is granted temporarily, it must be checked, and
it must be backed up by hard evidence, not be based purely on faith or belief.
It  is  a  great  honour  and  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  deliver  the  St.  Edmund’s  College  Millennium
Lecture on the topic of faith in central banking.
I must confess that when Professor Heap first invited me to give a talk on “Faith and Finance in the
New Millennium” as part of a series of lectures on the general theme “Faith in the Future” I suffered
an initial instant of hesitation or lack of faith, if you will. As you can imagine “faith” is not a natural
subject to discuss for a central banker and economist, who is trained to look at facts and hard evidence.
To  address  such  a  difficult  issue  in  such  a  distinguished  seat  of  learning  as  Cambridge  University
would seem to require a good measure of courage. But then, of course, courage - if not faith - is an
attribute that central bankers should undoubtedly possess. I am also much reassured and grateful for
the faith, if I may say so, that you put in me by inviting me to talk about this subject.
To make my job a little bit easier - and pull the topic a little closer to my “home turf” - I have taken
the liberty to change the title of the lecture. I have also turned it into a question: “Should we have faith
in central banks?”
I should admit from the start that I do not have an obvious and clear-cut answer for you. If there was a
simple answer it would not have been an interesting question to ask ... and it would have been a very
brief Millennium Lecture. So I will try to approach this question a bit in the spirit of how I presume
that Cambridge undergraduates might tackle their weekly essay questions, but hopefully - given  my
lack of practice - I will not be graded quite as harshly.
A look at the dictionary
1.
Should  we  have  faith  in  central  banks?  My  answer  to  this  question  depends  on  what  is  meant  by
“faith”.  A  natural  starting  point  is  to  take  a  look  at  the  dictionary.  The  term  “faith”  is  used  in  a
religious context as well as in everyday language. From the Concise Oxford Dictionary - if you allow
me to make reference to “the other place” here - I take away three main uses of the term “faith”. These
different meanings are also reflected in the history of philosophical approaches to faith and belief.
First, there is the theological meaning of faith as “belief in religious doctrine”, “spiritual apprehension
of divine truth apart from proof” or, more generally, “belief founded on authority”. Here, Blaise Pascal
springs to mind as an advocate of a strict separation between faith and reason. In his view one could
not arrive at faith by means of reasoning but only “through the heart”.
On this first definition my answer  to  the  question posed  by  the title  of  my  lecture is  “no”.  I  would
prefer to confine faith, in the sense of unquestioned belief, strictly to the private and religious sphere.
When it comes to central banking neither the central banker’s actions nor the public’s expectations can
afford  to  just  rely  on  faith  devoid  of  proof  or  evidence.  Moreover,  I  do  not  regard  it  as  helpful  to
characterise  central  banking  as  some  sort  of  mystical  art  that  is  to  instil  awe  and  worship.  On  the
contrary, I consider that the public would be generally ill-advised to put “blind trust” into particular
individuals or institutions. This is an important lesson to take away from liberal economic and political
philosophy  as  well  as  from  the  overwhelming  merits  of  the  democratic  system  of  government.
Ultimately, trust must be earned, it is granted temporarily, it must be checked and it must be backed up
by hard evidence, not be based purely on faith or belief.
1
BIS Review 96/2000
Second, faith is used in everyday language as a synonym for “belief”, “reliance” and “trust”, which
could  perhaps  be  interpreted  in  the  sense  of  “well-founded  expectation”.  In  this  context  one  could
think of faith as  a  probabilistic statement.  Immanuel  Kant  has associated  faith  with  an intermediate
degree of certainty, in between mere “opinion” but short of “knowledge”.
On  this  definition  my  basic  answer  to  the  question  becomes  “yes”.  At  least  in  the  example  of  the
institution I represent, I see good reasons to believe that the public in Europe should and that it can
rely  on  the  European  Central  Bank  to  fulfil  its  mandate  and  maintain  price  stability.  This  sort  of
“reasoned faith” or “confidence” is (as it should be) underpinned by a sound institutional setup, the
application  of  well-established  economic  principles  and,  last  but  not  least,  by  the  quality  and
determination of the people dedicated to this task.
A third aspect of faith relates to “keeping a promise” or “engagement” as in “acting in good faith”, in
the sense of reflecting “honesty of intention”. For Thomas Hobbes “to have faith”, “to trust” and “to
believe  a  man”  are  synonymous.  One  could  think  of  this  dimension  of  faith  as  representing  a  two-
sided relationship, rather than a unilateral act of faith.
From  this  perspective  faith  -  or  here  better:  trust  -  is  similar  to  a  contract  established  between  two
parties.  The  faith  that  the  public  places  into  the  central  bank  imposes  a  constant  obligation  on  the
central bank to honour this trust and fulfil the promise of stable money. The bond of trust between the
public  and  its  central  bank  can  be  seen  as  something  like  a  credit  relationship.  Indeed,  the  term
“credit” is Latin for “he believes”, i.e. it expresses the hope and expectation that  initially  one-sided
trust will be reciprocated and returned in the future. Trust is given “on credit” but in turn it is based on
credibility or trustworthiness.
If you allow me to jump from these etymological reflections straight to the mundane tasks of central
banking in practice I should like to stress the following. In the case of European Monetary Union the
promise of maintaining prices stable over the medium term - and thus maintaining the value of money
- is built on solid and credible institutional foundations. So far in its young life the European Central
Bank has lived up to its promise and there is every reason to believe that price stability in the euro area
will continue to be maintained over the medium term. Long-term bond yields and surveys of inflation
expectations  continue to indicate  a high  degree  of  confidence  in  the  ECB’s  ability  to  deliver  on  its
primary  objective  over  the  medium  term.  This  is  what  ultimately  counts.  For  this  achievement  the
ECB can deservedly claim some “credit”, if I may say so.
In  the  remainder  of  the  lecture  I  will  concentrate  mainly  on  trust  and  credibility  as  two  aspects  of
“faith”, which appear most relevant for monetary policy making. Trust and the quest for credibility are
at the core of a monetary economy, the role of central banks in such an economy and the search for an
appropriate monetary constitution. This is not to say that there is no room for faith as “belief based on
authority” both in the public perception of central banks and of central bankers.
Trust: the role of money and the value of price stability
2.
One does not have to look very far in order to find a link between faith and money. In fact, every one-
dollar bill bears the inscription “In God we trust”. The Euro will be more secular in this respect. In the
case of Sterling, the pound notes feature a “promise to pay the bearer” of the note the amount stated.
This  points  to  the  very  nature  of  money  as  being  built  on  trust,  on  a  promise.  Trust  is  crucial  for
money to function as a medium of exchange, as a store of value and as a stable unit of account. Using
economic terminology, money - or rather the trust that underpins the use of money - has public good
characteristics or confers positive network externalities on all participants in the economy. In this way
money  economises  significantly  on  the  costs  of  transactions  that  would  be  present  in  a  pure  barter
economy.
If you look more closely at the dollar bill, you will find a further inscription which states “This note is
legal  tender  for  all  debt,  public  and  private”.  This  imposes  an  obligation  to  accept  the  note  in  the
settlement of  contracts and  highlights the fact that  money  derives  its  value  -  whether  imposed by  a
legal tender requirement or not - from the willingness of other economic agents to accept it to settle
transactions. Each agent will only accept money, if he can be confident that it will in turn be accepted
BIS Review 96/2000
2
by other agents in future transactions. Thus money is a social achievement as has long been recognised
by  economists  for  example  by  Menger.  Money  is  a  question  of  trust,  its  use  requires  trust  and  it
reflects trust. This is especially true in the case of fiat money, i.e. the use of printed paper - which has
no intrinsic worth - as  a  medium  of  exchange  and  as  a  store  of  value.  Yet  even  commodity  money
requires trust and a well-founded expectation that it will be accepted for a wide range of transactions.
Milton Friedman, in his book Money Mischief (1992), reports the well-known story of the monetary
system of a small island in Micronesia which at the end of the 19th century used stone wheels as a
medium of exchange and as a store of wealth. He recounts an episode when the colonial government
imposed “fees” on disobedient district chiefs simply by painting black crosses on these stone wheels.
This miraculously and promptly induced them to change their ways just in order to have these marks
erased  again  and  thus  -  in  their  perception  -  their  wealth  restored.  Friedman  concludes  that  this
example  illustrates  “how  important  appearance  or  illusion  or  “myth”,  given  unquestioned  belief,
becomes in monetary matters. Our own money, the money we have grown up with, the system under
which it is controlled, these appear “real” and “rational” to us. Yet the money of other countries often
seems to us like paper or worthless metal, even when the purchasing power of individual units is quite
high.”
The  euro  has  been  in  existence  for  almost  two  years  now.  It  does  not  come  in  the  form  of  stone
wheels. In fact it does not yet have any concrete and tangible expression at all. Until the introduction
of euro banknotes and coins at the beginning of 2002 it will essentially remain a “virtual” currency,
which may perhaps seem as remote, unfamiliar and unnatural in the eyes of the  public  as  the  stone
wheels described by Friedman. This lack of tangibility and visibility of the euro in part accounts for
the  particular  challenges  that  the  euro  faces  in  winning  the  hearts  of  the  general  public  as  a  new
currency which has yet to replace the familiar and trusted national notes and coins in circulation. As
Friedman’s  example  shows:  symbols  may  be  important  in  monetary  matters.  At  the  same  time,
irrespective of the particular symbols and media to which money functions are attached - be it stone
wheels or computer chips - money is ultimately a question of trust. The euro’s current existence as a
“non-tangible currency” perhaps makes this point - which is valid for any fiat money - more plain and
obvious.
No matter what specific medium of exchange a society might wish to adopt, the efficiency of money
in  facilitating  economic  transactions  via  the  price  mechanism  depends  on  its  stability  as  a  unit  of
account, i.e. as a common financial denominator, for the economy. In order to hold and accept money
economic agents must not only be confident that money remains accepted as a medium for exchange,
but also be confident that money will retain its value over time, thereby ensuring that price signals can
provide accurate guidance for markets to function efficiently. In contrast, if money loses its value, this
also undermines its usefulness for exchange. Indeed in periods of very high inflation currency tends to
be replaced, for example, by cigarettes or other goods - or, perhaps, “bads” - in everyday transactions.
An inflationary currency  will simply  cease  to  be  accepted in transactions  notwithstanding  any  legal
tender provisions such as those written on the dollar bills. I am old enough to remember such a period
in post-war Germany, before the currency reform of 1948.
Stable  money,  stable  prices:  these  are  the  very  foundations  of  a  well-functioning  market  economy.
There is a strong economic case for price stability, which today is - again - widely accepted. However,
the case for price stability goes beyond the purely economic sphere. Price stability, the ability to rely
on  stable  money,  is  the  basis  for  trust  in  the  interaction  among  economic  agents,  trust  in  property
rights, trust in society and trust in the future more generally. Trust in stable money is also the basis for
a  free  society,  the  ability  of  people  to  take  decisions  and  plan  their  future  for  themselves.  This  is
particularly  evident  with  respect  to  life-time  savings  for  retirement,  which  is  a  topical  issue  at  the
moment in the context of discussions over a greater role for private pension schemes. Private provision
of  retirement  savings  crucially  requires  the  trust  of  savers  in  the  long-run  stability  of  money.
Conversely, a loss of such confidence inevitably leads to calls on the state to step in and provide for
the future collectively. Inflation undermines trust in money and in property rights more generally. This
mechanism was apparently recognised by Lenin who allegedly remarked that the “most effective way
to destroy civil society is to destroy its money”.
3
BIS Review 96/2000
There is a saying that “peace is not everything, but without peace everything else comes to nothing”. I
am tempted to say the same thing for price stability.
Inflation  -  like  war,  to  which  it  is  often  closely  associated  -  destroys  the  fruit  of  honest  labour,  it
devalues  savings  and  investment,  it  erodes  the  social  fabric  of  society  and  ultimately  puts  the  very
foundations of democracy and freedom at risk. This is one of the lessons of the bitter history of the
20th  century,  which  was  a  century  of  hyperinflation  in  the  wake  of  wars  and  wars  in  the  wake  of
hyperinflation.  No  one  has  described  the  deleterious  effects  of  inflation  more  vividly  than  Stefan
Zweig has done in his book “Die Welt von Gestern” on Germany in the 1920s. He depicts the sense of
distrust, despondency, desolation and despair that hyperinflation brought to Germany in 1923 (in the
wake of the first world war) from which the fragile democratic and economic institutions of the young
Republic were never really to recover (thus preparing the ground for the Second World War).
Zweig contrasts this with the pre-war “golden age of security”, when “it paid to put money year for
year in safe investments”, when “the saver was not yet robbed”, the “honest deceived” but when the
“most patient, not the speculators had the greatest profit”. He concludes “that nothing has rendered the
German people so embittered, so full of hatred, so ready for Hitler as this inflation” (own translation).
From  this  one  could  establish not just  an  economic  case  but  an  ethical  obligation  to  maintain  price
stability. Indeed as far back as the middle ages Nicolaus Oresme has argued in favour of stable money
as a principle of natural law and has denounced the debasing of currency by the state as worse than
usury  and  equivalent  to  robbery  and  exploitation.  In  our  times  another  bishop,  Karl  Lehmann,  the
current chair of the German Conference of Bishops, has stressed a moral and ethical justification of
price stability. In line with recent documents of catholic social teaching he  emphasises  the  fact that
inflation  tends  to  hit  the  weakest  segments  of  the  population  hardest  and  that  it  has  contributed  to
impoverishment in particular in developing countries.
On the whole, however, the world of faith and the world of money eye each other with a good measure
of distrust and suspicion. Men of faith have often regarded money as the symbol of greed, sin and evil
rather  than  as  an  instrument  for  mutually  beneficial  exchange  and  a  foundation  of  prosperity.  The
Christian ethical tradition has in particular expressed moral reservations against the trading or lending
of money against an interest charge. This sceptical attitude towards money and interest rates, which to
an  economist  is  simply  the  intertemporal  price  of  money,  was  well-entrenched  in  the  Scholastic
tradition  and  goes  back  to  Aristotle’s  view  that  to  “make  money  out  of  money”  would  go  against
natural  law.  Interestingly  such  moral  scruples  on  lending  against  interest  are  also  found  in  other
religions and this form of lending is banned to this day in the Islamic world. I must admit that, as a
central banker charged with setting official interest rates, I have difficulties to accept this particular -
to my  mind unfounded - belief, even if the authority in question was claimed to be Aristotle  or  the
Bible, both of which I am quite happy to consult on other matters.
Credibility: the role of rules and institutions
3.
The weight of historical experience, a large body  of  theoretical  literature and  of  empirical  evidence
point to the importance of price stability as the foundation of a well-functioning market economy and
as a precondition for durable growth and prosperity. Nevertheless history is littered with episodes of
high  inflation  which  imposed  high  economic  and  social  costs  on  society.  To  be  sure,  at  times  the
importance of the common and precious good of price stability may have been underrated or forgotten
by society. At other times stability may have been purposefully compromised in the pursuit of other
seemingly more pressing objectives. However, the main lesson that I would take away from history is
this: when it comes to price stability, good faith and honest intentions are not enough.
Fundamentally, money represents a promise. It requires trust by the users of money in the issuer of
money  to  honour  this  promise.  Money  is  built  on  trust,  but  in  turn  trust  must  be  built  on  solid
foundations. The promise must be made credible and this - at least in relatively modern times - is the
job of central bankers.
A promise always concerns the future. As we know when we make promises in everyday life, when
the time comes to make good on our promises there is a danger that we find either our mind or the
BIS Review 96/2000
4
situation having changed. Perhaps we might have simply forgotten what we said in the past or would
like to change our plans under the pressure of a myriad of more pressing concerns. This is all  very
human.  It  also  pretty  much  describes  the  core  of  the  much-discussed  problem  of  credibility  in
monetary policy.  Thus  a  good  monetary  constitution  that can  be  expected to  durably  deliver  on the
promise  of  stability  needs  to  take  human  frailty  and  imperfection  into  account.  Like  elsewhere  in
public life, in monetary policy one should and cannot simply rely on good intentions, blind trust or
unquestioned authority.
Can we trust central banks and can we expect them to be credible in making good on their promise of
price stability?
There  is  today  a  broad  consensus  that  stable  money  is  too  important  to  be  left  to  the  day-to-day
political  process,  which  inevitably  will  always  have  to  balance  different  objectives,  conflicting
interests and short-term pressures. If stable money is regarded as a common good for the benefit of all
and if it is seen as a precondition for long-term prosperity and social justice then it makes sense for
society to create an independent institution that stands above the fray of day-to-day politics and can
pursue this objective with minimum distraction. This is the basis for central bank independence.
If price stability, by contrast, were regarded as just one out of a long  list  of political  and  economic
objectives  -  rather  than  as  a  common  goal  and  a  precondition  for  the  successful  pursuit  of  other
objectives  -  then  there  would  be  no  legitimacy  for  entrusting  this  task  (and  only  this  task)  to
independent  central  banks.  Making  value  judgements  when  trading-off  different  objectives  and
balancing conflicting interests is the legitimate job of elected politicians with a popular mandate and
not of appointed technocrats.
An independent central bank thus pre-supposes a broad consensus on the “quasi-constitutional” nature
of  the  common  good  of  price stability.  Assigning  the central  bank  a  clear  overriding  objective  also
imposes  limits  on its  discretionary  exercise  of  power  and  makes  it easier  for  the  public  to  hold  the
central  bank  accountable  for  its  mandate.  This  is  important  to  keep  in  mind  if  we  entertain  the
possibility that while, yes, “money is too important to be left to the politicians” one could similarly
concur with Poincaré that “money is too important to be left to central bankers” (as quoted by Milton
Friedman in his 1962 essay on “Should there be an independent monetary authority?”). In other words,
why should one trust central bankers more than politicians?
Friedman, at least at the time he wrote, trusted neither of the two and advocated a constitutional rule
for  constant  money  growth  as  his  preferred  solution  of  the  long-standing  debate  on  “Rules  versus
authorities in monetary policy” (which is the title of the classic paper by Henry Simons from 1936).
His  concerns  reflect  what  I  would  regard  as  a  healthy  distrust  of  the  unfettered  “rule  of  men”  as
opposed to the “rule of law” which he much prefers - in line with the long and venerable tradition of
British liberal thinking. Friedman, at the time, was quite sceptical on central bank independence and
asked whether it was “really tolerable in a democracy to have so much power concentrated in a body
free from any kind of direct, effective political control?”
This is why I believe it is important to stress that, if an independent central bank is assigned a clear
and  limited  mandate,  this  represents  a  constraint  on  the  discretionary  exercise  of  power  by  the
government but also by the central bank itself. In the absence of a complete and universally applicable
rule for monetary policy an independent central bank which focuses firmly on the single overriding
goal  of  price  stability  is  the  closest  realistic  and  credible  substitute  for  a  literal  “rule  of  law”.  In
particular such a central bank does not have the discretion to pick and choose at will among several
objectives. A clear commitment to a single overriding objective is the key to credibility and it is also
the key for accountability, i.e. the obligation to constantly justify and explain policies to the general
public.
Institutions themselves represent a set of rules. They are a way to reduce reliance on individual moral
behaviour in the pursuit of desirable objectives. They clearly delineate the power of individuals and
limit  their  discretion  in  the  exercise  of  power.  As  a  consequence,  institutions  -  if  designed
appropriately - should in general prove to be more reliable and durable carriers of trust and reputation
than  can  be  expected  for  individuals.  At  the  same  time  the  institutional  solution  of  an  independent
central bank allows for  greater flexibility  than  the  adoption  of  any  strict  mechanical rule.  Friedman
5
BIS Review 96/2000
himself, in the essay mentioned above, acknowledged that one “cannot dispense fully with the rule of
men” since “no law can be specified so precisely as to avoid problems of interpretation or to cover
explicitly every case”.
A  high  degree  of  accountability  and  transparency  can,  nevertheless,  help  to  monitor  the  conduct  of
monetary  policy  and  to  establish  appropriate  incentives  for  the  behaviour  of  central  banks.  Explicit
performance  contracts  for  individual  central  bankers  have  been  suggested  as  one  way  of  providing
such  incentives  and  of  reducing  the  reliance  on  trust  in  individual  ethical  behaviour.  For  example,
salaries of central bank governors could be linked in some way to the measured inflation rate or they
could be dismissed if a certain inflation threshold is reached. One difficulty with this approach is the
one pointed out already by Friedman. It will in general not be possible to specify a written contract
which can cover all possible contingencies and which could be verified unambiguously ex post.
Moreover, there are limits to the extent to which the behaviour of individuals inside an institution can
be monitored and verified precisely from the outside. Ultimately, the assessment of performance can
only  be  based  on  observable  and  verifiable  outcomes  of  decisions,  which  -  however  -  will  also  be
affected by many other exogenous influences. Especially in cases where decision-making is done by
committee  -  as  is  the  case  for  the  majority  of  independent  central  banks  -  it  is  rather  difficult  to
disentangle individual contributions and responsibilities with respect to the common decisions taken.
Delegating  authority  and  placing  trust  in  institutions  which  are  assigned  a  clear  objective  seems
preferable to relying on the discretion and good faith of individuals, on the one hand, and imposing
strict mechanical rules, on the other hand. Any institution is more than the mere sum of individuals.
This is the very reason for the existence of institutions - otherwise there would be no need for them.
Institutions instil and reflect a sense of common purpose and responsibility. They provide a discipline
on individual behaviour within such an institution. At the same time they provide support and strength
to the individuals making up the institution.
The  strength  of  an  institutional  approach  is  particularly  evident  in  the  case  of  independent  central
banks. In this context, I believe, there are great merits in decision-making by committee. On the one
hand, it allows diverse experiences, arguments and points of views being brought to the table. On the
other hand, there is a shared responsibility for the common decisions taken. It is not a single individual
but the entire institution which is behind these decisions. To my mind both aspects are crucial for a
strong and independent central bank.
For  these  reasons  accountability  and  transparency  are  both  more  easily  and  more  appropriately
implemented in the relationship between the public and the central bank as an institution, rather than
primarily with respect to individual central bankers. In this relationship the public acts as a principal
who delegates the task of monetary policy to the central bank as its agent. The act of delegation can be
one-off, of a constitutional nature, or it can be periodically renewed. In both cases it is crucial that the
central  bank  can  be  held  accountable  for  its  performance  by  the  public.  This  can  be  achieved  in
different - more or less formal - ways. Even if no explicit contractual elements and specific sanctions
are  incorporated  in  this  relationship  the  delegation  of  decision-making  authority  to  an  independent
central bank establishes a kind of quasi-contractual relationship. The delegation of authority represents
an act of trust on the part of the public and it represents a promise and an obligation on the part of the
central bank to fulfil its mandate.
So, should we - should you - have faith in central banks? The answer is yes and no. No, it would not
be  wise  to  always  and  everywhere  trust  central  bankers  with  our  money,  but,  yes,  there  are  good
reasons to trust central banks, if they are designed as solid and independent institutions with a clearly
defined mandate. Institutions limit the faith we need to place into the omniscience and benevolence of
individual decision-makers and provide a more lasting and reliable basis for trust and credibility.
Reputation and accountability: the role of central banks in society
4.
Properly designed institutions provide the basis for trust and confidence. However, this trust must be
earned,  maintained  and  confirmed  through  action  over  time.  Like  individuals,  institutions  become
BIS Review 96/2000
6
carriers  of  reputation  as  a  function  of  their  past  behaviour.  This  reputation  forms  the  basis  for
expectations of future behaviour.
In the case of the European Central Bank, the institutional preconditions for credible and successful
monetary  policy  are  in  place.  The  European  Central  Bank  is  built  on  trustworthy  institutional
foundations. As a new institution, however, it started out without a track record and thus cannot rely
on an established reputation. The statutes and institutional setup of the ECB have worked very well to
date  and  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  taken  its  monetary  policy  decisions  in  full
independence.  However,  to  firmly  establish  trust  and  reputation  takes  time.  Trust  is  deepened  and
reputation  is  built  when  it  is  tested  in  difficult  circumstances  and  when  it  is  maintained  over  an
extended period of time. Until a sufficient track record is established, the ECB - by necessity - has to
rely primarily on the strength of its institutional setup and the force of its arguments to win the trust of
the public.
As  a  new  institution it is  unsurprising  that  the  ECB  has  been  subject  to  an  extraordinary  degree  of
public scrutiny and, indeed, criticism in its young life. I firmly believe that over time this is generally a
healthy  situation.  Over  time  any  public  institution,  which  is  based  on  a  sound  constitutional
foundation, can only benefit from being open to outside advice and from being exposed to criticism
and  debate.  This  creates  desirable  incentives  for  constant  improvement  and  helps  the  institution  to
strengthen  its  commitment  to  fulfil  its  mandate  in  the  best  possible  way.  An  open,  frank  and  fair
dialogue is particularly crucial in the process of developing understanding and a bond of trust between
a young institution like the ECB and its principal, whom it ultimately serves, i.e. the European public.
I do believe that this process of trust-building requires some patience and indeed “good faith” on both
sides. Not “blind faith”, but perhaps some “good-will”.
Undoubtedly well-established central banks with a long and proud history like the Bank of England,
the Federal Reserve or the Bundesbank face an easier task in this regard. They can draw on a large
stock of “trust capital”, an often formidable reputation and a safety net of deep-rooted public support,
if not devotion. If I may take the example of the Bundesbank, the borderline between trust and quasi-
religious  faith,  indeed,  becomes  very  hard  to  make  out.  It  was  Jacques  Delors  who  once  famously
remarked: “Not all Germans believe in God, but all believe in the Bundesbank”. Such a degree of faith
is,  of  course,  partly  the  result of  the  success  that  this  central  has  had  in  maintaining  its  promise  of
stable  money.  However,  one  needs  to  remember  that  the  Bundesbank  (and  its  predecessor
organisation, the “Bank Deutscher Länder”) started from almost zero after the catastrophes of tyranny,
war and inflation, which had thoroughly destroyed faith and trust in public authority. In this regard the
ECB, thankfully, is in a much more favourable position.
The attitude of the German public towards their central bank is also the product of the high premium
that  was  -  and  continues to  be  -  placed  on stability  in  Germany,  as  a  consequence  of  the  traumatic
instabilities of war and inflation in the first half of the 20th century. This sort of “faith” thus can be
explained  in  the  case  of  Germany.  Andre  Glucksmann  has  used  the  term  “currency  religion”  to
describe the Germans’ devotion to monetary stability and to the  Bundesbank  as the  guardian  of the
D-Mark. In my view such devotion, nevertheless, represents something of an anomaly. I am not sure
that it is necessarily always helpful for an institution like a central bank to be held in such awe. Central
bankers rightly become nervous - or at least slightly uncomfortable - if public expectations become too
high or are elevated to quasi-religious dimensions. Moreover, if a central bank - for whatever reasons -
acquires prestige and standing that transcends the strict confines of its mandate and becomes an object
of faith or mythical devotion, this may suggest that it fills a void left elsewhere. In particular this may
be an indication of a lack of confidence in other - more important - institutions in society.
To my mind independent central banks fulfil an important function for the benefit of society. Their job
is to maintain price stability, maintain trust and confidence in the currency. Nothing more and nothing
less  should  be  asked  of  them.  This  reflects  a  clean  division  of  labour  and  a  clear  allocation  of
responsibilities vis-à-vis other economic policy actors and, especially, vis-à-vis democratically elected
governments.  Stable  money  is  too  important  to  be  overburdened  with  other  purposes.  This  is
especially important in the process of European integration.
7
BIS Review 96/2000
Faith in the European Central Bank, faith in Europe?
5.
The move to European Monetary Union is an important step in the long history of closer European
integration. In particular, in the field of monetary policy the Maastricht Treaty represents a decisive act
of delegation of decision-making authority or sovereignty. The Treaty entrusts the objective of price
stability to an independent and supranational body, the European Central Bank.
The Treaty  was  ratified by  the  parliaments and  governments  of  all  Member  States  of  the  European
Union and in some cases endorsed by referendum. Thus the delegation of European monetary policy
to the ECB is endowed with full democratic legitimacy. This bond of legitimacy is a crucial aspect of
sound institutional foundations for monetary policy. There is no doubt that in order to be successful
over the longer term, the ECB as the guardian of price stability - like any institution in a democracy -
will have to win and maintain the trust and support of the European public. It can and should be held
accountable  for  fulfilling  its  mandate.  This  mandate  is  clear,  but  it  is  also  limited.  It  needs  to  be
understood what monetary policy can be expected to deliver, but also what it cannot be expected to
achieve.
This is particular important in the case of the European Monetary Union, which not only delegates the
authority for monetary policy to an independent central bank but which also severs the traditionally
close link between the currency and the nation state. Historically, currency jurisdictions and national
borders have tended to coincide, at least in more recent times. This reflects the fact that the right to
issue money has been seen as a key attribute of national sovereignty. Thus monetary union cannot be
regarded as just a small and innocuous step of a primarily technical nature. One is hard pressed to find
examples in history, where sovereign nation states voluntarily chose to cede or share sovereignty in
the monetary field. It is therefore clear that European Economic and Monetary  Union  has  been  and
will  continue  to  be  part  of  the  wider  economic  and  political  project  that  the  process  of  European
integration process has represented from the very start.
Monetary union is certainly not only about money. It is an important element in the very successful
quest for lasting peace, stability and prosperity in Europe. This quest involves the building of trust and
the sharing of sovereignty among European partners and the building of common institutions, in cases
where this is desirable for the benefit of all. Europe is more than a collection of nation states, but it
also stops far short of becoming a single federal entity. I do not believe that a stable monetary regime
necessarily must have its root at the level of the nation state. Going back in history the international
gold standard coincided with an era of stability. It was a system that was fundamentally based on rules
and which transcended the nation state. Nevertheless, as a currency that is new and not linked in the
traditional way to the nation state the euro does face particular challenges in winning the trust and the
hearts of the people.
Money  is clearly  regarded as  more  than  simply  a  medium  of  exchange  or  a  unit  of  account.  It  is  a
symbol to which people are attached in meta-economical - if not religious - terms. The Archbishop of
Canterbury, George Carey, once stated: “I want the Queen’s head on the bank notes. The point about
national identity is very important. I don’t want to become French or German.” Personally, I do not
feel  less  German,  only  because  I  share  a  currency  with  fellow  Europeans,  just  as  presumably  the
Welsh,  for  example,  can  retain  a  strong  sense  of  identity  despite  sharing  the  same  money  with  the
English. I also believe that a European identity - with its own shared symbols and characteristics - can
happily  co-exist  with,  and  even  re-enforce,  national,  regional  and  local  identities.  Nevertheless,
symbols matter. The euro reflects the economic reality that now binds together those countries which
have adopted it as their currency. It will also inevitably be regarded as a broader symbol of a shared
future and destiny.
Whatever the wider goals and ambitions of European integration may be, one thing is clear. The first
and foremost objective of European Monetary Union was not simply to create a common currency but
a stable currency. This is the promise that Europe needs to fulfil on a lasting basis. A stable money is
too important to just be regarded as an instrument for other political ambitions. The reverse is true:
without stable money all further ambition will come to nothing. Jaques Rueff in the 1950s famously
claimed that “Europe will be built on money or it will not be built”. I would contend that European
integration  in  the  meantime  had  progressed  quite  successfully  even  without  a single  currency.  Now
BIS Review 96/2000
8
that the step to Monetary Union has been taken - and only now - I can, however, fully subscribe to his
statement.  You  will  probably  understand  that  I  would,  however,  add  an  adjective:  “Europe  will  be
built on stable money or it will not be built”.
The prime minister of Portugal, Antonio Guterres, is reported in 1995 to have taken this line one step
further. He drew the analogy to Jesus’ call on St. Peter when founding the Christian church: “Thou art
Peter, the rock, and on this rock I shall build my church” turned into “Thou art the euro, on this new
currency  shall  we  build  our  Europe”.  I  must  admit  I  would  prefer  to  make  the  argument  in  more
secular terms and not to overburden the euro with additional hopes, beliefs or visions. Fulfilling the
promise of a stable money - taken by itself - is not a trivial requirement but it is not matter of faith in
the religious sense as discussed at the beginning of my speech. The practical task of maintaining price
stability, preserving the value of the new currency, the euro, falls to the European Central Bank. The
ECB is well-equipped to do its job. At the same time other policy makers in Europe also have to play
their part.
Concluding remarks
6.
Should we have faith in central banks? My first answer to this question was a clear “no” if faith means
“belief in unquestioned authority”. Central bankers should not ask just for  faith,  they  cannot  expect
such faith and they cannot take faith for granted. Instead they must work hard every day to earn the
trust that the public places in them. Central bankers are not super-humans, they cannot be guaranteed
to  be  benevolent  or  omniscient.  They  will  perform  best  within  an  institution  that  is  given  a  clear
objective and that is held accountable by the public.
Conversely,  the  public  would  be  ill-advised  to  put  “blind  trust”  in  central  bankers.  Price  stability,
preserving  the  value  of  money  is  the  precondition  for  a  well-functioning  market  economy,  for
economic and social stability, a free and prosperous society. Price stability is too important for society
to  be  left  “on  trust”  to  the  vagaries  of  the  political  process  or  to  the  whims  of  individual  central
bankers. It requires to build solid and strong independent institutions which are dedicated to serve and
defend the common good of price stability.
It  is  both  economically  sensible  as  well  as  democratically  legitimate  for  society  to  delegate  such  a
limited  and  well-defined  task  to  an  independent  central  bank.  Such  an  act  of  delegation  confers  an
obligation on the central bank to fulfil this trust and to be held accountable. Faith may be all right, but
control by an attentive public will also be needed. On the second meaning of “faith” in the sense of a
justified belief, a well-founded expectation, I believe there are good reason to trust independent central
banks with the maintenance of price stability.
Finally,  trust  can  be  regarded  as  a  stock  of  capital  or  “credit”  that  is  built  up  in  the  relationship
between the central bank and its ultimate master, the public it serves. Such a stock of trust is the basis
for keeping faith also in difficult times. Trust flows in both directions and - like stable money - it is a
common good. Trust breeds more trust in return. But the building of trust in a relationship requires
some time and patience.
I believe that the European Central Bank can take credit and, indeed, pride in achieving its mandate so
far. Its mandate is the maintenance of price stability in the euro area over the medium term. Nothing
more  and  nothing  less.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  European  Central  Bank  is  determined  and
committed to continue to fulfil its responsibility and keep the promise of a stable currency for Europe.
Should we fail in the pursuit of this task the statutes of the European Central Bank may not foresee
any  immediate  sanctions  or  material  punishment.  As  mentioned  before  I  would  not  regard  such
sanctions as either necessary or effective. However, central bankers may well take fright from a glance
at  Dante’s  Divina  Comedia.  There  a  certain  Adam  of  Brescia  is  mentioned,  guilty  of  the  crime  of
falsifying coins - i.e. debasing of the currency. His punishment in one of the darkest - or rather hottest
- corners of hell is a horribly inflated belly. Central bankers beware!
9
BIS Review 96/2000
