Mr. Grenville discusses exchange rates and crises against the background of
the  financial  turmoil  in  Asia*      Talk  by  Mr.  Stephen  Grenville,  a  Deputy  Governor  of  the
Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the  Third  Biennial  Pacific  Rim  Allied  Economic  Organizations
Conference in Bangkok on 16/1/98.
Economists have an unenviable reputation for being practitioners of the “dismal
science”, but this is undeserved.  The economist’s characteristic response to a crisis is a positive
one:  they identify a central crucial factor, and generally this is something that can be put right.
Economists  rarely  throw  up  their  hands  and  say  that  it  is  all  too  difficult.    This  capacity  to
produce  simple  answers  which  purport  to  avoid  further  problems  is,  in  one  sense,  admirable.
But  it  carries  with  it  the  danger  that  complex  causality  will  be  mis-diagnosed.    It  opens  the
possibility,  too,  that  pet  panaceas,  rules  of  thumb,  and  glib  nostrums -  often  driven  more  by
doctrine than by careful analysis - will influence the response.
The 1994/95 Mexican crisis, which provides a foretaste of the current problems in
Asia, provides a classic example of this.  After the crisis (which involved an almost 50 per cent
fall  in  the  exchange  rate),  one  might  have  gained  the  impression  from  contemporary  analysis
that, if only Mexico had published accurate figures of its foreign exchange reserves in a timely
In  the  case  of  Thailand,  there  was  a  view -  particularly  in  the  early  days  of  the
episode - that if only Thailand had floated its exchange rate sooner, everything would have been
all right.  According to this view, there were a couple of relatively simple policy mistakes (fast
growth  and  a  fixed  exchange  rate)  and,  when  these  were  remedied,  everything  would  quickly
return to normal.  What I will be arguing here is that the problems are much more complex and
multi-faceted  than  this.    To  be  sure,  there  have  been  very  large  falls  in  the  exchange  rate  in  a
number of Asian countries, and this has been an important part of the story.  But when we look
back on the early analysis, which identified the basic problem as an exchange rate over-valuation
of  10-15 per  cent  which  could  be  corrected  by  floating  the  exchange  rate,  events  since  then
should have demonstrated the inadequacy of this view.
I have argued elsewhere (Grenville 1997) that, if there is an identifiable principal
problem, it is more deep-seated and lies in the fragility of the financial sector.  It has many of
the characteristics of an old-fashioned bank liquidity crisis, with failing confidence at the heart
of the problem.  I am not going to go through this argument again today, because this session is
about exchange rates.  And, in any case, the exchange rate clearly did play an important part in
the story.  What I shall argue, however, is that it was not the central, over-riding, element of the
story.
The facts
First,  the  facts.    Table 1  shows  the  exchange  rate  movements  in  a  number  of
East-Asian countries during 1997 and of course there have been some further large falls in the
early  days  of  1998.    These  have  been  very  large  movements  and  unusually  rapid,  but  the
magnitudes, at least during 1997, are not unprecedented.
Not  long  after  the  exchange  rate  was  floated  in  Australia  in  1983,  there  was  a
change of close to 40 per cent in the trade-weighted exchange rate (which would be of the same
order  of  magnitude  that  we  saw  in  Asia  in  1997).    For  Japan,  in  the  two  years  beginning  in
 I am grateful for the help of John Hawkins and Amanda Thornton in preparing this paper.
BIS Review   13/1998
- 2 -
April 1995, the exchange rate depreciated by 34 per cent:  over a longer period of time (e.g. ten
years),  we  can  find  much  larger  changes  in  the  yen,  from  around  250  to  the  dollar  at  one
extreme, to 80 to the dollar at the other extreme.  Even the exchange rate between the two “safe
havens” -  the  US dollar  and  the  German  mark -  experienced  changes  (both  up  and  down)  of
around 50 per cent in the mid 1980s.1
Table  1:   East  Asian  Exchange  Rates
per cent change during 1997
vs US dollar
trade-weighted*
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
South Korea
Thailand
-56
-35
-33
-47
-45
-44
-24
-26
-43
-38
Why do these big changes in exchange rates occur?
*   RBA calculation
This is a central question, to which there is no clear answer yet.  But I want to put
forward two issues which may be a large part of the story:  the first has to do with large capital
flows;  and the second has to do with what the technicians would call “model uncertainty”:  there
is  no  close,  well-established  relationship  between  the  fundamentals  of  the  economy  and  the
exchange rate.  When these uncertainties are great, it is difficult for markets to assess what is the
“right” exchange rate.
First,  capital  flows.    One  of  the  outstanding  (indeed  amazing)  characteristics  of
the  1990s  has  been  the  extraordinary  increase  in  international  capital  flows,  particularly  to  the
emerging countries, and particularly to the countries of this region.  Graph 1 shows a measure of
the increase in overall flows.  The ten countries that were the main recipients, shown in Graph 2,
accounted for about three-quarters of the total, and half of them are in East Asia.  Graph 3 is a
reminder  that  these  flows  were  extraordinarily  large  relative  to  the  size  of  these  economies -
routinely  amounting  to  6 per  cent  or  more  of  GDP.    The  other  characteristic  of  international
capital flows (shown in Graph 4) was the greatly increased importance of portfolio investment -
first channelled through banks and, more recently, directly from funds management institutions.
One  of  the  characteristics  of  these  professional  fund  managers  is  that  they  have  applied  more
formal, structured principles to portfolio management, including the idea that diversification will
protect  fund  holders  from  some  volatility.    At  the  same  time,  few  of  these  fund  managers  are
experts  in  the  individual  emerging  markets -  they  tend  to  treat  these  markets  as  an  investment
class,  rather  than  develop  country-specific  detailed  information.    In  this  world,  contagion  is
                                                  
1 
Among  the  Asian  countries  themselves,  it  is  worth  recalling  that  Indonesia,  as  a  conscious  and
deliberate  element  of  macro  policy,  changed  its  exchange  rate  by  large  amounts  three  times  in  the  late
1970s  and  1980s,  at  a  time  when  it  had  a  fixed  exchange  rate  and  there  was  no  pressing  need  for
exchange rate changes - they were well-conceived macro policy responses to emerging policy problems,
and were taken on in the well-founded belief that exchange rate changes of this size could be absorbed by
the economy.
BIS Review   13/1998
- 3 -
common and changes of sentiment can be driven by herd behaviour.  It is a bold fund manager
who stands his ground when the herd is stampeding.2
Graph 1: Developing Countries Net Capital Flows
Billions of US$
Graph 2: Concentration of Private Capital Flows
1990-95
US$B
180
180
120
120
60
60
0
0
US$B
180
180
120
120
60
60
0
0
Private
Official
-60
-60
1972
1977
1982
1987
1992
-60
-60
1997
Graph 3: Private Gross Capital Flows
12 largest recipients of private capital, % of GNP
 6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
 6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
China
Mexico
Brazil
Korea
Malaysia
Argentina
Thailand
Indonesia
Russia
India
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Graph 4: Developing Countries Net Private Capital Flows
US$B
US$B
Billions of US$
Direct investment
80
80
40
40
0
0
-40
-40
Portfolio
investment
Other investment
80
80
40
40
0
0
-40
-40
0
0
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
0
0
1995
-80
-80
1972
1977
1982
1987
1992
-80
-80
1997
At the same time as these large mutual funds were discovering the attractions of
diversification, the financial infrastructure to implement this was also being put in place, mainly
driven by international financial institutions searching out expansion opportunities.  They were
encouraged in this by the general intellectual climate which promoted globalisation, and by the
official international financial institutions (IMF, World Bank, and so on) who saw freeing up of
financial  capital  as  an  important  part  of  the  development  process.3,4    The  recipient  countries
were happy enough to see these flows, as they themselves embraced the increasing sophistication
of their financial infrastructure as a symbol of modernity and as a driving force for the growth.
Progressive  dismantling  of  capital  controls  in  the  recipient  countries  was  a  factor,  but  in  a
number  of  cases  the  capital  accounts  had  already  been  substantially  opened  (in  Indonesia,  for
instance, capital flows were, to all intents and purposes, free from 1970 onwards).
                                                  
2
Korea, for example, as a pre-condition for entry into the OECD “rich countries’” club, had further to
One other point worth noting is the disparity between the size of these funds and the size of the
recipient  countries.    Even  though  these  funds  have  not  diversified  all  that  much,  their  size  is  enormous.
Even  if  the  US  mutual  funds  bought  every  share  listed  on  the  ASEAN  stock  markets,  this  would  still
represent less than a tenth of their assets.
3 
deregulate capital flows.
4 
Coming  out  of  this,  we  saw  such  developments  as  the  Bangkok  International  Banking  Facility,
which  began  as  an  offshore  banking  centre,  but  very  quickly  developed  into  the  smooth  facilitator  of
massive  flows  of  capital  into  Thailand  (over  $10 billion  per  year -  more  than  10 per  cent  of  GDP -  since
1993).  At  the  same  time,  Thai  finance  companies  hoped  to  improve  their claims  for  banking  licences  by
facilitating inflows.
BIS Review   13/1998
- 4 -
It was  not  so  much  change  of  regulation  but  change  of  attitude  and  perceptions
that  was  the  driving  force  of  the  enormous  increases  in  capital  flows.    By  1990,  a  number  of
these countries had recorded two decades of high growth and had established an enviable track
record of political stability, balanced budgets and lowish inflation.  If there was an “economic
miracle”  occurring  (cf. World  Bank,  1993),  it  is  not  surprising  that  foreign  investors  wanted  a
slice of the action.
Not  least,  domestic  investors  in  these  countries  took  the  opportunity  of  what
looked  like  extremely  low  borrowing  rates  on  these  overseas  funds  to  finance  an  investment
boom, including, inevitably, a good share of over-investment and misplaced investment.
These big flows (and the big current account deficits  that  went  with  them)  were
not some kind of aberration, but reflected the normal working of market forces.  For those who
find  these  deficits  to  be  aberrant  behaviour,  could  I  remind  you  of  the  Feldstein  and  Horioka
(1980) analysis, which suggested that the true aberrant behaviour was the close correspondence
between saving and investment within most countries in the world.  In other words, the amount
of  capital  flow  between  countries  has  been  smaller  than  optimal  behaviour  would  seem  to
suggest.    While  a  number  of  poor  investment  opportunities  were  certainly  undertaken  (most
notably, excessive real estate investment), at an aggregate level it is still correct to say that there
were many high profit opportunities available in these countries, as they moved from well inside
the technological frontier towards the frontier itself, driven by an eagerness to adopt all sorts of
productivity-enhancing techniques.
Graph 5: Singapore Current Account
Per cent of GDP
 10
10
0
0
-10
-10
-20
-20
-30
-30
-40
-40
 10
10
0
0
-10
-10
-20
-20
-30
-30
1968
1972
1976
1980
1984
1988
1992
Source: IMF International Financial Statistics .
-40
-40
1996
If  all  this  sounds  a  bit  textbook-ish,  consider  the  experience  of  Singapore.    As
shown in Graph 5, they ran a current account deficit averaging more than 10 per cent of GDP for
two decades, in a period of policy-making which would universally be regarded, with hindsight,
as extremely successful.  I should remind you  also  that  all  these  countries  ran,  in  the  textbook
sense, “good” deficits - i.e. they were used to  fund  investment  and  not  consumption,  and  were
certainly not funding budget deficits.
Some  of  these  countries  understood,  perhaps  intuitively  more  than  by  rigorous
logic,  that  big  current  account  deficits  made  them  vulnerable:    Indonesia,  for  instance,  was
uncomfortable if its current account deficit was above 3 per cent of GDP.  Korea, too (in recent
years at least), ran quite modest current account deficits.  But by and large, once these countries
BIS Review   13/1998
- 5 -
accepted  the  idea  of  financial  deregulation  and  open  markets,  they  were  going  to  be  on  the
receiving end of very substantial capital inflows.5
Table  2:   Saving,  Investment,  Current  Account  and  Budget  Balances
1991-1995  average
Saving
(% of GNP)
Investment
(% of GNP)
CAB
(% of GDP)
Budget Balance
(% of GDP)
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
South Korea
Thailand
Memo: Mexico
United States
Germany
Japan
31.8
34.2
18.7
35.4
34.9
17.6
15.5
21.8
34.8
34.1
40.5
21.7
36.9
41.8
19.4
16.0
22.2
30.4
-2.5
-6.3
-3.4
-1.3
-6.4
-5.2
-1.2
-0.9
2.6
0.8
0.1
-0.6
-0.2
2.9
0.1
-3.6
-2.0
-0.6
There is not a lot of point in trying to identify precisely whether the capital flows
were more supply-driven than demand-driven, because we have known  since  Marshall  that  the
outcome depends on the two blades of the demand and supply scissors.  Nevertheless, it might
be  worth  noting  that  the  financial  flows  were  often  significantly  larger  than  the  amount  that
could be absorbed in terms of real flows of goods and services - i.e. the capital inflow was larger
than the current account deficit:  Graph 6 illustrates this.
Graph6: Private Capital Inflows and the Current Account
As a percentage of GDP
 Norway
Indonesia
  Sweden
Chile (89-94)
Colombia
 Argentina (92-93)
 Finland
Venezuela (92-93)
 Philippines (89-94)
Malaysia (89-94)
 Mexico (89-94)
 Thailand (88-94)
 Malaysia (80-86)
  -2
-4
-6
-8
-10
0
2
4
6
Private capital inflows
8
 Source: World Bank (1997)
We will return, later, to the issue of whether the policy problems created by these
huge capital flows (and the resultant rapid growth of domestic credit) could have been avoided
by a different exchange rate regime.  The basic point made here is that these countries embodied
significant profit opportunities (albeit with lots of opportunities to over-invest and invest in the
wrong  industries),  and  that  it  was  normal  for  large  amounts  of  capital  to  flow  from  the  “old
world” of savers towards the new opportunities available in these countries.
                                                  
5 
Indonesia also understood that it was difficult to put in place the necessary prudential structure in
time to keep pace with the burgeoning capital inflows.  The central bank Governor has noted:  “we started
building the foundations of a house but suddenly we had to host a party”.
BIS Review   13/1998
- 6 -
The  second  major  issue  behind  exchange  rate  fluctuations  revolves  around
perceptions of how the economy works - “the model”.  What is the “mind-set” of participants in
the market - what do they think is the “proper” exchange  rate?    This  is  based  not  just  on  their
views about some “fundamentals”, but also their guesses about other market participants’ views,
so there is certainly plenty of opportunity for exchange rates to move very significantly, and stay
away from the underlying fundamentals for significant periods of time.  We noted, earlier, that
this has happened in the case of countries such as the United States, Japan and Australia, where
there  are  well-developed  views  about  how  the  economy  works  and  detailed  analytical  and
econometric studies of what proper pricing relativities should be.  The “models” or “mind-sets”
for the countries in question are much less fully developed and universally held, so there is far
more opportunity for prices to shift sharply, and stay at rates which, earlier, would have seemed
abnormal.    On  top  of  this,  there  are  substantial  information  asymmetries,  asymmetries  which
made  market  participants  very  nervous  about  going  against  the  run  of  the  market  or  taking
significant contrarian positions.
This  combination -  very  large,  footloose  capital  flows  and  an  exchange  rate  not
firmly anchored by “fundamentals” - goes a long way to  explain  the  big  exchange  rate  moves.
When  sentiment  and  confidence  changed  and  the  original  investors  began  to  pull  out  their
capital,  the  exchange  rate  fall  did  nothing  to  induce  new  inflows.    Where  were  the  stabilising
speculators of textbook theory, who were supposed (in the textbook view) to respond to the fall
in  the  exchange  rate  by  recognising  that,  once  the  exchange  rate  was  below  its  fundamental
level,  there  was  a  profit  opportunity  for  those  who  bought  the  currency?    In  the  absence  of  a
firmly-defined  “fundamental”  equilibrium  exchange  rate,  as  the  exchange  rate  fell,  the  market
changed  its  view  on  what  was  the  “correct”  equilibrium  rate.    Even  when  most  market
participants agreed that exchange rates had gone too far, they recognised the possibility that they
could go further still.  To stand against the run of the market in a contrarian position might be
ultimately vindicated, but in the short run required a degree of courage and confidence that no
fund manager (whose performance is evaluated more-or-less constantly) could afford to take.  In
short, there were no equilibrating flows to anchor the exchange rates.
How should exchange rates behave?
Let’s  try  to  develop  this  a  bit  further  to  see  whether  there  is  any  clear,  fairly
universally-accepted  idea  of  how  exchange  rates  should  move  in  the  circumstances  in  which
these countries found themselves.
Perhaps  the  nearest  guidance  we  can  get  from  formal  academic  ideas  is  the  old
discussion about the “transfer problem”.  The key point is that as financial flows shift from one
country to another, it is necessary to induce equivalent real flows of goods and services (which
would  take  the  form  of  a  current  account  deficit,  corresponding  to  the  financial  flows  in  the
capital account).  The old literature observed that there could be a wide range of outcomes for
the “transfer problem”:  where the financial flow took the form of direct foreign investment, the
same decision about the financial flow generally induced the real flow - as a company decided
to invest overseas, it shipped plant and machinery in roughly corresponding amount.  But if the
flows  took  the  form  of  portfolio  investment,  then  the  exchange  rate  had  to  appreciate  to
encourage the real resource transfer.
The  other  longer-term  structural  influence  on  the  exchange  rate  was  the  rapid
productivity increases in the tradeables sectors:  in theory, these countries might have expected
to  find,  over  time,  their  real  exchange  rates  appreciating.    In  the  Balassa/Samuelson  (1964)
BIS Review   13/1998
- 7 -
model, productivity rises fastest in the tradeables sector, and equilibrium requires a higher real
exchange rate.
Of course, there were other forces at work.  In 1996, there was a very significant
fall in the terms of trade of these countries.6  And the story is further complicated by the specific
nature  of  the  exchange  rate  regime -  fixed  more-or-less  to  the  US  dollar -  so  the  effective
exchange  rate  swung  with  the  US  dollar.    To  further  complicate  the  picture,  capital  flows
responded to the changing monetary stance in the big capital-exporting countries -  low  interest
rates in Japan in recent years encouraged the so-called “carry trade” - borrowing at low interest
rates in Japan and lending at high rates elsewhere in Asia.7
These factors were transient, and taking the dominant structural elements as being
the capital transfer issue and Balassa/Samuelson, it  was  not  surprising  to  find  upward  pressure
on exchange rates during the 1990s and some modest appreciation of real exchange rates.  The
exchange rate strength might have been expected to last for a  considerable  length  of  time,  and
perhaps  become  permanent  because  of  the  structural  improvement  in  productivity.    The
relatively  modest  increases  in  the  real  exchange  rate  seen  in  countries  like  Thailand  were  thus
not, in themselves, a clear indicator of an over-valued exchange rate or impending depreciation.
Table  3:   East  Asian  International  Reserves
change from December 1991 to December 1996;  US$bn
Indonesia
Malaysia
Philippines
South Korea
Thailand
Source:  IMF, International Financial Statistics
9
16
7
20
20
In the face of this upward pressure on the exchange rate, the policy approach  of
these countries over the decade (until 1997) had been to resist significant appreciation.  This is
reflected  in  the  increase  in  their  foreign  exchange  reserves  (Table 3).    Why  did  they  resist  the
upward  pressure?    This  was,  in  part,  because  the  lower  exchange  rate  was  seen  as  offering  a
beneficial  general  incentive  for  the  most  dynamic  parts  of  the  economy -  the  tradeables  sector
and,  in  particular,  the  export  sector.    Partly,  too,  it  reflected  a  perception  that  high  exchange
rates  left  countries  vulnerable  to  sudden  changes  in  sentiment.    Looking  at  the  experience  of
these countries, it is hard to disagree strongly with these sentiments.  Dornbusch (1994, p. 280),
writing about Mexico, notes “… over-valuation is one of the gravest policy errors along the way.
Over-valuation  stops  growth  and,  more  often  than  not,  ends  in  a  speculative  siege  on  the
exchange rate and ultimately currency realignment”.8
Lessons
I  have  tried  to  put  the  case  that  the  capital  inflows  that  occurred  into  these
countries  in  the  first  half  of  the  1990s  were  not  some  aberration  of  policy-making,  but  were
For example, the price of a standard computer chip fell from $50 in late 1995 to under $10 in 1996.
Some  argue  that  the  reversal  of  capital  flows  to  East  Asia  was  triggered  by  market  fears  that
                                                  
6
 
7
 
Japanese interest rates were about to rise, putting an end to the “carry trade”.
8 
It is worth noting that Mexico’s exchange rate over-valuation problem in 1994 was quite  different
from any Asian experience - a fixed rate regime had been used by Mexico as an anchor while inflation was
reduced, with the inevitable consequence of over-valuation.
BIS Review   13/1998
- 8 -
more-or-less to be expected.    But  we  now  know,  with  hindsight,  that  they  were  unsustainable.
Where did it go wrong?  What should be done?
The  first  lesson  is  that  whatever  the  “model”  suggests  is  the  norm  for  capital
flows, when these flows get large, economies are vulnerable to changes in sentiment.  The model
does  not  say  much  about  how  policies  should  handle  changes  of  sentiment  which  bring  very
large variance to capital flows and GDP.  Wherever there are large foreign capital flows, there is
a  high  probability  of  rapid  changes  of  mood,  because -  whoever  bears  the  exchange  rate  risk
(whether borrower or lender) - one of the parties to the transaction is holding an exchange rate
position  which  is  not  “natural”.    This  makes  that  party  flighty  and  quick  to  re-assess  their
position.    In  many  cases,  the  response  was  that  the  party  with  the  most  information  bore  the
exchange  rate  risk -  i.e.  the  domestic  borrower  borrowed  in  foreign  currency.    It  was  not
irrational to expect exchange rates to remain reasonably stable, not only because policy in these
countries had succeeded in keeping a high degree of stability over a  reasonably  long  period  of
time, but also because (based on our earlier argument) they might have expected, if anything, the
exchange  rate  to  appreciate  over  time,  which  would  have  reduced  the  cost  of  their  overseas
borrowing.9    But  in  the  end  it  was  the  old  issue  of  variance  or  the  variability  over  time  that
brought  the  best-laid  plans  of  borrowers  to  such  an  unhappy  end.    We  noted  earlier  that  the
textbook  equilibrating  forces  were  largely  absent -  as  foreign  exchange  became  dearer,  people
wanted to buy more, not less.  This was reinforced by lenders’ behaviour.  As the exchange rates
fell, foreign lenders, although protected from exchange rate risk, began to realise that they were
exposed to increasing credit risk, and became extremely reluctant to roll over their lending.  The
credit-rating agencies  added  their  own  special  twist-of-the-knife,  down-grading  these  countries
six  months  after  the  problems  began,  so  that  portfolio  managers  were  forced  to  sell  into  the
collapsed markets.
Now we have looked at some of the forces operating on the exchange rate, we can
ask:    “Would  an  earlier  float  of  the  exchange  rate  have  avoided  these  problems?”    With
hindsight,  it  is  hard  to  argue  against  this  view -  the  actual  path  proved  unsustainable,  so  any
alternative looks attractive.  But this does not tell us whether the alternative would, in fact, have
handled  the  situation  more  satisfactorily:    for  this,  we  would  need  to  sketch  out  what  the
exchange  rate  path  over  time  would  have  been  under  this  alternative  scenario.    Given  the
capital-transfer  process  underway,  how  much  would  the  exchange  rate  be  expected  to
appreciate?    This  is  hard  to  think  through,  but  the  key  idea  here  is  that  an  interest  rate
differential should be balanced by an expectation of exchange rate depreciation if portfolios are
to be held in balance.  Portfolio equilibrium could not be achieved by lowering domestic (local
currency)  interest  rates,  because  these  were  set -  in  effect -  by  the  high  domestic  marginal
efficiency  of  capital:    high  interest  rates  were  needed  to  rein  in  the  intrinsic  dynamism  of  the
domestic  economy.    If  the  interest  differential  was  expected  to  be  maintained  for  a  significant
period of time (say, a decade or more), then there would need to be a very large appreciation of
the exchange rate to balance the likelihood that interest differentials would be maintained  over
this  period  of  time.    How  far  would  it  have  had  to  appreciate  before  foreign  investors  would
have  stopped  extrapolating  the  appreciation  and  begun  to  expect  depreciation?    Would  this
process  have  been  smooth,  without  the  over-shooting  we  have  seen?    What  sort  of  knife-edge
equilibrium would this have been, in which portfolio managers’ calculations teeter between the
recent history of appreciation, but incorporate a steady, gentle, expected depreciation from here
on?    Would  the  even-higher  current  account  deficits  that  would  have  occurred  during  the
                                                  
9
Were they foolish not to hedge their borrowing?  This is a common ex post criticism, but it seems
to ignore the obvious financial-market identity that if they had hedged their borrowing, then they would have
eliminated  the  interest  rate  advantage  of  borrowing  in  foreign  currency.    This  does  not  say  that  it  would
have been unwise to hedge - merely that it is understandable that they did not.
BIS Review   13/1998
- 9 -
appreciation phase have spooked the market?  There are no answers to these “what if” questions,
but it seems naive to argue that markets would have maintained a smoothly-evolving equilibrium
exchange rate through the extraordinary changes of the 1990s.  Greater exchange rate flexibility
may well have provided a better outcome (or, more likely, brought on the crisis earlier), but it
needed  to  occur  within  a  financial  infrastructure  which  had  the  capacity  to  withstand  the
exigencies of real-world flexible markets.
I  now  turn  to  more  immediate  issues,  particularly  the  events  of  1997.    Once
exchange rates were floated, why didn’t higher interest rates work more effectively to stabilise
the exchange rates of these countries?  There are new lessons and old lessons to be re-learned:
 if  the  market  does  not  believe  that  high  interest  rates  will  be  sustained,
then there is no encouragement to capital inflows (and, in fact, the market may think that the
exchange rate will fall further when the unsustainable interest rates are lowered);
 high  interest  rates  are  supposed  to  work  by  encouraging  domestic
borrowers  to  roll  over  their  foreign  exchange  debt  and  borrow  more  overseas,  and  by
encouraging foreigners to lend more, denominated in domestic currency.  But foreigners are
now worried about credit risk:  higher local-currency interest rates do not encourage them to
roll  over  their  foreign  exchange  loans  (in  fact,  will  cause  them  to  worry  more  about  the
financial health of their debtors), and it seems unlikely that many foreigners will be tempted
to  lend  in  local  currency  (the  Stiglitz  and  Weiss  (1981)  “adverse  selection”  argument  is
relevant  here:    only  the  most  daring  (and  therefore  risky)  borrowers  will  be  willing  to  pay
higher interest rates).
None  of  this,  of  course,  argues  for  low  interest  rates -  but  it  is  a  reminder  that
simple manipulation of interest rates will not always protect an exchange rate.
What other lessons should be drawn, specifically on the appropriate exchange rate
regime  for  the  future?    Policy-makers  of  these  countries  always  accepted,  in  principle,  that  as
their countries became more integrated with the outside world, they would not be able to control
both interest rates and the exchange rate.  They understood this, but were perhaps hoping to put
off  the  day  for  somewhat  longer.    It  seems  unlikely,  now,  that  these  countries  can  go  back  to
anything like the fixed exchange rates that they had before:  nor would this be desirable.  But we
could also understand if the policy-makers of the region  find  both  the  extent  of  the  movement
and  the  actual  levels  which  the  market  has  now  produced  to  be  aberrant,  and  hardly  a
recommendation for “leaving it up to the market”.  Those of us who have experienced floating
exchange rates for some time now might offer a couple of points:
 like  them,  Australia  did  not  float  because  we  had  decided  that  it  was  a
good idea, but because we were forced by circumstances to do so;
 like  them,  Australia  found  the  initial  stages  of  the  float  to  be  extremely
uncomfortable,  and  even  over  the  longer  term,  there  seem  to  have  been  moments  when  the
exchange rate was not closely anchored by the fundamentals;
nevertheless,  most  of  us  have  come  to  the  view  that  floating  exchange
rates  work  well  for  us  (although  there  will  be  times  when  we  believe  we  can  do  beneficial
 BIS Review   13/1998
- 10 -
intervention  in  the  market).    Our  systems  have  built  up  some  resilience  as  people  become
more accustomed to exchange rate swings, and build these variations into their decisions.10
It is also clear that the proper answer is not to restrict capital flows, although these
countries may be, in future, less enthusiastic about encouraging some of the more footloose and
volatile  forms  of  capital  inflow.    These  countries  should  move  forward  with  financial
deregulation, although the central lesson from  this  experience  is  that  the  prudential  framework
should  advance  in  step  with  the  opening  up  of  the  financial  sector.11    The  sine  qua  non  of
smooth adaptation to large capital flows must be  a  resilient  and  robust  formal  financial  sector,
with  risk-averse  conservative  banks  forming  a  large  stable  core.    Such  risk-averse  institutions
would  have  been  reluctant  to  expose  themselves  to  the  sort  of  exchange  rate  shocks  that  have
occurred, and so a well-functioning formal financial sector would have borrowed less in foreign
currency  and  would  have  been  more  conscious  of  the  credit  risk  of  lending  to  those  who  had
borrowed  extensively  overseas.    To  the  extent  that  this  left  private  non-bank  borrowers  still
borrowing  excessively  in  foreign  currency,  then  we  might  hope  that  the  “consenting  adults”
view  would  prevail,  leaving  the  borrower  and  lender  to  sort  out  repayments  on  a  one-on-one
basis without putting the entire economy at risk.  But those who are confident that this  private
non-bank  borrowing  will  be  a  smooth,  well-informed  process  might  contemplate  just  how
quickly  private  investors  changed  from  wide-eyed  enthusiasm  to  gloomy  disillusionment,  and
how slow the international credit agencies were to see the impending problems.  The alarm-bells
went  off  when  the  building  was  well-and-truly  ablaze.    The  problems  of  lack  of  a
clearly-understood  model  and  asymmetrical  information  may  be  addressed  by  greater
transparency and provision of data, but it hardly seems likely that they can be overcome.    The
lesson  we  should  draw  from  all  this  is  that  inconvenient  fluctuations  in  exchange  rates  are
inevitable, and we have to design systems which can cope with them.
To  put  this  point  in  different  words,  we  need  to  enlarge  our  view  of  “the
fundamentals”.  To the conventional list of “fundamentals”, we need to add another vital one -
some assessment of the  health  and  resilience  of  the  financial  system.    Whether  these  countries
can afford to return to their old pace of growth depends very largely on their ability to cope with
variance - particularly variance of capital flows and exchange rates.  So the constraint on growth
will  not  be  the  conventional  one  of  available  resources,  but  whether  the  financial  sector  has
proven  itself  to  be  able  to  withstand  vigorous  “stress-testing” -  can  it  withstand  big  exchange
rate changes?  Can it cope with asset booms and busts?  It also needs  to  be  able  to  handle  big
swings in perceived company profitability, because we know that a project which is performing
well in an environment of 8 per cent growth can turn into a loser when growth slows.
                                                  
10 
This is not to argue that the sort of exchange rate changes which have occurred in Asia are helping
to bring about a new and beneficial equilibrium.  They are, in fact, very damaging, not just because of the
inappropriate  price  signals  they  embody,  but  because  of  the  high  interest  rates  used  to  contain  the
exchange rate movements, and the damage to firms which have borrowed in dollars.  Much more modest
changes would have achieved an improved competitiveness, and as far as capital flows are concerned, big
movements in exchange rates seem to be inhibiting rather than encouraging capital flows, by worsening the
basic situation in these countries, reducing profitability, limiting GDP growth and creating substantial policy-
making uncertainty.  It might be worth noting, too, that in the Mexican case, the large nominal exchange
rate fall which was initially seen (in 1994/95) as being an important part of the corrective process has been
more-or-less  offset  by  subsequent  inflation,  so  that  the  improvement  in  the  real  exchange  rate  and
competitiveness has been largely lost.
11 
When  people  used  to  argue  about  the  correct  sequencing  for  the  deregulatory  process,  they
recognised  that  financial  deregulation  should  come  last,  because  if  there  remained  any  opportunities  for
disequilibrium profits in the meantime, a very open financial sector would allow these to be exploited.
BIS Review   13/1998
- 11 -
I  have  already  noted  how  important  it  is  to  improve  prudential  supervision  in
these countries.  This is not controversial, although putting it into practice will be difficult and
time  consuming.    One  more-controversial  element  would  be  an  effort  on  the  part  of  the
prudential  authorities  in  the  capital  supplying  countries  to  go  beyond  assuring  themselves  that
their  own  banks  are  acting  prudently  and -  in  addition -  asking  whether  their  actions  may  be
putting the recipient country’s financial institutions at risk.  This would seem to require a greater
degree of co-operation than exists (or is envisaged) at the moment.
In short
Large  and  volatile  capital  inflows  are  an  inevitable  part  of  the  international
context  in  which  these  countries  operate.    Even  with  a  floating  exchange  rate,  very  large
medium-term  exchange  rate  changes  can  be  expected.    This  will  put  a  lot  of  pressure  on  the
solvency of firms and,  more  particularly,  banks.    You  therefore  need  a  sound,  well-supervised
and risk-averse banking system.  This is an essential part of a deregulated financial market, but
one that many Asian countries lack.
It  may  not  be  possible  to  return  to  the  highest  of  the  growth  rates  seen  in  the
previous three decades, but fast rates of growth are still possible, and eminently desirable.  The
countries which get back there quickest will be those which are able to put in place institutions
which  can  withstand  the  changes  of  sentiment  which  are  part-and-parcel  of  a  globalised
economy.
References
Balassa,  B.  (1964),  ‘The  Purchasing  Power  Parity  Doctrine:    A  Reappraisal’,  Journal  of  Political
Economy, Vol. 72, No. 6, pp. 584-596.
Dornbusch, R. (1994), ‘Mexico:  Stabilization, Reform and No Growth’, Brookings Paper on Economic
Activity, pp. 253-315.
Feldstein, M.S. and C.Y. Horioka (1980), ‘Domestic Saving and International Capital Flows’, Economic
Journal, June, Vol. 90, pp. 314-329.
Grenville, S.A. (1997), ‘Asia and the Financial Sector’, Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin, December.
Samuelson,  P.A.  (1964),  ‘Theoretical  Notes  on  Trade  Problems’,  Review  of  Economics  and  Statistics,
Vol. 23, pp. 1-60.
Stiglitz, J.E. and A. Weiss (1981), ‘Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information’, American
Economic Review, Vol. 71, pp. 393-410.
World  Bank  (1993),  East  Asian  Miracle:    Economic  Growth  and  Public  Policy,  World  Bank  Policy
Research Report.
World Bank (1997), Private Capital Flows to Developing Countries:  The Road to Financial Integration,
World Bank Policy Research Report.
BIS Review   13/1998
