Mr. Yam discusses “Intervention true to  guiding  policy”      Discussion  by  the  Chief
Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Mr. Joseph Yam, published in South China Morning
Post on 24/8/98.
The  current  debate  revolving  around  government  intervention  in  the  stock  and  futures
markets to deter currency manipulation brought a feeling of nostalgia to me. It made me recall the many
debates on government intervention there were within the administration when Sir Philip Haddon-Cave
was financial secretary.
I was then, in the late 1970s, a young economist in the Economic Services Branch of the
Government Secretariat, with little responsibility and a lot to learn. Those debates were, somehow, rather
more healthy and more intellectual. There was certainly less mud being thrown around.
But  the  contrast  is  understandable.  Today,  this  is  a  controversial  issue.  There  are
interested parties airing their grievances through punchy and articulate expressions of their views on this
philosophical issue of interventionism. This is also an issue in which, in a more politicised environment
and at a time when the community is enduring the pain of economic adjustment, the politically minded
see great political mileage. A government with the whole of the legislature arguably in opposition makes
a vulnerable target.
It  is  so  easy  to  wave  the  banner  of  free  markets  and  condemn  any  government
intervention,  and  be  seen  to  be  righteous  and  knowledgeable;  notwithstanding  that  the  government
concerned has been so successfully running the freest economy in the world. But we must be humble and
thank those wanting to lecture us on free markets, if only for the purpose of keeping us on our toes.
Hong Kong is changing and one would expect any dynamic city to be different after the
passage of 20 years. But, surprise, surprise, the policy of positive non-interventionism has not changed.
Many may have chosen to ignore or forget the true meaning of this policy, but not the administration of
the HKSAR. Certainly, I have not forgotten it. And, having worked continuously and closely with five
financial secretaries in succession, I can vouch for all of them in their firm adherence to this policy of
positive non-interventionism. It applies also to the specific case of the current intervention in the stock
and futures markets. As a firm believer in such a policy, I am responsible for conducting the intervention.
The nostalgia has prompted me to take time off watching the markets to read some of the
long-forgotten literature on positive non-interventionism. This gives me great pleasure, particularly when
I see the rare sentences and, if I am more fortunate, paragraphs attributable to my drafting that survived
the final texts. Yes, Sir Philip was a great financial secretary with a great mind. Even many of our critics
hold him in high regard. I hope that in quoting him, our stance in the stock and futures market can be put
into a context that our critics may be able better to appreciate.
As early as November 1973, at the Conference on Managers in a Changing Hong Kong
Environment,  Sir  Philip  spoke  on,  amongst  other  things,  the  role  of  public  policy.  He  said  that,  “the
Government must accept such responsibilities as are necessary to ensure that management decisions are
not  frustrated  by  imperfections  in  the  operation  of  the  market  mechanism,  leading  to  economic
inefficiency or social distress which only the Government can remove.”
In  September  1979,  he  talked  about  interventionism  and  the  adjustment  mechanism,
amongst other things, in a speech on the Hong Kong Economy in Transition. He said that: “A pragmatic
view dictates an admission that interventionism can be relevant to the maintenance of economic stability
in Hong Kong even in the general context of a philosophy of positive non-interventionism”. In the same
speech  he  cautioned  against  taking  for  granted  the  “efficiency  with  which  [the]  essentially  automatic
adjustment mechanism operates in restoring equilibrium”. He then went on in the same speech to identify
areas that could be collectively referred to as market imperfections which justifies market intervention.
BIS Review   67/1998
- 2 -
But it was the speech he made to the Federation of Hong Kong Industries in December
1980 (and as Principal Assistant Secretary for Economic Services then it was my honour to have a hand
in drafting part of the speech) in which he made abundantly clear  his  stance  on  the  policy  of  positive
non-interventionism. Here I quote two paragraphs of his speech in full.
Sir Philip said: “I have frequently described the Government’s economic policy stance as
being one of “positive non-interventionism”. Not surprisingly,  perhaps,  some  have  claimed  that  this  is
really just a fancy term for laissez-faire or, less kindly, that it covers up a “do-nothing” approach. This is
simply  not  so:  positive  non-interventionism  involves  taking  the  view  that  it  is  normally  futile  and
damaging  to  the  growth  rate  of  an  economy,  particularly  an  open  economy,  for  the  Government  to
attempt to plan the allocation of resources available to the private sector and to frustrate the operation of
market forces, no matter how uncomfortable may be their short term consequences.”
Sir Philip added: “But in my description of our economic policy stance, I do qualify the
term ‘non-interventionism’ with the adjective ‘positive’. Perhaps in the past I have not spelled out the
implications  of  this  adjective  clearly  enough.  What  it  means  is  this:  that  the  Government,  when  faced
with  an  interventionist  proposal,  does  not  simply  respond  that  such  a  proposal  must,  by  definition,  be
incorrect. Quite the contrary.
“Generally speaking, or so I would like to argue, the Government weighs up carefully the
arguments for and against an act of interventionism in any sector of our economy and on the demand or
supply  side  in  the  light  of  present  and  likely  future  circumstances.  The  Government  then  comes  to  a
positive decision as to where the balance of advantage lies. It is true that, more often than not, we come
to the conclusion that the balance of advantage lies in not intervening; and, I must confess, I would be
alarmed if we didn’t. Yet, in all cases, the decision is made positively, and not by default, and it is not the
non-outcome  of  a  do-nothing  approach.  But,  there  are  many  examples  of  the  Government  deciding,
usually on the advice of its boards and committees, to intervene, in one way or another, in the free play
of market forces.”
Indeed there  are  many  examples  of  intervention.  We  built  the  airport  because,  without
government intervention, it would simply not have been economically viable. We built roads and bridges.
We  provided  public  housing,  medical  services,  the  list  is  long.  But  we  tend  to  do  less  than  other
jurisdictions  and  so  the  size  of  our  public  sector  in  relation  to  gross  domestic  product  is  one  of  the
smallest in the world.
Specifically in the monetary and financial systems, there is significant intervention in the
form of the regulation of financial markets and the supervision of financial institutions. This is precisely
because  we  feel  that,  in  the  words  of  Sir  Philip,  ‘the  balance  of  advantage’  lies  in  so  intervening  and
because ‘imperfections in the operation of the market mechanism [may lead] to economic inefficiency’.
In very much the same spirit, we intervened in 1996 and built a real time payment system
because  the  private  sector  was  not  able  to  come  up  with  this  highly  desirable  piece  of  financial
infrastructure. We have been intervening since the beginning of 1990 to develop the Hong Kong dollar
debt  market,  again  because  the  market  was  considered  essential  for  effective  financial  intermediation,
and, regrettably, the private sector was not able to develop one that is properly structured.
The  linked  exchange  rate  system  is  also  a  product  of  the  policy  of  positive
non-interventionism. The Government intervened to fix the exchange rate because we found out in 1983,
and since, that there is a need for a monetary anchor. In the absence of such an anchor, the value of our
currency will be, in mathematical terms, an indeterminate. In other words, it is not something that  the
free market can determine in the best interest of the community without intervention.
We  have  had  four  speculative  attacks  on  our  currency  since  the  outbreak  of  financial
turmoil in the region in the middle of last year.
BIS Review  67/1998
- 3 -
It  is  very  well  known  to  almost  everyone  in  the  market  that  a  handful  of  hedge  funds
have on each occasion conducted a double play in the stock futures market and the currency market. We
have come to realise how this double play works, although it has only become apparent, at least to us, in
the third and fourth attacks in June and August this year respectively.
On each occasion, interbank interest rates were pushed higher, to varying degrees, with a
view to engineering a sharp fall in the stock index futures.
While the August episode is still being played out, it is clear that these currency attacks,
or manipulations, have introduced a large interest rate premium for the Hong Kong dollar over the US
dollar. This currency manipulation premium amounts to around three to four percentage points. With the
community  already  in  considerable  pain,  having  to  go  through  the  inevitable,  and  already  very  sharp,
economic  adjustment  necessitated  by  financial  turmoil  in  Asia,  we  can  do  without  the  pain  being
disproportionately exacerbated by those manipulating our currency in order to benefit  from  their  short
stock  futures  positions.  There  is  further  the  serious  risk  of  this  double  play  creating  a  situation  of
over-shooting  in  the  stock  and  other  asset  markets,  undermining  the  stability  of  our  otherwise  robust
financial system.
I must emphasise, however, that I am in no position to  judge  whether  or  not  there  has
been  overshooting  and,  if  so,  the  extent  of  the  overshooting.  But  we  can  all  see  that  markets  can
overshoot badly and uncontrollably if we just look around us in the region. Whatever accusations one can
throw  at  the  Indonesians  -  “crony  capitalism,  nepotism,  corruption,  racism,  poor  macroeconomic
management, neglect of financial development” - even if all these were true, they still do not justify the
extent of the meltdown of their currency and their financial system, and the distress they are in. But the
brutal reality is that they are now in that position.
Markets panic and overshoot, and if we are not careful, we can easily be pushed into that
situation. And the culprits would be the handful of hedge funds having little or no interest in Hong Kong,
not to mention in our well being, other than it being a free market which they can manipulate and from
which they can take money, somewhat like an ATM machine, as others have put it.
The HKSAR administration is run by people who have put Hong Kong on the map as the
freest economy in the world. It is clear to us that there are, again quoting my great teacher Sir Philip,
“imperfections in the operation of the market mechanism”, possibly leading to “economic inefficiency”
and “social distress”. So the administration decided to intervene to deter currency manipulation, to get
rid  of  the  unnecessary  and  unfair  pain  that  has  been  inflicted  on  the  community  as  reflected  in  the
currency manipulation interest rate premium, and to avoid market adjustments overshooting in panic into
an uncontrollable tailspin.
Consistent  with  Sir  Philip’s  view  that  interventionism  should  be  “relevant  to  the
maintenance  of  economic  stability  in  Hong  Kong”,  and  with  Exchange  Fund  Advisory  Committee
backing,  Financial  Secretary  Donald  Tsang  Yam-kuen  made  the  order  to  intervene  in  the  free  play  of
market forces.
There  has  been  no  departure  from 
long  established  policy  of  positive
non-interventionism that has served Hong Kong so well in the  past.  Those  who  think  that  we  have  so
departed should try and refresh themselves of what this policy really means.
the 
And no one needs to take my word for it. Those are the words of Sir Philip, the architect
of that policy and someone who commanded and still commands a lot of respect.
Indeed as Monetary Authority chief, I have no responsibility over that policy. It rests on
the broad shoulders of Sir Donald Tsang who is carrying it bravely. Let us all make a little effort to give
him the support that he needs, spiritual or otherwise, by trying to gain a better appreciation of what the
policy of positive non-interventionism really means.
BIS Review   67/1998
- 4 -
Whilst on the subject of intervention, may I reiterate that  our  intervention  in  the  stock
and futures market to deter currency manipulation does not imply any weakening of our resolve to adhere
to the linked exchange rate system. This resolve has never been stronger. Indeed, as I have mentioned
elsewhere,  there  simply  is  no  better  alternative  for  Hong  Kong.  The  experience  of  many  of  our
neighbouring economies in the past year or so underlines why.
As  the  financial  storm  in  this  region  spreads  to  almost  everywhere  now,  and  with
increased intensity, the discipline of currency board arrangements of our linked exchange rate system is
our best safeguard for our long-term prosperity and stability.
BIS Review  67/1998
