Mr. Stals discusses the current  monetary  situation  in  South  Africa  and  the
implications  for  1998      Address  by  the  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,
Dr. C. Stals,  at  an  investment  conference  arranged  by  Huysamer  Stals  in  Johannesburg  on
18/11/97.
1. The task and function of monetary policy
Monetary  policy  is  about  money.  Governments  give  central  banks  the  special
right  to  issue  money,  and  also  a  mandate  to  manage  the  money  system  in  the  interest  of
economic development. In the final situation,  monetary  policy  is  about  the  quantity  of  money,
the price of money and the value of money.
In  the  broad  context  of  macroeconomic  policy,  the  central  bank  is  normally
tasked with the function of protecting the value of money. This is  but  an  immediate  objective,
making an important  contribution  to  the  achievement  of  the  ultimate  goal  of  economic  policy,
which  is  to  sustain  optimum  economic  development  that  will  create  more  jobs  and  lead  to  an
improvement in the standard of living of all the people of the country.
Monetary  policy  cannot  be  used  to  solve  all  the  macroeconomic  problems  of  a
country. However, a stable financial environment with a low rate of inflation is regarded as an
important precondition for the solution of many of the existing macroeconomic problems in any
country.  By  focusing  on  the  maintenance  of  low  inflation,  central  banks  do  not  distance
themselves  from  the  broader  macroeconomic  problems  such  as  excessive  budget  shortages,
untenable  balance-of-payments  deficits, 
short-term  business  cycle  developments  or
uncompetitive international trade positions. It is indeed  only  in  conditions  of  a  stable  financial
environment, that is low inflation, that the real nature of the more fundamental macroeconomic
deficiencies will be exposed, diagnosed, understood and rectified. In most cases, remedial action
for  structural  economic  ails  will  also  not  produce  the  required  corrections  in  an  inflationary
environment.
Pressure is often put on central banks to harness the power of money creation for
purposes other than pure monetary  policy  objectives,  for  example  to  facilitate  the  financing  of
public sector budget deficits, or to stimulate real demand for goods and services, or to help small
businesses. Pursuing all kinds of non-monetary objectives with monetary policy will, however,
normally lead the country inevitably on the dead-end road of higher inflation.
2. Recent monetary developments in South Africa
The  main  objective  of  monetary  policy  therefore  is  and  should  be  to  keep
inflation low. In the absence of a national commitment to a predetermined and quantified target
for inflation, the Reserve Bank’s approach is that the rate of inflation in South Africa should be
maintained more or less in line with the average rate of inflation in the economies of our major
trading partners and competitors.
Measured against this benchmark, South Africa did not do well in recent years. It
is true that the average rate of inflation stayed around a level of about 14 per cent for more than
twenty years from 1972 to 1992 and has now been kept below 10 per cent per annum for almost
5 years. At the level of 8 per cent established over the twelve months up to September 1997, the
most recent available statistic,  the  South  African  rate  of  inflation  is,  however,  still  about  three
times as high as the current rates of inflation in our major international trading partners.
BIS Review   1/1998
- 2 -
After  the  depreciation  of  the  rand  last  year,  consumer  price  inflation  increased
from 5.5 per cent in April 1996 to 9.9 per cent in April 1997. Since then, it declined again to 8
per  cent  in  September.  Calculated  at  a  seasonally  adjusted  annualised  rate,  consumer  prices
increased  by  only  6.6  per  cent  in  the  third  quarter  of  1997.  Increases  in  the  production  price
index followed a similar trend and declined from a peak of 9.6 per cent in March 1997 to 6.1 per
cent  in  September.  In  the  third  quarter  of  1997,  the  seasonally  adjusted  annualised  rate  of
production price inflation indeed declined to a very low level of 2.1 per cent.
The rate of increase in the total amount of domestic bank credit extension to the
public and private sectors together similarly showed an encouraging slowdown in recent months.
The  rate  of  growth  in  total  bank  credit  extension  reached  a  peak  of  21.6  per  cent  in  February
1997,  before  declining  to  15.3  per  cent  over  the  twelve  months  up  to  September  1997.  The
growth from quarter to quarter in the average total domestic credit extension fell from 23.6 per
cent  in  the  first  quarter  of  1997  to  6.2  per  cent  in  the  third  quarter.  The  growth  in  total  bank
credit extended to the private sector also declined to a level of less than 10 per cent in the third
quarter.
Developments in the M3-money supply were less satisfactory. The growth rate in
M3 measured over twelve months declined from 16.5 per cent in March 1997 to 12.7 per cent in
June,  but  then  accelerated  again  to  16.3  per  cent  in  September  1997.  On  a  quarterly  basis,
however, the rate of increase in M3 also slowed down from 18.1 per cent in the first quarter of
1997 to 12.2 per cent in the third quarter.
Another monetary aggregate which is of great importance for the Reserve Bank is
the  amount  of  liquidity  available  in  the  banking  sector  as  reflected  in  the  amount  of  loans
banking  institutions  seek  from  the  Reserve  Bank’s  discount  window  every  day.  This  amount
declined from a daily average level of R10.6 billion in March 1997 to R5.3 billion in October,
indicating that the lower rate of increase in the demand for credit was no longer  absorbing  the
increases in liquidity arising from the large net capital inflows from abroad. The banks no longer
needed large amounts of Reserve Bank assistance for most of the time.
These  trends  in  monetary  conditions  were  also  reflected  in  interest  rates  which
first rose quite substantially last year but then declined since the beginning of 1997. The rate on
bankers’ acceptances with a maturity of three months declined from 16.2 per cent at the end of
January 1997 to 14.2 per cent on 25 October.
Satisfactory developments also occurred  in  the  international  financial  aggregates
over the past twelve months. The net inflow of foreign capital gained momentum again towards
the end of 1996. During the first three quarters of this year, the total net capital inflow amounted
to almost R20 billion. Net purchases of bonds and equities by non-residents amounted to about
R34  billion,  which  enabled  South  African  residents,  mainly  institutional  investors,  to  switch  a
further R17 billion of their South African portfolios into foreign currency denominated assets.
The  relatively  large  net  capital  inflows  during  the  first  three  quarters  of  1997
exceeded  a  smaller  deficit  on  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments  and  enabled  the
Reserve  Bank  and  the  private  banking  sector  to  increase  their  holdings  of  short-term  foreign
assets. At the end of September 1997, the total gross gold and other foreign exchange reserves
held by the combined banking sector amounted to an estimated R33.6 billion, or the equivalent
of about 10 weeks’ imports.
BIS Review   1/1998
- 3 -
These  favourable  overall  balance  of  payments  developments  contributed  to  a
more  stable  exchange  rate  for  the  rand.  After  depreciating  by  almost  22  per  cent  in  1996,  the
nominal  effective  exchange  rate  of  the  rand,  measured  against  a  basket  of  the  currencies  of
South Africa’s major trading partners, depreciated by less than one per cent from 31 December
1996 to 31 October 1997. Larger depreciations against the US dollar and the British pound were
neutralised by appreciations against most of the European currencies and the Japanese yen. The
average value of the rand against foreign currencies for the first ten months of the year is about
6 per cent lower compared with the average value for the first ten months of 1996.
3. Implications for monetary policy
Monetary policy decisions in South Africa are guided mainly by developments in
financial aggregates such as the  money  supply,  bank  credit  extension,  money  market  liquidity,
market  interest  rates,  the  official  foreign  reserves  and  the  exchange  rate.  There  is,  over  time,
obviously a relationship between developments in the financial aggregates and in real economic
activity.
The  growth  rates  of  most  of  the  financial  aggregates  over  the  past  few  months
showed  a  marked  slowdown,  particularly  the  rates  of  growth  in  the  components  of  gross
domestic expenditure, which already started to decline in the second half of 1996. Critics of the
Reserve  Bank  are  often  of  the  opinion  that  monetary  policy  should  be  linked  more  directly  to
changes in real economic activity, and not to changes in the financial aggregates. The experience
of  the  1960s  and  1970s,  when  monetary  policy  was  still  guided  by  Keynesian  demand
management principles, proved that premature relaxations of monetary policy could easily lead
to  “stop-go”  or  “boom-bust”  economies,  and  to  a  persistent  rise  of  inflation  to  a  higher  level
after the completion of each  successive  business  cycle.  In  the  modern  approach  of  supply  side
economies,  monetary  authorities  in  most  countries  now  link  policy  changes  with  great  success
rather  to  changes  in  the  financial  aggregates.  There  is  therefore  a  different  and  more  effective
timing of changes in monetary policy.
Taking  account  of  developments  in  real  economic  activity  in  South  Africa  over
the past year, in the overall balance of payments and in the financial markets, the Reserve Bank
adopted an easier monetary policy stance already in the middle of 1997. The Bank acquiesced in
gradual  increases  in  money  market  liquidity,  and  also  in  the  declines  of  market  interest  rates
such  as  the  yield  on  long-term  government  bonds  and  Treasury  bills,  and  on  bankers’
acceptances and negotiable certificates of deposit.
The Reserve Bank endorsed the easier monetary conditions by reducing the Bank
rate from 17 to 16 per cent on 20 October 1997.
4. Recent developments in the monetary situation
Since  the  last  week  of  October,  turmoil  in  the  currency  and  capital  markets
overflowed  the  cauldron  of  certain  overheated  East  Asian  economies  and  disrupted  also  the
South African financial tranquillity. These developments led to some substantial selling of South
African bonds and equities by non-residents, sharp declines in equity prices, volatile conditions
in the foreign exchange markets, an increase in the money market shortage and upward pressure
on  interest  rates.  Understandably,  the  new  situation  created  great  uncertainty  in  the  financial
BIS Review   1/1998
- 4 -
markets and initiated an ongoing debate on what the consequences of these developments would
be for South Africa.
There is no doubt that major adjustments will be necessary to restore equilibrium
in  the  economies  of  the  affected  East  Asian  countries.  Some  of  the  countries,  for  example
Thailand, are already biting the bullet and are now implementing IMF austerity programmes for
painful  macroeconomic  adjustments  that  cannot  be  avoided.  It  will  take  time  to  restore
confidence and to put a new tiger in the tanks of those countries that are perhaps now suffering
from growth fatigue.
It remains to be seen to what extent the unavoidable slow-down in real economic
activity of the East Asian region will affect global economic developments  over  the  next  year.
The  South  African  economic  conditions  will  obviously  also  be  influenced  by  these
developments, although our direct trade with the affected economies is relatively small. We have
perhaps a greater interest in the early recovery of the ailing Japanese economy, which can now
also be delayed because of adverse influences of conditions in the economies of the tired tigers
of the region.
South  Africa  has  also  recently  been  affected  by  the  decline  in  the  gold  price,  a
development  which  is  of  course  not  completely  unrelated  to  the  developments  in  the  foreign
exchange  and  capital  markets.  There  may  be  some  disappointment  that  on  this  occasion
international investors looking for value in a flight from securities opted for the US dollar, and
not  for  gold.  Once  again,  the  possible  adverse  effects  of  the  decline  in  the  gold  price  on  the
South African balance of payments or the exchange rate of the rand should not be exaggerated.
It holds a much greater social problem if one or two gold mines should be forced to close and
many mine workers should be retrenched because of the low gold price.
Monetary  policy  must  obviously  even  in  the  short  term  be  adapted  to  major
changes  in  underlying  conditions,  and  must  take  account  of  the  recent  dramatic  movements  in
the foreign exchange and financial markets. The basic fundamentals in South Africa,  however,
remain sound and well-balanced. Should these external disruptions settle down soon, and should
the events of the past few months in East Asia not have too much of a ripple effect on the overall
global economic growth prospects for 1998, South Africa can look forward to a period of steady
and sound economic recovery next year.
5. Implications for 1998
The  macroeconomic  consolidation  process  in  the  South  African  business  cycle
has been completed to an important extent:
 There is better equilibrium now between real total domestic production and real total demand;
•
The  overall  balance  of  payments  is  in  surplus  and  the  capital  inflows  up  to  the  third
quarter exceeded a relatively small current account deficit;
In  the  financial  sector,  both  money  supply  and  bank  credit  extension  still  increased  at
relatively high rates over the past year, but slowed down significantly over the past few
months;
The total gold and foreign exchange reserves is now at a more comfortable level than at
any stage last year;
  BIS Review   1/1998
- 5 -
  The  rate  of  inflation  has  declined  since  the  first  quarter  of  this  year  and  the  rates  of
increase  in  both  consumer  and  producer  prices  will  hopefully  continue  on  a  downward
path;
the average nominal effective exchange rate of the rand stabilised over the past year.
Not  everyting  is,  however,  favourable  for  an  expected  economic  recovery  in
South Africa next year. In our forward planning we must take account of:
 the  possible  adverse  effects  on  the  global  economy  of  the  present  problems  of  certain  East
  Asian countries and Japan;
the  adverse  effects  of  the  lower  gold  price,  particularly  for  the  official  objective  of
increasing total formal sector employment in South Africa; and
the threatening danger of adverse climatic conditions because of the El Nino effect.
On balance, South Africa can with justification look forward to a better economic
performance in 1998 after the successful consolidation period of 1997.
BIS Review   1/1998
