Mr.  Greenspan  presents  the  US  Federal  Reserve’s  mid-year  report  on  monetary
policy      Testimony  by  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System,
Mr. Alan Greenspan, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the US Senate on
21/7/98.
Mr. Chairman and  members  of  the  Committee,  I  appreciate  this  opportunity  to  present
the Federal Reserve’s mid-year report on monetary policy.
Overall, the performance of the US economy continues to be impressive. Over the first
part of the year, we experienced further gains in output and employment, subdued prices, and moderate
long-term interest rates. Important crosscurrents, however, have been impacting the economy. With labor
markets very tight and domestic final demand retaining considerable momentum, the risks of a pickup in
inflation remain significant. But inventory investment, which was quite rapid late last year and early this
year,  appears  to  have  slowed,  perhaps  appreciably.  Moreover,  the  economic  and  financial  troubles  in
Asian  economies  are  now  demonstrably  restraining  demands  for  US  goods  and  services  -  and  those
troubles could intensify and spread further. Weighing these forces, the Federal Open Market Committee
chose to keep the stance of policy unchanged over the first half of 1998. However, should pressures on
labor resources begin to show through more impressively in  cost  increases,  policy  action  may  need  to
counter  any  associated  tendency  for  prices  to  accelerate  before  it  undermines  this  extraordinary
expansion.
Recent Developments
When  I  appeared  before  your  committee  in  February,  I  noted  that  a  key  question  for
monetary  policy  was  whether  the  consequences  of  the  turmoil  in  Asia  would  be  sufficient  to  check
inflationary tendencies that might otherwise result from the strength of domestic spending and tightening
labor  markets.  After  the  economy’s  surge  in  1996  and,  especially,  last  year,  resource  utilization,
particularly  that  of  the  labor  force,  had  risen  to  a  very  high  level.  Although  some  signs  pointed  to
stepped-up  increases  in  productivity,  the  speed  at  which  the  demand  for  goods  and  services  had  been
growing  clearly  exceeded  the  rate  of  expansion  of  the  economy’s  long-run  potential  to  produce.
Maintenance of such a pace would put even greater pressures on the economy’s resources, threatening
the balance and longevity of the expansion.
However, it appeared likely that the difficulties being encountered by Asian economies,
by  cutting  into  US  exports,  would  be  a  potentially  important  factor  slowing  the  growth  of  aggregate
demand  in  the  United  States.  But  uncertainties  about  the  timing  and  dimensions  of  that  development
were considerable given the difficulties in assessing the extent of the problems in East Asia.
In the event, the contraction of output and incomes in a number of Asian economies has
turned out to be more substantial than most had anticipated. Moreover, financial markets in Asia and in
emerging market economies generally have remained unsettled, portending further difficult adjustments.
The contraction in Asian economies, along with the rise in the foreign exchange value of the dollar over
1997,  prompted  a  sharp  deterioration  in  the  US  balance  of  trade  in  the  first  quarter.  Nonetheless,  the
American economy proved to be unexpectedly robust in that period. The growth of real GDP not only
failed to slow, it climbed further, to about a 5½ percent annual rate in the first quarter, according to the
current national income accounts. Domestic private demand for goods and services - including personal
consumption expenditures, business investment, and residential expenditures - was exceptionally strong.
Evidently, optimism about jobs, incomes, and profits, high and rising wealth-to-income
ratios,  low  financing  costs,  and  falling  prices  for  high-tech  goods  fed  the  appetites  of  households  and
businesses for consumer durables and capital equipment. In addition, inventory investment contributed
significantly to growth in the first quarter; indeed, the growth of stocks of materials and goods outpaced
that  of  overall  output  by  a  wide  margin  during  the  first  quarter,  adding  1  percentage  points  to  the
annualized growth rate of GDP. Although accumulation of some products likely was unintended, surveys
BIS Review   63/1998
- 2 -
indicate  that  much  of  the  stockbuilding  probably  reflected  firms’  confidence  in  the  prospects  for
continued growth.
As  evidence  piled  up  that  the  economy  continued  to  run  hot  during  the  winter,  the
Federal  Reserve’s  concerns  about  inflationary  pressures  mounted.  Domestic  demand  clearly  had  more
underlying momentum than we had anticipated, supported in part by financial conditions that were quite
accommodative.  Credit  remained  extremely  easy  for  most  borrowers  to  obtain;  intermediate-  and
long-term  interest  rates  were  at  relatively  low  levels;  equity  prices  soared  higher,  despite  some
disappointing earnings reports; and growth in the monetary aggregates was rapid. Indeed, the crises in
Asia, by lowering longer-term US interest rates - through stronger preferences for dollar investments and
expectations of slower growth ahead - and by reducing commodity prices, probably added to the positive
forces boosting domestic spending in the first half, especially in the interest-sensitive housing sector. The
robust  expansion  of  demand  tightened  labor  markets  further,  giving  additional  impetus  to  the  upward
trend in labor costs. Inflation was low - though, given the lags with which monetary policy affects the
economy and prices, we had to be mainly concerned not with conditions at the moment but with those
likely  to  prevail  many  months  ahead.  In  these  circumstances,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee
elected  in  March  to  move  to  a  state  of  heightened  alert  against  inflation,  but  left  the  stance  of  policy
unchanged.
Although  national  income  and  product  data  for  the  second  quarter  have  not  yet  been
published,  growth  of  US  output  appears  to  have  slowed  sharply.  The  auto  strike  has  brought  General
Motor’s  production  essentially  to  a  halt,  probably  reducing  real  GDP  in  the  second  quarter  by  about
½ percentage point at an annual rate. The limited available information on inventory investment suggests
that stockbuilding dropped markedly from its unsustainable pace of the first quarter. In addition to the
slower pace of inventory building, Asian economies have continued to deteriorate, further retarding our
exports in recent months.
Indeed, readings on the elements that make up the real GDP have led many analysts to
anticipate  a  decline  in  that  measure  in  the  second  quarter,  after  the  first-quarter  surge.  Given  the
upcoming  revisions  to  the  national  income  accounts,  such  assessments  would  have  to  be  regarded  as
conjectural.  It  is  worth  noting  in  any  case  that  other  indicators  of  output,  including  worker  hours  and
manufacturing production, show a somewhat steadier, though slowing, path over the first half of the year.
And  underlying  trends  in  domestic  final  demand  have  remained  strong,  imparting  impetus  to  the
continuing economic expansion.
During the first half of the year, measures of resource utilization diverged. Pressures on
manufacturing facilities appeared to be easing. Plant capacity was growing rapidly as a result of vigorous
investment. And growth of industrial output was dropping off from its brisk pace of 1997, importantly
reflecting  the  deceleration  in  world  demand  for  manufactured  goods  that  resulted  from  the  Asian
economic difficulties.
But  labor  markets,  in  contrast,  became  increasingly  taut  during  the  first  half.  Total
payroll  jobs  rose  about  one-and-one-half  million  over  the  first  six  months  of  the  year.  The  civilian
unemployment  rate  dropped  to  a  bit  below  4½  percent  in  the  second  quarter,  its  lowest  level  in  three
decades. Firms resorted to a variety of tactics to attract and retain workers, such as paying various types
of monetary bonuses and raising basic wage rates. But, at least through the first quarter, the effects of a
rising wage bill on production costs were moderated by strong gains in productivity.
Indeed, inflation stayed remarkably damped during the first quarter. The consumer price
index  as  well  as  broader  measures  of  prices  indicate  that  inflation  moved  down  further,  even  as  the
economy strengthened. Although declining oil prices contributed to this development, pricing leverage in
the goods-producing sector more generally was held in check by reduced demand from Asia that, among
other things, has led to a softening of commodity prices, a strong dollar that has contributed to bargain
prices  on  many  imports,  and  rising  industrial  capacity.  Service  price  inflation,  less  influenced  by
BIS Review   63/1998
- 3 -
international  events,  has  remained  steady  at  about  a  3  percent  rate  since  before  the  beginning  of  the
crisis.
Some elements in the goods price mix clearly were transitory. Indeed,  the  more  recent
price data suggest that overall consumer price inflation moved up in the second quarter. But, even so, the
increase remained moderate.
In any event, it would be a mistake for monetary policy makers to focus on any single
index in gauging inflation pressures in the economy. Although much public attention is directed to the
CPI, the Federal Reserve monitors a wide  variety  of  aggregate  price  measures.  Each  is  designed  for  a
particular purpose and has its own strengths and weaknesses. Price pressures appear especially absent in
some of the measures in the national income accounts, which are available through the first quarter. The
chain-weight price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy, for example,
rose 1.5 percent over the year ending in the first quarter, considerably less than the 2.3 percent rise in the
core CPI over the same period. An even broader price measure, that for overall GDP, rose 1.4 percent.
These  indexes,  while  certainly  subject  to  many  of  the  measurement  difficulties  the  Bureau  of  Labor
Statistics has been grappling with in the CPI, have the advantages that their chain-weighting avoids some
aspects of so-called substitution bias and that already published data can be revised to incorporate new
information  and  measurement  techniques.  Taken  together,  while  the  various  price  indexes  show  some
differences, the basic message is that inflation to date has remained low.
Economic Fundamentals: The Virtuous Cycle
So  far  this  year,  our  economy  has  continued  to  enjoy  a  virtuous  cycle.  Evidence  of
accelerated  productivity  has  been  bolstering  expectations  of  future  corporate  earnings,  thereby  fueling
still further increases in equity values, and the improvements in productivity have been helping to reduce
inflation.  In  the  context  of  subdued  price  increases  and  generally  supportive  credit  conditions,  rising
equity values have provided impetus to spending and, in turn, the expansion of output, employment, and
productivity-enhancing capital investment.
The essential precondition for the emergence, and persistence, of this virtuous cycle  is
arguably the decline in the rate of inflation to near price stability. In recent years, continued low product
price  inflation  and  expectations  that  it  will  persist  have  promoted  stability  in  financial  markets  and
fostered perceptions that the degree of risk in the financial outlook has been moving ever lower. These
perceptions, in turn, have reduced the extra compensation that investors require for making loans to, or
taking ownership positions in, private firms. With risks in the domestic economy judged to be low, credit
and equity capital have been readily available for many businesses, fostering strong investment. And low
mortgage interest rates have allowed many households to purchase homes and to refinance outstanding
debt. The reduction in debt servicing costs has contributed to an apparent stabilization of the financial
strains on the household sector that seemed to emerge a couple of years ago and has buoyed consumer
demand.
To a considerable extent, investors seem to be expecting that low inflation and stronger
productivity growth will allow the extraordinary growth of profits to be extended into the distant future.
Indeed,  expectations  of  earnings  growth  over  the  longer  term  have  been  undergoing  continual  upward
revision by security analysts since early 1995. These rising expectations have, in turn, driven stock prices
sharply higher and credit spreads lower, perhaps in both cases to levels that will be difficult to sustain
unless  the  virtuous  cycle  continues.  In  any  event,  primarily  because  of  the  rise  in  stock  prices,  about
$12½ trillion has been added to the value of household assets since the end of 1994. Probably only a few
percent of these largely unrealized capital gains have been transformed into the purchase of goods and
services  in  consumer  markets.  But  that  increment  to  spending,  combined  with  the  sharp  increase  in
equipment investment, which has stemmed from the low cost of both equity and debt relative to expected
profits on capital, has been instrumental in propelling the economy forward.
BIS Review   63/1998
- 4 -
The consequences for the American worker have been dramatic and, for the most part,
highly favorable.  A  great  many  chronically  underemployed  people  have  been  given  the  opportunity  to
work, and many others have been able to upgrade their skills as a result of work experience, extensive
increases  in  on-the-job  training,  or  increased  enrollment  in  technical  programs  in  community  colleges
and elsewhere. In addition, former welfare recipients appear to have been absorbed into the work force in
significant numbers.
Government  finances  have  been  enhanced  as  well.  Widespread  improvement  has  been
evident in the financial positions of state and local governments. In the federal sector, the taxes paid on
huge realized capital gains and other incomes related to stock market advances, coupled with taxes on
markedly  higher  corporate  profits,  have  joined  with  restraint  on  spending  to  produce  a  unified  budget
surplus  for  the  first  time  in  nearly  three  decades.  The  important  steps  taken  by  the  Congress  and  the
Administration  to  put  federal  finances  on  a  sounder  footing  have  added  to  national  saving,  relieving
pressures on credit markets. The paydown of debt associated with the federal surplus has helped to hold
down  longer-term  interest  rates,  which  in  turn  has  encouraged  capital  formation  and  reduced  debt
burdens. Maintaining this disciplined budget stance would be most helpful in supporting a continuation
of our current robust economic performance in the years ahead.
The  fact  that  economic  performance  has  strengthened  as  inflation  subsided  should  not
have been surprising, given that risk premiums and economic disincentives to invest in productive capital
diminish as the economy approaches price stability. But the extent to which strong growth and high labor
force  utilization  have  been  joined  with  low  inflation  over  an  extended  period  is,  nevertheless,
exceptional. So far, at least, the adverse wage-price interactions that played so central a role in pressuring
inflation higher in many past business expansions - eventually bringing those expansions to an end - have
not played a significant role in the current expansion.
For one thing, increases in hourly compensation have been slower to pick up than in most
other recent expansions, although, to be sure, wages have started to accelerate in the past couple of years
as the labor market has become progressively tighter. In the first few years of the expansion, the subdued
rate of rise in hourly compensation seemed to be, in part, a reflection of greater concerns among workers
about job security. We now seem to have moved beyond that phase of especially acute concern, though
the  flux  of  technology  may  still  be  leaving  many  workers  with  fears  of  job  skill  obsolescence  and  a
willingness to trade wage gains for job security. In the past couple of years, of course, workers have not
had  to  press  especially  hard  for  nominal  pay  gains  to  realize  sizable  increases  in  their  real  wages.  In
contrast  to  the  pattern  that  developed  in  several  previous  business  expansions,  when  workers  required
substantial  increases  in  pay  just  to  cover  increases  in  the  cost  of  living,  consumer  prices  have  been
generally well-behaved in the current expansion.
A  couple  of  years  ago  -  almost  at  the  same  time  that  increases  in  total  hourly
compensation began trending up in nominal terms - evidence of a long-awaited pickup in the growth of
labor  productivity  began  to  show  through  more  strongly  in  the  data;  and  this  accelerated  increase  in
output per hour has enabled firms to raise workers’ real wages while holding the line on price increases.
Gains in productivity usually vary with the strength of the economy, and the favorable results that we
have observed during the past two years or so, when the economy has been growing more rapidly, almost
certainly overstate the degree of structural improvement. But evidence continues to mount that the trend
of  productivity  has  accelerated,  even  if  the  extent  of  that  pickup  is  as  yet  unclear.  Signs  of  major
technological  improvements  are  all  around  us,  and  the  benefits  are  evident  not  only  in  high-tech
industries but also in production processes that have long been part of our industrial economy.
Those technological innovations and the rapidly declining cost of capital equipment that
embodies  them  in  turn  seem  to  be  a  major  factor  behind  the  recent  enlarged  gains  in  productivity.
Evidently,  plant  managers  who  were  involved  in  planning  capital  investments  anticipated  that  a
significant increase in the real rates of return on facilities could be achieved by exploiting emerging new
technologies. If that had been a mistake on their part, one would have expected capital investment to run
up briefly and then start down again when the lower-than-anticipated rates of return developed. But we
BIS Review   63/1998
- 5 -
have instead seen sustained gains in investment, indicating that hoped-for rates of return apparently have
been realized.
Notwithstanding  a  reasonably  optimistic  interpretation  of  the  recent  productivity
numbers, it would not be prudent to assume that even strongly rising productivity, by itself, can ensure a
non-inflationary  future.  Certainly  wage  increases,  per  se,  are  not  inflationary,  unless  they  exceed
productivity  growth,  thereby  creating  pressure  for  inflationary  price  increases  that  can  eventually
undermine economic growth and employment. Because the level of productivity is tied to an important
degree  to  the  stock  of  capital,  which  turns  over  only  gradually,  increases  in  the  trend  growth  of
productivity  probably  also  occur  rather  gradually.  By  contrast,  the  potential  for  abrupt  acceleration  of
nominal hourly compensation is surely greater.
As  I  have  noted  in  previous  appearances  before  Congress,  economic  growth  at  rates
experienced on average over the past several years would eventually run into constraints as the reservoir
of  unemployed  people  available  to  work  is  drawn  down.  The  annual  increase  in  the  working-age
population (from 16 to 64 years of age), including immigrants, has been approximately 1 percent a year
in recent years. Yet employment, measured by the count of persons who are working rather than by the
count  of  jobs,  has  been  rising  2  percent  a  year  since  1995,  despite  the  acceleration  in  the  growth  of
output per hour. The gap between employment growth and population growth, amounting to about 1.1
million persons a year on average since the end of 1995, has been made up, in part, by a decline in the
number of individuals who are counted as unemployed - those persons who are actively seeking work - of
approximately 650,000 a year, on average, over the past two and one-half years. The remainder of the
gap  has  reflected  a  rise  in  labor  force  participation  that  can  be  traced  largely  to  a  decline  of  almost
300,000 a year in the number of individuals (aged 16 to 64) wanting a job but not actively seeking one.
Presumably, many of the persons who once  were  in  this  group  have  more  recently  become  active  and
successful  job-seekers  as  the  economy  has  strengthened,  thereby  preventing  a  still  sharper  drop  in  the
official unemployment rate. In June, the number of persons aged 16 to 64 who wanted to work but who
did not have jobs was 10.6 million on a seasonally adjusted basis, roughly 6 percent of the working-age
population. Despite an uptick in joblessness in June, this percentage is only fractionally above the record
low reached in May for these data, which can be calculated back to 1970.
Nonetheless,  a  strong  signal  of  inflation  pressures  building  because  of  compensation
increases markedly in excess of productivity gains has not yet clearly emerged in this expansion. Among
nonfinancial corporations (our most recent source of data on consolidated income statements), trends in
costs seem to have accelerated from their lows, but the rates of increase in both unit labor costs and total
unit costs are still quite low.
Still, the gap between the growth in employment and that of the working-age population
will inevitably close. What is crucial to sustaining this unprecedented period of prosperity is that it close
reasonably  promptly,  given  already  stretched  labor  resources,  and  that  labor  markets  find  a  balance
consistent  with  sustained  growth  marked  by  compensation  gains  in  line  with  productivity  advances.
Whether these adjustments will occur without monetary policy action remains an open question.
Foreign Developments
While the United States has been benefiting from a virtuous economic cycle, a number of
other  economies  unfortunately  have  been  spiraling  in  quite  the  opposite  direction.  The  United  States,
Canada, and Western Europe have been enjoying  solid  economic  growth,  with  relatively  low  inflation
and declining unemployment, but the economic performance in many developing and transition nations
and Japan has been deteriorating. How quickly the latter erosion is arrested and reversed will be a key
factor in shaping US economic and financial trends in the period ahead. With all that is at stake, it would
be  difficult  to  overstate  how  crucial  it  is  that  the  authorities  in  the  relevant  economies  promptly
implement  effective  policies  to  correct  the  structural  problems  underlying  recent  weaknesses  and  to
promote  sustainable  economic  growth  before  patterns  of  reinforcing  contraction  become  difficult  to
contain.
BIS Review   63/1998
- 6 -
Conditions in Asia are of particular concern. Aggregate output of the Asian developing
economies  has  plunged,  with  particularly  steep  declines  in  Korea,  Malaysia,  Thailand,  and  Indonesia.
Even  the  economies  of  the  stalwart  tigers  -  Hong  Kong,  Singapore,  and  Taiwan  -  have  softened.
Economic  growth  in  China  has  also  slowed,  owing  largely  to  the  currency  depreciations  among  its
neighbors and the sharp declines in their demand for imports.
Russia  has  also  experienced  some  spillover  from  the  Asian  difficulties,  but  Russia’s
problems are mostly homegrown. Large fiscal deficits stem from high effective marginal tax rates that
encourage avoidance and do not raise adequate revenue. This and the recent declines in prices of oil and
other commodities have rendered Russian financial markets and the ruble vulnerable, particularly in an
environment  of  heightened  concern  about  all  emerging  markets.  The  Russian  government  has  recently
promulgated a set of new policy measures in connection with an expanded IMF support package in an
effort to address these problems.
In Latin America, conditions vary: Economies that are heavily dependent on exports of
oil and other commodities have suffered as prices of those items have fallen, and several countries in that
region have received more intensive scrutiny in international capital  markets,  but,  on  the  whole,  Latin
American economies continue to perform reasonably well.
Disappointingly,  economic  activity  in  Japan  -  a  crucial  engine  of  Asian  economic
growth -  has  turned  down  after  a  long  period  of  subpar  growth.  Gross  domestic  product  fell  at  a
5¼ percent annual rate in the first quarter. More recently, confidence of households and businesses has
continued to erode, the sharp contraction elsewhere in Asia has fed back onto Japan, and the dwindling
domestic  demand  for  goods  and  services  in  that  country  has  been  further  constrained  by  a  mounting
credit crunch. Nonperforming loans have risen sharply as real estate values fell following the bursting of
the  asset  bubble  in  1991.  Problems  in  the  banking  sector,  exacerbated  by  the  broader  Asian  financial
crisis, have led to market concerns about the adequacy of the capital of many Japanese banks and have
engendered  a  premium  in  the  market  for  Japanese  banks’  borrowing.  This  resulting  squeeze  to  profit
margins  has  led  to  a  reluctance  to  lend  in  dollars  or  yen.  In  response  to  the  weakening  economy  and
deteriorating  banking  situation,  the  Japanese  yen  has  tended  to  weaken  significantly,  in  often-volatile
markets, against the dollar and major European currencies.
As  you  know,  we  have  sought  to  be  helpful  in  the  Japanese  government’s  efforts  to
stabilize their economy and financial system, reflecting our awareness of the important role that Japanese
financial and economic performance plays in the world economy, including that of the United States. We
have  consulted  with  the  relevant  Japanese  authorities  on  methods  for  resolving  difficulties  in  their
banking system and have urged them to take effective measures to stimulate their economy. I believe that
the Japanese authorities recognize the urgency of the situation.
That  a  number  of  foreign  economies  are  currently  experiencing  difficulties  is  not
surprising. Although many had previously realized a substantial measure of success in developing their
economies,  a  number  had  leaned  heavily  on  command-type  systems  rather  than  relying  primarily  on
market  mechanisms.  This  characteristic  has  been  evident  not  only  in  their  industrial  sectors  but  in
banking where government intervention is typically heavy, where long-standing personal and corporate
relationships  are  the  predominant  factor  in  financing  arrangements,  and  where  market-based  credit
assessments are the exception rather than the rule. Recent events confirm that these sorts of structures are
ill-suited to today’s dynamic global economy, in which national economies must be capable of adapting
flexibly and rapidly to changing conditions.
Responses  in  countries  currently  experiencing  difficulties  have  varied  considerably.
Some  have  reacted  quickly  and,  in  general  terms,  appropriately.  But  in  others,  a  variety  of  political
considerations appear to have militated against prompt and effective action.
BIS Review   63/1998
- 7 -
As a consequence, the risks of further adverse developments in these economies remain
substantial. And given the pervasive interconnections of virtually all economies and financial systems in
the world today, the associated uncertainties for the United States and other developed economies remain
substantial as well.
In the current circumstances, we need to be aware that monetary policy tightening actions
in  the  United  States  could  have  outsized  effects  on  very  sensitive  financial  markets  in  Asia,  a
development that could have substantial adverse repercussions on US financial markets and, over time,
on our own economy. But while we must take account of such foreign interactions, we must be careful
that our responses ultimately are consistent with a monetary policy aimed at optimal performance of the
US economy. Our objectives relate to domestic economic performance, and price stability and maximum
sustainable economic growth here at home would best serve the long-run interests of troubled financial
markets and economies abroad.
The Economic Outlook
The Federal Open Market Committee believes that the conditions for continued growth
with low inflation are in place here in the United States. As I noted previously, an important issue for
policy  is  how  the  imbalance  of  recent  years  between  the  demand  for  labor  and  the  growth  of  the
working-age population is resolved. In that regard, we see a slowing of the growth in aggregate demand
as a necessary element in the mix.
At  this  time,  some  of  the  key  factors  that  have  supported  strong  final  demand  by
domestic purchasers remain favorable. Although real short-term interest rates have risen as the federal
funds rate has been held unchanged while inflation expectations have declined, the financial conditions
that have fostered the strength in demand are still in place. With their incomes and wealth having been on
a strong upward track, American consumers remain quite upbeat. For businesses, decreasing costs of and
high rates of return on investment, as well as the scarcity of labor, could keep capital spending elevated.
These  factors  suggest  some  risk  that  the  labor  market  could  get  even  tighter.  And  even  if  it  does  not,
under  prevailing  tight  labor  markets  increasingly  confident  workers  might  place  gradually  escalating
pressures on wages and costs, which would eventually feed through to prices.
But a number of factors likely will serve to damp growth in aggregate demand, helping to
foster  a  reasonably  smooth  transition  to  a  more  sustainable  rate  of  growth  and  reasonable  balance  in
labor  markets.  We  have  yet  to  see  the  full  effects  of  the  crisis  in  East  Asia  on  US  employment  and
income.  Residential  and  business  fixed  investment  already  have  reached  such  high  levels  that  further
gains approaching those experienced recently would imply very rapid growth of the  stocks  of  housing
and  plant  and  equipment  relative  to  income  trends.  Moreover,  business  investment  will  be  damped  if
recent  indications  of  a  narrowing  in  domestic  operating  profit  margins  prompt  a  reassessment  of  the
expected  rates  of  return  on  investment  in  plant  and  equipment.  Reduced  prospects  for  the  return  to
capital would not only affect investment directly but could also affect consumption if stock prices adjust
to a less optimistic view of earnings prospects.
Of course, the demand for labor that is consistent with a particular rate of output growth
also could be lowered if productivity growth were to increase more. And, on the supply side of the labor
market, faster growth of the labor force could emerge as the result of increased immigration or delayed
retirements.  Nonetheless,  it  appears  most  probable  that  the  necessary  slower  absorption  of  labor  into
employment will reflect, in part, a deceleration of output growth, as a consequence of evolving market
forces. Failing that, firming actions on the part of the Federal Reserve may be necessary to ensure a track
of expansion that is capable of being sustained.
Thus, members of the Board of Governors and presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
anticipate a slowing in the rate of economic growth. The central tendency of their forecasts is that real
GDP will rise 3 to 3¼ percent over 1998 as a whole and 2 to 2½  percent in 1999. With the rise in the
demand for workers coming into line with that of the labor force, the unemployment rate is expected to
change little from its current level, finishing next year in the neighborhood of 4½ to 4¾ percent.
BIS Review   63/1998
- 8 -
Inflation performance will be affected by developments abroad as well as those here at
home.  The  extent  and  pace  of  recovery  of  Asian  economies  currently  experiencing  a  severe  downturn
will have important implications for prices of energy and other commodities, the strength of the dollar,
and  competitive  conditions  on  world  product  markets.  Should  the  situation  abroad  remain  unsettled,
these factors would probably continue to contribute to good price performance in the United States in the
period ahead. But it is important to recognize that the damping influence of these factors on inflation is
mostly temporary. At some point, the dollar will stop rising, foreign demand will begin to recover, and
oil and other commodity prices will stop falling and could even back up some. Indeed, a brisk snap-back
in foreign economic activity, should that occur, would add, at least temporarily, to price pressures in the
United States.
On a more fundamental level, it is the balance of supply and demand in labor and product
markets  in  the  United  States  that  will  have  the  greatest  effect  on  inflation  rates  here.  As  I  noted
previously, wage and benefit costs have been remarkably subdued in the current expansion. Nonetheless,
an accelerating trend in wages has been apparent for some time.
In addition, a gradual upward tilt in benefit costs has become evident of late. A variety of
factors - including the strength of the economy and rising equity values, which have reduced the need for
payments  into  unemployment  trust  funds  and  pension  plans,  and  the  restructuring  of  the  health  care
sector - have been working to keep benefit costs in check in this expansion. But, in the medical area at
least, the most recent developments suggest that the favorable trend may have run its course. The slowing
of price increases for medical services seems to have come to a halt, at least for a time, and, with the
cost-saving shift to managed care having been largely completed, the potential for businesses to achieve
further savings in that regard appears to be rather limited at this point. There have been a few striking
instances this past year of employers boosting outlays for health benefits by substantial amounts.
Given that compensation costs are likely to accelerate at least a little further, productivity
trends and profit margins will be key to determining price performance in the period ahead. Whether the
recent strong performance of productivity can be extended remains to be seen. It does seem likely that
productivity  calculated  for  the  entire  economy  using  GDP  data  weakened  in  the  second  quarter.  This
development  clearly  owed,  at  least  in  some  degree,  to  the  deceleration  of  output  in  that  period.  In
manufacturing, where our data are better measured, productivity appears still to have registered a solid
increase. We will be closely monitoring a variety of indicators to assess how productivity is performing
in the months ahead.
Monetary policymakers see the most likely outcome as modestly higher inflation rates in
the next one and one-half years. The central tendency of monetary policymakers’ CPI inflation forecasts
is for an increase of 1¾ to 2 percent during 1998 and 2 to 2½  percent next year. As noted, the ebbing of
the  special  factors  reducing  inflation  over  the  past  year  or  so,  such  as  the  decline  in  oil  prices,  will
account for some of this uptick. But the Federal Open Market Committee will need to remain particularly
alert  to  the  possibility  that  more  fundamental  imbalances  are  increasing  inflationary  pressures.  The
Committee  would  need  to  resist  vigorously  any  tendency  for  an  upward  trend,  which  could  become
embedded in the inflationary process.
The  Committee  recognizes  that  significant  risks  attend  the  outlook:  One  is  that  the
impending  constraint  from  domestic  labor  markets  could  bind  more  abruptly  than  it  has  to  date,
intensifying  inflation  pressures.  The  other  is  the  potential  for  further  adverse  developments  abroad,
which  could  reduce  the  demand  for  US  goods  and  services  more  sharply  than  anticipated  and  which
would thereby ease pressures on labor markets. While we expect that the situation will develop relatively
smoothly,  the  Committee  believes  that,  given  the  current  tightness  in  labor  markets,  the  potential  for
accelerating inflation is probably greater than the risk of protracted, excessive weakness in the economy.
In any case, it will need to continue to monitor evolving circumstances closely, and adjust the stance of
monetary policy as appropriate, in order to help establish conditions consistent with progress towards the
Federal Reserve’s goals of price stability and maximum sustainable economic growth.
BIS Review   63/1998
- 9 -
Ranges for Money and Credit Growth
Indeed, recognition of the benefits of low inflation and our commitment to the Federal
Reserve’s statutory objective of price stability were once again dominant in the Committee’s semiannual
review of the ranges for the monetary and debt aggregates. The  FOMC  noted  that  the  behavior  of  the
monetary  aggregates  had  been  somewhat  more  predictable  over  the  past  few  years  than  it  had  been
earlier in the 1990s. The rapid growth of M2 and M3 over the first half of the year, which lifted those
measures  above  the  upper  ends  of  the  target  ranges  established  in  February,  was  consistent  with  the
unexpectedly strong advance in aggregate demand. However, movements in velocity remain difficult to
predict.
The  FOMC  will  continue  to  interpret  the  monetary  ranges  as  benchmarks  for  the
achievement of price stability under conditions of historically normal velocity behavior. Consistent with
that interpretation, the Committee decided to retain the current ranges for the monetary aggregates for
1998, as well as the range for debt, and to carry them over on a provisional basis to next year. Although
near-term prospects for velocity behavior are uncertain, the Committee recognizes that monetary growth
does appear to provide some information about trends in the economy and inflation. Therefore, we will
be  carefully  evaluating  the  aggregates,  relative  both  to  forecasts  and  to  their  ranges,  in  the  context  of
other readings on other variables in our efforts to promote optimum macroeconomic conditions.
Concluding Comments
As  I  have  stated  in  previous  testimony,  the  recent  economic  performance,  with  its
combination  of  strong  growth  and  low  inflation,  is  as  impressive  as  any  I  have  witnessed  in  my  near
half-century of daily observation of the American economy. Although the reasons for this development
are  complex,  our  success  can  be  attributed  in  part  to  sound  economic  policy.  The  Congress  and  the
Administration  have  successfully  balanced  the  budget  and,  indeed,  achieved  a  near-term  surplus,  a
development  that  tends  to  boost  national  saving  and  investment.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  pursued
monetary  conditions  consistent  with  maximum  sustainable  long-run  growth  by  seeking  price  stability.
These policies have helped bring about a healthy macroeconomic environment for productivity-boosting
investment and innovation, factors that have lifted living standards for most Americans. The task before
us is to maintain disciplined economic policies and thereby contribute to maintaining and extending these
gains in the years ahead.
BIS Review   63/1998
