Mr. George speaks on the advent of the euro, and its possible impact on Europe
and  the  Mediterranean  region 
  Speech  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,
Mr. E.A.J. George, at the FT Euro-Mediterranean Capital Markets Conference in London on 26/3/98.
 I’m delighted to take part in this conference which has been organised by the British
Government  during  its  term  of  Presidency  of  the  European  Union  to  promote  and  strengthen
financial  and  economic  ties  within  the  partnership  between  the  European  Union  and  its
Mediterranean neighbours.
It  is  a  very  happy  accident  of  fate  -  to  me  as  a  central  banker  at  least  -  that  this
country  should  hold  the  EU  Presidency  at  this  particular  time,  as  Europe  prepares  to  take  the
definitive  step  to  monetary  union.  Earlier  this  week  in  Frankfurt  the  Council  of  the  European
Monetary  Institute  finalised  its  “convergence  report”,  which  we  published  yesterday,  at  the  same
time  as  the  parallel  report  by  the  European  Commission.  The  Commission  also  published  its
recommendation  to  EU  Finance  Ministers  and  Heads  of  Government  that  11  EU  member  states
should move to monetary union, in a first - tidal - wave, from January 1st next year. Without seeking
to anticipate the decision to be taken by the Heads of Government under Prime Minister Tony Blair’s
Presidency in Brussels during the first weekend of May, the odds  are  that  monetary  union  will  go
ahead on that basis. It is an historic moment.
The irony, of course, is that this country itself  will  not  be  a  part  of  that  first  wave.That is a disappointment to some, but a relief to others - a point I’ll come back to - but, whatever
view one takes about that, no-one, I think, can fail to recognise the huge achievement  of  all  those
who have laboured, with such determination, for so long, and against formidable difficulties, to bring
the venture to this point, and I take my hat off to them.
In  the  circumstances,  Mr  Chairman,  I  could  hardly  choose  to  speak  about  anything
else this morning. The advent of the euro, on this broad basis, will, of course, have profound effects
on  financial  activity,  and  on  both  providers  and  consumers  of  financial  services,  all  around  the
world - including in our Mediterranean partner countries. And I should like to take this momentous
development, in the broader context of the evolution of the European Union, as my theme.
I recognise at the outset that the EU is, fundamentally, about politics, inspired by the
need to ensure that Europe is never again devastated by war. I am only too happy to leave the debate
about what that implies for the political organisation of Europe - including the relationship between
European  institutions  and  the  individual  member  states  -  to  the  politicians.  My  interest  is  in  the
economic  dimension  of  Europe  -  though  I  realise  of  course  that  economics  and  politics  can’t  in
practice be separated quite as neatly as this distinction suggests.
The “economics” of Europe starts from familiar arguments in favour of free trade and
competition  as  the  most  effective  means  of  ensuring  that  productive  resources  are  efficiently
deployed,  promoting  specialisation  in  areas  of  comparative  advantage  -  and  thereby  satisfying
consumer  demands  more  effectively  and  increasing  aggregate,  macro-economic,  welfare.  These
arguments apply, in principle quite generally - as much to international trade and competition as to
regional trade and competition or indeed to trade and competition within individual national markets.
The  macro-economic  benefits  are  less  immediately  obvious  at  the  micro-economic
level.  Existing  activity  is  threatened  by  greater  competition,  and  there  is  a  natural  temptation  -  to
employees,  their  employers  and  their  national  governments  -  to  seek  to  defend  their  established
activity through protective action in one form or another. The benefits of greater competition, and of
the removal of barriers or distortions to free trade, on the other hand, flow essentially from the future
activity that is likely to result - so that they are much less tangible. And the benefits - anyway in the
short-term - do not necessarily accrue evenly across the free trade area - they accrue to those that are
flexible and adaptable enough to take advantage of the new opportunities that free trade offers. So
BIS Review   29/1998
˝
- 2 -
that although we know that in principle at the macro-economic level free trade and competition are a
powerful  positive  sum  game  - and although  we  have  seen  it  clearly  enough  in  practice  -  there  are
always likely to be visible - and vocal - losers. And that is bound to provoke outbursts of popular
resistance. Against that background establishing and maintaining free trade to the extent that that has
been achieved in the EU is in itself a remarkable achievement.
But  the  EU  has  already  in  many  areas  gone  well  beyond  just  free  trade,  in
establishing  the  single  market.  That  involves  more  than  the  free  movement  of  goods  and  services
within Europe. It involves also the free movement of both labour and capital, as well as supporting
European  legislation  to  avoid  market  distortions  from,  for  example,  state  aids,  or  government
procurement, or restrictive practices within the private sector. This further pooling of sovereignty has
essentially the same purpose - it is designed to reinforce the macro-economic benefits from free trade
and competition and act as a stimulus to growth and employment by allocating resources still more
effectively  based  on  comparative  advantage,  enabling  savings  to  flow  to  where  they  can  be  most
productively  invested  and  production  to  be  located  where  it  can  be  most  effectively  carried  on  to
satisfy consumer demand.
The advent of the euro represents a massive new step in the same direction.
The crucial and unique advantage of monetary union is the exchange rate certainty it
will bring throughout the euro area  - not  just  the  reasonable  de  facto  stability  that  can result  from
each  EU  member  state  individually  pursuing  disciplined  macro-economic  policies  in  parallel,  and
which  has  in  practice  been  achieved  within  much  of  Europe  for  quite  long  periods  within  the
framework of the Exchange Rate Mechanism - but actual, and in principle permanent, exchange rate
certainty.  There  is  no  doubt  that  this  is  a  very  real  advantage.  One  can  argue  that  exchange  rate
certainty is not an essential complement to the European single market - any more than exchange rate
fixity is essential to achieving the benefits of  free trade more generally. But there is no doubt that
intra-European  exchange  rate  certainty  will  -  through  the  intensified  competition  resulting  from
greater  transparency  of  prices  and  lower  transaction  costs,  through  broader  and  deeper  capital
markets,  and  through  the  associated  improvement  in  economic  resource  allocation  -  substantially
enhance  the  macro-economic  benefits  to  be  derived  from  the  single  market.  Whether  or  not  it  is
essential, therefore, exchange rate certainty is very desirable from this perspective.
The  potential  drawback  of  monetary  union  can  also  be  simply  stated,  though  it  is
more  difficult  to  assess.  Essentially  there  is  a  risk  that  the  single  monetary  policy  -  the  single,
one-size-fits-all, short-term interest rate - within the euro area, which is a necessary corollary of the
single currency, will not in the event prove to be appropriate to the domestic needs of each of the
euro-member  countries.  There  is  no  doubt  that  such  risks  exists.  They  may  result  from  cyclical
divergence.  They  may  arise  from  differences  in  fiscal  positions  even  though  these  are  to  be
constrained through the Stability Pact. Or they may result from economic shocks of some sort that
have a bigger impact on some countries than on others. The rise in oil prices in the early 1970’s or
German reunification are classic examples.
So the risk of divergent monetary policy needs within the euro area is real. And the
damage it could cause if serious tensions between member countries were to emerge is substantial,
because  alternative  adjustment  mechanisms,  such  as  labour  migration  or  fiscal  redistribution,  that
exist within individual countries, and which help to alleviate the similar regional tensions that arise at
the national level, are simply not well-developed at the pan-European level.
The Maastricht Treaty, of course, recognised this risk, and the famous convergence
criteria  were  designed  precisely  as  a  means  of  reducing  the  risk  to  manageable  proportions  by
requiring  that,  before  they  join  the  euro  club,  countries  should  have  achieved  at  least  a  minimum
degree  of  macro-economic  convergence  -  demonstrating  their  commitment  to  macro-economic
BIS Review   29/1998
˝
- 3 -
discipline  through  both  fiscal  consolidation  and  monetary  policy  directed  at  effective  price,  and
exchange  rate,  stability.  And  there  is  no  doubt  that  all  European  Union  member  states  have  made
huge  progress  towards  macro-economic  stability  over  the  past  few  years,  which  you  will  find
documented  in  the  two  “convergence  reports”.  Although  the  EMI  in  particular  emphasises  the
ongoing need in a number of countries to persist in determined fiscal consolidation, it is this progress
towards nominal convergence that underlies the European Commission recommendation.
The nagging doubt is whether this pursuit of macro-economic stability will in fact be
maintained  -  whether  the  convergence  that  has  certainly  been  achieved  will,  in  the  terms  of  the
Treaty, prove to be sustainable.
A particular worry is that macro-economic stability, on its own, has not been enough
to prevent the emergence of very high, and very different, levels of unemployment in a number of the
major Continental European economies. Unemployment has been for some considerable time, and it
remains,  much  the  most  urgent  and  important  economic  issue  confronting  us  in  Europe.  I  don’t
suggest  for  a  moment  that  the  right  answer  would  be  to  abandon  macro-economic  discipline  and
revert to old-fashioned demand management policies. In anything other than the very short term that
would  be  likely  to  make  matters  worse.  I  share  the  broad  consensus  view  that  Europe’s
unemployment  problems  originate  essentially  in  rigidities  on  the  supply-side  of  the  economy.  The
point  is  that  unless  we  are  all  more  successful  in  bringing  down  this  structural  unemployment,
through micro-economic policies designed to improve structural, supply-side flexibility, then some
countries  could  find  it  difficult  to  continue  to  live  with  a  common  macro-economic  discipline
without significant tensions.
Some people on the Continent who basically share this concern are inclined to argue
that if the government of a euro-participating country were to find itself in this situation - and given
that it would have no macro-economic way out, for example, through exchange rate adjustment, or
monetary relaxation, or fiscal stimulus beyond the limits of the Stability Pact - then it would have an
overwhelming incentive to take the sort of supply-side measures which have proved so difficult to
implement hitherto. And the people in those countries would similarly have the incentive to accept
structural change. I am not wholly persuaded that you can necessarily rely upon that making life very
much easier. But what I think this discussion leads to the broader conclusion, given that the euro is to
go  ahead,  that  structural  reform  -  in  labour  markets  and  welfare  systems  and  in  broadening  and
deepening the single market for goods and services, but also capital markets - in order to improve
supply-side  flexibility  -  becomes  more  crucially  important  than  ever.  The  need  for  greater
supply-side flexibility was the subject of much of the discussion at the informal meeting of European
Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors in York last weekend, and I was greatly encouraged
by the degree of consensus around the table on this point.
The  United  Kingdom  of  course  will  not  participate  in  the  first  wave  of  monetary
union. That decision, taken last October, was - as I noted earlier - a disappointment to some of our
EU  partners;  but  it  was  a  considerable  relief  to  others  because  UK  participation  from  the  outset
would  certainly  have  complicated  the  project  -  not  least  because  of  the  substantial  cyclical
divergence between ourselves and the major countries on the Continent.
But in making its announcement the British Government made it clear that it is not
opposed to euro membership as a matter of principle. When the time comes - and that will almost
certainly not be during the lifetime of the present Parliament - it will make its decision - and submit it
to Parliament, and the people in a referendum - on pragmatic, economic, grounds. In the meantime
the United Kingdom will prepare both for the introduction of the euro on the Continent from next
January and for our own eventual participation.
BIS Review   29/1998
˝
- 4 -
The fact is that monetary union will have a major effect on this country whether or
not  we  are  a  part  of  it,  and  it  is  clearly  in  our  national  interest  as  well  as  the  interest  of  the
participating  countries,  that  it  should  be  successful.  We  benefit  in  macro-economic  terms  from  a
stable  and  prosperous  Europe  just  as  Continental  Europe  benefits  from  a  stable  and  prosperous
United  Kingdom  -  and  the  same  mutual  interest,  of  course,  applies  between  Europe  and  its
Mediterranean neighbours.
We  can  contribute  to  that  success  in  at  least  three  ways.    Most  immediately  the
Government has undertaken to use its current term as President of the European Union Council of
Ministers  to promote an  orderly  decision-making  process  during  the  crucial  next  few  months.  Not
being part of the first wave leaves us free to concentrate on that, and while there are issues - such as
the vexed question of the Presidency of the European Central Bank - which only others can resolve,
the UK’s role is to give them every opportunity to reach timely decisions.
More fundamentally, we can contribute to the success of the euro, even from outside
by  continuing  to  pursue  policies  directed  towards  macro-economic  stability  and  supply-side
flexibility in parallel with those persuaded within the euro area. The Government is committed to this
course as a matter of national economic self interest. But these same policies are calculated, too, to
make us a more prosperous and active trading partner for Europe as a whole, and to ensure that we
do  not  have  any  avoidable  disruptive  effect  on  the  policies  or  on  the  economy  of  the  euro
participants.  More  than  this  they  are  calculated  to  foster  sustainable  economic  convergence  as  the
necessary precursor to our eventual adherence to the euro club.
But  thirdly  -  and  of  particular  relevance  to  this  conference  -  we  can  contribute,
directly and positively, to the strength of the euro through the City of London’s financial markets.
The potential benefits to Europe of the euro derive importantly, as I have said, from
the exchange rate certainty which it will provide across the euro area; they derive importantly, too,
from  the  greater  transparency  and  liquidity  and  competition  of  unified  financial  markets  in  the
euro-denominated  instruments  rather  than  the  fragmented  markets  denominated  in  the  various
national currencies that we have now. Providing transparent and liquid, competitive, innovative and
well-regulated financial markets is one of the things which the City of London does particularly well.
Provided  the  City  is  properly  prepared  -  as  it  will  be  -  and  here  I  commend  to  you  the  Bank  of
England’s  quarterly  reports  on  the  practical,  preparations  we have  been  making  in  London  for  the
introduction  of  the  euro  from  1st  January  next  year  -  available,  amazingly,  at  no  charge  from  the
Bank  -  then  there  will  be  a  vigorous  Euro-euro  market  in  London,  from  Day  1,  just  as  there  are
vigorous markets in Euro-DM and Euro-francs as well as Euro-DM and Euro-Yen now. If not our
dowry  exactly  -  since  we  are  not  entering  into  the  marriage  at  this  stage  -  it  will  be  our  wedding
present.
The  wholesale  financial  markets  in  the  UK  derive  their  strength  from  London’s
position  as  a  uniquely  international,  rather  than  simply  a  national  or  regional  European,  financial
centre. This reflects the critical mass of markets and financial services in commercial and investment
banking available in London including the strongest financial businesses from all around the world.
For instance, there are more banks operating in the City which are incorporated abroad than there are
domestic banks, and more than half the total deposit base (over £1 trillion) of the UK banking system
is  denominated  in  foreign  currencies.  And,  the  fact  that  so  many  foreign-owned  institutions  -
including  very  many  from  our  European  partner  countries  -  continue  to  build  their  presence  in
London, suggests that they share this perception.
The City in this capacity is, I know, seen as something of a mixed blessing by some
people  on  the  Continent.  There  is  a  view  that  the  euro  should  in  some  sense  ‘belong’  to  the
participating countries and to them alone. If that view were to prevail it would point in the direction
BIS Review   29/1998
˝
- 5 -
of one form of bureaucratic regulation or another - no doubt with a nod in the direction of monetary
policy  considerations  as  justification  -  which  would  damage  the  euro at least  as  much as  it  would
harm  the  financial  markets  of  the  City.  At  the  same  time  some  of  these  same  people  argue  for  a
successful, strong and widely-used euro that will take its proper place alongside the dollar and the
yen as an international trading and portfolio currency, and in that context they positively welcome
the active participation of London. In the end I do not think there is very much choice. In a world of
increasingly integrated capital markets and liberalised capital movements it is inconceivable that the
international use of the euro could be unnaturally constrained.
And  that  will  be  in  the  interest  of  the  users  of  financial  markets  -  whether  as
borrowers or lenders - within Europe itself and across the world, including the Mediterranean region.
It  will  be  in  the  interest,  too,  of  the  providers  of  financial  services  by  promoting  the  volume  of
financial  activity  throughout  the  European  Union.  Like  trade  in  goods  and  other  services,  trade  in
financial services is very much a positive sum game. As the major interface between Europe and the
rest of the world, London’s success is not a threat to other European financial centres. I have little
doubt that euro activity in London will mean more rather than less euro activity in other European
financial  centres  like  Frankfurt,  Paris,  Milan  or  Amsterdam.  And,  conversely,  I  have  little  doubt
either that what is good for those centres will be good too for the City.
Mr. Chairman, I make no apology for concentrating my remarks today on the advent
of  the  euro.  It  is  an  historic  step;  and  it  will  affect  the  lives  of  all  of  us  -  throughout  Europe,
throughout  the  Mediterranean  region,  and  across  the  world.  It  can  be  a  powerful  force  for  good
through its impact on free trade and competition, and on economic prosperity. But it is not without its
dangers. What matters now is that we should all do all that we can to maximise the potential benefits
and minimise the risks.
BIS Review   29/1998
˝
