Mr.  Crockett  discusses  financial  stability  and  international  capital  flows
Keynote  address  by  the  General  Manager  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  Mr.  Andrew
Crockett, to the 33rd Seacen Governors’ Conference in Bali on 13/2/98.
Financial stability has always been a major responsibility of central banks. In recent
years, it has become even more important because of the increased capacity of financial disturbances
to spill over into the real economy. One need look no further than the difficulties currently facing the
economies  in  East  Asia  to  appreciate  the  consequences  of  weak  financial  systems.  The  task  of
maintaining  stability  has  also  become  more  complex:  liberalisation  and  innovation  have  brought
benefits  but  they  have  also  made  national  financial  systems  more  vulnerable,  both 
to
domestically-generated stresses and internationally-transmitted disturbances.
In my remarks this morning, I will begin by reviewing some of the forces making for
change  in the  financial  environment.  Then  I  will  consider  the  implications  of  the  changes  that  are
taking place for central banks’ task of preserving monetary and financial stability. Finally, I will try
and draw one or two concrete lessons from our most recent experience.
Basic trends in the international financial system
It  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  international  financial  system  is  undergoing  a
process  of  unprecedented  change.  Among  the  most  significant  driving  forces  are  advances  in
communications  and  information  technology.  By  dramatically  lowering  the  cost  of  financial
transactions  and  broadening  the  dissemination  of  financial  information,  these  advances  have
expanded trading and investment opportunities and are exercising powerful effects on the scale and
structure  of  financial  intermediation.  One  notable  effect  has  been  to  enhance  the  role  of  markets,
whose task it is to transmit information about the value of assets among borrowers and lenders. This
in turn is forcing traditional intermediaries to redefine their roles.
A  second  important  force  for  change  is  innovation,  which  has  permitted  the
development of products that facilitate the pricing and management of risk. This too has expanded
the  effective  bundle  of  financial  services  on  offer.  By  allowing  risks  to  be  hedged,  they  allow
non-financial  enterprises  to  focus  on  their  comparative  advantages.  But  they  also  facilitate
speculation, and the more rapid adjustment of positions taken. They also strengthen linkages between
markets in ways that are not yet fully understood.
Another  key  impetus  to  change,  though  also  a  consequence  of  it,  has  been  market
liberalisation. This applies both to the removal of constraints on the activities of different types of
financial  institutions  within  a  given  market,  and  to  the  liberalisation  of  cross-border  capital
movements and rights of market access. As a result of liberalisation, a broader range of institutions
can now provide financial services; and an increasing  number  of  both  markets and  institutions  are
active across national boundaries. This has greatly extended the reach of competition and forced the
modernisation of market practices in far flung centres.
A  consequence  of  the  forces  for  change  I  have  just  described  has  been  a  rapid
expansion in the scale of financial activity relative to overall economic activity, and of international
as against purely domestic activity. This in turn has generated unquestioned benefits in terms of more
efficient global resource allocation. At the same time, the greater masse de manoeuvre in financial
markets has increased the power of market expectations to reinforce or undermine official polices.
And the growth of the financial superstructure  relative  to  the  economy  as  a  whole  means that any
sustained disruption to the financial system now has potentially broader economic effects than might
have been the case previously.
BIS Review   30/1998
˝
- 2 -
Consequences of Changes in the financial environment
For  emerging  markets,  the  consequence  of  these  trends  has  been  that  they  have
rapidly  become  integrated  in  international  capital  markets.  This  has  had  a  number  of  advantages.
Private debt or portfolio inflows in response to economic liberalisation have expanded sizeably, from
less than $40 billion per year over the period 1983-1990, to an average of about $200 billion a year
in  the  last  five  years.  These  capital  inflows  have  provided  additional  resources  to  supplement
domestic savings  and  support  high  levels  of  investment.  Foreign  direct investment  has also  grown
sharply.  This  has  in  many  cases  been  a  vehicle  for  the  transfer  of  technology,  and  in  others  a
competitive spur to domestic industry. And the market disciplines that accompany greater economic
openness have provided timely and forceful penalties on inappropriate policies. By the same token
they have reinforced the premium on strong and sustainable macro-economic policies.
But  greater  capital  market  integration  and  larger  capital  flows  have  also  had  less
beneficial consequences. These have been much in evidence in the experience of Asian countries in
the past year. In a different form, however, they were behind the Mexican economic crisis of 1994-5
and indeed some of the problems encountered in the European Monetary System in the early 1990s.
When  countries  have  become  excessively  dependent  on  foreign  inflows,  their  sudden  reversal  can
generate significant adjustment difficulties. Let us consider what has now become a typical sequence
of events, with a view to drawing some lessons that can help avert costly crises in the future.
Countries  undertaking  strong  stabilisation  and  structural  reforms  have  often  found
themselves  a  magnet  for  foreign  capital.  Capital  inflows  have  been  even  greater  when  domestic
economic  growth  in  the  receiving  countries  has  accelerated,  and  when  low  interest  rates  in  the
sending countries has encouraged lenders to reach for higher yields. The inflows, in turn, have either
contributed  to  inflationary  pressures  (when  there  is  a  fixed  exchange  rate)  or  led  to  currency
appreciation (when the exchange rate regime is more flexible). Either way, external competitiveness
has tended to deteriorate and a balance of payments deficit has emerged.
A  balance  of  payments  deficit  is  a  natural  counterpart  of  a  situation  in  which
domestic  investment  exceeds  domestic  saving.  In  itself,  therefore,  it  is  no  bad  thing.  But  if  it  is
financed by capital inflows that are liable to dry up or be reversed, it can put the country concerned
in a vulnerable position. A feature of capital flows in the new, more integrated international capital
markets, is that a high proportion has been in the form of short term lending, denominated in foreign
currency. This has been encouraged by significant  interest  differentials  in  favour  of  the  borrowing
country, and an exchange rate regime that has masked the risk of exchange rate changes.
Thus, when growing payments imbalances, or some external event, causes investors
to re-evaluate the sustainability of exchange rates, there is liable to be a sudden withdrawal of funds.
This can quickly lead to a currency crisis, with all the consequences we have seen in recent months.
Then, if there are financial weaknesses within the domestic economy, the negative effects on output
and growth can multiply.
Lessons of the Recent Crisis
With what I have just said as background, allow me to consider certain preliminary
lessons  that  can  be  drawn  from  the  current  crisis.  Naturally,  a  more  thorough  analysis  of  how  to
prevent such crises in the future will have to await a longer perspective on events.
A first lesson is that even economies with relatively strong fundamentals, and fairly
sound macro-economic policies, can fall victim to sudden loss of confidence. Why should this be?
One  reason is  that  even  good  macro-economic  policies  require  adjustment in  the  light  of  evolving
circumstances. This flexibility was not always there in the case of the countries most affected by the
BIS Review   30/1998
˝
- 3 -
crisis.  Let  me  expand  a  little  on  what  I  mean.  When  strong  capital  inflows  are  pushing  up  the
exchange  rate  and  undermining  external  competitiveness,  monetary  policy  often  finds  itself  in  an
acute  dilemma.  On  the  one  hand,  higher  interest  rates  may  be  required  to  dampen  an  investment
boom.  On  the  other,  lower  interest  rates  may  be  needed  to  moderate  the  inflow  of  short-term
speculative  funds.  In  these  circumstances,  monetary  policy  needs  assistance  from  fiscal  policy:  a
budget surplus may be needed to curb domestic demand,  and to  provide  the  financial  resources  to
sterilise the foreign exchange inflow.
Flexibility is also needed in the area of exchange rate management. I do not mean that
countries  should  always  adopt  freely  floating  exchange  rates.  That  would  not  necessarily  be  an
optimum policy in emerging markets, whose financial systems are not fully developed. For example,
Hong  Kong  and  Argentina  have  successfully  operated  a  currency  board  type  system  for  the  past
several years. But the exchange rate regime must be adapted to the capacity of domestic policy and
institutions  to  take  the  burden  of  adjustment.  Where  political  or  other  factors  make  it  difficult  for
domestic adjustment mechanisms to take the strain of reversals in capital flows, then the exchange
rate has to be the safety valve. If the exchange rate regime makes it difficult to make timely changes
in  the  external  value  of  a  currency,  then  disequilibria  can  build  up  that  add  immeasurably  to  the
abruptness and costs of the eventual adjustment.
This is not just the recent experience of East Asian countries. It was the experience of
Mexico in  1994-5;  and it  was a  substantial  part  of  the  explanation  of  the  turmoil  in  the  European
Monetary System in 1992-3. I know from the experience of my own country, where I was closely
involved  in  decision-making  at  the  time,  that  it  is  extraordinarily  difficult  to  make  changes  in  an
exchange rate peg that has come to symbolise an overall macro-economic strategy. I also know that
the penalties for not making an adjustment in time are severe. Which leads me to the conclusion that
governments should seek an exchange rate regime that avoids this dilemma unless, as is perhaps the
case in countries with currency-board arrangements, they are prepared to accept the full rigour and
logic of fixed rates.
So  much  for  the  macro-economic  origins  of  currency  crises.  What  of  the
macro-economic  responses.  Some  have  argued  that  the  stringent  monetary  and  fiscal  policies
advocated by the IMF are inappropriate, because they  intensify  the  financial  problems  of  indebted
firms  and  deepen  the  internal  recession.  While  I  have  some  sympathy  for  this  view,  I  am  afraid  I
cannot  see  any  easy  policy  alternatives  when  a  country  finds  itself  in  a  full-scale  crisis.  In  such
conditions, the first priority is to restore external confidence, and this can rarely be achieved without
a  clear  commitment  to  monetary  restraint.  Perhaps  the  most  important  lesson  is  the  need  to  seek
external assistance and to adopt corrective policies before problems reach the crisis stage. An early
policy response can be more accurately targeted to the underlying causes, and the macro-economic
consequences can be less severe.
One of the clearest lessons of the experiences both in Mexico and in East Asia is the
role  of  weaknesses  in  the  financial  system  in  propagating  economic  disturbances.  This  is  a
consequence  of  the  growing  integration  of  international  capital  markets,  and  will  certainly  not  be
reversed. If anything, markets are likely to be even more closely tied together over time. There are
several more specific lessons to be drawn from this recognition. In the first place, liberalisation in the
domestic financial system, and in the openness to the world capital market must be accompanied by
measures  to  strengthen  prudential  regulation  and  supervision.  For  those  countries  that  still  have
capital  account  restrictions,  this  means  that  the  dismantling  of  capital  controls  will  have  to  be
carefully  phased  and  sequenced.  It  may  also  mean  that  existing  prudential  safeguards,  such  as
liquidity  ratios,  reserve  requirements,  exposure  limits  and  controls  over  currency  and  maturity
mismatches in banks’ portfolios, may have to be strengthened.
BIS Review   30/1998
˝
- 4 -
More  generally,  however,  the  recent  crisis  has  revealed  that  many  banking  and
financial systems continue to embody practices that make them vulnerable. These practices relate to
inadequate  internal  controls,  non-transparent  accounting  standards,  weaknesses  in  loan  approval
procedures,  lax  licensing  provisions,  insufficient  capital  adequacy  requirements,  and  uncertain
closure procedures, among others. Because these weaknesses are widespread, and because there was
no  internationally  accepted  standard  of  banking  prudence,  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking
Supervision  promulgated  last  year  a  set  of  25  “Core  Principles”  for  banking  supervision.
Implementing these principles should make an important contribution to strengthening banking and
financial systems around the world.
The  Core  Principles  represent  an  important  new  step  in  the  work  of  the  Basle
Committee.  For  that  reason,  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  both  to  certain  aspects  of  the
philosophy underlying their preparation, and  to  some  of  the  specific  recommendations.  In  the  first
place, the Core Principles are intended to be comprehensive in their coverage. That is to say, they
apply  to  all  phases  in  the  life  of  a  bank,  from  initial  licensing,  through  continuing  supervision,
through closure procedures for institutions that are unable to meet minimum standards. They are also
comprehensive  in  their  institutional  scope:  they  are  intended  to  apply  to  both  domestic  and
internationally  active  banks,  coming  from  industrial,  emerging  and  less-developed  economies.
Lastly, and very importantly, they have been drawn up with the active  involvement  of  supervisors
from  a  wide  range  of  countries,  including  most  of  the  key  emerging  market  economies,  including
some central banks represented here.
Let  me  now  turn  to  some  of  the  specific  recommendations,  and  to  ways  in  which
bank supervision can work to strengthen bank soundness. One of the key  foundations of the Basle
Committee’s  approach  over  the  years  has  been  the  focus  on  risk-weighted  capital  adequacy.  This
remains as important as ever, but it is clear that the way in which the current standards are expressed
has not prevented major episodes of instability. Part of the problem lies in the fact that insufficient
attention is given to the fact that the minimum capital requirements are just that: minima. What can
be acceptable for a strong, well-managed, well-diversified institution in a major  financial  centre  is
likely to be inadequate for a bank operating in a more volatile environment, where credit and market
risks  are  much  greater.  Some  supervisors  in  emerging  markets  have  recognised  this  and  have  set
higher minimum standards. Singapore and Argentina are good examples in this regard. I hope their
initiative will be followed more generally.
But it is not simply the formal capital ratio that needs to be considered. In very many
countries  banks  fail  despite  the  fact  that  they  were  in  apparent  compliance  with  minimum  capital
ratios shortly before their collapse. This points to deficiencies in accounting standards, which, quite
simply, allow bad loans to be classified as good. Bank supervisors will have to insist on much more
rigorous standards of loan classification and bad debt provisioning. They will also have to insist on
greater  transparency  in  financial  accounts,  so  that  problems  can  be  identified  before  they  grow  to
life-threatening proportions.
Of course, at the root of balance sheet weaknesses are poor lending decisions. Not all
of  these  can  be  prevented  by  better  banking  supervision.  Improved  information  on  borrower
conditions  is  clearly  a  first  step.  A  comparison  by  lenders  of  the  return  prospects  of  large  local
projects with return requirements prevailing internationally is another. Other sources of excesses can
certainly be tackled. Some of these arise from what has come to be called “insider” or “connected”
lending. A variant of this practice is the policy loans that are encouraged by political authorities who,
for  whatever  reason,  are  unwilling  to  make  direct  budgetary  provision  for  expenditures.  The  core
principles make it clear that credit decisions by banks should be made purely on economic grounds.
This means that credit officers in banks should have the training and the mandate to make prudent
decisions; and that supervisors should have the independence to enforce best practice in  the  banks
they supervise.
BIS Review   30/1998
˝
- 5 -
Before  leaving  the  subject  of  how  to  strengthen  financial  systems,  I  would  like  to
make a more general point about leverage. We all know that banks can get into trouble when they are
too-highly leveraged; in other words when their capital becomes too small relative to their assets. In
such a case a relatively small decline in the quality of a portfolio can set alarm bells ringing that can
lead to a run, with the consequent need to liquidate assets in fire-sale conditions. It is for this reason
that minimum capital requirements are such an important part of prudential regulation. But excessive
leverage  is  not  a  problem  only  for  banks.  It  can  apply  to  other  financial  institutions  and,  just  as
important, outside the financial sector.
When,  as  in  many  Asian  countries,  debt-to-equity  ratios  become  very  high,  the
companies concerned become excessively vulnerable to a re-evaluation of their profit prospects. A
relatively small decline in asset values can wipe out equity, and thus lead to premature foreclosure by
lenders.  One  of  the  most  important  lessons  of  the  recent  crisis  is  the  need  for  non-financial
corporations  to  hold  higher  levels  of  equity  capital.  It  is  tempting,  of  course,  when  profits  are
growing  rapidly,  to  exploit  the  possibilities  of  leverage  to  increase  the  return  on  equity.  Lending
institutions, and their supervisors, have a responsibility to counteract this temptation by making sure
that potential adverse scenarios are recognised and properly factored in to the pricing of risk.
One  of  the  reasons  why  bank  borrowing  has  played  such  an  important  role  in
financing  investment  in  emerging  markets  is  that  bond  markets  are  relatively  underdeveloped  in
many  of  these  countries.  A  key  task  is  therefore  to  provide  the  necessary  infrastructure  and
encouragement  for  the  growth  of  long-term  debt  markets.  It  is  good  to  note  that  several  monetary
authorities in the Asian region are now treating this as a matter of priority. Once such bond markets
are  established,  they  should  prove  attractive  for  corporate  borrowers  seeking  to  reduce  their
vulnerability to a liquidity crunch.
I have so far been speaking about lessons that borrowing countries can learn from the
recent crisis. But there are also important lessons for those countries whose institutions contributed to
the  expansion  and  subsequent  collapse  of  cross-border  lending,  as  well  as  for  the  international
community in its handling of the strains that can accompany greater international mobility of capital.
Let  me  therefore  turn  to  what  the  major  creditor  countries  could  do  differently,  before  saying
something about international arrangements more generally.
Banks  in  the  major  creditor  countries  have  participated  fully  in  the  enthusiasm  for
investment  in  rapidly  growing  emerging  markets.  This  already  happened  in  the  1970s  in  Latin
America,  and  led  to  the  debt  crisis  that  began  in  Mexico  in  1982.  As  a  result  of  that  experience,
banks  were  for  a  while  much  more  circumspect.  But  by  the  1990s  they  were  already  lending
substantial  amounts  in  Asia,  buoyed  by  the  perception  that  the  Asian  economies  had  better
macro-economic fundamentals, including low inflation rates, modest public debt and very high rates
of domestic saving and investment. This led lenders to overlook points of vulnerability. As we now
know,  a  significant  part  of  foreign  lending  went  to  over-leveraged  companies  and  to  financial
institutions with weak balance sheets.
With  hindsight,  we  can  say  that  the  lending  banks  made  the  crisis  worse  by  first
lending  too  much,  and  then  withdrawing  loans  too  precipitately.  Both  these  problems  must  be
tackled. In the first place, banks must be given the means and the incentive to make better lending
decisions. Relevant information about the condition of borrowing institutions and countries must be
made more transparently available; and banks must be encouraged to act on it by knowing that they
will not be bailed out from bad lending decisions. Secondly, if a crisis does develop, ways must be
found to reduce the tendency of private lenders to withdraw funds at the first hint of trouble.
BIS Review   30/1998
˝
- 6 -
Before  concluding,  I  want  to  say  something  about  international  responses  to  the
problem of strengthening financial stability. When a crisis develops, it is entirely appropriate that we
use the mechanisms of international co-operation to help moderate and resolve the crisis. In practice,
this involves a central role for the IMF, as well as for groupings of countries with a close interest in
the speedy restoration of stability.  But  are  there  ways  in  which  the  international  community  could
make  its  influence  more  effective?  In  other  words,  are  there  initiatives  that  can  be  taken  at  the
international level that would help prevent crises, and resolve those that nevertheless occur in a more
effective manner?
As I noted earlier, confident answers to these questions can only be given when we
have  a  greater  perspective  on  the  reasons  why  the  recent  crisis  occurred  and  spread.  But  certain
tentative conclusions are  already  possible.  In  the  first  place, the international  community  can  do  a
better job of establishing standards by which the various actors in international capital markets agree
to be bound. These need to include standards of transparency with regard to relevant macroeconomic
data and indicators of financial system soundness. Such data will facilitate assessment of conditions
by  domestic  authorities,  by  market  participants,  and 
institutions.  Improved
arrangements for surveillance, for example through peer reviews as agreed at Manila, can help alert
domestic authorities to danger signals that may not be visible to them. I have already referred to the
Core Principles of banking supervision. These will need to be elaborated in the coming months and
years,  and  their  implementation carefully  monitored.  Where  necessary,  countries  that  need  help  to
come up to international best practice should receive technical assistance.
international 
In  addition  to  core  principles  of  banking  supervision,  standards  will  be  needed  in
other areas, such as accounting and disclosure practices for borrowers and lenders. Ways will need to
be found to codify prudent behaviour in managing international borrowing and lending. In all of this,
the  more  advanced  financial  centres  will  have  to  give  a  lead.  In  my  judgement,  it  would  be
unacceptable  for  the  industrialised  countries  to  call  for  the  adoption  of  standards  in  the  emerging
markets that they are not prepared to adopt themselves.
Concerning  crisis  resolution,  one  thing  that  is  clear  is  that  ever-larger  official
financing  packages  are  not  the  answer.  The  key  to  successful  crisis  resolution  is  to  restore  the
confidence of the private sector, without provoking moral hazard. This means finding ways in which
the private sector is involved in crisis resolution from the start. The ideal is for private creditors to
form  committees  that  work  out  mutually  agreed  rescheduling  packages  with  borrowers  facing
liquidity  difficulties, as  indeed  happens  in  national  jurisdictions.  For  the  cases  (hopefully  small  in
number)  where  this  does  not  work,  ways  will  have  to  be  sought  that  replicate  at  the  international
level the impact of insolvency procedures at the national level. In any event, the private sector cannot
be allowed to simply await rescue by the international community.
Concluding remarks
I have tried to offer some preliminary thoughts on the lessons that we can draw from
the events in Asia during the recent eight months. You and others are engaged in reviews from which
we shall undoubtedly learn more. But a number of issues have emerged that need to be addressed if
we are to avoid similar incidents in future. I have argued that expanded capital flows have not, by
themselves, been the root source of the current crisis. However, to harvest the benefits they  bring,
action is required by domestic authorities and the international community in a number of areas. First
and foremost, a premium needs to be placed on sustainable and responsive macroeconomic policies.
In  this  regard,  more  critical  examination  of  exchange  rate  policies,  particularly  in  the  light  of
accumulated  foreign  currency  indebtedness,  is  needed.  Second  is  the  imperative  of  efforts  to
strengthen financial systems. There is now a core body of principles on which to draw which reflects
the  accumulated  experience  of  supervisors  and  regulators  in  a  variety  of  countries.  Their
implementation,  both in  industrial  and emerging  market  economies,  should  be  a  matter  of  priority
BIS Review   30/1998
˝
- 7 -
both for domestic authorities and the international financial community. Thirdly, there is a need to
promote  transparency  to  avoid  excesses  building  up  unnoticed.  This  will  require  improvements  in
accounting and disclosure practices and in international banking statistics, and an extension of data
dissemination standards to cover domestic financial conditions. And, finally, as I noted at the end of
my remarks, arrangements for crisis resolution need to involve burden sharing with the private sector
to lessen moral hazard risk.
It would clearly be presumptuous to assert that by addressing these and other issues to
be identified in due course, we shall avoid crises in the future, or handle more smoothly those that do
occur. It would be equally hazardous to expect that there are ready and easy answers in several of
these areas. I am confident, however, that the Asian economies struck by crisis will emerge strong
and vigorous from the measures they are undertaking, and that the international community will be
responsive to the lessons it has learnt from your experience.
BIS Review   30/1998
˝
