Mr. George discusses Britain in Europe and the economics of EMU   Speech by the
Governor of the Bank of England, Mr. E.A.J. George, at the Borsen in Copenhagen on 6/3/98.
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  this  morning,  and  to  have  this  opportunity  to  meet  with  the
Danish financial community.
I would like to use this opportunity to explain to you something of the British attitude to
Europe - as I see it - and in particular our attitude to monetary union. I  am  well  aware  that  we  British
have something of a reputation for stubbornness about Europe. I should like to try to persuade you this
morning that while we do have some - not wholly irrational - misgivings, we are nevertheless as anxious
as anyone to see the project succeed. We have to be - it is clearly in our national interest that it should.
Let  me  make  clear  at  the  outset  that,  of  course,  I  recognise  that  monetary  union  is
fundamentally  a  political  issue.  It  necessarily  involves  some  deliberate  pooling  of  national  sovereignty
over  important  issues  of  public  policy  -  monetary  policy  and  overall  fiscal  policy  -  just  as  the  single
market  involved  the  pooling  of  sovereignty  over  aspects  of  trade  and  competition  policy  and  so  on.
Decisions  about  monetary  union  will  quite  rightly  be  taken  by  elected  politicians,  according  to  their
perception of its long-term political impact on the future of Europe, as well as its impact on the  future
prosperity of their countries, and they will have to carry their electorates with them.
As a central banker I have nothing to say about the politics of monetary union. But it is
also, of course, about economics, and the economics of monetary union could go either way; if it goes
well, that certainly could yield political benefits, but if the economics were to go wrong, then that could
blow  back  on  the  politics  of  Europe  and  give  rise  to  tensions.  I  shall  concentrate  my  remarks  this
morning on the economics of EMU.
The  economic  pros  and  cons  have  in  fact  been  exhaustively  debated  in  the  United
Kingdom and the arguments are now reasonably well defined, even though different opinions inevitably
attach different weights to them.
On  the  positive  side,  the  crucial  and  unique  economic  advantage  of  monetary  union  is
exchange rate certainty within the euro area - not just the reasonable de facto stability that might result
from each EU member state individually pursuing disciplined macro-economic policies in parallel - but
actual exchange rate certainty. And that is a very real economic advantage as UK exporters presently
suffering from the strengthening of sterling over the past eighteen months will readily tell you! One can
argue  that  exchange  rate  certainty  is  not  an  essential  complement  to  the  European  single  market  -  any
more than exchange rate fixity is essential to achieving benefits from free trade more generally. But there
is  no  doubt  that  intra-European  exchange  rate  certainty  would  -  through  the  increased  competition
resulting  from  greater  transparency  of  prices  and  lower  transactions  costs,  through  broader  and  deeper
capital markets, and through the associated improvement in economic resource allocation - enhance the
benefits derived from the single market. Whether or not it is  essential,  therefore,  most  people  would,  I
think, agree that, other things equal, exchange rate certainty would be very desirable in this context.
The potential disadvantage of monetary union can equally be simply stated, though it is
perhaps more difficult to assess. Essentially there is a risk that the single monetary  policy  -  the  single,
one-size-fits-all,  short-term  interest  rate  -  within  the  euro  area,  which  is  a  necessary  corollary  of  the
single  currency,  will  not  in  the  event  prove  to  be  appropriate  to  the  domestic  needs  of  each  of  the
euro-member countries. There is no doubt that such risk exists. It may result from cyclical divergence -
where  for  example  would  we  be  in  the  UK  now,  confronted  as  we  are  with  relatively  strong  domestic
demand growth, if we were obliged to have German- level interest rates? Or where would Germany and
France be as they struggle to sustain domestic demand if they were constrained to have interest rates at
the  UK  level?  The  risk  may  arise  from  differences  in  fiscal  positions  even  though  these  are  to  be
constrained through the Stability Pact. Or it may result from economic shocks of some sort that have a
bigger  impact  on  some  countries  than  on  others.  The  rise  in  oil  prices  in  the  early  1970s  or  German
reunification are classic examples.
BIS Review   23/1998
- 2 -
So  the  risk  of  divergent  monetary  policy  needs  within  the  euro  area  is  real.  And  the
damage  it  could  cause  if  serious  tensions  between  member  countries  were  to  emerge  is  substantial,
because alternative adjustment mechanisms, such  as  labour  migration  or  fiscal  redistribution,  that  exist
within  individual  countries,  and  which  help  to  alleviate  the  similar  regional  tensions  that  arise  at  the
national level, are not well-developed at the pan-European level.
The  Maastricht  Treaty,  of  course,  recognised  this  risk,  and  the  famous  convergence
criteria were designed precisely as a means of reducing the risk to manageable proportions by requiring
that,  before  they  join  the  euro  club,  countries  should  have  achieved  at  least  a  minimum  degree  of
macro-economic convergence  -  demonstrating  their  commitment  to  macro-economic  discipline  through
both  fiscal  consolidation  and  monetary  policy  directed  at  effective  price,  and  exchange  rate,  stability.
And  there  is  no  doubt  that  all  European  Union  member  states  have  made  huge  progress  towards
macro-economic stability over the past few years. The betting in financial markets is therefore that when,
in early May, the Heads of State come to make their decision, a broadly based euro will indeed go ahead.
The nagging concern is whether this determined pursuit of macro-economic stability will
be  maintained  -  whether  in  fact  the  degree  of  macro-economic  convergence  that  has  been  achieved  is
likely - in the terms of the Treaty - to be “sustainable”.
A particular worry is that macro-economic stability, on its own, is not enough. It has not
been  enough  to  prevent  the  progressive  emergence  of  very  high,  and  very  different,  levels  of
unemployment in a number of the major Continental European economies. Unemployment has been for
some considerable time, and it remains, much the most urgent and important economic issue confronting
us in Europe. I do not suggest for a moment that the right answer would be to abandon macro-economic
discipline and revert to old-fashioned demand management policies. In anything other than the very short
term  that  would  be  likely  to  make  matters  worse.  I  share  the  broad  consensus  view  that  Europe’s
unemployment problems originate essentially in rigidities on the supply-side of the economy. The point
is  that  unless  we  are  all  more  successful  in  bringing  down  this  structural  unemployment,  through
micro-economic  policies  designed  to  improve  structural,  supply-side  flexibility,  then  some  countries
could find it difficult to continue to live with a common macro-economic discipline without significant
tensions.
Some people here on the Continent who share this concern are inclined to argue that if a
euro-participating  country  were  to  find  itself  in  this  situation  -  and  given  that  it  would  have  no
macro-economic  way  out,  for  example,  through  exchange  rate  adjustment,  or  monetary  relaxation,  or
fiscal stimulus beyond the limits of the Stability Pact - it would then have an overwhelming incentive to
take the sort of supply-side measures which have proved so difficult to implement hitherto. I am not sure
that you  can  necessarily  rely  upon  that  making  life  very  much  easier.  But  what  I  think  this  discussion
points up, is the broader conclusion that if the euro is to go ahead in current conditions, as I assume that
it will, then supply-side flexibility will become more crucially important that ever across the whole euro
area.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer announced last October that the United Kingdom would
exercise its opt-out and not participate in the first wave of euro membership. That was a disappointment
to some of  our  European  partners.  But  it  was  a  considerable  relief  to  others,  because  UK  participation
from  the  outset  would  certainly  have  complicated  the  project  -  not  least  because  of  the  substantial
cyclical divergence between ourselves and the major countries on the Continent.
But the Chancellor also made it clear that the British Government is not opposed to euro
membership  as  a  matter  of  principle;  it  will  make  its  decision  on  pragmatic,  economic,  grounds,  and
submit that decision to Parliament and to the British people in a referendum. The Chancellor recognised
that - barring some fundamental and unforeseen change in economic circumstances - it was unrealistic to
think that a decision could be made during the lifetime of the present Parliament - which could extend to
May 2002. But he stressed that in the meantime the United Kingdom should prepare - both for the euro’s
introduction on the Continent on 1 January 1999 and for our own eventual participation.
BIS Review   23/1998
- 3 -
This  statement  was  the  first  by  a  British  Government  to  declare  for  the  principle  of
monetary  union.  It  implies  that  the  United  Kingdom  is  to  be  regarded  effectively  as  a  “Pre-In”.  It
recognised that the single currency will affect us whether we are in or out of it, and that it is clearly in our
national interest to play a full part in ensuring that the euro is successful.
This, in my view, provides a solid foundation for a continuing, positive and constructive
relationship  between  the  United  Kingdom  and  those  EU  member  states  that  do  participate  in  the  first
wave  of  the  euro.  And  that  must  be  in  the  interest  of  both  sides:  just  as  we  benefit  from  a  stable  and
prosperous Europe, so too the Continental European interest lies in a stable and prosperous Britain - and
that mutual interest above all is the thing we must all hold on to. To allow the euro to become a divisive
factor in the broader relationship between European Union member states would be collectively to cut off
our nose to spite our face!
What then can the United Kingdom bring, initially as an ‘out’, or ‘pre-in’, to the party, in
terms of contributing to the euro’s success?
There are, I think three things in particular.
Most immediately the Government has undertaken to use its current term as President of
the  European  Union  Council  of  Ministers  to  promote  an  orderly  decision-making  process  during  the
crucial next few months. Not being part of the first wave leaves us free to concentrate on that, and while
there are issues - such as the vexed question of the Presidency of the European Central Bank - which only
others can resolve, the UK’s role is to give them every opportunity to reach timely decisions.
We can,  secondly,  contribute  positively  and  directly  to  the  success  of  the  euro  through
the City of London’s financial markets.
The potential benefits of the euro derive importantly, as I have said, from the exchange
rate  certainty  which  it  will  provide  across  the  euro  area.  But  the  potential  benefits  will  derive
importantly,  too,  from  the  greater  transparency  and  liquidity  of  unified  financial  markets  in  the
euro-denominated  instruments  rather  than  the  fragmented  markets  denominated  in  the  various  national
currencies  that  we  have  now.  Providing  transparent  and  liquid,  competitive,  innovative  and
well-regulated financial markets is one of the things which the City does particularly well. There will be
a  vigorous  Euro-euro  market  in  London,  just  as  there  are  vigorous  markets  in  Euro-DM,  Euro-francs,
Eurodollars and so on now. If not our dowry exactly, since we will not participate  in  the  first  wave,  it
will be our wedding present.
The wholesale financial markets in the UK derive their strength from London’s position
as  a  uniquely  international,  rather  than  simply  a  national  or  regional  European,  financial  centre.  This
reflects  the  critical  mass  of  markets  and  financial  services  in  commercial  and  investment  banking
available in London including the strongest financial businesses from all around the world, and including
leading  Danish  institutions.  For  instance,  there  are  more  banks  operating  in  the  City  which  are
incorporated  abroad  than  there  are  domestic  banks,  and  more  than  half  the  total  deposit  base  (over  £1
trillion)  of  the  UK  banking  system  is  denominated  in  foreign  currencies.  And,  the  fact  that  so  many
foreign-owned institutions - including very many from our European partner countries - continue to build
their presence in London, suggests that they share this perception.
The  City  in  this  capacity  is,  I  know,  seen  as  something  of  a  mixed  blessing  by  some
people on the Continent. There is a view that the euro should in some sense ‘belong’ to the participating
countries and to them alone. If that view were to prevail it would point in the direction of one form of
bureaucratic  regulation  or  another  -  no  doubt  with  a  nod  in  the  direction  of  monetary  policy
considerations  as  justification  -  which  would  damage  the  euro  at  least  as  much  as  it  would  harm  the
financial markets of the City. At the same time some of these same people argue for a successful, strong
and widely-used euro that will take its proper place alongside the dollar and the yen as an international
BIS Review   23/1998
- 4 -
trading  and  portfolio  currency,  and  in  that  context  they  positively  welcome  the  active  participation  of
London.
In the end I do not think there is very much choice. In a world of increasingly integrated
capital markets and liberalised capital movements it is inconceivable that the international use of the euro
could be unnaturally constrained. There will be active euro markets in the major financial centres of the
world, including in London, which will be ready to trade in the whole range of euro wholesale financial
products from day one.
And  that  will  be  in  the  interest  of  financial  activity  right  across  Europe.  Like  trade  in
goods, trade in financial services is a positive sum game, so that London’s success is not a threat to other
European financial centres. As a major interface between Europe and the rest of  the  world  I  have little
doubt  that  euro-activity  in  London  will  mean  more  rather  than  less  euro  activity  in  other  European
financial centres like Frankfurt, Paris, Milan, Amsterdam or Copenhagen. And I have little doubt either
that what is good for those centres will be good too for the City.
Thirdly,  and  perhaps  most  fundamentally,  the  United  Kingdom,  even  while  it  does  not
participate in the euro, can contribute to its success by continuing to pursue macro-economic, both fiscal
and monetary, discipline in parallel with the euro-area countries. The Government is committed  to  this
course  as  a  matter  of  national  economic  self-interest  -  one  of  its  very  first  acts  in  Government  for
example  was  to  hand  operational  independence  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  to  the  Bank  of
England. But these same policies are  calculated,  too,  to  make  us  a  more  prosperous  and  active  trading
partner for Europe as a whole, and to ensure that we do not have any avoidable disruptive effect on the
policies  or  on  the  economy  of  the  euro  participants.  More  than  this  they  are  calculated  to  foster
sustainable economic convergence as the necessary precursor to our eventual adherence to the euro club.
And in the meantime the British Government will continue to pursue, and to advocate in
the councils of Europe the supply-side flexibility that will be vital to its success.
Madam  Governor,  I  hope  that  I  may  have  persuaded  some  of  you  at  least  that  British
reservations about monetary union are not just plain obstinacy! Out of the first wave of the euro we may
be,  but  we  remain  very  much  an  active  and,  I  hope,  constructive  partner  in  the  process  of  European
monetary integration in a wider sense - which is why I prefer to think of Britain in Europe - which I took
as the title for my talk.
BIS Review   23/1998
