Mr. Patrikis discusses global electronic commerce   Speech by the First Vice-President
of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  Mr.  Ernest  T.  Patrikis,  at  the  1998  International  ACH
Conference in Seattle on 9/3/98.
I am very pleased to be here today to discuss global electronic commerce. At the Federal
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  we  have  a  tradition  of  embracing  emerging  technologies  as  a  means  of
fostering the growth of commerce. As early as 1914 the Federal Reserve System was using the telegraph
to wire funds across the nation. By 1918, the Federal Reserve Banks had introduced their first dedicated
funds transfer network. Today, over 350,000 funds transfers are sent over Fedwire every day with a total
value of more than $1.1 trillion.
So, electronic commerce itself is not new. What is new is the emerging global network
environment  and  its  electronic  access  capabilities.  The  promise  of  this  global  network  has  brought
electronic  commerce  to  the  forefront  of  public-policy  making.  The  Organization  for  Economic
Cooperation and Development and other international organizations have expressed their belief that “the
exponential growth and diffusion of the Internet is quickly making the promise of widespread electronic
commerce  a  reality.  High-speed,  interconnected  global  networks  like  the  Internet  provide  new  ways  to
conduct commercial transactions, generate new markets and revenue streams, lower  transactional  costs,
and forge new relationships between businesses and consumers.”
Nowadays,  it  is  impossible  to  speak  about  the  potential  explosion  of  the  Internet  and
electronic  commerce  without  a  discussion  of  the  appropriate  role  of  Government  in  fostering  and
regulating  electronic  commerce.  In  the  United  States,  the  question  of  the  Government’s  role  in  global
electronic  commerce  was  answered  when,  in  July  1997,  the  White  House  released  its  “Framework  for
Global  Electronic  Commerce”  white  paper.  The  Framework  is  the  clearest  and  most  comprehensive
articulation of the United States Government’s view of its role in the creation of the global information
infrastructure  as  a  vibrant  international  market-place.  The  overriding  theme  of  the  Framework  was
summed up in a statement made by President Clinton upon the release of the report. He said that:
Governments can have a profound effect on the growth of electronic commerce. By their
actions,  they  can  facilitate  trade  or  inhibit  it.  Government  officials  should  respect  the
unique  nature  of  the  medium  and  recognize  that  widespread  competition  and  increased
consumer  choice  should  be  the  defining  feature  of  the  new  digital  market-place.  They
should  adopt  a  market-oriented  approach  to  electronic  commerce  that  facilitates  the
emergence of a global, transparent, and predictable legal environment to support business
and commerce.
To  ensure  that  the  acts  of  the  United  States  Government  comport  with  this  view,  the
Framework  sets  forth  five  principles  intended  to  inform  the  Government’s  actions  in  this  area.  The  first
principle is that the private sector should be allowed to take the lead. Although the Government played a
significant  role  in  financing  the  initial  research  and  development  of  the  Internet,  the  White  House
believes  that  its  subsequent  expansion  has  been,  and  should  continue  to  be,  driven  primarily  by  the
private  sector.  The  Framework  takes  as  a  fundamental  principle  the  notion  that  innovation,  expanded
services,  broader  participation,  and  lower  prices  will  arise  in  a  market-driven  arena.  The  natural
outgrowth of this first principle is seen in the  Federal  Government’s  hesitance  to  issue  any  regulations
governing the use of the Internet and its encouragement of private sector self-regulation.
The  second  principle  in  the  Framework  is  really  a  corollary  to  the  first  principle  and
provides  that  the  Government  should  avoid  undue  restrictions  on  global  electronic  commerce.  This
principle is based on the belief that unnecessary regulation of commercial activities on the Internet will
distort  the  development  of  the  electronic  market-place  by  raising  the  cost  of  products  and  services  for
According to the third Framework principle, where Government involvement is needed,
its  aim  should  be  to  support  and  enforce  a  predictable,  minimalistic,  consistent,  and  simple  legal
BIS Review   26/1998
- 2 -
environment  for  commerce.  This  legal  environment  should  be  based  on  a  commercial  law  model  that
allows for private governance though decentralized, contractual relationships or organized system rules,
rather than a top-down regulation model. Moreover, the basic goal of any Government regulation should
be  to  ensure  competition,  protect  intellectual  property  and  privacy,  prevent  fraud,  foster  transparency,
support commercial transactions, and facilitate dispute resolution.
The  fourth  principle  directs  the  Government  to  recognize  the  unique  qualities  of  the
Internet in relation to existing regulatory models. We should not assume, for example, that the regulatory
frameworks established over the past sixty years for telecommunications, radio, and television apply to
the  Internet.  The  Framework  specifically  directs  the  Government  to  review,  and  revise  or  eliminate
existing  laws  and  regulations  that  may  hinder  electronic  commerce  to  reflect  the  needs  of  the  new
electronic age.
Finally,  in  the  fifth  principle,  the  Framework  announces  what,  to  many,  is  the  most
important  principle  in  connection  with  electronic  commerce  and  the  Internet,  namely  that  electronic
commerce  over  the  Internet  should  be  facilitated  on  a  global  basis.  In  this  regard,  the  United  States
Government has identified nine areas where international agreements are needed to preserve the Internet
as  a  non-regulatory  medium,  one  in  which  competition  and  consumer  choice  will  largely  shape  the
market-place.  The  nine  areas  are:  (1)  customs  and  taxation;  (2)  electronic  payments;  (3)  a  Uniform
Commercial Code for Electronic Commerce; (4) intellectual property protection; (5) privacy; (6) security;
(7)  telecommunications  infrastructure  and  information  technology;  (8)  content;  and  (9)  technical
standards. These nine areas are discussed in some detail in the Framework. I would like to spend the rest
of  my  time  discussing  two  of  these  issues  in  more  detail  --  specifically,  electronic  payments  and  a
Uniform Commercial Code on Electronic Commerce.
My interest in these areas reflects my belief that advancements in each are essential to the
continued  growth  of  electronic  commerce  over  the  Internet  both  domestically  and  globally.  Users  of
electronic commerce need safe and reliable payments systems linked to the Internet to facilitate payment
for  goods  and  services  contracted  for  over  the  Internet.  More  fundamentally,  contractual  relationships
forged over the Internet must have some basis in a sound legal and technological infrastructure.
Electronic Payments
Over  the  past  few  years  we  have  seen  the  emergence  of  new  technology  which  allows
individuals  to  pay  for  goods  and  services  over  the  Internet  and  over  private  networks.  These  payment
methods  have  developed  along  two  lines.  First,  technology  exists  that  allows  individuals  to  make
payments  over  the  Internet  and  private  networks  using  traditional  payment  mechanisms  such  as  credit
cards.  When  used  in  this  way,  the  Internet  is  simply  the  next  in  an  evolving  line  of  communications
media used to convey payment information. The underlying payment is governed by the same laws that
would  govern  credit  card  payments  at  a  point-of-sale  terminal  or  over  the  telephone.  Moreover,  and
perhaps  more  importantly  from  a  central  banker’s  perspective,  these  Internet  payment  methods  remain
tied  to  existing  payments  systems  involving  the  transfer  of  balances  among  accounts  at  financial
institutions.
“Electronic  money,”  based  on  stored-value  smart  cards  and  other  technologies,  is  also
under development. When used in connection with these products, the Internet no longer acts solely as an
access  device  to  communicate  payment  information  to  merchants  and  banks.  Instead,  the  transfer  of
“value” over the Internet will become, for all practical purposes, the modern day equivalent of tendering
currency  in  satisfaction  of  a  debt.  While  private  electronic  money  will  not  have  “legal  tender”  status,
electronic money issuers will use private contractual relationships to effect discharge of their obligations.
“Electronic  money” 
the  United  States  of
privately-issued  currency,  the  value  of  which  depends  on  the  financial  health  of  the  issuer.  Because
electronic value is simply a promise of the issuer to pay on demand, the question arises as to whether the
issuance of electronic value should be limited to banks and other supervised  institutions.  In  the  United
the  re-emergence 
is  essentially 
in 
BIS Review   26/1998
- 3 -
States, banks have been intricately linked to the payments system and, as a result, are subject to unique
regulatory burdens such as reserve requirements, deposit insurance premiums, and extensive supervision.
Some  argue  that  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  payments  system  require  limiting  the  issuance  of
electronic money to banks.  In  fact,  some  foreign  jurisdictions,  such  as  Japan  and  the  European  Union,
have limited the issuance of electronic currency to banks or credit institutions in EU parlance.
Unlike  Europe  and  Japan,  however,  the  United  States  is,  at  least  for  the  time  being,
remaining silent on the issue of nonbank issuance of electronic money. The  White  House  believes  that
the  commercial  and  technological  environment  is  changing  far  too  rapidly  for  it  to  be  able  to  develop
policy  that  is  both  timely  and  appropriate.  In  the  near  term,  therefore,  the  White  House  is  calling  for
case-by-case monitoring of electronic payments experiments.
In  keeping  with  the  spirit  of  the  White  House  Framework,  Federal  bank  supervisors  in
the  United  States  have  expressed  a  clear  willingness  to  listen  to  what  the  private  sector  has  to  say  on
issues  involving  emerging  electronic  payments.  For  example,  in  1996  the  Board  of  Governors  issued
proposed regulations concerning the applicability of Regulation E to stored-value cards. As part of that
proposed  rule  making,  the  Board  requested  comments  from  the  public  as  to  whether  part  or  all  of
Regulation  E  should  apply  to  electronic  money  or  value  residing  on  a  computer  system  or
personal-computer  hard  drive.  Similarly,  the  FDIC  requested  public  comment  on  the  application  of
Federal deposit-insurance coverage to electronic value represented on computer systems. This openness,
combined with an increasing willingness to  let  the  banking  industry  partner  with  technology  and  other
industries, reflects a commitment on the part of bank supervisors in the United States to allow the private
sector to direct the future of electronic commerce and payments.
From a longer term perspective,  however,  the  market-place  and  industry  self-regulation
alone  may  not  fully  address  all  of  the  issues  associated  with  e-money.  The  White  House  Framework
suggests  that  Government  action  may  be  necessary  to  ensure  the  safety  and  soundness  of  electronic
payments  systems,  to  protect  consumers  or  to  respond  to  important  law-enforcement  objectives.  Of
course, the White House would work closely with the private sector to inform policy development  and
ensure that governmental activities flexibly accommodate the needs of the emerging market-place.
From  a  central  bank  perspective,  one  of  the  most  fundamental  questions  raised  by
electronic payments is its impact on monetary policy, especially if its development is as widespread as
some  have  predicted.  In  the  near  term,  it  appears  that  Internet  payments  systems  will  not  significantly
impact monetary policy. For the most part, the Internet and other communication networks are currently
being used to facilitate existing banking transactions using traditional banking settlement channels. Most
payments over the Internet simply result in the movement of funds from a bank account in one institution
to one in the same or another bank. This should have few, if any, implications on the conduct of United
States monetary policy or the measurement of the United States money supply. “Money” as defined by
M1, M2, or M3, would still be held in accounts at banks and would be reported to the Federal Reserve
through existing reporting mechanisms.
If, however, Internet payments evolve to the point where digital “coins” or other private
electronic money begin to be widely used and circulated like Federal Reserve bank notes, the potential
implications for monetary policy could be much greater. The effect that stored value, whether smart card
or  computer  based,  has  on  monetary  policy  will  in  large  part  turn  on  the  extent  to  which  it  shifts  the
money supply out of the banking sector. When stored value is issued by banks, this is not a real risk. As
Governor  Edward  Kelly  noted  in  a  1996  speech  before  a  cyber-payments  conference,  bank  liabilities
incurred through issuing stored-value cards should be included in the statistical reports that banks must
currently submit to the Federal Reserve Board.
In  addition  to  monetary  policy  concerns,  other  factors  could  trigger  the  need  for  the
Government to resolve the issue of bank versus nonbank issuance of electronic value. For example, as I
noted earlier, banks are subject to extensive regulation and supervision at least in part to ensure the safety
and soundness of the payments systems. If nonbanks begin to take significant  market  share  away  from
BIS Review   26/1998
- 4 -
banks  because  of  an  inherently  lower  cost  structure,  that  raises  serious  questions  about  a  level  playing
field and whether banks can ever fairly compete. If nonbanks begin offering through the Internet many of
the payment services, or alternatives to the payment services, now offered exclusively by banks, it raises
a real question about the ultimate value of a bank charter, and what it really means to be a bank. It could
be argued, for example, that there is no such thing as a nonbank issuer of e-money -- but only supervised
bank issuers and unsupervised bank issuers.
Another related concern  is  the  emergence  of  nonbank  Internet  financial  firms  that  have
balance sheets closely resembling that of banks, but do not have access to the lender-of-last resort. What
happens  if  these  institutions  have  a  liquidity  crisis?  What  if  that  crisis  is  so  large  that  it  threatens  to
gridlock  the  entire  payments  system?  What  role  do  the  supervisors  play?  What  role  should  the
supervisors play?
In addition to these domestic policy concerns, the Administration’s position on electronic
payments  will  be  informed  by  international  developments.  A  number  of  international  organizations  in
which  the  Federal  Reserve  plays  a  role,  such  as  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and  the  G-10
central bank governors, have already completed important studies on  aspects  of  electronic  banking  and
payments. For example, a multi-national task force on the Security of Electronic Money was established
by the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, and the Group of Computer Experts, of the G-10
central bank governors. This  task  force,  which  was  chaired  by  Israel  Sendrovic  of  the  Federal  Reserve
Bank  of  New  York,  issued  a  report  on  its  findings  entitled  “Security  of  Electronic  Money”  in  August
1996.  The  Task  Force  examined  primarily  consumer-oriented  stored-value  products  by  surveying  the
leading  global  suppliers  of  both  card-based  and  software-based  stored-value  systems.  The  report
concluded  that  the  technology  security  measures  of  these  systems  are  being  designed  to  achieve  an
adequate  level  of  security  relative  to  other  forms  of  common  retail  payments,  assuming  that  they  are
implemented appropriately.
What remains to be seen is whether the infrastructure needed to create binding electronic
contracts between previously unaffiliated parties can be developed to meet the needs of  consumers  and
merchants  globally.  This  leads  me  to  my  second  topic  --  the  establishment  of  a  Uniform  Commercial
Code for Electronic Commerce.
Uniform Commercial Code For Electronic Commerce
The White House Framework states that, in order “to encourage electronic commerce, the
United  States  Government  should  support  the  development  of  both  a  domestic  and  global  commercial
legal framework that recognizes, facilitates and enforces electronic transactions worldwide.” In keeping
with its belief that the private sector should take the lead in electronic commerce issues, the White House
is largely relying on the efforts of the National Conference of Commissioners of Uniform State Laws and
the  American  Law  Institute,  the  sponsors  of  the  Uniform  Commercial  Code,  to  produce  the  desired
domestic  commercial  law  framework.  Internationally,  the  United  States  Government  is  working  with
organizations  such  as  the  United  Nations  Commission  on  International  Trade  Law,  the  OECD,
UNIDROIT and the International Chamber of Commerce to achieve the necessary global commercial law
framework.
The  United  States  has  adopted,  and  has  urged  others  to  adopt,  the  following  drafting
principles. First, parties should be free to order the contractual relations between themselves as they see
fit.  Second,  rules  should  be  technology  neutral  --  in  other  words,  the  rules  should  neither  require  nor
assume  a  particular  technology  --  and  should  be  forward  looking  --  should  not  hinder  the  use  or
development of technologies in the future. Third, existing rules should be modified and new rules should
be  adopted  only  as  necessary  or  substantially  desirable  to  support  the  use  of  electronic  technologies.
Finally, any drafting process should involve the high-tech commercial sector as well as businesses  that
have not yet moved on-line.
BIS Review   26/1998
- 5 -
Unlike  the  situation  in  the  retail  electronic  payments  area,  where  there  has  been
significant private-sector resistance to developing legal standards, there is an increasing consensus, both
domestically and abroad, that electronic commerce will  not  flourish  until  there  are  laws  addressing  the
validity  of  electronic  contracts  and  the  legal  significance  of  attribution  procedures  used  by  parties  to
determine the identity of the sender of an electronic message.
Domestic Efforts
Domestic efforts to address these needs have proceeded under two very different venues.
First, there is the work of the NCCUSL and the ALI to modernize the UCC to reflect the realities of the
Internet.  In  the  absence  of  Federal  legislation  or  regulation,  the  NCCUSL/ALI  drafting  process  is
attractive for at least two reasons. First, the general approach of the UCC is consistent with the views of
many  in  the  emerging  electronic  commerce  community  in  that  it  allows  for  variation  through  private
contract.  Second,  NCCUSL/ALI  has  been  extremely  successful  in  ensuring  that  commercial  law  is
essentially the same in substance among the fifty states. This success  largely  results  from  the  care  that
NCCUSL takes in establishing drafting committees that reflect diverse interests affected by the particular
legislation being considered.
With respect to electronic commerce, NCCUSL and the ALI have established a drafting
committee  that  will  recommend  changes  to  the  general  definition  provisions  of  the  UCC  located  in
Article  1.  The  drafting  committee’s  mandate  is  broad:  consider  and  draft  revisions  and  additions  to
Article 1 in light of developments since its adoption. One of the most significant developments that has
occurred  since  the  adoption  of  Article  1  is  the  shift  from  paper  to  electronic  media.  At  a  minimum,
therefore, it is expected that Article 1 will be revised to recognize the validity of electronic signatures and
electronic writings.
Another effort rapidly proceeding under the auspices of NCCUSL and the ALI is a new
UCC  article  on  licenses  which  will  govern  not  only  traditional  software  contracts  but  any  license  of
information (for example, books, movies, databases). In the process of addressing concerns unique to the
information  industry,  the  drafters  have  considered  issues,  such  as  electronic  contracting,  that  every
industry will likely need to consider. For example, the February 1998 draft of Article 2B provides that a
“record” cannot be denied legal effect solely on the grounds that it is electronic. Article 2B also addresses
the use of “attribution procedures” as a signature substitute in an  electronic  commerce  environment.  In
this  regard,  Article  2B,  as  currently  drafted,  largely  mirrors  the  concept  of  commercially  reasonable
security procedures found in Article 4A of the UCC governing funds transfers.
Article 2B does not, however, address some rather important aspects of electronic records
namely, the admissibility of electronic records in legal proceedings and the use of electronic records to
satisfy  legal  requirements  that  original  documents  be  retained.  Regardless  of  whether  Article  2B
ultimately addresses all of these issues, the adoption by all 50 states of Article 2B is still a long way off.
Moreover, the principles stated in Article 2B are restricted to the scope of Article 2B. Thus, even when
Article 2B is adopted, it will not affect a significant portion of electronic commerce. With that in mind,
NCCUSL established a separate drafting committee to tackle electronic transaction issues generally in a
new  Uniform  Electronic  Transaction  Act.  The  ETA,  although  on  a  “fast  track”,  is  still  at  a  very  early
drafting  stage.  Several  important  decisions,  including  the  scope  of  the  Act,  are  still  being  debated.
Having  said  that,  the  Act  is  expected  to  provide  for  the  legal  recognition  of  electronic  signatures  and
records in most commercial transactions, and for the use of electronic records as evidence.
In  addition  to  the  uniform  state  law  efforts  of  NCCUSL/ALI,  there  has  been  a
proliferation of non-uniform United States state laws addressing electronic commerce that are generally
referred  to  as  “digital  signature”  or  “electronic  signature”  laws.  There  are  at  least  43  states  that  have
enacted,  or  are  currently  considering,  electronic  signature  legislation.  These  state  law  initiatives  vary
considerably.  For  example,  many  states  have  limited  the  scope  of  their  legislation  to  specific  types  of
transactions (for example, transactions with the State, medical records, motor vehicle records). However,
BIS Review   26/1998
- 6 -
the  biggest  difference  concerns  the  type  of  signatures  covered,  electronic  signatures  versus  digital
signatures, and the effect of those signatures on electronic documents.
The  more  general  term  --  electronic  signature  --  can  be  used  to  describe  any  letters,
characters, or symbols manifested by electronic or similar means and executed or adopted by a party with
an intent to authenticate a writing. Examples of an electronic signature include a name typed at the end of
an  e-mail  message  by  the  sender  or  a  digitalized  image  of  a  handwritten  signature  of  the  sender.  A
“digital signature” is a subset of electronic signatures and represents a unique way to “sign” an electronic
message.
A digital signature is simply a string of alpha-numeric characters. It is created by running
an electronic message through a one-way hash function (thereby creating a unique digest or fingerprint of
the  message)  and  then  using  public  key  cryptography  to  encrypt  the  resulting  message  digest.  Like  all
electronic signatures, a digital signature can serve the same function as a handwritten signature in that it
can  be  used  to  signify  authorship  or  assent.  A  digital  signature,  however,  also  serves  an  important
security function that a handwritten signature and many electronic signatures may not. Because of the use
of  the  hash  function,  a  digital  signature  allows  the  receiver  of  a  message  to  determine  whether  the
message has been altered since it was digitally signed.
State  legislation  in  this  area  tends  to  address  either  electronic  signatures  (23  states)  or
digital signatures (16 states), but not both. States with legislation on electronic  signatures  differ  on  the
question  of  what  qualifies  as  an  electronic  signature.  Several  states  have  taken  the  UCC  Article  1
approach and recognize any form of electronic mark intended to serve as an electronic signature. Other
states,  however,  require  that  several  conditions  be  met  before  an  electronic  signature  will  be  legally
enforceable. Generally, for these states, in order for an electronic signature to be effective it must: (1) be
unique to the person using it; (2) be capable of verification; (3) be under the sole control of the person
using it; (4) be linked to the data in such a manner that if the data is changed the signature is invalidated;
and (5) conform to regulations adopted by the Secretary of State.
Digital signature statutes typically provide for the promulgation of regulations governing
the  implementation  and  use  of  a  digital  signature  infrastructure.  The  digital  signature  infrastructure
contemplated  by  these  statutes  involves  a  trusted  third  party,  usually  a  certification  authority  or  CA,
whose job is to confirm that the private key used by a sender to sign an electronic message is in fact the
private key of the purported sender. Because the legitimacy of the digital signature infrastructure largely
depends on the procedures established by the CA, most digital signature statutes define the obligations of
the  sender,  relying  party,  and  CA  with  respect  to  the  use  of  digital  signatures  and  certificates  and  set
standards of conduct or CAs. In addition, most digital signature statutes establish a licensing procedure
for CAs.
As an aside,  on  January  12  of  this  year,  the  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency
authorized  Zions  First  National  Bank  to  establish  an  operating  subsidiary  that  would  serve  as  a
certification  authority.  The  OCC  determined  that  acting  as  a  CA  is  the  functional  equivalent  of  notary
services long offered by banks and a natural outgrowth of bank identification and verification skills. The
operating subsidiary will be licensed and operated in accordance with the Utah digital signature statute.
The  Utah  law,  which  served  as  a  model  for  many  of  the  other  states’  digital  signature  laws,  insulates
certification authorities, that properly perform their functions, from liability.
Of  course,  the  ultimate  purpose  of  any  digital  and  electronic  signature  statute  is  to
provide for the validity of electronic signatures. All of the state statutes provide that use of an electronic
or,  if  appropriate,  digital  signature  on  an  electronic  record  will  be  treated  in  the  same  manner  as  a
handwritten  signature  on  paper.  Most  of  the  digital  signature  statutes,  however,  also  include  a  legal
presumption that the person whose name is associated with a digital signature is in fact the person who
signed the document.
BIS Review   26/1998
- 7 -
One final point that I would make in connection with state law initiatives is what lawyers
call conflicts of laws law -- that is, most of the legislative efforts just described do not address the degree
to which the state enacting the legislation will recognize electronic signatures created in compliance with
another  state’s  statutory  scheme.  These  statutes  also  generally  fail  to  address  the  validity  of  unsigned
electronic documents or the evidentiary use of electronic records generally.
If  you  are  interested  in  learning  more  about  these  statutes,  you  might  want  to  visit  the
www.mbc.com  web  site.  This  web  site  provides  a  summary  of  all  existing  and  pending  digital  and
electronic signature legislation in the United States with links to the actual legislation where possible.
Like  the  states,  Congress  is  also  divided  on  the  appropriate  scope  and  content  of
electronic  authentication  legislation.  In  September  1997,  the  House  passed  “The  Computer  Security
Enhancement Act of 1997”. If passed by the Senate, that act would establish a national policy panel for
digital  signatures.  The  panel,  which  would  be  composed  of  Federal  and  state  Government  as  well  as
private  technical  and  legal  experts  and  interested  members  of  the  public,  would  serve  as  a  forum  for
exploring  all  relevant  factors  associated  with  the  development  of  a  national  digital  signature
infrastructure.  The  panel  would  be  expected  to  produce  model  practices  and  procedures  for  CAs,
standards to ensure consistency among jurisdictions that license CAs, and audit standards for CAs.
In  addition  to  this  bill,  at  least  three  other  bills  have  been  introduced  into  Congress
within the past five months that propose specific rules for electronic signatures. The Electronic Financial
Services  Efficiency  Act  introduced  by  Representatives  Baker  and  Dreier  (H.R.  2937)  on  November  8,
1997 is by far the most comprehensive of the three. The Baker bill would place electronic authentication
methods on par with traditional written signatures provided that they reliably establish the identity of the
sender  or  maker  of  the  electronic  communication,  and  reliably  verify  that  the  message  has  not  been
altered.  Public  key  cryptography  and  signature  dynamics  technology  are  specifically  recognized  as
trustworthy electronic authentication techniques. Other technologies would be deemed satisfactory if they
meet certain criteria.
One aspect of the Baker bill which has generated a lot of interest is its establishment of
an industry self-regulatory organization along the lines of the National Association of Securities Dealers.
Any person or entity -- not  just  a  certification  authority  --  wishing  to  provide  electronic  authentication
services  in  the  United  States  would  have  to  be  registered  with  the  SRO.  The  SRO  would  establish  a
committee, supervised by the Department of Treasury, to develop, refine, and apply standards respecting
the role and responsibilities of parties involved in electronic authentication services and the licensing and
registration of certification authorities.
On  February  2,  1998,  Senator  Bennett,  Chairman  of  the  Banking  Committee’s
Subcommittee  on  Financial  Services  and  Technology,  introduced  the  Digital  Signature  and  Electronic
Authentication Law of 1998 (S. 1594) which is aimed at facilitating the use of electronic authentication
by  United  States  financial  institutions.  The  bill  establishes  the  right  of  a  financial  institution  to  use
electronic authentication if  it  has  entered  into  an  agreement  with  any  counterparty  or  has  established  a
banking, financial,  or  transactional  system  using  electronic  authentication  and  the  use  of  the  electronic
authentication would be valid according to the relevant agreement or system rules.
Under  this  bill,  financial  institutions  would  be  exempt  from  state  law  regulations
governing  the  registration,  licensing,  or  use  of  electronic  authentication  as  well  as  from  any  state  law
limitations  or  impositions  of  fees  in  connection  with  electronic  authentication  services.  Absent
compliance with state laws, however, use of electronic authentication by financial institutions would not
be  eligible  for  the  state  law  presumptions  or  benefits,  including  the  presumption  that  an  electronic
signature is the equivalent of a manual signature.
Moreover, financial institutions remain subject to supervision by the appropriate banking
supervisor  which  may,  by  regulation  or  order,  preclude  a  financial  institution  from  using  electronic
authentication in its business if it determines that such use would not be consistent with safe and sound
BIS Review   26/1998
- 8 -
banking practices, or if such use would threaten the safety and soundness of the institution, subsidiary or
affiliate.  In  addition,  like  the  Baker  bill,  the  Bennett  bill  expressly  provides  that  state  consumer
protection laws, as well as the Truth in Lending Act and the Electronic Funds Transfer Act, continue to
govern consumer transactions that use electronic authentication.
Finally,  in  early  November  1997,  Representative  Eshoo  introduced  the  Electronic
Commerce Enhancement Act of 1997 (H.R. 2991), which would require Federal agencies to make forms
available  electronically  and  to  allow  individuals  to  submit  forms  electronically  over  the  Internet.
Digitally signed forms accepted in accordance with this act would have the  same  force  and  effect  as  if
they  contained  a  written  signature.  In  addition,  the  bill  calls  for  the  issuance  of  digital  signatures  to
appropriate  Federal  employees  and  the  establishment  of  guidelines  governing  the  manner  in  which
Federal agencies accept certificates for digital signatures. These guidelines will permit a Federal agency
to accept certificates issued by the agency or a trusted third party provided that: (1) the trusted third party
is licensed or accredited by a state or local Government or an appropriate accreditation body; and (2) “in
accordance with commercially reasonable standards, accepts liability for and is insured against negligent
issuance or handling of certificates”.
International Efforts
While  the  United  States  Government  has  for  the  most  part  been  an  observer  of  the
domestic  efforts  to  establish  a  legal  infrastructure  for  electronic  commerce,  it  has  been  an  active
participant in the international arena through organizations  such  as  the  United  Nations  Commission  on
International  Trade  Law  (UNCITRAL)  and  the  Organization  for  Economic  Co-Operation  and
Development (OECD).
UNCITRAL was established by the General Assembly in 1966 with the general mandate
to  further  the  progressive  harmonization  and  unification  of  the  law  of  international  trade.  In  1996,
UNCITRAL adopted a Model Law on Electronic Commerce. The Model Law is aimed at removing legal
obstacles to the use of electronic communications. Thus, the Model Law provides that information shall
not be denied legal effect solely on the grounds that it is generated, sent, received or stored by electronic
means,  and  establishes  rules  for  when  an  electronic  writing  and  signature  will  satisfy  existing  legal
requirements  for  writings  and  signatures.  The  Model  Law  also  provides  solutions  for  legal  issues  that
arise  in  the  use  of  electronic  communications,  such  as  the  admissibility  of  electronic  records  and  the
attribution of electronic communications to particular parties.
UNCITRAL, along with OECD and others, has now undertaken to explore possible legal
rules  underpinning  digital  and  other  electronic  signature  systems;  specifically  the  cross-border
recognition of electronic signatures. While the United States would have preferred UNCITRAL to have
extended  the  work  of  the  Model  Law  to  cover  additional  contracting  issues,  a  large  number  of  other
countries supported work on digital and other electronic signatures. The United States has chosen to fully
participate rather than risk the emergence of rules which, while not binding on any state, might not be as
supportive of market-based commerce as the United States believes it should be, and which would carry a
UN imprimatur.
The core issues from the United States perspective have been whether agreement can be
obtained on rules that are open to all systems, that is  rules  that  recognize  leading  technologies  such  as
Public Key Infrastructure, or PKI, but also provide legal support for other  systems.  Moreover,  variable
PKI  formats  have  been  developed,  and  differing  levels  of  PKI  certification  will  be  in  commercial  use,
including CA generated high and low level certs, and probably non-CA issued certs. The United States
position  has  been  that  the  different  user  paradigms  may  require  different  legal  standards  and
presumptions, which should not be limited to existing PKI-based systems.
In addition, the United States has advocated that any UN or other international legal text
on  signature  rules  should  incorporate  both  regulated  licensed  systems  and  private  sector  non-regulated
systems.  Furthermore,  such  rules  should  be  open  to  non-digital  technologies.  From  the  standpoint  of
BIS Review   26/1998
- 9 -
commercial  law,  delineation  of  fall-back  rules  on  obligations,  assurances,  and  reliance  would  be
necessary  to  achieve  the  necessary  risk  allocation  and  commercial  usage.  This  will  probably  require
sliding  standards  for  attribution,  commercial  reliance,  liability  and  security  depending  on  the  types  of
transactions and the imperatives of market cost and pricing. Carveouts may be appropriate for closed or
controlled access systems.
So far, there has been a significant amount of debate, but little agreement, on these and a
host of other issues. While a number of countries in the Working Group appear to agree that any project
should, to the extent possible, follow the media neutral approach taken in the 1996 Model Law, thus far
the focus has tended to be on the cross-border recognition of the use of digital signature technology. This
may  be  indicative  of  the  fact  that  several  countries  have  enacted  or  have  proposed  digital  signature
legislation.  Spain,  Germany,  Malaysia  and  Italy  are  among  the  foreign  jurisdictions  that  have  enacted
digital  signature  legislation.  Other  countries  such  as  Australia,  Japan  and  the  United  Kingdom  have
developed guidelines on digital signatures.
The  Working  Group  has  agreed  on  at  least  one  important  issue.  Even  though  PKI
technology can be used to encrypt messages, questions relating to the use of PKI and other cryptography
for  security  purposes  are  outside  of  the  scope  of  this  UNCITRAL  effort.  Of  course  the  United  States
continues to advocate the development of a voluntary market-driven key management infrastructure and
of  key  recoverable  encryption  products.  And  while  this  position  is  not  reflected  in  the  OECD’s
Guidelines  for  Cryptography  Policy,  I  am  sure  that  the  Administration  will  continue  to  promote  key
recovery both domestically and abroad.
In closing, I would like to echo the sentiment expressed in the Framework: “The success
of electronic commerce will require an effective partnership between the private and public sectors, with
the  private  sector  taking  the  lead.”  The  creation  of  private  fora  such  as  this  conference,  which  bring
together  Government  representatives  and  industry,  provides  an  exciting  opportunity  to  further  that
partnership.  I  challenge  each  of  you  to  use  this  opportunity  not  just  to  recite  your  company’s  or  your
agency’s views but to  listen  to  the  ideas  and  concerns  of  other  conference  participants  and  incorporate
them into both public and private policy initiatives.
BIS Review   26/1998
