Mr. Carse gives a banking supervisor’s perspective on control issues in financial
institutions      Speech  by  the  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,
Mr. David Carse, at the BanComp ’98 conference in Hong Kong on 25/5/98.
I am pleased to be here this morning to speak to you at the start of this conference on
internal controls and anti-money laundering. The advertised title of my speech is “Understanding the
role and needs of the regulator in all authorised financial institutions”. This is a very broad subject
and I have therefore narrowed it down to focus on the banking supervisor’s perspective on control
issues in financial institutions. I am sure there are many compliance and audit professionals in the
audience today, so I trust I should not have too hard a hard job persuading you that good  internal
controls are not only important, but crucial to the success of financial institutions. Just consider, for
example, what poor internal controls did for BCCI, Daiwa Bank and Barings.
So what advice can I offer you today to help you ensure that your institution will not
meet the same fate? Well, what I will do is to share with you my thoughts on the key elements of a
financial institution’s control systems, and highlight some of the areas where other institutions have
gone horribly wrong. I will also talk about one of the key areas of a financial institution’s controls -
its controls against being used for money laundering.
So  let  me  start  by  giving  you  a  banking  supervisor’s  view  of  internal  controls.  But
first,  what  exactly  do  we  mean  by  “internal  controls”?  The  definition  I  would  suggest,  which  is
borrowed from the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, is that internal controls refers to the
ongoing process by which the Board of Directors and management of an institution ensure that the
institution  meets  three  key  sets  of  objectives.  First,  operational  objectives  -  the  efficiency  and
effectiveness of the institution in using its assets and other resources and in protecting the institution
from  loss.  Second,  information  objectives  -  the  reliability  and  completeness  of  financial  and
management  information  needed  for  decision-making  within  the  institution  and  for  regulatory  and
other external uses. Third, compliance objectives - compliance with applicable laws and regulations,
supervisory requirements, and internal policies and procedures, in order to protect the institution’s
franchise and reputation.
What, then, are the main elements of the sort of control systems needed to achieve
these  objectives?  Basically,  there  are  five  inter-related  elements:  management  oversight  and  the
control culture; risk assessment; control activities; information and communication; and monitoring
activities. The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision has recently put all this together into a set
of fourteen principles for regulators to use in evaluating institution’s internal control systems. I do
not propose to run through these one by one, but I would like to pick out one or two points so as to
give you an idea of what I, as a regulator, see as the key ideas.
First, on management oversight and the control culture, the starting point is that the
Board of Directors need to understand the risks run by the institution, to set the acceptable limits on
these risks, and to ensure that senior management takes the steps necessary to identify, monitor and
control these risks. Senior management must then take the responsibility to implement the strategies
approved  by  the  Board,  to  set  appropriate  internal  control  procedures,  and  to  monitor  the
effectiveness of these procedures.
This makes it quite clear where the main responsibility for controls rests - and that is
fairly  and  squarely  on  the  shoulders  of  the  institution’s  Board  of  Directors  and  its  senior
management, not just on its compliance and audit departments. However, having said that, everyone
in  an  institution  shares  the  responsibility  to  some  extent.  A  key  task  for  the  Board  and  senior
management is to establish the right culture within the institution, a culture in which the importance
of internal controls is stressed, and high ethical and integrity standards are promoted. This culture
BIS Review   48/1998
- 2 -
will  be  determined  not  simply  by  what  the  top  levels  of  management  say  but  what  they  do.  For
example, do the institution’s remuneration policies reward risk-taking at the expense of prudence?
Does senior management display a casual attitude towards breaches of limits? Do they encourage the
right  attitude  towards  regulatory  compliance?  Is  there  backing  and  respect  at  senior  levels  for  the
internal  audit  and  compliance  functions?  The  response  of  the  senior  levels  of  the  organisation  to
these kind of issues will determine how personnel lower down actually behave in practice, including
their attitude to control issues.
Moving on to risk assessment, the important thing is to identify and evaluate every
factor that could adversely affect the achievement of the institution’s objectives. This means not just
the familiar risks of credit risk and liquidity risk, but also risks such as operational risk, interest rate
risk, market risk, country and transfer risk, legal risk and reputational risk. And this needs to be an
ongoing  process,  continually  re-evaluating  the  risks  and  reviewing  the  control  systems  to  address
these risks.
Regarding control activities, the point I would stress is that control activities need to
be  an  integral  part  of  the  daily  operations  of  an  institution.  Examples  of  this  include:  top  level
reviews  of  performance  and  risk  exposure;  appropriate  activity  controls  that  monitor  performance
and  exceptions  at  the  departmental  or  divisional  level;  segregation  of  duties;  physical  controls  on
access to assets; periodic checking for compliance with exposure limits; a system of approvals and
authorisations for transactions over certain limits; and a system of verification and reconciliation of
transaction details and activities. The objective should be to ensure that all areas of the institution are
continually in compliance with established policies and procedures.
On information and communication, it should be self-evident that an institution needs
comprehensive  and  timely  financial,  operational  and  compliance  data,  and  so  needs  to  have  good
information  systems.  But  having  the  information  is  only  the  first  step.  Equally  important  is  the
second step, that the information should get to the right people at the right time.
Finally,  on  monitoring,  it  cannot  be  overstressed  that  that  monitoring  of  the
effectiveness of an institution’s internal controls should be a continual and ongoing process, and that
monitoring of key risks should be an integral part of the daily operations of the institution. Effective
and independent internal audit and compliance functions have an important role to play here. This
requires  these  functions  to  have  direct  access  to  senior  levels  of  the  organisation  so  that  potential
criticisms of systems or transactions cannot be blocked by the line management concerned.
These, then, are what I would regard as the key elements of a financial institution’s
internal  controls.  As  regards  how  these  are  applied  to  individual  institutions,  my  expectation  as  a
banking  supervisor  is  that  any  financial  institution,  regardless  of  size,  should  have  an  effective
system of internal controls that is consistent with the nature, complexity, and risk of its activities and
that  responds  to  changes  in  the  institution’s  environment  and  conditions.  I  am  not  saying  that  I
expect  every  institution  to  be  using  state-of-the-art  risk  management  and  control  techniques.  But
what  I  do  expect  is  that  every  institution  should  have  control  systems  that  adhere  to  the  basic
principles  I  have  just  discussed,  and  which  are  as  state-of-the-art  as  they  need  to  be  given  that
particular  institution’s  activities.  I  also  expect  these  systems  to  be  kept  under  review  as  things
change.
Let me now move on to discuss some of the things that can go wrong when controls
break down. I will not go into particular case studies, but will try instead to draw together some of
the  common  threads  of  recent  problem  bank  cases.  The  Basle  Committee  paper  that  I  mentioned
earlier suggests five such common threads, and I will draw on this in the following remarks.
BIS Review   48/1998
- 3 -
The first, which I have mentioned already, is lack of adequate management oversight
and  accountability,  and  failure  to  develop  a  strong  control  culture  within  the  institution.  Without
exception, a common feature of recent problem bank cases has been management inattention to, and
laxity in, the control culture of the institution, insufficient guidance and oversight by the Board of
Directors  and  senior  management,  and  a  lack  of  clear  management  accountability  through  the
assignment of roles and responsibilities. These cases also reflect insufficient incentives to carry out
strong line supervision and maintain a high level of control consciousness within business areas.
The second thread is inadequate assessment of the risk of certain banking activities,
whether  on  or  off  balance  sheet.  Many  banking  organisations  that  have  suffered  major  losses
neglected  to  continually  assess  the  risks  of  new  products  and  activities,  or  update  their  risk
assessments  when  significant  changes  occurred  in  the  environment  or  business  conditions.  Many
recent  cases  highlight  the  fact  that  control  systems  that  function  well  for  traditional  or  simple
products are unable to handle more sophisticated or complex products.
The third thread is the absence or failure of key control activities, such as segregation
of  duties,  approvals,  verifications,  reconciliations,  and  reviews  of  operating  performance.  Lack  of
segregation of duties in particular has played a major role in the significant losses that have occurred
at banks.
The  fourth  thread  is  inadequate  communication  of  information  between  levels  of
management within the bank, especially in the upward communication of problems. To be effective,
policies and procedures need to be effectively communicated to all personnel involved in an activity.
Some losses in banks occurred because relevant personnel were not aware of or did not understand
the bank’s policies. In several instances, information about inappropriate activities that should have
been reported upward through organisational levels was not communicated to the Board of Directors
or  senior  management  until  the  problems  became  severe.  In  other  instances,  information  in
management reports was not  complete  or  accurate,  creating  a  favourable  impression  of  a  business
situation that was in fact problematic.
The  fifth  and  final  thread  is  inadequate  or  ineffective  audit  programs  and  other
monitoring activities. In many cases, audits were not sufficiently rigorous to identify and report the
control  weaknesses  associated  with  problem  banks.  In  other  cases,  even  though  auditors  reported
problems, they were not corrected by management.
From  these  common  threads,  it  should  now  be  clear  why,  in  the  first  part  of  my
remarks  today,  I  stressed  the  things  I  did  -  management  oversight  and  control  culture,  risk
assessment,  control  activities  and  monitoring,  and  information  and  communication.  These  are  the
areas that institutions need to focus on to avoid becoming a “problem bank case” themselves.
Let me move on now to consider the role of the banking supervisor in ensuring that
an institution’s internal controls are adequate and effective. This is an area on which there has been
greatly increased emphasis in recent years. Of course supervisors, like the management of financial
institutions, have always been concerned with the quality of control systems. However, the approach
has  been  rather  piecemeal,  and  has  focused  on  certain  types  of  risk  which  are  easily  quantifiable,
rather than the more intangible types of risk. What we are trying to do nowadays is to move towards
a more systematic identification and assessment of the risks facing a bank across the whole range of
its activities and the adequacy of the controls over these risks.
This “risk-based” approach is intended to focus our attention on what we see as the
institution’s key risk areas. Of course, the correct identification of the institution’s key risk areas is
crucial  in  this.  For  most  of  Hong  Kong’s  local  banks,  credit  risk,  liquidity  risk  and  perhaps
BIS Review   48/1998
- 4 -
reputational risk remain the highest risk areas, but for individual institutions other forms of risk such
as interest rate risk and market risk also come into the equation. If an institution engages in types of
business that we regard as being at the higher end of the risk scale, such as share margin financing or
lending for property development, this will  also  attract  our  attention.  Other  things  that  will  attract
our attention include major changes in the operating environment, including new technology; areas
or activities which are experiencing rapid growth; the introduction of new lines of business, products
or activities; and domestic and foreign acquisitions. In each case we would want to be assured that
any necessary enhancements to the control environment have been made so as to reduce the chance
of adverse and unforeseen effects on the institution.
Different  risk  areas  require  different  approaches,  but  essentially  our  approach  is  to
start  by  reviewing  the  written  policies  and  procedures  setting  down  the  controls  over  a  particular
area,  and  then  to  look  at  how  the  controls  work  in  practice.  This  may  involve  a  combination  of
reviews  of  documentation,  discussions  with  staff,  and  some  testing  of  transactions.  The  end-result
will  be  a  judgement  as  to  whether  we  believe  the  controls  are  effective  or  need  improvement.  If
improvement  is  needed  we  will  discuss  our  recommendations  with  the  management  and  agree  an
action plan and time-scale for the remedial action.
This may sound to you quite similar in some respects to the work of an institution’s
internal audit department and external auditors. I would agree that there are certainly some common
features, and indeed we would usually review as part of our own work the work done by the audit
department on identifying areas of potential risk and control problems. Similarly, external auditors’
observations  and  recommendations  are  often  very  useful  to  us  in  coming  to  a  judgement  on  the
effectiveness of an institution’s internal controls. However, to supervise an institution effectively a
supervisor needs, in my opinion, a means of independently verifying that internal controls are sound
and  that  all  substantive  risks  have  been  identified  and  considered.  For  this  reason,  our  ongoing
dialogue  with  institutions,  and  our  periodic  on-site  examinations  of  institutions’  activities,  are
invaluable.
I  believe  this  oversight  can  also  be  beneficial  in  a  practical  way  to  the  institution
itself. For example, we may have insights that the institution does not. We may be able to give an
institution feedback on how it compares vis-à-vis its peers in similar areas and to indicate respects in
which, from our experience, its controls and risk management processes are falling behind the game.
I would not want to overplay this “management consultant” type role, but I think it can be beneficial,
perhaps especially to the smaller, less sophisticated financial institutions. Of course, this presupposes
that we have the necessary expertise to offer useful advice. This is a constant challenge in today’s
environment  of  rapid  technological  change  and  product  innovation.  We  have  therefore  tried  to
develop  our  own  treasury  and  securities  specialists  whose  task  it  is  to  review  and  assess  more
leading-edge  and  sophisticated  areas  such  as  value  at  risk  and  treasury  and  derivatives  risk
management.
Let me move on now to the subject of the prevention of money laundering. This is a
key  concern  for  the  supervisors  of  all  major  international  financial  centres,  and  is  something  that
should be high on the agenda for the management of every financial institution.
Here  in  Hong  Kong  considerable  time  and  effort  has  been  put  in  over  a  period  of
years into ensuring that the banking system follows best international practice on the prevention of
money laundering. Principally, this means following the recommendations of the Basle Committee
on  Banking  Supervision  and  the  Financial  Action  Task  Force,  whose  guidance  notes  on  the
prevention of money laundering we have used to develop our own detailed Guidelines to institutions.
The basic thrust of these Guidelines is to provide that institutions should have in place adequate and
effective  policies,  procedures  and  controls  to  combat  money  laundering,  covering  essential  areas
BIS Review   48/1998
- 5 -
such as procedures for account opening, customer identification and record keeping as well as proper
systems for reporting suspicious transactions and training of staff.
Please be in no doubt as to how seriously we regard adherence to these Guidelines.
The reason for this is simple. To paraphrase the health warning on a packet of cigarettes, “Money
laundering  can  seriously  damage  your  health”.  Being  associated  with  money  laundering  can
seriously  undermine  confidence  in  an  individual  financial  institution  and  potentially  in  a  financial
system as a whole. We are presently seeing this demonstrated in the case of the Mexican banking
system, which is embroiled in a money-laundering scandal.
So  what  steps  can  a  banking  supervisor  take  to  ensure  that  institutions  are  doing
everything they can to protect themselves from being used for money laundering? The first thing is
to make sure that the Guidelines issued to institutions are kept up-to-date as techniques and patterns
of  money  laundering  evolve,  and  to  ensure  that  institutions  revise  their  own  internal  guidelines
accordingly. We have recently revised our Guidelines and issued them as a convenient booklet. I am
pleased  to  say  that  demand  for  this  has  been  high  and  we  have  issued  over  5000  copies  of  the
booklet.  However,  Guidelines  need  to  be  put  into  practice.  To  ensure  that  senior  management  are
focused on the need for this, money-laundering controls are a regular agenda item for our prudential
meetings with management. They are also a regular topic for our on-site examinations. During these
examinations we review an institution’s policies and procedures, look at their records of suspicious
transactions, and interview staff at random to check that they have been trained to identify suspicious
transactions  and  to  follow  the  appropriate  procedures  for  account  opening  and  customer
identification. We may also commission external auditors’ reports if we think it necessary.
So how do institutions in Hong Kong rate on combating money laundering? Perhaps
the best indicator of their vigilance against money laundering is the number of reports of suspicious
transactions  made  to  the  Joint  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  (JFIU).  These  numbers  suggest  that
institutions  are  certainly  improving,  as  both  the  number  of  reports,  and  the  number  of  institutions
making reports, has been increasing over time. The number of reports made to the JFIU rose from
only  264  in  1992  to  4210  in  1997.  Our  own  on-site  examinations  also  suggest  that  the  level  of
awareness, and the training of staff, is improving. So, overall, institutions are doing well. However,
there is always room for improvement, and I would urge those with responsibility for this area not to
relax their guard.
This  brings  me  to  my  concluding  remarks.  I  started  out  today  by  talking  about  the
important  elements  of  a  control  system,  and  how  banking  supervisors  assess  the  effectiveness  of
institutions’ controls. I discussed some of the common threads of recent “problem bank” cases, and
the control issues they highlighted. Finally, I stressed the importance of controls in the area of money
laundering  prevention.  While  I  hope  this  was  of  interest  to  you,  and  at  least  gave  you  a  slightly
different perspective on some familiar issues, I think I should end by saying that I certainly lay no
claim to having all the answers. Please do not sit back and expect the banking supervisors to issue
guidelines telling you exactly what you need to do. While I hope my advice may be of some help, the
responsibility for ensuring that your institution has the right controls and the right culture is yours.
So  I  hope  this  conference  provides  you  with  some  useful,  practical  ideas  for  improving  your
institutions’ controls when you return to work.
BIS Review   48/1998
