Mr.  Yam  comments  on  the  financial  turmoil  in  Asia      Address  by  the  Chief
Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Institute, Mr. Joseph Yam, JP, at the Euromoney Asia Pacific
Issuers and Investors Forum on 2/12/97.
1. Ladies and gentlemen, I am honoured to have been invited this year to deliver the
opening address for Euromoney’s Asia Pacific Issuers and Investors Forum.
2.  The  year  1997  has  been  an  unusual  year  for  Asia,  particularly  for  Hong  Kong.
Amidst financial turmoil of the worst kind in the history of Asia, Hong Kong went through political
transition to become a Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China. This was
achieved  in  the  smoothest  manner  one  could  imagine.  And  as  the  currencies  of  Asia  tumbled  one
after another in a process of competitive devaluation, involving sharp depletions of foreign reserves
and  requiring  financial  assistance  from  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  others,  and  sending
shock waves to financial markets throughout the region and beyond, our currency, the Hong Kong
dollar, remained very stable and our already very substantial foreign reserves increased. Although our
asset markets have been affected by the contagion, some consolidation was in any case overdue; and
in the event, for the year to date, the downward adjustment has been  significantly  less  severe  than
those of many others in the region.
3.  Hong  Kong  has  thus  held  up  extremely  well  under  the  circumstances.  This  has
perhaps surprised many, just as they have been surprised that the financial turmoil of the region could
so suddenly erupt with such severity and contagion.
4. Indeed, not long ago, stories about the Asian miracle abounded. Asia had been the
fastest  growing  region  in  the  world  and  the  economic  numbers  had  been  generally  sound.  Asian
economies had low inflation rates and exchange rates had been stable, at least until recently. Current
account for the region as a whole had been broadly in balance, although understandably the situation
for individual economies varied. The fiscal account excluding Japan had been in surplus. Asia also
had exceptionally high savings rates of over 30% of GDP and investment rates were equally  high.
Official sector savings of the Asian economies, in terms of their foreign currency reserves, were very
substantial, accounting for about 40% of the world’s foreign exchange reserves. Now five of the top
six foreign reserves holders in the world are in Asia. The work force in Asia was young, educated
and flexible. The political situation was stable. Policies were outward-looking with a commitment to
open markets and free trade.
5.  So  what  went  wrong  in  Asia?  What  turned  the  Asian  miracle  into  what  is  now
referred to, quite unkindly in my opinion, as the Asian myth or the Asian mirage? A few months into
this fall out, there have been many explanations offered. The most talked about was the rapid growth
and volatility of international capital flows.
6. According to IMF statistics, net capital inflow to emerging markets was less than
US$  50  billion  a  year  at  the  beginning  of  the  decade.  By  1996,  however,  this  had  increased  to
US$ 235 billion. Asia has received roughly half of this capital inflow. In some Asian economies, net
capital inflows have averaged 5% to 8% of GDP over a long  period.  Contributing  to  this  surge  of
international  capital  flows  was  financial  liberalization  undertaken  by  economies  which  had  the
foresight  to  do  so,  with  a  view  to  encouraging  financial  intermediation,  domestically  as  well  as
internationally,  so  that  the  high  savings  could  be  channelled  into  productive  investments,  thus
promoting  economic  growth.  Meanwhile,  there  has  been  continued  willingness  on  the  part  of  the
developed  economies  to  export  capital,  under  the  influence  of  sustained  economic  growth,  low
inflation  and  low  interest  rates.  Increasing  amount  of  mutual  funds  and  pension  funds  of  these
economies looked for higher returns in the emerging markets. In the case of Japan, sustained large
current  account  surpluses,  coupled  with  the  earlier  appreciation  of  the  yen,  have  forced  many
BIS Review   115/1997
- 2 -
Japanese firms to relocate their production to  the  rest  of  Asia.  Thus  capital  inflows  into  the  Asian
region have been large.
7. With financial liberalization and the globalization of financial markets, a substantial
part  of  the  capital  inflow  into  Asia  has  been  in  the  form  of  foreign  portfolio  investments  directed
principally at financial instruments in the form of equity and bonds, and, where available, derivatives
thereof. These international funds are generally highly alert to shifts in the expectation of risk, return
and  liquidity.  They  can  therefore  be  highly  volatile,  with  the  tendency  of  reversing  direction
whenever there is the slightest hint of trouble, in respect of the macroeconomic policies, in particular
financial  policies  pursued  by  governments,  the  robustness  of  the  financial  markets  in  which  they
operate, the soundness of the financial intermediaries with which they deal, etc.
8.  Those  economies  which  are  dependent  upon  such  capital  inflows  are  clearly
vulnerable to their reversal. Ideally therefore they ought to pay a lot of attention to pursuing sound
macroeconomic  policies  and  be  transparent  about  them.  This  has  perhaps  proven  to  be  politically
difficult to achieve in some cases. They also need to ensure that they are in a position to deal with the
volatility that characterizes the flow of international capital. And this means having:
first, an effective monetary management mechanism that is capable of
delivering currency stability;
second,  a  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  that  safeguards  the
integrity  of  financial  markets  and  the  financial  intermediaries  in  accordance  with
internationally accepted standards; and
third,  a  robust  financial  infrastructure  that  enables  financial  transactions  to  be
conducted efficiently and with a minimum of risk of failure.
9. This is a tall order, even for a relatively closed financial system that operates under
more benign circumstances, not to mention for a newly liberalized financial system under  stressful
conditions. It is therefore understandable that when the reversal of capital inflows came, it caused the
damaging financial turmoil that we have seen in a number of Asian economies.
10. Financial liberalization encourages greater financial  intermediation,  domestically
and internationally, and this obviously is beneficial to economic growth and development. But clearly
the risks arising from this worthy process must be identified and managed properly before the long
term beneficial effects could be realized. The risks are, nevertheless, not well appreciated, simple as
they may be, particularly with the benefit of hindsight.
11.  There  is,  as  always,  credit  risk.  Yet  it  is  such  a  common  feature  that  undue
exuberance  on  the  part  of  investors  would  push  price  to  earning  ratios  well  beyond  fundamentals.
Bankers also fail to assess the impact of interest rate hikes on the value of collateral or on cash flows.
The result is therefore the usual over exposure of investors and lenders to asset losses. Then there is
maturity risk. To say that it is risky to finance illiquid non-tradables, such as property, with short term
capital inflows is, I suppose, teaching grandmothers to suck eggs, particularly in this company, but
this again has been a common feature underlying financial shocks, not just in Asia but also in other
parts  of  the  world.  The  same  with  currency  risk.  Many  borrowers,  in  both  the  private  and  public
sectors,  were  keen  to  borrow  foreign  currency  funds  to  finance  investments  that  do  not  generate
sufficient foreign exchange to repay the debt. Such debts were also unhedged. And so when exchange
rates move sharply, which they do, the currency mismatch results in large losses.
12. But I suppose we all learn from mistakes. We in Hong Kong did so the hard way
in the early 1980s when the situation was compounded by uncertainties about the political future of
BIS Review   115/1997
- 3 -
Hong  Kong.  We  had  our  currency  crisis  in  1983,  after  nine  years  of  operating  with  a  floating
exchange  rate,  against  volatile  capital  flows,  without  any  effective  mechanism  for  monetary
management or currency anchor. Our banks had been overly exposed to credit, maturity and currency
risks, and a total of seven banks had to  be  rescued  directly  or  indirectly  through  the  use  of  public
funds. In short, we had been complacent.
13. But, thankfully, never have we been in any doubt about the need to maintain free
and open markets, and a liberal financial system. The correct response to financial turmoil is not to
resort to controls or to apportion blame, but to put one’s own house in order, and ensure that one is in
a position to cope. This we did through a series of reform measures to strengthen our monetary and
financial systems implemented in the past ten years. This was, in part, also spurred by the desire to
minimize the risk of possible financial disturbance ahead of and through political transition, and to
provide  the  environment  for  Hong  Kong’s  continuing  development  as  an  international  financial
centre, as required under the Basic Law. Our experience tells us that financial reform takes time and
determination, and the ability to bite the bullet and bear the short-term pain. It is also very much a
continuous  process,  with  financial  innovation  creating  new  circumstances  and  presenting  new
challenges all the time.
14. I believe that we have successfully achieved this, which is the important  reason
why  we  have  stood  out  as  an  oasis  of  calm,  at  least  relatively  speaking,  in  the  storm  of  financial
turmoil that is currently sweeping through the region and beyond. Some say that we are sticking out
like a sore thumb, referring particularly to our fixed exchange rate link with the US dollar. I can of
course respond to that by pointing to how well our linked  exchange  rate  system,  a  currency  board
system that functions on auto-pilot, has worked. I can point to the supervisory efforts which have put
our banking system on a very sound footing, and to our advanced financial infrastructure which has
helped tremendously to contain and manage risks of a systemic nature. But many of you are, I am
sure, already sick of my talking all the time, and may even dismiss what I say as trumpeting. I do not
blame you. I am well aware of the possibility that over ten years of direct involvement in monetary
reform in Hong Kong may have introduced a degree of bias in my views on the subject, which I have
tried consciously to avoid.
15.  But  I  would  urge  you  instead  to  look  at  the  reports  of  our  annual  medical
check-ups  conducted  by  the  IMF  since  1990  in  the  form  of  what  are  known  as  the  Article  IV
Consultations. The IMF team was in fact in Hong Kong for this year’s Consultation in the  second
half of October, when the short-lived but somewhat intense attack on our currency occurred. It was
the best time for any diagnosis of financial problems. But after observing us closely over the period
the  team  again  gave  us  a  clean  bill  of  health.  Let  me  give  you  a  few  relevant  quotes  from  the
Concluding Statement of the Consultation, which has already been published. It said that:
“The  authorities’  commitment  to  a  rules-based  and  non-interventionist  approach
should enhance the economy’s ability to withstand the recent regional and financial market turmoil.”
“As in the past, the mission strongly endorses the authorities’ continued commitment
to the linked exchange rate system.”
“Appropriately, the authorities have taken forceful action during the past two weeks to
tighten  significantly  monetary  conditions,  and  have  successfully  demonstrated  their  ability  and
commitment to defend the link.”
“It is important to recognize that allowing interest rates to rise in response to exchange
market  pressures  is  an  essential  element  of  the  currency  board  mechanism  that  lies  at  the  heart  of
Hong Kong’s monetary arrangements.”
BIS Review   115/1997
- 4 -
“Recent events demonstrate that the system is working exactly as intended ...”
“Our discussions with market participants have indicated a widely-held consensus that
the prudential and regulatory oversight of the financial sector is strong, which has helped underpin
confidence in the system.”
16. But what the internationally renowned doctor, in the form of the IMF, says may
not  always  be  universally  acceptable,  particularly  for  those  who  may  have  been  innocent  parties
having  to  suffer  the  pain  of  market  adjustment,  inevitable  as  it  may  be.  It  is  quite  understandable
therefore that there will always be grievances and consequently calls for prescriptions for pain killers
and  other  preventive  medicine.  I  welcome  constructive  suggestions  very  much  and  we  are  in  the
process of meeting with those who are so kind as to offer their views and go through the vigorous
technical discussions that good ideas deserve.
17. So far I am glad that there is full support for our linked exchange rate system. No
one liked the prospect of Hong Kong being swept along in the process of competitive devaluation in
the region and sharper downward adjustment in asset prices. At the technical level, two schools of
thought  could  be  identified  at  this  stage.  One  expressed  concern  on  the  scope  in  which  the  Hong
Kong Monetary Authority exercised discretion in our rule-based monetary system. Associated with
this  are  also  suggestions  for  improvement  on  how  the  system  could  be  allowed  to  work  more
effectively and automatically. The other felt that the HKMA should have been more forthcoming in
relieving the tightness in the money market and therefore the pain of those affected.
18. Interestingly, the two schools of thought are quite polarized. And, as always, the
correct course should be somewhere in between, involving a good mix of pragmatism in the light of
present  day  circumstances  in  financial  markets,  having  regard  also  to  the  need  for  the  HKMA  to
function as the lender of last resort to the banking system, but without any departure from the strict
discipline of the currency board system requiring full US dollar backing for the Hong Kong dollar
monetary  base.  This,  incidentally,  has  very  much  been  the  attitude  of  the  HKMA.  Discussions
continue, as part of the review initiated by the Financial Secretary, and I look forward to more of the
technical scrutiny of ideas which can be quite enjoyable and revealing.
19. Meanwhile, elsewhere in the region, the full doses of the medicine prescribed by
the IMF for  a  number  of  the  Asian  economies  are  being  dutifully  and  courageously  taken.  If  they
persevere, they stand a good chance of coming out of this financial turmoil quickly and the damaging
contagion that has spread across the world would be effectively contained. And for the longer term, I
am  hopeful  that  the  new  framework  for  enhanced  Asian  regional  cooperation  to  promote  financial
stability,  agreed  upon  at  the  Manila  meeting  of  Asian  finance  and  central  bank  deputies,  and
subsequently  endorsed  by  APEC  economic  leaders  at  the  Vancouver  meeting,  would  play  an
effective role.
20. The framework, which recognizes the central role of the IMF in the international
monetary system, includes important initiatives:
first, there will be established a mechanism for regional surveillance to complement
global surveillance by the IMF;
second,  there  will  be  enhanced  economic  and  technical  cooperation  particularly  in
strengthening domestic financial systems and regulatory capacities;
third, there will be measures to strengthen the IMF’s capacity to respond to financial
crisis; and
BIS Review   115/1997
- 5 -
fourth, there will be a cooperative financial arrangement that would supplement IMF
resources on a case by case, contingent basis.
21. But it is perhaps in the nature of financial flows that they do more often than not
lead to overshooting in financial markets. The strong growth track record of Asia and indeed of other
emerging markets has, with the benefit of hindsight, brought about excess optimism in these markets,
producing a compression of yield spreads which underpriced the underlying credit, market and other
risks  that  are  typical  of  emerging  markets  going  through  financial  liberalization.  Indeed,  Alan
Greenspan said recently that “in retrospect, it is clear that more investment monies flowed into these
economies  than  could  be  profitably  employed  at  modest  risk”.  With  the  sharp  correction  seen  in
financial  markets  in  Asia,  against  the  background  that  the  economic  fundamentals  have  largely
remained sound, whether in isolation or relative to other emerging markets beyond the region, it is
possible that there might now have been overshooting in the other direction.
22.  I  am  sure,  however,  that  the  markets  will  eventually  find  their  right  levels,
reflecting  new  circumstances,  for  better  or  for  worse.  I  am  not  convinced,  in  any  case,  that  the
devaluation brought about by floating the exchange rate is necessarily the panacea for the ills of our
Asian  neighbours.  First  year  economics  tells  us  that  the  four  elasticities  of  demand  and  supply  of
imports  and  exports  may  not  interact  to  produce  a  clearly  positive  contribution  to  the  balance  of
payments  position  from  devaluation.  Furthermore,  when  stable  exchange  rates  are  replaced  by
flexible, volatile and, in all likelihood, depreciating ones, the demand for hedging in the more volatile
environment and under liberalized arrangements may drive exchange rates to such debilitating levels
that many would regret the lack of resolve in pursuing sensible policies and in the defence of stable
exchange rates in the  first  place.  There  is  no  doubt  that  confidence  in  the  stability  of  a  few  Asian
currencies  has  now  been  badly  undermined  and  rebuilding  it  may  take  more  than  just  time.
Nevertheless, as the very productive Asian economies find their feet again, they will soon be on their
way with renewed vigour.
23.  For  Hong  Kong,  as  very  much  a  service-oriented  economy,  any  erosion  of
competitiveness, as a result of our currency holding stable against the US dollar while others have
fallen, is likely to be mild. Our economy is not particularly sensitive to exchange rate changes. The
IMF forecast for Hong Kong’s growth rate next year is 4.25%, only a shade below our trend growth
rate of 5%, representing a healthy consolidation in the circumstances.
BIS Review   115/1997
