Mr. Meister asks whether supervisory capital standards should  be  modernised
or redesigned   Luncheon  speech  by  Mr.  Edgar  Meister,  a  member  of  the  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the Conference entitled “Financial Services at the Crossroads: Capital Regulation in
the  21st  Century”  orrganised  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  in  New  York  on
26-27/2/98.
I
I  am  delighted  to  have  been  given  the  opportunity  of  speaking  to  such  a  highly
qualified audience at this major conference on capital regulation.
If you see a banker jump out of the window, jump after him - there is sure to be profit
in it, said Voltaire, the 18th century French philosopher. Looking at the situation in South-East Asia,
I  am  not  entirely  convinced  that  it  would  always  be  wise  to  follow  Voltaire’s  advice.  Even  if  all
banks do the same thing, that does not necessarily mean that it is appropriate.
It  is  also  becoming  clear,  however,  that  the  Asian  crisis  has  lent  new  points  of
emphasis to the already important topic of capital adequacy; in other words, risk and capital. In that
respect, this conference has come at a very opportune moment.
What we have to consider is whether the concept of the capital accord, which dates
from  1988,  is  still  appropriate  for  meeting  the  challenges  of  the  21st  century  in  terms  of  a  good
prudential supervisory standard? Or do we need an alternative system, and which alternative system
of capital requirements might be superior to the present one?
There  are  divergences  of  opinion  on  this  matter  not  only  between  the  supervised
institutions and the supervisors but also, in some cases, among the supervisors themselves.
In order to assess both courses of action (modernise or redesign), it would appear to
be the obvious approach to use current, accepted criteria in the field of prudential supervision. These
include:
 The security level of the individual institution, i.e. its capacity and expertise in managing
risk and its cushion of capital against losses. And closely linked to that: the overall
stability  of  the  banking  system.  I  assume  nobody  wants  a  level  of  financial  market
stability that is lower than now.
as well as
important  additional  conditions 
 The  regulatory  burden  and  level  playing  field  aspects.  Streamlining  supervision  and
deregulation  are 
for  avoiding  competitive
disadvantages  caused  by  banking  regulation  and  for  optimising  the  supervisory
system  on  cost-effectiveness  criteria.  The  regulatory  burden  cannot  be  the  main
deciding criterion, however. Furthermore, prudential measures should not themselves
create competitive discrepancies between different groups of banks.
II
In terms of considerations of risk, an ideal capital standard should be designed to fully
reflect an institution’s risks and to derive a capital base which takes due account of risk. At the same
time,  it  would  be  desirable  if  this  standard  raised  market  discipline.  In  reality,  we  are  still  too  far
away from that theoretical ideal.
BIS Review   18/1998
- 2 -
There are differences in the measurability and hence also in the controllability of the
main risks to which banks and other financial intermediaries are exposed. With the risk controlling
techniques that have now been developed and on account of the availability of the input data, market
risks, for example, can be measured quite accurately in most cases.
By  contrast,  in  what  is  still  the  main  risk  area  for  banks,  credit  risk,  a  purely
quantitative determination of risk - comparable to market-risk modelling - is much more difficult and
has not yet been achieved. For that reason, assessment of the credit risk is still strongly marked by
traditional methods, i.e. the judgement of the banks’ credit officers.
As we have heard before, the efforts to improve the quantification of credit risks (by
using models) are mainly hampered by the inadequate availability of data or their poor quality. For
that  reason,  the  recent  survey  on  data  sources  by  the  ISDA  to  develop  a  reference  and  liquidity
assessment for credit risk modelling is to be welcomed. It remains to be seen, however, whether the
quality of the data in major market segments will be adequate.
Operational  risks,  too,  including  -  for  example  -  inadequate  segregation  of  duties,
fraud and errors in the field of data processing, are very difficult to  model  on  account  of  the  even
greater problems concerning data. Measuring these risks is therefore rather a combination of estimate
and guess; in other words, a „guestimate“ which is largely based on data not objectively observable.
III
The  difficulties  in  risk  measurement  are  a  problem  for  the  institutions,  but  also  for
prudential supervision for which it is difficult to define capital requirements.
Our existing regulatory framework aims, not least, to ensure that the institutions have
an adequate cushion of capital as a protection against unavoidable losses. Although this “shield” of
capital is supposed  to  cover  all  risk  factors  without  them  being  broken  down  in  greater  detail  (for
operational  and  legal  risks,  too,  for  instance),  the  calculation  of  the  required  supervisory  capital  is
essentially geared to a single risk factor: the default risk (and, to a lesser extent, the market risk, from
January 1998 onwards).
Bankers and some supervisors have recently called the Capital Accord into question,
not  least  because  of  its  inexact  categorisation  of  risks.  It  is  pointed  out  that  exposures  to  OECD
countries are uniformly assigned a risk weighting of 0%, for instance, although there are considerable
differences  in  terms  of  risk  within  that  group  of  countries.  The  same  applies  to  exposures  to
non-banks with a weighting of 100%, including blue chips that are known worldwide. Additionally, it
is claimed that the degree of diversification in the loan book is not taken into account. This is said to
result in a misallocation of funds since they are not used in the most productive way.
IV
This  is  the  backdrop  against  which  more  sophisticated  methods  of  credit  risk
measurement are discussed, ranging from a subtly differentiated prudential weighting scheme, the use
of external or internal rating, the inclusion of portfolio effects and credit risk models to new concepts
completely  different  from  the  Capital  Accord.  It  is  my  assessment  that  the  supervisors  are
fundamentally  open-minded  about  these  discussions.  The  new  concepts  include,  in  particular,  the
pre-commitment approach and more self-regulation, as proposed by the Group of Thirty.
BIS Review   18/1998
- 3 -
Pre-commitment  implies  that  a  bank  decides  itself  how  much  capital  it  will  hold
within  a  given  period  to  cover  the  risks  arising  from  its  trading  book.  Sanctions  will  apply  if  the
accumulated losses exceed that amount. This idea is tempting in many respects. It could make things
easier for the supervisors and the  regulatory  burden  would  be  lower  for  the  institutions.  Moreover
this approach is highly market-oriented.
There  are  a  number  of  fundamental  difficulties,  however.  The  pre-commitment
approach involves a purely ex-post analysis of a bank’s risk and capital situation. This  perspective
results  in  supervisory  authorities  reacting  rather  than  specifying  a  given  level  of  capital  for  the
institution  in  a  preventive  manner.  Without  wishing  to  pre-empt  this  afternoon’s  discussion,  I
perceive  the  danger  of  an  institution  accepting  additional  risks  if  there  is  a  threat  of  the
pre-commitment being infringed and hence of regulatory sanctions. If there is a danger of the amount
of capital being exceeded, some traders will attempt to change course abruptly in accordance with the
dictum “If you are in trouble, double”.
A key problem also consists in finding a consistent penalising mechanism. Assuming
that the risks taken result in the institution suffering losses higher than the earmarked reserved capital,
banking  supervisors  would  have  to  impose  penalties  which  would  lead  to  the  financial  difficulties
being even bigger.
Furthermore,  the  market  is  to  be  informed  of  this  for  the  purpose  of  strengthening
market  discipline.  It  is,  above  all,  this  envisaged  sanction  -  so  it  seems  to  me  -  which  meets  with
considerable  reservations  on  the  part  of  many  institutions  and  supervisory  authorities.  I  am  quite
doubtful whether institutions would be prepared to go that far in terms of disclosure.
At the risk of exaggeration, and relating to  the  concept  of  the  bank  as  a  whole,  the
pre-commitment  approach  represents  a  bank’s  promise  that  it  will  not  become  insolvent.  If  that
promise  cannot  be  kept,  it  will  remain  an  open  question  -  at  least  in  critical  cases  -  whether  the
supervisors can or will impose sanctions.
A  proposal  by  the  G-30,  which  goes  further  than  the  pre-commitment  approach,
amounts to leaving supervision and the development of regulatory strategies basically to the market
or  to  a  small  group  of  major  international  financial  institutions.  The  involvement  of  supervised
institutions in the development of regulatory standards is not new in principle. It has been tried and
tested. Whenever certain methods have become state of the art, supervisors have always been ready
to adopt such standards as binding - as was latterly the case for the recognition of internal models for
market risks.
Nevertheless,  there  may  be  problems,  for  example,  if  there  are  no  administrative
sanctions  to  enforce  the  standards.  How  binding  would  they  be?  Trusting  solely  in  an  effective
market  control,  pre-supposes  a  comparatively  high  degree  of  transparency.  As  in  the  case  of  the
pre-commitment  approach,  it  appears  to  be  questionable  whether  all  the  market  players  would  be
prepared  to  disclose  their  risk  positions  and  losses  to  the  market,  for  example.  That  would
simultaneously  mean  them  revealing  market  expectations,  trading  strategies  and  other  business
secrets.
Furthermore, it would not be greatly surprising if the interests of this select group of
institutions were not identical with the general interests of the financial industry. In particular, there is
the possibility of competitive distortions at the expense of smaller institutions. As mentioned above,
the possibility of supervisory standards, including voluntary self-regulatory standards in the private
sector, causing new competitive problems should at all events be avoided.
BIS Review   18/1998
- 4 -
V
As  concepts,  the  pre-commitment  approach  and  self-regulation  as  proposed  by  the
G-30  can  indeed  supply  important  and  thought-provoking  ideas.  Given  the  present  prudential
standard,  the  advantages  of  these  alternative  concepts  consist,  for  example,  in  a  reduction  of  the
regulatory burden and  banks  having  even  greater  freedom  in  their  risk  management  by  virtue  of  a
pronounced market orientation.
At the same time - in addition to the reservations already mentioned - I perceive the
danger of a decline in the overall security level of the individual  credit  institution  and  the  banking
system. Existing risks might be covered by less capital than hitherto under the Capital Accord.
Self-regulation aiming at greater market discipline would be welcome. The alternative
concepts that have been referred to here would probably not be able to achieve that on a lasting basis
or especially if a bank or a  banking  system  were  in  a  difficult  situation,  and  would  not  be  able  to
make up for the disadvantages of institutions having a lower capital base.
What should also be given consideration is that pre-commitment and self-regulation -
as advocated by G-30 - is intended to apply mainly to large, internationally operating banks. These
are  precisely  the  players  who  have  an  especially  prominent  role  in  terms  of  the  stability  of  the
financial markets.
At the same time, we know that the world of risk has become more complex during
the last few years and that the risks which the institutions have to bear under the pressure to perform
have increased. Risky high-yield transactions in emerging markets, for example, are likely to become
increasingly significant in future despite the recent turmoil in Asia.
Precisely the events in South-East Asia demonstrate how  difficult  it  is  to  determine
bank-specific risks with sufficient accuracy. Even leading rating agencies have tended to run behind
the markets in line with the maxim: “Please follow me, I am right behind you.”
VI
Capital is therefore still a modern prudential requirement. The Basle Capital Accord
is, in this context, a rough and comparatively simple approach.
This standard, which has now been put into practice virtually worldwide, undoubtedly
has some weaknesses. It has however demonstrated its suitability under changing conditions in the
almost ten years since its introduction. In my view, the empirical findings are definitely positive.
However,  the  Capital  Accord  has  not  worked  where  the  calculated  capital  was  not
actually  in  place.  I  am  referring  to  credit  institutions  in  many  countries  which  have  experienced
crises.  In  such  cases,  some  institutions  only  formally  fulfilled  the  norm  of  8%  minimum  capital.
Actually, an evaluation of assets and liabilities in line with market conditions would have shown that
the capital had been used up long beforehand.
As  the  Capital  Accord  sets  the  capital  requirements  more  conservatively  than  the
alternative approaches mentioned, there remains a buffer for cushioning the risks which are difficult
to measure - operational and legal risks, for instance. To that extent, an adequate cushion of capital
can to a certain extent make up for shortcomings in risk identification, measurement and control.
BIS Review   18/1998
- 5 -
VII
To come back to the original question: I am in favour of an evolutionary solution. The
Basle Accord should be modernised and not - at present - be replaced by other concepts. There are
indeed other approaches which are worth discussing, but at present I cannot identify any convincing
alternative concept among them which would be operationally viable, practicable and superior to the
Capital Accord.
The Capital Accord itself is adaptable enough for new developments in the markets to
be  integrated  into  its  system  in  a  meaningful  manner  -  as  occurred  in  the  case  of  market  risk,  for
example. This also applies to all currently impending topics for discussion, such as on-balance-sheet
netting, credit derivatives, credit risk models and new capital elements.
In return, this also implies capital buffers becoming necessary for risks that have so
far not been covered: given an easing of capital requirements in other areas, buffers for operational
risks, for valuation risks and for concentration risks, for instance, must no longer be a “no-go” area.
Generally speaking, further qualitative requirements may also help to curb risks and
hence  have  a  stabilising  impact  in  micro  and  macro-prudential  terms.  In  that  respect,  the  Basle
Committee’s  “Framework  for  the  Evaluation  of  Internal  Control  Systems”  is  especially  important.
Quantitative and qualitative minimum standards for the use of credit risk models based on a widely
used and convincing practice would also have to be specified in due course.
In  my  view,  self-regulation  can  have  a  stimulating  effect,  but  it  cannot  replace  an
administrative supervision of banks and other financial intermediaries. To that extent, self-regulation
is an approach which complements prudential supervision. I believe that this assessment is reinforced
by the various bank  crises  that  have  occurred  in  the  past  and  has  been  borne  out  yet  again  by  the
Asian crisis.
A basic stance of this kind virtually necessitates supervisors working closely with the
institutions. That is very helpful for finding regulations which are up-to-date and compatible with the
market and, at the same time, strengthen market discipline and do not lose sight of the stability of the
overall system.
BIS Review   18/1998
