Mr.  Tietmeyer  considers  the  euro  as  a  denationalised  currency    Speech
delivered  by  the  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Prof.  Hans  Tietmeyer,  to  the
Österreichisch-deutsche Kulturgesellschaft in Vienna on 27/11/1997.
I
Currency  is  more  than  just  a  part  of  the  economy.  A  currency  is  always  a
reflection of its country, its politics and its culture. As Joseph A. Schumpeter, probably the most
versatile Austrian economist of this century, famously put it: a nation’s monetary system reflects
everything  which  that  nation  desires,  suffers,  is.  “Nothing  reveals  as  clearly  what  a  nation  is
made of as what it does in monetary policy.”
It is tempting to place Schumpeter’s words -- just for a moment -- in the context
of a supranational currency (like the euro).
Then the proposition would be that a single monetary system reflects everything
that these nations (note the change from singular to plural) “desire, suffer, are”.
For  one  thing,  those  words  express  the  idea  of  a  community  which  is  bound
together  by  a  common  destiny.  (Even  though  the  verb  “suffer”  sounds  somewhat  emphatic.)
That  is  because  the  single  currency  binds  the  people  in  the  participating  countries  together  in
terms  of  money  and  currency,  for  better  or  for  worse,  for  ever.  After  all,  monetary  union  no
longer provides for an orderly secession.
For another, Schumpeter’s words are a reminder of the necessary communality. If
the  monetary  system  reflects  what  the  peoples  of  those  nations  want,  what  they  do,  and  what
they are, then it will be crucial to monetary union that the individual participating countries also
want  and  do  the  same  things;  in  other  words,  that  they  attach  largely  identical  aims  and
expectations  to  the  single  currency  and  also  act  accordingly  --  at  least  in  terms  of  their  basic
stance.
Otherwise,  the  single  currency  would  contain  the  potential  for  conflict  which
could easily lead to real tensions. And, sooner or later, such conflicts would have a detrimental
effect not only on the currency, but also on the economy, integration, and Europe’s political and
social culture.
II
Under  the  terms  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  European  monetary  union  will
ultimately  begin  on  January  1,  1999.  The  euro  will  then  become  the  dominant  currency  in
Europe, at least in the money and capital markets.
Since the euro banknotes and coins will not be available until the end of 2001 and
the  beginning  of  2002,  the  national  currencies  will  continue  to  play  a  dominant  role  in  the
interim  for  wage  and  salary  earners,  consumers,  retailers  and  probably  among  medium-sized
businesses,  too.  However,  those  national  currencies  will  also  be  inextricably  linked  to  one
another by irrevocably fixed conversion rates -- as in a single currency.
The decision on which countries are to be in  at  the  start  of  monetary  union  will
not be taken until the spring of 1998, and will be based on the convergence situation, which will
BIS Review   114/1997
- 2 -
then  be  verifiable;  in  the  end,  this  binding  decision  will  be  taken  by  the  heads  of  state  or
government of the EU countries by qualified majority vote.
Out of respect for this decision-making process, which has been laid down in the
Treaty, I do not wish to indulge in speculation on the future membership. Instead, I would like
to  go  into  more  detail  on  the  supranational  nature  of  the  new  currency  and  the  resulting
advantages and implications which follow from it.
The  euro  is  intended  to  be  a  denationalised  currency.  In  precise  terms,  that
implies two characteristics:
  the euro as a largely borderless currency,
and the euro as a largely depoliticised currency.
The  euro  is  intended  to  be  a  borderless  currency  in  the  sense  that  the  national
borders within the supranational euro area will have no bearing either on the fixing of monetary
policy  or  on  the  use  of  the  currency.  It  will  be  the  common  currency  of  all  the  participating
countries,  and  for  that  currency,  there  will  be  only  one  single,  supranational  monetary  policy,
even if the national central banks will still be responsible for its implementation.
Moreover,  the  euro  will  provide  a  crucial  boost  to  the  opening-up  of  borders
across markets and economies in Europe which was already initiated by the Common Market. In
monetary union, the participating countries can no longer adjust the exchange rates against each
other.
This means that what were once major barriers for entrepreneurs and  consumers
have  now  been  eliminated:  the  exchange-rate  risk,  conversion  and  transaction  costs.  However,
one means of protection will also disappear -- and for ever -- namely, exchange rate adjustments
as the former last resort in the event of declining competitiveness or radical structural changes.
At the same time, the euro has also been designed as a depoliticised currency. The
European Central Bank is, by intention, to operate  independently  of  political  influence  exerted
by governments, parliaments and other European institutions. It has a clear mandate to safeguard
the value of money. At all events, that is its primary task.
The  monetary  system 
the  realm  of  everyday
policy-making.  The  objective  of  monetary  stability  is  protected  in  a  particular  manner.  And
policy  makers  cannot  subordinate  it  to  other  objectives  --  subject  to  expedience,  the  political
leaning of the government, or election dates.
is  hence  removed  from 
By  choosing  that  structure,  the  signatories  of  the  Treaty  made  a  conscious
decision to continue a tradition which, especially in the postwar era, has become established in a
number of countries in Europe whose currencies have shown a particular degree of stability.
Even countries which, for a long time, had tied their currency regimes much more
closely  to  everyday  policy-making  have  evidently  come  to  recognise  the  advantages  of
unpolitical monetary systems in the run-up to Maastricht. This does not, of course, rule out the
possibility  of  the  earlier  tradition  occasionally  rearing  its  head  in  some  isolated  issues.
Denationalisation and depoliticisation, though, are certainly linked in a particular fashion. At all
BIS Review   114/1997
- 3 -
events,  removing  monetary  boundaries  in  any  form  calls  for  a  modicum  of  matching
depoliticisation.
This  is  true  not  just  for  the  ultimate  form  in  which  boundaries  are  removed,
monetary union -- but it is particularly applicable to it.
But  even  the  first  steps  in  removing  boundaries  --  such  as  the  transition  to
convertibility -- reduce  the  leeway  for  a  monetary  regime  which  is  simultaneously  intended  to
serve other political ends.
With convertibility, a currency exposes itself to a comparison of its stability with
that of other currencies. That means that external pressure towards stability begins to be exerted.
This  was  clearly  recognisable  when  a  number  of  European  currencies  made  the  transition  to
convertibility in the 1950s and 1960s.
National  political  influence  on  the  monetary  system  is  restricted  even  more  by
participation in an exchange rate system with fixed parities, regardless of whether a multilateral
system or a unilateral pegging to another currency is involved.
It  is  true  that  every  country  continues  to  have  a  national  monetary  policy  to  a
certain  extent.  However,  if  the  national  monetary  policies  --  for  instance,  owing  to  different
political  leanings  and  preferences  --  diverge  too  greatly,  then  the  respective  parities  will  no
longer be realistic.
In  most  cases,  this  results  in  unrest  in  the  markets  which  sooner  or  later  forces
parities to change. But if parity  changes  are  frequent,  participation  in  an  exchange  rate  system
makes little sense; if anything, it becomes counterproductive.
If there are no more currency boundaries in monetary union, there can only be a
single strategy and a common orientation for the monetary system.
III
This uniform strategy and this common orientation can only be a currency which
is  largely  depoliticised,  especially  in  a  supranational  monetary  union  in  which  the  basic
structures of the nation state remain.
If monetary union is not embedded from the outset in a largely homogeneous and
political  union  which  is  constituted  along  the  lines  of  national  government,  but  is  founded
instead  on  the  basis  of  different  nation  states,  that  supranational  monetary  policy  can  only  be
largely unpolitical, meaning disengaged from the political influence of nation states which goes
beyond the legal mandate to safeguard the stability of the currency. This is particularly valid as
long as there is no all-encompassing decision-making process at the European level -- and that
will probably not exist in Europe for a long time to come.
In  addition,  experience  has  shown  that  a  depoliticised,  consistent,  long-term
strategy  is  also  superior  in  two  crucial  respects  to  a  discretionary  approach  which  submits  to
political expedience:
 by creating more confidence on the part of the markets, and
BIS Review   114/1997
- 4 -
 above all,  by  being  better  able  to  provide  stable  money  and  to  safeguard  it  on  a  long-term
basis.
Therefore,  a  depoliticised  currency  is  most  likely  to  provide  the  opportunity  of
reaching a sustainable consensus among the countries participating in monetary union. After all,
special national political interests do not apply here. The only thing that counts is the common
objective of an enduringly stable currency.
It is precisely a consensus of that kind which underlies the Maastricht Treaty. In
future, Europe must safeguard and preserve it.
Therefore, it is also important to see to it that, in the course of the establishment
of monetary union and its institutions, there is no attempt at a sort of re-nationalisation.
That  goes  for  the  appointment  of  the  executive  staff  of  the  future  European
Central Bank as well as for how their tasks are construed.
As envisaged in the Treaty, neither the members of the ECB Executive Board nor
the  presidents  of  the  national  central  banks  represented  in  the  Governing  Council  are  there  to
represent  national  interests.  Rather,  they  are  the  caretakers  and  guardians  of  the  new  single
currency -- no more, but also no less. And if a sort of accountability is considered necessary, it
should be to the European institutions (the European Parliament, for instance) -- as provided for
the Treaty.
Therefore, the question of the national origin and/or the distribution of the seats in
the  ECB  Executive  Board  by  nationality  should  not  be  the  key  criterion  for  appointment  --  at
least this is the idea behind monetary union, and this is the letter, and certainly the spirit, of the
Treaty.
too, 
Internally, 
the  participating  countries  should  not 
towards  a
re-nationalisation. Of course, there will  be  a  flow  of  information  between  a  country’s  political
bodies  and  the  respective  central  bank  management  in  future,  too.  However,  reporting
requirements on the part of the national central bank management would be a cause for concern,
if this were tied to the idea that the governor of a given central bank were a sort of representative
of that country’s national interests regarding monetary policy in the Governing Council.
lean 
That  is  not  the  case.  Every  member  of  the  Governing  Council  (regardless  of
whether he/she belongs to the Executive Board or is the governor of a national central bank) has
a personal responsibility, namely for the long-term stability of the euro throughout the monetary
union. The governor of a national central bank must not even be bound by his own bank in the
sense of an “imperative mandate”.
That is also the logic behind the “one person -- one vote” rule in the Council. If
the  governors  were  the  defenders  of  national  interests  in  monetary  policy  decision-making,  it
would  have  been  a  much  more  obvious  thing  to  weight  the  individual  votes  in  terms  of  the
respective  share  of  capital  --  as  is  done  in  the  IMF,  for  instance.  A  structure  of  that  kind  was
consciously rejected, in view of the desired denationalisation of money.
After all, the euro must not become merely the sum of  national  orientations  and
interests.  It  must  become  an  independent  currency  which  safeguards  monetary  stability
throughout the euro area.
BIS Review   114/1997
- 5 -
The euro cannot peg itself externally and thus attract credibility and stability from
without, as smaller currencies could before. Rather, it must first set a stability benchmark itself.
And to that end, a consensus on stable money or a stable exchange rate, important
as it may be, is not enough.
There  will  always  be  situations  in  which  monetary  policy  makers  have  to  take
decisions which -- at least momentarily -- will have an adverse impact on one group or another
in society and which do not conform with the intentions of one government or another.
It is precisely in such difficult moments that the European Central Bank must also
be able  to  take  decisions  and  have  the  capacity  to  act  in  its  area  of  competence.  It  cannot  and
must not wait for a general social and political consensus.
Decisions regarding stability policy do require courage every now and then, even
though they are, of course, guided by sound judgement.
In  such  critical  moments,  I  hope  that  Sarasto’s  wish  in  Mozart’s  “The  Magic
Flute” will be granted to the future President and the  Vice-President  (and,  of  course,  the  other
Governing Council members, too):
“Oh, Isis and Osiris, send
   the spirit of wisdom to the young couple!
   You who guide the wanderers’ steps,
   strengthen them with patience when in danger”.
(Whether or not that immediately leads you to believe that the European Central
Bank resides “in these holy halls” is something I shall leave up to you.)
The independence of the future European Central Bank by no means implies,  of
course, that it will be detached from the  Community  or  from  the  general  public.  (Much  as  the
Bundesbank today is involved at the centre of German public life and public debate.)
It is precisely that independent position which requires the central bank to engage
with the general public, to explain its monetary policy, and to make its motives and strategy as
transparent  as  possible.  It  is  not  least  for  that  reason  that  the  Bundesbank  is  advocating  a
pre-announced monetary target for European monetary policy, by which it must then allow itself
to be judged.
Conversely, I can assure you that the general public, too, is keeping a close watch
on  monetary  policy  and  subjecting  it  to  a  critical  assessment.  It  notes  every  word  which  is
written and spoken (and, in some cases, precisely those words which remain unspoken).
I therefore believe that an independent central bank tends to be subjected to closer
scrutiny  by  the  public  than  some  areas  of  policy.  And  this  is  as  it  should  be.  After  all,  a
depoliticised  currency  is  a  currency  which  has  remained  as  close  to  people  as  a  borderless
currency.
But  the  crucial  point  is:  a  borderless  currency  must  go  hand  in  hand  with  a
depoliticised currency. As a denationalised currency, the euro needs both elements.
BIS Review   114/1997
- 6 -
IV
In the eyes of some analysts, the euro brings the monetary policy experiments of
this century full circle.
The  century  began  and  will  end  with  a  denationalised  money.  At  its  beginning,
there was the gold standard. At its end, there will be the euro.
The  currencies  on  the  gold  standard  were  borderless  owing  to  the  fixed  parities
and to gold as a common point of reference.
They were depoliticised in the sense that the anonymous mechanism of pegging to
the gold standard forced corrections to the gold standard. Independent central banks followed a
clear monetary mandate, namely that of maintaining gold parity.
Historians  may  argue  over  whether  the  days  of  the  gold  standard  were  indeed  a
golden  era.  At  all  events,  the  experience  of  the  past  cannot  simply  be  transferred  to  the
present-day situation.
At that time, wages and prices were more flexible than they are today.
Above  all,  the  position  of  the  state  within  and  vis-à-vis  the  economy  was
different.  The  government  ratio  tended  to  be  below  rather  than  above  ten  per  cent  back  then;
today, in most European countries, it is over fifty per cent.
That  has  implications  for  adjustment  potential  and  flexibility.  Naturally,  it  is
primarily  the  private  sector  which  must  shoulder  the  burden  of  adjustment  in  the  event  of
exogenous shocks and changes in competitiveness.
At the time of the gold standard, the private sector still made up the lion’s share
of the economy. Nowadays, by contrast, the burden of adjustment is concentrated on just under
half  of  the  economy.  The  fact  that  society  in  general  has  little  desire  to  allow  market
mechanisms to act on their own is reflected precisely in today’s government ratio.
After  the  collapse  of  the  gold  standard,  three  trends  initially  prevailed  in  the
following decades -- and it was no accident that those trends coincided:
• Firstly, the currency became increasingly (re-)politicised. It became associated more closely
with other non-monetary objectives.
• Secondly,  the  heyday  of  the  independent  central  bank  came  to  an  end  in  just  about  every
country; in many countries, that was the case until only just recently.
• Thirdly,  the  politicisation  of  money  went  hand-in-hand  with  an  increased  isolation  of  the
links  declined
the  economy  from  external 
influences.  International 
currency  and 
significantly.
Therefore, a central motive of the Bretton Woods System, adopted in 1944, was
to  promote  world  economic  integration  by  means  of  orderly  monetary  conditions.  And  in  this
sense, the system performed good service.
BIS Review   114/1997
- 7 -
Regarding the criteria of borderless and depoliticised money, the Bretton Woods
System was, as it were, a wanderer between the worlds.
Money was not truly without borders. Until well into the 1960s,  capital  controls
were an instrument frequently employed by a large number of countries. Indeed, in many cases
such controls were being used precisely in Europe, too, until the end of the 1980s.
And currency was not entirely depoliticised in the Bretton Woods System, either.
It was not only determined by the dominant position of the United States and whatever political
views prevailed there at any given time. Many capital controls also  mostly  concealed  differing
political strategies and preferences.
In  the  long  term,  the  monetary  system  created  after  World  War  II  was  not
depoliticised  enough  in  order  to  keep  pace  with  the  increasing  denationalisation  of  currency
brought about by increasingly efficient and powerful international financial markets.
At any rate, it was often the case that the rules of the fixed-rate system were not
observed.
   Countries  running  deficits  were  often  too  hesitant  in  correcting  their  balances  of
payments.
Exchange rates were adjusted too late in most cases.
And,  above  all,  by  the  mid-1960s  onwards,  the  US  dollar,  the  key  currency,  was
increasingly failing to fulfil its role as an objective point of reference for stable money --
a role which only an unpolitical currency could have performed.
It was thus no great surprise that the Bretton Woods System finally collapsed  in
1973.  Fixed  exchange  rates  accompanied  by  differing  preferences  were  something  the
increasingly developing and emancipated financial markets no longer allowed.
V
The  1970s  then  witnessed  the  great  contest  of  monetary  strategies -- particularly
within Europe, too -- especially once the first oil crisis began to pose major challenges.
On  the  one  hand,  there  was  the  concept  of  political  money.  The  objective  of
monetary  stability  took  a  back  seat.  Monetary  policy  was  to  promote  other  objectives:
employment,  absorption  of  the  oil  shock,  in  some  cases  even  foreign  policy  and  foreign  trade
objectives.
On the other hand, there was the concept of unpolitical money. Regaining internal
monetary  stability  and  safeguarding  it  --  in  other  words,  the  “natural”  objective  of  monetary
policy  --  prevailed.  Particularly  independent  central  banks  --  such  as  the  Bundesbank  and  the
Swiss National Bank -- put this stance into practice.
In  Germany,  that  was  an  important  test  for  the  concept  of  unpolitical  money,
introduced in 1948 with the currency reform and secured institutionally by the independence of
the central bank.
BIS Review   114/1997
- 8 -
The  outcome  has  left  no  room  for  doubt  in  economic  terms.  Countries  with
unpolitical money have not only had lower inflation rates, but also less unemployment. And, on
the whole, they were also able to handle the oil shock and the unpredictability of the US dollar
and other currencies much better. Besides, they were able to acquire an increasingly high stock
of  confidence  on  the  part  of  the  financial  markets,  resulting  in  relatively  low  capital  market
rates.
This  positive  experience  is  something  you  in  Austria  have  also  gained.  The
reasoning  behind  your  hard-currency  policy  --  if  I  understand  it  correctly,  as  an  outsider  --  is
likewise based on the realisation that inflation does not solve any problems.
Austria has been consistent in applying this hard-currency policy -- even during a
period which was somewhat difficult (the second half of the 1960s). On the whole, this has led
to  the  financial  markets  and  the  public  having  a  justifiably  high  degree  of  confidence  in  the
schilling.
The question of whether monetary policy can be employed to promote and secure
jobs also crops up every now and then in Germany as well as in your country.
On the one hand, this seems understandable. A high degree of monetary stability
has  been  achieved  at  the  moment  worldwide.  By  contrast,  high  unemployment  is  a  pressing
problem, especially on the European continent.
However,  for  those  who  have  been  following  monetary  policy  practice  over  the
past  decades,  the  debate  sometimes  seems  quite  eerie.  For  monetary  history  has  indeed
pronounced  a  clear-cut  judgement:  maintaining  monetary  stability  over  the  medium  and  long
term  is  undoubtedly  the  best  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to  employment,  even  if
monetary policy by itself can neither secure nor create employment.
For  some  time  now,  Europeans  have  been  increasingly  interested  in  findings  in
the United States, where, for some time now, a rather dynamic upswing, a relatively tight labor
market, and yet a comparatively low rate of inflation have coincided.
What can and should we in Europe learn from that?
If Europe succeeds in making its labour markets significantly more flexible, and
if competitive pressure in the goods markets rises significantly; and if this causes the wind of the
global  markets  and  of  worldwide  competition  to  be  conveyed  more  strongly  internally  via
flexible, highly competitive structures, and the European economy is given a breath of fresh air,
then the conditions for sustained price stability in Europe will improve. Then, perhaps even the
European  Central  Bank  can  get  by  with  relatively  low  interest  rates  in  future  in  order  to  keep
inflation in check.
The  key  to  that,  though,  is  certainly  not  a  lax  or  pseudo-employment-oriented
monetary  policy  (which  would,  in  actual  fact,  backfire),  but  more  market  economy  and
competition.
And  the  road  to  more  competitive  structures  is  only  through  a  stable,  i.e.  tight,
money.
BIS Review   114/1997
- 9 -
It is true that the great master of Viennese popular theatre, Johann Nestroy, once
philosophised:
“The Phoenecians invented money -- but why so little of it?”
However,  the  central  bank  must  limit  the  supply  of  money  and  set  the  interest
rates accordingly. That is its task.
It is also true that Arthur Schopenhauer once said:
“There are people who would pay any price for money.”
Yet philosophers are not always right, especially when it comes to analysing the
economy.  The  same  applies  to  Schopenhauer’s  dictum;  otherwise,  it  would  be  virtually
impossible, above all, to manage the money stock by using interest rates.
VI
The  disintegration  of  monetary  policy  strategies  in  the  1970s  did  not  only  have
the economic implication that countries had diverging degrees of economic success.
There was an important European policy implication, too. The plan to implement
a phased monetary union that we developed in the Werner Group in 1970 soon foundered; not
only on differing monetary strategies, but also on the lack of willingness of at least one country,
at that time, to surrender national sovereignty.
In  its  day,  in  fact,  the  Werner  Plan  had  two  advantages  over  today’s  Maastricht
Treaty:
  Firstly, the six-nation EC of the time was relatively homogeneous in economic terms.
Secondly, with regard to its strategy for integration, the Werner Plan was more consistent
than  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  It  envisaged  a  marked  intensification  of  both  political  and
monetary integration.
But, in the final analysis, at that time there was neither the willingness to realise
this deeper political integration nor a convergence in monetary policy.
The monetary union, which had already been planned for the 1980s, did not come
into being.
The  lack  of  convergence  in  the  1970s  was  not  even  enough  to  keep  a  larger
monetary arrangement together. In the end, all that was left was the ”mini-snake“.
The exchange rate mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary  System,  newly
formed in 1979, was also not very stable to begin with. It was not until 1983 that an important
change took place in the history of monetary integration in Europe.
With  Finance  Minister  Delors  at  the  helm,  France  changed  course  towards  a
clearly non-inflationary policy. Others followed.
BIS Review   114/1997
- 10 -
This step, initiated by France, paved the way
for a gradual convergence of inflation rates at a low level in the 1980s,
for increasingly stable exchange rates within the ERM,
and, finally, for making a further-reaching monetary union conceivable again.
   At  all  events,  in  1988  the  Delors  Group  was  commissioned  to  develop  a
framework taking account of the new conditions.
VII
The Maastricht Treaty, negotiated in the early 1990s, gave a sound legal structure
to the idea of monetary union -- even if some critics, not without reason, occasionally described
it as a torso, in light of the fact that the structures of a political union were lacking.
In  order  to  really  comprehend  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and  its  significance,  I  feel
two things have to be realised:
The first realisation is that the essential elements of the Maastricht Treaty did not
fall into Europe’s lap. They are the result of experience, and not just of the positive kind.
The same applies to a sufficiently well-founded economic convergence which the
Maastricht  Treaty  rightly  calls  for.  Over  long  stretches  of  Europe’s  postwar  history,  this
convergence has tended to be absent.
This  has  changed  at  least  in  some  respects.  It  was  a  decidedly  arduous  process
which led to today’s high level of monetary convergence.
However, despite a large number of major advances, the level of convergence is
regrettably much lower in the area of public finance, at least if the looming future burdens posed
by demographic trends and the mounting debts  which  have  already  been  run  up  are  taken  into
account.
It was also difficult at that time to anchor the concept of a depoliticised currency
in the Treaty. Differing national traditions regarding the perceived role of the state and society
understandably played a part in that.
This  idea  naturally  fits  in  particularly  well  with  the  German  tradition  of
decentralised structures. It has been and still is more difficult for other countries on account of
their traditions and structures -- despite the obvious economic superiority of this concept.
And the second realisation is that Maastricht is not merely the logical continuation
of a historic trend. Monetary union is a quantum leap in qualitative terms.
We are daring to start anew what did not succeed in the 1970s.  And  this  time  it
must succeed, and this success must be enduring.
BIS Review   114/1997
- 11 -
Participation is final. Under the terms of the Treaty, there is no longer an escape
hatch -- no matter what economic or political developments a given country may undergo. That
is what makes it different from an exchange rate system or unilateral exchange rate pegging.
This monetary finality, if you will, means putting a crucial political and economic
framework in place for future generations, too.
Maastricht  enshrines  the  concept  of  a  depoliticised  currency,  and  hence  stable
money, as the primary objective for the central bank, for all time. Under the terms of the Treaty,
once a country has entered into monetary union, it no longer has the option of trying a different
path.
And each of the participating countries is in intra-European competition for ever
without being able to adjust its exchange rate or to adapt central bank rates to its own economic
situation.
Of  course,  these  monetary  restrictions  --  technically  speaking  --  already  result
from a tight exchange rate pegging.
Only,  with  a  fixed  exchange  rate  corridor,  a  country  still  has  it  in  its  power  to
decide  on  those  self-commitments  --  but  that  will  no  longer  be  so  once  monetary  union
commences.
Under  the  conditions  of  the  21st  century,  it  will  certainly  not  get  any  easier  to
maintain economic convergence and to safeguard a country’s own competitiveness.
  One reason is that competition will continue to increase, in Europe and most certainly all
over the  world.  The  technological  driving  forces  of  globalisation  will  continue  to  exert
an effect.
The other reason is that just about all the European countries -- more or less -- are still
facing great structural challenges which are still a long way from being overcome, such
as persistent unemployment.
The countries have to work hard to find solutions. The national governments and
parliaments should not forget the words of your fellow Austrian, Karl-Heinrich Waggerl:
“Ask  for  God’s  blessing  for  your  work  --  but  do  not  ask  Him  to  do  the  work
Himself as well.”
The  subject  of  convergence  in  monetary  union  therefore  does  not  just  present
itself -- as economic textbooks call it -- in external shocks which affect individual countries to
varying degrees.
The  key  issue  here  is  for  countries  to  tackle  the  structural  challenges  they  are
facing, which are identifiable now, in a similar manner and at a similar pace.
Otherwise, “internal shocks” would ensue. The individual economies would grow
apart.  But  not  due  to  an  external  event  hitting  a  given  region  like  a  comet.  Rather,  because
monetary union would smoulder inside, giving rise to tectonic tension.
BIS Review   114/1997
- 12 -
At any rate, it will probably not suffice to set aside the topic  of  convergence  by
using the learned argument that a country which is in competition and does not have  access  to
central  bank  money  and  credit  has  no  choice  but  to  maintain  its  competitiveness  and  keep  its
public finances in shape.
It is basically correct that a country’s policy makers can also rise to the occasion,
as it were, along with the challenges of competition.
But of course, a country -- just like an enterprise -- can also founder as a result of
failing to meet those challenges, if its starting position is too unfavourable. The difference is that
an  enterprise  then  just  disappears  from  the  market,  whereas  a  country  naturally  continues  to
exist.
If a country were to encounter difficulties with the conditions of monetary union,
then an economic problem would arise. And -- let us not deceive ourselves  --  that  would  soon
create a political problem.
Europe  must  avoid  that  problem  as  far  as  possible.  Therefore,  monetary  union
requires a minimum level of convergence on the part of all its participants, both before accession
and, of course, most certainly thereafter.
VII
The euro will have to be a denationalised currency; there cannot and must not be
any doubt about that.
It will thus be in keeping  with  an  increasingly  borderless  economy.  And  therein
lie the key economic arguments in favour of the euro. The path to monetary union offers Europe
major new opportunities.
In  a  Europe  which  is  heading  towards  a  single  market,  and  in  a  world  which  is
converging in economic terms, a large single monetary area  offers  major  advantages  --  always
provided the euro remains enduringly stable.
Monetary  union  and  the  single  currency,  the  euro,  will  not  just  mean  the
elimination of many risks and costs. If it becomes and remains sufficiently stable, the euro also
has  great  prospects  of  building  on  the  D-mark’s  position  as  a  world  currency.  And,  it  can
improve  the  efficiency  of  the  European  single  market  and,  moreover,  give  further  impetus  to
political integration.
Those great opportunities and advantages of that historic step into monetary union
are  not  qualified  by  pointing  to  the  reality  of  today’s  situation  in  Europe  and  the  resulting
challenges.
As  a  denationalised  currency,  the  euro  will  be  embedded  in  a  political  Europe
which is still largely characterised by national structures.
As  a  borderless  currency,  the  euro  will  encounter  bordered  national  economic,
social and tax policies still searching for answers to the borderless economy.
BIS Review   114/1997
- 13 -
And, as a depoliticised money, the euro will encounter a political reality in which
some people and groups still expect enormous, and fundamentally unrealistic, favours from the
welfare state.
Both are a sign of tensions. Europe’s future hinges crucially on how the countries
resolve those tensions.
Facing  up  to  competition  among  the  countries  and  regions  and  promoting
competition,  more  market,  and  more  flexibility  within  the  countries  is  the  relatively  long-term
solution  which  fits  a  denationalised  currency.  And,  for  the  participating  countries,  that  means
facing the associated new economic and political challenges and accepting political limitations.
Monetary stability is not a substitute for the right solutions. But it is the basis for
them, and promotes orientation towards the future.
Keeping the euro enduringly stable is one of the major future tasks for Europe.
So that monetary union does not end like Don Giovanni -- namely, in a descent to
hell -- but more along the lines of The Marriage of Figaro.
Which, to be sure, also leads to a  series  of  entanglements.  However,  in  the  end,
the right partners come together. That must apply to monetary union, too, even though it is not
couples that are involved here, but a union with as many countries as possible.
BIS Review   114/1997
