Mr. Tietmeyer considers the challenge of the euro for Europe   Special address
by the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Prof. Hans Tietmeyer, at the conference on “The
Challenge of the Euro for Emerging Markets”, convened jointly by the National Bank of Poland
and the European Economics and Financial Centre in Warsaw on 12/2/98.
Europe  is  facing  major  challenges.  Not  only  will  it  have  to  take  important
decisions affecting the course of future integration. Above all, Europe must also stand up to the
test of global competition while preserving its basic values of freedom and solidarity.
The immediate task facing the countries of central and eastern Europe is economic
transformation  -  making  their  economies  internationally  competitive  and  open  on  a  sustainable
basis.
Jumping  into  the  “deep  water”  of  international  competition  with  privatised
enterprises and banks has set off radical reforms having far-reaching implications.
One of the great thinkers of the Enlightenment, Immanuel Kant, said that the true
philosophers are those who carry conviction through their teachings and by setting an example.
Poland may be said to be one of the most successful countries in transition so far.
For years now, it has been achieving notable rates of growth. The central bank is doing a good
job  under  its  president.  It  is  universally  recognised  that  the  rate  of  inflation  has  been  brought
down  sharply  and  that  this  has  been  a  crucial  factor  underpinning  the  restructuring  of  the
economy.
Furthermore,  important  steps  have  now  been  taken  towards  autonomy  for  the
Polish central bank; they are reflected in the Central Bank Act which recently came into force.
Germany congratulates Poland on the progress that has been achieved. And we are
pleased that many different contacts exist at all levels - including, of course, the field of central
banking.
I should also like to mention the notable  scale  of  direct  investment  in  Poland  by
German  enterprises.  It  is  gratifying  to  see  that  particularly  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises
are involved in that area.
But, where there are many points of light, some things inevitably  cast  a  shadow.
According  to  the  OECD,  one  of  the  major  risks  is  that  the  expansion  of  the  current  account
deficit cannot be sustained at a manageable level. Furthermore, the OECD experts are calling for
the acceleration of restructuring, especially in the areas of privatisation and pension reform. I am
certain that the responsible decision-makers in Poland are taking that advice seriously.
II
The EU countries are also facing a problem of transformation.
Increasingly fierce worldwide competition is setting  great  challenges  for  most  of
the  EU-countries,  too.  They  must  subject  their  systems  of  public  finance  to  a  critical
examination,  adjust  their  welfare  systems  and  make  the  labour  market  more  flexible.  The  high
level  of  unemployment  -  not  least  in  Germany  -  calls  for  far-reaching  reforms  quite
independently of the euro.
BIS Review   10/1998
- 2 -
But the changeover to the euro also calls for transformation.
At  the  beginning  of  May,  the  European  Council  will  take  the  decision  on  the
countries  which  are  to  be  members  of  monetary  union  from  January 1999.  For  the  future
participating countries it is a question of transition  to  the  single  currency  and  merging  national
monetary policies to form a single monetary policy.
These  are  no  longer  distant,  visionary  goals  but  projects  on  which  a  decision  is
imminent in the next few months.
Admittedly, that decision also involves giving up monetary sovereignty to a  new
supranational institution - the European Central Bank (ECB). In most countries, this will not be
an  easy  step  to  take,  since  in  some  cases  it  will  represent  a  permanent  departure  from
long-standing  and  cherished  national  traditions.  Entry  into  monetary  union  is  a  road  on  which
there is no turning back.
European  monetary  union  (EMU)  is  not  a  new  project,  however.  Economic  and
political  integration  has  been  an  established  policy  aim  in  Europe  since  the  end  of  the  Second
World War.
As early as 25 years ago, there was a serious  attempt  to  set  a  monetary  union  in
motion, although it did not meet with success at the time. In 1991, the Maastricht Treaty revived
the idea of monetary union and enshrined the goal of creating a new currency.
The  key  element  of  the  Treaty  is  the  Statute  of  the  European  System  of  Central
Banks with the European Central Bank at its apex. According to the present schedule, the ECB is
to  be  officially  inaugurated  in  Frankfurt  on  June  30.  It  will  have  the  legal  task  and  duty  of
maintaining the price stability of the new European currency. In doing this, the Maastricht Treaty
expressly provides that the ECB shall take its decisions without being subject to any influence on
the part of political decision-making bodies.
The  new  single  currency  undoubtedly  deserves  a  good  starting  position  with  an
operationally  viable  supranational  central  bank.  That  is  because  a  euro  which  is  stable  on  a
sustainable basis offers great advantages and opportunities:
- The euro will save conversion costs.
 It will eliminate exchange rate risks between the euro participants.
- The euro will improve the functionality of the single market. That will, above
all, benefit consumers.
- Above and beyond that, the euro has the potential to build on the international
role of the former European currencies (and the D-Mark, in particular)  and  to
become an international reserve and investment currency.
- And  the  euro  can  lend  a  further  boost  to  European  economic  and  political
integration.
The national central banks of the participating countries will become integral parts
of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks.  The  Bundesbank  is  working  all-out  to  stay  on
BIS Review   10/1998
- 3 -
schedule for putting the technical, organisational and institutional framework in place. The other
European  central  banks,  too,  must  conclude  their  preparations  on  time  so  that  the  European
System  of  Central  Banks  can  begin  its  work  punctually  in  compliance  with  the  terms  of  the
Treaty.
The  spirit  and  letter  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty  require  a  euro  which  is  a  single
currency in the true sense of the word. That means more than just having the same currency in
the participating countries. A single currency requires:
  that  monetary  policy  uses  the  same  set  of  instruments  and  pursues  a  common
objective and a common orientation - not national interests and orientations;
that fiscal, economic and social policies - which will remain the responsibility of
the individual nations - are consistent with stability and do not come into conflict
with one another.
A monetary union without adequate and sustained joint stability  might  become  a
“union  of  conflict”.  Further  political  integration  in  Europe,  too,  would  be  subjected  to  severe
strain.
To  prevent  that  happening,  it  will  be  crucial  to  make  the  right  choice  of
participating  countries.  They  must  have  the  economic  capability  and  the  political  will  to
participate in monetary union on an enduring basis without excessive tensions.
Demonstrating  that  the  convergence  criteria  enshrined  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty
have  been  met  on  a  lasting  basis  is  an  important  factor  in  the  decision  on  the  countries  to  be
selected.  This  decision  is  meant  to  ensure  that  only  those  countries  will  participate  which  are
ready for economic union in terms of their economy and anti-inflationary policy.
I  shall  not  make  any  forecasts  here  about  the  prospective  participants.  That  is
because  I  have  too  much  respect  for  the  procedure  enshrined  in  the  Treaty  and  for  the
decision-making  prerogative  of  the  Heads  of  State  or  Government -  a  right  which  they  will
exercise  at  the  beginning  of  May.  The  preparations  for  this  are  likely  to  start  as  soon  as  the
Commission and the EMI (the forerunner of the ECB) have presented their Convergence Reports
on March 25.
Why is the decision on the countries chosen to be in at the start of monetary union
so important? In monetary union, all the participating countries must be in a position to stay the
course unaided. They must be able to secure economic competitiveness and efficiency, above all,
by virtue of their own internal efforts. If they are not in a position to do that, not only will they
encounter difficulties themselves but other countries of the EMU area will, too.
In contrast to the United States, for example, there will be no supraregional safety
net,  no  revenue  and  burden  sharing  arrangement  or  a  union-wide  social  security  system  in  the
future euro area. Regional divergences in economic development will still have to be cushioned
at the national level.
Moreover, EMU is not - and, according to the provisions of the Treaty, should not
be - a “transfer union”. Instead, the Maastricht Treaty and the “Stability and Growth Pact”  call
for  autonomous  fiscal  policy  stability  on  the  part  of  all  member  states.  In  particular,  excessive
national budget deficits and high levels of government debt may create the potential for conflict,
BIS Review   10/1998
- 4 -
which  would  result  in  political  pressure  to  provide  transfer  payments  or  to  conduct  a  soft
monetary policy.
That must not be allowed to occur, however. That is because, in a monetary union,
differences over the course of policy can quickly lead to political conflict and confrontation.
III
For  the  present  countries  in  transition  in  central  and  eastern  Europe,  the  most
relevant topics to start with are future EU membership and participation in the single market.
It is not yet clear when they will be able to participate in EMU. This is likely to
require a lengthy process of convergence.
It  was,  not  least,  precisely  at  the  insistence  of  the  German  representatives  at  the
Luxembourg summit that the Heads of State or Government agreed to start discussions in March
of this year on EU membership with six countries - including Poland. I hope that this discussion
process will bring positive results in the none too distant future.
For that purpose, however, the present EU countries must also ensure that the EU
is  well  prepared  for  the  demands  of  an  enlarged  community.  In  particular,  a  reform  of
agricultural policy and the structural funds of the Community are on the “Agenda 2000”.
As part of a possible EU membership, joining the fixed exchange rate mechanism
of the reformed European Monetary System (ERM II) will then probably also be on the agenda
for the currencies of the new member countries.
I can imagine that - if there is a positive decision on Poland’s  EU  membership  -
the Polish zloty would be a potential candidate. In principle, all EU  countries  have  the  right  to
participate  in  ERM II  if  they  fulfil  the  necessary  economic  conditions  -  in  particular,  full
currency  convertibility,  application  of 
relevant 
legislation,  and
stability-conscious monetary, fiscal and economic policies.
single  market 
the 
Given successful monetary and economic policies, many people will perhaps  ask
whether  unilaterally  pegging  the  exchange  rate  to  the  euro  in  advance  might  not  be  a  sensible
strategy  for  advanced  emerging  economies  -  which  would  be  more  ambitious  and  demanding
than the crawling peg strategy which is being pursued here at present.1
However, a strategy of this kind initially presupposes that the euro will indeed be
a  stable,  and  internationally  attractive,  investment  and  reserve  currency,  and  hence  a  serious
competitor for the US dollar.
If that is the case, emerging economies can, of course, use exchange rate pegging
to import credibility for an anti-inflationary stance which has yet to be established.
Nevertheless, as was shown by the ERM in 1992-93 and latterly by developments
in  South-East  Asia,  this  kind  of  pegging  must  not  be  too  rigid,  especially  if  there  are
                                                  
1
The Polish zloty is currently linked to a basket of five currencies (including, primarily, the US dollar and
the D-Mark) in the form of a crawling peg.
BIS Review   10/1998
- 5 -
shortcomings in economic policy and economic divergence from the anchor currency. Exchange
rate  pegging  which  has  become  obsolete  can  be  made  worthless  overnight  by  the  financial
markets.  Importing  credibility  by  means  of  pegging  exchange  rates  must  be  underpinned  by  a
corresponding  domestic  policy.  If  that  is  not  achieved,  pegging  the  exchange  rate  can  become
very dangerous.
Far-reaching  and  sustained  anti-inflationary  and  institutional  convergence  should
therefore come before an exchange rate pegging of this kind, and not the other way round.
That is especially true for later entry into monetary union.
Sustained convergence towards a  European  stability  union  is  the  stated  objective
of  the  central  and  east  European  countries  in  transition.  In  this  regard,  I  share  the  view  of  the
OECD that Poland has decidedly good prospects of converging over time with western Europe.
We  in  Germany  would  very  much  welcome  a  sustained  stability  convergence.  I
am certain that this would be an advantage for both countries in the long run.
Important as the political will to become more closely involved in the process of
European integration may be, the key to its success will be a permanently sustainable economic
base.
Good  politics  needs  good  economics;  in  the  final  analysis,  there  is  no  way  of
getting round that fact.
BIS Review   10/1998
