Mr. Greenspan presents the Federal Reserve’s semi-annual Humphrey Hawkins
monetary policy testimony and report to the US Congress   Testimony  of  the  Chairman  of  the
Board of the US Federal Reserve System, Mr. Alan Greenspan, before the US Congress on 24/2/98.
Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee,
I  welcome  this  opportunity  to  present  the  Federal  Reserve’s  semi-annual  report  on
economic conditions and the conduct of monetary policy.
The US Economy in 1997
The  US  economy  delivered  another  exemplary  performance  in  1997.  Over  the  four
quarters of last year, real GDP expanded close to 4 percent, its fastest annual increase in ten years. To
produce  that  higher  output,  about  3  million  Americans  joined  the  nation’s  payrolls,  in  the  process
contributing to a reduction in the unemployment rate to 4¾ percent, its lowest sustained level since
the late 1960s. And our factories were working more intensively too: Industrial production increased
5¾ percent last year, exceeding robust additions to capacity.
Those gains were shared widely. The hourly wage and salary structure rose about 4
percent, fueling impressive increases in personal incomes.  Unlike  some  prior  episodes  when  faster
wage rate increases mainly reflected attempts to make up for more rapidly rising prices of goods and
services, the fatter paychecks that workers brought home represented real increments to purchasing
power. Measured consumer price inflation came in at 1¾ percent over the twelve months of 1997,
down about 1½ percentage points from the pace of the prior year. While swings in the prices of food
and fuel contributed to this decline, both narrower price indexes excluding those items and broader
ones including all goods and services produced in the United States also paint a portrait of continued
progress  toward  price  stability.  Businesses,  for  the  most  part,  were  able  to  pay  these  higher  real
wages while still increasing their earnings. Although aggregate data on profits for all of 1997 are not
yet available, corporate profit margins most likely remained in an elevated range not seen consistently
since  the  1960s.  These  healthy  gains  in  earnings  and  the  expectations  of  more  to  come  provided
important support to the equity market, with most major stock price indexes  gaining  more  than  20
percent over the year.
The strong growth of the real income of workers and corporations is not unrelated to
the  economy’s  continued  good  performance  on  inflation.  Taken  together,  recent  evidence  supports
the  view  that  such  low  inflation,  as  closely  approaching  price  stability  as  we  have  known  in  the
United States in three decades, engenders many benefits. When changes in the general price level are
small and predictable, households and firms can plan more securely for the future. The perception of
reduced risk encourages investment. Low inflation also exerts a discipline on costs, fostering efforts
to  enhance  productivity.  Productivity  is  the  ultimate  source  of  rising  standards  of  living,  and  we
witnessed a notable pickup in this measure in the past two years.
The robust economy has facilitated the efforts of the Congress and the Administration
to restore  balance  in  the  unified  federal  budget.  As  I  have  indicated  to  the  Congress  on  numerous
occasions, moving beyond this point and putting the budget in significant surplus would be the surest
and  most  direct  way  of  increasing  national  saving.  In  turn,  higher  national  saving,  by  promoting
lower real long-term interest rates, helps spur spending to outfit American firms  and  their  workers
with the  modern  equipment  they  need  to  compete  successfully  on  world  markets.  We  have  seen  a
partial down payment of the benefits of better budget balance already: It seems reasonable to assume
that  the  decline  in  longer-term  Treasury  yields  last  year  owed,  in  part,  to  reduced  competition  --
current and prospective -- from the federal government for scarce private saving. However, additional
effort remains to be exerted to address the effects on federal entitlement spending of the looming shift
within the next decade in the nation’s retirement demographics.
BIS Review   15/1998
- 2 -
As  I  noted  earlier,  our  nation  has  been  experiencing  a  higher  growth  rate  of
productivity -- output per hour worked -- in recent years. The dramatic improvements in computing
power and communication and information technology appear to have been a major force behind this
beneficial  trend.  Those  innovations,  together  with  fierce  competitive  pressures  in  our  high-tech
industries to make them available to as many homes, offices, stores, and shop floors as possible, have
produced  double-digit  annual  reductions  in  prices  of  capital  goods  embodying  new  technologies.
Indeed, many products considered to be at the cutting edge of technology as recently as two to three
years ago have become so standardized and inexpensive that they have achieved near “ commodity”
status, a development that has allowed businesses to accelerate their accumulation of more and better
capital.
Critical  to  this  process  has  been  the  rapidly  increasing  efficiency  of  our  financial
markets -- itself a product of the new technologies and  of  significant  market  deregulation  over  the
years.  Capital  now  flows  with  relatively  little  friction  to  projects  embodying  new  ideas.  Silicon
Valley is a tribute both to American ingenuity and to the financial system’s ever-increasing ability to
supply venture capital to the entrepreneurs who are such a dynamic force in our economy.
With  new  high-tech  tools,  American  businesses  have  shaved  transportation  costs,
managed  their  production  and  use  of  inventories  more  efficiently,  and  broadened  market
opportunities. The threat of rising costs in tight labor markets has imparted a substantial impetus to
efforts to take advantage  of  possible  efficiencies.  In  my  Humphrey-Hawkins  testimony  last  July,  I
discussed  the  likelihood  that  the  sharp  acceleration  in  capital  investment  in  advanced  technologies
beginning  in  1993  reflected  synergies  of  new  ideas,  embodied  in  increasingly  inexpensive  new
equipment, that have elevated expected returns and have broadened investment opportunities.
More recent evidence remains consistent with the view that this capital spending has
contributed to a noticeable pickup in productivity -- and probably by more than can be explained by
usual business cycle forces. For one, the combination of continued low inflation and stable to rising
domestic profit margins implies quite subdued growth in total consolidated unit business costs. With
labor  costs  constituting  more  than  two-thirds  of  those  costs  and  labor  compensation  per  hour
accelerating, productivity must be growing faster, and that step-up must be roughly in line with the
increase  in  compensation  growth.  For  another,  our  more  direct  observations  on  output  per  hour
roughly tend to confirm that productivity has picked up significantly in recent years, although how
much the ongoing trend of productivity has risen remains an open question.
The acceleration in productivity, however, has been exceeded by the strengthening of
demand for goods and services. As a consequence, employers had to expand payrolls at a pace well
in excess of the growth of the working age population that profess a desire for a job, including new
immigrants.  As  I  pointed  out  last  year  in  testimony  before  the  Congress,  that  gap  has  been
accommodated by declines in both the officially unemployed and those not actively seeking work but
desirous of working. The number of people in those two categories decreased at a rate of about one
million per year on average over the last four years. By December 1997, the sum had declined to a
seasonally adjusted 10½ million, or 6 percent of the working age population, the lowest ratio since
detailed  information  on  this  series  first  became  available  in  1970.  Anecdotal  information  from
surveys of our twelve Reserve Banks attests to our ever tightening labor markets.
Rapidly  rising  demand  for  labor  has  had  enormous  beneficial  effects  on  our  work
force. Previously low- or unskilled workers have been drawn into the job market and have obtained
training  and  experience  that  will  help  them  even  if  they  later  change  jobs.  Large  numbers  of
underemployed  have  been  moved  up  the  career  ladder  to  match  their  underlying  skills,  and  many
welfare recipients have been added to payrolls as well, to the benefit of their long-term job prospects.
BIS Review   15/1998
- 3 -
The recent acceleration of wages likely has owed in part to the ever-tightening labor
market and in part to rising productivity growth, which, through competition, induces firms to grant
higher wages. It is difficult at this time, however, to disentangle  the  relative  contributions  of  these
factors. What is clear is that, unless demand growth softens or productivity growth accelerates even
more, we will gradually run out of new workers who can be profitably employed. It is not possible to
tell how many more of the 6 percent of the working-age population  who  want  to  work  but  do  not
have jobs can be added to payrolls. A significant number are so-called frictionally unemployed,  as
they have left one job but not yet chosen to accept another. Still others have chosen to work in only a
limited geographic area where their skills may not be needed.
Should  demand  for  new  workers  continue  to  exceed  new  supply,  we  would  expect
wage  gains  increasingly  to  exceed  productivity  growth,  squeezing  profit  margins  and  eventually
leading to a pickup in inflation. Were a substantial pickup in inflation to occur, it could, by stunting
economic growth, reverse much of the remarkable labor market  progress  of  recent  years.  I  will  be
discussing our assessment of these and other possibilities and their bearing on the outlook for 1998
shortly.
Monetary Policy in 1997
History teaches us that monetary policy has been its most effective when it has been
pre-emptive. The lagging relationship between the Federal Reserve’s policy instrument and spending,
and, even further removed, inflation, implies that if policy actions are delayed until prices begin to
pick  up,  they  will  be  too  late  to  fend  off  at  least  some  persistent  price  acceleration  and  attendant
economic instabilities. Preemptive policymaking is keyed to judging how widespread are emerging
inflationary forces, and when, and to what degree, those forces will be reflected in actual inflation.
For most of last year, the evident strains on resources were sufficiently severe  to  steer  the  Federal
Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  toward  being  more  inclined  to  tighten  than  to  ease  monetary
policy.  Indeed,  in  March,  when  it  became  apparent  that  strains  on  resources  seemed  to  be
intensifying, the FOMC imposed modest incremental restraint, raising its intended federal funds rate
¼ percentage point, to 5½ percent.
We did not increase the federal funds rate again during the summer and fall, despite
further  tightening  of  the  labor  market.  Even  though  the  labor  market  heated  up  and  labor
compensation  rose,  measured  inflation  fell,  owing  to  the  appreciation  of  the  dollar,  weakness  in
international commodity prices, and faster productivity growth. Those restraining forces were more
evident in goods-price inflation,  which  in  the  CPI  slowed  substantially  to  only  about  ½  percent  in
1997, than on service-price inflation, which moderated much less -- to around 3 percent. Providers of
services  appeared  to  be  more  pressed  by  mounting  strains  in  labor  markets.  Hourly  wages  and
salaries in service-producing sectors rose 4½ percent last year, up considerably from the prior year
and  almost  1½  percentage  points  faster  than  in  goods-producing  sectors.  However,  a  significant
portion of that differential, but by no means all, traced to commissions in the financial and real estate
services sector related to one-off increases in  transactions  prices  and  in  volumes  of  activity,  rather
than to increases in the underlying wage structure.
Although  the  nominal  federal  funds  rate  was  maintained  after  March,  the  apparent
drop  in  inflation  expectations  over  the  balance  of  1997  induced  some  firming  in  the  stance  of
monetary policy by one important measure -- the real federal funds rate, or the nominal federal funds
rate  less  a  proxy  for  inflation  expectations.  Some  analysts  have  dubbed  the  contribution  of  the
reduction in inflation expectations to raising the real federal funds rate a “ passive”  tightening, in that
it increased the amount of monetary policy restraint in place without an explicit vote by the FOMC.
While the tightening may have been passive in that sense, it was by no means inadvertent. Members
of the FOMC took some comfort in the upward trend of the real federal funds rate over the year and
the rise in the foreign exchange value of the dollar because such additional restraint was viewed as
BIS Review   15/1998
- 4 -
appropriate  given  the  strength  of  spending  and  building  strains  on  labor  resources.  They  also
recognized that in virtually all other respects financial markets remained quite accommodative and,
indeed, judging by the rise in equity prices, were providing additional impetus to domestic spending.
The Outlook for 1998
There can be no doubt that domestic demand retained considerable momentum at the
outset  of  this  year.  Production  and  employment  have  been  on  a  strong  uptrend  in  recent  months.
Confident households, enjoying gains in income and wealth and  benefitting  from  the  reductions  in
intermediate- and longer-term interest rates to date, should continue to increase their spending. Firms
should  find  financing  available  on  relatively  attractive  terms  to  fund  profitable  opportunities  to
enhance efficiency by investing in new capital equipment. By itself, this strength in spending would
seem  to  presage  intensifying  pressures  in  labor  markets  and  on  prices.  Yet,  the  outlook  for  total
spending on goods and services produced in the United States is less assured of late because of storm
clouds massing over the Western Pacific and heading our way.
This is not the place to examine in detail what triggered the initial problems in Asian
financial markets and why the subsequent deterioration has been so extreme. I covered that subject
recently  before  several  committees  of  the  Congress.  Rather,  I  shall  confine  my  discussion  this
morning to the likely consequences of the Asian crisis for demand and inflation in the United States.
With  the  crisis  curtailing  the  financing  available  in  foreign  currencies,  many  Asian
economies have had no  choice  but  to  cut  back  their  imports  sharply.  Disruptions  to  their  financial
systems  and  economies  more  generally  will  further  damp  demands  for  our  exports  of  goods  and
services. American exports should be held down as well by the appreciation of the dollar, which will
make the prices of competing goods produced abroad more attractive, just as foreign-produced goods
will be relatively more attractive to buyers here at home. As a result, we can expect a worsening net
export  position  to  exert  a  discernible  drag  on  total  output  in  the  United  States.  For  a  time,  such
restraint might be reinforced by a reduced willingness of US firms to accumulate inventories as they
foresee weaker demand ahead.
The forces of Asian restraint could well  be  providing  another,  more  direct  offset  to
inflationary  impulses  arising  domestically  in  the  United  States.  In  the  wake  of  weakness  in  Asian
economies and of lagged effects of the appreciation of the dollar more generally, the dollar prices of
our non-oil imports are likely to decline further in the months ahead. These lower import prices are
apparently  already  making  domestic  producers  hesitant  to  raise  their  own  prices  for  fear  of  losing
market share, further contributing to the restraint on overall prices. Lesser demands for raw materials
on the part of Asian economies as their activity slows should help to keep world commodity prices
denominated in dollars in check. Import and commodity prices, however, will restrain US inflation
only  as  long  as  they  continue  to  fall,  or  to  rise  at  a  slower  rate  than  the  pace  of  overall  domestic
product prices.
The key question going forward is whether the restraint building from the turmoil in
Asia will be sufficient to check inflationary tendencies that might otherwise result from the strength
of domestic spending and tightening labor markets. The depth of the adjustment abroad will depend
on  the  extent  of  weakness  in  the  financial  sectors  of  Asian  economies  and  the  speed  with  which
structural inefficiencies in the financial and nonfinancial sectors of those economies are corrected. If,
as we suspect, the restraint coming from Asia is sufficient to bring the demand for American labor
back into line with the growth of the working-age population desirous of working, labor markets will
remain  unusually  tight,  but  any  intensification  of  inflation  should  be  delayed,  very  gradual,  and
readily reversible. However, we cannot rule out two other, more worrisome possibilities. On the one
hand,  should  the  momentum  to  domestic  spending  not  be  offset  significantly  by  Asian  or  other
developments, the US economy would be on a track along which spending could press too strongly
BIS Review   15/1998
- 5 -
against available resources to be consistent with contained inflation. On the other, we also need to be
alert  to  the  possibility  that  the  forces  from  Asia  might  damp  activity  and  prices  by  more  than  is
desirable  by  exerting  a  particularly  forceful  drag  on  the  volume  of  net  exports  and  the  prices  of
imports.
When confronted at the beginning  of  this  month  with  these,  for  the  moment,  finely
balanced, though powerful forces, the members of the Federal Open Market Committee decided that
monetary policy should most appropriately be kept on hold. With the continuation of a remarkable
seven-year expansion at stake and so little precedent to go by, the range of our intelligence gathering
in the weeks ahead must be wide and especially inclusive of international developments.
The  Forecasts  of  the  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  and  the  Presidents  of  the  Federal
Reserve Banks.
In these circumstances, the forecasts of the governors of the Federal Reserve Board
and presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks for the performance of the US economy over this year
are  more  tentative  than  usual.  Based  on  information  available  through  the  first  week  of  February,
monetary policymakers were generally of the view that moderate economic growth is likely in store.
The  growth  rate  of  real  GDP  is  most  commonly  seen  as  between  2  and  2¾  percent  over  the  four
quarters  of  1998.  Given  the  strong  performance  of  real  GDP,  these  projections  envisage  the
unemployment rate remaining in the low range of the past half year.  Inflation,  as  measured  by  the
four-quarter  percent  change  in  the  consumer  price  index,  is  expected  to  be  1¾  to  2¼  percent  in
1998 -- near the low rate recorded in 1997. This outlook embodies the expectation that the effects of
continuing tightness in labor markets will be largely offset by technical adjustments shaving a couple
tenths from the published CPI, healthy productivity growth, flat or declining import prices, and little
pressure in  commodity  markets.  But  the  policymakers’  forecasts  also  reflect  their  determination  to
hold the line on inflation.
The Ranges for the Debt and Monetary Aggregates
The FOMC affirmed the provisional ranges for the monetary aggregates in 1998 that
it had selected last July, which, once again, encompass the growth rates associated with conditions of
approximate  price  stability,  provided  that  these  aggregates  act  in  accord  with  their  pre-1990s
historical  relationships  with  nominal  income  and  interest  rates.  These  ranges  are  identical  to  those
that  had  prevailed  for  1997  --  1  to  5  percent  for  M2  and  2  to  6  percent  for  M3.  The  FOMC  also
reaffirmed its range of 3 to 7 percent for the debt of the domestic nonfinancial sectors for this year. I
should caution, though, that the expectations of the governors and Reserve Bank presidents for the
expansion of nominal GDP in 1998 suggest that growth of M2 in  the  upper  half  of  its  benchmark
range is a distinct possibility this year. Given the continuing strength of bank credit, M3 might even
be above its range as depositories use liabilities in this aggregate to fund loan growth and securities
acquisitions. Nonfinancial debt should come in around the middle portion of its range. In the first part
of the 1990s, money growth diverged from historical relationships with income and interest rates, in
part as savers diversified into bond and stock mutual funds, which had become more readily available
and  whose  returns  were  considerably  more  attractive  than  those  on  deposits.  This  anomalous
behavior  of  velocity  severely  set  back  most  analysts’  confidence  in  the  usefulness  of  M2  as  an
indicator  of  economic  developments.  In  recent  years,  there  have  been  tentative  signs  that  the
historical  relationship  linking  the  velocity  of  M2  --  measured  as  the  ratio  of  nominal  GDP  to  the
money stock -- to the cost of holding M2 assets was reasserting itself. However, a persistent residual
upward drift in velocity over the past few years and its apparent cessation very recently underscores
our ongoing uncertainty about the stability of this relationship. The FOMC will continue to observe
the  evolution  of  the  monetary  and  credit  aggregates  carefully,  integrating  information  about  these
variables with a wide variety of other information in determining its policy stance.
BIS Review   15/1998
- 6 -
Uncertainty about the Outlook
With the current situation reflecting a balance of strong countervailing forces, events
in the months ahead are not likely to unfold smoothly. In that regard, I would like to flag a few areas
of concern about the economy beyond those mentioned already regarding Asian developments.
Without doubt, lenders have provided important support to spending in the past few
years  by  their  willingness  to  transact  at  historically  small  margins  and  in  large  volumes.  Equity
investors  have  contributed  as  well  by  apparently  pricing  in  the  expectation  of  substantial  earnings
gains  and  requiring  modest  compensation  for  the  risk  that  those  expectations  could  be  mistaken.
Approaching  the  eighth  year  of  the  economic  expansion,  this  is  understandable  in  an  economic
environment that, contrary to historical experience, has become increasingly benign. Businesses have
been meeting obligations readily  and  generating  high  profits,  putting  them  in  outstanding  financial
health.
But  we  must  be  concerned  about  becoming  too  complacent  about  evaluating
repayment risks. All too often at this stage of the  business  cycle,  the  loans  that  banks  extend  later
make up a disproportionate share of total nonperforming loans. In addition, quite possibly, twelve or
eighteen months hence, some of the securities purchased on the market could be looked upon with
some  regret  by  investors.  As  one  of  the  nation’s  bank  supervisors,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  make
every  effort  to  encourage  banks  to  apply  sound  underwriting  standards  in  their  lending.  Prudent
lenders  should  consider  a  wide  range  of  economic  situations  in  evaluating  credit;  to  do  otherwise
would risk contributing to potentially disruptive financial problems down the road.
A second area of concern involves our nation’s continuing role in the new high-tech
international financial system. By joining with our major trading partners and international financial
institutions in helping to stabilize the economies of Asia and promoting needed structural  changes,
we are also encouraging the continued expansion of world trade and global economic and financial
stability on which the ongoing increase of our own standards of living depends. If we were to cede
our role as a world leader, or backslide into protectionist policies, we would threaten the source of
much of our own sustained economic growth.
A  third  risk  is  complacency  about  inflation  prospects.  The  combination  and
interaction of significant increases in productivity-improving technologies, sharp declines in budget
deficits, and disciplined monetary policy has damped product price changes, bringing them to near
stability. While part of this result owes to good policy, part is the product of the fortuitous emergence
of  new  technologies  and  of  some  favorable  price  developments  in  imported  goods.  However,  as
history counsels, it is unwise to count on any string of good fortune to continue indefinitely. At the
same time, though, it is also instructive to remember the words of an old sage that “luck is the residue
of design”. He meant that to some degree we can deliberately put ourselves in position to experience
good fortune and be better prepared when misfortune strikes. For example, the 1970s were marked by
two  major  oil-price  shocks  and  a  significant  depreciation  in  the  exchange  value  of  the  dollar.  But
those  misfortunes  were,  in  part,  the  result  of  allowing  imbalances  to  build  over  the  decade  as
policymakers lost hold of the anchor provided by price stability. Some of what we now see helping
rein  in  inflation  pressures  is  more  likely  to  occur  in  an  environment  of  stable  prices  and  price
expectations that thwarts producers from indiscriminately passing on higher costs, puts a premium on
productivity enhancement, and rewards more effectively investment in physical and human capital.
Simply put, while the pursuit of price stability does not rule out misfortune, it lowers
its probability. If firms are convinced that the general price level will remain stable, they will reserve
increases in their sales prices of goods and services as a last resort, for fear that such increases could
mean loss of market share. Similarly, if households are convinced of price stability, they will not see
variations  in  relative  prices  as  reasons  to  change  their  long-run  inflation  expectations.  Thus,
BIS Review   15/1998
- 7 -
continuing  to  make  progress  toward  this  legislated  objective  will  make  future  supply  shocks  less
likely and our nation’s economy less vulnerable to those that occur.
BIS Review   15/1998
