Mr. Greenspan gives a testimony on the global financial system   Testimony
of  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  System,  Mr.  Alan
Greenspan,  before 
the  Committee  on
Appropriations of the US Senate on 3/3/98.
the  Subcommittee  on  Foreign  Operations  of 
The  global  financial  system  has  been  evolving  rapidly  in  recent  years.  New
technology has radically reduced the costs of borrowing and lending across traditional national
borders,  facilitating  the  development  of  new  instruments  and  drawing  in  new  players.
Information is transmitted instantaneously around the  world,  and  huge  shifts  in  the  supply  and
demand for funds naturally follow, resulting in a massive increase in capital flows.
This  burgeoning  global  system  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  a  highly  efficient
structure  that  has  significantly  facilitated  cross-border  trade  in  goods  and  services  and,
accordingly, has made a substantial contribution to standards of living worldwide. Its efficiency
exposes  and  punishes  underlying  economic  imprudence  swiftly  and  decisively.  Regrettably,  it
also  appears  to  have  facilitated  the  transmission  of  financial  disturbances  far  more  effectively
than ever before.
Three years ago, the Mexican crisis was the first such episode associated with our
new high-tech international financial system. The current Asian crisis is the second.
We  do  not  as  yet  fully  understand  the  new  system’s  dynamics.  We  are  learning
fast, and need to update and modify our institutions and practices to reduce the risks inherent in
the  new  regime.  Meanwhile,  we  have  to  confront  the  current  crisis  with  the  institutions  and
techniques we have.
Many  argue  that  the  current  crisis  should  be  allowed  to  run  its  course  without
support from the International Monetary Fund or the bilateral financial backing of other nations.
They  assert  that  allowing  this  crisis  to  play  out,  while  doubtless  having  additional  negative
effects on growth in Asia, and engendering greater spill-overs onto the rest of the world, is not
likely to have a large or lasting impact on the United States and the world economy.
They  may  well  be  correct  in  their  judgment.  There  is,  however,  a  small  but  not
negligible probability that the upset in East Asia could have unexpectedly large negative effects
on Japan, Latin America, and eastern and central Europe that, in turn, could have repercussions
elsewhere, including the United States. Thus, while the probability of such an outcome may be
small, its consequences, in my judgment, should not be left solely to chance. We have observed
that  global  financial  markets,  as  currently  organized,  do  not  always  achieve  an  appropriate
equilibrium, or at least require time to stabilize.
Opponents  of  IMF  support  for  member  countries  facing  international  financial
difficulties  also  argue  that  such  substantial  financial  backing,  by  cushioning  the  losses  of
imprudent  investors,  could  encourage  excessive  risk-taking.  There  doubtless  is  some  truth  in
that,  though  arguably  it  has  been  the  expectation  of  governments’  support  of  their  financial
systems  that  has  been  the  more  obvious  culprit,  at  least  in  the  Asian  case.  In  any  event,  any
expectations  of  broad  bailouts  have  turned  out  to  have  been  disappointed.  Many  if  not  most
investors  in  Asian  economies  have  to  date  suffered  substantial  losses.  Asian  equity  losses,
excluding  Japanese  companies,  since  June  1997,  worldwide,  are  estimated  to  have  exceeded
$700  billion,  at  the  end  of  January,  of  which  more  than  $30  billion  had  been  lost  by  US
investors. Substantial further losses have been recorded in bonds and real estate.
BIS Review   21/1998
- 2 -
Moreover,  the  policy  conditionality,  associated  principally  with  IMF  lending,
which dictates economic and financial discipline and structural change, helps to mitigate some of
the  inappropriate  risk-taking.  Such  conditionality  is  also  critical  to  the  success  of  the  overall
stabilization  effort.  At  the  root  of  the  problems  is  poor  public  policy  that  has  resulted  in
misguided investments and very weak financial sectors. Convincing  a  sovereign  nation  to  alter
destructive  policies  that  impair  its  own  performance  and  threaten  contagion  to  its  neighbors  is
best  handled  by  an  international  financial  institution,  such  as  the  IMF.  What  we  have  in  place
today to respond to crises should be supported even as we work  to  improve  those  mechanisms
and institutions.
Some observers have also expressed concern about whether we can be confident
that IMF programs for countries, in particular the countries of East Asia, are likely to alter their
economies significantly and permanently. My sense is that one consequence of this Asian crisis
is  an  increasing  awareness  in  the  region  that  market  capitalism,  as  practiced  in  the  West,
especially  in  the  United  States,  is  the  superior  model;  that  is,  it  provides  greater  promise  of
producing rising standards of living and continuous growth.
Although  East  Asian  economies  have  exhibited  considerable  adherence  to  many
aspects  of  free-market  capitalism,  there  has,  nonetheless,  been  a  pronounced  tendency  toward
government-directed investment, using the  banking  system  to  finance  that  investment.  Given  a
record of real growth rates of close to 10 percent per annum over an extended period of time, it
is not surprising that it has been difficult to convince anyone that the economic system practiced
in  East  Asia  could  not  continue  to  produce  positive  results  indefinitely.  Following  the
breakdown,  an  increasing  awareness,  bordering  in  some  cases  on  shock,  that  their  economic
model was incomplete, or worse, has arguably emerged in the region.
As  a  consequence,  many  of  the  leaders  of  these  countries  and  their  economic
advisors  are  endeavoring  to  move  their  economies  much  more  rapidly  toward  the  type  of
economic system that we have in the United States. The IMF, whatever one might say about its
policy  advice  in  the  past,  is  trying  to  play  a  critical  role  in  this  process,  providing  advice  and
incentives  that  promote  sound  money  and  long-term  stability.  The  IMF’s  current  approach  in
Asia  is  fully  supportive  of  the  views  of  those  in  the  West  who  understand  the  importance  of
greater 
reduced  government  controls,  scaling  back  of
government-directed investment, and embracing greater transparency -- the publication of all the
data that are relevant to the activities of the central bank, the government, financial institutions,
and private companies.
reliance  on  market 
forces, 
It is a reasonable question to ask how long  this  conversion  to  embracing  market
capitalism  in  all  its  details  will  last  in  countries  once  temporary  IMF  support  is  no  longer
necessary.  We  are,  after  all,  dealing  with  sovereign  nations  with  long  traditions,  not  always
consonant  with  market  capitalism.  There  can  be  no  guarantees,  but  my  sense  is  that  there  is  a
growing understanding and appreciation of the benefits of market capitalism as we practice it --
that what is being prescribed in IMF programs fosters their own interests.
The just-inaugurated president of Korea, from what I can judge, is unquestionably
aware of the faults of the Korean system that contributed to his country’s crisis; he appears to be
very strenuously endeavoring to move his economy and society in the direction of freer markets
and  a  more  flexible  economy.  In  these  efforts,  he  and  other  leaders  in  the  region  with  similar
views, have the support of many younger people, a large proportion educated in the West, that
see the advantages of market capitalism and who will soon assume the mantle of leadership.
BIS Review   21/1998
- 3 -
Accordingly,  I  fully  back  the  Administration’s  request  to  augment  the  financial
resources  of  the  IMF  by  approving  as  quickly  as  possible  US  participation  in  the  New
Arrangements  to  Borrow  and  an  increase  in  the  US  quota  in  the  IMF.  Hopefully,  neither  will
turn out to be needed, and no funds will be drawn. But it is better to have it available if that turns
out not to be the case and quick response to a pending crisis is essential.
BIS Review   21/1998
