The  changing  face  of  exchange  control  and  its  impact  on  cross-border
investment opportunities in South Africa   Address by the Governor of the South African Reserve
Bank,  Dr.  Chris  Stals,  at  the  Annual  Australia/Southern  Africa  Business  Council  Meeting  held  in
Sydney on 23/7/98.
1. The history of exchange control in South Africa
The  beginning  of  exchange  control  dates  back  to  1939  when  South  Africa,  as  a
member  of  the  now  defunct  British  Sterling  Area,  was  asked,  together  with  other  members  of  the
Sterling Area, to introduce restrictions on the outflow of funds to non-Sterling Area countries. This
ensured  the  free  movement  of  funds,  emanating  mainly  from  the  United  Kingdom,  within  the
Sterling Area.
After World War II, the Sterling Area exchange controls were gradually phased out,
but in South Africa in 1961 the controls were extended and given a specific South African function.
This  followed  upon  disrupting  internal  political  clashes  (the  Sharpeville  incident),  and  South
Africa’s  withdrawal  from  the  British  Commonwealth.  Exchange  control  in  South  Africa  was  now
intended to provide some protection to the domestic economy from the adverse effects of large-scale
outflows  of  capital.  For  the  first  time,  exchange  control  also  restricted  the  repatriation  of
non-resident investment funds from the country.
During the period 1961 to 1993, exchange control was extended from time to time,
mostly  in  reaction  to  a  worsening  of  South  Africa’s  internal  political  situation,  and  increasing
external pressures in general. For example, in 1976, after the uprising of school children in Soweto,
proceeds of the sale of non-resident owned securities in South Africa were blocked and eventually
converted into securities rand, tradable only at a substantial discount at a second tier (lower value)
exchange  rate.  After  the  United  Nations  introduced  world-wide  economic  and  financial  sanctions
against South Africa in 1986, a standstill on the repayment of a major part of South Africa’s foreign
indebtedness  was  introduced,  providing  for  an  extended  negotiated  redemption  of  the  outstanding
amount.
By  the  time  that  the  major  social  and  political  reforms  were  introduced  in  South
Africa  in  the  early  nineties,  there  existed  a  very  comprehensive  system  of  exchange  control  that
covered  certain  current  account  transactions  and  the  inflows  and  outflows  of  both  resident  and
non-resident investment funds.
2. The phasing out of exchange control
There was general consensus that exchange controls created many distortions in the
South  African  economy.  Interest  rates,  the  exchange  rate,  financial  asset  and  property  prices,  and
even  production  costs  in  the  domestic  economy  were  affected  by  the  comprehensive  exchange
controls.  The  system  prevented  the  important  price  mechanism  of  the  market  economy  from
functioning properly. This led to the maldistribution of scarce resources and the functioning of the
economy at levels below its optimum capacity.
After the democratic election for a new Government of National Unity took place in
April  1994,  and  international  punitive  actions  against  the  South  African  economy  were  removed,
there  was  general  consensus  within  the  new  Government  that  exchange  controls  should  also  be
removed. There was, however, major disagreement on how fast the controls should disappear. At the
one extreme were supporters, mostly in the private financial sector, of a “big bang” approach. They
pleaded  for  the  immediate  removal  of  all  the  controls.  On  the  other  hand,  there  was  substantial
BIS Review   65/1998
- 2 -
support  for  a  more  gradualist  approach  and  for  the  dismantling  of  the  exchange  controls  over  an
extended period of time.
The Reserve Bank supported the latter approach, mainly for the following reasons:
•  Years  of  economic  sanctions,  boycotts,  disinvestment  campaigns  and  the
withdrawal  of  foreign  loan  funds  from  South  Africa  depleted  the  country’s
foreign  reserves.  At  the  time  of  the  elections  of  April  1994,  the  Reserve  Bank
owned, on a net basis, zero foreign reserves.
•  During the long extended period of exchange controls, backlogs developed, and a
huge pent-up demand for an outflow of capital emerged. Overdue loans had to be
repaid  to  non-residents,  and  no  South  African  residents  were  allowed  to
accumulate  foreign  assets  of  any  significance  over  a  period  of  more  than  thirty
years.
•  Distortions were by that time so much embedded in the South African financial
structure  that  the  sudden  removal  of  exchange  control  would  not  only  have
exerted pressure on the country’s low level of official foreign exchange reserves,
but could also have forced painful immediate structural changes that would have
unduly disrupted the domestic economy in the short term.
The  South  African  authorities  therefore  decided  on  a  gradual  phasing-out  of  the
existing exchange controls. Beginning already in 1993, the following relaxations were accordingly
introduced over the past five years:
•  As a first priority, all exchange controls applicable to current account transactions
were removed. South Africa now fully complies with the requirements of Article
VIII of the International Monetary Fund.
•  Secondly,  controls  on  non-residents  were  removed.  The  debt  standstill
arrangements of 1985 were finally rescheduled towards the end of 1993, and the
financial  rand  system  (two-tier  exchange  rate)  was  terminated  in  March  1995.
Non-residents  are  now  completely  free  to  introduce  funds  for  any  purpose  into
South Africa, to repatriate such funds and to transfer out of the country current
and capital gains earned on their investments without restriction.
•  Resident  corporates  (companies)  were  gradually  enabled  to  make  direct
investments  in  foreign  subsidiaries,  branches  or  joint  ventures  by  transferring
limited amounts of funds from South Africa, and by raising funds abroad through
equity  and  loan  issues.  In  the  process,  direct  investments  of  about  R50  billion
(US $10.7 billion) were acquired by the South African corporate sector over the
past four years.
•  Resident institutional investors were given permission in June 1995 to diversify
part of their total assets into foreign currency denominated investments. At  this
stage,  they  may  hold  up  to  15  per  cent  of  their  total  assets  outside  of  South
Africa.  In  total,  the  financial  sector  has  now  acquired  about  R55  billion  (US
$11.8 billion) in the form of portfolio foreign investments.
•  Last  year,  in  June  1997,  private  individuals  were  given  permission  to  make
limited  investments  in  their  own  names  outside  of  South  Africa.  At  this  stage,
BIS Review   65/1998
- 3 -
individual  taxpayers  in  good  standing  with  the  tax  authorities  may  invest  up  to
R400  000  per  individual  outside  of  South  Africa.  A  modest  amount  of  foreign
exchange equal  to  less  than  R2  billion  has  since  then  been  absorbed  under  this
concession
•  Many other smaller exchange control restrictions were either eased or removed,
for example on short-term trade financing, inter-bank financing arrangements and
the  transfer  of  legacies,  donations  and  emigrants’  funds.  Administrative
procedures  were  simplified  and  banks  (authorised  dealers  in  foreign  exchange)
were  mandated  to  approve  many  transactions  without  prior  reference  to  the
Reserve Bank.
There  remains  but  one  major  area  for  relaxation,  and  that  is  in  respect  of  the
restrictions  still  applicable  to  the  so-called  “blocked”  funds  of  former  residents  of  South  Africa.
Apart  from  settling-in  allowances,  the  remainder  of  the  assets  of  emigrants  is  blocked  in  South
Africa and becomes non-transferable. Income earned on  blocked  funds,  however,  is  not  subject  to
the restrictions.
South Africa has therefore now reached a stage where there are no effective exchange
controls any more on current account transactions and on the movement of funds of non-residents.
Resident  corporates,  financial  institutions  and  private  individuals  all  have  limited  scope  to  make
some investments outside of the country and have, on a combined basis, now accumulated more than
R100 billion of foreign assets. Backlogs that existed in 1994 for the outflow of non-resident funds
have been accommodated in full, and those that existed for the outward investment of resident funds
are  gradually  being  absorbed.  On  balance,  South  Africa  has  now  removed  more  than  seventy  per
cent of all the exchange controls of the past.
3. The inflow of capital into South Africa
The macroeconomic  argument  for  the  removal  of  exchange  control  is  based  on  the
assumption  that,  on  balance,  in  a  liberalised  economy,  over  time  capital  inflows  will  exceed
outflows.  Despite  the  need  to  accommodate  large  accumulated  backlogs,  this  philosophy  was
vindicated by developments in the capital account of the South African balance of payments over the
past four years.
Non-resident  investors  increased  their  holdings  of  South  African  equities  by  about
R63 billion (US $13.5 billion) from 1 January 1995 up to the end of June 1998, and also invested a
net  amount  of  about  R30  billion  (US  $6.5  billion)  in  South  African  bonds.  The  total  portfolio
investment capital inflow of more than R90 billion was mainly used for financing the acquisition of
foreign assets by South African residents, as already mentioned above.
Taking  account  of  the  relatively  large  net  inflows  of  portfolio  foreign  capital,
outflows  to  finance  foreign  investment  by  residents,  and  all  other  capital  movements,  the  capital
account of the South African balance of payments still showed a net inflow of funds from abroad of
R53 billion over the period from the beginning of 1995 up to March 1998. The inflows were more
than sufficient to cover modest current account deficits and to raise the total gross foreign exchange
reserves of the country to a level of R45 billion (US $9.0 billion) at the end of March 1998. At this
level, the total foreign reserves were sufficient to cover about three months’ imports of goods and
services. In terms of international standards, the level of the foreign reserves is still relatively low,
but at least much more comfortable than at the end of March 1994, when the gross foreign reserves
of the country amounted to only R10.3 billion (US $3.0 billion).
BIS Review   65/1998
- 4 -
One of the disappointing aspects of the capital inflows into South Africa over the past
four years has been the relatively small amount of direct foreign investment made in the country. Not
more than 25 per cent of the total inflows represented direct foreign investment, and the rest came in
as portfolio investment in securities, loan capital and short-term financing facilities.
4. Restructuring of the financial sector
The  gradual  removal  of  exchange  controls  was  accompanied  by  some  major
restructuring of the financial sector in South Africa. To encourage competition in the market, more
foreign  banks  were  allowed  to  establish  themselves  in  the  country.  More  than  20  foreign  banks
opened up branches or subsidiaries in South Africa, and more than 60 foreign banks now do business
in the country through representative offices. Together with about 35 domestic banking institutions,
the South African banking industry is now providing, on a competitive basis, excellent and modern
financial  services  to  the  country.  The  industry  is  healthy,  well-managed  and  subject  to  financial
regulation  and  supervision  based  on  the  principles  of  the  Basle  Committee  guidelines  and  core
principles.
While the gradual phasing-out of exchange control continued, the financial markets
were  also  restructured,  liberalised  and  made  more  flexible  to  accommodate  almost  explosive
increases  in  volumes.  In  the  capital  market,  three  separate  specialised  institutions  were  created  to
provide, respectively, for equity trading on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE), bond trading on
the  Bond  Exchange  of  South  Africa,  and  trading  in  derivatives  on  the  South  African  Futures
Exchange.
Two years ago, the JSE introduced major reforms to provide for corporate ownership,
foreign ownership (of stock brokers), dual capacity trading, negotiated commissions and electronic
screen trading. The JSE is continuing to improve its facilities  by  providing  for  the  immobilisation
and  dematerialisation  of  stock,  and  for  improved  clearing  and  settlement  arrangements.  With  a
listing of about 700 different securities, a total market capitalisation of about US $275 billion and a
turnover  of  about  US  $45  billion  last  year,  the  JSE  is  now  classified  as  one  of  the  major  stock
exchanges of the world.
The most spectacular increase in the total volume of transactions over the past few
years took place in the Bond Exchange of South Africa. Total turnover in this market increased from
the equivalent of US $553 billion in 1995, to US $927 billion in 1997, that is an increase of 67.6 per
cent over just two years. The relaxation of the exchange controls made an important contribution to
the development of the Bond Exchange. Total gross transactions by non-residents in this market last
year exceeded the equivalent of US $257 billion, or almost 30 per cent of total turnover.
Interest is also growing in the South African Futures Exchange. The total number of
contracts traded in this market increased from 3½ billion in 1995 to more than 5 billion in 1997.
A  further  important  development  that  flowed  from  the  globalisation  process  is  the
emergence of a Euro-rand market where the outstanding amount of rand-denominated loans raised
by  non-South  African  borrowers  from  non-South  African  investors  now  amounts  to  about
R36 billion.  A  substantial  part  of  the  proceeds  obtained  from  these  loan  issues  was  reinvested  in
South African bonds.
The market in foreign exchange in South Africa is also growing rapidly. The average
daily turnover in this market now exceeds US $10 billion. Of particular importance is the expansion
in  forward  cover  operations  in  this  market,  where  South  African  banks  now  carry  a  fully  covered
forward sales (or purchases) book of about US $180 billion.
BIS Review   65/1998
- 5 -
The Reserve Bank recently introduced steps to encourage a more active development
of the domestic inter-bank market for funds. It is the objective to ensure that short-term interest rates
should  be  flexible,  and  should  fluctuate  to  reflect  changes  in  underlying  market  conditions.  The
effective  rate  at  which  central  bank  funds  are  made  available  to  banking  institutions  is  now
determined  on  a  daily  basis  through  a  tender  system  for  repurchase  transactions,  entered  into
between  the  Reserve  Bank  and  banking  institutions.  This  greater  flexibility  in  short-term  interest
rates  is  of  particular  importance  in  light  of  the  growing  volume  of,  and  greater  volatility  in,
short-term international capital movements.
As a further step in the development of the financial system, the Reserve Bank at the
beginning of this year also upgraded the national payment, clearing and settlement system. The new
system provides for an electronic on-line real-time link between participating banks, and for secure
fund  transfers  between  these  banks.  It  enables  the  banks  to  monitor  and  manage  their  liquidity
positions continuously, and provides for electronically managed end-of-day settlement of interbank
transactions. As from the beginning of October, it will become possible to settle transactions on an
intra-day basis as and when instructions are received within the system.
The  gradual  phasing-out  of  the  exchange  controls  was  therefore  accompanied  by  a
simultaneous process of liberalising, modernising and upgrading of the domestic financial system. In
the process, the removal of the exchange controls did not create any major disruption in the domestic
markets, and the health and soundness of the South African financial institutions were protected.
Both  processes,  however,  should  be  seen  as  part  of  the  wider  movement  of
international  financial  globalisation.  Without  introducing  these  changes,  it  would  not  have  been
possible for South Africa to participate in the process of world-wide integration of financial markets.
The removal of exchange controls and the simultaneous upgrading of the domestic financial system,
opened up the way for South Africa’s participation in this process.
5. The Southern African Development Community
A further consequence of the socio/political/economic reforms in South Africa over
the past few years was a natural greater involvement for the country in the economic development
process  of  the  African  continent.  Apart  from  a  more  active  participation  in  continental  initiatives
working through the Organisation of African Unity, the United Nations Economic Commission for
Africa, and the African Development Bank, South Africa is taking an active part in the activities of
the Southern African Development Community (SADC).
Fourteen  countries  of  the  Southern  African  region  now  belong  to  this  formal
agreement  for  economic  co-operation,  with  the  long-term  goal  of  eventual  economic  integration.
South  Africa  plays  a  leading  role  in  the  development  of  financial  and  investment  co-operation
amongst the participants in SADC.
Within the structured institutional framework of SADC, a Committee of Governors
of  all  the  central  banks  of  the  region  was  established.  This  Committee  introduced  a  number  of
co-operation  projects  intended  to  develop  the  financial  systems  and  markets  of  the  region.  The
approach of the Governors Committee at this stage is first to develop the financial infrastructures in
each  of  the  countries,  before  venturing  into  the  more  challenging  task  of  macroeconomic
co-ordination or integration.
One of the important projects in the work of the SADC Governors Committee is to
remove remaining exchange controls within the region. Where practicable, countries are encouraged
BIS Review   65/1998
- 6 -
to do this even faster than what has been programmed for the overall phasing out of the controls. It is
envisaged that there will eventually be a relatively free movement of goods, services and capital in
this vast area with a total population of more than 180 million people.
6. The financial globalisation process
The phasing out of exchange control and the restructuring of the financial system are
important  preconditions  for  South  Africa’s  greater  participation  in  the  financial  globalisation
process. As can be deducted from some of the statistics quoted in this address, South Africa is now
firmly on the road of greater participation in the expanding international financial markets.
Recent  events  in  the  wake  of  the  East  Asian  financial  crisis  proved  once  again,
however, that the globalisation process is not without risk. The easy movement of large amounts of
funds  into  and  out  of  countries  with  relatively  small  economies  can  at  times  be  very  disrupting.
During  the  four  months  January  to  April  1998,  non-residents  increased  their  holdings  of  South
African bonds, acquired through the Bond Exchange, by more than R16 billion. Over the next ten
weeks, that is during May, June and the first half of July 1998, they reduced their holdings again by
R12 billion.
Both  the  inflows  and  the  outflows  of  capital  on  this  occasion  disrupted  the  South
African  financial  markets  and  complicated  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  centred  on  the
medium-term  objective  of  maintaining  financial  stability  in  the  interest  of  optimum  economic
growth.  In  the  situation  and  against  the  background  of  a  rather  depressed  domestic  economy,  the
yield  on  long-term  government  bonds  increased  from  12.7  per  cent  on  30  April  1998,  to  16.4  per
cent on 6 July, before it declined again to 15.5 per cent last week.
The  Reserve  Bank’s  fluctuating  repo  rate  similarly  showed  wide  fluctuations  and
increased from 14.8 per cent in early May to a peak of 24.0 per cent on 22 June, before settling down
at  a  level  of  about  21  per  cent.  All  banking  institutions  in  the  country  were  forced  to  raise  their
deposit and lending rates by about 6 percentage points since the end of April. The prime overdraft
rate of the major commercial banks now stands at 24 per cent. With the latest measure of inflation at
only 5 per cent per annum, real interest rates are at an extremely high level.
The  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  also  came  under  a  lot  of  pressure.  After  being
relatively stable for a period of about 18 months from October 1996 up to the end of April 1998, the
rand depreciated from R5.05 against the US dollar in the middle of May to R6.62 =  $1  on  6  July
1998. Since then, the exchange rate appreciated again to fluctuate around the R6.00 = $1 level for
the last few days. At this level, the rand, measured against a basket of currencies, is still about 18 per
cent down from where it was at the beginning of this year.
Some  critics  do  believe  that  the  removal  of  the  exchange  controls  is  partly  to  be
blamed  for  this  greater  volatility  in  financial  conditions.  They  advise  South  Africa,  therefore,  to
reintroduce some of the controls, for example, the two-tier exchange rate system. This view is not
shared by the monetary authorities in South Africa. Despite the gyrations of recent weeks, we still
believe  that  the  advantages  of  participation  in  the  financial  globalisation  process  will,  over  time,
bring more advantages to the South African economy than disadvantages.
7. Concluding remarks
The  policies  of  the  phasing  out  of  exchange  control,  the  restructuring  and
liberalisation  of  the  financial  system  and  the  promotion  of  active  participation  in  the  process  of
financial globalisation, have created many opportunities for cross-border investment in South Africa.
BIS Review   65/1998
- 7 -
Foreign  banks,  fund  managers,  institutional  investors  and  manufacturing  concerns  are  extending
their financial business with South Africa in the form of:
•  conventional short-term trade financing;
  short-term inter-bank financing facilities;
loans extended for medium and longer-term periods to South African borrowers
in both the private and public sectors;
•  portfolio investment in equities, bonds and financial derivatives, acquired through
the various capital market exchanges; and
•  direct  investment  in  the  form  of  subsidiaries,  branches,  or  joint  ventures  with
South African undertakings.
Developments in recent years also led to the creation of an active Euro-rand market
outside of South Africa, and to a greater involvement of South Africa in the economic development
process of the Southern African region.
These  exciting  developments  have  already  created  opportunities,  also  for  the
expansion  of  financial  relations  between  South  Africa  and  Australia.  I  believe  many  more
opportunities  exist  and  are  waiting  for  the  financial  and  other  economic  entrepreneurs  in  South
Africa and in Australia to be exploited.
Our two countries should not always be regarded as major export competitors in the
world  markets  for  base  minerals  and  other  commodities.  There  are  also  many  areas  where  our
economies are complementary and where our policies can be supportive in the global environment.
This applies particularly when it comes to our efforts of integrating  our  financial  markets  into  the
world environment.
BIS Review   65/1998
