Mr. Brash addresses the topic “living with low inflation: farming for profit” in
New Zealand   Address by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Dr. Donald T. Brash,
to the Foresight in New Zealand Agriculture Summit in Wellington on 2/4/98.
Introduction
Thank you very much for that kind welcome.
I must, however, immediately ask your forgiveness, in that I am going to change the
topic of my address from that which is printed in the very elegant programme which you have before
you.  When  I  came  to  prepare  this  address  I  went  back  to  the  title  suggested  for  me  -  “Business
performance and investment; redefining the industry” - and I could see the thrust of what was being
asked for, but my heart dropped.You see, I could regale you with old war stories about when I tried to assist  in  the
marketing  of  kiwifruit.  I  could  give  you  my  frank  assessment  of  the  performance  of  the  producer
board with which I have most personal contact, the Kiwifruit Marketing Board, or whatever it is now
called. I could tell you I am still successfully losing money as an absentee kiwifruit grower. I could
talk about added-value. I could chant the mantras - which you all know - saying there’s no future in
selling  undifferentiated  commodities.  I  could  say  we  all  need  to  be  in  the  business  of  building
top-of-the-line brands. I could claim that, if we did that, then, regardless of the exchange rate or the
state of the world economy, all would be well. I could say the rich and the famous would then want
to  buy  our  products  -  top-of-the-line,  nuclear-free,  greener-than-green,  designer  foodstuffs  and
natural fibres, all sanctioned by Xena the Warrior Princess and Peter Blake.
I could say all that, and it would all be true, but from me it would just be rhetoric, in
that I am not in the marketing business, except perhaps of price stability. As a central banker, I think
I  should  talk  about  the  things  I  know  best,  under  the  title  “Living  with  low  inflation:  farming  for
profit.”
Moreover,  I  suspect  that  what  I’m  going  to  say  is  germane  to  what  this  summit  is
trying to achieve.
The exchange rate
In  the  last  two  or  three  years,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  acutely  aware  that  its
policies have been causing, or appearing to cause, the nation’s export farmers a whole lot of distress.
Often, in despair, farmers would tell us that the rising dollar was driving them into the ground, and
for  some  it  was.  Between  the  low  point  in  early  1993  and  the  high  point  in  early  1997,  the  New
Zealand dollar rose against the US dollar by nearly 40 per cent, while even on a trade-weighted basis
the increase was some 30 per cent, big increases by any standards.
Having acknowledged that, I must also say that sometimes farmers, and unfortunately
some of their representatives, blamed the exchange rate when the real villain was low world prices
over  which  monetary  policy  could  have  no  influence.  As  I  have  noted  on  other  occasions,  for
example, roughly three-quarters of the fall in the farm-gate price of bull-beef over the three years to
June 1996 was a result of the fall in US beef prices, with only one-quarter of the fall explained by the
rise in the New Zealand dollar. Moreover, while I would not deny for a moment that the rise in the
exchange rate between early 1993 and early 1997 put huge pressure on many farmers, it is important
to  recall,  for  what  I  am  going  to  say  in  a  moment,  that  that  rise  had  at  least  some  offsetting
advantages:  the  price  of  fuel  was  lower  than  it  would  have  been  otherwise,  as  was  the  price  of
tractors, the cost of off-farm transport, and quite probably  the  cost  of  farm  and  off-farm  labour  as
BIS Review   30/1998
˝
- 2 -
well.  I’ve  sometimes  felt that,  for  some  marketing  agencies at  least,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  a
convenient whipping boy, or a way to pass the buck - pardon the pun.
Now export farmers are feeling much better, or at least those who have escaped the
impact of the drought are feeling better. The exchange rate has fallen sharply, and some observers
feel it will fall further yet. Hopefully, as a result, the New Zealand dollar incomes of export farmers
will rise. I’m sure many farmers are now saying it’s time to reinvest in their farms. If that’s the case,
I’m delighted.
But I want to sound a warning note to farmers. Yes, everything else being equal, your
end of the court is now favoured, just as it was back in the early 90s. But it is important to remember
that  exchange  rates  go  both  up  and  down,  and  you  should  not  assume  that,  just  because  the  kiwi
dollar  has  fallen  sharply  over  the  last  six  to  nine  months  it  will  stay  down  at  these  levels
permanently. Indeed, if our economy prospers, we should expect to see a gradual appreciation of the
exchange rate over the long-term.
Perhaps  farmers  need  to  think  about  the  exchange  rate the  way  Canterbury  farmers
think about rain. Sooner or later, droughts are going to happen.
Consider  what  we  call  “the  real  exchange  rate”.  The  real  exchange  rate  is  New
Zealand’s nominal exchange rate, adjusted by the difference between inflation in New Zealand and
inflation  in  our  trading  partners.  This  is  more  relevant  to  exporters  than  simply  looking  at  the
nominal exchange rate: clearly, if inflation within New Zealand is markedly higher than that in our
trading partners, even a falling exchange rate is of little help to exporters,  while  if  our  inflation  is
markedly lower than that in our trading partners, exporters can cope with an appreciating exchange
rate. When the real exchange rate rises, or in other words when the nominal exchange rate rises by
more than the difference between our inflation rate and that of our trading partners, exporters are put
under real pressure. And vice versa. Now have a look at Graph 1.
Graph 1
Nominal and ’Real’ Trade Weighted Exchange Rate
(1970 - March 1998 average equals 100)
Index
Nominal TWI
Foreign/Domestic price level
’Real’ exchange rate 
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
Index
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
BIS Review   30/1998
˝
- 3 -
The  solid  line  is  the  nominal  Trade  Weighted  Index,  in  other  words  the  nominal
exchange rate. The dotted line shows the difference between inflation in New Zealand and inflation
in our trading partners. As you can see, over long periods of time, the nominal exchange rate tends to
reflect the difference between our inflation rate and that of our trading partners: when our inflation
was relatively high, our exchange rate tended to depreciate; when our inflation was relatively low,
our exchange rate tended to appreciate.
Of course, there have been divergences between the two lines, sometimes for periods
of three or four years at a time, and that is illustrated by the dashed line, or real exchange rate. But
over  the  whole  period  shown,  nearly  30  years,  there  has  been  no  persistent  tendency  for  the  real
exchange rate to rise or fall, and that is true despite the fact that through the first half of the period
the exchange rate was essentially pegged to the US dollar (with periodic devaluations) while for the
last 13 years the currency has been floating. The dashed line - the real exchange rate - has fluctuated
around a pretty flat trend-line. Back in the late 1980s, farmers were in despair, and part of the reason
for that was that the real exchange rate was at a peak in 1987/88. In the early 1990s, by contrast, it
was relatively low, and farmers were feeling much better. In the mid 1990s, it was up again, and now
its coming down again. Note how enduring this cycle is, irrespective of the exchange  rate  regime.
Farmers need to remember this, when judging what investments are worthwhile.
A good Canterbury farmer knows that droughts are inevitable, and plans accordingly.
Likewise, a good exporter knows that fluctuations in the real exchange rate are also inevitable, and
plans accordingly. I would like to be able to say that the Reserve Bank can reduce the amplitude of
these  fluctuations,  but  since  fluctuations  in  the  real  exchange  rate  have  been  of  broadly  similar
magnitude  in,  for  example,  the  United  States,  Japan,  Australia  and  the  United  Kingdom  in  recent
years, I can give you no confidence at all in this regard.
Interest rates
My  staff  tells  me  that  12  months  back  they  were  often  fielding  calls  from  angry
farmers, wanting to vent their spleen about the exchange rate. Those calls have dried up. Now the
calls of distress are often coming from Auckland - people upset that interest rates aren’t lower. A few
days ago an Auckland talkback host was telling me in no uncertain terms what he thought about me
and  monetary  policy  because  he  couldn’t  sell  his  house.  Out  in  the  vast  hinterlands  of  Auckland
talkback  radio,  I’m  becoming  a  bit  of  a  villain  again.  I’m  consoled  by  the  comment  of  a  wise
American central banker who once said that an unpopular central bank governor is not necessarily a
good central bank governor, but a popular central bank governor is almost certainly a bad one.
So  maybe  farmers  are  a  bit  happier,  for  a  while  at  least.  However,  too  often,  I’m
afraid, farmers do have something in common with that Auckland talkback host. And this leads me
to the amended title of my address. At the beginning of this year my staff and I were wrestling with
that old faithful: “Why does New Zealand have such high interest rates relative to other countries?”
Now  the  conventional  explanation  is:  “The  New  Zealand  economy  has  been  more  buoyant  than
others, pushed along by a fiscal loosening, strong immigration and so on. As a result, until recently
we  had  to  have  monetary  policy  tighter  than  elsewhere  and  that  meant  higher  interest  rates  than
elsewhere.”
That is fine as an explanation, as far as it goes. But a key part of the story has also
been that insatiable desire to borrow that still afflicts us New Zealanders, so that, as soon as money is
available at under 10 per cent, we rush down to the bank saying: “Give us more”, forcing the Reserve
Bank to tighten monetary conditions to contain inflation.
Why is that? Are New Zealanders irrational? I doubt that. But hold on - we’ve had
price  stability  since  1991.  Yet,  clearly,  if  you  look  at  our  willingness  to  borrow  ever-increasing
BIS Review   30/1998
˝
- 4 -
amounts at apparently high rates of interest, it’s taking a long time for that lesson to sink in, and in
the meantime, monetary policy has had to be pretty tight. What’s been happening?
Well, one young economist in our Economics Department recently came up with an
interesting graph. She compared our real estate inflation with Australia’s. She then offset that against
the mortgage rates in the two countries and something very telling emerged. People don’t borrow to
buy the basket of goods and services that go into the Consumers Price Index. Mostly they borrow to
buy property. Measured against property inflation, our real interest rates have been much lower than
theirs have, at least until recently (Graph 2). That’s to say, our mortgage rate minus our residential
property  inflation  has,  until  recently,  been  much  lower  than  Australia’s  mortgage  rate  minus  their
property inflation. So, in the mid 1990s, it made more sense to borrow to the hilt to buy property in
New  Zealand  than  in  Australia.  New  Zealanders  weren’t  being  irrational.  They  were  reacting
perfectly sensibly to the incentives that property inflation was giving them, though, I have to add, it
has come to an end now, and I fear there may be tears, as happens whenever a fall in property prices
affects  people  who  have  borrowed  heavily  in  the  expectation  that  prices  will  continue  to  rise
indefinitely.
Graph 2
Real mortgage interest rate
(Mortgage interest rate less ex-post house price inflation)
 NZ
Australia
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
Living with low inflation
Let’s  peel  this  back  further.  Why  did  property  inflation  continue  in  the  1990s?  We
achieved  price  stability  measured  by  the  CPI  in  1991.  Those  representing  both  sides  of  wage
negotiations quickly understood what that meant. I well recall Ken Douglas saying - and I hope Ken
will forgive me if I report this a bit roughly - that he didn’t support this new Reserve Bank obsession
with price stability, but if that was going to be the fact of the matter, then double digit pay rises were
a  thing  of  the  past.  Likewise,  retailers  and  the  providers  of  services  quickly  surrendered  the
traditional cost-plus attitude of the 1970s and early 1980s.
However, strangely, we have been far less successful with property ownership, and, I
have to say, this applies both in town and in the countryside, as Graph 3 illustrates: for most of the
BIS Review   30/1998
˝
- 5 -
last decade, both  house  prices  and  farm  prices  have  risen markedly  more  quickly  than  the  general
rate of CPI inflation. Far too many people still see getting heavily into debt to buy a second property
as  the  best  way  they  can  save  for  their  retirement,  even  though,  in  my  view,  they  will  be
disappointed.
Graph 3
House prices and rural land prices
(indexes rebased to a March 1988 value of 100)
Index
280
260
240
220
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
Auckland house prices
Other NZ house prices
Farm land prices
CPIX
1988
1989
1990 1991
1992
1993
1994 1995
1996
1997
Source VNZ.  ’Other NZ’ series is derived by RBNZ from VNZ data.
Index
280
260
240
220
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
Lest I be misquoted yet again, I’m not criticising home ownership. Owning your own
place is normally a good thing to do because it provides a secure home. It also provides an asset for
people, particularly in their retirement, assuming it is financed rationally. I own a home myself, and
have done so for most of my adult life, for all the normal reasons that apply to most New Zealanders.
However,  my  concern  is  that  -  forgive  me  pinching  a  great  line  -  New  Zealanders’  “irrational
exuberance” for getting into debt, in the hope of making money out of now non-existent inflation, is
still distorting the New Zealand economy.
So, the question remains, why that passion for debt to finance speculative real estate?
Why  have  people,  when  it  comes  to  their  personal  finances,  failed  to  learn  the  lessons  of  low
inflation that they have learnt very well indeed in the work place?
One  of  my  staff  has  come  up  with  an  interesting  proposition.  He  says  it’s  all  the
Reserve  Bank’s  fault.  Maybe  we’ve  sold  the  message  wrongly.  Maybe  our  advocacy  has  been  at
fault.
Certainly,  I’ve  given  innumerable  speeches  about  the  worth  of  price  stability,  but
always  as  a  public  good  or  as  a  benefit  that  applies  to  society  as  a  whole.  I’ve  talked  about  how
economies perform better if people making investments have a stable currency by which to measure
the value of commercial decisions over time. I’ve talked about social justice, and the way inflation
harms the poor and benefits the rich, and so on. Maybe what we, the Reserve Bank, have failed to do
is talk about the value of price stability as a private good. More specifically, maybe we’ve failed to
take the lead in saying: “All right, low inflation is here to stay. This is what you need to think about
in personally managing your affairs given that fact.”
BIS Review   30/1998
˝
- 6 -
As we bounced this idea about, another staff member said: “Yes, just this weekend,
my  father  -  he’s  got  a  few  properties  -  said:  ‘Back  when  there  was inflation  I  knew  how  to  make
money - but now I don’t’.” At the moment we are investigating some media strategies to start talking
about this. I don’t know if anything will come of it, but I do think there is an important point here.
The virtue of price stability as a private good is a case that hasn’t been won yet, or at very least we
have failed to explain the implications of low inflation at the individual level.
For example, people need to think about questions like: “Does that second property
make  sense  if,  over  time,  its  value  will  increase  at  little  more  than  the  average  rate  of  inflation,
indeed  for  some  properties  at  less  than  the  average  rate  of  inflation?  Given  the  extent  to  which
property prices have risen faster than incomes over the last few years, is there a risk of a substantial
fall in property prices over the next few years? Would I be better investing in financial assets that
earn  interest?  Does  putting  that  deck  on  the  house  make  sense  given  low  inflation,  or  will  I  be
over-capitalised? This mortgage is stretching my finances to the limit, so can I endure it, given that
my debt won’t be wiped out by inflation in five years’ time?”
Am I just seeking to re-educate townies doing up old villas in Grey Lynn, not because
they want to live in them, but because they plan to sell next year? Well, no. When farmers were in
distress about non-tradable inflation and the “blunt instrument of monetary policy”, I and one or two
others on the receiving end, said: “Hold on, what about the runaway prices for farm land? They’ve
been  going  up  just  as  fast  or  faster  that  property  in  town.”  “Not  fair,”  replied  various  farmers’
representatives. “That’s a cost of production we have to face, not a price we control,” they said.
Well  maybe.  But  for  the  most  part  farmers  sell  land  to  and  buy  land  from  other
farmers. It seems to me that many farmers are like people in the cities when it comes to their private
finances. Too many still haven’t internalised the lesson that, by hook or by crook, price stability is
here to stay. This is part of why, to put it bluntly, the price of farm land is still very high - certainly
irrationally  high,  if  one  is  assessing  the  business  of  farming  in  terms  of  the  annual  profits  being
earned  on  the  investment.  The  Meat  and  Wool  Board’s  Economic  Service  reports  that  the  rate  of
return on the market value of farm assets used in farming sheep and beef averaged just 0.8 per cent in
1995/96, and 1.7 per cent in 1996/97. Indeed, that rate of return has not reached 6 per cent in any
year  since  1979/80.  And  this  in  an  industry  where  the  trend  of  world  market  prices  has  been
inexorably downwards since the Second World War.  Why, on that basis, would anybody invest in
farming?
Of course, the answer, in part, is that farming people have non-commercial reasons
for wanting to be in this business, as well as commercial reasons, and that’s perfectly legitimate. Lots
of other people make similar decisions. I recognise also that, in part, the reasons for the low rates of
return on sheep and beef properties in the years cited were related to temporary factors, such as the
strong demand for land suitable for planting in forestry and, on  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum,  for
land  suitable  for  conversion  to  dairying.  However,  also,  I  suspect  that  too  many  farmers  are  still
farming for capital gain. Too many farmers still think, okay, my life will be pretty basic during my
working career, but the life-style is good, and I will have a gold-plated retirement when I sell.
Here I come right back to the wider theme of this summit. I don’t think farming for
capital gain does farming any  good at all. I think it is based on delusion, in  that  from  here  on  the
capital gains won’t be there, because inflation has been contained even for farm land prices (indeed,
Graph 3 indicates as much over the last couple of years, while many observers are predicting some
fall  in  land  prices  from  current  levels).  However,  in  the  meantime,  the  entry  costs  of  getting  into
farming are still too high, which excludes fresh blood and innovation.
For  example,  why  would  anybody  take  seriously  advice  to  improve  the  market
acceptability  of  the  meat  they  produce,  or  the  wool  they  produce,  if  the  real  crop  is  selling  the
BIS Review   30/1998
˝
- 7 -
property to the next guy? Why would the pursuit of excellence, that this summit is promoting, have
any relevance, if the primary goal is property speculation?
The answer, ladies and gentlemen, is no reason at all.
My  worry  is  that,  as  the  profitability  of  producing  meat,  and  wool,  and  milk  is
gradually  restored  with  a  lower  exchange  rate,  farmers  will  quickly  capitalise  that  increased
profitability into the price of land once more. If that happens, the profitability of farming will remain
low indefinitely: farm-owners may have substantial wealth, but the rate of return on that wealth will
remain  very  low.  Eventually,  this  process  only  ends  when  people  refuse  to  invest  in  an  industry
where  the  rate  of  return  is  so  low  and  the  risks  -  of  weather,  disease,  and  markets  -  are  so
considerable, and put their money in the bank instead. Farming doesn’t come to an end at that point:
land prices fall to the point where the rate of return on farming seems attractive relative to the risk.
BIS Review   30/1998
˝
