Mr.  Camdessus  shares  his  views  on  a  new  financial  architecture  for  a
globalized  world      Address  by  the  Managing  Director  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund,
Mr. M. Camdessus, at the Royal Institute for International Affairs in London on 8/5/98.
The G-7/G-8 Summit will be held in Birmingham next week. High on the Summit
agenda will be the issue of how to renovate the architecture of the international financial system
in the face of the tremendous changes under way in the global economy.  The  Asian  crisis  has
been so unexpected in many of its aspects, so broad, so cruel in its human consequences that -
even before the crisis has run its full course - the leaders  of  the  world  want  to  embark  on  the
design of a new architecture. This is certainly the right thing to do, and the venue of this meeting
could  hardly  be  more  fitting.  Like  many  other  cities  in  advanced  countries,  Birmingham  has
experienced the forces of change in the global economy first hand - from the loss of traditional
industries  to  the  challenge  of  finding  new  employment  opportunities.  Moreover,  two  centuries
ago, this city was at the heart of the Industrial Revolution, an era that, like our own, was a time of
extremely  rapid  change.  At  that  time,  intellectuals  of  all  schools  of  thought  used  to  meet
frequently in Birmingham - every full moon, I understand - and bring their reflections to bear on
the  challenges  of  their  new  world.  This  was  the  so-called  Lunar  Society,  which  included  such
personalities  as  Matthew  Boulton,  James  Watt,  Erasmus  Darwin  (grandfather  of  Charles),  and
William  Small  -  a  friend  of  Benjamin  Franklin  and  Thomas  Jefferson,  all  with  wide-ranging
interests, all sharing a sense of optimism and responsibility for building a better world. Imagine
what a blessing it would be if the G-7/G-8 - our new Birmingham group - were to be inspired by
such an example when dealing with their pressing agenda!
As  a  modest  preface  to  their  work,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  my  personal
views on the need for change the Asian crisis reveals, the building blocks  available  for  a  new
architecture, and the work already under way at the IMF and, in the best traditions of Chatham
House, to fly a few kites and suggest some further steps for the longer term.
Change is needed
 As in the days of the Industrial Revolution, we are now at a defining moment of
human  history.  The  question  before  us  is  straightforward:  how  to  utilize  the  full  potential  of
globalization to improve the living standards of all - particularly the poorest - while containing
the risks it entails, such as those we have seen materialize so brutally in Asia, and those at least
equally  pernicious,  even  if  less  spectacular,  of  the  continuous  marginalization  of  the  poorest
countries. What kind of new architecture of the global system could achieve this? The response
must be deduced from a proper analysis of the most recent crises.
Contrary to what we saw during the debt crisis of the 1980s, the problems in Asia
were  not  almost  exclusively  macroeconomic  in  nature;  even  if  these  countries  suffered,  all  of
them,  from  some  deficiencies  in  this  respect,  by  and  large  they  had  long  track  records  of
successful  economic  management.  Rather,  in  a  context  dramatically  changed  by  a  major
realignment between the dollar and the yen, and important differences in short-term yields, three
other factors helped trigger the crisis:
the weakness of their public and private banking and financial structures;
• 
•  an  unsustainable  accumulation  of  short-term  financing  -  particularly  of
interbank lending, which Alan Greenspan refers to as the Achilles’ heel of the
BIS Review   43/1998
- 2 -
international financial system - which made countries particularly vulnerable
to a sudden shift in market sentiment.
•  and,  last  but  not  least,  deep-seated  problems  of  governance,  corruption,  and
what US commentators call “crony capitalism”.
Together with the macroeconomic problems, these three major factors had to be
addressed  for  our  response  to  the  crisis  to  be  pertinent.  If  you  examine  our  programs  with
Thailand, Korea, and Indonesia, you will see that we have tried to deal with these factors, and
they will have to be taken into consideration in the future in whatever efforts are undertaken to
avoid the recurrence of crises. But even that will not suffice. In view of the enormous human and
economic  cost  of  the  Asian  crisis,  no  wonder  we  hear  many  radical  suggestions  as  to  how  to
avoid  such  losses  in  the  future.  There  are  calls  for  us  to  do  a  better  job  of  predicting  and
preventing  crises,  addressing  their  social  impact  more  effectively,  stopping  speculators  and
properly regulating this “casino economy”, seeing to it that investors bear the full costs of their
mistakes,  stabilizing 
international  monetary  system,  providing  for  more  political
accountability of our institution, etc., etc.
the 
We  cannot  deny  the  basic  justification  of  these  -  at  times  vociferous  -  calls  for
change. No doubt there are at least some elements of validity in each of them. Taken together
they tell us that, at this stage, world public opinion expects its leaders to design and build a new,
common  house  with  an  audaciously  modern  architecture,  and  not  limit  themselves  to  some
plumbing and interior decorating of the old mansion.
But,  as  responsible  architects,  let  us  start  by  recognizing  the  building  blocks  at
hand. Indeed, they are substantial.
Seven building blocks
The  first  of  these  building  blocks  is  the  tremendous  potential  for  growth  and
prosperity globalization provides countries fully integrating into the global economy. Formidable
sources  of  dynamism  are  there,  engendered  by  new  information  technologies  and  unifying
financial  markets.  The  question,  then,  is  how  to  discipline  and  channel  these  forces  so  that
growth will be sustainable and more broadly shared and the fundamental desire for greater equity
will be more fully satisfied.
The  second  building  block  is  integration.  By  integrating  themselves  into  the
mainstream of the globalizing world economy, the poorest countries will avail themselves of a
most powerful instrument of acceleration of development, while, if they preferred to do it alone,
they would expose themselves to the risks of marginalization, abandoning several generations to
economic stagnation and poverty.
The  third  building  block  is  the  universal  consensus  on  the  importance  of  an
increasingly open and liberal system of capital flows in order for globalization to deliver on its
promises.
The fourth building block is what we could call the “golden rule” of transparency,
now truly seen as the key for modern management, economic success, and rational behavior of
global markets.
BIS Review   43/1998
- 3 -
The fifth is good governance, which is equally essential for strong economies and
properly  functioning  democracies.  No  doubt,  competing  for  excellence  in  governance  is  the
modern face of statesmanlike responsibility.
The sixth building block could be a set of standards and codes of best practices;
this  could  require  a  few  words  of  elaboration.  More  and  more  we  observe  an  emerging
recognition  that  the  global  markets  still  suffer  from  the  kind  of  anarchy  that  afflicted  our
domestic  financial  markets  here  in  Europe  during  the  nineteenth  and  the  beginning  of  the
twentieth  centuries  -  that  is,  until  various  scandals  and  crises  led  to  the  creation  of  such
institutions and rules as securities and exchange commissions, banking supervision, accounting
standards,  disclosure  and  prudential  rules,  and  so  forth.  Our  challenge  today  is  to  disseminate
these good practices in emerging markets and to establish similar checks and balances in global
markets. This could appear an impossible task, as many will pretend that the absence of rules or
regulations of any kind has been at the very origin of the developments of  these  markets.  The
world  community  is  now  coming  to  a  different  view,  and  looks  forward  for  the  definition  of
international standards and codes of good practices, which would be progressively disseminated
by the IMF through its surveillance, and could help limit the excesses of an international “casino
economy”.
Last,  but  not  least,  the  seventh  building  block  is  the  option  for  the  multilateral
approach  to  handle  problems,  which  are  now  more  and  more  global  in  nature.  And  the  key
instruments of such an approach will have to be the Bretton Woods institutions themselves. Let
me be immodest for a moment. The experience they have accumulated, the quality of their staff,
their  demonstrated  ability  to  address  new  economic  challenges  promptly  and  efficiently  make
them a major asset of the world community and a central pillar of a new architecture, provided
they continue adapting themselves, reforming themselves, to this new world. And suggestions for
self-reform are in abundant supply.
These  seven  building  blocks  have  been  neglected  or  unevenly  utilized  for  too
long. Assembled in the right way, they could offer a rock-solid foundation for a new financial
system.  Assembling  them,  nevertheless,  will  be  hard  work,  each  of  them  implying  that  vested
interests or perverse practices be challenged. Thus, notwithstanding our sense of urgency, we are
heading here for an evolutionary change: Athena in her helmet will not spring full-grown from
the head of Zeus! And, as with all transitions from one era to another, we can expect risks and
uncertainties to persist for some years to come. This makes it all the more urgent to get to work
on this new architecture right away.
Initial steps for a new architecture
In fact, a number of significant steps are already under way. At its April meeting,
our governing body, the Interim Committee (of Ministers and Central Bank Governors of IMF
member countries), set the broad agenda for the IMF’s own work - and its work with others - for
the near future. Five areas have been given priority by member governments:
•  The  central  role  to  be  played  by  the  IMF  in  crisis  prevention  through  its
surveillance  and  its  role  in  encouraging  members  to  strengthen  their
macroeconomic policies and financial sectors.1
                                                     
1
Of  course,  it  is  clear  that  for  IMF  surveillance  to  be  effective,  member  countries  must  provide  timely,
accurate, and comprehensive data to the Fund. The Interim Committee underscored members’ obligation in
BIS Review   43/1998
- 4 -
The Interim Committee suggests that the Fund intensify its work in surveillance of
financial  sector  issues  and  capital  flows,  and  focus  on  the  risks  posed  by  potentially  abrupt
reversals  of  capital  flows,  especially  those  of  a  short-term  nature.  The  Fund  is  also  asked  to
examine ways  to  strengthen  the  monitoring  of  capital  flows,  a  major  and  difficult  undertaking
indeed!
•  Drawing  on  the  lessons  from  the  Asian  crisis,  and  the  frustration  that
confidential  warnings  from  the  Fund  were  not  always  heeded,  the  Fund  has
been asked to develop a “tiered response”, whereby countries that are believed
to  be  seriously  off  course  in  their  policies  are  given  increasingly  strong
warnings. Addressing an audience in this country, where football is a way of
life,  or  in  my  own  country  in  advance  of  the  World  Cup,  I  do  not  need  to
emphasize how important it is to know exactly when the referee has shown a
yellow card and how many yellow cards are permitted! We also have the red
card  in  our  Articles  of  Agreement,  but  using  this  card  could  precipitate  the
crisis we seek to avoid. So we prefer to use the yellow card.
•  The Interim Committee also called upon the IMF to help members strengthen
their domestic financial systems by encouraging them to develop supervisory
and  regulatory  frameworks  that  are  consistent  with  internationally  accepted
best  practices,  as  well  as  strengthened  standards  for  bank  and  non-bank
institutions.  Here  you  will  recognize,  of  course,  the  “standards  and  good
practices” building block. Work in this area is already in progress in various
fora.  A  notable  example  is  the  Basle  Committee’s  Core  Principles  for
strengthening  banking  regulation  and  supervision,  which  the  IMF  is  now
helping  to  disseminate  to  member  countries.  We  will  now  work  with  other
relevant institutions that could be responsible for developing similar standards
in areas such as accounting, auditing, disclosure, asset valuation, bankruptcy,
and  corporate  governance.  We  will  also  consider  how  to  disseminate  such
standards  to  member  countries  through  our  surveillance  and  encourage  their
adoption. Working with so many institutions, public and private, in addition to
our  182  member  countries,  will  be  an  ambitious  undertaking,  but  we  are
ready -  and  enthusiastic  -  to  play  our  full  part  in  this  new  chapter  in
international cooperation.
In the meantime, the IMF has been applying this standards approach to one of its
traditional  domains  of  expertise:  fiscal  policy.  Last  winter,  following  the  suggestion  of  the
Chancellor of Exchequer, the IMF developed a code of good practices on fiscal transparency to
which members will be encouraged to adhere. Looking ahead, we plan to develop a similar code
with respect to financial and monetary policies in cooperation with the appropriate institutions.
                                                                                                                                                                          
this  regard  and  suggested  delaying  the  Fund’s  reviews  of  member  economies  when  deficiencies  in
disclosing  relevant  information  to  the  IMF  seriously  impede  our  surveillance.  Indeed,  the  G-7  countries
have  the  opportunity  this  week  to  establish  leadership  by  pledging  to  convey  to  the  IMF  and  to  publish
comprehensive  and  timely  data  on  both  gross  and  net  reserves,  including  reserve-related  liabilities  and
central  bank  derivative  transactions  and  positions,  as  well  as  external  debt  and  data  on  banking  and
financial sector health.
BIS Review   43/1998
- 5 -
•  But despite these efforts at crisis prevention, crises may continue to arise from
time  to  time.  In  this  regard,  the  Interim  Committee  also  reaffirmed  both  the
central role of the Fund in crisis management and the need to develop more
effective procedures to  involve  the  private  sector  in  forestalling  or  resolving
financial crises.2
•  Finally, as I have already alluded, the Committee reaffirmed its view that the
time  has  come  to  add  a  new  chapter  to  the  Bretton  Woods  Agreement  by
making  the  liberalization  of  capital  movements  one  of  the  purposes  of  the
Fund  and  extending,  as  needed,  the  Fund’s  jurisdiction  for  this  purpose.  It
requested  the  Executive  Board  to  pursue  its  work  on  this  issue  with
determination,  with  the  aim  of  submitting  an  appropriate  amendment  of  our
Articles of Agreement as soon as possible.
Greater  transparency  and  availability  of  economic  information,  adoption  of
standards and dissemination  of  best  practices,  a  continuous  strengthening  of  IMF  surveillance,
the  orderly  liberalization  of  capital  movements,  and  better  private  sector  involvement  in  crisis
prevention  and  resolution  -  taken  together  and  utilized  to  their  full  potential  -  these  first  five
pillars could be a very significant contribution to a new financial architecture much more attune
to  dramatically  modernized  and  globalized  markets.  I  have  no  doubt  the  G-7/G-8  leaders  in
Birmingham will invite us to build on this basis. One can even imagine that they want to point
out some additional avenues, which, as we  have  been  absorbed  by  more  immediately  pressing
aspects of our work - we have not, as yet, been able to explore sufficiently.
What next?
Trying to answer the question of “what next” is a risky endeavor. No doubt with
globalization  unfolding  its  opportunities  and  risks,  new  priorities  will  promptly  capture  our
attention  and  overtake  our  pre-established  agendas.  But  it  is  always  better  to  try  to  anticipate
them, particularly when they reflect problems that should already have been addressed, be it:
                                                     
2 
As  regards  the  latter,  some  follow-up  actions  are  needed,  including  measures  to  discourage  excessive
reliance  on  short-term  financing  and  strengthen  countries’  capacity  to  withstand  sudden  shifts  in  market
sentiment. In addition, the Interim Committee has requested the Fund to consider other ways to strengthen
incentives for creditors to use available information to analyze risks appropriately and avoid excessive risk-
taking. Possibilities include introducing provisions in bond contracts regarding bondholder representation
and voting in case of negotiations on bond restructuring; extending the Fund’s policy of providing financing
to  member  countries  in  arrears  to  private  creditors;  encouraging  strong  bankruptcy  systems  for  both
domestic and international  capital  markets;  and  advising  member  countries  to  exercise  greater  caution  in
granting  public  guarantees.  We  also  need  to  examine  the  possibility  of  closer  contacts  with  creditors  in
order to explain Fund arrangements and, if needed, catalyze private sector financing so as to achieve more
equitable burden sharing vis-à-vis the official sector and limit moral hazard.
Establishing closer contacts with private creditors, particularly at an early stage of a crisis, raises difficult
issues; thus, it is not surprising that the Interim Committee has not pronounced on this point. Among the
various options, I would suggest that consideration be given to asking the appropriate authorities in each
creditor country to arrange for the selection of a representative of its financial community, who could be
contacted in a crisis and who could provide a channel for communicating with a wide spectrum of financial
institutions.
BIS Review   43/1998
- 6 -
  the integration of the poorest countries in the globalized economy. Asia should
not distract us from the pressing problems of the poorest economies;
the stabilization of the international monetary system; or
the 
institutions, as far as the IMF is concerned.
the  democratic  accountability  of 
international  financial
issue  of 
The issue of the integration of the poorest countries is, of course, already on our
agenda. But, true, the attention of the world has been so focused on the Asian crisis and the need
to  avoid  its  recurrence  that  the  immense  problem  of  development  and  alleviation  of  poverty,
particularly in Africa, seems to have been put temporarily on a back burner. This is no longer
acceptable.
In this context, I was particularly happy that, in drawing the lessons of an external
evaluation of ESAF, the Interim Committee encouraged us to “strengthen the ability of the Fund
to  foster  sustained  growth  and  external  viability  in  poor  countries”.  There  is  more  than
conventional  rhetoric  in  these  words.  This  mention,  in  a  document  essentially  devoted  to  the
handling of financial crisis, surely testifies to the recognition by the world’s financial leaders that
the  success  or  failure  of  poor  countries  in  finding  their  own  way  toward  integration  and
development  in  an  interdependent  world  will  have  a  major  influence  on  what  the  twenty-first
century will be. This means that the solidity of our new architecture will crucially depend on the
way in which, for the poorest countries, monetary and financial strategies, on the one hand, and
poverty alleviation strategies, on the other hand, are made mutually reinforcing.
Poverty alleviation is chiefly, of course, the task of the World Bank, the regional
development banks and bilateral donors. Among the latter, it is quite encouraging, indeed, to see
the  energy  and  enthusiasm  with  which  the  British  Minister  for  Development  -  an  MP  from
Birmingham, as a matter of fact! - Ms. Clare Short, is promoting the DAC Target of reducing by
one  half  the  proportion  of  the  world’s  population  living  in  extreme  poverty  by  2015.3  These
objectives  are  ambitious,  but  they  remain  realistic,  provided  industrial  countries  join  forces  in
stopping the present decline of development assistance and implement their agreed commitment
to  support,  as  needed,  countries  that  truly  own  their  national  strategies  for  sustainable
development. Among the latter, I would agree that particular priority be given to post - conflict
countries  where  we  must  join  forces  to  give  new  chances  to  reconciliation,  peace  and
development. Obeying this same imperative of serving together peace and development, I would
also suggest that the G-7/G-8 warmly endorse Mr. Koffi Annan’s recommendation to the African
governments to reduce purchases of arms and munitions to 1½ percent of GDP and maintain zero
growth on defense budgets for the next decade. Industrial countries must play their full part in
these efforts, and, here, I must share with you my anxiety.
Today’s  silence  on  the  crisis  in  official  development  assistance  is  profound  and
distressing.  It  means  that  Africa,  in  particular,  must  rely  chiefly  for  its  economic  progress  on
humanitarian compassion or the benefits of trade. This cannot suffice if human development is to
be  intensified  and  accelerated.  Yet,  at  the  present  juncture,  the  macroeconomic  and  structural
successes of recent years, precisely in the context of IMF-World Bank supported programs, are
creating an opportunity that is too good to miss. Africa has found a way to advance from two
decades of negative per capita growth to positive growth in more than forty of its countries. In
                                                     
3
I hope I am not revealing a state secret in telling you that she inscribed this on her Christmas card!
BIS Review   43/1998
- 7 -
many African countries, a new generation of leaders is seriously concerned about the need for
democratization,  protection  of  human  rights,  promotion  of  “good  governance”,  and  human
development.  Their  efforts  are  in  danger  of  falling  short,  however,  because  their  domestic
savings rates are still too low to finance the volume of investments needed to boost their rate of
growth from approximately 5 percent to over 7 percent, which is not an unrealistic objective; it
could  be  attained  and  sustained  for  a  long  time  if  local  savings  were  supplemented  by  an
appropriate  mix  of  public  and  private  foreign  support  and  if  a  few  key  conditions  were  met,
notably:
•  continued modernization of the framework for private investment; and
• 
improvement  in  public  governance  through  the  total  commitment  of  new
governing teams.
Together with the World Bank and bilateral donors, we can make a difference. But
a  strong  political  impulsion  by  the  world’s  leaders  and  the  example  of  their  countries’
cooperation  to  development  will  be  of  the  essence.  May  their  communiqué  demonstrate  their
vision and leadership in this domain also.
The stability of the international monetary system has been on the agenda for more
than 20 years of annual summits. The Asian crisis has highlighted how disruptive developments
in  exchange  markets  can  help  trigger  a  crisis.  It  is  in  this  domain  that  efforts  to  strengthen
multilateral  surveillance  over  the  international  monetary  system  could  be  particularly  fruitful.
Moreover,  the  development  of  the  euro  into  a  key  international  currency  could  make  a  major
contribution to stability of the overall architecture, provided that close cooperation is established
among the monetary authorities of the tripolar system that might take shape. Even if it would be
premature at this stage to try to elaborate further on how to maximize the positive effects of this
major  innovation,  no  doubt  the  new  international  monetary  equilibrium  will  have  to  be  kept
under  review  as  a  key  element  of  the  new  architecture.  From  the  outset,  effective  means  of
coordination will have to be found to avoid excessive misalignments and disruptive corrections.
The  world  is  fully  justified  in  expecting  a  responsible  leadership  from  these  major  currencies
blocs, which should be actively mindful of their global responsibility and resist the temptation of
“benign neglect”. Each of them.
Lastly, at a time when de facto more and more responsibilities are being given to
the international financial institutions, and particularly to the IMF, the question of their political
accountability  will  probably  be  raised  with  increasing  insistence.  Indeed,  this  question  already
arises from time to time, although not always with full awareness of the nature of our institutions
and of the powerful checks and balances already enshrined in their Articles of Agreement. In this
context, and as far as the IMF is concerned, is there anything that could be done to strengthen
what one might call the political accountability or legitimacy of our institutions? At this stage,
this would require at least a few organizational changes, which would make more explicit the tie
that  binds  us  to  the  governments  we  depend  on.  The  IMF  could,  for  instance,  encourage  its
Governors, in general the Ministers of Finance, to become more actively involved in its work, in
terms of decision-making and not merely in a consultative capacity in the Interim Committee. A
similar question faces the G-7, which feels the need to embrace emerging market countries, but is
unclear  about  how  to  go  about  it,  and  finds  it  difficult  to  come  up  with  acceptable  ways  of
choosing  its  partners.  The  design  of  a  new  architecture  provides,  perhaps,  a  good  occasion  to
address these long-avoided questions. Two avenues could be explored.
BIS Review   43/1998
- 8 -
The first would be to “revitalize” the IMF Interim Committee. It could become an
essential structure, because no other can match the scope of its responsibility and the legitimacy
of its members, who are collectively responsible for key developments in the world economy. At
present, however, it is hampered by the ritualism of its meetings and an insufficient awareness of
its uniqueness and potential. This is why I  think  that  the  suggestion  of  the  French  Minister  of
Finance, M. Strauss-Kahn, to consider its transformation into a “Council” with decision-making,
rather than merely consultative, powers, is particularly important. This is not a new  idea.  This
transformation,  pursuant  to  Article  XII,  Section  1  of  the  Fund’s  Articles  of  Agreement,  could
give it a new start. This approach was envisaged under the Jamaica accords, but deferred at the
time  because  of  the  experimental  nature  of  the  Interim  Committee.  But  given  the  daunting
changes that have occurred recently in the world economy, and the fact that the IMF has achieved
truly universal status with the accession of the transition countries, perhaps the time has come to
consider  it.  Without  greatly  altering  the  operation  of  the  institution  and  the  pivotal  role  of  its
Executive  Board,  such  a  transformation  would  give  the  IMF  renewed  and  very  valuable
legitimacy for the increasingly difficult tasks it is called upon to perform.4
The second avenue, in the same spirit, would consist of making provisions every
two  years  for  the  G-7/G-8  -  on  the  occasion  of  their  meetings  -  to  join  the  heads  of  state  and
government of the 16 countries holding seats on the IMF and World Bank Executive Boards to
discuss with them and with the heads of those two institutions and the WTO the major economic
and financial questions of the day. This new G-24 would have the significant merit of its basic
legitimacy, as it would strictly reflect the system of international representation established for
monetary and financial affairs in Bretton Woods. This would clearly represent a step forward not
only  in  terms  of  dispelling  the  current  malaise,  but  also  in  terms  of  hastening  the  adoption  of
integrated policy responses to the challenges of the globalized economy. The Secretary General
of the United Nations should also be invited to participate to take into account the work of the
entire family of UN agencies, which could become a fourth humanitarian and social pillar of the
world system.
Such ideas could, of course, be met with skepticism and run up against logistical
problems that may seem insurmountable. Nevertheless, they need to be discussed, as they could
provide a concrete way of recognizing that each medium-sized or developing country must have
a more equitable share of responsibility for the future of the world economy, a share that they
believe  is  unjustly  denied  them  in  the  present  institutional  arrangements  of  the  international
financial system.
Now, at the end of this analysis of a number of key issues confronting the world
economy, it is perhaps appropriate to come back for one minute to the central messages of our
eminent predecessors of the Lunar Society two hundred years ago. I am told that they included:
   the value of drawing lessons and inspiration from various disciplines and from
the experience in different countries;
the  need  to  establish  and  disseminate  standards  so  quality  would  be  upheld
and trade would flourish; and
                                                     
4
This  decision  must  be  taken  by  an  85  percent  majority  and  thus  requires  the  active  support  of  all  G-7
members.
BIS Review   43/1998
- 9 -
•  a  deep  concern  for  the  social  implications  of  economic  change  and  a  keen
desire to improve education;
•  and,  of  course,  a  strong  sense  of  purpose  and  confidence  in  the  promises  of
their new world.
No doubt these messages could strike a chord with many people today, including -
why not? - the stellar group that will assemble in Birmingham. May they share these approaches
and concerns. Their confidence in the lasting benefits of globalization will be fully justified as a
new world, born from the opening of economies, the unification of markets, and the  universal
availability  of  information  and  knowledge,  has  an  immense  potential  for  high-quality  growth.
May they also validate their own message of confidence by a clear demonstration of their sense
of universal responsibility and solidarity.
BIS Review   43/1998
