Mr. Hartmann reviews the standardisation in cross-border payments in the
light  of  European  economic  and  monetary  union      Speech  by  Mr. Wendelin  Hartmann,  a
member of the Directorate of the Deutsche Bundesbank, on the occasion of the EMI Seminar on
Standardisation - The case of cross-border transfers, held in Frankfurt/Main on 30/1/98.
The European Monetary Institute has organised a seminar on a topic with which I
have  become  very  closely  associated  during  the  many  years  that  I  have  been  working  at  the
Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  my  time  as  Chairman  of  the  Working  Group  on  EU  Payment
Systems. The focal point of my work has always been in the field of organisation and in what is
generally  called  “controlling”  these  days.  Success  in  organising  and  managing  means  running
operations  quickly,  safely  and  cost-effectively:  in  short,  efficiently.  To  do  this  one  requires
standard  frameworks  within  which  those  participating  in  the  system  in  their  respective
enterprises  can  interact,  standard  procedural  components,  standard  specifications  and  basic
technical conditions: in short, standards on whose application the participants are  in  agreement
or which they are committed to use. This statement will have taken on a special meaning at the
European  level,  too,  by  the  beginning  of  stage 3  of  economic  and  monetary  union.  I  am
therefore  pleased  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  to  you  today  about  my  view  of  the  issues
concerning the standardisation of payments in Europe and of the role of the European System of
Central Banks (ESCB) in this area.
From January 1, 1999 the EU central banks will be required to use the euro as aunit  of  account.  TARGET,  the  large-value  payment  system,  will  support  the  reliable
implementation of the monetary policy of the European Central Bank and will process payments
in euros. The national RTGS systems of the central banks will be linked internationally through
an Interlinking component called the “Interlinking system”. The SWIFT network will be used at
first as a communications network. All countries within the euro area will be able to participate
in TARGET. EU member countries outside the euro area will likewise be able to participate in
TARGET  provided  their  national  RTGS  systems  are  able  to  handle  the  euro  as  a  foreign
currency  in  addition  to  handling  their  respective  national  currency.  The  credit  institutions  and
their customers will convert to the euro successively at a date chosen by themselves. The credit
institutions  and  the  central  banks  will  therefore  incorporate  conversion  procedures  into  their
accounting  and  payment  systems.  These  will  make  it  possible  to  convert  transactions
automatically prior to booking or before they are fed into a payment system, thus enabling  the
parallel use of two currency units. The means of achieving this vary from one European country
to another. You can well imagine that all of these plans would be impossible without intensive
consultation  at  national  and  international  level,  and  consultation  here  means  agreeing  on
standards.
Using  TARGET  for  settling  payment  transactions  has  also  given  rise  to  new
quality  requirements  with  respect  to  securities  settlement  systems.  Monetary  policy  operations
and the collateralisation of intra-day credit with the purpose of fostering the smooth functioning
of  the  payment  system  require  the  final  and  unconditional  transfer  of  collateral  prior  to  the
BIS Review   7/1998
- 2 -
period so that the cross-border use of collateral will be possible. However, market solutions will
have to be sought in the long term. I am confident that the central securities depositories will be
successful in achieving that in cooperation with ourselves.
With this in mind the European Monetary Institute submitted, at the beginning of
the  month,  a  list  of  requirements  which  it  had  worked  out  in  cooperation  with  the  EU  central
banks  and  which  contains  standards  for  the  use  of  EU  securities  settlement  systems  in  ESCB
credit  operations  in  stage 3  of  monetary  union.1  These  new  standards  have  to  be  met  by  all
securities settlement systems which are to be used for the respective transactions with the ESCB.
At  this  juncture  I  would,  of  course,  also  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  previous  EMI
publications  on  the  operational  framework  for  the  single  monetary  policy,2  the  general
documentation on monetary policy instruments and procedures3 and, naturally, especially those
on TARGET.4
The EU central banks are only marginally involved, if at all, in cross-border retail
payment transactions, another field which also includes electronic money. It is generally agreed
that these  payments  should  continue  to  be  primarily  commercial  transactions  and  are  therefore
not  subject  to  the  general  technical  preparations  for  monetary  union.  This  means  that  the
European  commercial  banks  will  be  all  the  more  dependent  on  an  early  agreement  on  the
technical  standards  which  are  probably  indispensable  for  competitive  cross-border  retail
payment  systems.  There  is  no  doubt  that  as  a  result  of  these  standards  cross-border  retail
payments in the single market will be more efficient and cheaper.
As these examples  show,  the  standards  that  are  relevant  to  payment  transactions
consist of general legal norms regulating structures and procedures, thus forming a basis which
ensures that business operations are at least of a minimum quality. National legislators and other
legislating authorities are responsible for this type of standardisation. They themselves set, make
possible  or  limit  procedural  standards  from,  for  example,  competitive  aspects  through  legal
norms  and  legal  interpretation.  I  would  now  like  to  concentrate  on  payment  system  standards
that are suitable for operational use and that have been developed - usually by private operators -
on the basis of the procedural standards I have just mentioned.
The  main  objective  of  standardising  operational  procedures  should  always  be  to
achieve  the  maximum  degree  of  rationalisation  for  all  participants  while  retaining  competition
                                                  
1.  European  Monetary  Institute:  Standards  for  the  use  of  EU  securities  settlement  systems  in  ESCB  credit
operations; January 1998
2.  European  Monetary  Institute:  The  single  monetary  policy  in  stage  three;  Specification  of  the  operational
framework; January 1997
3.  European  Monetary  Institute:  The  single  monetary  policy  in  stage  three;  General  documentation  on  ESCB
monetary policy instruments and procedures; September 1997
4. European Monetary Institute:
- Report to the council of the European Monetary Institute on the TARGET system by the Working Group on
EU Payment Systems; May 1995
- First progress report on the TARGET project; August 1996
- Technical annexes to the first progress report on the TARGET project; August 1996
- Second progress report on the TARGET project; September 1997
- Technical annexes to the second progress report on the TARGET project; September 1997
- End of day procedures in TARGET; September 1997
BIS Review   7/1998
- 3 -
with  respect  to  terms  and  conditions.  What  this  means  in  practice  is  the  creation  of  efficient
business processes through the use of standard components such as data records and, ultimately,
the use of standard comprehensive procedures themselves. This makes it possible - especially in
payment systems - to achieve economies of scale and straight-through-processing. In addition to
that interface problems can be reduced and, as a result, the costly conversion into other standards
can  be  avoided.  Standard  data  formats  (e.g.  SWIFT  and  EDIFACT),  address  codes  (e.g.  bank
code  numbers,  BIC  and  IBAN)  and  communication  protocols  (e.g.  ISO/FTAM)  as  well  as  the
standard  general  procedural  arrangements  and  legal  frameworks  are  examples  of  how  such
objectives can be achieved.
As far as procedures relating to applications are concerned, there is no doubt that
the banking industry deserves credit for standardisation issues being tackled enthusiastically and
successfully.  This  has  often  been  done  in  close  cooperation  with  the  central  banks  and  the
European banking associations (e.g. the ECBS). I hope that the European Central Bank will also
take part in this in future. Today’s event suggests that it will.
I think it is important to refer here, too, to the industrial standards that support our
business  and  that  have  become  essential  pillars  of  the  systems  we  use:  there  is  no  doubt  that
SWIFT, which is  probably de  facto the only globally accepted payments standard, is the main
one  to  mention  here.  No  less  effective,  however,  are  the  respective  national  standards  in  each
country, for example, the DIN standards of the Deutsches Institut für Normung and, on a world
basis, the international standards, for example, the internationally accepted ISO standards of the
International Standardisation Organisation, which are being incorporated into national standards.
I would like to draw your attention in particular to the internationally standardised data transfer
via  ISO/FTAM  protocols  and  electronic  mail  by  means  of  the  ISO/OSI  X.400  standard  for
message  handling  systems.  These  systems  are  also  used  in  the  German  gross  and  net  payment
systems.  When  supplemented  by  the  protocols  of  the  TCP/IP  family  (Transmission  Control
Protocol/Internet Protocol), they will play a “translator” role between  the  business  applications
under  the  different  IT  conditions  of  the  various  central  banks  in  the  future  communications
network of the ESCB.
Thus,  we  already  have  an  excellent  set  of  instruments  and  suitable  means  of
achieving  standardisation.  So  what  is  still  missing  in  practice  in  cross-border  payments  in
Europe? What else can and should be done? There have been complaints about the time required
to execute payments  and  about  the  transparency  of  procedures  used  in  retail  payment  systems.
Implementing the transparency directive of the EU Commission will possibly help here.  In  the
standards  relating  to  applications  in  this  payment  sector,  however,  we  have  a  large  number  of
procedures which still confuse the user and which, generally speaking, are relatively inefficient.
If I now add electronic money on chip cards or network money to my list, I think the absence in
many cases of internationally applicable standards is precisely what is hampering the spread of
technical  innovations  and  the  speed  of  European  integration.  As  far  as  the  cross-border  use  of
debit cards is concerned, a commendable start has been made here, and these efforts have been
successful. Perhaps we are therefore justified in thinking that progress will soon be made in the
other areas for which solutions have not yet been found such as the interoperability of e-money
systems. Such progress would be desirable in achieving a standard European direct debits system
as  well.  Different  national  legal  frameworks,  customs  and  experience  naturally  do  not  make  it
easy to achieve common standards.  Even  the  security  systems  in  payment  transactions  are  still
largely nationally oriented. In the end, the absence of common standards, and not just for retail
payments,  results  in  a  de  facto  isolation  of  national  payment  systems.  In  the  long  run  that
certainly cannot be in Europe’s interest because for the participating banks and their customers it
BIS Review   7/1998
- 4 -
can  only  compound  the  problem  of  segmented  markets  with  little  transparency  but  with
relatively high prices and a low degree of efficiency.
What  conclusion  are  we  to  draw  from  all  of  this?  The  status  quo  of
standardisation  in  Europe’s  cross-border  payment  systems  is  hardly  satisfactory.  There  is  no
doubt  that  what  we  require  is  a  simple,  that  is  to  say,  a  standardised,  form  of  access  to  the
national  systems  within  the  EU  from  other  countries.  The  European  central  banks,  and  the
banking  industry,  have  shown  that  it  is  possible  to  build  bridges  in  the  first  instance  to  link
national systems to each other. Bridging standards reduce the national conversion cost to the cost
of  using  this  standard  instead  of  a  large  number  of  national  ones.  I  am  thinking  here  of  the
Interlinking system in TARGET and, with respect to retail payments, of, for example, TIPANET
of the cooperative bank sector or S-Interpay of the savings bank sector. Further progress could
then be achieved, for example, by stepping up the consistent use of international standards and
the ECBS norms, which are not dependent on specific formats, for the national side of settling
cross-border  payments,  that  is  to  say,  by  using  them  in  the  country  in  which  the  principal  is
domiciled and in the country of the ultimate beneficiary. In my opinion, there is an urgent need
for action in the field of retail payments. I very much prefer a market-oriented approach. As far
as  possible,  the  banking  industry  and  the  central  banks  should  reach  voluntary  agreements  on
efficient  cross-border  payments.  These  agreements  can  be  amended  more  easily  and  more
efficiently  to  meet  the  momentous  developments  in  payment  systems  than,  for  example,
payments legislation could.  The  work  on  European  integration  in  payments,  however,  must  be
accompanied  by  a  harmonisation  of  the  legal  frameworks,  which  in  some  cases  still  contain
enormous  differences.  This  work  must  be  done  by  the  legislating  bodies.  The  Directive  on
settlement  finality  which  the  EU  Commission  is  in  the  process  of  passing  legislation  on  and
which  is  designed  to  remove  the  possibility  of  national  bankruptcy  law  having  an  effect  on
payments and settlement systems is a very important step here. However, there are still a number
of  other  obstacles  to  be  cleared  away,  for  example,  those  adversely  affecting  progress  in
establishing a standard European direct debit system. However, the central banks could take over
an active role as coordinator provided the European banking industry were in agreement.
Criticism is sometimes heard to the effect that standardisation and  the  formation
of  cartels  in  payments  are  undermining  competition.  I  do  not  think  this  is  true  as  long  as  the
technical standards do not adversely affect competition with respect to terms and conditions. It is
true that standardisation leads  to  restrictions  in  operational  freedom.  A  bank  can  no  longer  act
exactly  as  it  wishes.  In  the  end,  however,  standardisation  tends  to  foster  competition  on  a
transparent platform which is technically uniform.
EDIFACT is possibly an example of a system in which efforts at standardisation
may  also  be  limited.  This  standard,  which  in  my  opinion  is  splendid,  broadly-based  and
applicable in various sectors of the economy, has only had moderate success in being applied in
payment  transactions.  The  credit  institutions  in  Germany  have  agreed  to  admit  the  EDIFACT
format as a standard in addition to the national DTA format and the SWIFT formats in interbank
credit transfers. I think that the pressure from the large enterprises to find as many applications
for this effective standard as possible has created problems with respect to its acceptability and
implementation among those concerned. The payment systems component directly  affecting  us
is only a small part of the entire application spectrum. Only time will tell whether there has been
success in establishing this very consistent standard for process control. It could be argued in the
first  instance  that  in  any  case  different  individual,  national  and  international  needs  call  for  a
corresponding  plurality  of  systems  even  in  payment  transactions.  In  my  opinion,  however,  it
would be better in the long term to strive for a maximum degree of standardisation with the aim
of  creating  uniform  effective  payment  standards  at  least  throughout  Europe.  The  resultant
BIS Review   7/1998
- 5 -
rational  and  efficient  systems  could  strengthen  the  position  of  Europe  in  the  growing  global
competition.
Standardisation in payment transactions remain an important topic for the ESCB -
and  not  just  for  the  ECB.  The  implementation  of  monetary  policy  and  a  satisfactorily
functioning economy require efficient payment systems.  According  to  Article 3  of  the  ESCB’s
Statute, one of the functions of the ESCB is therefore to promote the smooth functioning of the
payment  systems.  Article 22  of  the  ESCB’s  Statute  actually  gives  the  future  ECB  the  right  to
make  regulations  to  ensure  efficient  and  sound  clearing  and  payment  systems  within  the
Community and with other countries. To that extent there may be a fairly reasonable distribution
of functions within the ESCB in line with the subsidiarity principle laid down in the Maastricht
Treaty.
The ECB and the national central banks could be asked to act as intermediaries or
coordinators for the banking industry in standardisation matters concerning payments. The fact
that  central  banks  may  also  be  seen  by  the  banking  industry  to  be  competitors  in  some  cases,
namely  in  large-value  payment  systems,  has  not  proved  to  be  a  problem  so  far.  Providing  a
service of a neutral nature in relation to the various banking groups has always been a function
of  the  central  banks.  The  banking  industry  and  the  national  central  banks  have  cooperated
successfully for years to devise and implement rules and systems for executing payments. I am
therefore  optimistic  that  the  industry  will  continue  to  do  this  in  cooperation  with  the  ECB  in
future.  The  way  the  preparatory  work  for  payment  systems  in  stage 3  of  monetary  union  has
gone  so  far  confirms  my  opinion.  Let  us  therefore  meet  the  challenges  that  lie  before  us  with
enthusiasm and confidence.
Ladies and gentlemen, I  expect  that  this  seminar  will  provide  important  insights
into  the  possibilities  of  improved  cooperation  in  the  field  of  standardisation  between  the  EU
Commission, the European  banking  associations  and  the  central  depositories,  on  the  one  hand,
and the future ESCB, on the other. I am convinced that the undisputed objective of an efficient
European financial market cannot be achieved without successful standardisation.
BIS Review   7/1998
