Mr.  Stals  addresses  the  topic  “Implications  for  the  South  African  financial
sector of the process of financial globalisation”      Speech  by  the  Governor  of  the  South  African
Reserve  Bank,  Dr.  C.  Stals,  at  the  Tenth  Annual  “Beeld”  Economist  of  the  Year  Banquet,  held in
Johannesburg on 8/5/98.
1. Lessons from the East Asian crisis
Recent developments in certain East Asian countries focused attention on the many
pitfalls for the smaller economies of the world on the road to financial globalisation. The reasons for
the collapse of financial markets in East Asia may differ from country to country, but a few common
shortcomings in the economies of the afflicted countries were identified:
Firstly,  in  many  countries,  inappropriate  macroeconomic  policies  were  applied  to
defend  artificial  exchange  rates,  and/or  to  maintain  interest  rates  at  untenable  low  levels.  These
countries  were  highly  successful  for  many  years  and  they  achieved  remarkably  high  average
economic growth rates over an extended period of time. Based mainly on an industrious and frugal
labour force, they were able to remain competitive, despite the emergence of underlying weaknesses
in the economic fundamentals.
Secondly, the financial systems did not keep pace with the changing macroeconomic
environment. Banking institutions were not properly regulated and monitored, and financial markets
were distorted by undue governmental intervention. In some cases, there were insufficient disclosure
of  basic  information  that  could  have  enabled  investors  to  make  a  better  assessment  of  the
deteriorating situation at an earlier stage.
Thirdly, the countries became overly exposed to foreign capital flows, and vulnerable
balance of payments positions developed that could not be managed once confidence faded. Large
current  account  deficits  were  no  longer  covered  by  total  capital  inflows,  and  the  withdrawal  of
short-term funds from some countries exacerbated the situation.
Fourthly, bad governance in public and private sector institutions did not realise the
seriousness of the underlying adverse developments, and did not take timely corrective action. When
the bubble finally burst, the situation had already advanced to a stage where only costly and painful
macroeconomic restructuring could salvage these economies.
The experience of the afflicted East Asian countries provides ample evidence of the
vulnerability  of  the  smaller,  emerging  market  economies  in  the  environment  of  financial
globalisation. Other countries, including South Africa, can also be subjected by the global financial
markets  to  similar  painful  corrections,  although  it  might  be  for  completely  different  reasons.  The
lesson for South Africa from the East Asian crisis is therefore to be alert, to be cautious, and to be
aware of the harsh but not unreasonable disciplines of the global markets.
2. South Africa and financial globalisation
Over the past few years, the South African financial sector has moved quite fast on
the road of globalisation. In the Annual Report for 1997 of the Bank Supervision Department of the
Reserve  Bank,  interesting  information  has  been  made  available  about  developments  in  the  South
African banking sector in 1997.
There  are  now  more  than  20  foreign  banks  operating  in  South  Africa  through
locally-established  branches  or  subsidiaries,  and  more  than  60  foreign  banks  with  representative
offices  in  South  Africa.  South  African  banks  are  also  extending  their  activities  to  the  rest  of  the
BIS Review  40/1998
˝
- 2 -
˝
world  and  during  1997  obtained  permission  from  the  Registrar’s  Office  to  establish  more  than
45 branches, subsidiaries, and representative offices in other countries around the world.
At  the  end  of  1997,  the  total  South  African  banking  sector  utilised  more  than
R35 billion  in  foreign  funding,  and  carried  loans  extended  by  them  in  foreign  currencies  of  about
R17½  billion.  The  foreign  liabilities  and  foreign  assets  of  the  South  African  banking  sector,
respectively, represented but small percentages of the total assets (or total liabilities) of the banking
sector,  estimated  at  about  R440  billion  as  at  31st  December  1997.  Foreign  funds  as  a  source  of
financing of the activities of South African banking institutions are, however, still increasing.
It is well-known that non-resident investors have become very important participants
in the South African financial markets. Over the past 16 months, that is since the beginning of 1997,
non-resident investors increased their holdings of South African equities by R45.6 billion, and their
holdings of South African bonds by R31.1 billion.
The South African Government raised a total amount of approximately R11.3 billion
in seven public loan issues made in international capital markets since December 1994. At the same
time, many South African public and private sector borrowers also made use of the foreign financial
markets to fund the expansion of their activities in South Africa, and in the rest of the world. The
gradual relaxation of exchange controls has indeed enabled South African residents to acquire large
foreign  assets  abroad.  The  following  estimates  provide  some  indication  of  the  extent  of  these
investments since the beginning of 1994:
Direct foreign investment by South African corporates 
Portfolio foreign investment by South African institutional investors 
Portfolio foreign investment by South African private individuals 
R44.3 billion
R37.4 billion
  R1.1 billion
Volumes  in  the  South  African  foreign  exchange  market  increased  substantially  in
recent times. At this juncture, it is not unusual to have a daily turnover in excess of US$ 10 billion in
this market.
One further indication of the extent to which South Africa has already become part of
the global financial markets can be found in the expansion of the Euro-rand market. The total amount
outstanding  in  this  market,  where  non-resident  borrowers  raise  funds  in  rand-denominated  loan
issues made to non-resident (mainly European) investors, now exceeds R37 billion.
3. Consequences for the South African economy
This  process  of  the  globalisation  of  the  South  African  markets  has  important
consequences for the South African economy. The major advantage for South Africa is, of course,
that the scarce sources of finance for economic development  can  be  supplemented  with  increasing
amounts  of  foreign  funds.  Savings  of  more  developed  countries  are  therefore  transferred  to  South
Africa to supplement domestic saving.
The  large  inflow  of  funds  over  the  past  four  years  enabled  the  Reserve  Bank  to
increase  the  country’s  official  foreign  reserves  from  a  small  to  a  more  acceptable  amount  of
R33 billion,  which  is  sufficient  to  cover  about  three  month’s  imports  of  goods.  This  increase  also
made it possible to substantially relax exchange controls in order to create a more free market, which
should eventually contribute to a higher economic growth rate.
It is necessary that foreign investments make a more purposeful direct contribution to
real economic development in South Africa, and not only to the restructuring of the financial system.
BIS Review  40/1998
˝
- 3 -
To  achieve  this,  South  Africa  must  ensure  that  attractive  and  competitive  investment  projects  are
available for this purpose.
The  globalisation  of  South  Africa’s  financial  markets,  however,  have  important
consequences  for  the  analysis  of  South  African  financial  conditions,  and  in  particular  for  the
forecasting of possible future developments in South African financial aggregates. The exchange rate
of the rand is consequently more subject to the inclinations and whims of foreign investors, as well
as to developments in the foreign exchange markets of nearly all the other parts of the world. How
well  the  South  African  financial  authorities  may  plan  and  manage,  developments  over  which  they
have no control can change the exchange rate of the rand, especially against individual currencies, in
a direction which was not expected or could not be forecasted. These kinds of changes can be very
disruptive over the short term.
This also applies to South African interest rates. A sudden inflow of funds from the
rest of the world can lead to a decline of South African interest rates against the run of events in the
South African economy or the objectives of the monetary authorities. Similarly, an outflow of funds
arising from developments in a distant country, such as for example Indonesia, can very easily lead
to an increase in South African interest rates when we would have liked to have seen a decline.
South African share prices are also affected by the views of foreign investors and do
not always truly reflect the actual potential of South African companies. Developments in the prices
in  London,  New  York,  Paris  and  Tokyo  often  have  a  greater  influence  on  these  prices  than
developments in South Africa.
Even  the  South  African  inflation  rate  tends  to  move  to  lower  levels  in  accordance
with  the  inflation  rates  in  the  rest  of  the  world.  Inflationary  errors  that  are  made  with  domestic
macroeconomic policy under these circumstances, will often have a detrimental effect on the South
African balance of payments, or aggregate domestic economic activity, before leading to an increase
in prices.
4. Economic forecasting: a difficult task
Against  the  background  of  the  international  integration  of  financial  markets  it
becomes much more difficult to predict developments in financial aggregates, such as interest rates,
exchange rates and the inflation rate. It does not only depend on what happens in the better known
own  national  economy,  but  requires  a  broader  cosmopolitan  knowledge.  Mr.  Alan  Greenspan’s
decisions often can have a greater influence on the developments of these aggregates in South Africa
than decisions of the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank.
Unfortunately, businessmen, investors and economic policy makers often have to take
a view about possible future developments in these financial aggregates. The decisions they have to
take are mainly concerned about the future, and not about the past or present situation. It is therefore
essential  that  forecasts  be  made,  even  if  it  is  done  in  a  framework  of  greater  uncertainty  and
unforeseeable future developments. With all the modern electronic technology which is available to
facilitate forecasts, the world of the actual economy remains too uncertain to be always correct.
There are a few basic principles which must be kept in mind when making forecasts
of financial aggregates:
1.  Do not believe too much in your own forecasts. There are good reasons why you
will often be wrong.
BIS Review  40/1998
˝
- 4 -
˝
2.  Do not accuse someone else - for example, the Governor of the Reserve Bank - if
your  forecasts  are  wrong.  He  also  has  only  little  control  over  developments  in
these macroeconomic aggregates.
3.  Make  regular  forecasts.  The  data  on  which  forecasts  are  usually  based  change
often and therefore justify regular revisions of forecasts.
4.  Be willing to acknowledge a wrong forecast and produce a new one. Most people
who take note of  your  forecasts  have  in any  case  already  forgotten  the  last  one
that you made.
5.  Remember  the  assumptions  which  form  the  basis  of  every  forecast.  They  are
often so unrealistic that the forecast is also nearly worthless.
6.  Make  forecasts  on  the  basis  of  objective  analyses,  and  not  on  what  suits  your
book or the book of your clients. It doesn’t help to be popular but wrong.
7.  Be grateful if you are sometimes right in this difficult game of trial and error - it
may not happen again.
5. Concluding remarks
The integration of South Africa in the world financial markets is an on-going process
that  is  linking  developments  in  the  major  financial  aggregates  in  this  country  more  and  more  to
developments in the rest of the world.
Because of this process, economic forecasting has become much more complex. Not
only  changes  in  the  South  African  situation  influence  developments  in  important  financial
aggregates, such as interest and exchange rates, but also events in remote places such as Indonesia.
Economic  forecasters  have  great  responsibility,  not  only  to  provide  consistent  and
sensible forecasts, but also to understand and explain the shortcomings of even their best efforts - and
to remember that even bad forecasts can sometimes become self-fulfilling.
BIS Review  40/1998
˝
