Mr.  King  looks  at  the  UK  economy  and  monetary  policy      Speech  by  Mr.  Mervyn
King,  an  Executive  Director  and  Chief  Economist  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Building  Societies
Association Annual Conference in Bournemouth on 27/5/98.
Next Monday - 1 June - sees the start of the statutory basis for Britain’s new monetary
policy regime. An independent Bank of England will, through its Monetary Policy Committee (or MPC),
set interest rates to achieve an inflation target of 2½%. For over 30 years economic policy in Britain has
been bedevilled by inflation and the resulting instability of output and employment. Stability - of both
prices and macroeconomic performance more generally - requires a credible commitment to a monetary
and fiscal framework embracing low inflation and sustainable public finances. That we now have.
But  stability  of  the  economy  is  not  the  same  as  stability  of  interest  rates.  Short-term
interest rates must go up and down according to the state of the economy if the inflation target is to be
met. In contrast, if monetary policy is successful in achieving the inflation target then, precisely because
short-term  interest  rates  will  have  moved  over  the  economic  cycle,  long-term  interest  rates  will  be
relatively  stable.  And,  from  the  perspective  of  your  borrowers,  whether  on  fixed  or  floating  rate
mortgages, what matters is the predictability of the cost of a loan over the life of the mortgage rather than
fluctuations, within reason, of monthly payments. Timely movements in short-term interest rates are the
means by which both the average cost of a mortgage, and its variability, can be reduced to the minimum
necessary to attract loan finance. In so doing we should be able to avoid crisis - and inevitably large -
changes of interest rates of the kind that we have seen so often in the past. Indeed, since the inflation
target was adopted in October 1992 there have been no changes of interest rates of that kind - all changes
were  decided  at  the  regular  monthly  monetary  meetings.  Moreover,  the  switch  last  May  to  a  fixed
timetable of meetings for the Monetary Policy Committee - with all interest rate decisions announced at
12 noon on the Thursday on which the MPC meeting concludes - was a major step forward in reducing
uncertainty in financial markets.
Through the Looking Glass .....
So if interest rates must be flexible, in which direction are they likely to move next? I
wish  I  could  tell  you.  Inflation,  as  measured  by  RPIX,  rose  to  3.0%  in  April,  compared  with  2.6%  in
March. But that jump largely reflected the Budget changes to excise duties which took effect earlier this
year than last. That will drop out of the index in the third quarter of this year when RPIX inflation is
likely to fall back towards its target level of 2½%.
However, this relatively optimistic short-term outlook reflects an extraordinarily benign
inflation  environment.  The  combination  of  a  strong  exchange  rate  (still  about  25%  above  its  level  of
August  1996),  a  20%  fall  in  dollar  oil  prices  over  the  past  year,  and  an  average  fall  of  9.5%  in  other
commodity prices, is holding down retail price inflation. Domestically generated inflation is significantly
higher than RPIX inflation. As the one-off effects of the rise in sterling wear off over the course of the
next year or so - as indeed they will unless sterling appreciates further - inflation will start to rise above
the target unless domestically generated inflation declines.
In  the  long  run,  domestically  generated  inflation  is  likely  to  be  close  to  the  rate  of
increase of unit labour costs. At present unit labour costs are rising at about 3½% a year. The earnings
figures released earlier this month - which showed that average earnings in the economy grew by 4.9%
and in the private sector by no less than 5.6% - were undoubtedly disappointing. It is too soon to judge
how far they reflect the impact of higher bonuses  this  year  than  last.  In  any  event,  to  hit  the  inflation
target those rates of earnings growth will have to fall back.
These  high  levels  of  earnings  growth  are  not  the  underlying  cause  of  inflationary
pressure; they are a symptom of a tight labour market. Equally, the prospects for earnings growth depend
critically on the future path of output and on inflation expectations. The MPC’s central projection in the
May Inflation Report is that the pace of output growth will slow. But a slowdown in economic growth is
not, in itself, sufficient to hit the inflation target. The central issue for monetary policy is whether total
BIS Review   53/1998
- 2 -
nominal demand will slow sufficiently quickly to prevent retail price inflation rising when the favourable
effects of a high exchange rate and lower commodity prices wear off.
The extent to which domestic demand growth slows down is crucial. At present, we are
relying on a sharp deterioration in the trade balance to keep output growth down to levels that do not lead
to rising inflationary pressure. But in the longer-run domestic demand growth must fall from its present
rate of 3½ - 4% to something closer to trend. During 1997 as a whole, consumption grew by 5%. That
growth  rate  is  already  moderating.  And  the  MPC’s  central  projection  is  for  a  further  slowdown  in
domestic demand during this year. That is likely to be brought about by a combination of the fiscal and
monetary tightening that has been put in place over the past year or so. But there are real uncertainties.
There  is  a  risk  that  consumption  may  prove  stubbornly  buoyant.  Real  personal  disposable  income
increased by 4.2% last year, and the ratio of net financial wealth of households to their income reached
an all-time high of over 3. Those factors will support consumption. The latest retail sales figures provide
some  comfort  with  volume  growth  below  that  in  the  middle  of  last  year  when  consumption  was
stimulated by windfall gains, predominantly from the conversion of building societies. (Rarely have so
many, been so grateful, to so few building societies.)
Highs and lows in house prices
In the past, domestic demand has been sensitive to developments in the housing market.
In  the  late  1980s  house  prices  increased  by  40%  in  two  years,  while  consumption  rose  by  over  9%.
Borrowing using housing as  collateral  -  so  called  equity  withdrawal  -  amounted  to  almost  50%  of  the
increase in consumption over that period. The impact of rises in house prices on consumption - which is
cause and which is effect - remains hotly contested by economists. A rise in house prices leads not only
to an increase in wealth but also to an increase in the cost of housing services. Or, to put it another way,
if the price of your home goes up, you will not be able to spend more on other things if you wish to carry
on living in your home. So it is not at all clear that changes in house prices will in fact have a significant
impact on household spending.
Perhaps of greater importance is the role which house prices play in signalling consumer
confidence  about  the  future.  In  common  with  other  assets,  such  as  equities,  house  prices  can  respond
quickly to news about future economic prospects. And house prices and consumer confidence do seem to
be closely correlated. So house prices may be a leading indicator of sentiment about the economy and
hence of consumption and domestic demand. But, just like equities, house prices also reflect changes in
real interest rates. Since long-term real interest rates have fallen from over 3½% to below 3% over the
past year, it is not surprising that house, and other asset, prices have risen.
Precisely  because  housing  is  an  asset,  its  price  is  more  volatile  than  most  goods  and
services in the retail price index. As such, it is important to look at house price levels as well as at their
rates of change. Although house prices have been rising quite rapidly over the past couple of years, they
returned to the peak reached in the late 1980s only at the end of last year, and exceeded it for the first
time in the first quarter of this year. That, of course, followed the sharp fall in house prices in the early
1990s - house prices fell by over 10% between 1990 and the end of 1992.
For most families, apart from future earnings and pensions, their wealth is dominated by
one  asset  and  one  liability.  The  asset  is  their  home  and  the  liability  is  the  mortgage  on  it.  But  the
difference between these  two  is  sensitive  to  the  state  of  the  economy.  In  a  low  inflation  world,  house
prices are likely to rise and fall whereas the mortgage liability is fixed in money terms. This mismatch
has the potential to create large swings in household net worth which may well exacerbate fluctuations in
demand and output. The upside consequence was seen in the consumption boom of the 1980s, and the
opposite  was  evident  in  the  bust  of  the  early  1990s  when  falls  in  house  prices  meant  that  as  many  as
1½ million  families  had  negative  net  equity  resulting  in  higher  precautionary  saving  and  lower
consumption.
The forward-looking information contained in house prices underlines the importance the
MPC  attaches  to  measuring  them  accurately.  The  recent  divergence  between  the  rates  of  house  price
BIS Review   53/1998
- 3 -
inflation implied by the Halifax and the Nationwide indices is both puzzling and unfortunate. The rates
of house price inflation recorded by the two indices began to diverge at the beginning of 1997. The most
recently published data suggest that house prices, as measured by the Nationwide index, rose by 12.0%
in  the  year  to  April  1998,  whereas,  according  to  the  Halifax  index,  they  rose  by  only  5.6%.  Gross
household wealth in the year to April 1998 rose by £80 billion more according to the Nationwide than
the Halifax index. Such differences matter in our assessment of the economy.
The Bank of England, together with representatives from the Halifax and Nationwide and
from the Department of Environment, Transport and the Regions (DETR), have spent a great deal of time
and  effort  trying  to  understand  the  cause  of  this  divergence  and  to  assess  what  is  really  happening  to
house prices.
The answer to the first question - what accounts for the divergence? - remains largely a
mystery. The Bank’s preferred explanation, reached I have to admit via a process of elimination of other
plausible explanations rather than by the  existence  of  incontrovertible  evidence,  is  that  the  divergence
reflects the way in which house prices are “mix adjusted” to take account of the different characteristics
of  the  houses  bought  and  sold  in  any  one  month.  Changes  in  the  relative  composition  of  the  loan
portfolios of the Halifax and the Nationwide over the last year or so are likely to  have  magnified  this
effect.
To answer the second question - what is really happening to house prices? - the Bank has
developed an alternative measure of house price inflation using data from the Land Registry. These data
have the advantage that they cover nearly all housing transactions in England and Wales and so are more
comprehensive than the data used by either the Halifax or the Nationwide. However, the Bank estimate is
far from ideal. The published Land Registry data are not ‘mix adjusted’. And, although the Bank staff do
apply a simple mix adjustment to take account of the basic type of  property  brought  and  sold  and  the
county in which the property is located, it is less sophisticated than that used  by  either  the  Halifax  or
Nationwide.
So I would not want to claim in any way that we at the Bank have found the true measure
of  house  price  inflation.  Rather,  the  Bank  estimate  was  developed  in  the  spirit  of  trying  to  give  some
guidance to the members of the MPC on the relative weights that they should attach to the conflicting
pictures  painted  by  the  Halifax  and  Nationwide  indices.  The  house  price  index  constructed  by  the
Department of Environment, Transport and the Regions is also helpful in this respect. That index has the
advantage  that  it  is  constructed  using  a  more  complete  method  for  adjusting  for  the  mix  of  houses
transacted  than  the  Bank  estimate,  but  it  is  based  on  only  a  small  sample  -  approximately  5%  -  of
mortgage-backed transactions.
The Bank estimate suggests that house prices increased by 9.0% in the year to 1997 Q4,
compared  with  6.9%  measured  by  Halifax  and  12.9%  by  Nationwide.  The  Bank  estimate  is  broadly
consistent with the DETR index, which shows a 7.9% increase over the same period. But further work is
required on this issue which is of importance to us all.
“Divided we stand, united we fall”
That brings me to the Monetary Policy Committee and the prospect for interest rates. The
transparency  of  the  new  process  means  that  the  debate  about  monetary  policy  within  the  MPC  is
explained clearly to the world at large. Hence the reasons why monetary policy is so finely balanced are,
I believe, now widely understood.
But it is not just the policy debate which is now more transparent. The voting record of
each individual member of the MPC is in the public domain. There is a good reason for this. Disclosure
is  an  incentive  for  individuals  to  cast  their  vote  for  the  policy  most  likely  to  hit  the  government’s
inflation  target.  I  have  little  doubt  that  the  prospect  of  having  to  defend  one’s  voting  record  in  public
makes  individual  members  of  the  MPC  well  aware  of  their  responsibilities.  There  can  be  no  hiding
BIS Review   53/1998
- 4 -
behind the coat-tails of the chairman, nor disowning a decision subsequently by claiming to have argued
against a position adopted by consensus. Transparency should improve both the quality of decisions and
the accountability of Committee members.
But there is an additional point which is fundamental to the role of the Monetary Policy
Committee. Its purpose is to take technical decisions about the level of short-term interest rates. When
the issue is one of technical judgment it is better to rely on the collective wisdom of nine people than the
views of only one individual. I have noticed that the highest in the land often rely on teams of doctors
whereas  you  and  I  have  only  one.  Of  course,  it  is  often  tempting  to  take  comfort  from  the  great
confidence with which any one doctor proclaims his or her diagnosis. But the evidence suggests that in
difficult cases reasonable experts can interpret the evidence in different ways. Rather than take comfort
from one self-confident view, which I would find difficult to challenge, I would like to know where the
balance  of  professional  opinion  lies.  That  is  why  in  the  case  of  essentially  technical  judgments  it  is
sensible to rely upon collective wisdom, and there are other areas in which we do precisely that. The Law
Lords, for example, reach their decisions by aggregating individual judgments, and the same is true in the
United States Supreme Court. The MPC is based on the same principle. For such a system to work it is
crucial  that  the  individual  members  of  the  MPC  give  their  best  judgment  and  do  not  try  to  reach  an
artificial consensus.
When policy is clearly off-track, as in the spring of last year, it is not difficult to reach
unanimous  decisions,  as  the  Committee  did  through  1997.  But  when  policy  is  finely  balanced,
disagreements about the precise level of interest rate are not only likely but an indication that policy is
broadly  on-track.  That  is  why  the  motto  of  the  MPC  should  perhaps  be  “divided  we  stand,  united  we
fall”.
Some commentators have been unable to resist labelling members of the Committee as
either “hawks” or “doves”. There is a fundamental problem with this labelling. It makes no sense in the
new  system  to  describe  individuals  as  hawks  or  doves.  Each  member  of  the  Committee  has  the  same
inflation target. Unlike some other central banks, MPC members cannot entertain closet views about the
attractions  or  dangers  of  slightly  higher  or  lower  inflation.  Their  task  -  to  which  they  will  be  held
personally accountable - is to hit the Government’s inflation target. So members of the Committee vote
on interest rates according to the economic data, which change from month to month, and the analysis of
those data. No one takes a position that higher interest rates are a good or a bad thing out of principle. If
you drove past an infant school at 40mph, you might well be described as driving dangerously fast. But if
you drove at 40mph on a motorway, you might well be described as driving dangerously slowly. Actions
must  be  judged  in  the  light  of  the  circumstances.  In  terms  of  monetary  policy,  that  means  that  the
positions which members of the MPC take on interest rates will change over time according to the way
the  economy  evolves.  But  if  interest  rates  themselves  cannot  be  predicted,  because  they  depend  on
changing economic data, what should be predictable is the way MPC members respond to those data. A
predictable “policy reaction function”, to use the jargon, should, over time, diminish the interest which
market commentators take in the meetings of the MPC and direct that interest to what is happening in the
economy.
So, as the voting record shows, it is seriously misleading to think of the MPC in terms of
fixed camps of “hawks” and “doves”. As circumstances change, it is easy to imagine that the “hawks”
shall be “doves” and the “doves” shall be “hawks”. And, over a five year period, since each member of
the  MPC  is  trying  to  hit  the  same  inflation  target,  I  predict  that  it  will  be  impossible  to  distinguish
between “doves” and “hawks”. What will the commentators call us then? If Britain either has or is about
to join Monetary Union, then the birds may have flown the nest. But if the MPC is still setting interest
rates  in  Britain,  then  I  hope  that  we  shall  be  seen  as  a  group  that  is  tediously  predictable,  sometimes
raising interest rates, sometimes cutting them,  but  always  moving  in  response  to  the  economic  data  in
order to hit the inflation target.
BIS Review   53/1998
