Bank of Japan’s May report of recent economic and financial developments1
Bank of Japan communication, 21/5/98.
The Bank’s view2
Japan’s economy remains stagnant with continued strong downward pressures on
economic activities.
With  respect  to  final  demand,  public-sector  investment  seems  to  have  bottomed
out.  However, growth in net exports has virtually peaked out as exports to other Asian countries
decline.  Business fixed investment has been on the decline.  Private consumption shows no sign
of recovery although the deterioration has slowed.  Housing investment remains weak.  Against
the  background  of  weak  final  demand,  inventories  have  accumulated  further  and  industrial
production continues to decline.  As a result, not only corporate profits but also employment and
income conditions have worsened significantly.
The  above  indicates  that  production,  income,  and  expenditure  show  negative
interactions  with  one  another.    In  these  circumstances,  the  economic  stimulus  package  was
decided,  and  the  fiscal  1998  supplementary  budget  bill  was  submitted  to  the  Diet.    These
measures are expected to boost demand through additional fiscal expenditure and special income
tax-reduction  and  thereby  alleviate  the  downward  pressures  on  the  economy.    In  order  for  the
Japanese  economy  to  resume  a  self-sustained  recovery,  improvements  in  corporate  and
household  confidence  are  vital.    Hence,  the  overall  economic  activity  and  the  effects  of  the
economic stimulus measures should be carefully monitored.
With  regard  to  prices,  wholesale  prices  continue  to  fall,  and  the  year-to-year
increase in consumer prices (excluding the effects of institutional changes such as the rise in the
consumption tax rate) has been declining close to zero.  As for the future, the downward pressure
on domestic prices, induced by the decline in import prices including overseas commodity prices,
is weakening.  Also, the expansion in the output gap in the economy is expected to slow as the
economic stimulus package is implemented.  In the immediate future, however, prices are likely
to weaken reflecting the present high inventory level and the relatively large output gap.
In  the  financial  markets,  both  long  and  short-term  interest  rates  followed  a
declining trend with the releases of weak economic indicators.  Yields on long-term government
bonds have recorded a historical low and stock prices remain soft.  The yield differential between
bonds issued by the private sector and those by the government, as well as the so-called “Japan
premium”, has remained at the relatively high level and shown no significant decrease, indicating
the continuing cautious attitudes of market participants toward credit risk.
With respect to monetary aggregates, the growth in M2+CDs, which had picked up
from the end of 1997, slowed in March and April.  Also, the growth in broadly-defined liquidity
has been declining since the middle of 1997.
                                                     
1 This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting
was held on May 19, 1998.
2 The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary
Policy Meeting held on May 19, as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
BIS Review   45/1998
- 2 -
Private  bank  lending  remains  sluggish.    Although  corporate  financing  via  the
capital markets and government financial institutions continues to expand, the increase in overall
corporate financing seems to indicate a clear slowdown under the stagnant economic conditions.
Banks  remain  cautious  in  extending  loans  with  a  view  to  improving  their
medium-term  profitability  and  financial  soundness.    In  the  capital  markets,  the  difference  in
fund-raising costs of firms has remained relatively large according to their creditworthiness.  In
such  circumstances,  some  firms,  especially  small  and  medium-sized  firms,  have  been  facing
difficult financing conditions and this influence on the economy continues to warrant a careful
monitoring.
 NB   This BIS Review is available on the BIS World Wide Web site (http://www.bis.org).
 BIS Review   45/1998
