Mr. Wellink looks at the United Kingdom and EMU   Speech by the President of the
Nederlandsche Bank, Dr A.H.E.M. Wellink, at the meeting of the Nederlandse City Lunches in London
on 16/6/98.
Introduction
Britain has a love-hate relationship with Europe. Love, because the UK, too, favours a
powerful Europe generating peace and free trade relations worldwide. At the same time, however, Britain
has always been in two minds about its own role, opposed as it is to a federal Europe, where national
sovereignty is curbed. It is not for nothing that Churchill did not envisage his own country as part of a
united Europe at that time.
The relationship between the United Kingdom and Europe is complicated further by the
existence  of  a  third  party:  the  United  States.  The  United  States  sometimes  seems  a  more  attractive
partner. It is always easier, in a relationship, be it between states or between husband and wife, to operate
with someone from one’s own background, in this case Anglo-Saxon, than with a partner from a totally
different culture.
All  told,  however,  the  British  seem  to  be  favouring  Europe.  Newt  Gingrich,  the
Chairman of the US House of Representatives, is wrong. He has said that Britain would do better to join
the North American Free Trade Association than to take up with EMU; but  what  is  the  point  of  that?
After all, both economically and politically, the UK has much stronger ties with Europe. Tony Blair is
evidencing a greater sense of reality when he holds that his country’s future lies in the heart of Europe.
The question is, however: is he talking about the next few years or about the distant future?
The British are hesitant about European integration, as they have always been. The UK
only  joined  the  EC  in  1973,  when  they  were  sure  of  its  success.  A  similar  process  would  seem  to  be
taking place where EMU is concerned. At first, the UK was eager to be in on the process, completely
liberalizing its capital movements, but it subsequently demanded an opt-out clause so as not to be forced
to take further action. Such an approach is risky. There is always the chance than when jumping onto a
moving  train,  one  ends  up  between  the  train  and  the  platform.  A  few  years  ago,  no  one  was  able  to
foresee that on 1 January 1999 EMU would be setting off with eleven out of the fifteen Member States.
Now the UK is the only large Member State which is not joining the monetary union. Today I will be
making out a case for  the  UK’s  participation  in  EMU,  and  I  will  discuss  a  policy  which  may  make  it
easier for it to join EMU.
The desirability of British membership
I  can  be  brief  about  the  advantages  for  Europe  of  the  British  taking  part  in  EMU.
Obviously, the union is strengthened by the participation of a country accounting for 16% of the EU’s
GDP. It would mean a larger zone of exchange rate stability, a larger market, and better chances of the
euro  becoming  an  international  currency.  In  these  respects,  British  membership  of  EMU  is  just  as
important as that of, let us say, France. Because EMU is built around French-German cooperation, and it
is hence also about politics, it has been suggested that France’s membership is a must. But the UK, too,
has a contribution of its own to  make  to  EMU.  After  all,  the  UK  has  the  City,  the  financial  centre  of
Europe. It would be peculiar, to say the least, if the leading financial centre of an economic power such
as  the  EU  were  to  lie  outside  the  euro  zone.  Another  issue  of  at  least  the  same  importance  is  the
considerable  contribution  which  Britain  can  make  to  the  policy  discussions  about  greater  labour  and
product market flexibility. The reduction of the working week  in  France  and  Italy  to  35  hours,  on  the
conditions now envisaged, indicates that continental Europe could do with some counterweight on this
point.
Let me say something about what entry into EMU would mean for the United Kingdom
itself. In principle, the British Government is in favour of joining EMU. In October 1997, Gordon Brown
BIS Review   59/1998
- 2 -
said in the House of Commons: “If, in the end, a single currency is successful, and the economic case is
clear and unambiguous, then the Government believes Britain should be part of it”.
The  UK  could  benefit  materially  from  joining  EMU.  Exchange  rate  stability,  greater
comparability  of  prices,  and  larger  money  and  capital  markets  offer  the  British  economy  additional
opportunities for growth. It must furthermore be remembered that even if the UK does not join, it will be
feeling  the  impact  of  EMU.  Geographically,  the  UK  may  be  an  island,  but  it  is  not  economically.  So
much  is  evidenced  by  the  degree  to  which  the  British  economy  is  affected  by  the  exchange  rate
movements of sterling. That influence being as great as it is, then surely it is better to be seated at the
table where the policy affecting your economy is determined. That means joining EMU. After all, so long
as the UK  remains  outside  EMU,  it  will  not  be  permitted  to  take  part  in  the  euro-X  group,  where  the
economic policies of the euro area are coordinated by the Ministers of Finance.
The City, too, stands to benefit substantially from Britain’s participation, because it will
become  part  of  deeper  and  more  liquid  financial  markets.  Obviously,  the  City’s  position  as  Europe’s
financial centre is not yet  in  peril.  As  my  colleague,  Eddie  George,  neatly  pointed  out,  the  number  of
people working in the financial sector and affiliated industries in Greater London equals the population
of Frankfurt: 600,000. But the City is not impregnable. Take, for instance, Liffe, which lost its leading
position  in  the  trade  in  futures  of  German  central  government  bonds,  the  most  important  contract  in
European  government  bonds,  to  the  Deutsche  Terminbörse  in  Frankfurt  within  only  a  short  period  of
time. If the UK were to remain outside EMU for a long time to come, some City activities could well be
gradually shifted to financial centres on the continent.
Policy-making for membership
From  whatever  angle  you  look  at  it,  the  UK  would  do  well  to  enter  into  EMU.  From
where we stand, EMU is incomplete without the United Kingdom. The question is not so much whether
the UK should join, as when. Research by the Treasury shows it is too early. Of the five economic tests
developed by the Treasury, the crucial one assesses whether the British business cycle is sufficiently in
line  with  that  in  other  European  countries  and  is  not  marked  by  major  outliers,  the  question  being
whether  the  single  monetary  policy  actually  fits  in  with  the  UK’s  economic  policy.  At  present,  the
interest rate set by the Bank of England is double the monetary policy rate in the core countries of the
future euro zone, viz. 7.5% against 3.3%. This is in line with Britain’s cyclical conditions. At this stage,
considerable reduction of this short-term interest rate would be at odds with the British inflation target of
at most 2.5%. But apart from the question whether this is an economically favourable time to join, there
are  institutional  impediments  to  the  UK’s  immediate  membership  as  well.  For  one  thing,  the  British
population have to voice their approval in a referendum and, for another, the UK still needs to meet the
exchange rate criterion for joining the monetary union.
Let us take a closer look at these obstacles. First of all, the British Government will have
to  convince  the  people  of  the  importance  of  membership.  This  will  be  possible  if  the  advantages  are
presented in a convincing way, since the idea of joining monetary union is no longer an unfamiliar one.
But the exchange rate criterion, which applies for countries in search of EMU membership, is another,
more complex and more formal, matter. Countries wishing to join EMU on 1 January 1999 are required
to have taken part in the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System for the last two
years,  without  the  fluctuation  margins  being  exceeded.  Countries  joining  at  a  later  stage  are  basically
subject  to  the  same  rules.  But  the  exchange  rate  mechanism  which  will  take  effect  as  from
1 January 1999  differs  from  that  currently  in  force.  In  my  opinion,  ERM2  will  replace  ERM1.  But
legally, it is not that simple, and my view is not shared by everyone. For the time being, the UK is not
making any moves to join the new exchange rate mechanism. I understand the UK’s reluctance to join
ERM2, considering its unfortunate experience with ERM1. Although the UK only joined ERM1 in 1990,
it was already forced to leave in 1992. Naturally they feel that the experience does not bear repetition.
But the circumstances prevailing at that time, viz. an excessively high entry rate for sterling and, more
importantly, a macroeconomic policy which did not fully support the exchange rate objective, are in no
way comparable to those in evidence in the UK and Europe today.
BIS Review   59/1998
- 3 -
Now  let  us  take  a  look  at  Britain’s  cyclical  conditions  and  economic  policy.  The
exchange  rate  movements  of  sterling  largely  reflect  the  cyclical  divergences  between  the  UK  and  the
European continents. I already noted, it is crucial to British participation in EMU that, in the longer term,
its economic development does not diverge substantially from those in Europe. The UK’s economy has
always  been  subject  to  greater  turbulence,  and  its  business  cycle  is  invariably  ahead  of  those  on  the
mainland. But the cyclical outliers seem to be decreasing. It is gratifying to note that the political stop-go
cycle of interest rate policy has made way for a monetary policy aimed at keeping inflation under control.
The  Government’s  economic  policy  is  now  also  directed  at  putting  a  stop  to  the  well-known  British
pattern  of  stop-go,  boom-bust.  Gordon  Brown’s  first  budget  had  a  moderating  effect  on  the  exuberant
cyclical conditions. Right now, the first signs of a cyclical slowdown are showing up. Hopefully, they do
not portend a bust for the British economy. But we will have to wait and see.
Like  the  business  cycles  of  countries  such  as  the  Netherlands  and  Germany,  that  of
Britain will never run exactly parallel to the European average. This is the consequence of conducting a
single monetary policy  in  an  area  as  large  as  the  euro  zone.  The  differences  among  the  countries  will
have to be addressed through their budgets, within the confines of the Stability Pact, and especially by
flexible  labour  and  product  markets.  In  these  respects,  the  UK  is  streets  ahead  of  the  other  major  EU
countries, and is therefore well placed for EMU.
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, I have come to the end of my speech. All things considered, the
prospects are good for the UK making a successful entry into EMU somewhere in the first few years of
the  21st  century.  The  British  Government’s  commitment  to  membership  of  EMU,  and  their  refusal  to
adopt a wait-and-see attitude can be regarded advantageous. In the meantime, the British should have a
say in matters. They are a full-fledged member of the EU, and have been in on the process towards EMU
throughout.  Outsiders  should  not  become  outcasts.  From  the  Dutch  perspective  in  particular,  it  is
desirable that the UK should put its mark on the shape of the European economy and EMU, also during
the  run-up  to  its  participation.  Britain  can  play  an  important  role  in  boosting  the  flexibility  of  the
European labour and product markets. Such a role is needed to stimulate the European economy, and to
offer Europe’s 18 million unemployed the prospect of a new job. To quote Helmut Kohl: “To cooperate
as  closely  as  possible  with  Britain  ‘in  building  Europe’,  Europe  needs  the  United  Kingdom,  and  vice
versa.  The  European  Union  needs,  above  all,  that  unique  British  blend  of  realism  and  traditionalism,
pragmatism and idealism, level-headedness and love of freedom”. With which I could not agree more.
 NB   This BIS Review is available on the BIS World Wide Web site (http://www.bis.org).
 BIS Review   59/1998
