Mr. Tietmeyer discusses the role of the IMF in the global economy   Opening address
by the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Prof. Hans Tietmeyer, at the symposium “The Role of the
IMF in the Global Economy” held in Frankfurt am Main on 2/7/98.
A mass of analyses, commentaries and proposals have already appeared concerning the
crisis in some emerging markets and the problems in certain countries in transition. Many have helped to
enlighten us, but some have merely created more confusion. I hope that today’s symposium will belong
in the enlightening category.
The title of the symposium sums up the main issue: we are living more and more in a
global  economy.  This  has  been  caused  by  two  driving  forces;  firstly,  political  factors:  the  opening  of
goods  and  services  markets  worldwide,  which  has  been  gradually  proceeding  for  decades  the
ever-growing liberalisation of capital transactions, and the internal orientation of countries in transition
to market-based structures. Secondly, technical developments are having an ever-increasing impact: the
almost perfect information technologies now available, and the highly efficient transportation systems.
These  two  aspects  are  interlinked  and  mutually  reinforcing.  The  political  opening
strengthens the economic incentives to seek newer and better technical solutions. Conversely, technical
progress creates powerful pressures to liberalise markets as it makes the maintenance of barriers more
and more inefficient and expensive.
The  benefits  and  challenges  of  globalisation  are  inextricably  linked.  Above  all,
globalisation  brings  major  benefits  for  everyone.  The  most  important  benefits  are:  greater  efficiency
through  stronger  competition,  a  better  allocation  of  resources  and,  consequently,  falling  costs.
Ultimately, the rising standard of living worldwide owes much to the gains produced by globalisation.
But  it  has  other  noticeable  effects,  too.  Globalisation  demands  considerable  internal
flexibility from economies, and, at the same time, credibility from the national political decision makers.
And the integration of previously national markets increases interdependency. As a result, national and
regional crises can no longer be considered in isolation. Contagion is a constant danger in the world of
today and tomorrow.
That  is  why,  in  addition  to  each  country’s  primary  duty  to  prepare  for  and  prevent
financial crises in its own territory, joint efforts at the global level are also meaningful and necessary.
And this is without question the task of the IMF.
Some people believe that the recent financial crises would not have happened if there had
been no  globalisation  and  that,  consequently,  the  gradual  opening  of  markets  is  the  main  cause  of  the
problems. But that view is too short-sighted. The main causes are the misguided or at least risky policies
pursued  by  the  countries  in  question.  Essentially  that  also  applies  to  the  countries  affected  indirectly.
Their own internal weaknesses make them vulnerable.
It  is  also  true  that  the  global  financial  markets,  with  their  tendency  towards
short-termism,  are  sometimes  a  factor  in  making  the  magnitude  of  the  potential  reversal  so  great.  If  a
country then loses the confidence of investors because of a political error, it is punished hard - sometimes
too hard, at least for a time.
II
The outbreak  of  the  crisis  in  some  Asian  countries  poses  some  new  questions  because
some of the key fundamentals were quite sound: In many cases the public fiscal balance was in surplus or
at least was not in excessive deficit. Unemployment was fairly limited. The monetary policy stance was
mostly  quite  restrained,  and  inflation  remained  moderate  for  a  long  time.  For  quite  a  while  current
account deficits were financed by capital imports apparently unproblematically.
BIS Review   59/1998
- 2 -
Some  indicators  even  showed  an  exceptionally  positive  trend.  In  particular,  the  saving
and  investment  ratios  were  comparatively  high,  and  real  growth  in  this  region  was  stronger  than
elsewhere.  Until  a  short  time  ago,  the  title  of  such  a  symposium  might  well  have  been  “The  Asian
economic miracle”.
On closer inspection, however, it can be seen that the economic successes of recent years
already  carried  the  seeds  of  the  later  crisis:  massive  short-term  capital  inflows,  asset  inflation  in  the
equity and property markets, in some cases a misallocation of capital, currency appreciation in real terms,
decreasing  competitiveness  and  growing  current  account  deficits.  These  symptoms  also  pointed  to
internal weaknesses and political mistakes: for example, an over-rigid pegging of the exchange rate to the
dollar and inadequate efficiency of the domestic financial sector.
Certainly,  there  are  good  reasons  for  pegging  an  exchange  rate  to  another  currency.
Credible pegging to a stable anchor can help to reinforce internal discipline. And it can help to lower the
risk premium demanded by investors.
But  there  are  other  considerations  which  can  become  a  danger  if  the  exchange  rate  is
pegged too rigidly: They can make it hard to pursue the objective of internal monetary stability. Interest
rate policy becomes a hostage to the exchange rate, for - given strong capital inflows - an interest rate
rise often has an opposite impact on monetary expansion than the one intended. A persistent stability gap
can then arise in comparison with the anchor country which over time can endanger the competitiveness
of  exports.  In  addition,  the  fixed  exchange  rate  encourages  residents  to  borrow  in  foreign  currency  at
relatively favourable nominal interest rates. However, they expose themselves to substantial risks if their
own currency has to devalue.
In  this  way  the  policy  of  rigid  exchange  rate  pegging  helped  to  make  some  countries
vulnerable to a change in mood in the markets and hence to a rapid reversal of financial capital flows.
Moreover, in some cases the domestic financial sector was underdeveloped and not very
efficient.  Not  infrequently  the  financial  institutions  were  subject  to  political  pressure.  And  the
supervision was not particularly effective.
When the capital began to flow back out of these countries, this soon led, in conjunction
with a vulnerable financial sector, to a massive disruption of the economic system.  Hence  mistakes  in
monetary  policy,  omissions  in  supervising  financial  institutions  and  insufficient  domestic  competitive
structures in some cases made the crises possible in the first place and were largely responsible for the
scale of the crises.
A number of Asian countries tolerated the emergence of a bubble economy and evidently
did  not  correctly  assess  the  associated  dangers.  However,  the  financial  and  foreign  exchange  markets
cannot move out of step with real economic conditions in the long run. A reversal will occur one day -
suddenly  and  mostly  in  an  exaggerated  form.  That  is  dangerous  for  the  countries  concerned,  but  also
quite often for others, too.
An overall analysis of the problem must include some further aspects:
Firstly, the crisis has not yet been overcome, despite the IMF’s intervention and despite
the reforms initiated in a number of countries. The causes - but also the resistance to solutions - are often
deep-seated. It is very hard to change long-established patterns  of  behaviour  and  accustomed  routines.
Yet policy makers in the countries concerned cannot and should not shy away from these challenges - in
the self-interest of the countries concerned but also in the interest of others.
It  is  encouraging  that  certain  countries  have  taken  important  steps  to  tackle  these
challenges and are reaping the first rewards. That also confirms that the IMF has pointed these countries
in the right direction.
BIS Review   59/1998
- 3 -
And  secondly,  some  structural  problems  of  the  Asian  emerging  economies  are  by  no
means unique. Such problems also exist elsewhere, and often have similar causes: in some countries in
transition the financial sectors are too weak; external debt is often rather short-term and denominated in
foreign currency to an excessive extent.
In  some  industrial  countries  there  are  at  the  moment  tendencies  towards  exaggerated
asset prices. One must ask oneself whether the prices reflect the true value of the underlying assets and
whether perhaps the potential for a reversal is becoming too great.
The situation in Japan is a special problem. The efforts to overcome the difficulties  in
that country via monetary and fiscal policy means have been unsuccessful so far. But it is not exclusively
a problem of finding the right macroeconomic course.
It  would  seem  that  there  is  still  too  little  competition  on  the  goods  and  especially  the
financial markets in Japan. In particular, the problems in the financial sector, which have accumulated
over years, demand convincing, forward-looking solutions. At the same time a problematic vacuum exists
in some areas and the political response has been too hesitant and vague with respect to the necessary
corrections.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  new  announcements  will  soon  be  followed  by  convincing  and
confidence-building actions.
III
In dealing with financial crises, the Fund has learned many lessons in the past few years
and  has  accumulated  important  experience  with  the  strategy  of  intervening  very  early  with  massive
amounts. The rationale behind this strategy is more or less as follows: the best way to counter a crisis of
confidence  in  a  country,  once  it  has  broken  out,  is  to  take  resolute  action  to  provide  comprehensive
conditioned financial assistance and so to set an unmistakable signal. In my view, however, the results of
this strategy have not been particularly encouraging in a number of cases.
At  least  three  serious  drawbacks  are  apparent:  Firstly,  the  frequent  application  of  this
strategy is simply very expensive for the Fund.
Secondly, levels of financial assistance that are announced very early on act like a kind
of  benchmark.  And  in  the  next  crisis  they  are  considered  the  absolute  minimum.  If  the  international
community were to offer less, the countries concerned and the financial markets could well interpret this
as indifference, as proof of a kind of benign neglect - or even malign neglect.
And  thirdly,  an  early,  massive  intervention  by  the  IMF  undermines  the  ability  of  the
financial  markets  to  function  in  the  long  run.  Functioning  markets  need  not  only  the  chance  to  make
profits but also the possibility to punish mistakes through incurring losses. Otherwise there is a danger of
a moral hazard. And not only for the policy makers of the countries concerned. The markets, too, will
end  up  underestimating  the  risks  because  they  are  confident  of  a  bail-out.  This  leads  to  global
misallocation of capital and shifts costs on to the public sector.
Basically,  this  reveals  the  central  problem  of  any  form  of  interventionist  economic
policy: the other players come to expect interventions and anticipate the later measures. On balance, it
has become clear that an interventionist strategy for managing financial crises can easily lead to a dead
end.
BIS Review   59/1998
- 4 -
IV
So how can the IMF escape from this dead end on a lasting basis? Naturally, there is no
magic formula. But there are a few general conclusions.
The  first  requirement  is  that  the  Fund  should  concentrate  less  on  correcting  a  market
outcome  that  has  already  occurred.  Instead  it  should  try  to  influence  the  ex  ante  setting  in  which  the
financial markets operate and to improve their functioning.
That  begins  with  improved  prevention.  Above  all,  this  requires  more  transparency  and
information  so  that  the  financial  markets  can  form  their  expectations  more  rationally  and  more
realistically  and  so  that  the  IMF  itself  can  assess  the  need  for  action  more  quickly.  Specifically,  this
means  publishing  more  data  (especially  on  the  maturity  structure  and  denomination  of  external  debt),
publishing timelier data and at shorter intervals (if possible, monthly instead of twice-yearly) and using
more  sources,  that  is  not  only  the  data  of  the  borrowers  themselves  but  also  data  from  the  lending
financial institutions in the industrial countries.
Improving the data quality of a number of countries will certainly require a substantial
intensification of basic statistical work and more openness. However, the return of benefits is likely to be
considerable.
The  advantages  of  greater  transparency  are  obvious.  The  countries  concerned  have  a
greater  recognition  of  the  need  to  take  certain  action.  The  “ownership”  of  adjustment  programmes,  in
particular, increases. And there are less uncertainties for the market players.
The  limits  of  such  transparency  must  lie  where  confidentiality  and  the  “internal
openness” of advisory or decision-making processes have to be upheld. But in the integrated  world  of
today it must also be clear that national sovereignty is increasingly coming up against its limits.
The IMF itself can contribute towards more information. But  it  is  not  a  rating  agency.
The ultimate responsibility for correctly assessing chances and risks in a given country remains with the
players in the financial markets.
In the broader sense, greater prevention also includes technical support. For example, the
international community can and should provide support, especially in the field of banking supervision,
where a number of emerging economies evidently still have some weaknesses. The BIS recently set up
the Institute for Financial Stability in order to train expert staff, and the committees of the G-10 central
bank  governors,  which  mostly  meet  in  Basle,  have  now  intensified  their  cooperation  with  the
representatives of the emerging economies.
In addition, the IMF should take account of the recent experience and specific conditions
of  countries  when  making  its  policy  recommendations.  For  example,  the  level  of  development  of  the
domestic financial sector needs to be taken into account in assessing the right route to the liberalisation
of capital transactions. And when recommending an exchange rate peg, the country’s ability to cope with
such a regime needs to be considered carefully.
Finally,  one  aspect  of  prevention  should  surely  be  that  the  IMF,  wherever  economic
policy weaknesses are apparent, should exert greater pressure if necessary on the government concerned
before a crisis has broken out, even if the extent to which this can be done publicly is a very sensitive
question.
For the main contribution towards effective crisis prevention must be made, of course, by
the countries concerned themselves. That applies to emerging economies and countries in transition, to
the poorer developing countries and, not least, to the industrial nations as well.
BIS Review   59/1998
- 5 -
A  necessary  precondition  for  winning  the  confidence  of  the  markets  is  convincing
economic and political action (good governance). No one can ignore market mechanisms in the long run
without causing economic damage. And political power must not be misused in order to secure personal
advantages and to distort the domestic economy with lucrative monopolies.
V
When a crisis does break out, the IMF should again pay more attention to its catalyst role
as  a  moderator  and  coordinator.  The  primary  aim  must  be  to  maintain  or  restore  the  crisis  countries’
access to private capital.
Therefore  the  IMF  should  contribute  towards  bringing  creditors  and  debtors  together
round the table at an early stage and towards working out market-based solutions. I fully agree with what
Mr.  Michel  Camdessus  said  in  a  recent  interview  in  a  German  newspaper:  “Moral  hazard  exists.
Overcoming this problem, however, requires the involvement of the private creditors. Their participation
is the backbone of our activity”.
Clearly, not every case is identical. It is naturally easier to perform the role of moderator
if - as in some Asian cases - the creditors are in the main commercial banks. In some cases in Asia the
IMF seems to have been rather late in seizing that chance. If the groups of creditors - as in the Mexico
case  -  are  more  widely  spread  and  heterogeneous,  it  may  be  more  difficult  to  bring  all  the  interested
parties together around one table. On the other hand, if non-banks are involved more heavily, the dangers
of a spreading financial crisis in the sense of a systemic risk also tend to be smaller.
The  IMF  should  also  minimise  its  provision  of  financial  assistance  not  least  because
these  are  public  resources  which  it  is  distributing.  It  should  therefore  itself  bear  only  the  absolutely
necessary portion of a financing package. It can define a maturity and an interest rate for the resources
which it provides that give the debtor an incentive to repay them as soon as possible. Finally, of course,
the IMF must make its help subject to certain requirements, that is it must define the conditionality. That
is part of the IMF’s mandate and is also in the interest of the world community.
In defining the conditionality it is imperative to tackle the underlying causes. Time after
time it has become clear that macroeconomic measures alone often do not suffice. In Asia - as elsewhere
- it has become apparent instead that one of the root causes was the insufficient soundness and robustness
of the financial sector.
The work of the committees in Basle and the efforts of the Fund have laid the basis for
appropriate rules and appropriate supervision. The key need now is to translate that into action. For many
of  the  countries  concerned  that  may  not  be  easy.  But  the  gains  will  make  the  effort  worthwhile.
Moreover, effective financial supervision and robust financial sectors are a prerequisite for the further
liberalisation of capital transactions as envisaged by the IMF and supported by us.
VI
Since last autumn the IMF  has  come  under  heavy  criticism  from  some  quarters  -  most
unfairly  in  some  cases.  The  proposals  for  improving  the  situation  range  from  abolishing  the  IMF
altogether to setting up additional institutions.
We  can  be  certain  of  two  things:  Firstly,  the  IMF  is  now  over  50  years  old.  When  a
human  being  reaches  that  age  we  say  that  he  or  she  is  still  capable  of  doing  outstanding  work,  has
acquired  great  experience  but,  of  course,  is  not  infallible.  Secondly,  the  overall  setting  has  changed
tremendously in the past decades. The world has long since moved away from fixed exchange rates with
limited capital transactions. Today the exchange rates of the major reserve currencies are flexible and the
markets are becoming increasingly integrated worldwide.
BIS Review   59/1998
- 6 -
But I do not believe that the Fund’s age and the changed setting mean that the IMF is
superfluous. On the contrary! In this context I would like to draw your attention to the fact that we in
Germany  have  already  notified  the  Fund  of  our  agreement  to  an  increase  in  our  quota  in  order  to
strengthen the financial basis of the Fund’s activities.
But,  of  course,  providing  money  is  not  enough.  An  interdependent,  global  economy
requires not only efforts to achieve political cooperation but also vigilant watchdogs. In the first instance,
it is the market players themselves who are responsible for exercising vigilance. It is not the Fund’s task
to take over or replace the watchdog function of the markets.
But  in  improving  the  functioning  of  the  financial  markets,  the  IMF  also  pinpoints  the
responsibility  of  the  private  investors  themselves.  For  this  reason  the  IMF  must  concentrate  on  its
original function of acting as a catalyst. This central role of the IMF needs to be strengthened rather than
reduced. In performing this role, the IMF will contribute to enhancing the stability and openness of the
global economy. That is a challenge for at least another 50 years!
BIS Review   59/1998
