Mr.  Gaddum  discusses  the  euro,  US  dollar  and  the  world  economy      Dinner
speech by the Deputy Governor of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Mr. Johann Wilhelm Gaddum, on the
occasion  of  the  Joint  Conference  of  Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung  and  Aspen-Institut,  Berlin  in
Washington DC on 6-8/5/1998.
There is no doubt about it. The European Central Bank will come into operation on
July 1.
That  also  means  that  the  euro  is  on  its  way,  and  that  will  bring  about  changes  in
Europe. But is it only Europe that will be affected?
I very much appreciate having this opportunity to explain the views of the Deutsche
Bundesbank on this matter to such a well-informed audience here in Washington.
Recently, in a well-known US newspaper, I saw a cartoon which captured what - to
my mind - is the widespread ambivalence concerning the future prospects of the euro.
The cartoon showed a group of experts  (presumably  economists)  sitting  at a  round
table and apparently discussing the future outlook for the euro. The chairman of this group finally
gets  carried  away  and  exclaims:  “I  bet  you  10  to  1  that  the  euro  will  be  a  success!”  Each  of  the
others at the table nods vigorously in agreement with this forecast, replying: “I think so, too.” Only
one of the group adds somewhat timidly: “But in dollars.”
Begun as a foreign policy concept, the idea of European monetary union (EMU) has
taken  on  economic  significance  during  the  past  few  years  as  a  result  of  the  globalisation  of  the
markets. So far, there has been little discussion of this international dimension of EMU.
EMU will create a currency area which, when all 15  states  of  the European  Union
have become members, will have a population of approximately 370 million whose gross domestic
product will represent about 38.3% of the GDP of all OECD states. This will change the respective
importance of the world’s currencies.
It  therefore  seems  reasonable  to  suppose  that,  when  stating  what  we  expect  of
monetary union, we have to explain, firstly, what the European Central Bank will mean for Europe
and particularly for Germany and, secondly, what it may mean for our friends and partners in other
parts of the world.
II
Konrad Adenauer always incorporated the idea of European cooperation into German
policy, and since then - yes, right up to the present day - this has been a central feature of German
policy.
All  German  governments  have  had  this  objective  in  mind.  And  the  idea  of  a
monetary union has always  played an important role in this.
In the light of this it is not surprising that in Germany both the government and the
opposition  support  the  project  of  monetary  union  -  despite  the  considerable  reluctance  of  the
population.
BIS Review   39/1998
˝
- 2 -
Both  prior  to  and  after  the  signing  of  the  (Maastricht)  Treaty  the  Bundesbank  has
outlined  in  its  statements  what  monetary  union  will  mean  for  Germany  (and  for  the  other
participating states).
At  the  request  of  the  Federal  Government  the  Bank  issued  a  further  comment  on
March 26, that is to say, shortly before the decision taken last weekend.
It  was  only  to  be  expected  that  the  Bundesbank’s  analysis  of  the  degree  of
convergence  reached  within  the  European  Union  incorporates  light  and  shade,  opportunities  and
problems. This comment by the Central Bank Council was anything but an excuse for euphoria.
The Bundesbank has not  resolved to reject monetary union because of the inherent
problems. In addition to making its analysis, it has nevertheless made it clear what responsibilities
policy makers will incur as a result of monetary union.
First of all, I shall outline the positive points:
•  Exchange rate tensions within Europe have declined appreciably.
•  Inflation  rates  are  very  similar  and  are  no  more  than  somewhere  between  1.0%
and 2.0%.
•  Capital market rates are now very close to the German rate.
The challenges, however, are as follows:
When  their  bilateral  exchange  rates  are  fixed  irrevocably,  the  participants  in
monetary union are giving  up  not  only  an  economically  compensatory  mechanism  -  the  exchange
rate - for ever. They have also to accept an adjustment over the long term of the different economic
and political traditions in the member  states  to  the  new  supranational  framework and  to  put aside
national interests in favour of this new dimension.
In  a  monetary  union,  which  by  definition  transcends  the  sovereignty  of  the
participating  nation  states,  discrepancies  may  arise  time  and  again  that  must  be  solved  through
national economic, fiscal and social policy measures and not through the monetary policy applying
uniformly throughout the union.
EMU will increase the competition for inward investment in the participating states.
The more flexible a country’s  goods,  financial and labour markets are the better it will be able to
compete.
For this reason, the policy of reform which has been in force over the past few years
must not be abandoned or applied less vigorously. On the contrary, it must be intensified.
Fiscal policy has a particular role of responsibility in monetary union.
Fiscal  policy,  in  contrast  to  internal  and  external  monetary  policy,  which  is  a
union-wide responsibility,  will  remain  the  responsibility  of  the  member  states.  Consequently,  it  is
particularly  important  that  the  public  authorities  can  prove  that  their  financial  position  is  on  a
permanently sound footing.
If  they  are  to  fulfil  this  requirement,  some  member  states  will  have  to  make  a
particular effort.
BIS Review   39/1998
˝
- 3 -
A permanently sustainable financial position on the part of member states is essential
if conflicts between them are to be avoided and, moreover, if conflicts between the respective states
and the single stability-oriented monetary policy are to be avoided.
So much for the Bundesbank’s basic concern.
We have always thought it was important to make it clear that, if European monetary
union was a worthwhile objective, it could not be achieved without a measure of sacrifice.
Monetary  union  provides  all  the  advantages  of  a  fairly  large  homogeneous  market
freed from exchange rate fluctuations. But from its participants it demands economic and political
discipline.
The  combination  of  monetary  policy  uniformity  and  political  diversity  poses
problems.
traditions.
It was in this connection that President Chirac spoke of an adventure.
The  two  largest  member  states  of  the  union,  Germany  and  France,  have  different
On the one hand, there is Germany’s fortunate experience with a Bundesbank that is
independent in its monetary policy decisions.
Conflicts  with  the  government  of  the  day,  whether  it  be  Adenauer’s,  Schmidt’s  or
Kohl’s,  have  done  nothing  to  change  that.  In  the  event,  they  have  actually  strengthened  the
Bundesbank’s standing.
France, on the other hand, sees monetary policy as an instrument of the government
in  power.  The  recent  amendments  to  the  statutes  of  the  Banque  de  France  represent  a  change  in
approach which was necessitated by the provisions of the Maastricht Treaty and which was largely
unpopular.
The political compromise reached in the dispute concerning the appointment of the
first president of the ECB has to be seen against this background.
The aim of the eight-year term of office which is laid down in the Treaty and which
cannot be extended is to ensure the independence of the incumbent. The fact that it is precisely this
ruling that has been called into question confirms fears that not all of the ramifications implied by an
independent monetary policy have yet been finally accepted by the governments concerned. Like the
independence of the Bundesbank, it is something that we shall probably still have to fight for.
III
Although the integration of the world economy began a long time ago, a significant
acceleration occurred in the 1980s and 1990s.
This is seen in the trends in international capital flows and in the financial markets to
an even greater degree than it is in foreign trade.
BIS Review   39/1998
˝
- 4 -
However,  a  gigantic  step  is  now  being  taken  with  the  introduction  of  a  single
currency in a large part of the global financial market.
The  fragmentation  into  many  national  capital  markets,  a  phenomenon  which  is
particularly apparent in the case of the bond markets and which has arisen as a result of the existence
of different currencies (and therefore of different interest rates), will be a thing of the past.
The national markets in Europe will compete with each other more intensively than
they do now. They will gradually lose the specific national features that they now have.
The  large  cross-border  euro  capital  market  will  accelerate  the  trend  towards
globalisation.  This  will  encourage  processes  of  concentration  and  yet  provide  opportunities  to
specialise in market segments which need a particularly intensive degree of management know-how.
The volume of transactions on the future euro bond market will approach the size of
the undisputedly dominant US market today.
If today’s US market is about six times larger than the German market, it will only be
about 1.6 times larger than the euro market.
The euro will take over the role of the D-Mark.  The tripolar  world  capital market
consisting of the dollar, the euro and the yen is gradually emerging.
The depth and breadth of the euro market, which will be greater than the depth and
breadth  of  the  present  national  markets,  will  become  more  attractive  to  internationally  operating
customers for and suppliers of capital.
In  contrast  to  the  situation  in  the  United  States,  we  will  have  several  sovereign
issuers in one single currency area. This competition with respect to creditworthiness need not be a
disadvantage.
The greater attractiveness of the European market will increase its efficiency and the
professionalism of the market players. What does all of this mean for the German capital market?
With  the  loss  of  the  D-Mark,  Germany,  and  particularly  the  German  bond  market,
will lose a major competitive advantage.
The  currency  which  has  been  the  anchor  for  the  European  Monetary  System  and
which  over  a  period  of  some  decades  has  become  the  most  important  investment  and  reserve
currency after the dollar will disappear.
We have been trying for some years now to make up for the approaching loss of the
competitive advantage we have as a result of the D-Mark.
The German capital  market  had  to  be  prepared  for  the  euro.  Structural  weaknesses
had to be removed.
The  German capital  market  is  now  in  a  strong  starting  position  and  is  equipped  to
meet the competition from other financial centres.
BIS Review   39/1998
˝
- 5 -
German bonds set the benchmark for the yield curve in Europe. Repo business has
switched back from London to Frankfurt.
The  German  futures  exchange  now  handles  more  than  70%  of  the  Federal
Government’s contracts. The Bunds, too, have returned from London to Frankfurt.
However, one thing is clear to us:  in the long run only a stable euro will have a good
chance of taking over the role of a reserve, investment and transaction currency.
Only  a  stable  single  currency  will  provide  the  European  Community  with  the
opportunity to play a major role in the  world economy  and  to  do  so  with  correspondingly  greater
influence than it has today.
IV
What does this mean for our friends and partners in other parts of the world? Many
hardly showed any interest in the European debate on monetary union at first; then, in the end, when
things had taken on a more concrete shape, they reacted in astonishment. For a long time the EMU
project was regarded in non-European countries as having no chance of success.
A sarcastic but not at all untypical comment which I would like to quote may serve
as an example of this attitude:
“It’s a lunatic idea but, to be honest, one that I thought would collapse  of its  own
stupidity. Unfortunately, it hasn’t, and so here goes.” (Samuelson, January 1997)
Even  US  economists  for  the  most  part  reacted  sceptically  to  the  idea  of  a  single
currency in Europe when they considered its economic justification.
On  the  other  hand,  the  European  advocates  of  the  EMU  project  were  seldom
prepared to answer this criticism.
Presumably  the  reason  for  this  was  that  from  the  outset  they  had  suspected  that
Americans were being particularly critical about European efforts at integration because they viewed
this development through the eyes of competitors.
However,  internationally  successful  currencies  are  not  simply  established  by
politicians  by  decree.  They  have  to  stand  their  own  in  competition  with  other  currencies  on  the
financial markets.
I am certain that it will take some time before the euro will be able to assert itself in
the international markets and represent a genuine competitor for the US dollar.
At least in the past structural changes in the international currency pattern occurred
only  very  slowly.  One  only  needs  to  think  of  the  time  it  took  for  the  dollar  to  replace  the  pound
sterling.
It  was  no  different  when  the  D-Mark  was  being  established  as  an  international
currency: that took years, if not decades.
In  its  competition  with  the  dollar  the  euro  will  have  to  acquire  for  itself  a  certain
degree of trust. This is something it will not inherit.
BIS Review   39/1998
˝
- 6 -
However,  Americans  and  Europeans  alike  can  only  benefit  from  the  competition
between these two major currencies for the confidence of investors.
The  disappearance  of  exchange  rate  risks  on  the  European  market  will  provide
interesting investment opportunities in Europe for US enterprises, too.
The increase in world trade that can be expected from EMU will also benefit the US
economy.
The European economies which enter into this monetary union will be compelled to
dismantle  market  rigidities  (especially  in  the  labour  markets)  if  they  want  to  survive  in  the
intensified international competition and be able to meet the consequences of external shocks in the
currency area.
The IMF is right in describing the labour markets as the Achilles’ heal of the EMU
project.
Politically, the development of a system of transfers between the participating states
has no chance at the moment. The unsatisfactory situation in the labour markets therefore makes a
change in policy inevitable.
This  will  ultimately  have  positive  repercussions  for  Europe’s  trading  partners,  too,
including the United States.
Another  reassuring  point  is  that  the  Maastricht  Treaty  rules  out  the  possibility  of
policy makers using the exchange rate of the euro as a foreign trade policy instrument.
A  more  productive  European  economy  with  sound  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  is
likewise not only in Europe’s interests but also in the United States’.
I am quite sure that the entire international monetary  system  will  profit  from  more
predictable monetary and fiscal policies in European monetary union.
V
In  Washington  it  is  naturally  impossible  to  speak  of  the  international  monetary
system without addressing yet another aspect of European monetary union, namely the impact of the
imminent  European  monetary  union  on  the  debate  that  is  currently  being  held  -  especially  in  the
light of the east Asian crisis - in the United States (and elsewhere) on the future role of the IMF.
Now  and  again  one  hears  fears  voiced,  especially  in  the  United  States,  about  the
potential  threat  the  EMU  poses  for  the  global leadership  role  of  the  Bretton  Woods  institutions.  I
agree with those who urge reforms at the IMF and the World Bank.
The  need  for  reform  may  be  due  just  as  much  to  the  structural  changes  in  the
financial markets as to the changes in the importance of world trading partners.
Europe still  has  to  find  its  role in  this  process  of  reform.  Where  these partners  are
nation states, each of the member states of the EU acts in its own right; whenever central banks are
concerned, the ECB acts as the European central bank.
BIS Review   39/1998
˝
- 7 -
I admit that this is a complicated arrangement. No easy answer has yet been found.
What  is  necessary  in  the  interest  of  the  international  monetary  system  is  a  clear
declaration  of  belief  in  an  open  world  economy  which  does  not  attempt  to  support  hegemonies
through hidden regulations.
Surveillance  and  rules,  however  carefully  they  are  fomulated,  are  no  substitute  for
the self-imposed sense of responsibility of the market players themselves.
Instead,  a  promising  approach  may  be  to  refrain,  when  attempting  to  reform,  from
giving the IMF a never ending series of new tasks to perform but to restore the role of the IMF to its
original function, namely that of a catalyst.
VI
I  hope  that  during  the  next  two  days  this  conference  will  provide  you  with  many
opportunities to take part in interesting discussions which will afford you additional information and
new material for coming to your own conclusions.
When you leave Washington again at the weekend, you should be in no doubt - if I
may return to the cartoon I mentioned at the beginning - at least about the currency you use when
making a bet.
BIS Review   39/1998
˝
