Mr. George gives a central banker’s response to the Asian crisis   Speech by the
Governor of the Bank of England, Mr. E.A.J. George, at the Foreign and Colonial Emerging Markets
Conference, in London, on 28/5/98.
Thank  you,  Mr  Chairman.  I’m  delighted  to  participate  in  this  Emerging  Markets
Conference, sharing the platform with such distinguished company. I am particularly pleased to be
joined in this session by Guillermo Ortiz - my colleague from the Bank of Mexico.
The particular examination question which you set me is: “How did an OECD central
banker respond to the Asian crisis?”. I have to confess that it’s a somewhat embarrassing question. If
I’m  brutally  honest  I  have  to  acknowledge  that  I  didn’t  see  it  coming;  I  played  a  modest  role  in
helping  to  contain  its  immediate  impact  on  global  financial  stability;  and  I’m  still  struggling  to
understand its implications, in terms both of its economic after-effects, and of the lessons we must
all learn to reduce the risks in the future. I would only plead in mitigation, your honour, that I was by
no  means  alone  in  all  of  that;  and  I  beg  leave  to  join  in  my  defence  all  my  central  banking
colleagues,  governments  and  Finance  Ministry  officials,  in  Asia  and  elsewhere,  the  international
financial institutions, and the world’s financial markets.
The  storm  last  year  in  Asia  struck  essentially  the  ASEAN  four  -  Thailand,  the
Philippines,  Malaysia  and  Indonesia  -  spreading  subsequently  to  South  Korea  and  intermittently
battering Hong Kong and elsewhere.
It is still not wholly clear - to me at least - quite why the storm struck suddenly when
it did. Most crises of this sort have their origins in some evident macro-economic policy failure. At
least in hindsight there are usually fairly clear tell-tale signs of expanding fiscal deficits and/or lax
monetary  policies,  classically  accompanied  by  evidence  of  imbalance  in  the  form  of  accelerating
inflation or a rapidly deteriorating balance of payments. There were such signs, perhaps most notably
in  Thailand;  but  they  were  not  for  the  most  part  particularly  pronounced  in  Asia.  Some  of  you
perhaps understand better than I do why the initial infection proved to be so contagious. It was after
all your money!
In fact through the first half of the 1990’s, and in some cases  for  much  longer,  the
countries  in  question  had  been  remarkably  successful.  They  attracted,  by  their  very  success,  huge
inflows of capital from the rest of the world, where yields had fallen, in the hope of achieving higher
returns.
There  is  no  question  that  this  capital  inflow  made  a  very  big  contribution  to  the
remarkable economic expansion in Asia and hence to the global economy; but with the  benefit  of
hindsight,  the  accelerating  scale  of  the  inflow,  and  particularly  the  forms  that  it  took,  became  an
important  part  of  the  problem.  It  was  not  all  in  the  end  productively  employed.  There  was
over-investment in some sectors; much went into ambitious property development; and much went
into financial assets, including short-term foreign currency claims, rather than into real assets. The
hoped-for higher returns could not be maintained.
Again with the benefit of hindsight, it is possible to identify a number of structural
weaknesses in the mechanisms for financial resource allocation in the recipient countries. There was,
for example, a general lack of reliable financial information, and a lack of transparency in relation to
the  financial  position,  of  both  public  and  private  sectors.  Complex  and  opaque  links  between
government,  financial  institutions  and  non-financial  companies  made  it  difficult  for  outsiders  to
understand the real nature of their exposures. Financial markets were not well developed, leaving the
system heavily dependent upon the banks. There was inadequate regulatory or supervisory oversight.
BIS Review   49/1998
- 2 -
There was widespread, often informal, government influence over financial flows, which importantly
also  contributed  to  a  perception  that  much  of  the  borrowing  was  implicitly  under-written  by  the
government. The list could go on.
The problem was compounded by the absence of any real perception of exchange rate
risk. Borrowers were evidently confident that governments would maintain their exchange rate pegs
against the dollar, even when the dollar itself began to strengthen, so that unhedged foreign currency
debt, much of it at short-term, appeared to be a cheap alternative to domestic currency borrowing.
The result was a build-up of short-term foreign currency liabilities, by banks and non-banks, which
was  not  fully  appreciated,  and  which  left  the  Asian  economies  especially  vulnerable  to  a  flight  of
capital in the event of a change in sentiment. The particular problem is that while national authorities
can create their domestic currency, if they choose to do so, even if it leads to inflation, they cannot
simply create foreign currencies in the same way.
So, once the run started, it was violent and contagious. For a time around the end of
last year there was a significant possibility of a chain of default emanating from Asia that could have
reverberated right through the global financial system. The immediate task was to contain that risk.
Essentially there are two broad options for dealing with a foreign currency crisis. One
is simply to allow financial markets - exchange markets, interest rates, and stock and bond prices - to
take the strain, and to seek to restore confidence, and to moderate the impact of market movements,
by restrictive macro-economic policy adjustment in the affected country. The second is to try to limit
the  financial  market  impact  and  the  extent  of  the  associated  macro-economic  adjustment  by
providing  or  arranging  alternative  external  financing.  In  practice  these  options  are  not,  of  course,
mutually exclusive and the real question is the appropriate balance between them.
Where a country has transparently been pursuing an unsustainable macro-economic
policy, most people find it easy to accept that that country should bear the burden and adjust, painful
though  that  may  be.  Many  people  find  this  harder  to  accept  where,  as  in  the  present  case,
conventional  macro-economic  policies  had,  for  the  most  part,  been  relatively  responsible.  There
were  certainly  adjustments  to  macro-economic  policy  that  needed  to  be  made  -  a  more  flexible
exchange  rate  regime  in  some  cases,  for  example,  or  a  somewhat  tighter  overall  macro-economic
stance,  with  perhaps  some  adjustment  between  fiscal  and  monetary  policy.  And,  once  the  capital
outflow had started, macro-economic adjustment had to be harsher than might otherwise have been
necessary,  in  order  to  re-establish  confidence.  But  there  are  real  dangers  in  extreme  market
movements or in excessively severe macro-economic adjustment to contain them. The political and
social consequences are all too apparent in parts of Asia; but even without that there is a danger of a
vicious circle of domestic default and systemic financial weakness in the affected country. And that
could have seriously adverse implications - in terms of both financial and economic knock-on-effects
- for the global economy.
That, essentially, is why it may be in the self-interest of the international community
to attempt to mitigate the market and macro-economic adjustment pressures by providing financial
support. It is why the international community responded to the crisis in Asia by promptly offering
very  large  amounts  of  official  assistance  -  $17  billion  in  the  case  of  Thailand,  $43  billion  for
Indonesia and $57 billion for South Korea. This kind of official assistance of course is essentially for
the  international  financial  institutions  and  for  governments  -  though  central  banks  are  often  the
channel  for  bilateral  financing,  as  the  Bank  of  England  is,  for  example,  in  the  case  of  the  UK’s
contribution to the bilateral support for Korea.
But such official financial help cannot be unlimited and it cannot be provided without
strings.  It,  too,  has  real  dangers.  If  it  were  too  readily  forthcoming  it  could  encourage  “moral
BIS Review   49/1998
- 3 -
hazard”, especially by encouraging commercial lenders - particularly foreign currency creditors - in
the belief that they will be bailed out if things go wrong. That would be likely to add to the problem
of potentially volatile capital inflows next time around. Not surprisingly, too, there is strong political
resistance in many countries, including notably the United States, to the idea that public - taxpayers’-
money should be used to bail out private creditors, especially foreign creditors.
External  financing  need  not  come  solely  from  the  public  sector.  Private  finance
would serve the same purpose, and in many situations market price adjustments may be sufficient to
stem the capital outflow. But, given the extent of the loss of confidence in the Asian case, organising
private financial support meant in practice persuading existing creditors  that  their  assets  would  be
better  protected  if  they  were  prepared  to  leave  them  in  place,  especially  if  other  major  private
creditors agreed to do the same, and if official support were made available in parallel. But in this
case, too, difficult judgements have to be made. There is a danger that, if private creditors have in
effect to be coerced into staying put, they will immediately cut their positions elsewhere, while they
still could, thereby adding to the international contagion.
In fact, in the critically important case - because of its size - of Korea, the promise of
massive official support failed to restore market confidence. And when it became apparent that the
official bilateral financing was in practice available only as the very last resort we - again with the
central banks as the immediate intermediaries - had to turn to the commercial bank lenders in the
major creditor countries and persuade them to extend the maturity of their loans. Like most U-turns,
it was a dangerous moment. But the banks’ constructive response went a long way to stabilising the
immediate situation in relation to Korea - and thereby to the region as a whole. The creditor banks
are also now in negotiation with Indonesia’s bank and commercial non-bank debtors.
I  can’t  pretend  that  we  are  completely  out  of  the  wood  in  terms  of  the  external
financial crisis in Asia, but there is now at least a good deal more light between the trees.
International attention is now extending to managing the economic fall-out from last
year’s financial disturbances, against the background of the longer-standing financial and economic
fragility in Japan - which is of course the largest economy in the Asian region. The concern relates in
part  to  the  implications  for  global  economic  activity;  but  it  relates  importantly,  too,  to  the
prospective external payments imbalances within the global economy which will need to be handled
very carefully if they are not to lead to trade frictions and/or exchange rate volatility.
But attention has also turned to an intensive reappraisal, in all sorts of international
fora, of more effective means of preventing, and managing, such situations in the future.
It would have been understandable in the light of the Asian experience if there had
been some turning back from the path towards greater freedom of international capital movements,
and  there  has  been  some  suggestion  of  this.  But  on  the  whole  the  international  debate  -  in  which
central  banks  as  well  as  governments  are  actively  involved  -  continues  to  recognise  the  long-term
benefits  of  free  capital  movements  and  the  contribution  that  they  can  make  to  global  economic
prosperity. The mood is to continue cautiously down that path, but to emphasise the need, not only
for sound macro-economic policies, which everyone accepts as a sine qua non, but also for steps to
accompany capital account liberalisation designed to reduce the risks of volatility.
These  relate  in  part  to  the  process  of  capital  account  liberalisation,  where  there  is
now  a  good  deal  more  stress  on  ‘sequencing’  -  that  is  on  liberalising  potentially  more  stable,
longer-term,  capital  inflows  initially,  rather  than  short-term  borrowing  denominated  in  foreign
currency.
BIS Review   49/1998
- 4 -
But  they  relate  particularly  to  three  key  conditions  for  living  with  free  capital
movements.
The  first  is  “transparency”.  In  a  broad  sense  a  need  for  greater  transparency  is
recognised in relation to public policy, to the relationship between the public and private sectors, to
corporate governance, accounting standards, and so on. In a narrower sense there is seen to be a need
for more reliable, and greater and more timely disclosure of, financial information generally, at the
level  of  individual  borrowing  entities,  but  especially  also  in  relation  to  countries’  true  foreign
exchange  short-term  asset  and  liability  positions.  This  is  especially  important  in  relation  to  the
foreign  currency  liquidity  position  of  the  monetary  authorities  and  of  the  banking  system.  The
general point is that we cannot reasonably expect markets to make a proper assessment of the risks
of  their  investments,  including  particularly  their  short-term  lending  if  they  do  not  have  adequate
information  in  accessible  form,  so  that  we  need  to  provide  appropriate  incentives  for  countries  to
provide such information. The corollary is that where they do have adequate information, financial
market participants can be expected to accept the penalty if their judgements prove ill-founded - as
indeed they largely do already in respect of many forms of overseas investment.
The second condition for more stable capital flows is stronger financial systems. That
includes  for  example  the  broadening  of  capital  markets  so  that  the  allocation  of  capital  is  less
concentrated  on  local  banking  systems.  It  includes  robust  financial  infrastructure  -  for  example
payments and settlements systems. And it includes crucially more effective financial regulation and
supervision. A key feature of future arrangements for me in this area is the encouragement, not just
of more published information about the short-term foreign currency assets, relative to liabilities, of
the  public  sector  and  the  banking  system,  but  more  positive  management  of  the  country’s  foreign
currency  liquidity  position,  taking  account  of  the  nature  of  the  exchange  rate  regime.  It  was
weaknesses in this area, above all, in my view that turned the Asian financial problem into a panic.
These  various  steps  -  which  need  a  great  deal  of  elaboration  and  refinement  -  in
themselves represent a huge agenda for the future. But however much we try to prevent accidents we
need nevertheless to be prepared for them to happen. The third condition for living with freedom of
capital movements, therefore, is a more consistent view of how, when a crisis does break, the burden
might be expected to be shared in future between official and private sector financing.
In  this  context,  one  thing  seems  clear:  given  the  evidence  of  public  resistance,  we
cannot  assume  that  massive  official  financing  packages  will  in  fact  be  deliverable  in  the  future  to
bail out private foreign currency creditors. Various ideas have been put forward for involving private
foreign currency lenders in an extension of maturities in case of a serious foreign exchange crisis -
perhaps within a framework of insolvency principles or some other form of code of practice. These
ideas,  too,  need  to  be  developed  and  refined;  and  we  need  to  establish  suitable  incentives  and
conditions to ensure that the financing burden is in fact shared between official and private sector
creditors.  The  general  point  here  is  that  it  may  help  to  discourage  excessive,  potentially  volatile,
short-term foreign currency lending in future if the lenders clearly understand from the outset that
they will indeed be expected to carry a substantial part of the load.
Mr Chairman, the debate on all these issues is still at a relatively early stage, and is
being carried forward seemingly whenever two or more monetary officials, or indeed private sector
analysts  or  commentators,  are  gathered  together  in  one  place.  It  is  a  key  part  of  the  present
international monetary agenda, and as the debate crystallises into policy consensus, it will become an
important  element  in  the  environment  in  which  you  take  your  decisions  on  investment  in  the
emerging  markets.  I  have  no  doubt  that  massive  capital  flows  to  the  emerging  markets  will  be  a
continuing  feature  of  the  financial  landscape  -  it  is  in  the  long-term  interests  of  the  recipient
BIS Review   49/1998
- 5 -
countries, the investing community, and the world economy that they should. The task is to try to
introduce greater stability into the process.
BIS Review   49/1998
