Mr. Heikensten examines EMU and economic policy in Europe     Speech  by
the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Sweden, Mr. Lars Heikensten, at JP Bank’s Conference at
the World Trade Center, on 29/5/98.
This is not the end.
It is not even the beginning of the end.
But it is, perhaps, the end of the beginning.
Winston  Churchill’s  declaration  in  November  1942,  after  the  victory  at
El Alamein, is, I think, applicable - in rather different circumstances - to EMU’s consequences
for economic policy in Europe after the weekend at the beginning of May.
Several years of intensive preparations for monetary union now lie behind us. This
work, steeped in economic policy premises as well as technicalities, has been carried out in many
different European settings. Many of the EU Member States have also worked hard both to be
ready on time for EMU by fulfilling the Maastricht criteria and to complete the more practical
and technical arrangements. It is now roughly a month since these processes were crowned with
the historic decisions in Brussels to initiate European monetary union with eleven countries. A
couple of days from now, the new European Central Bank will be holding its first meetings.
So there are good reasons to shift our attention and look ahead. The convergence
process has been successful in many respects and monetary union is to start in little more than six
months time. But once it has started, what challenges will EU’s economic policy have to face?
What are the rules for this policy? How are the dialogue and decisions likely to develop in the
next few years? These are some of the questions that I shall be considering today.
1.  Convergence
A  natural  starting-point  for  a  discussion  of  the  current  economic  situation  in
Europe  is  the  convergence  reports  that  the  Commission  and  the  European  Monetary  Institute
(EMI) presented at the end of March.
•  The price trend for the EU area in recent years is impressive. The disparities in
the rate of price increases have diminished and in January this year inflation
was  below  2  per  cent  in  all  the  Member  States  except  Greece.  This
development is fundamentally a consequence of the monetary policy focus on
price  stability,  backed  up  by  economic  policy  in  general.  Other  factors  have
been increased international competition and low oil prices.
•  The picture of government finances in the EU countries has also brightened.
Progress has been made in the process of financial consolidation. However, a
number  of  countries  are  only  just  below  or  at  3  per  cent  and  have  qualified
thanks to measures of a temporary nature.
•  A  high  degree  of  exchange  rate  stability  now  prevails  in  most  EU  countries
and tensions in the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) have been moderate.
•  The  notable  convergence  of  long-term  interest  rates  is  another  indication  of
the stable situation and EMU expectations.
BIS Review   50/1998
- 2 -
All in all, the reports from the Commission and the EMI show that convergence in
the Maastricht sense has come a long way. This is important because the chances of the monetary
union  functioning  properly  are  better  if  rates  of  inflation  are  much  the  same  initially  and
government finances are under control.
Besides the matters behind the Maastricht criteria, with monetary union imminent
there are somewhat different issues that need to be considered. Even when the Treaty was being
drafted, many economists pointed out that the criteria by no means constituted the only, perhaps
not even the most important, requirements for an efficient monetary union.
There are now two other matters that seem to be particularly important and they
will  no  doubt  receive  more  attention,  both  in  the  European  economic  debate  and  in  the  EU
decision-making processes in economic policy:
•  One  has  to  do  with  the  degree  of  uniformity  in  cyclical  activity  and  the
possibility of using judicious fiscal stances in different parts of the monetary
union to make up for the absence of national discretion in monetary policy.
•  The  other  concerns  the  participant  countries’  economic  structures,  not  least
how  their  labour  markets  function  and  to  what  extent  they  are  sufficiently
flexible both to cope with any shocks to stability and to bring unemployment
down to more acceptable levels.
If  the  various  political  systems  fail  to  prevent  large  imbalances  in  government
finances,  internally  as  well  as  between  countries  in  the  monetary  union,  then  the  ECB  will  be
under  strong  pressure  to  consider  other  objectives  than  average  European  inflation.  The  same
applies if unemployment were to remain high or become even higher.
I shall be returning to these questions in my final section and try to paint a picture
of  how  they  will  be  handled  in  the  European  Union  in  the  coming  years.  Before  doing  so,
however, it may be in place to look in somewhat more detail at the structure for economic policy
decisions in EU/EMU.
2.  Functions
EMU is a historically unique construction, with a common central bank that is to
conduct monetary policy across national boundaries. At the same time, however, eleven elected
governments are to conduct fiscal policies with eleven different budgets, besides making many
other  decisions  that  affect  the  functioning  of  their  national  economies,  not  least  their  labour
markets.
Monetary policy
In  a  monetary  union,  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy  is,  by  definition,  a
common  concern.  The  monetary  policy  objective  is  price  stability;  without  prejudice  to  this
objective, monetary policy is to support the general economic policies in the Community.  The
more budget policies focus on stability - and wages stay in line with productivity - the greater
will be the room to manoeuvre in monetary policy.
BIS Review   50/1998
- 3 -
The  ECB’s  basic  tasks  will  be  to  define  and  implement  the  single  monetary
policy, conduct foreign exchange transactions, hold and manage the official foreign reserves of
the Member States, and promote the smooth operation of payment systems. The national central
banks  (NCBs)  will  be  able  to  have  an  active  influence  on  policy,  participate  in  its  practical
implementation  and,  perhaps  not  least,  communicate  it  in  their  respective  countries.  But  the
analysis of the euro area will be undertaken centrally to a large extent and the level of interest
rates  will  be  decided  by  the  ECB  Governing  Council,  which  consists  of  the  members  of  the
ECB’s Executive Board and the NCB Governors of the, initially eleven, participating countries.
The  European  System  of  Central  Banks  (ESCB)  has  been  given  a  highly
independent  status  so  as  to  be  in  a  position  to  conduct  a  monetary  policy  for  price  stability
without short-run political considerations. But its independence does not relieve the ECB of the
duty  to  inform  and  communicate.  On  the  contrary,  it  accentuates  the  need  for  a  dialogue  and
exchange of information. The European Parliament has displayed a high profile in these matters
and worked to establish a basis for discussing and monitoring monetary policy continuously.
The  ECB  will  be  obliged  to  make  difficult  decisions  in  various  matters.  One
problem may arise from cyclical disparities between euro area countries. While these disparities
may diminish over time, they are unlikely to disappear completely. Meanwhile, the ECB has to
set  a  single  instrumental  rate  for  the  whole  monetary  union.  The  common  interest  rate  will
normally not be ideal in relation to the economic situation in every country.
The  national  financial  structures  also  differ  considerably,  which  means  that,  for
instance,  interest  rate  sensitivity  varies.  There  are  countries  where  a  large  proportion  of
borrowing is arranged at a variable interest rate; the national tax systems differ, for example as
regards tax relief for interest expenditure; and the time required for bank interest rate adjustments
varies. All this means that the impact of a change in the monetary union’s interest rate will differ
from  country  to  country.  In  Italy,  for  instance,  lending  to  households  is  arranged  at  variable
interest rates to a greater extent than in Germany and the Netherlands. EMU will probably speed
up the ongoing integration in these respects, too, so the ECB’s problems may be greatest initially.
Many  matters  to  do  with  the  ECB’s  working  procedures  have  already  been
decided. The broad structure is in place. But in many respects, the way in which the ECB and the
ESCB  will  operate  and  develop  in  practice  is  still  an  open  question.  Some  observers  are
concerned that national interests will be excessively influential at the expense of a union-wide
perspective. They point out, for example, that the NCB Governors make up a larger proportion of
the Governing Council than is the case with the regional FED Governors in the United States.
Another argument is that the ECB has a limited staff at its disposal. Personally, I do not find this
particularly convincing. The performance of a clearly defined task - maintaining price stability -
in a way that is good for the union as a whole will be a heavy responsibility for each member of
the Governing Council; in this sense they are all in the same boat. There are also many signs that
power will gradually shift towards the centre and this in turn will affect recruitment. My guess is
that the ECB will be able to attract personnel who are qualified, which in contexts like this is
more important than their number.
Fiscal policy
Fiscal  policy  is  a  national  concern  but  the  national  room  to  manoeuvre  is
conditioned  by  various  EU  regulations.  The  Treaty  has  general  provisions  to  the  effect  that
economic policy is to contribute to the achievement of Community objectives in accordance with
BIS Review   50/1998
- 4 -
the principle of an open market economy with free competition. The Member States are to regard
their economic policies as a matter of common concern and are explicitly required to coordinate
them but the decisions are to be made on a national level.
Then  there  are  more  specific  agreements  on  matters  like  the  scale  of  rates  for
value-added  tax,  government  subsidies  and  rules  for  public  procurement.  These  agreements,
which  are  a  limited  constraint  on  the  construction  of  taxes  and  public  spending,  have  been
concluded  mainly  for  purposes  other  than  stabilisation  policy  -  to  promote  competition  and
establish a single market for capital, goods, services and labour.
The fiscal policy rules that have attracted most attention are those for government
budgets  and  debt.  The  Maastricht  Treaty  stipulates  that  budget  deficits  are  not  to  exceed
3 per cent and that the government debt-to-GDP ratio ought not to exceed 60 per cent. This was
intended  to  make  monetary  union  candidates  put  their  public  finances  in  order  prior  to
participation.
The Stability and Growth Pact has clarified what will apply once monetary union
has begun. The Pact can be said to consist of two parts: a surveillance mechanism for detecting at
an early stage that a country is starting to have budgetary problems and is in danger of incurring
an  excessive  deficit,  and  a  mechanism  for  sanctions  on  errant  countries.  The  first  mechanism
covers  all  the  EU  countries  and  requires  them  to  present  a  fiscal  policy  programme.  The
sanctions mechanism, on the other hand, applies only to countries in the euro area. The purpose
of  the  Pact  is  to  strengthen  political  mechanisms  at  union  level  so  that  budget  discipline  is
permanently maintained. There has been underlying concern that otherwise a country might be
strongly  tempted  to  shift  a  part  of  the  adjustment  costs  for  consolidating  government  finances
onto the other countries.
The  Pact  requires  every  Member  State  to  aim  for  a  medium-term  budgetary
position close to balance or in surplus. If the 3 per cent limit is exceeded, the Commission and
the  Ecofin  Council  are  to  follow  a  specified  plan  of  action:  examination,  opinion,
recommendation, publication and, as a last resort, sanctions. The Pact has been constructed with
a view to generating so much pressure on Member States to put government finances in order
that sanctions will never be necessary.
A knotty problem when constructing the Pact was how to make the requirements
sufficiently  strict  without  placing  undue  restrictions  on  national  fiscal  policies.  This  is  all  the
more important when monetary policy is no longer available at national level, so that the task of
adjustment  falls  more  heavily  in  practice  on  fiscal  policy.  OECD  estimates  indicate  that  in  a
“normal”  economic  downturn,  the  cyclical  budget  balance  in  EU  countries  weakens  by
1-1.5 per cent of GDP. Some budgetary discretion is therefore needed so that there is a margin
for automatic stabilisers to act when activity is falling. The conclusion is that the trade-off seems
reasonable  but  the  Pact  does  make  it  necessary  to  achieve  a  balanced  budget  or  a  surplus
relatively soon. Under these circumstances, the Swedish government’s ambition to establish an
annual budget surplus of 2 per cent over the business cycle is commendable.
Fiscal policy accordingly faces new challenges and it is not all that easy to tell just
what may happen. When monetary policy ceases to be a national instrument, fiscal policy will
have to play a greater part in stabilisation policy. At the same time, the scope for budget policy
will be curtailed in a sense by the Stability and Growth Pact, though this need not be so much of
a  restriction  in  practice  as  long  as  the  objective  of  medium-term  balance  or  surplus  is  met.  A
stronger challenge is to be expected from the ongoing integration in the European Union, which
BIS Review   50/1998
- 5 -
EMU may accentuate. This process can be rather rapid, not least in financial markets. In markets
for  goods,  pricing  in  a  single  currency  may  accelerate  the  existing  trend  towards  smaller
differences in consumption taxes, for example.
Structural and labour-market policy
Finally some words about structural and labour-market policy. This policy field is
much less clearly defined than the two I have already considered. It is affected by many different
rule  systems  at  both  national  and  EU  levels,  besides  belonging  to  the  competence  of  many
different ministers and commissioners. The  common  agricultural  policy  and  tax  harmonisation
are two examples.
The components of structural policy that concern the internal market - competition
laws, the whole of the market for goods and services, the mobility of capital, and labour market
mobility - are largely regulated at EU level. The competition laws are one example here.
Another component of structural policy is the  regulations  and  other  matters  that
apply to the labour market. Many initiatives here have recently been taken at EU level in order to
speed things up and comply with political requirements in the Union. In these matters, however,
most  decisions  have  to  be  made  at  the  national  level.  But  the  connection  with  conditions  for
monetary policy is evident: the better the economy can be made to work, the higher the growth
that can be achieved without this generating increased inflation.
Monetary union is likely to accelerate the process towards increased integration in
Europe.  In  this  way  it  will  also  contribute  to  new  demands  for  structural  adjustment.  One  of
monetary union’s primary purposes is, in fact, to stimulate competition and structural changes,
primarily to the benefit of consumers in the EU area. At the same time, such a development will
probably entail a greater degree of joint action and harmonisation in the Union.
3.  Interaction
As I have outlined, monetary union involves a central direction of monetary policy
and  a  broadly  national  direction  of  budget  policy,  though  discretion  in  budget  policy  is
demarcated  by  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and  the  Stability  Pact,  for  instance,  and  is  being  further
curtailed by the gradual extension of international integration. At the same time, structural policy
is to varying degrees a common EU concern. This raises the question of how a balanced policy
can be constructed in such an environment.
Bodies for decision-making and cooperation
One  approach  to  this  question  involves  describing  the  EU  institutions  that  have
been set up for economic policy decision-making and cooperation.
•  Ecofin, as the decision-making body for the ministers of finance and economy,
is the principal forum in the field of economic policy. It is in this group that,
for example, many of the decisions were taken so that monetary union could
start  on  time.  The  budget  policies  of  the  Member  States  have  also  been
monitored  here  and  this  will  continue  under  the  Stability  Pact.  Moreover,
Ecofin  draws  up  an  annual  “budget  statement”,  the  Broad  Economic  Policy
Guidelines, containing the principles for economic policy in the EU area.
BIS Review   50/1998
- 6 -
•  Most of the matters on the Ecofin agenda have been prepared by the Monetary
Committee,  which  besides  representatives  for  each  of  the  fifteen  Member
States (normally an under-secretary of state or a deputy central bank governor)
includes representatives for the Commission and, more recently, for the EMI.
When  monetary  union  starts,  the  name  of  the  Monetary  Committee  will  be
changed to Economic and Financial Committee but at present it seems that its
composition  will  be  unchanged  apart  from  the  EMI  being  replaced  by  the
ECB.
Work on monetary union has been a heavy burden for these bodies in recent years.
Meetings have been protracted and business has ranged from major issues like the Stability and
Growth  Pact,  the  new  European  exchange  rate  system  (ERM2)  and  legislation  for  monetary
union to matters such as the design of the European coinage.
Some of the structure is now changing with the advent of monetary union but not
its basic features. The preparatory work is over, as is a  good  deal  of  the  work  connected  with
ERM.  A  number  of  processes,  such  as  those  concerning  government  finances,  are  being
modified. But this is accompanied by an increased need to discuss issues raised by the fact  of
monetary union.
Now  that  the  countries  which  will  be  participating  initially  in  monetary  union
have been singled out, moreover, an informal group - the Euro 11 Group - is being set up  for
discussions among the ministers of finance and economy in the euro area. The idea is that this
group will concentrate on  matters  that  concern  just  the  participating  countries  and  cater  to  the
greater need for dialogue and cooperation that they perceive in connection with the inception of
monetary  union.  However,  this  is  not  a  decision-making  body  and  all  matters  considered  by
Euro 11  are  prepared  by  the  Monetary  Committee,  in  which  all  fifteen  EU  Member  States  are
represented.
The crucial institutional change is, of course, that as of next year the conduct of
monetary policy will be fully centralised. The Treaty explicitly states that the ECB is not to be
swayed by political considerations; its task is to concentrate on monetary policy. But naturally a
dialogue will be needed with the governments in the EU and euro areas, in the first place with the
ministers  of  finance  and  economy.  The  Treaty  actually  provides  for  this  in  that  the  Ecofin
president may participate in meetings of the ECB Governing Council and even submit motions.
Moreover,  representatives  of  the  NCBs  and  finance  ministries  will  continue  to  meet  in  the
Economic and Financial Committee.
Monetary union raises many other institutional questions that I will not be taking
up today. Not the least of these is relations with countries and organisations outside the European
Union. Where, for instance, does the primary responsibility for the exchange rate lie in Europe
and what about relations between euro area countries and the International Monetary Fund?
I now want to hark back to the issues I touched on earlier: fiscal policy in relation
to the business cycle, and how the labour market functions. How will these matters be handled in
the system for economic policy decisions?
Cyclical disparities and fiscal policy
BIS Review   50/1998
- 7 -
The  past  year  has  seen  a  general  strengthening  of  economic  activity  in  the  EU
area.  This  has  helped  improve  government  finances  and  provided  better  conditions  in  other
respects  for  the  start  of  monetary  union.  But  it  has  been  accompanied  by  increased  cyclical
disparities  between  the  future  euro  countries.  This  is  clear  from  a  look  at  how  observers  have
revised their growth predictions as compiled, for example, in “consensus forecasts”. A look at
the  euro  countries  divided  into  two  groups  with  higher  and  lower  predicted  GDP  growth,
respectively, shows that in the past year the gap between these groups has widened. The same
applies in terms of predicted inflation.
One should not make  too  much  of  this;  the  differences  have  grown  but  are  still
small  and  assessments  for  1999  suggest  that  they  will  narrow  again.  But  the  picture  does
illustrate a problem that will have to be addressed. The single monetary policy is incapable of
both stimulating the economy in some countries and curbing it in others. Pressure on fiscal policy
will  accordingly  vary  across  countries.  For  one  thing,  differences  in  automatic  stabilisers  and
thus  in  cyclical  sensitivity  will  automatically  lead  to  country  differences  in  budget  trends.  For
another, different degrees of active fiscal policy will be needed to manage tensions that may arise
from a single interest rate throughout the monetary union.
This question has been deliberated informally for some time by economic policy
decision-makers in the European Union. It also underlies the discussions that are now held  on
EU’s broad economic policy guidelines. In a way, it also contributed to the initiative from the
German  finance  minister  before  the  weekend  at  the  beginning  of  May,  when  some  further
reinforcement  of  budget  policy  in  the  coming  year  was  achieved  by  agreeing  on  an  earlier
implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact’s  objective  and  an  earlier  production  of  the
annual convergence and stability programmes.
This is ultimately a question for which each country is responsible. Countries that
fulfil the Stability Pact’s criteria will be entitled to a fiscal stance that is more expansionary than
the ideal for European inflation. Today, moreover, there is cause for concern that current fiscal
policy may be too expansionary in some countries. But it is also clear that the costs of such a
policy  mainly  fall  on  the  countries  themselves.  Higher  domestic  inflation  eventually  weakens
competitiveness;  with  exchange  rates  irrevocably  fixed,  once  a  cost  crisis  is  there,  it  may  be
difficult to rectify. Improved productivity can provide a remedy but achieving it is not easy. In
practice, this presumably leaves either fiscal tightening at a later stage to retard the rate of wage
increases or an adjustment of labour taxes, neither of which is simple.
For the credibility of the EMU project it is important that no country is already in
such  a  situation  at  the  start.  Countries  with  a  risk  of  high  inflation  are  therefore  likely  to
experience strong pressure in various processes, for example in Ecofin. On the whole, it seems to
me that the question of adjusting fiscal policies to the ECB’s monetary policy will be a major
issue. The same applies to how any fiscal adjustments are to be allocated across countries.
Labour market problems
It is an established fact that the functioning of the labour market is a problem in
many  Member  States.  A  solution  to  the  employment  question  clearly  presupposes  that  the
European labour market is made to work more smoothly than before. The matter is also directly
connected  with  monetary  union.  There  will  no  longer  be  any  possibility  of  using  a  national
monetary  policy  to  deal  with  labour  market  shocks.  It  is  then  all  the  more  important  that  the
labour market functions properly.
BIS Review   50/1998
- 8 -
Employment growth in the  EU  area  has  been  weak  and  unemployment  in  many
countries has been high for a long time compared, for instance, with the United States. Labour
force mobility is also lower than in the United States. But we also know that the Member States
differ  considerably.  Some,  such  as  the  Netherlands  and  the  United  Kingdom,  have  been
comparatively  successful  in  generating  new  jobs.  Others  have  done  considerably  worse.  The
remedies chosen by the successful countries vary, too. Some have adopted highly decentralised
solutions  and  extensive  deregulation.  Others  have  sought  to  build  up  a  consensus  and  make
minor changes in some public systems.
The  question  of  how  labour  markets  in  Europe  work  and  how  they  can  be
improved  is  already  very  much  a  part  of  the  European  agenda.  There  have  been  political
initiatives  in  a  variety  of  contexts  in  recent  years,  including  national  action  plans  for
employment. These plans include the analysis of labour market laws, effects of tax systems and
business conditions. Processes are being built up, inspired by the Maastricht Treaty’s successes
with budget policy. The annual employment guidelines require each Member State to present a
national  action  plan  with  a  view  to  improving  people’s  employability,  entrepreneurial  spirit,
flexibility  and  equality.  These  national  action  plans  are  to  be  specific,  with  goals  and  time
schedules,  so  that  they  can  be  evaluated.  Good  examples  are  to  be  highlighted  so  that  other
countries, if they wish, can adopt them.
Structural questions have been brought to the fore during the British  Presidency
and there have been somewhat more concrete discussions in various committees about how to
get  Member  States  in  step  here  as  well.  One  approach  involves  finding  good  examples  in
different fields, just as in the case of employment, and analysing the structural problems of each
country. This process generates what the British call peer pressure, which can also contribute to
the desired national changes coming about.
Once  again,  however,  the  decisions  in  this  field  largely  have  to  be  made  at
national level. But to perhaps an even greater extent than with fiscal policy, the major benefits of
a successful national policy will accrue to the country in question. By itself, this seems hopeful
and should facilitate changes. At the same time, the political resistance in most EU countries is
strong.
Some believe that the very fact of monetary union will generate desired reforms in
labour markets. Possibly but not necessarily - when high unemployment rates in recent decades
in many EU countries have  failed  to  produce  changes,  why,  it  may  be  asked,  would  monetary
union be more successful? In conclusion, I consider that much work at EU level will be invested
in political education and a search for methods to gain support for changes in this field. But I do
not foresee the same pressure in the joint processes as in the case of fiscal policy; there is less
need of a common approach.
Laborious but successful process
I should like to conclude with a summary and some tentative  conclusions  about
the future course of the economic policy debate in the European Union.
1. There  are  important  interfaces  between  monetary  policy,  fiscal  policy  and
structural policy. Problems concerning the composition of fiscal policy or the
workings  of  the  labour  market  affect  the  room  to  manoeuvre  in  monetary
BIS Review   50/1998
- 9 -
policy.  This  suggests  that  a  vital  dialogue  will  be  needed  between  different
parts  of  EU’s  economic  policy  decision-making  system  that  are  involved  in
such  matters.  More  of  a  joint  appraisal  will  presumably  emerge.  New
processes and institutions are also likely to develop.
2. The  growing  need  for  dialogue  and  a  joint  appraisal  has  already  led  to  new
tasks  and  developments  for  a  number  of  EU  institutions.  Many  observers
consider that this is true of Ecofin, which as a leading actor in the construction
of  EMU  has  responded  to  new  requirements.  One  example  of  a  completely
new structure is Euro 11, which is designed for the handling of joint issues by
the  euro  area’s  finance  ministers.  There  are  many  other  opportunities  for
dialogue, so those who fear that the ECB will be operating in something of a
vacuum are likely to be mistaken.
3.  Issues  concerning  fiscal  policies  in  EU/EMU  and  labour  markets  have  also
arrived on the agenda in other ways, for example at the Monetary Committee.
This is partly because many consider than monetary union has accentuated the
need  for  a  joint  European  discussion.  With  monetary  union  soon  to  be
launched, moreover, the agenda has more room for other matters. The Stability
and Growth Pact is one example of earlier initiatives in connection with EMU.
Various  processes  have  likewise  been  started  to  bring  the  problem  of
unemployment into the limelight.
4. There are strong grounds, in the fields I have discussed, for keeping decision-
making essentially at a national level. The effects of the policies, for instance
in the labour market, mostly occur in the country in question. There are also
considerable  country  differences  in  such  matters  as  the  premises  for  fiscal
policy, the structure of government finances, labour market regulations and so
on.  Still,  the  ongoing  integration  of  markets,  which  monetary  union  may
stimulate, is presumably exerting increased pressure for reform.
The process that monetary union is now driving onwards is, in fact, fairly typical
of EU cooperation in general. The European Union is a highly decentralised organisation. Power
and political legitimacy are essentially located at the national level. The joint budget is limited.
Matters move forward in a process where external events, for instance in  the  global  economy,
and  political  initiatives  modify  the  agenda.  Problems  are  often  managed  with  arduously
negotiated  compromises  between  sovereign  states.  Each  new  initiative  and  decision  forms  a
platform  for  the  next  phase.  Monetary  union,  which  is  now  leading  to  the  appearance  of  new
items on the agenda, is after all largely a consequence in its turn of earlier decisions, for instance
on the internal market.
This  process  may  sometimes  appear  to  be  rather  random  and  it  often  provides
instances  of  uncertainties  and  risks.  But  it  is  a  process  that  has  gradually  brought  the  EU
countries closer together. And monetary union is an another, major step.
BIS Review   50/1998
