Mr.  Reddy  reports  on  recent  developments  and  concerns  in  the  emerging
market countries and the current scenario in the Indian economy   Key note address by the
Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  Dr.  Y.V.  Reddy,  at  the  CII  seminar  on
Emerging Concerns and State of Indian Economy
On  this  occasion,  I  propose  to  address  the  limited  issue  of  identifying  the
emerging concerns on the state  of  economies  of  emerging  markets  with  particular  reference  to
recent developments and place before you a factual account of the current scenario in the Indian
economy.
The Recent Crisis
The recent crisis has many unique features which are worth relating as a backdrop
to the current concerns.
First,  it  was  unexpected,  by  almost  all  concerned  i.e.,  governments,  multilateral
institutions, rating agencies and market participants. Second, it is unusual since its origin is not
of low economic growth or low savings or high government deficit or financial repression but in
a way failure of the market mechanisms or private sector. Third, it is pervasive since it is a crisis
of  currencies,  corporates  stocks  and  banking.  Fourth,  it  is  the  most  contagious  so  far,  with  an
impact, initially  on  neighbours,  then  other  developing  countries  and  soon  the  developed  world
also.  Fifth,  it  is  still,  by  and  large  inexplicable  though  the  immediate  cause  appeared  to  be
sudden confidence erosion and global scale herding by market participants. Sixth, the response
of the official policy makers and the international financial community seems to have been often
delayed  and  pretty  much  behind  events  -  following  or  reacting  to  events  rather  than  shaping
them.  Seventh,  it  is  not  only  pervasive  and  widespread  but  also  deep  -  say  the  extent  of
depreciation of some currencies. Eighth, while there  are  some  similarities  between  the  directly
affected  countries,  there  are  significant  dissimilarities.  Ninth,  similarly  while  there  are  some
internal  causes  (i.e.  domestic  situation  or  excessive  short-term  borrowing  and  lending  to  non
productive sectors) there are also some external causes (i.e., global factors such as developments
in Japan and China, including in particular excessive lending from major financial centres).
There are three important aspects of the crisis which we need to note.
Firstly,  it  appears  to  be  a  case  of  unrealistically  high  expectations  and
disappointment on the part of participants. Secondly, there is still some lack of consensus on the
appropriate  response,  and  also  as  to  the  role  of  relevant  institutions.  Thirdly,  and  most
importantly, there is widespread agreement that the economies concerned will bounce back but
the issue is, how soon and at what cost, even if they are transitional. Also, the bounce back will
necessarily be different for differently affected countries.
Areas of Concern
It is not, therefore, surprising that there are new concerns expressed, or what may
be  called  emerging  concerns.  These  relate  not  only  to  the  state  of  the  economy  or  policies  of
each of the emerging markets but also the broader role of government, aspects relating to market
failures  in  both  capital  exporting  and  importing  countries,  sovereignisation  of  private  debt,
financial sector liberalisation especially regulation of banks, volatility of capital flows, the pace
BIS Review  17/1998
- 2 -
of  capital  account  liberalisation,  regulatory  systems  in  major  financial  markets,  exchange  rate
management, international bankruptcy procedure, the role of multilateral agencies, and of course
international lender of last resort, etc.
Emerging Concerns and the Indian Economy
Broadly  speaking,  there  are  five  major  areas  of  concern  today,  whenever  one
analyses  an  emerging  economy.  These  relate  to  macro-economy,  external  sector  management,
regulation  of  the  financial  sector,  the  state  of  the  corporate  sector  and  the  broader  issue  of
transparency in the system. More important, the specific aspects of concern in each are different
now compared to say a year ago. Without entering into a debate on the appropriateness of such
concerns  or  the  differences  about  what  should  be  a  concern  or  what  magnitude  should  engage
attention,  I  will  address  clearly  identifiable  areas  currently  being  looked  at  by  market
participants and the present status of the Indian economy in respect of each of these.
Macro-Economy
The annual growth rate of Gross Domestic Product has been in the range of 7 to
7.5  per  cent  during  the  last  three  years  (i.e.,  fiscal  years  1994-95  to  1996-97).  For  the  current
year, estimates range between 5.0 to 6.0 per cent. Investments as a percentage of GDP has also
been reasonably steady in the period at around 26 per cent on average.
The  current  account  deficit  as  a  per  cent  of  GDP  has  been  consistently  in  the
range of 1 to 1.8 per cent, and has averaged 1.3 per cent, and the current year’s position will not
be very different.
The fiscal deficit of the Government of  India  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  has  come
down  gradually  from  6.1  per  cent  in  1994-95  to  5.5  per  cent  in  1995-96  and  5.0  per  cent  in
1996-97.  Though  there  are  some  fiscal  strains,  it  is  hoped  that  there  will  be  no  directional
change.
The annual rate of growth in broad money (M3) was 22.3 per cent in 1994-95, but
dropped subsequently, pulling down the annual average growth rate between 1994-95 and 1996-
97 to 17.3 per cent and in the current year it should be around 15.5 per cent. There is a similar
pattern in regard to inflation, which averaged 7.4 per cent between 1994-95 and 1996-97 and the
wholesale Price Index this year is estimated to be around 6 per cent, less than last year’s 6.9 per
cent.
Finally,  non-food  credit  growth  has  averaged  21  per  cent  per  annum  in  the  last
three years and this year it is expected to be around 20  per  cent  including  investments  in  PSU
and corporate bonds, debentures and CP.
As you may be aware, the latest CSO estimate places GDP growth of 1996-97 at
7.5 per cent and net capital inflow from abroad for the last two years has been placed at 1.86 and
1.15 per cent of GDP at market prices.
External Sector
On the external front, in SDR terms, exports have grown at 13.6 per cent and 16.7
per cent during 1994-95 and 1995-96 while imports have grown at 18.0 and 23.7 per cent. Last
year, (1996-97) there has been a deceleration to 9.6 and 10.6 per cent,  respectively.  This  year,
BIS Review  17/1998
- 3 -
during April-December, growth  of  exports  was  9.1  per  cent  and  that  of  imports  13.5  per  cent,
both in SDR terms.
The  Foreign  Direct  Investment  flows  continue  to  rise  and  are  US$  2.5  billion
during  April-December  1997-98  as  against  $  2.7  billion  during  the  whole  of  1996-97.  More
important, the policy framework and the procedures ensure that most of the value of FDI flows
to infrastructure and productive sectors.
FII investments during the current year so far are less compared to $1.9 billion for
the entire 1996-97 period; but, it is expected that it would be at least $1 billion during this year.
The flows on account of external aid last year, commercial borrowings and non-resident deposits
are positive on a net basis, and broadly as per expectations at the beginning of the year.
The  invisibles  have  also  been  on  track  and  as  a  result,  the  foreign  currency
reserves  as  on  February  6,  1998  are  higher  at  $24.4  billion  compared  to  $22.4  billion  at  the
beginning of the financial year.
More important, some mention about external debt management and magnitudes
would be in order. The RBI controls by a process of approval of each case, the total short-term
debt,  including  trade-related  credit  beyond  180  days.  Our  short-term  debt  as  a  per  cent  of  our
reserves  is  around  27  per  cent,  while  as  a  per  cent  of  total  external  debt,  it  is  about  seven  per
cent.  Each  external  commercial  borrowing,  including  maturity,  interest  terms  etc.,  has  to  be
approved by the Government/RBI. In fact, a micro level productive use of such external debt is
ensured during the approval process. In fact, our volume of external debt has been generally on
the  decline  and  during  1993-97  total  external  debt  was  reduced  by  US$  1  billion,  while  there
was  accretion  to  reserves  of  the  order  of  US$  16.6  billion.  Indeed,  strict  control  over  external
debt is the cornerstone of our external sector liberalisation.
Sometimes, the issue of forward liabilities of the central bank is raised. We have
been very cautious by generally limiting such aggregate outstanding liabilities and rarely does it
exceed 10 per cent of reserves. Of course, there is no rigid rule. We observe great prudence in
these  matters  while  exercising  flexibility.  We  publish  all  such  operations  from  time  to  time.
Finally, the exchange rate is flexible but volatility has been and is being checked by the Reserve
Bank of India.
Financial Sector
As most of you may be aware, we have adopted international standards of capital
adequacy  for  banks,  and  their  non-performing  assets  are  closely  monitored  with  a  view  to
bringing them down. In particular, I would like to emphasise some major features.
First, our  banks’  total  exposure  to  assets  of  Asian  and  East  Asian  countries  was
less than US$ 500 million, and foreign liabilities are well below 10 per cent of total liabilities.
Second,  lending  to  property  is  frowned  upon  and  is  generally  restricted  to  housing  finance.
Third,  lending  to  stocks  is  also  severely  restricted  and  there  is  a  ceiling  of  5  per  cent  of
incremental deposits for this purpose. Actually, very little of this facility has been used. Fourth,
by  virtue  of  close  monitoring  and  approvals  required  and  in  the  absence  of  derivatives  etc.,
off-balance-sheet  items  of  banks  are  minimal  and  closely  monitored.  Fifth,  the  banks  are
permitted to borrow or invest abroad only up to 15 per cent of their net unimpaired capital. The
authorised  dealers  (apart  from  a  few  money  changers)  on  foreign  exchange  are  almost  always
banks,  whose  exposures,  open  positions  etc.  are  closely  monitored.  Sixth,  the  non-banking
BIS Review  17/1998
- 4 -
financial  companies  have  been  brought  under  tight  legislative,  regulatory  and  prudential
framework recently.
Corporate Sector
The debt of corporates as a percentage of equity, on  the  basis  of  annual  surveys
audited  by  the  RBI  indicates  that  corporate  debt  of  1730  selected  non-financial  public  limited
companies was 76.5 per cent of the extent of equity in 1993-94 and it has come down to 57.9 per
cent in 1995-96.
Also, as a percentage of total debt, external debt was about 10 per cent in respect
of large corporates and less than 2 per cent in respect of all corporates covered by the study in
respect of 756 selected companies.
At the present juncture, therefore, the corporate sector of India as a whole is not
overexposed to external liabilities.
Transparency
On  all  areas  of  public  interest  involving  RBI’s  operations,  press  releases  on  a
daily  basis  are  common.  The  Reserve  Bank  releases  a  weekly  statistical  supplement  which  is
virtually  a  balance  sheet  of  the  RBI  and  captures  monetary,  fiscal  and  external  sector
developments.  In  addition,  the  monthly  bulletin  of  the  RBI  gives  a  wide  array  of  information,
including  for  instance  forex  operations  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  One  can  note  all  the  forex
transactions  of  the  RBI,  including  outstanding  forward  liabilities  in  the  monthly  bulletin.  The
formal  statements  of  the  Governor,  especially  on  monetary  and  credit  policy  developments
clearly  express  a  view  of  monetary  and  credit  developments.  The  Annual  Report  in  Trends  in
Banking  contains  a  wealth  of  authentic  information  and  the  latest  issue  gives  bank-wise  ratios
relating to performance. Parliamentary oversight and occasional recourse to judiciary by affected
parties ensure that an acceptable degree of transparency is maintained.
Conclusion
In  brief,  we  ensure  sustainable  current  account  deficit,  restrict  reliance  on
short-term  external  debt;  limit  access  to  external  debt  and  emphasise  productive  use  of  such
debt. We encourage Foreign Direct Investment as the main  source  of  non-debt  creating  capital
inflows.  Also,  the  exchange  rate  is  market-determined  though  the  RBI  closely  monitors  and
occasionally intervenes to avoid volatility  and  also  ensure  orderly  conditions  in  forex  markets.
We undertook financial sector reforms, especially banking reform as a prelude to liberalisation
of some capital account transactions in the external sector. We discourage banks’ investments in
real  estate  and  stock  markets.  Non-banking  financial  companies  are  currently  subject  to
regulation.  Corporate  exposure  to  debt,  especially  external  debt,  is  within  reasonable  limits,
though growing. There is transparency in operations of the Reserve Bank of India - whether it is
forward market or whether it relates to performance of banks. In fact, the RBI takes initiatives in
the  orderly  development  of  the  money  market,  government  securities  market  and  foreign
exchange markets. We hold constant formal and informal consultations with market participants
on these issues. To conclude, we believe  that  market  participants  should  note  these  features  of
the current state of our economy in assessing our prospects - both short and medium-term.
BIS Review  17/1998
