Mr.  Grenville  discusses  the  Asian  economic  crisis  and  how  such  problems
might  be  avoided  in  future      Speech  by  Mr.  Stephen  Grenville,  a  Deputy  Governor  of  the
Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  Australian  Business  Economists  and  the  Economic  Society  of
Australia (NSW Branch) in Sydney on 12/3/98.
It  is  much  too  early  to  draw  definitive  conclusions  about  the  economic  crisis
currently  being  played  out  in  Asia,  but  there  is  some  point  in  trying  to  bring  together  the
emerging ideas as to what went wrong, what might be done to fix the immediate problems, and
how, in a more fundamental sense, these problems might be avoided in future. One of the things
that strikes me is how much thinking has evolved, already, in the months since the crisis broke.
With that in mind, lessons which now seem to be appropriate will, no doubt, be modified over
time. Historians can wait to compose the definitive, fully-digested version when the dust settles,
but others need to call it continuously, refining and modifying our understanding as we go along,
knowing perfectly well that what we write today may seem unperceptive or simply wrong when
we come back to it in a year’s time.
Ross Garnaut has recently written that: “The shock of 1997 is a defining event in
the economic history of East Asia. Like the great Depression in the West, it has the capacity to
change thought about economic development and economic policy in fundamental ways.”1. This
process  is  currently  underway,  and  if  it  sounds  more  like  a  damage  report  rather  than  the
anatomy of a paradigm shift, this may reflect the close range of our current perspective. Among
the jumble of likely causes and hypotheses, it is difficult to fit all the pieces together and assign
proper weights. That said (and to anticipate one of the later conclusions), the individual elements
of the crisis are neither  new,  nor  were  they  ignored  beforehand.  But  the  conjuncture  of  events
produced  outcomes  that  no-one  forecast.  And  once  the  critical  break  had  come,  it  was  not
possible to restore the status quo ante by fixing the individual elements that had gone wrong.
General lessons
The first lesson, which stems directly from the fact that no-one forecast the nature
or  the  extent  of  the  crisis,  is  the  need  for  humility.  While  plenty  of  observers  worried  about
various  aspects  of  these  emerging  markets,  no  serious  commentator  could  be  said  to  have
forecast  these  crises,  in  the  sense  of  defining  the  nature  of  the  unfolding  story  with  some
precision  as  to  timing.2  Generic  weakness  in  the  financial  sector  was,  like  Mark Twain’s
weather,  something  that  everyone  complained  about,  but  no-one  did  much  about.  The  related
point is that there remains much that we do not understand.
This issue of failure to forecast is especially embarrassing because these countries,
by  and  large,  did  the  things  which  economists  had  said  were  important.  Their  budgets  were
balanced,  they  kept  inflation  low,  they  reduced  (over  time)  protection  and  increased  their
openness,  both  on  trade  and  capital  accounts,  and  they  embraced  deregulation  (although  never
completely).  Even  to  the  extent  that  they  ran  what  look  in  hindsight  to  be  dangerously-large
current account deficits at times, there was no doubt that these were “good” deficits - i.e. they
funded high levels of investment, rather than government expenditure or private consumption.
                    
1 
2 
 Garnaut (1998, p. 23).
For example, Paul Krugman, who was sceptical about aspects of the “Asian miracle”, does not claim
to have foreseen the crisis:  “Speculative attacks on currencies are nothing new, and some of us even
warned a couple of years ago that South-east Asian countries  might  be  at  risk.    But  the  scale  and
depth of this crisis have surprised everyone;  this disaster has demonstrated that there are financial
dangers undreamt of in our previous philosophy.” (Krugman 1998b).
 BIS Review   22/1998
- 2 -
The second general lesson is that it has turned out to be much more complex than
it  seemed  initially.  Initially,  the  crisis  was  seen  in  relatively  simple  terms  (President Clinton
described it as “a few little glitches in the road”). The belief was that exchange rates had become
over-valued, these economies had run a bit faster than their productive capacities would allow,
and that in some cases (most notably Thailand) the current account had blown out in a way that
made  them  vulnerable.  The  implication  was  that,  with  exchange  rates  floated,  they  would
depreciate  modestly,  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  could  be  tightened  a  bit  in  order  to  slow
growth, and in the process current account deficits would shrink. There was a feeling that “this
isn’t  a  problem;  it’s  an  opportunity”.  At  least,  there  was  a  feeling  that  after  some  short-term
pain,  these  economies  would  emerge  stronger  than  before:  the  crisis  would  provide  the
motivation for institutional improvement.
These are the generalisations: let’s get more specific  about  the  things  that  might
explain the crisis.
The exchange rate
If this was a “currency crisis”, then exchange rates must be the key factor, mustn’t
they? There are a couple of different aspects of this that need separate discussion. First, did some
aspect  of  the  initial  exchange  rate  cause  the  crisis?  Secondly,  what  can  we  learn  from  the
behaviour of exchange rates as the crisis emerged?
First, did the exchange rate regimes cause the crisis? The early diagnosis was that
the central problem was exchange rates which were over-valued, and fixed. Most commentators
assess  that  the  exchange  rates  were  over-valued  by  something  in  the  order  of  10 per  cent.  We
know that over-valued exchange rates are vulnerable, so this was clearly an element in the story.
But  these  exchange  rates  are  now  at  levels  around  half  the  starting  point,  or  in  the  case  of
Indonesia around a quarter. Whatever over-valuation there was in the exchange rates at the start,
markets have taken them much further in the opposite direction. If a 10 per cent exchange rate
misalignment  in  one  direction  made  these  countries  vulnerable  to  crisis,  where  does  that  leave
them now? In short, the initial exchange rate over-valuation seems too small, too routine, and the
subsequent behaviour too inexplicable, for this to carry the full weight of being the key cause.
Were  fixed  rates  the  culprit?  Again,  fixed  rates  raise  issues  of  vulnerability,  but
these countries did not stick to this fixed rate regime out of any perversity - they felt they needed
this anchor in their macro policies. At the same time, some of their neighbours which have come
through the crisis well also have fixed rates - Hong Kong and China. It might also be noted by
those  who  believe  that  exchange  rate  flexibility  would  have  avoided  the  crisis  that  these
countries’ exchange rates had been under substantial upward pressure during the first half of the
1990s.  While  the  policies  they  pursued  have  clearly  turned  out  to  be  unsustainable,  the
counter-factual -  earlier  introduction  of  floating  exchange  rates -  might  also  have  been  a  very
bumpy ride.3
In short, it may be  routine  to  refer  to  these  as  currency  crises,  but  the  exchange
rate  movements  are  symptomatic  of  something  else.  That  said,  we  can  learn  something,  in  a
pathological  sense,  about  the  behaviour  of  exchange  rates  from  observing  their  behaviour  in
times of crisis. The first and most obvious lesson is that when exchange rate regimes shift from
fixed  to  floating,  the  transition  may  be  quite  turbulent,  and  markets  have  some  trouble
establishing  a  sensible  rate.  It  was  naive  to  believe  that  a  modest  over-valuation  would  be
                                                       
3 
Grenville (1998, p. 33).
BIS Review   22/1998
- 3 -
smoothly  corrected  by  floating.  Even  in  deep,  well-established  markets,  such  as  Japan  and  the
USA, exchange rates routinely move by 30 per cent or more.
Perhaps  the  most  extraordinary  aspect  of  this  is  the  degree  of  contagion  of
exchange rates. Just because the Thai baht moved a fair way, why did the rupiah and won have
to move also (not to mention the ringgit and peso)? Two factors seem to be involved here. The
first is the “wake-up call” argument: the fall of the baht made markets look at other currencies,
and find the same matters of concern. The second component of the argument is that, once one
exchange rate started to move, the others had to move to maintain their competitiveness.4
While we are talking about exchange rates and their extreme behaviour, I should
say something about the apparent failure of high interest rates to  support  these  exchange  rates.
Interest rates in these countries have been quite high (both in nominal and real terms) for quite a
few  years  (in  fact,  this  is  one  of  the  important  causes  of  the  large  capital  inflows).  When  the
crisis arrived, interest rates were put even higher. This was appropriate, but what is clear is that
they  were  not  put  high  enough  to  prevent  the  depreciation  over-shooting.  Why  was  this  so?
Some argue that the only thing that went wrong here was that the authorities were not prepared
to put them high enough to do the job. There is, however, another side to this story.5 Briefly:
 extremely  high  interest  rates  are  not  credible:  markets  expect  them  to  be
abandoned quickly;
 the foreign debt was foreign currency denominated, and higher domestic interest
rates  would  have  made  foreign  creditors  even  more  nervous  about  the
credit risks they faced, and therefore more likely to withdraw their money;
 very high interest rates raise problems of adverse selection - the only borrowers
are those who do not intend to repay.
Current account deficits and capital flows
The  large  current  account  deficits  incurred  by  these  countries  are  now  seen  to
have been a major source of vulnerability. We noted earlier that these were “good” deficits, and
in defence of Korea and Indonesia, it should also be noted that neither was running a particularly
large  deficit  over  recent  years  (for  Korea  2 per  cent  of  GDP  in  1990-96,  and  3 per  cent  for
Indonesia). But Thailand certainly was - around 8 per cent of GDP. What is very clear, ex post,
is the vulnerability to extraordinary reversals of capital flows (which we have not, for example,
seen in Australia). The inflow into these countries was around US$ 40 billion in 1995, more than
doubled to nearly US$ 100 billion in 1996, and reversed to an outflow of around US$ 12 billion
in 1997. It is hardly surprising that a major adjustment is underway in these countries, to adapt
to this reversal.
Before  we  condemn  current  account  deficits  as  a  manifestation  of  misguided
policies, we should note that these deficits were not only “good” (in the sense that they funded
investment, not consumption), but were - to a very large degree - the normal working through of
market processes. These countries experienced very high productivity growth as technology was
brought to bear, combined with low labour costs. They “got their act together” and  provided  a
                                                       
4 
Those who like this argument would also point to the Chinese effective depreciation of 1994.  This is
claimed by some to have disturbed international competitiveness and helped to set in train the export
shortfalls in other Asian countries, that in turn contributed to the crisis.
The following argument is set out in more detail in Grenville (1998, p. 33).
5 
BIS Review   22/1998
- 4 -
hospitable environment for commerce and investment. It is hardly surprising that there has been,
over  time,  a  significant  flow  of  capital  from  the  “old”  high-saving  countries  to  the  “new”
investment opportunities in East Asia.6 If there  was  an  economic  miracle  taking  place,  foreign
investors wanted a slice of the action. The fast-developing financial infrastructure provided the
conduit between domestic borrowers and foreign savers. There is, in fact, an earlier example of
this. Singapore went for two decades with a current account deficit averaging more than 10 per
cent of GDP, and most people look back on this era as an extraordinary success.
In short, if we can identify a critical problem here, it is the potential for reversal
of  the  capital  flow,  rather  than  the  current  account  deficit  per se.  This  was,  of  course,
exacerbated by two characteristics of the capital flows - their short-term nature and the foreign
currency  denomination  of  the  debt.  These  were  seen,  at  the  time,  as  natural-enough
characteristics  of  the  institutional  structure:7  to  interfere  would  be  to  go  against  the  tide  of
market-oriented policies. But we can now identify them as major sources of vulnerability.8
The financial sector
A  third  key  weakness,  which  was  identified  early  on,9  is  that  fast-growing
financial sectors are very vulnerable, because they inevitably reflect  lack  of  experience,  by  the
commercial  bankers,  borrowers  and  prudential  supervisors.  Just  as  a  rapidly-growing  balance
sheet is a warning sign for an individual financial institution, the same warning signs existed in
these countries. But even this was hard to foresee as a devastating problem. As a country moves
away from under-developed financial “repression”,10 it is both inevitable and desirable that the
depth  of  the  financial  sector  increases -  i.e.  the  balance  sheets  of  financial  institutions  expand
faster  than  nominal  GDP.  That  said,  of  course  there  is  an  issue  of  “how  much  faster”?  Less
excusable are the inadequate efforts to put in place effective prudential supervision.
Coincidence and compounding
I have argued, so far, that none of the elements which are usually put forward is,
in  itself,  all  that  unusual,  or  enough  to  explain  the  extent  of  the  crisis.  The  fatal  flaw  was  the
combination.11 To some extent, the problems were self-reinforcing - when one weak link broke,
this put more pressure on other linkages, which collapsed under the extra burden placed on them.
But it is by no means inevitable that these problems should coincide - I would simply note that
Australia in the mid 1980s had an exchange rate fall of the magnitude of Thailand’s and Korea’s
without a major crisis, and had an asset price bust of probably the same order of magnitude (in
the late 1980s) without this degree of damage.
                                                       
6 
7 
8 
Feldstein and Horioka (1980).
Grenville (1998, p. 31).
The bumpy international environment made the capital flows more volatile, and help to explain both
the  exchange  rate  appreciations  and  the  variation  in  capital  flows.    The  yen/dollar  exchange  rate
moved  20 per  cent  in  the  year  beginning  April 1996,  affecting  these  countries’  effective  exchange
rates,  their  trade  and  their  capital  flows.    Low  Japanese  interest  rates  initially  encouraged  excess
liquidity to flow to these countries, which reversed when markets began to focus on possible interest
rate increases.
Grenville (1997) and Macfarlane (1997b).
McKinnon (1973).
An analogy might illustrate the point about compounding causation:  in a car crash, who or what is to
blame  for  the  injuries?    Is  it  speed,  some  act  of  recklessness  such  as  intoxication,  a  poor  road
surface,  an  under-inflated  tyre,  an  inadequate  guard-rail,  a  poorly-designed  car,  or  inadequate
seat-belts?  Some of these things are mutually compounding, and others are simply unable to cope
with the abnormal strains to which they are subject.  So it is  with  the  Asian  “currency”  crisis.    The
search for a single key cause - and, by implication, a single key solution to prevent recurrence - will
miss the complexity of the task ahead.
9 
10 
11 
BIS Review   22/1998
- 5 -
That said, there are clear linkages between the fault lines, and in the Asian case,
there  was  a  conjuncture  of  problems.  Large  capital  inflows  led,  more-or-less  inevitably,  to
excessive credit growth and growth of the financial sector, because it was not possible to sterilise
them fully. The large flows meant, also, that there was easy funding available for projects (both
good  and  bad),  and  that  asset  prices  were  bid  up.  Similarly,  the  large  capital  flows  made  it
difficult  to  raise  interest  rates  higher  (they  were  already  quite  high),  for  fear  of  inducing  even
more capital inflow. High domestic interest rates, at the same time, persuaded many borrowers
to  take  the  risk  of  tapping  into  attractively  lower  foreign  currency-denominated  borrowing.
Further, with quasi-fixed exchange rate regimes in these countries, there was little incentive for
institutions borrowing in foreign currencies to hedge their debt. These issues should have  been
recognised  as  sources  of  vulnerability,  but  the  focus  was  on  growth,  without  enough  concern
about resilience in the face of variance in growth.
This failure to recognise the interaction of elements was a key misunderstanding
as the crisis broke. With hindsight, it should have been realised that simply freeing the exchange
rates  would  cause  them  to  shift  a  fair  way  and  this  would  create  enormous  problems  for  a
financial sector weighed down by bad debts and large foreign currency-denominated debt. This
would, in turn, feed back into the exchange rate. If we were to identify the crucial combination,
it would be the large volatile foreign capital flows, plus fragile financial sectors.
These two factors, in combination, made these economies extremely vulnerable to
changes of confidence. We have in our minds financial markets which are  constantly  digesting
and  evaluating  information  to  produce  a  price -  an  exchange  rate -  which  reflects  the
“fundamentals”.  But  we  see,  here,  that  the  more  nebulous  concept  of  “confidence”,  at  times,
dominates the fundamentals. “In a matter of just a few months, the Asian economies went from
being the darlings of the investment community to being virtual pariahs. There  was  a  touch  of
the absurd in the unfolding drama, as international money managers harshly castigated the very
same  Asian  governments  they  were  praising  just  months  before.  …  But,  as  often  happens  in
financial  markets,  euphoria  turned  to  panic  without  missing  a  beat.  Suddenly,  Asia’s  leaders
could  do  no  right.  The  money  fled.”12  This  is  not,  of  course,  the  first  time  this  has  happened.
Alan Greenspan, describing this reaction in capital flows as “a visceral, engulfing, fear”, went on
to  say  “The  exchange  rate  changes  appear  the  consequences,  not  of  the  accumulation  of  new
knowledge of a deterioration in fundamentals, but of its opposite: the onset of uncertainties that
destroy  previous  understandings  of  the  way  the  world  works.  That  has  induced  massive
disengagements  of  investors  and  declines  in  Asian  currencies  that  have  no  tie  to  reality.  In  all
aspects of life, when confronted with uncertainty, people tend to withdraw. … At one point the
economic  system  appears  stable,  the  next  it  behaves  as  though  a  dam  has  reached  a  breaking
point, and water (read, confidence) evacuates its reservoir. The United States experienced such a
sudden  change  with  the  decline  in  stock  prices  of  more  than  20 per  cent  on  October 19, 1987.
There is no credible scenario that can readily explain so abrupt a change in the fundamentals of
long-term  valuation  on  that  one  day.  Such  market  panic  does  not  appear  to  reflect  a  simple
continuum from the immediately previous period.”
Krugman (1998a) has suggested a possible reason for this big shift in confidence.
Foreign  investors  thought  they  were  working  in  a  riskless  world,  and  made  their  investment
decisions accordingly. Then, quite suddenly, they realised the risk, and underwent a fundamental
adjustment  in  expectations.  This  explanation  has  some  attractions  but  does  not  seem  to  fit  the
overall reality closely. There were not too many explicit guarantees around, leaving aside bank
                                                       
12 
Sachs (1997).
BIS Review   22/1998
- 6 -
and  sovereign  debt  (which  remained  guaranteed),  so  there  was  not  a  rational  reason  for
re-evaluation. The more intuitively appealing explanation (at least to me) is that investors simply
changed their minds. They had not known much about the countries (or projects) they invested
in to start with, so there was lots of opportunity for them to shift between exuberance and deep
pessimism, either based on a modest accretion of news on fundamentals or, more likely, on the
basis of what their colleagues in the market were doing. Correlated shifts in expectations are the
key  to  understanding  what  happened.  The  fundamentals  (such  as  when  a  thing  gets  cheaper,
people buy more of it) were overwhelmed by something akin to panic - if everyone is running in
one direction, we should run too (because it becomes increasingly costly not to). Of course, once
the  mood  had  changed,  commentators  and  investors  alike  found  much  in  these  economies  that
they did not like, particularly issues which come under the broad rubric of “governance”.
What can be done?
There are two relevant time horizons here - what should be done, in the form of
“battle-field dressing”, to cope with the crisis and get these economies back on the rails again?
Then, in the longer term, what can be done to make them  less  vulnerable  in  the  face  of  future
problems?
Early on it was recognised that these crises had many of the characteristics of an
old-fashioned  banking  liquidity  crisis -  a  “bank  run”.  There  had  been  a  massive  loss  of
confidence and withdrawal of money, so what was required - reaching back into the 19th century
prescription  of  Bagehot -  was:  “lend  freely,  but  at  a  penalty  rate”.  The  “withdrawal”  took  the
form of capital outflow from the country, rather than a domestic shift of funds, but the principle
was the same. This was, indeed, the diagnosis and the prescription in Mexico in 1995, and most
people, with hindsight, regard this as an overall success. (More on Mexico in a moment.)
While this is clear enough in principle, making it operational presents  problems.
The most prominent of these has been concern about “moral hazard”. Moral hazard arises “when
someone  can  reap  the  rewards  from  their  actions  when  things  go  well  but  not  suffer  the  full
consequences when things go badly”13. In the Asian policy debate, there were  lots  of  left-over
arguments from the 1995 Mexican episode, with some arguing that the US$ 50 billion IMF/USA
bail-out had been unduly beneficial to fund management institutions, particularly in the USA.
It has to be acknowledged that all types of insurance have significant elements of
moral hazard, and the issue is not to avoid doing anything involving moral hazard, but  how  to
keep it in check. The idea that Asian creditors have, in general, been protected is wrong.14 The
problem is a narrower one than is usually posed - applying specifically to government debt and
bank  debt -  the  first  because  of  its  sovereign  nature,  and  the  second  because  of  the  systemic
implications  of  widespread  bank  failure.  In  these  cases,  it  is  difficult  to  avoid  a  degree  of
“bailing out”, and it is just as difficult to expect investors to ignore this.15
                                                       
13 
14 
Greenspan (1998, p. 2).
Chairman Greenspan has pointed out that:  “Asian equity  losses,  excluding  Japan,  since  June 1997
worldwide are estimated to have exceeded $700 billion of which more than $30 billion has been lost
by  US  investors.    Substantial  further  losses  have  been  recorded  in  bonds  and  real  estate.”
(Greenspan 1998, p. 2).
The dramatic fall in interest-rate spreads going into 1997 has to be explained  in  terms  of  collective
“exuberance” rather than the moral hazard residual from Mexico, because the narrowing of spreads
occurred across all types of debt, including debt which by no stretch of the imagination was going to
be subject to any kind of bail-out.
15 
BIS Review   22/1998
- 7 -
We  will  examine,  in  a  moment,  what  might  be  done  to  address  moral  hazard
issues in the longer term. But meanwhile, with the crisis on us, moral hazard should not be used
as  the  all-encompassing  excuse  for  inaction.  Bagehot’s  prescription  worked  reasonably  well  in
Mexico, but has not been applied with the same speed and vigour in Asia.
What about the longer-term reforms? Given that the damaging combination seems
to  have  been  big  foreign  capital  flows  plus  fragile  financial  sectors,  this  is  the  place  to  begin.
Longer-term reform must include the building of resilient financial sectors, which can withstand
substantial  shifts  in  sentiment,  and  big  changes  in  the  exchange  rate.  Part-and-parcel  of
prudential  measures  would  be  to  discourage  the  sort  of  short-term  and  foreign  currency
exposures which occurred, and where they occur in the private commercial sector, to insulate the
banks  from  them.  A  well-functioning  banking  sector  might  also  act  as  the  stable  core  of  the
financial  sector  which  would,  to  some  extent,  act  as  the  “guardian  on  the  gateway  to
investment”. For this to be possible, banks need not only to be well staffed by people with real
business  experience,  but  need  to  be  free  from  the  pressures  of  “connected”  or  “command”
lending pressures, which have been all-too-apparent in these countries in the past.
The difficulties with moral hazard have to be acknowledged, and the crises dealt
with  in  ways  that  ensure  that  those  who  were  involved  in  failed  investments  are  financially
penalised.  But  if,  when  all  other  measures  are  taken  to  improve  transparency  and  disclosure,
these  international  capital  flows  remain  flighty  and  volatile,  even  those  who  are  searching  for
market  purity  will  have  to  either  accept  restrictions  on  such  flows,  or  the  existence  of  some
lender-of-last-resort.  The  damaging  externalities  of  the  reversal  of  these  capital  flows  cannot
simply  be  left  to  run  their  course,  with  markets  “sorting  it  out”  in  the  way  we  are  observing
currently in Asia.
No-one has yet come up with any clever ideas on how to back up the international
lender-of-last-resort by prudential rules to address the moral hazard problem. Just as disclosure
is an important part of any prudential framework, it will have a role to play - hence the IMF’s
Special  Data  Dissemination  Standard  and  the  BIS’  data  on  bank  lending.  No-one  could  argue
with the general principle that “more information is better than less information”, or that when
markets  are  “blinded  by  faulty  signals,  a  competitive  free-market  system  cannot  reach  a  firm
balance except by chance”16, but it  might  be  worth  focusing  on  exactly  where  the  information
deficiencies  lie.  Looking  back  on  it,  most  of  the  problems  which  exist  were  known  about  in
general  terms,  and  it  is  misleading  to  argue  that  if  more  exact  figures  had  been  known,  then
various market participants would have behaved very differently. Will greater transparency put
an end to the problem of correlated expectations in financial markets - the sudden switches from
euphoria to gloom? It seems unlikely (there was no shortage of information in stock markets in
October 1987).  But  they  might  help  to  limit  the  extent  of  the  swings.  As  we  have  seen  in  the
case of Indonesia, once markets and the press take  a  set  against  a  country,  every  new  piece  of
news is given the most pessimistic slant and every negative rumour is treated as established fact.
As we search for what more might be done, it is worth keeping in mind that, for
every  over-eager  borrower  in  these  countries,  there  was  an  over-eager  lender  in  the
capital-supplying country. Are there measures that could be taken by the prudential authorities in
the  capital-supplying  countries  so  that  these  authorities  look  not  just  at  the  consequences  for
their own financial system, but for the  financial  stability  of  the  capital-receiving  country?  One
obvious lesson is that, in evaluating the “fundamental health” of countries, we should widen the
                                                       
16 
Greenspan (1998, p. 10).
BIS Review   22/1998
- 8 -
scope  of  the  assessment  of  “fundamentals”,  to  embrace  an  assessment  of  the  health  of  the
financial system and the effectiveness of prudential supervision.
Much more controversial would be any proposal to restrain capital flows. One of
the  important  initiatives  to  come  out  of  the  IMF’s  meeting  in  Hong  Kong  in  September 1997
(i.e.  shortly  after  the  crisis  broke)  was  to  develop  an  amendment  of  the  IMF  Articles  of
Agreement  to  make  the  liberalisation  of  international  capital  flows  one  of  the  purposes  of  the
Fund. There is the potential for vigorous debate on this. Some argue that the problems of capital
flow were caused by “half-way liberalisation”, and things would have worked better if financial
markets  had  been  deeper,  with  a  greater  range  of  instruments  and  greater  liquidity.  The
prescription that follows from this is, of course, to proceed with speed and vigour towards more
financial  deregulation.  The  counter  argument  is  that  prudential  supervision  and  the  general
apparatus  of  administering  big  capital  flows  need  to  develop  pari passu  with  the  process  of
financial deregulation, and it is very clear that this did not occur over the past ten years: financial
development  greatly  outpaced  the  development  of  the  prudential  framework.  In  this  view,
financial deregulation should only occur as and when the appropriate prudential safeguards can
be put in place.
Whatever the outcome of this debate, I suspect that these countries will be much
less ready to welcome short-term capital flows, and the enthusiasm for developments such as the
Bangkok International Banking Facility (which acted as a frictionless conduit for Thai business
people  to  borrow  overseas)  has  been  dampened.  There  is  unlikely  to  be  much  enthusiasm  for
vigorous  financial  deregulation  if  this  means  encouraging  the  sort  of  free-wheeling,  non-bank
institutions which were not only eager to sign up borrowers for foreign currency loans, but then
turned  around  and  sold  this  debt  into  banks  elsewhere  in  the  region,  with  disastrous
consequences for both borrower and lender.
How quickly will the recovery occur?
As the crisis unfolded in the second half of last year,  it  might  have  been  argued
that the best guidance on the likely evolution of these three countries was the Mexican crisis of
1994/95 - styled by the IMF Managing Director  as “the  first  crisis  of  the  21st century”17.  This
had  the  usual  characteristics -  that  the  financial  aspects  unfolded  quite  quickly,  and  that  after
these  had  stabilised,  the  real  sector  effects  worked  their  way  through  more  slowly,  over  time.
The sequence might be characterised like this:
 there was a 50 per cent depreciation;
 a  $50 billion  IMF/USA  rescue  package  was  made  available:  not  all  of  this  was
needed, and a large part of it was repaid within a year. Private capital flow
returned relatively quickly, particularly direct foreign investment (and, in
fact, Mexico’s foreign debt is larger now than in 1994);
 the annual GDP growth figures were minus 6 per cent in the year following the
crisis,  and  plus 5 per  cent  in  the  year  after  that,  so  that  two  years  later
GDP is back somewhere near the original starting point;
                                                       
17 
It was unlike most earlier IMF crises, in that neither budget deficits nor lax monetary policy were the
cause - see Macfarlane (1997a).
BIS Review   22/1998
- 9 -
 inflation of close to 100 per cent in the ensuing three years, so that the improved
competitiveness created by the depreciation was more-or-less unwound (at
least measured by the CPI) by subsequent inflation;18
 there  was  a  very  quick  closure  of  the  current  account  deficit,  turning  into  a
balance more-or-less as soon as the economy slowed;19
 an  amount  in  excess  of  10 per  cent  of  GDP  was  used  to  rescue  the  financial
sector.
Mexico  was,  as  far  as  the  casual  observer  can  tell,  not  greatly  changed  in  the
process. No doubt the banking system has been strengthened by the cleaning-out of bad debt, but
on the basic approach to policy, there has been no paradigm shift. No real-world economic event
is  just  like  the  pure  text-book  case,  but  this  does  look  like  the  international  version  of  an
old-fashioned bank run, and the old-fashioned remedy worked well enough. It might be argued
that  one  of  the  main  legacies  of  the  Mexican  rescue  was  the  inhibitions  to  action  that  it
produced, when the problem recurred elsewhere. Despite its success,  it  triggered  a  coalition  of
forces (led by those who are concerned about the moral hazard aspects of the bail-out) who have
hindered  the  same  prescription  being  applied  in  Asia.  Why  might  the  Asian  countries  be
different?
 whereas  Mexico  received  something  approaching  US$  50 billion  in  available
credit  from  the  IMF/USA  (and  the  required  amounts  were  quickly
disbursed),  these  countries  have  received  much  smaller  disbursements:
Thailand -  US$  8½ billion;  Korea -  US$  13 billion;  and  Indonesia -  US$
3 billion.
 one reason why Mexico received a quick disbursement of assistance to offset the
capital flight was the nature of the foreign debt. It was largely  sovereign
debt (Tesobonos), and there was little debate (at least beforehand)  that  it
should  be  paid  out  in  full.  The  USA/IMF  money  made  this  possible.
When it came to Asia, none of the short-term debt was sovereign, so there
was,  initially,  no  specific  plan  to  pay  it  off.  The  hope  was  that  the
announcement of the packages would, itself, instil new confidence so that
creditors would roll over their debt;20
 these countries may  well  be  headed  for  the  same  sorts  of  negative  growth  rates
that Mexico faced in the first year after the crisis. If so, the deceleration in
the growth rate is significantly greater, because Mexico had been growing
at around 3-4 per cent, whereas these countries grew at 7-8 per cent;
 Mexico  had  the  advantage  of  being  next  to  the  large  and  growing  US  market,
whereas Asia’s crisis comes at a time when the US growth is at the mature
phase of the cycle, and Japan is still stagnant;
                                                       
18 
19 
In terms of wages, a significant real depreciation remains.
Contrast  this  with  the  mid  1980s  in  Australia,  where,  despite  the  loss  of  confidence  and  concerns
about the current account deficit, the inflow continued at more than its historic average.
With Korea close to default in late December 1997, the American authorities stepped in (with the IMF)
to broker a rollover for bank-to-bank debt, which included a guarantee by the Korean Government.
20 
BIS Review   22/1998
- 10 -
  as  in  Mexico,  these  countries  have  very  quickly  (almost  immediately)
corrected  their  current  account  deficits,  by  reductions  in  imports
stemming largely from the slowing of GDP;
Mexico began with a much more clearly over-valued exchange rate;
 if  Asian  exchange  rates  do  not  recover,  these  countries  seem  headed  for  very
substantial  inflation  (particularly  Indonesia).  Mexico  was  probably  more
able  to  handle  this,  as  it  had  had  plenty  of  recent  experience  with
inflation.  The  Asian  countries  have  had  relative  price  stability  for  many
decades;
 the  unfinished  business  of  rescuing  the  financial  systems  of  Thailand  and
Indonesia  have  already  absorbed  the  sorts  of  money  Mexico  used  to
support its financial sector (i.e. more than 10 per cent of GDP), and they
are “still counting”. This is neither surprising (in Scandinavia, something
around  6-8 per  cent  of  GDP  was  used,  and  even  in  the  relatively  minor
case  of  the  American  S&Ls,  something  like  2 per  cent  of  GDP  was
required),  nor  is  this  particularly  alarming -  all  of  these  countries  started
with  almost  no  government  domestic  debt,  and  they  can  cope  with  this
degree of future indebtedness. But it is a heavy price to pay, for countries
that are still poor.
An  important  issue  is  whether  these  countries  will  emerge  with  stronger
institutional structures. As the crisis broke, there were many of us who thought that “this isn’t a
problem, this is an opportunity”. We had in mind the sort of institutional reform which came in
Indonesia in the mid 1970s, following the Pertamina crisis - painful and expensive, but resulting
in significant institutional improvement. These issues  were  probably  a  major  motivation  in  the
design of the IMF’s program, which included a large number of structural or governance issues
in the “conditionality” - the requirements imposed on Indonesia. This fits with the idea that “out
of  adversity  comes  reform”.  We  probably  need  more  perspective  to  be  able  to  judge  this
properly, but in the case of Indonesia, at  the  moment  it  looks  as  if  the  degree  of  crisis  has  far
exceeded  the  “optimal  level”  and  the  process  of  reform  is  slipping  backwards,  rather  than
moving forward. Most notably, we see the position of the group of economists who have guided
Indonesia’s economic success over the past thirty years substantially eroded. As they lose their
influence, diversions such as the currency board proposal distract attention from facing up to the
urgent elements of the crisis - an exchange rate which has wildly over-shot; a wounded banking
system;  and  a  degree  of  foreign  indebtedness  which  puts  many  Indonesian  companies  not  just
illiquid, but insolvent.
In the case of Indonesia, the potential crisis is such that it is now time to refocus
the reform effort on the core economic issues - the exchange rate, foreign debt;  and  rebuilding
the  financial  sector.  To  be  sure,  reform  in  the  structural  issues  of  governance  is  eminently
desirable, but what is needed now is the kind of triage we see in an emergency room - sorting the
life-saving critical priorities from longer-term issues.21,22
Will  these  countries  get  back  to  their  old  pace  of  growth  relatively  soon?  They
still have many of the attributes that gave them fast growth. There is still plenty of potential to
                                                       
21 
22 
Feldstein (1998).
Will financial markets accept something short of root-and-branch reform of Indonesian governance?
Who can tell?  But we know that they worked happily enough with these problems for thirty years.
BIS Review   22/1998
- 11 -
link technology with relatively cheap labour, with all the productivity boost that this implies (to
put this point differently, they are still well back from the technological frontier in many areas).
That said, it is not going to be easy. As Garnaut has put it: “Two of the pre-conditions of growth
in  the  old  East  Asian  style  have  obviously  been  lost  for  the  time  being:  a  reasonable  level  of
macro-economic stability; and political coherence around the growth objective.”23
What  have  we  learnt  about  our  economic  paradigm?  The  text-book  model
envisages  continuous  adjustment  of  prices  and  quantities  as  the  system  gropes  towards
equilibrium. Good models acknowledge mis-starts and false cues along the way. But none of this
seems to fit the process we see underway in Asia. Exchange rates started modestly over-valued,
and are  now  dramatically  under-valued.  Current  account  deficits  may  have  been  too  large,  but
these  countries  are  now  running  surpluses:  Thailand  has  gone  from  a  deficit  of  8 per  cent  of
GDP to the prospect of a surplus, this year, of 4 per cent of GDP. This is being achieved (if that
is the right word) through a fall in domestic spending (not through exchange-rate-boosted export
growth). The main manifestation of the crisis - the falls in currency - have not been the principal
equilibrating  mechanism,  but  are  producing  unfortunate  (to  say  the  least)  side  effects  and
collateral  damage -  not  just  inflation,  but  enormous  damage  to  bank  and  commercial  balance
sheets, to saving, and are distorting relative prices.
What is underway here is not  an  equilibrating  process  of  adjustment,  but  one  of
economic collapse, where markets are no longer operating to provide sensible price signals. It is,
in  the  words  of  David Hale,  an  “unnecessary  crisis”.  The  loss  of  faith  in  markets  is  likely  to
colour future policy-making (making these governments probably more likely to be tempted by
very interventionist policies). Foreign markets are likely to be even  more  uncertain  about  their
relationships with these countries, particularly their investment relationships.
The other side of the coin is that these countries have, until now, been high saving
countries and if this saving can be maintained in the face of strong inflation, the wherewithal to
fund investment still exists, even without foreign capital flows.
One  would  have  to  be  more  pessimistic  if  one  accepts  the  commonly-held  view
that  the  investment  done  in  these  countries  was  predominantly  low  return.  While  not  claiming
any expertise, I am not immediately drawn to this view. If the investment was all that bad, how
did  they  manage  to  grow  at  7-8 per  cent  for  so  long?  While  there  has  doubtless  been  excess
investment in apartments and office buildings, and when growth prospects change dramatically,
over-capacity in other areas is likely, I do not get the impression that there has yet, for instance,
been  over-investment  in  city  freeways  in  either  Jakarta  or  Bangkok.  To  put  the  point  more
explicitly,  many  good,  high-return  projects  have  been  done,  and  these  will  continue  to  serve
their countries well, once the economies can be got back on an even keel.
                                                       
23 
Garnaut (1998, p. 21).
BIS Review   22/1998
Conclusion
- 12 -
In  1993,  the  World  Bank  produced  a  book  called  the  East  Asian  Miracle -
formally anointing something which had been seen  by  many  other  observers  quite  a  few  years
earlier -  the  extraordinary  economic  growth  of  East  Asia.  This  had  begun,  some  three  decades
earlier,  with  the  four  “tigers” -  Korea,  Hong  Kong,  Taiwan  and  Singapore.  These  economies
grew,  year  after  year,  at  pace  two  or  three  times  as  fast  as  the  industrial  countries.  The
performance spread to a number of others - Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia - and the biggest
miracle of all, China.
not 
Two 
First, 
things 
noting. 
this  was 
are  worth 
some
amazing-but-irrelevantly-trivial  miracle,  like  pulling  a  white  rabbit  out  of  a  hat:  this  made  an
enormous difference to the living standards of these countries, with per capita income doubling
in  less  than  a  generation.  Hong  Kong  and  Singapore  went  from  being  well  behind  the  living
standards  of  Western  countries,  to  being  much  the  same.24  Secondly,  it  changed  the  way
economists  thought  about  the  so-called  “developing”  countries:  no  longer  were  they  seen  as
pathological  cases  to  be  discussed  with  a  mixture  of  pity  and  resignation  that  nothing  much
could  be  done.  Instead,  they  were  seen  as  having  some  kind  of  advantage -  at  least  in  growth
terms - over the developed countries which had used up all the easy opportunities for expanding
production. Economists started to argue that the best qualification for growing fast was to start
from behind.
That was still the broad picture at the start of 1997. But now, in a matter of a few
months, real questions are being asked whether this - like so many other miracles - turns out to
be  some  sleight  of  hand,  or  not  sustainable  over  time.  One  of  the  original  sceptics  of  the
miracle - Paul Krugman -  might  seem  vindicated  in  his  likening  of  these  countries  to  the  early
years of the Soviet Union, where fast growth was achieved artificially and in a way  that  could
not  be  sustained  in  the  longer  run.25  Even  among  the  countries  themselves,  the  basis  of  the
miracle -  free  markets  and  increasing  exposure  to  the  outside  world -  is  now  under  serious
question.
In  the  face  of  these  doubts  and  the  current  crisis,  should  we  abandon  this  new
paradigm and return to some version of the old, low-growth, view of these countries? The most
powerful  reason  for  not  doing  this  is  that  the  forces  which  drove  growth  in  the  past  are  still
there -  the  poorer  of  these  countries  are  still  well  back  from  the  technological  frontier  and  the
application  of  capital  to  still-cheap  labour,  and  improvements  in  organisation  and  governance
mean  that  fast  growth  is  still  achievable.  The  fact  that  they  are  still  relatively  poor  makes  this
eminently desirable. First priority is to get them back on the rails again. Second priority, when
the immediate crisis is over, is to get along with those structural and governance issues that we
have  heard  so  much  about  of  late.  If  they  are  as  economically  important  as  the  current  debate
implies, the growth potential of these countries should be higher still. The countries which can
put in place robust, resilient and responsive financial sectors most quickly will be the ones which
can return to rapid growth first.
                                                       
24 
As  Stiglitz  has  said:    “In  1975,  six  out  of  10  Asians  lived  on  less  than  $1  a  day.    In  Indonesia  the
absolute  poverty  rate  was  even  higher.    Today,  two  out  of  10  East  Asians  are  living  in  absolute
poverty.    Korea,  Malaysia,  and  Thailand  have  eliminated  absolute  poverty  and  Indonesia  is  within
striking distance of that goal.  …  No other economic system has delivered so much, to so many, in
so short a span of time.” (Stiglitz 1998).
Although he was most sceptical about Singapore, which seems to be one of the least affected.
25 
BIS Review   22/1998
References
- 13 -
Feldstein, M.S. (1998), ‘Trying to do too much’, Financial Times, 5 March.
Feldstein,  M.S.  and  C.Y.  Horioka  (1980),  ‘Domestic  Saving  and  International  Capital  Flows’,
Economic Journal, June, Vol. 90, pp. 314-329.
Garnaut, R. (1998), The Financial Crisis: A Watershed in Economic Thought About East Asia,
paper  presented  at  Economic  Society  of  Australia  (Canberra  Branch),  Canberra,  19
February. (To be published in Asian-Pacific Economic Literature.)
Greenspan, A. (1998), Statement of Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System  before  the  Committee  on  Banking  and  Financial  Services,  US  House  of
Representatives, Washington, DC, 30 January.
Grenville,  S.A.  (1997),  ‘Asia  and  the  Financial  Sector’,  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  Bulletin,
December.
Grenville,  S.A.  (1998),  ‘Exchange  Rates  and  Crises’,  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  Bulletin,
February.
Krugman, P. (1998a), ‘What Happened to Asia?’, January (unpublished).
Krugman, P. (1998b), ‘Asia: What Went Wrong’, Fortune, p. 21, 2 March.
Macfarlane,  I.J.  (1997a),  ‘Monetary  Policy  Regimes:  Past  and  Future”,  Reserve  Bank  of
Australia Bulletin, October.
Macfarlane, I.J. (1997b), ‘The Changing Nature of Economic Crises’, Reserve Bank of Australia
Bulletin, December.
Macfarlane, I.J. (1998), Address to American Australian Association, New York, 11 March.
McKinnon,  R.I.  (1973),  Money  and  Capital  in  Economic  Development,  The  Brookings
Institution, Washington, DC.
Sachs, J.D. (1997), ‘The Wrong Medicine for Asia’, The New York Times, 3 November.
Stiglitz, J. (1998), ‘Restoring the Asian Miracle’, Asian Wall Street Journal, p. 8, 2 February.
BIS Review   22/1998
