Mr.  Meyer  addresses  the  competitiveness  of  financial  centres  from  a  Swiss
perspective   Address by the Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, Mr. Hans
Meyer, at the International Bankers Club Luxembourg, held in Luxembourg on 23/3/98.
Both  Luxembourg  and  Switzerland  are  major  financial  centres  in  Europe.  The
performance and competitiveness of the financial services industry are thus of key economic and social
importance to both countries. I should like to use this opportunity to say a few words on the subject from
what may be a somewhat unusual perspective.
The factors which determine the competitiveness of an industry are basically the same as
those determining the success of the entire economy. In both cases, we are looking at a multitude of quite
diverse factors with varying degrees of importance. Today, I would like to single out just three of them
which  I  believe  are  of  particular  significance:  economic  stability,  social  equilibrium  (i.e.  political
stability),  and  the  human  factor.  Although each  of  these  elements  could  be  dealt  with  separately,  they
should ultimately be viewed in a broader context.
Let’s start with economic stability. I define this as a state of balanced development across
the economy as a whole, characterised by steady growth, a modest inflation rate and low unemployment.
One of the main prerequisites for achieving such a state is the ability not only to create
but to  sustain  an  appropriate  economic  framework.  This  is  primarily  an  objective  for  monetary  policy,
fiscal policy and competition policy. The main goal of monetary policy is to maintain price stability. This
is of course not an end in itself, but a means to an end. A non-inflationary climate facilitates the free play
of market forces and keeps socially damaging developments at bay. Fiscal policy must, basically, aim in
the  longer  term  to  balance  the  public  budgets.  As  with  monetary  policy,  it  is  a  question  of  steady,
ongoing  efforts.  This  should  be  no  surprise,  considering  that  the  whole  spectrum  of  public  sector
activities  is  reflected  in  the  public  budgets.  This  in  turn  raises  the  question  of  what  services  the  state
should  perform,  who  should  pay  for  them  and  how  public-services  can  most  efficiently  be  provided.
Where  competition  policy  is  concerned,  the  aim  is  to  create  conditions  conducive  to  the  free  play  of
market forces. In recent decades, it has unfortunately not always been possible to gain consensus support
for the idea of free competition, which is still regarded with scepticism and suspicion by many people.
Provided that free competition is able to develop in a stable environment, there can be little doubt that it
is the best means to assure optimal use of available resources. When things go wrong, it is generally due
not to the principle of free competition itself but to the lack of a stable environment.
I would like to stress once again that the task of creating a stable economic framework is
a  never-ending  one:  it  is  a  question  of  constantly  working  towards  -  but  never  actually  reaching  -  the
intended goal. Success in this endeavour is not just a question of thinking things through in a consistent
way but, above all, of adopting a persevering and workmanlike approach.
Economic stability in the sense of a balanced development of the economy as a whole is
the sine qua non for a financial centre. It is essential if investors are to gain sufficient confidence in the
prospect of sustainable business success. Stable prices, low interest rates, modest rates of taxation and a
solid currency are the crucial factors.
To what extent - if at all - is a financial centre reliant on its economic hinterland? This
question is  less  easy  to  answer.  Although  a  well-balanced  interdependency  might  seem  to  be  desirable
here as well, this is not necessarily confirmed by experience. In fact, there never seems to have been any
close correlation, and with modern technology enhancing the mobility of people, goods and services, the
links have become even looser. Our two countries at least are proof of the fact that there need not be any
close correlation between the importance of a country’s economy and that of its financial sector.
Talking  about  economic  stability,  I  referred  to  the  need  for  perseverance.  This  is
precisely where I see the link with social and political stability. The central task of any community is to
provide its members with the greatest possible degree of security, freedom and general welfare. The last
BIS Review   26/1998
- 2 -
of  these  factors  -  the  general  welfare  of  the  population  -  is  dependent  precisely  on  the  creation  of  the
appropriate  economic  framework  I  mentioned  earlier.  I  should  add  that  this  task  can  only  be
accomplished if a sufficient number of citizens actively help in shaping developments. This is especially
the case in the sphere of fiscal policy.
In the wake of extremely dynamic growth, public budgets have grown considerably in all
developed countries over the past few decades. While the original purpose of this spending was to meet a
pressing and legitimate need such as in the area of social security -  there  has  been  a  growing  disparity
between  the  claims  made  on  the  public  purse  and  the  willingness  to  generate  the  necessary  resources.
Today,  we  have  reached  a  point  where  this  trend  needs  to  be  reversed.  However,  neither  rules  and
regulations  nor  government  ordinances  can  achieve  this  alone.  Instead,  we  have  to  take  small  but
persistent steps to rectify the situation both from the spending and the revenues side, and - not least of
all - to improve productivity. Because  such  ongoing  measures  need  the  backing  of  the  community,  the
chances of success tend to be greater in smaller communities than in larger ones.
Our experience suggests that a federally structured society based on direct democracy is
well  suited  to  achieving  the  interaction  between  economic  and  political  stability  I  have  just  outlined.
Here again, though, I should add that we are always on the way towards our goals and will never actually
meet them.
Even in the conditions we enjoy, it is not easy to reach the necessary consensus.
This  brings  me  to  the  “human  factor”.  The  background  conditions  I  have  been  talking
about  are  aimed  in  no  small  measure  at  enabling  individuals  to  develop  their  own  interests  as  well  as
those of society. This symbiosis is essential to the prosperity of the economy as a whole.
Where human resources are concerned, what is needed most of all  is  adequate  training,
motivation  and  the  right  mentality.  Over  the  course  of  time,  the  development  of  the  economy  and  the
associated structural change have constantly thrown up new challenges for everyone involved. This can
be  seen,  for  example,  in  the  phenomenon  of  structural  unemployment,  arising  from  an  imbalance  in
supply and demand for specific skills. Although the need for continuous training and retraining is nothing
new, it has now become an urgent concern. But qualifications alone are not sufficient. They only come
into their own when the people in question are also motivated.
If we were to restrict ourselves purely to economic  activities,  we  could  leave  it  at  that.
But after what I said about the correlations between the economy and society, there is clearly more to it.
In  a  democratic  community,  we  don’t  just  need  “economic  subjects”  who  contribute  their  skills  in
specific areas and  with  the  right  mentality.  We  also  need  citizens  who  are  willing  and  able  to  concern
themselves at all times with developments in the community and to help shape these developments.
If progress is to be made towards achieving balanced - and therefore stable growth, it is
especially  important  that  individuals  should  be  able  to  identify  with  the  community  as  a  whole.  Clear
interdependencies  with  the  economy  emerge  here  as  a  key  aspect  of  social  coexistence.  Only  if  the
individual members of society are assimilated into a balanced and flourishing economic environment will
they  identify  with  society  to  the  extent  that  they  work  actively  towards  its  goals  -  which  in  turn  is
essential  to  the  successful  shaping  of  the  appropriate  economic  framework.  The  resulting  social
equilibrium,  i.e.  political  stability,  creates  the  necessary  confidence  in  a  stable  and  sustainable
development that is so essential to a financial centre.
Today, there is a tendency for people to retreat into the role of the pure economic subject.
I  see  this  as  a  worrying  development,  and  indeed  as  posing  a  threat  to  both  the  economy  and  society.
Based on what I said earlier, the economy and society can only flourish in a balanced environment. But
this balance can only be achieved if the citizens are aware of their dual responsibility and act accordingly.
BIS Review   26/1998
- 3 -
We have talked about economic stability, political stability and the human factor. These
are the elements which define the substance of a financial centre, and the necessary symbiosis between
them  hinges  on  the  actions  of  the  individual.  But  we  should  not  forget  the  importance  of  other  major
aspects  such  as  a  clearly  defined  legal  system  and  a  properly  functioning  technical  and  organisational
infrastructure.
I  would  also  like  to  address  another  aspect  that  is  of  particular  importance  to  a  central
bank: the stability  of  the  system.  Maintaining  stability  in  the  financial  sphere  should  not  be  viewed  in
isolation, as it is closely interlinked with the human and economic factors discussed earlier.
Political and economic stability, the quality of the human contribution, a clearly defined
legal  order  and  an  efficient  infrastructure  are  the  keys  to  the  success  of  a  financial  centre.  To  this,  we
should add a reputation which is founded upon a sound attitude and a good track record, going beyond
the criteria we have enumerated.
Stability  of  the  financial  system  is  a  concern  primarily  for  the  market  participants
themselves. Furthermore, it comes within the remit both of the bank supervisors and of the central bank,
which is responsible for monetary policy. As you know, responsibilities and powers are kept separate in
my  country,  the  task  of  supervising  the  banks  being  assigned  to  an  independent  body,  the  Federal
Banking  Commission.  Discussion  about  whether  it  would  be  preferable  to  unite  the  two  institutions
under  one  roof  has  been  going  on  for  a  long  time.  Both  solutions  clearly  have  their  advantages  and
disadvantages,  each  of  which  may  be  weighted  differently  depending  on  the  requirements  of  society.
Consequently, the debate must be pragmatic and not dogmatic. We believe that our approach has proved
its  worth  and  do  not  see  any  need  for  radical  change.  It  is  clear,  though,  that  the  separation  of
responsibilities and powers can only function on a basis of close cooperation and trust.
I should like to touch upon two areas in which fundamental changes are needed. First, the
financial systems have obviously been becoming more complex with regard to the roles played by their
major participants. The traditional approach of focusing  supervisory  activities  on  the  banks  thus  seems
less and less appropriate. A more comprehensive supervisory system, covering the financial markets as a
whole, would be preferable, with particular attention being paid to the transparency of market activities.
Moreover, bank supervision should take account of the increasingly international nature
of  the  financial  markets.  There  would  appear  to  be  good  reason  to  call  for  a  globalisation  of  the
supervisory system. But globalisation is one of those “in” words that has to be treated with caution. As a
matter  of  fact,  individual  financial  markets  are  still  embedded  in  a  national  economic  and  social
environment. What we need is for cooperation between the national supervisory bodies to be  gradually
intensified  -  which  is  in  fact  happening.  True  supranational  supervision  is  still  a  long  way  off,  as  the
necessary economic and social framework is lacking.
For this reason, I should now like to focus on the role that an individual central bank has
to play in helping to safeguard the stability of the financial system.
I  have  already  spoken  about  the  general  prerequisites  needed  for  a  financial  market  to
flourish. Within the  scope  defined  by  the  operating  conditions  mentioned,  market  players  are  basically
responsible themselves for what they do or don’t do. Their prime concern is to stay solvent at all times
by adopting sound business practices and putting an effective organisation in place. To prevent problems
from  occurring,  the  responsible  bodies  at  the  individual  banks  must  be  able  at  all  times,  and  with  a
minimum of delay, to accurately assess their risk situation and to take rapid and appropriate action.
Of course, it is never  possible  to  rule  out  the  possibility  of  an  individual  bank  running
into difficulties. In such cases, a solution must first be sought through the market. Solidarity among the
other market players should provide  a  “first  line  of  defence”.  Seeking  funds  from  the  central  bank  can
only be contemplated in the last instance - hence the expression “lender of last resort”. Obtaining credit
from the central bank presupposes that the liquidity requirements are only temporary. If the solvency of a
BIS Review   26/1998
- 4 -
bank is in peril because of a threat to its capital, the problem is a matter for the supervisory authorities
and possibly for the state itself. In practice, the boundary between liquidity and solvency problems can be
a fluid one.
In my view, it is important for everyone involved not to lose sight of these principles -
which are in fact quite simple. It should not be assumed that the central bank might take action beyond
the limits outlined. But this does not mean that it cannot assist in the search for solutions, as far as they
do not involve extending further credit.
If the problems of individual banks multiply, there is a danger that liquidity may dry out
throughout  the  entire  system.  In  such  a  case,  the  central  bank  would  basically  be  able  to  supply  the
market with the necessary liquidity. However, it may then come into conflict with the requirements of a
policy  geared  to  economic  stability.  Consequently,  the  short-term  benefits  of  an  easing  of  monetary
policy should be weighed against the longer-term risks.
I would like to sum up my thoughts as follows:
1.
2.
3.
4
5.
6.
Three  factors  are  of  prime  importance  to  the  competitiveness  of  a  financial
centre:  economic  stability,  political  stability  and  the  “human  factor”  (i.e.
professionalism, motivation and mentality). Although these  factors  can  each  be
viewed separately, it is the interaction between them that really counts.
Economic stability, in the sense of a balanced development of the economy as a
whole, is made possible by the existence of an appropriate economic framework.
This  is  created  first  and  foremost  by  monetary  policy,  fiscal  policy  and
competition  policy.  Economic  stability  provides  the  financial  services  industry
with a favourable climate in terms of low  inflation  and  interest  rates,  moderate
tax levels and appropriate exchange rates.
Favourable  economic  conditions  are  planned  and  implemented  as  part  of  the
process  of  social  coexistence.  This  can  best  be  achieved  when  the  largest
possible number of the community’s members are involved.
Individuals are at the same time citizens and economic subjects, thereby creating
a  crucial  interdependency.  Proper  integration  into  a  balanced  economic
environment  is  an  important  prerequisite  for  developing  a  sense  of  common
purpose  -  in  other  words,  identifying  with  society  and  thus  also  displaying  a
willingness  to  actively  help  shape  its  progress.  This  ultimately  means  that
economic  and  social  development  can  only  progress  in  a  sustainable  and
balanced way if an appropriate equilibrium can be maintained between them.
Even  at  a  time  when  global  economic  and  social  developments  are  becoming
more  and  more  closely  intertwined,  being  an  integral  part  of  a  national
community  still  plays  an  important  role.  It  is  still  essential  that  these  national
communities should strive first and foremost to keep their own house in order - a
house, though, which should not just be stable but open as well.
Ensuring  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  is  one  of  the  core  tasks  of  the
supervisory  authorities  and  of  the  central  bank  in  its  capacity  as  lender  of  last
resort. However, the market players’ sense of individual responsibility is also of
key  importance.  If  a  third  party  is  to  offer  assistance  in  a  system  run  on  free
market  principles,  this  can  and  should  be  seen  as  nothing  more  nor  less  -  than
helping the others to help themselves.
BIS Review   26/1998
