Mr.  Carse  reviews  the  impact  of  the  Asian  crisis  on  the  Hong  Kong  banking
sector   Speech by the Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Mr. David
Carse, at the Sixth Conference on Pacific Basin Business, Economics and Finance in Hong Kong on
28/5/98.
I  am  pleased  to  have  the  opportunity  to  talk  to  you  about  the  impact  of  the  Asian
financial crisis on the Hong Kong banking sector.
The Asian financial crisis is one year old this month, though this is a birthday that we
do  not  want  to  celebrate.  The  crisis  can  be  dated  from  late  May  when  the  Thai  Baht  came  under
severe  pressure.  A  renewed  attack  in  early  July,  while  we  were  celebrating  the  success  of  the
Handover  in  Hong  Kong,  led  to  the  floating  of  the  Baht,  which  promptly  plunged  in  value.  The
contagion then spread to neighbouring economies, and although Hong Kong was for a time immune,
it eventually reached us too.
Explaining  the  origins  and  causes  of  the  Asian  crisis  has  become  a  major  growth
industry and I have no intention of adding to the debate today. Suffice to say that one point on which
almost all the commentators are agreed is that weakness in banking systems in the region has been
one of the main reasons which explains the intensity of the crisis and the speed with which it took
hold.  In  the  words  of  Alan  Greenspan,  “what  turns  otherwise  seemingly  minor  imbalances  into  a
crisis is an actual or anticipated disruption to the liquidity or solvency of the banking system”. When
banks are already weak, for example because of a high level of non-performing loans, an external
shock  such  as  an  attack  on  the  currency  will  further  damage  confidence  in  the  banking  system.
Banks  will  lose  domestic  deposits  and  will  find  themselves  unable  to  rollover  short-term  external
borrowing. The resultant capital outflows will put further downward pressure on the exchange rate,
force up interest rates and drive down asset prices. The customers to whom banks have lent will get
into  financial  difficulties,  further  weakening  the  position  of  the  banks.  With  their  capital  and
liquidity  impaired,  the  banks  are  in  no  position  to  lend,  and  this  leads  to  the  “credit-crunch”,  and
resultant shrinkage of the real economy that we are seeing in so many countries in the region.
The reasons for the banking sector weaknesses are various. Lending excesses drove
up asset prices and allowed companies to become over-leveraged. Poor risk management on the part
of  the  banks  themselves  was  compounded  by  ineffective  banking  supervision  and  lack  of
transparency  which  provided  little  scope  for  market  discipline  to  be  exercised  until  the  problems
were glaringly obvious. At that point, the market reaction was extreme. Even if supervisors did have
the  will  to  tackle  banking  sector  problems  in  their  countries,  they  were  often  subject  to  political
interference that stood in the way of prompt corrective action. Government influence also directed
bank  lending  into  uneconomic  projects  and  non-viable  companies.  This  government  involvement
lent credence to the view that regional banks were effectively government guaranteed, which made it
easier  for  these  banks  to  borrow  in  the  global  interbank  market.  This  provided  the  fuel  for  the
irresponsible lending which took place.
Hong Kong did not suffer from these structural and systemic weaknesses. But it is the
case that imbalances had emerged in the economy, and this became particularly evident during 1997
as confidence grew that the Handover would proceed smoothly - as indeed it did. This was reflected
in soaring residential property prices - up by an average of 48% during the year to October 1997 -
and a record level for the Hang Seng Index of 16,820 in August 1997. The boom in asset values was
to a large extent financed by the banks.
The sharp escalation in asset prices and in bank lending was clearly unsustainable. A
downward adjustment would have been necessary and would have happened sooner or later. All that
was required was an external shock to bring it about. This of course is precisely what happened in
BIS Review   48/1998
- 2 -
the third week of October when the Hong Kong dollar came under speculative attack. The operation
of  our  currency  board  system  meant  that  the  sales  of  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  depleted  the  clearing
balances  which  the  banks  maintain  with  the  HKMA  for  settlement  purposes  and  the  resultant
shortage  of  liquidity  caused  interest  rates  to  rise  sharply.  You  will  recall  that  the  overnight  rate
reached  280%  on  23  October  1997.  Although  the  overnight  rate  quickly  subsided,  term  rates
remained high for some weeks  thereafter  and  the  stock  market  experienced  considerable  volatility
and property prices fell. Renewed exchange rate pressure in January again saw interest rates spike
upwards, though the reaction this time was less severe. Nonetheless an inverse yield curve persisted
during much of January with the interbank rates higher than the prime lending rate.
Also during this period, the banks have had to contend with the blows to confidence
from continuing regional upheavals, most notably the liquidity crisis in Korea around the turn of the
year and the dramatic events in Indonesia which are still being played out. Coupled with mounting
evidence  that  the  domestic  economy  is  slowing  down,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  banks  in  Hong
Kong are going through more difficult times. The severity of the Asian crisis is a once-in-a-lifetime
event and no banking system in the region can hope to be unaffected by it. There is bound to be an
impact on the banks’ funding and liquidity, their loan growth, their asset quality and ultimately their
profitability. Apart from the effect on individual banks, the Asian crisis will also have repercussions
on  Hong  Kong’s  position  as  an  international  financial  centre,  given  that  so  many  regional  and
international banks affected by the crisis are based here.
How  precisely  has  the  Asian  crisis  impacted  on  banks  in  Hong  Kong?  In  the  first
place,  banks  have  become  much  more  conscious  about  the  need  to  remain  liquid.  The  spikes  in
interest rates that occurred in October 1997 and in January 1998 have made the banks more reluctant
to rely on borrowing from the interbank market to meet their funding needs. This is because of the
interest rate risk that this entails and because of the reduced amount of funds in the market that are
available to be borrowed. In particular, the supply of funds to the longer maturities in the interbank
market has greatly diminished. Banks that do have liquidity prefer to place it at very short term, even
overnight,  to  ensure  that  it  is  readily  available.  The  banks  also  wish  to  improve,  or  at  least  avoid
further deterioration in, their loan to deposit ratios. Taking the various factors together, there is now
much greater competition for customer deposits than there was six months ago. This is not confined
to the smaller banks: the large banks and the foreign banks are also involved. It is happening at a
time when the overall growth in customer deposits has slowed down in line with the economy.
The effect of this is evident in the additional margin over HIBOR which banks are
prepared to pay in order to attract deposits. This clearly has an effect on profitability: the net interest
margin of the local banks fell to 2.33% (annualised) in the first quarter of this year compared with
2.43% in 1997 as a whole. The banks are caught in a vicious circle. On the one hand they want to
boost or at least maintain their liquidity. But if they do this by paying over HIBOR for deposits that
they  then  place  in  the  overnight  interbank  market  at  HIBOR,  this  is  clearly  costing  them  money.
Banks do have the option of not paying the going market rate for deposits. But if they do this their
customers may go elsewhere. The deposit base is therefore less stable than it was.
The banks’ desire to stay liquid also means that they are more cautious about lending.
Generally speaking, they will want to lend only if they can raise the deposits to do so, and deposits
are growing more slowly. This caution also reflects their perception that credit risks have increased
in the current economic environment. Of course, the demand for borrowing has also declined as the
economy has slowed and the property and stock markets have weakened. But the supply of loanable
funds  has  probably  fallen  even  more,  partly  because  of  the  decision  of  some  foreign  banks  to  cut
back  their  lending  in  Hong  Kong.  This  does  not  represent  a  loss  of  confidence  by  these  banks  in
Hong  Kong.  Rather,  it  reflects  the  need  of  some  banks  to  downsize  their  balance  sheets  and  to
concentrate more in the future on profitability rather than volume growth and market share. It also
BIS Review   48/1998
- 3 -
reflects the fact that some banks are wanting to cut back on their Asian exposure and Hong Kong is
one of the few markets where it is possible to do so.
This will have the benefit, from the local banks’ point of view, that it will push up
lending margins; and over time this will attract more banks back into the market and encourage them
to lend. But the appetite for new lending is likely to remain subdued in the short-term.
As  already  mentioned,  the  fear  of  increased  bad  debts  is  another  factor  which  is
making  the  banks  wary  about  increasing  their  credit  exposure.  The  combination  of  regional
difficulties and domestic slowdown makes it inevitable that asset quality will deteriorate this year. In
the  first  quarter  of  the  year  there  was  a  noticeable  rise  in  loans  overdue  for  more  than  3  months,
although as a percentage of total loans the figure for the local banks (less than 2%) is still reasonable
by international, let alone, regional standards. As to how much worse the situation will get as we go
through  the  year,  it  is  difficult  to  say.  But  we  can  take  comfort  from  the  fact  that  although  loan
arrears in the all-important residential mortgage market are creeping up, the amounts involved are
still  very  small  in  percentage  terms  (only  around  0.3%  of  the  local  banks’  mortgage  portfolio  at
end-March).  Even  if  property  prices  do  fall  further,  there  is  a  strong  incentive  for  homeowners  to
continue to service their mortgages.
The main problem loans we have seen so far have been in the corporate sector and in
trade finance. Some companies have run into unavoidable problems because of the regional situation
while  others  may  have  over-extended  themselves.  However,  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  corporate
sector in general in Hong Kong has avoided the excesses seen in the rest of the region. In general,
companies in Hong Kong are not  highly  leveraged  compared  with  their  counterparts  in  the  region
and have not poured resources into an indiscriminate build-up of fixed assets. The banks have also
tended to follow more prudent lending policies than those elsewhere and are better protected by their
ability  to  take  and  realise  good  collateral.  We  do  not  therefore  expect  to  see  the  collapse  of  asset
quality that has occurred in some regional economies where corporates and the banks have also had
to contend with massive exchange rate depreciation.
The local banks in Hong Kong also have the benefit of the cushion provided by their
high capital adequacy ratios. This means that even if the banks do have to make higher provisions
this  year,  it  will  be  their  profitability  rather  than  their  solvency  that  is  affected.  While  lower
profitability is by no means welcome, it is not, by itself, a cause for concern in terms of the stability
of the banking system.
It is important to keep in mind that the local banks are still making money so far this
year despite the more difficult operating conditions. Equally, you will not be surprised to hear that
profits  are  generally  lower  than  the  same  period  of  last  year  due  to  a  combination  of  increased
funding costs, flat lending volume and increased bad debt provisions. The outlook for the year as a
whole is uncertain. If banks can record the same profits as last year, they will be doing very well.
Certainly, nobody should have exaggerated expectations about the 1998 outturn. It will be a tough
year, but I am confident that the banks can manage their way through it.
What  kind  of  strategy  are  the  banks  adopting  to  achieve  this?  I  have  already
mentioned some of the steps: namely, to build up liquidity and to be more selective and cautious in
their lending. Loan review and collection procedures are being stepped up to ensure that banks can
identify problem loans at an early stage and take action to safeguard their position. Banks are also
being more proactive in their asset and liability management, particularly in terms of their funding
strategy and how to price their deposits against the competition. Although banks in Hong Kong are
highly efficient in terms of the cost-income ratio, the pressure on revenues means that they need to
pay even more attention to costs. A number of banks have therefore frozen headcount and some have
BIS Review   48/1998
- 4 -
felt obliged to lay off staff. Some branches have been closed. This  is  an  unfortunate  aspect  of  the
adjustment process that Hong Kong is currently undergoing.
However, not all the moves are purely defensive. Banks are also trying to find ways
of delivering products and services to customers more cheaply and efficiently, for example through
telephone  call  centres,  electronic  banking  and  segmentation  of  the  branch  network.  There  is  also
more  emphasis  on  using  the  branch  networks  to  cross-sell  other  products  such  as  unit  trusts  and
insurance so as to build up non-interest income. Geographically, ambitions to expand in the region
have  obviously  been  dampened  by  the  financial  crisis.  But  there  is  a  wide  recognition  that  the
Mainland  of  China  offers  substantial  opportunities  for  banks  in  Hong  Kong  both  to  develop  new
business and to expand their relationship with existing customers.
Underlying all the banks’ strategies at present must be the recognition that the Year
2000 issue has to be tackled successfully. This is an issue of basic business survival. I believe that
banks in Hong Kong are aware of this and are working actively to meet the HKMA’s deadline  of
end-December 1998 to achieve Year 2000 compliance.
How is Hong Kong’s position as an international financial centre going to be affected
by what is happening in the region? It is clear that the number of foreign institutions in Hong Kong
will shrink to some extent. A number of foreign banks have already given up their banking licences
but this has been largely due to problems in their home market or mergers with other institutions.
The Asian crisis is likely to result in further rationalisation among the banks from the region as they
are  merged  and  restructured  in  their  home  countries.  The  reduction  in  business  activities  such  as
syndicated lending and trading in regional debt securities may cause other marginal players to leave
Hong Kong, simply because they can no longer make money.
However, I am sure that the bulk of foreign banks remain committed to Hong Kong
and will want to retain a substantial presence here. This is not wishful thinking, but rather founded
on hard logic. First, it simply does not make sense to suggest that within the space of a few months
Asia,  as  a  whole,  has  become  less  relevant  to  banks  with  global  aspirations.  Second,  within  Asia,
Hong  Kong  retains  its  unique  attractions  as  the  main  centre  for  banks  to  do  business  with  China.
Leaving aside short-term cyclical fluctuations, the economy of the Mainland is clearly on an upward
path. Foreign, and indeed local, banks will want to share in the financing and advisory opportunities
which  this  brings,  and  Hong  Kong  will  remain  the  best  location  from  which  to  launch  these
activities. The costs of doing business in Hong Kong must however be reasonable; and that it is why
the current adjustment process is necessary as well as painful. I am sure that the Hong Kong banking
sector will not only survive the process, but also go on from strength to strength in the future.
BIS Review   48/1998
