Mr. George discusses monetary policy, unemployment and economic growth in
the United Kingdom   Speech by the Governor of the Bank of England, Mr. E.A.J. George, at The
TUC Congress in Blackpool on 15/9/98.
Thank  you,  Chairman.  I’m  actually  very  pleased  to  be  here,  and  to  have  this
opportunity to respond directly to some of the serious concerns that have been expressed recently by
Trade Union leaders - among others - about monetary policy.
Let me start with what is perhaps your biggest concern. You think that the Monetary
Policy  Committee,  which  I  chair  and  which  sets  interest  rates,  is  only  interested  in  controlling
inflation and takes little or no account of the effects of its decisions on real economic activity and
jobs.  Some  of  you  evidently  think  that’s  because  we’re  a  crowd  of  “pointy-heads”  or  “inflation
nutters”,  or  even  “manufacturing  hooligans”  -  and  I’m  not  sure  these  descriptions  are  intended  as
terms of endearment. More seriously some of you think that the problem lies with our remit from the
Government  which  is  first,  to  maintain  price  stability  -  defined  as  an  underlying  inflation  rate  of
2½%,  and,  subject  to  that,  to  support  the  economic  policy  of  the  Government,  including  its
objectives for growth and employment.
Whatever the reason, your concern  is  that  we  place  too  much  emphasis  on  holding
prices down and not enough on keeping growth and employment up. The implication is that you see
a trade-off between inflation and the rate of economic growth, so that if only we’d let up a bit on
controlling inflation then this country could enjoy higher activity and lower unemployment, which
are  the  really  good  things  in  life  -  or  at  least  we  could  avoid  some  of  the  worst  damage  that  is
currently being inflicted upon the whole of the agriculture, large parts of manufacturing industry and
even some services sectors.
And that might even be true for a time. The trouble is that, in anything other than the
short term, it would be likely to mean more rather than less economic damage, and lower rather than
higher growth and employment.
Often in the past in this country we behaved as if we thought that promoting higher
growth  and  employment  -  which  of  course  is  what  we  all  want  to  see  -  was  largely  a  matter  of
pumping up demand. We paid too little attention to the structural, supply-side, constraints. All too
often  we  tried  to  buy  faster  growth  and  higher  employment  even  at  the  expense  of  a  bit  more
inflation. In effect we tried to squeeze a quart out of a pint pot. And you all know the result - rising
inflation and a worsening balance of payments, which eventually could only be brought back under
control  by  pushing  up  interest  rates  dramatically  and  forcing  the  economy  into  recession.  I  don’t
need to remind you of the really miserable social as well as economic consequences - as right across
the  economy  people  lost  their  jobs,  their  businesses  and  their  homes.  More  insidiously,  repeated
experience  of  boom  and  bust  produced  a  pervasive  short-termism  in  business  behaviour  which
infected both industry and finance and - dare I say both employers and employees - however much
we all like to blame everyone else. Everyone was tempted to grab what they could while the going
was good.
But we have learned from that experience. We’ve learned that in anything other than
the short term there really is no trade-off between growth  and  inflation.  What  we  are  trying  to  do
now  through  monetary  policy  is  to  keep  overall  demand  in  the  economy  growing  continuously
broadly  in  line  with  the  capacity  of  the  economy  -  as  a  whole  -  to  meet  that  demand.  Both  the
previous  Government  and  the  present  one  set  a  low  inflation  target  as  the  immediate  objective  of
monetary policy, not as an end in itself, but in effect as a measure of our success in keeping demand
in line with supply. So the real aim is to achieve stability across the economy as a whole in this much
wider sense.
BIS Review   71/1998
- 2 -
Now, there is not a lot, frankly, that we can do directly through monetary policy to
affect the supply side - the underlying rate of growth that can be sustained without causing inflation
to rise. That can be influenced by the whole raft of Government policies, ranging from education and
health to taxation and social security, and it depends ultimately on the ingenuity, the productivity,
and  the  flexibility,  of  the  economy.  Employers  and  employees,  working  together,  clearly  have  a
crucial  role  to  play  in  this  context,  and  I  recognise  the  constructive  and  forward-looking  role  that
many of you are now playing to improve the supply-side capacity of the economy.
Monetary policy operates on the demand side. And the best help that we can give is
to keep overall demand consistently in line with that supply-side capacity - not letting it run above
capacity but not letting it fall below capacity either - as reflected in consistently low inflation. That
way we can moderate rather than aggravate the unavoidable ups and downs of the business  cycle,
enabling steadier growth, high levels of employment and rising living standards to be sustained into
the medium and longer-term. And if we can do that, then we will contribute indirectly to the supply
side  by  creating  an  environment  which  encourages  more  rational,  longer-term,  decision-making
throughout the economy.
I would hope, Chairman, that on this basis we could all agree at least on what it is we
are  trying  to  do.  The  debate  is  not  about  the  ends  it  is  about  the  means.  We  are  every  bit  as
concerned with growth and employment as you are - as anyone in their right mind must be. But we
are  interested  in  growth  and  employment  that  is  sustained  into  the  medium  and  long  term.  And
permanently low inflation is a necessary condition for achieving that.
But, even if we agree on the objective, that still of course, leaves plenty of room for
us to disagree about what that means for the actual policy stance - the level of interest rates - at any
particular  time.  In  fact,  as  you  may  have  noticed,  because  we  are  wholly  open  about  it,  even  the
individual members of the MPC have been known to disagree about that - at the margin. Outside the
MPC, a lot of people say to me - “OK I agree we don’t want to return to boom and bust, but you are
still overdoing it. From where I sit, or from what I’m told,” they say, “we’re headed for recession -
just hours away”. Sometimes they imply by that that we are also going to undershoot the inflation
target - sometimes they don’t much seem to care about inflation.
Now there are always plenty of people who claim to know what’s going to happen to
the economy, to know that interest rates are “clearly far too high” or “clearly far too low”, and the
present time is no exception. It’s been difficult recently to hear yourself think above the deafening
noise of opinions on the state of the economy, which, understandably, often reflect the situation in
their particular neck of the whole economy wood.
The  truth  is  that  neither  we,  nor  they,  nor  anyone  else,  can  know  with  any  great
certainty precisely where demand is in relation to capacity in the economy as a whole. Still less do
we  know  where  it  is  likely  to  be  over  the  next  couple  of  years  -  and  that  is  the  more  relevant
consideration, given the time it takes before changes in interest rates have their full effects. Monetary
policy  is  not  a  precise  science  -  we’ve  never  pretended  that  it  is.  But  it  can’t  be  just  a  matter  of
sweeping, broad brush, impressions based upon partial information either. What we have to do is to
make the best professionally-informed analysis we can, of all the sources of information available to
us, relating to every sector of the economy and every part of the country, and then constantly review
and as necessary modify our judgements, month by month and quarter by quarter, in the light of the
flood of new information as it becomes available.
And that, of course, is exactly what we do in fact do - using the vast array of official
economic statistics and financial market data, all the publicly available and some private surveys and
commentaries,  as  well  as  a  wealth  of  anecdotal  and  structured  survey  evidence  that  we  collect
BIS Review   71/1998
- 3 -
ourselves, through our 16 non-executive directors, through the frequent visits which MPC members
make around the country, and through meetings in London, and through our network of 12 regional,
information-gathering and disseminating, agencies with their 7000 industrial contacts throughout the
United Kingdom. And we openly display the facts as they are available to us, as well as our analysis
and our conclusions, regularly through the publication of the minutes of our monthly meeting and in
the quarterly Inflation Report.
So when people say to me that the economy is headed for recession, I’m interested in
comparing the evidence on which they base their views with our own evidence, and I want to know
whether  or  not  they  are  also  saying  that  they  expect  us  to  undershoot  the  Government’s  inflation
target.
Let’s just for a moment turn down the noise and look at some of the relevant facts as
they relate to the economy as a whole.
Since the economy started to recover from recession in the spring of 1992 - some 6½
years ago - overall output has grown at an average rate of about 3%. That is well above the trend rate
for the past 20 years, of  just  over  2%.  Employment  has  increased  by  1.2  million  over  this  period,
while  unemployment  has  fallen  almost  month  by  month,  on  the  familiar  claimant  count  measure,
from a peak of over 10% in 1993, to some 4.7% now. That is the lowest rate for 18 years. Meanwhile
retail  price  inflation  (on  the  Government’s  target  measure)  has  averaged  around  2¾%  -  that’s  the
lowest  for  a  generation.  There’s  not  much  evidence  here  that  low  inflation  inevitably  means  low
growth and employment.
But,  of  course,  we  started  this  period  with  demand  below  capacity  -  with  a  fair
amount  of  slack  in  the  economy  which  we  were  gradually  taking  up.  By  last  year  it  had  become
clear, in the evidence of rising capacity utilisation and of growing tightness in the labour market, that
unless we acted to moderate the growth of demand we were at risk of overheating. That’s why we
tightened policy over last summer - to slow things down before inflation took off - and to head off a
subsequent recession. And although, as I say, you can never be sure - economic forecasting is a very
uncertain  business  -  a  necessary  slowdown  rather  than  a  more  serious  recession  is  what  we  think
we’re seeing, and, as I understand it, that is what your own General Council thinks too.
Our problem in slowing the economy down has been enormously complicated by the
increasing imbalance between the domestic and the internationally-exposed sectors of the economy.
Domestic  demand  for  goods  and  particularly  for  services  has  been  unsustainably  strong  and  large
parts of the economy have been doing very well on the back of that. But the sectors which are most
exposed to international competition have been suffering enormous pressure as a result, initially, of
the exaggerated strength of sterling - especially against the major European currencies in the run up
to decisions on the euro; and as a result subsequently of the successive waves of turmoil spreading
through large parts of the global economy. Overall demand growth - at least until fairly recently -
remained excessive and the labour market has continued to tighten.
The question was what should we do? It was not that we didn’t know that large parts
of the economy were under the hammer - we have been as conscious of that as anyone. Still less was
it  that  we  didn’t  care  -  we  care,  just  as  you  must,  about  activity  and  jobs  in  all  sectors  of  the
economy. But the stark choice confronting us was either to tighten policy, knowing that that would
inevitably increase the pain which the internationally exposed sectors were already suffering, or to
disregard  the  developing  excess  overall  demand  in  order  to  protect  the  internationally-exposed
sectors from further damage.
BIS Review   71/1998
- 4 -
This  second  course  might  have  meant  less  pain  for  the  internationally-exposed
sectors in the short run. But it would have meant putting the whole of the economy, including the
exposed sectors, at risk of accelerating inflation, and it would in all probability have meant a much
sharper downturn in the economy as a whole a little further ahead. We’ve been round that buoy all
too  often  before.  And  so  we  tightened  policy,  trying  as  best  as  we  could  through  our  tactics  to
minimise the unwanted upward pressure on the exchange rate.
I know, Chairman, only too well that this will be cold comfort to many of you in the
exposed  sectors  -  but  there’s  no  point  in  pretending  things  are  other  than  they  are.  The  present
imbalance means that we are trying to maintain stability in extraordinarily difficult circumstances.
But I will make one final point. The inflation target we have been set is symmetrical.
A significant, sustained, fall below 2½% is to be regarded just as seriously as a significant, sustained,
rise above it. And I give you my assurance that we will be just as rigorous in cutting interest rates if
the overall evidence begins to point to our undershooting the target as we have been in raising them
when the balance of risks was on the upside. There is now evidence that domestic demand growth is
moderating, as it must do, and that the labour market is tightening more slowly than before. On top
of that, as we said in our press notice last Thursday - announcing that we had not changed interest
rates  -  we  recognise  “that  deterioration  in  the  international  economy  could  increase  the  risks  of
inflation falling below the target”. That is still not the most likely outcome in the eyes of most of us -
and given the real world uncertainties we can anyway never sensibly tie our hands. But there is no
doubt in my mind that recent international developments have at least reduced the likelihood that we
will need to tighten policy further.
BIS Review   71/1998
