Mr. Bäckström speaks on Swedish monetary policy outside EMU   Address by
the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Sweden,  Mr.  Urban  Bäckström,  to  the  Monetary  Policy  Forum
organised by the Centre for Business Policy Studies and the Riksbank in Stockholm on 22/4/98.
I  am  pleased  to  note  that  the  Centre  for  Business  Policy  Studies  (SNS)  is
maintaining the tradition, together with the Riksbank, of arranging the Monetary Policy Forum.
This is our sixth annual opportunity of discussing monetary policy issues in the Forum and what
could be more natural on this occasion than to consider the monetary policy future in Europe in
connection with the launching of what is perhaps history’s most momentous project in this field.
Besides  the  question  of  how  monetary  policy  will  be  conducted  in  the  euro  area,  an  equally
important issue for us in Sweden is how our monetary policy will be affected when Stage Three
of EMU starts and Sweden does not participate initially.
The  discussion  of  “Monetary  Policy  in  EMU”  is  to  be  opened  by  my  Finnish
colleague, Dr. Sirkka Hämäläinen, and  I want to take this opportunity of wishing her  a hearty
welcome to Sweden.  In this context I should also like to express my appreciation of the close
cooperation between Suomen Pankki and Sveriges Riksbank, which we reckon to continue even
though Finland participates in the monetary union.
The  topic  assigned  to  me  is  “Swedish  Monetary  Policy  Outside  EMU”.    First  I
shall  paint  my  picture  of  what  an  outsider  position  will  entail  for  Sweden’s  economic  policy.
Then I will look at how monetary policy in Sweden is constructed in principle and conclude with
some remarks on the current situation.
In that Sweden will be outside the euro area initially, our economic policy will be
constructed to fulfil the goals that are set up in Sweden.  These goals are based in turn on our
domestic priorities together with the commitments we have as a member of the European Union.
To a large extent, Sweden’s priorities are the same as the EU’s: implement an economic policy
constructed for stability and low inflation, thereby creating conditions for a good development of
prosperity.    Participation  or  otherwise  in  the  monetary  union  does  not  affect  the  need  for  a
balanced economic policy.
Monetary policy aimed at price stability
A  political  majority  has  stated  that  membership  of  the  European  exchange  rate
mechanism,  ERM,  is  to  be  seen  as  a  preliminary  step  towards  participation  in  the  monetary
union.  Thus there are reasons for supposing that the question of ERM membership will not be
topical until the issue of future EMU participation has been resolved.  Meanwhile, the Riksbank
will continue to operate with a flexible exchange rate regime and an explicit price stability target
for monetary policy.  Here it should  be  underscored  that  experience  to  date  indicates  that  this
regime is working well.
From the beginning of 1999 the Riksbank’s present independent position will be
formally  embedded  in  law.    The  price  stability  objective  will  have  statutory  force  and  the
function of the Riksbank will be to ensure that this objective is fulfilled.  The amendments to the
legislation  on  the  Riksbank  have  already  been  approved  once  by  the  Riksdag  (Sweden’s
Parliament)  and  a  second  vote  on  this  constitutional  change  is  scheduled  for  after  the  general
election in September.  The reform is supported by five of the political parties and thus by a clear
parliamentary majority.
BIS Review   35/1998
˝
- 2 -
These changes meet EU requirements concerning monetary policy and the role of
the central bank.  Whether or not we adopt the single currency, Sweden has undertaken to have
an  independent  central  bank  and  this  entails  a  far-reaching  delegation  of  monetary  policy
decisions on the basis of an operational objective.
Budget policy aimed at surplus
Similarly,  Swedish  fiscal  policy  will  continue  to  be  based  both  on  our  national
objectives and on the requirements that have been adopted for the European Union.
An objective for Sweden’s public finances has been set up by the Government and
approved  by  the  Riksdag.    In  the  medium  term  the  government  budget  is  to  show  a  surplus,
measured  as  the  cyclical  average,  of  2  per  cent  of  GDP.    In  that  a  surplus  is  generated,
government debt can be reduced so that future challenges which Sweden’s economy may  face
can be tackled without creating problems for government finances.
Considering the government debt that has accumulated in the 1990s and the fact
that  Sweden’s  public  finances  are  relatively  sensitive  to  cyclical  activity,  this  objective  is
reasonable.    Current  assessments,  based  on  existing  decisions  and  official  economic  policy,
suggest that the budget policy target will be met in the coming years.
Besides the greater awareness of the importance of stable finances, the conditions
for  fulfilling  the  budget  objective  have  been  improved  by  institutional  changes  to  the  budget
process.  Sweden’s new budget process is inherently more disciplined than before and this can
contribute to the maintenance of sound finances.
The Swedish objective of  government financial consolidation is in  line  with  the
EU  budgetary  aim  of  positions  close  to  balance  or  in  surplus  over  the  medium  term.    So
Sweden’s  fiscal  policy  is  also  subject  to  EU  agreements  even  though  we  have  deferred
participation  in  the  monetary  union.    Sweden  has  undertaken  to  aim  for  the  objectives  in  the
Stability and Growth Pact.
More generally, as a member state, Sweden has undertaken to regard its economic
policy  as  a  matter  of  common  concern  to  all  EU  member  states.    We  will  accordingly  be
participating  in  the  economic  policy  discussions  and  be  subjected  to  assessments  and
evaluations.  We are also taking part in the drafting of the broad guidelines of economic policies;
these guidelines, which can be likened to fiscal plans for the Community, are to be incorporated
in the construction of EU countries’ economic policies.
Sweden moving towards stability
A  broad  consensus  has  been  established  -  in  the  world  in  general  as  well  as  in
Sweden - about the objectives and institutional arrangements that are appropriate for economic
policy, as well as the importance of international economic cooperation.  The inflation economy
that  prevailed  earlier  caused  major  problems.    An  expansionary  economic  policy  with
subsequent devaluations does not generate any lasting positive effects in the real economy.  It is
liable to result in high inflation that erodes the short-run gains in terms of costs.  The longer the
period of inflation, moreover, the more  painful  will  be  the  readjustment  to  a  more  sustainable
economic development based on low inflation.
BIS Review   35/1998
˝
- 3 -
Developments in Sweden have been moving in the right direction for a number of
years.  Inflation is low and growth favourable.  Earlier imbalances, in the government budget as
well as in foreign transactions, have been turned into surpluses.  Whether the adjustments in the
labour market are sufficient to permit a sustained and more extensive increase in employment in
the coming years remains to be seen.
FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATE WITH PRICE STABILITY TARGET
Sweden  is  in  its  sixth  year  with  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  and  the  fourth
year with a specific price stability target.  Insights into the new regime have been gained step by
step, both in the Riksbank and in the Swedish community in general.  The construction of the
regime and its underlying ideas have been discussed over these years, not least in these Monetary
Policy Forums.
The present monetary policy regime provides good conditions for long-term price
stability and thereby for an economy that functions better.  It also contributes to an appropriate
short-run  balance  between  acting  as  a  clear  anchor  for  price  stability  and  promoting  real
economic stabilisation.  Basically, it is a matter of minimising both the fluctuations around the
price  stability  target  and  those  around  the  Swedish  economy’s  growth  trend.    Cyclical
fluctuations cannot be eliminated but we can hope that sequences of intense boom-and-bust are a
thing of the past.
Low inflation and good growth go hand in hand
When inflation converges internationally and long-term inflation expectations are
permanently lowered to the level of the target for price stability, the core of the inflation process
lies  in  the  relationship  between  prevailing  demand  and  the  sustainable  level  of  output.    If
resource utilisation is so high that it becomes strained, inflation will tend to rise.  Conversely,
when resource utilisation is low, inflation tends to fall.  To a large extent it is the interaction of
demand and supply that determines whether inflation is rising, falling or constant in relation to
the 2 per cent target.
Monetary policy is capable of exerting a direct effect - through the repo rate - on
only  one  of  these  two  sides  of  the  economy,  namely  demand.    The  supply  side  is  essentially
influenced by structural factors that the Riksbank cannot control directly.  But permanently high
inflation can indirectly impair the workings of the economy, leading to weaker growth.  By the
same token, today’s low inflation should help the supply side to function more efficiently.
Seen from this angle, it is easy to appreciate that a policy for safeguarding price
stability  should  be  able  to  go  hand  in  hand  with  a  development  of  demand  that  matches  the
supply side’s sustainable capacity.   In  the  event  of  a  demand  shock,  even  in  the  short  run  the
Riksbank’s objective therefore coincides with that of general economic policy - a favourable real
economic trend.  In view of the discussion that arises from time to time about objectives for the
Riksbank, this should be borne in mind.  Consider these two examples:
•  Suppose,  first,  that  a  shock  causes  demand  to  fall;  resource  utilisation  will
then decline, with a risk of inflation dropping below the 2 per cent target.  The
monetary stance must then be adjusted so that the rate of inflation returns to
the target.  This involves lowering the repo rate so that demand recovers.
BIS Review   35/1998
˝
- 4 -
•  Suppose,  instead,  that  a  shock  causes  demand  to  rise  faster  than  the  supply
side can cope with.  Inflation will then be liable to rise above the targeted rate.
The monetary stance must therefore be tightened so that inflation falls back to
the target, which involves subduing demand to output’s sustainable level.
In  the  various  situations,  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  can  be  contractive,
expansive  or  neutral,  depending  on  the  degree  of  resource  utilisation  and  the  risk  of  inflation
deviating from the target in either direction.  The relevant rate of inflation here and the one that
is affected by total demand, is the underlying trend.  In that this trend is in line with the target,
conditions are created for sustainable growth.  In the event of a demand shock there is thus no
conflict between combating inflation and promoting growth.
Transient price effects of secondary importance
Besides  effects  from  demand  shocks,  price  movements  are  influenced  by
disturbances in supply.  Supply-side shocks vary both in kind and in the duration of their effects
on the economy.  The monetary policy response accordingly depends on how suddenly such a
shock occurs and how soon it fades.  A supply shock with a direct effect on prices, for example a
VAT increase, should be distinguished from an increase in productivity, which affects demand
via resource utilisation.  Let me start with the former case.
A  VAT  increase  will  tend  to  subdue  demand  at  the  same  time  as  it  adds  to  the
12-month rate of CPI inflation over a period of one year.  In this case, in the first year after the
tax increase, demand and inflation move in opposite directions.  If the monetary stance were to
be  tightened  in  order  to  achieve  a  prompt  return  to  inflation’s  targeted  rate,  it  would  cause
demand to fall further.  Temporary price stabilisation would be accompanied by a destablisation
of real economic activity.  A similar dilemma is posed by VAT reduction, which stimulates the
economy and lowers registered inflation.  A monetary policy response in the form of a repo rate
cut  -  to  return  inflation  to  the  target  -  would  act  as  a  further  economic  stimulus.    Here,  too,
temporary  price  stabilisation  would  be  accompanied  by  a  destablisation  of  real  economic
activity.
I have used VAT adjustments here as an example of shocks from the supply side.
Effects  of  the  same  type  are  associated  with  changes  in  other  indirect  taxes,  for  instance  the
current  proposal  to  lower  the  tax  on  tobacco.    The  same  applies  to  international  oil  price
movements,  as  well  as  to  the  Riksbank’s  own  interest  rate  adjustments,  which  have  a  direct
impact on house mortgage interest costs.
How,  then,  should  monetary  policy  deal  with  a  situation  in  which  prices  are
exposed to supply shocks of this kind? Part of the answer lies in the circumstance that - provided
people’s  medium  or  long-term  inflation  expectations  remain  unaffected  -  most  shocks  of  this
type are transitory.  The Riksbank has concluded that in the normal course of events, transitory
price effects of this type ought to be a secondary consideration in the construction of monetary
policy in so far as they do not affect inflation expectations and thereby have a more permanent
impact on inflation.
Effects  of  supply-side  shocks  may,  however,  be  more  permanent. 
  An
improvement in trend productivity, for example, implies lower resource utilisation and thereby
lower underlying inflation, and vice versa.  Such supply shocks should therefore influence the
construction of monetary policy.
BIS Review   35/1998
˝
Advantages and drawbacks of the CPI
- 5 -
A  drawback  with  the  CPI  is  that  it  combines  information  about  both  the
underlying trend and temporary price movements.  So why has the Riksbank chosen the CPI as
its target variable instead of some indicator of underlying inflation? The reason lies in the CPI’s
advantages as a familiar index that is used in many contexts, whereas the opposite applies to the
concept of underlying inflation.
Sweden  could,  in  fact,  supplement  the  CPI  figures  with  a  series  on  underlying
inflation  statistics  that  would  ultimately  become  more  familiar.    This  is  a  matter  that  the  CPI
Enquiry will be considering.  But it is still not clear just how an index of underlying inflation
should be constructed.
What is clear, however, is that this function cannot be performed by the Net Price
Index because that excludes only one type of transitory effect, namely indirect taxes.  In that it
includes other transitory effects - for example mortgage interest costs and international oil price
movements  -  the  Net  Price  Index  gives  a  picture  of  inflation’s  underlying  trend  that  is
incomplete and distorted.
Another  alternative  would  be  to  use  the  EU’s  harmonised  index  of  consumer
prices (HICP), which is constructed to exclude house mortgage interest costs.  One disadvantage
of this index, however, is that some of its components have not yet been finalised.
As an aid in the analysis of price trends, the Riksbank’s inflation reports include
various indicators of underlying inflation.
The  tolerance  interval  of  ±1  percentage  point  serves,  among  other  things,  to
accommodate  the  various  transitory  price  movements  that  normally  occur.    Experience  has
shown,  however,  that  in  periods  when  the  transitory  price  effects  are  extensive,  inflation  may
move outside the interval without this by itself having consequences that should be considered in
monetary policy.  Thus, the tolerance interval represents the range that is normally expected for
fluctuations  in  CPI  inflation.    It  serves  to  indicate  that  the  target  variable,  the  CPI,  cannot  be
controlled exactly.
Still, I am convinced that people’s awareness and understanding of these factors
will gradually grow as time passes.  This will happen not least as a  result of the efforts of  all
those knowledgeable analysts and business journalists who follow monetary policy closely and
mostly do their utmost to explain these complex details to a broader public.
Exchange rate of indirect importance for monetary policy
Now  I  should  like  to  say  something  about  the  role  of  the  exchange  rate.    Our
monetary policy strategy is premised on a flexible exchange rate.  In other words, the Riksbank
does  not  explicitly  target  the  exchange  rate  and,  given  Sweden’s  position  on  ERM,  it  seems
today that the rate will continue to be flexible at least until a new political decision is taken on
the issue of EMU.  This complies with EU agreements.   ERM  membership  is  voluntary.    But
even  in  a  flexible  regime,  exchange  rate  movements  constitute  an  important  policy  indicator,
albeit more indirectly.
 If the exchange rate weakens and remains at the weaker level, demand in the
Swedish economy is stimulated via increased exports and decreased imports.
BIS Review   35/1998
˝
- 6 -
In this way, a permanent depreciation can lead to higher inflationary pressure.
The  Riksbank  then  has  to  keep  its  instrumental  rate  at  a  higher  level  than
otherwise in order to fulfil the price stability target.
•  A  permanent  appreciation  of  the  krona  tends  to  dampen  demand,  leading  to
lower  inflationary  pressure.    All  else  equal,  the  Riksbank  can  then  keep  the
instrumental rate at a lower level.
With reference to the exchange rate, the Riksbank is wont to talk of “permanent”
or  “lasting”  developments  and  that  is  applicable  here.    We  do  not  react  to  occasional  market
movements because they are unlikely to influence inflation prospects.
The Maastricht Treaty requires all member states to treat exchange rate policy as a
matter of common interest; this applies even if the exchange rate is flexible.  An EU country is
expected to focus economic policy - both monetary and budget policy - on stability to the same
degree  as  the  other  EU  countries.    This,  basically,  is  the  absolutely  crucial  condition  for
sustained  exchange  rate  stability.    An  exchange  rate  that  deviates  permanently  from  the
long-term real equilibrium level may be an indication that economic policy lacks credibility.  In
such a situation the EU member states have a “common interest” in discussing how confidence
in economic policy can be enhanced.
During the spring there has been a discussion in Sweden about the exchange rate
tendency  in  connection  with  the  move  to  Stage  Three  of  EMU.    What  will  happen  if,  for
instance, companies adopt the euro as their unit of account?  The Riksbank has underscored that
it does not see any strong reasons for large currency outflows on account of the monetary union.
And  if  such  outflows  were  to  occur  and  the  krona  suddenly  weakened,  we  consider  that
countervailing forces would act in financial markets.
The  value  of  a  currency  is  determined  by  numerous  factors,  of  which  the  most
important  is  confidence  in  the  country’s  economic  policy.    The  general  trend  towards
internationalisation  in  recent  years  has  entailed  relatively  large  currency  outflows  due  to
portfolio diversification among resident investors.  But at the same time the krona has displayed
an  appreciating  trend  as  growing  confidence  in  economic  policy  generated  a  compensatory
currency inflow.
All in all, conditions for a stable exchange rate between the krona and the single
currency should be good.  There are many indications that the European Central Bank will define
a  price  stability  target  that  resembles  Sweden’s.    Similar  inflation  trends,  together  with
confidence  in  economic  policy  as  a  whole,  should  result  not  only  in  stable  nominal  and  real
exchange rates between the euro and the krona but also in conditions for a reasonable valuation
of the krona.
MONETARY POLICY’S CURRENT CONSTRUCTION
A long target horizon permits a gradual monetary adjustment
When assessing monetary policy’s construction, we look ahead to assess the path
of inflation in the coming twelve to twenty-four months.  A relatively long target horizon does
have the drawback that earlier assessments may have to be revised.  One reason for choosing a
long horizon - with the attendant difficulties in making reliable forecasts - is the time lag before
effects of monetary policy materialise.  By acting in good time, it is possible to adjust interest
BIS Review   35/1998
˝
- 7 -
policy  more  gradually  and  smoothly.    In  this  way,  any  consequences  that  altered  inflation
prospects may have for the monetary stance will usually be gradual and small.
With  a  shorter  target  horizon,  the  inflation  assessments  might  be  more  accurate
but  the  monetary  policy  responses  would  have  to  be  more  pronounced  in  order  to  fulfil  the
target.    There  would  also  be  wider  fluctuations  in  output  and  employment.    Real  factors  like
production and employment are accordingly taken into account when making this choice.
In view of the difficulties in assessing  and forecasting  economic tendencies and
monetary policy effects exactly, the Riksbank has opted for one to two years as its normal target
horizon.
Lower CPI figures
The  forecasting  problem  can  be  illustrated  with  assessments  from  the  National
Institute  of  Economic  Research;  I  use  them  here  simply  as  an  example,  not  to  single  out  the
National Institute from other forecasters.  But the National Institute is one of the forecasters with
the  largest  resources  and  it  usually  “sets  the  trend”  for  other  forecasters.    Last  November  the
Institute counted on annual rates of CPI inflation of 2.0 per cent for 1998 and 2.5 per cent for
1999.  In other words, inflation would move gradually upwards from the price stability target.  In
keeping with this, the Institute also counted on an monetary policy realignment, with an expected
increase in the repo rate from 4.10 to 5.5 per cent, that is, by 140 basis points.
This  March  -  only  four  months  later  -  the  National  Institute’s  prediction  of
inflation had changed considerably, to annual rates of 1.1 and 1.5 per cent for 1998 and 1999,
respectively.    The  Institute’s  most  recent  assessment  is  that  during  1998  and  1999  there  is  no
need for any change from the present level of the repo rate.  What has happened to forecasters’
perception of inflation?
Increased element of transitory price effects
Basically,  nothing  has  happened  in  the  appraisal  of  the  upward  cyclical  phase.
The National  Institute, like most other observers, counts on  good  growth in the  coming  years.
The  strength  of  the  upswing  may  vary  but  the  overall  picture  is  that  demand  growth  will  be
somewhat above the long-term trend, which implies rising resource utilisation.
But besides expectations  of  lower  wage  increases,  there  have  been  a  number  of
favourable price shocks on the supply side.  Falling international crude oil prices have already
led to price reductions for energy-related goods.  Moreover, falling interest rates have lowered
house mortgage interest costs.  Then there is the Government’s proposed  reduction of tobacco
tax.  However, the price shocks from the supply side are mainly transitory and tend to lower the
CPI  temporarily  but  not  necessarily  inflation’s  underlying  trend.    It  follows  that  these  effects
probably should not have much influence on monetary policy.  This holds even though the CPI
change  figures  are  likely  to  move  outside  the  lower  tolerance  limit  for  a  time  during  1998,
mainly on account of the lower tobacco tax.
How strong is the upward trend?
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  primary  concern  for  monetary  policy  is  inflation’s
underlying  rate  and  trend.    In  that  the  monetary  conditions  have  been  expansionary  for  some
time and both economic activity and resource utilisation are rising, Sweden should be moving
BIS Review   35/1998
˝
- 8 -
towards a situation with some increase in underlying inflation.  This phase may not be imminent
or involve anything dramatic but rising resource utilisation will ultimately lead to it.  But there
are  some  factors  which  may  defer  it.    They  have  to  do  with  the  momentum  in  the  Swedish
economy and the impact that may  come from the crisis in Asia.  Another  central  factor  is  the
exchange  rate’s  underlying  trend.    In  addition  there  is  the  increasingly  discussed  uncertainty
about the sustainability of international share prices.
To sum up, most of the evidence suggests that economic growth in Sweden will
become stronger in the coming two years.  To date, however, the upswing has been accompanied
by subdued price movements.  This mainly reflects a number of favourable transitory effects but
there  may  also  be  signs  of  a  somewhat  lower  inflation  propensity.    The  strength  displayed  by
productivity  may  perhaps  enable  the  Swedish  economy  to  expand  somewhat  faster  without
immediately  generating  inflationary  pressure.    But  it  is  still  too  early  to  form  a  more  definite
opinion  on  whether  the  productivity  trend  has  changed.    It  is  now  important  that  incoming
statistics are still followed closely and assessed.  As I just said, there is no reason at present to
alter the repo rate.
BIS Review   35/1998
˝
