Mr.  Tietmeyer  discusses  the  benefits,  opportunities  and  pitfalls  of  financial
and  monetary  integration      Address  by  the  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,
Prof. Hans Tietmeyer,  at  the  1998  Mais  Lecture  at  the  City  University  Business  School,  in
London, on 18/5/98.
First of all, I wish to thank you very much for your kind invitation.  I am pleased
to  have  the  opportunity  to  give  this  year’s  Mais  Lecture  and  to  share  with  you  some  of  my
thoughts.  It  is  a  great  honour  for  me  to  be  invited  to  continue  the  sequence  of  outstanding
personalities  who  have  established  and  maintained  the  tradition  and  reputation  of  the  Mais
Lecture with their talks.
At the same time, I am happy to be here in London once again. For every visitor
London  is  a  wonderful  city  full  of  culture  and  history.    For  a  central  banker,  London  is,  in
addition, a large and efficient financial centre. Its strong points include, not least, the academic
infrastructure  in  economics  and  business.  The  City  University  Business  School  is  making  an
important contribution to that.
I  should  of  course  like  to  add:  I  come  from  a  financial  centre  on  the  continent
which likewise has some strong points. And experience shows: competition is always stimulating
for both sides. Thus, the two financial and monetary centres, London and Frankfurt, go some way
towards symbolising tonight’s topic: Financial and Monetary Integration: Benefits, Opportunities
and Pitfalls.
I
I should like to begin with the hypothetical question: What will historians of the
future  regard  as  the  most  important,  forward-looking  features  of  the  close  of  the  twentieth
century? Perhaps they will point to the following three features:  Firstly: following the outcome
of  the  competition  between  the  political  systems,  the  competition  of  the  economic  systems
between a market economy and a centrally planned economy likewise seems to have come to an
end.  At  any  rate,  the  state  socialist  model  as  a  competitor  of  the  free  market  economy  has
foundered  -  not  only  because  it  was  dissolved  in  and  together  with  the  Soviet  Union  and  its
former  sphere  of  influence;  what  is  more,  it  is  no  longer  a  serious  reference  model  for  the
development of emerging economies; not even for China.
Secondly:  economic  historians  may,  later  on,  perhaps  see  the  present  time  as  a
period of dramatic technical and economic upheaval - of “creative destruction” in Schumpeter’s
phrase. In particular, basic innovation in microelectronics is being reflected in lots of procedural
innovations  which  are  now  more  and  more  reaching  application  status  and  in  many  product
innovations becoming increasingly marketable.
And  thirdly:  we  contemporaries  are  speaking  more  and  more  of  an  era  of
progressive  economic  integration,  at  both  a  regional  and  a  global  level.  Globalisation  is  the
keyword in today’s discussion.
These three features are of course interlinked. The victory of the market economy
system and the decline in transportation and communication costs are fuelling global integration.
Global  competition,  in  turn,  is  fostering  the  search  for  new  applications  of  the  technical
possibilities. And especially in a dynamic period with large adjustment requirements in almost
BIS Review   45/1998
- 2 -
all  sectors  of  the  economy,  a  centrally  planned  economy  is  especially  inferior  to  a  market
economy.
All  three  features  have  a  common  thrust.  They  work  in  the  direction  of
overcoming  national  frontiers  and  administrative  barriers.  The  old  dream  of  internationalism
therefore holds out the promise of coming true.
But the more this open, increasingly barrierless world becomes reality, the more
evident it grows that this is not a perfect or simple world. On the contrary: in the wake of the
former  east-west  conflict,  conflicts  within  countries  or  in  individual  regions  have  not  become
less common. Indeed, some conflicts which had previously been obscured have only now come
to  light.  And  the  technological  changes  and  economic  globalisation  are  not  only  a  source  of
greater  prosperity.  They  at  the  same  time  pose  huge  challenges.  The  developed  industrial
countries are particularly feeling the need for reform in their labour markets and social security
systems. This is especially true of countries in continental Europe.
II
Progressive economic integration is, of course, not a new phenomenon. But there
are many indications that this process has accelerated and intensified in the last ten years, both
quantitatively and qualitatively.
Economic integration is a comprehensive process. It is increasingly affecting the
real  economy.  The  international  interdependence  of  national  economies  is  increasing.  A  new
quality is emerging. For the growing interdependence is no longer based solely or primarily on
trade in finished products or commodities. Especially, the process of developing and producing
goods  is  being  increasingly  split  up  internationally.  This  is  possible  because  national  frontiers
have become increasingly permeable and communications have become more intensive, because
transportation  and  communication  costs  have  fallen  sharply,  and  because,  in  particular,  the
emerging economies have likewise become more integrated in the world economy; this, above
all, markedly facilitates direct investment there.
The front runners of such integration are of course the global financial  markets.
They are able to take the best advantage of the disappearance of transaction barriers and the new
technological options. In a world of increasing real economic interdependence, and with global
financial markets, the question of monetary integration is also becoming more urgent.
The calculability and appropriateness of monetary relationships is becoming more
important.  Globalisation  therefore  increases  the  overall  pressure  to  pursue  a  stability-oriented
monetary policy everywhere. If a country, especially a bigger one, drops out, this may lead, in an
integrated world economy, to serious damage due to volatile financial market prices. And this is
why  many  countries  are  switching  over  to  monetary  cooperation,  or  even  to  pegging  their
exchange rates.
One part of Europe is now going a radical step further. Eleven EU countries will
enter into monetary union on a durable basis at the end of this year. That union will then pursue a
single  supranational  monetary  policy  decided  by  a  supranational  and  politically  independent
central bank.
BIS Review   45/1998
- 3 -
A number of countries will closely watch the outcome of this experiment, which
may  change  Europe  considerably.  This  is  true  in  particular  of  those  countries  of  the  European
Union which do not wish to join the monetary union as yet. Accession candidates in central and
eastern Europe, too, will of course watch developments with keen interest. But countries in other
parts  of  the  world  as  well  will  focus  their  attention  on  the  euro  area.  This  is  because  some
countries  in  South  America  or  Asia  are  beginning  at  least  to  contemplate  the  option  of  a
monetary union. Even if they still have a long way to go.
III
What  is  it  that  prompts  sovereign  states  to  follow  this  basic  trend  towards
economic integration, even if of course it does not always lead as far as is planned for Euroland?
Essentially,  three  more  or  less  major  benefits  may  be  derived  from  any  form  of
economic integration: Firstly, more integration leads to more competition. Competitive pressure
enhances  efficiency.  Secondly,  integration  changes  market  structures.  Markets  become  larger.
Enterprises are able to exploit economies of scale. National economies can specialise to a greater
extent. Resources are fed into a larger pool, from which they can be allocated more efficiently.
And market breadth increases. The consumer can choose from a wider range of products offered.
Thirdly,  integration  reduces  information  and  transaction  costs.  This  applies  in  particular  to
monetary integration, too.
But - what is invariably true is also true of economic integration: there is no such
thing as a free lunch.
First  of  all,  it  is  helpful  to  distinguish  between  market  integration  and  policy
integration. Market integration mainly implies dismantling barriers and obstacles. Then national
markets  can  grow  together.  Policy  integration  goes  further.  It  also  implies  that  countries
coordinate or even harmonise the general direction of movement in individual sectors of national
policy, or individual parameters.
The  countries  which  join  an  integration  process  must  clearly  appreciate  three
potential problem areas:
First  problem  area:  market  integration  going  beyond  national  borders  poses
increased  domestic  challenges.  For  instance,  integration  in  the  international  division  of  labour
accelerates  structural  change  and  calls  for  more  internal  flexibility,  especially  on  the  labour
market.  And  liberalising  capital  movements  places  demands  on  the  domestic  financial  sector,
which must be able to handle international capital flows that may rapidly change direction.
Second  problem  area:  to  be  really  efficient,  market  integration  with  the
elimination of barriers may require a minimum of policy integration. This applies, for example,
to some protection provisions for products and in the production process. Different tax systems
may of course likewise distort cross-border goods and financial flows. And if capital markets are
globalised, different approaches to monetary policy may contribute to volatility. Such volatility
may have a strong impact on financial and real investment.
But,  and  this  is  the  third  problem  area:  policy  integration  is  itself  a  two-edged
sword.  It  may  make  markets  more  efficient.  But  it  can  also  contribute  to  curbing  policy
competition.  That  may  involve  risks:  an  excessive  tendency  towards  centralisation  may  arise
BIS Review   45/1998
- 4 -
take  sufficient  account  of  diverging  conditions.  The  delineation  of
which  does  not 
responsibilities may become  blurred  if  mixed  responsibilities  arise  with  undue  bureaucracy.  In
the  worst-case  scenario,  efficient  policy  solutions  may  no  longer  be  implemented.  Policy
innovation is blocked.
Countries must be able to come to terms with these three risks and problem areas
in  their  efforts  to  coordinate  or  integrate  their  policies,  if  they  are  to  secure  the  benefits  of
integration. Striking the right balance here is not always easy.
IV
The  financial  markets  are  something  like  the  flywheels  of  globalisation.  Free
capital  movements  and  efficient  financial  markets  greatly  facilitate  direct  investment.  They
provide the basis for transactions  and  for  the  safety  of  payment  flows,  which  are  the  financial
equivalent of real integration.
The global financial markets promote and strengthen market structures. They also
make  it  possible  for  investment  in  emerging  economies  to  be  funded  privately,  rather  than
officially, today on a much greater scale than previously. Capital is allocated today, more than it
used to be, in accordance with economic, rather than political, criteria.
Conversely,  the  integration  of  the  emerging  economies  into  the  global  financial
markets  provides  new  investment  outlets  for  savings.  This  must  also  be  seen  against  the
backdrop  of  the  ageing  populations  in  most  industrialised  countries.  They  in  particular  must
accumulate and invest capital today so as to be able to maintain their relative standard of living
in the future, too.
And the global capital markets have assumed a role which is bearing fruit in the
disciplining of national policies. They offer opportunities, but also pose a risk, to countries which
fail to follow the economic constraints. Nowadays they are an effective part of the checks and
balances.
These  important  benefits  of  the  international  capital  markets  are  sometimes
wrongly disregarded in the ongoing debate.
But the financial crises being encountered by some east Asian countries have, of
course,  highlighted  the  risks,  too.  A  number  of  emerging  economies  have  become  swiftly
integrated in the global financial markets. Not all of those countries have adjusted their internal
structures at the same pace and as thoroughly. That makes them vulnerable. Two weaknesses, in
particular, may become their Achilles heel: a domestic financial sector which is unable to handle
large capital flows in a sufficiently sound manner, and an overly rigid exchange rate pegging to
one or more other currencies.
Exchange  rate  pegging  can  in  some  cases  and  for  some  length  of  time  produce
positive  effects.  An  overly  rigid  exchange  rate  peg,  however,  can  have  problematic
consequences: It may jeopardise the competitiveness of an economy, and especially exports. It
may  fetter  domestic  interest  rate  policy.  It  thereby  makes  it  more  difficult  to  fight  inflation  in
periods of heavy capital inflows. And it may tempt residents to borrow in foreign currencies at
relatively favourable nominal interest rates. These consequences may make a country vulnerable,
as we have seen already in the Mexican case in 1994-5.
BIS Review   45/1998
- 5 -
In  addition,  some  risk  factors  are  inherent  in  the  market.  The  international
financial markets mostly have a tendency towards short-termism. A major part of international
lendings  and  borrowings  is  at  fairly  short  term.  And  they  quite  often  tend  to  follow  a
self-reinforcing herd instinct in periods both of euphoria and of scepticism.
Both  factors,  any  domestic  weaknesses  and  the  properties  of  the  international
financial markets, may cause a potential for a reversal in sentiment for a currency to build up.
Mostly triggered by some special economic or political change or other, the exchange rate of a
currency may go down very fast, in many cases to an overly low point. An “undershooting” of
the appropriate relationship occurs. Such a slump in the value of a currency can hit the economy
of the country concerned with a massive force, especially if that country is heavily indebted in a
foreign currency.
What is to be done? Two points in particular are important:
Firstly,  the  functioning  of  the  financial  markets  must  be  maintained  or
strengthened. On the one hand, to this end the markets need  more,  better  and  more  up-to-date
information  on  the  level,  maturity  and  denomination  pattern  of  the  debts  of  potential  risk
countries. Sufficient transparency is of particular significance for the functioning of the financial
markets. On the other hand, the IMF must not encourage moral-hazard attitudes on the part of
investors  and  recipient  countries  by  bailing  out  private  investors.  Losses  caused  by
misjudgements and enforced adjustment in the event of wrong behaviour are as much an integral
part of a functioning market as are profit opportunities. And crises should not invariably lead to a
rollback on the part of private investors. Private funding of investment is in principle superior to
public  funding.  Ways  must  be  found  to  safeguard  the  long-term  interests  of  private  investors.
Though there is probably no panacea, various approaches are being considered, and rightly so.
The IMF above all has to act as a catalyst maintaining or restoring countries’ access to private
capital. A policy of bailing out private investors is heading in the wrong direction.
Secondly, it is important for countries to eliminate their domestic weaknesses or
prevent  them  from  arising  in  the  first  place.  This  includes:  being  careful  about  overly  rigid
exchange rate pegs, strengthening domestic supervision of  the  financial  system,  and  above  all,
strengthening domestic competitive structures in the goods markets and in the financial sector.
V
Cynics  might  now  say  that  Europe  should  make  sparing  use  of  the  advice:  “Be
careful with exchange rate pegs”. After all, eleven European countries are actually on the road
towards monetary union. And hitherto they have also largely linked their mutual exchange rates,
though not always without any problems in the past.
Monetary  union  does  in  fact  represent  a  maximum  of  policy  integration  in  the
monetary  field.  Monetary  policy  is  not  merely  coordinated,  but  unified.  And  that  will  be  for
good, because in practice this step cannot be reversed.
There  were  of  course  also  some  other  options.  With  the  European  Monetary
System, Europe’s approach has for a long time been that of an exchange rate arrangement with
fixed but adjustable parities; at times there have been some considerable difficulties, but in the
end the system has proved largely successful. That goes in particular also for the period after the
BIS Review   45/1998
- 6 -
widening  of  the    fluctuation  margins.  Nevertheless,  this  approach  falls  short  of  full  monetary
integration and the strategy of a single currency.
At the time, your country above all proposed another, less ambitious solution than
full  monetary  union;  I  am  referring  to  the  adoption  of  a  parallel  currency,  to  be  used  as  a
common currency. That would probably have triggered a currency competition. Depending on its
design, that solution could, however, also have adversely affected the scope for monetary action
of  the  central  banks  of  the  existing  hard  currency  countries  and  thus  jeopardised  their
anti-inflation policy. A parallel currency would presumably have got stuck. It might perhaps have
been able to crowd out weaker currencies, but whether also a currency of the D-mark’s standing
would  at  least  be  doubtful.  This  is  true,  at  any  rate,  of  the  specific  form  of  monetary  policy
activities discussed at the time.
Be  that  as  it  may,  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  a  more  far-reaching  solution  was
adopted. A large majority in the EU opted not merely for a common currency. It also wanted a
single currency. There are sound economic reasons in favour of a single currency; incidentally,
also  sound  political  reasons,  at  least,  if  a  more  thorough-going  political  integration  is  being
sought.
Above  all,  the  single  currency  makes  it  possible  fully  to  exploit  the  economic
benefits of integration. Competition will be given maximum encouragement in the single market
by the complete transparency of prices. Factor allocation will no longer be impaired by domestic
exchange  rate  uncertainty.  Exchange-rate-related  information  and  transaction  costs  will  be
minimised  by  a  single  currency.  The  euro  financial  markets  will  have  an  optimum  depth  and
breadth.
But  what  applies  to  economic  integration  in  general  also  applies  to  monetary
integration  in  particular:  These  benefits  will  not  come  automatically  and  not  without
corresponding challenges.
How can monetary union secure the benefits? What risks are looming?
Monetary union is faced with three major challenges: Firstly, the aforementioned
benefits for the goods and financial markets will materialise only if  the  euro  remains  lastingly
stable.  Only  then  will  the  euro  lead  to  full  price  transparency,  reduce  costs  and  become  an
attractive  investment  currency.  Secondly,  monetary  union  must  not  trigger  or  exacerbate
economic tensions. Broadly speaking, an essential requirement that must be met is: one size fits
all. And, thirdly, monetary union must not give rise to political tensions between the participating
states.
These challenges  arise  against  the  backdrop  of  the  specific  conditions  presented
by monetary union. The euro will be legal tender in an area which consists of largely sovereign
national  states  whose  policies  -  other  than  monetary  policy  -  will  largely  remain  their
responsibility. That may lead to a dilemma between the requirements of a supranational currency,
and the political pattern in Europe, which will continue to be determined by the national states
and their policies.
The euro needs a high degree of flexibility in the economies of the participating
countries.  But  there  is  no  European  economic  and  structural  policy  which  can  ordain  such
necessary flexibility from above. And even if there were a responsibility at the European level for
BIS Review   45/1998
- 7 -
doing so, the possibility could not be ruled out that, ultimately, the result would be more rigidity,
rather than more flexibility. At the same time, there is no regional revenue equalisation scheme,
comparable to the systems operated in a national state. A social and transfer union cannot and
must not make up for any lack of flexibility and competitiveness, for the upshot would probably
be not only less flexibility, but possibly also more political disagreement.
At the same time, however, the euro needs discipline on the part of national fiscal
policy,  at  least  as  far  as  fiscal  deficits  are  concerned.  Otherwise  there  is  a  risk  of  conflicts,
because large debts in some countries will attract the savings of the euro area as a whole, and
contribute  to  higher  interest  rates  for  everyone.  Fiscal  policy,  however,  will  largely  remain  a
national responsibility. That is why it is so important that the Growth and Stability Pact should
prove to be effective in the future.
How can the euro function against this background? The “classical” answer of the
Werner Group in the early seventies (of which I was a member at the time) was: Europe must set
up a political union parallel to the monetary union. Thus, supranational political structures were
supposed to ensure that Europe met the requirements of a supranational currency.
Maastricht  adopted  a  different  approach.  It  left  the  rift  between  supranational
money and national policy structures. To that extent, it has sometimes been dubbed “a construct
with a limp”. If, however, there is no supranational political authority to meet the requirements of
a supranational currency, then the participating countries must do so on their own initiative, of
their own accord or in their own interest.
The Maastricht Treaty therefore also set important rules for the fiscal discipline of
member  countries.  And  compliance  with  those  rules  is  likewise  jointly  monitored.  However,
what  ultimately  will  be  crucial  for  the  functioning  of  the  Stability  Pact  will,  above  all,  be  the
countries’ ability and willingness to abide by those rules on a sustained basis.
A monetary union, under the Maastricht Treaty, therefore needs a large measure of
common  “stability  culture”  in  all  participating  countries.  And  another  point:  the  euro  can
function  as  a  depoliticised  currency  only  in  this  specific  form.  The  ultimate  monetary  target,
i.e. monetary  stability,  must  not  be  subordinated  on  a  discretionary  basis  to  other  goals.  And
monetary policy must be conducted by a politically independent central bank.
That may be considered in some quarters to be an overly German postulate. But in
my view this is implied not only by the requirements of a lastingly stable currency, but also by
the logic of a monetary union comprising several countries. For if one country subordinates its
own currency to political objectives other than stability, that may have unpleasant consequences
for  other  countries,  given  globalised  financial  markets.  But  still,  one  could  live  with  that.  If,
however, eleven countries try subordinating their common currency to their respective primary
political objectives, things will really get pretty chaotic in the union.
That  way,  the  euro  would  gain  the  confidence  neither  of  the  citizens  nor  of  the
financial markets. The upshot would, rather, be all too likely to be permanent political conflict.
The  euro  must  not  come  under  the  influence  of  the  domestic  interests  of  individual  countries.
Monetary policy must be geared to the situation in the euro area as a whole, taking responsibility
for maintaining stability of the common currency. Some of the incidents in Brussels during the
first weekend in May may in this context have been a timely warning, and a lesson to be learned
by all.
BIS Review   45/1998
- 8 -
VI
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  monetary  union  implies  the  irreversible  loss  of  the
sovereignty of the participating countries in the monetary sphere. Some loss of identity and of the
symbolism  of  a  nation  state  will  of  course  also  be  associated  with  giving  up  the  national
currencies. In Germany, this also means the loss of a symbol of economic reconstruction after the
war.
Monetary  union  thus  reinforces  an  overall  trend  towards  global  economic
integration,  especially  also  as  a  consequence  of  the  global  financial  markets:  the  nation  state
forfeits some of its freedom to shape events. In some countries and some quarters there are also
fears about the immediate forfeiture of sovereign rights, as in the case of the currency, and also
about  an  uncontrolled  dynamic  integration  process  which  will  -  automatically,  as  it  were  -
relegate the nation state into the background.
Here  in  the  U.K.  (but  not  only  here)  there  seems  to  be  some  concern  about  an
uncontrolled political integration drive in Europe: the fear of a “superstate of Europe”. Even if
this fear is manifest to some extent in continental Europe, too, there is, at the same time, rather,
more concern about an uncontrolled economic integration drive caused by increased competition.
In Germany, there is, in addition, concern that the stability of the euro might not match that of the
D-mark.
At all events, the common underlying question is similar: If European integration
and/or globalisation reduces the economic and social management capacity of the nation state,
and if the citizens’ democratic “say” in events remains tied to the institutions of the nation state,
does it follow that a democracy problem is emerging?
This  question  is  of  course  much  too  sophisticated  to  be  answered  in  a  few
sentences. I only wish to note two points:
Firstly, regarding the fear of a superstate of Europe. It is without doubt important
that monetary union must become a success. This means that in the distant future, too, it should
not  generate  crisis  situations  which  then  -  of  necessity  -  will  give  rise  to  tendencies  towards
overly strong centralisation which actually no one wants. The lasting functionality and stability
of monetary union is a prerequisite for political subsidiarity in Europe. Just as stable money is
and  will  remain  an  essential  prerequisite  for  internal  subsidiarity  in  society.  Even  with  further
political ties, that by no means is bound to lead to a superstate of Europe.
And secondly: the extent to which cross-border integration and globalisation are
seen  as  a  democracy  problem  depends,  not  least,  on  one’s  understanding  of  democracy.  It  is
correct  that  open  frontiers  make  reallocation  more  difficult.  Anyone  who  regards  reallocating
income  and  wealth  as  the  essence  of  democracy  must  indeed  consider  integration  and
globalisation to be a threat. If, however, democracy is seen rather as a control mechanism against
undesirable  political  developments,  then  the  international  financial  markets  will  be  regarded,
rather, as a supplement and less as a threat to democracy.
Thus,  the  financial  markets  may  often  penalise  an  undisciplined  fiscal  policy
quickly and massively. The burden arising from a long-term unsound policy therefore becomes
evident much more quickly. Democracy in the sense of control can then function better.
BIS Review   45/1998
- 9 -
VII
The  global  financial  markets  are  certain  to  test  the  euro,  the  political  and
economic conditions in the euro area and the stability orientation of the European Central Bank
as  well.  Basically,  they  are  already  doing  so  today,  even  though  the  euro  and  the  European
Central Bank do not exist yet. It would be an illusion to believe that the global financial markets
look critically only at the emerging countries.
The vital asset of a central bank is credibility. The decisions taken in Brussels to
fill  the  vacancies  on  the  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB  essentially  enhanced  that  credibility,  if
anything.
Actual  independence  from  the  influence  of  political  bodies  is  essential  for  the
future  credibility  of  the  European  Central  Bank.  In  my  view,  independence  does  not  at  all
conflict with the requirements of democracy as long as the European Central Bank abides by its
mandate.
Of course, adequate transparency of its decisions in the sense of explaining them
to the general public and stating the reasons for them, is important. Accountability in this sense
vis-à-vis  the  European  political  bodies,  and  especially  vis-à-vis  the  European  Parliament,  is
useful and right. However, accountability must not undermine the largely apolitical character of
the euro or its supranationality. Accountability vis-à-vis the national parliaments would not, in
my view, be consistent with the euro’s supranationality.
From the very outset, it will therefore be essential for the European Central Bank
to gain and retain the necessary confidence of the markets.
Credibility normally develops gradually, on account of one’s own track record. To
that extent, it seems to be a privilege to be able to inherit credibility from the national central
banks. In this context, the Bundesbank, as the guardian of the D-mark (the long-standing anchor
currency of the EMS) naturally plays an important part. This legacy, too, is of course not without
obligation. Rudi Dornbusch, Carlo Favero and Francesco Giavazzi recently wrote in an article:
“The capital markets will be unforgiving if they see anything less than Bundesbank policy.”
In various respects the D-mark and the Bundesbank have acted as the model for
the euro and the ECB. Seen from a historic perspective, however - and in conclusion I should
like to come back to that point - there are some far more impressive models. As far as longevity
and historical consistency are concerned, I hope that the euro and the European Central Bank will
also  try  to  emulate  the  pound  sterling  and  the  Bank  of  England.  This  is  true,  at  least,  if  one
disregards some periods in the Old Lady’s history which were not quite so successful. Viewed
over the longer term, anyway, the U.K. has had more success with its currency than Germany,
which saw two hyperinflations and the collapse of its currency in the first half of this century.
But - if I am rightly informed - in this country, too, the question of whether your
currency may one day disappear and be replaced by the euro is no longer completely unthinkable.
But  that  is  of  course  your  decision;  specifically  -  if  I  have  got  it  right -  the  decision  of  your
government, Parliament and the British people.
BIS Review   45/1998
- 10 -
BIS Review   45/1998
