Mr. Clementi explains how London’s banks and markets  will  help  to  forge
links between the euro area and the rest of the world   Speech by the Deputy Governor of the
Bank  of  England,  Mr.  David  Clementi,  before  international  bankers  and  members  of
Despite  all  the  uncertainties  of  the  last  few  years,  I  think  that  it  is  now  well
understood  that  the  euro  is  going  to  be  introduced  on  1  January  1999.  As  you  all  know,  the
United Kingdom is not going to adopt the euro as its domestic currency from the start. But the
euro is likely to become the core currency for the European wholesale markets in London. The
City  of  London  is  Europe’s  leading  financial  centre;  and  the  introduction  of  a  major  new
currency  on  the  Continent  of  Europe  means  that  London  must  have  all  the  necessary  trading,
payment and settlement infrastructure, and be fully part of the conversion.
London will be ready for the euro. What I want to do today is to  explain  -  with
my colleague, John Townend, and Sir David Walker, head of Morgan Stanley in Europe - how
London’s banks and markets will help to forge links between  the  euro  area  and  the  rest  of  the
world.  And  we  also  want  to  discuss  the  broader  question  of  how  the  euro  will  affect  the
European financial landscape.
We  hope  that  EMU  will  be  a  success.  The  British  Government  is  in  favour  of
joining  EMU  in  principle.  It  has  made  it  clear  that  it  sees  no  constitutional  bar  to  British
membership.
There  are  advantages.  For  example,  the  introduction  of  the  single  European
currency will help to complete the Single European Market. And the uncertainty associated with
investment decisions within the euro area will be reduced. Europe will continue its consolidation
as a major trading bloc. And financial benefits should flow from the introduction of the euro as a
major currency for financing. The tradeable government debt of the EU as a bloc, for example,
amounts to around 2.6 trillion dollars equivalent, compared to 2.1 trillion here in the US.  This
will  give  the  euro  debt  markets  a  broadly  similar  size  and  liquidity  as  hitherto  has  been  the
preserve of the dollar markets.
But  there  are  also  risks.  For  example,  will  the  UK  economy  be  able  to  live
comfortably with euro interest rates on a permanent basis? And if problems emerge after EMU
begins, will  a  ‘one-size-fits-all’  monetary  policy  be  adequate  to  deal  with  them,  particularly  if
there  is  insufficient  flexibility  in  product  markets  and  labour  markets?  A  particular  concern  is
the high rates of unemployment in some Continental European countries, and the differing rates
between them.
The British Government has set a number of economic tests to ensure that, before
the  UK  joins  EMU,  there  will  be  sustainable  convergence  between  the  UK  economy  and  the
euro  area.  The  tests  include  cyclical  convergence  and  structural  flexibility,  the  impact  on
investment,  the  impact  on  the  financial  services  industry  and  the  impact  more  generally  on
growth, stability and jobs.
So  the  UK  will  not  join  EMU  at  the  outset.  But  financial  firms  in  London,
whatever their nationality, see the euro as a key part of their business. With our support  at  the
Bank  of  England,  they  have  been  actively  preparing  for  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  London
thrives  on  liquid  markets,  regardless  of  currency.  So  the  introduction  of  the  euro  is  a  major
opportunity for London.
BIS Review   11/1998
- 2 -
From the start, London will act as a link between New York and the euro area by
providing  a  full  range  of  euro  services  in  wholesale  financial  markets.  That  includes  euro
payments and settlement, so that anyone who wishes to do so will be able to trade and settle in
euro  in  London  from  the  first  day  of  EMU.  But  it  also  extends  to  euro  banking,  foreign
exchange  and  derivatives  trading,  bond  and  equity  issuance  and  trading,  fund  management,
financial advice and professional support services as well.
The City of London is Europe’s leading financial centre and one of the top three
global  centres,  alongside  New  York  and  Tokyo.  Here  in  New  York,  the  financial  centre  is
influenced  by  the  size  of  the  domestic  economy.  That  is  true  of  Tokyo  as  well.  But  London’s
success has historically been due to its international financial business.
London has more foreign banking institutions than any other financial centre, and
it is the largest financial centre for cross-border bank lending.
London is the world’s leading centre for foreign exchange business, with average
daily  net  turnover  six  times  that  of  Frankfurt.  More  foreign  exchange  business  in  dollars,
Deutsche  Mark  and  French  francs  takes  place  in  London  than  in  each  currency’s  country  of
origin.
London  is  the  principal  centre  for  the  international  bond  markets,  with  60%  of
primary international bond syndication and 75% of secondary market trading.
The  London  Stock  Exchange  is  the  world’s  largest  centre  for  the  listing  and
trading  of  foreign  equities,  and  LIFFE  is  the  largest  financial  futures  exchange  in  the  world
outside Chicago.
London is also one of the largest centres for the fund management of institutional
equities, and one of the largest centres for insurance business.
London’s position derives from the critical mass of markets and financial services
available, and the concentration of the strongest financial businesses from all over the world.
London’s strengths include a long track record of innovation and capitalising on
new  opportunities.  The  most  well-known  example  is  the  creation  of  the  Eurodollar  markets,
which US firms in London did so much to promote.
London  is  the  home  of  the  English  language.  It  is  in  a  convenient  time-zone
between Asia in the morning and New York in the afternoon.
It has an abundance of trading and other financial skills and professional support
services - in law, accountancy, tax, property and communications.
It  has  a  world-class  technological  infrastructure,  which  is  continually  being
improved.
And equally important, London has an unwavering commitment to openness and
to  welcoming  the  establishment  of  foreign  firms.  In  particular,  the  regulatory  framework  in
London  has  proved  sufficiently  adaptable  to  maintain  confidence  in  financial  institutions  and
markets  without  stifling  innovation  and  risk-taking.  The  new  Financial  Services  Authority  in
London is committed to continuing this approach.
BIS Review   11/1998
- 3 -
All these factors help to explain the size of the financial sector based in London.
And foreign firms are continuing to move their operations, and in some cases their head offices,
to  London.  I  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  contribution  to  London’s  success  made  by
American firms such as JP Morgan, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Merrill Lynch, Citibank
and Chase. And many Continental European firms have recently also made major investments in
London,  including  ABN  AMRO,  Paribas,  Dresdner  and  Deutsche.  This  shows  how  global
financial institutions in the top rank regard London as the place to be, irrespective of whether the
UK participates in EMU.
You will have noticed that these factors have little to do with the question of the
base currency used either in the UK or in Continental Europe. The City thrives on liquid markets
regardless of currency, and it will thrive on the euro. Measured in these terms, the introduction
of the euro represents an opportunity for London.
We  cannot  of  course  be  complacent  about  London’s  position.  London  does  not
hold its pre-eminent position as of right. It continually has to earn it.
For this reason, in the run-up to the introduction of the euro, the Bank of England
is playing a key role in preparing London’s global marketplace for this major new opportunity,
alongside  market  practitioners  themselves:  We  are  ensuring  that  the  necessary  financial
infrastructure in London is in place so that anyone who wishes to do so can trade and settle in
euro  in  London  from  the  first  day  of  EMU.  We  are  also  helping  to  ensure  that  City  firms  -
whatever their nationality - are properly prepared so that they and their customers can make full
use of the infrastructure.
We are providing information to the London market so that firms - whatever their
nationality - are as well informed as possible about the technical side of the preparations for the
euro. This is the significance of our broadly quarterly series of publications on ‘Practical Issues’,
which now has a circulation of around 40,000, of which 5,000 go directly overseas.
We  also  aim  to  promote  agreement  between  central  banks  and  market
practitioners  across  Europe  on  practical  issues  in  areas  where  the  market  requires  a  degree  of
co-ordination.
In conclusion, I want to emphasise three points. First, the introduction of the euro
on  1  January  1999  will  create  a  major  currency  for  financing,  with  significant  depth  and
liquidity. Second, London will be ready for the introduction of the euro. Anybody who wishes to
do  so  will  be  able  to  trade  and  settle  in  euro  in  London  from  the  first  day  of  EMU.  Third,  as
Europe’s  leading  financial  centre,  we  are  confident  that  London  will  be  the  international
financial centre for the euro.  And  by  providing  competitive  financial  services  in  euro,  London
will  help  to  increase  the  flow  of  business  between  Europe  and  the  US.  The  City  is  not  just  a
major national asset. It is a major asset for Europe and the international economy as a whole.
BIS Review   11/1998
