Mr.  Macfarlane  reports  on  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  in  the
Australian  Economy      Opening  statement  by  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,
Mr. Ian Macfarlane, to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Financial Institutions
and Public Administration in Melbourne on 7/5/98 (slightly abridged).
1. Introduction
Mr Chairman,
It is a pleasure to be here in front of your Committee for the third time under the new
arrangements set out in the Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy. I hope this meeting will
be as successful as its predecessors in helping to lift the level of understanding of monetary policy,
financial stability, the Australian economy and, of course, the region more generally. I also hope you
have  found  our  Semi-Annual  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy  a  useful  source  of  information  and  a
reasonably clear statement of our views.
It is especially pleasing that we are meeting here in Melbourne for the first time. If
you  remember,  Mr.  Chairman,  the  attempt  to  do  so  last  November  was  foiled  by  a  clash  with
Melbourne  Cup  week  and  the  attendant  shortage  of  hotel  rooms.  Fortunately,  the  Victorian
Government has not been able to put on a sporting extravaganza to foil our plans this time.
2. Review of last time
As  on  the  previous  occasion,  I  would  like  to  start  today  by  recognising  that
accountability  includes  being  accountable  for  what  was  said  last  time.  I  will  do  this  by  reviewing
how the past six months have turned out against the background of what I told the Committee we
were expecting last November. At that time, I summarised our expectations by saying that I thought
1997 would prove to be a good year for economic growth, with GDP growing by about 4 per cent,
that inflation would remain below 2 per cent for a while, but with a tendency to pick up as we went
through 1998, and that there was a good chance that unemployment would decline. I said very little
about the current account and balance of payments, as the outlook for Asia was still very unclear.
We  had  only  two  quarters’  data  on  economic  growth  in  1997  at  the  time  of  our
previous meeting - now we have all four. The ABS records that GDP grew by 3.6 per cent over the
four  quarters,  and  non-farm  GDP  by  3.8 per cent,  slightly  less  than  the  4  per  cent  that  I  was
expecting. I do not think there is any point in making much of this small difference.
The  other  reason  that  I  would  not  make  much  of  this  small  difference  is  that  the
outcome  for  the  labour  market  turned  out  to  be  a  bit  better  than  we  expected.  The  average
unemployment rate in the first half of 1997 was 8¾ per cent. When we met in November, the most
recent  figure  we  had  was  8.6  per  cent.  The  run  of  numbers  we  have  received  over  the  past  few
months have been  either  8.2  per  cent  or  8.1  per  cent.  So  if  you  look  across  the  past  12  months,  I
think you could see a reduction in the unemployment rate of ½ per cent or so. So over the course of
1997 a combination of good growth and moderate outcomes on wages made some inroads into our
unemployment rate.
On inflation, I have little to add to what I said last time. Underlying inflation has been
1½ per cent over the past 12 months. We are still expecting that it will rise over the next 12 months,
largely  because  falling  import  prices,  which  were  pushing  inflation  down,  have  given  way  to
increasing import prices. In fact, the fall in the exchange rate has meant that wholesale import prices
have  risen  by  7.7  per  cent  over  the  past  12  months,  and  import  prices  made  their  first  positive
contribution  at  the  retail  level  to  the  CPI  in  the  March  quarter  after  seven  quarters  when  they
BIS Review   41/1998
- 2 -
detracted from it. These changes are not alarming, but they do tend to suggest that we have passed
the low point in the inflation cycle.
So I feel reasonably comfortable with our earlier assessment, except in one respect -
last  time  we  met,  the  full  extent  of  the  Asian  slowdown  was  still  uncertain.  In  fact,  it  is  quite
interesting that as recently as six months ago, most discussions treated the ASEAN Four as being the
known extent of the Asian slowdown. We did not know at that stage, although the possibility was
flagged, that Korea would join them, that Indonesia would deteriorate significantly further, and that
Japan  would  suffer  a  relapse  into  recession.  When  we  take  these  developments  into  account,  it  is
clear  that  a  bigger  external  contractionary  effect  now  has  to  be  factored  in.  I  will  return  to  this
subject in more detail later.
3. Prospects for 1998
(a) General
So much for 1997 - what about 1998? In the absence of the external shock from Asia,
1998 was shaping up to be, if anything, a stronger year than 1997. There was nothing in the internal
dynamic  of  the  economy  which  was  pointing  to  a  slowdown,  and  we  had  every  reason  to  expect
growth of 4 per cent plus. That will no longer be the case, and we are now looking at growth through
1998 of something more of the order of 3 per cent. This would probably mean that after a year in
which the unemployment rate came down, we might be looking at a year in which it flattens out.
I  have  already  mentioned  the  outlook  for  inflation  when  I  reviewed  the  previous
year’s results. Broadly speaking, we think that the trough in the inflation rate has passed, it is moving
back again into the 2-3 per cent range, but it is not doing so in an alarming way. We expect it to be in
that range by the end of this year, and it probably will rise a bit during next year.
(b) Balance of payments
Another part of the economy which in Australia has always been closely watched is
the current account of the balance of payments. With domestic demand in Australia growing at or
above trend, but with a number of our major export markets declining, it is an arithmetical certainty
that the current account has to widen, as it has. This is not a sign of an economic policy failure, and I
trust markets will treat it accordingly. A number of people, including myself, have made the point
that on this occasion the widening of the current account deficit is not the result of excessive growth
in  domestic  demand,  nor  is  it  the  result  of  declining  competitiveness  because  of  high  Australian
inflation,  nor  is  it  a  counterpart  to  a  large  budget  deficit.  For  these  reasons,  we  expect  it  will  not
arouse  the  same  excitement  as  it  has  in  the  past,  though  you  can  never  be  sure.  At  present,  our
expectation is that the current account deficit in 1998 will be about 5½ per cent of GDP, but if you
look at the cyclical behaviour of the current account over the last two decades, you could not rule out
it touching 6 per cent for a time.
Imports are probably slowing from their very high growth rate in the second half of
last year, but not by much according to the March quarter figures. Over the course of 1998, we still
expect them  to  show  their  usual  behaviour,  that  is  to  grow  by  a  few  percentage  points  faster  than
domestic  demand.  Exports,  on  the  other  hand,  cannot  hope  to  keep  up  last  year’s  pace  of  8½  per
cent, and a small positive figure is probably what we can expect.
Most  of  our  exports  -  our  rural  products  and  metals  and  minerals  -  are  sold  into
worldwide, rather than country-specific, markets. If we cannot sell zinc or copper to Korea, we sell it
to another country: the same goes for our rural exports. It means that for two-thirds of our exports,
BIS Review   41/1998
- 3 -
what we earn is a function of world demand, not of the demand from our specific  (largely  Asian)
trading partners. At the end of the day, the prices for these commodities adjust to clear the market,
and that has been happening. The prices of Australian commodity exports have fallen by 9 per cent
over the past year when measured in terms of a neutral basket of currencies. At the same time, the
Australian  dollar  has  fallen  against  this  neutral  basket  of  currencies,  so  our  commodity  prices  in
Australian dollars - what our exporters actually receive - have gone up slightly. Even for our biggest
exports - coal and iron ore - where prices are renegotiated annually, the Australian dollar prices in
contracts which commenced in April this year were higher than in the contracts a year earlier. This is
an example of the market adjusting - in this case, the foreign exchange market - to shield the export
sector (but not the whole economy) from the worst of the Asian downturn.
4. Asia
Having  made  these  points,  I  do  not  want  to  give  you  the  impression  that  I  am
downplaying the effects of Asia. To the contrary, the biggest difference between the way we view
our immediate future today and the  way  we  viewed  it  a  year  ago  is  clearly  the  external  shock  we
have received from Asia. While it is true that the Australian business cycle is always affected by the
world business cycle, the current Asian crisis is the first significant identifiable external shock we
have had for a long time. The last time I can remember something as specific as this was OPEC II in
1979,  but  that  was  on  a  much  bigger  scale  and  affected  the  whole  OECD  area  more  evenly.  The
current  Asian  crisis  is  unusual  in  that  Australia  has  a  bigger  exposure  to  it  than  any  other  OECD
country (other than the two who are actually part of the crisis - Japan and Korea).
We  have  always  been  very  conscious  of  Australia’s  vulnerability  to  a  sharp
contraction  in  Asia.  But  it  has  always  been  our  hope,  and  certainly  the  guiding  principle  behind
Australia’s policy, that the economic problems in Asia could be minimised by prompt action. It was
this awareness of possible danger ahead that lay behind Australia’s very quick response to the Thai
crisis, and the Reserve Bank’s willingness to put funds from its balance sheet at the Government’s
disposal to ensure that Australian participation was not delayed. It also explains why Australia is the
only country other than Japan to be a part of all three Asian support packages - those for Thailand,
Indonesia and Korea.
Australia has done what it can to help minimise the Asian fallout, but clearly events
have turned out worse than we had hoped for. The crisis has spread further than was at first thought
likely, it is resulting in larger falls in output and employment in the countries concerned, and finally
it has been compounded by the relapse of the biggest Asian economy - Japan - into recession. What
started  as  a  currency  crisis  in  Thailand  is  leading  to  widespread  suffering  in  a  range  of  Asian
countries.
Of  course,  those  countries  have  some  deep-seated  economic  policy  deficiencies  -
weak  banking  sectors,  too  much  of  what  is  called  “crony  capitalism”,  too  much  government
direction of investment (including implicit underwriting of  loans)  and  insufficient  disclosure,  poor
accounting  standards,  etc.  These  deficiencies  are  common  to  most  countries  at  earlier  stages  of
development than ours, and they have been around for decades. They did not deter massive capital
inflow for most of this decade, and I suppose it must be galling for some of these countries to listen
to sermons on their deficiencies delivered by international bankers who, until recently, were happy
to ply them with loans. We all have to agree that these countries made policy errors; that is par for
the course. Yet I agree with Paul Krugman who,  when  commenting  on  the  current  situation,  said:
“Yet  governments  are  no  more  stupid  or  irresponsible  now  than  they  used  to  be;  how  come  the
punishment has become so much more severe?”
These countries have had to make a very rapid adjustment to their external positions
to stop their exchange rates from falling below the extremely low levels they reached late in 1997.
BIS Review   41/1998
- 4 -
They could not rely on a resumption of capital inflow to stop the problem, so the only feasible way
was to return their current accounts to surplus. This has involved very tight policies, a very large fall
in domestic demand, and very large falls in imports. For the three countries in IMF programmes, we
estimate that imports have already fallen by between 30 and 40 per cent. Even though there has not
been  enough  time  to  expand  exports  in  line  with  their  improved  competitiveness,  their  current
accounts  have  already  moved  into  surplus.  Australia’s  exports  to  these  countries  appear  to  have
already fallen roughly in line with their falling imports. Thus, we have received the effects on our
trade flows quite early in the piece. In time, when their exports pick up, we should get some benefit
from this even if their domestic demand remains weak.
5.    How have we coped?
To date, we have coped quite well, largely because we were in good shape going into
it with strong domestic demand and low inflation. This was in part due to the fact that we had taken
expansionary monetary policy action between July 1996 and July 1997.
The  other  way  in  which  we  have  coped  well  is  that  our  financial  markets  have
behaved very sensibly. It is true that our exchange rate has depreciated against the US dollar, and
against major currencies in general, but this is an understandable market reaction to the deterioration
in our international trading environment. Apart from a minor panic in January, the whole process has
been very orderly.
The bond market too has performed very well. International and domestic investors
have clearly drawn a distinction between Australia and our Asian neighbours, and we have not seen
any rise in risk premia on Australian bonds. Indeed, we have improved our position over the period,
and Australian borrowers can now borrow in A$ at or below the same rate as equally creditworthy
US borrowers can borrow in US dollars. The Australian share market has also risen over the past six
months and, even though it has not performed quite as well as some overseas markets, is higher than
its former peak in mid-1997.
What  is  the  implication  of  Asia  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy?  The  simple
answer is that it makes it more difficult. The Australian economy has suffered an external shock - a
significant reduction in demand for our exports, which will lead to lower export volumes in  some
cases and lower export prices in others. This will show up in some combination of lower growth and
a widening of the current account of the balance of payments. Because of the fall that has occurred in
our exchange rate, it will also  show  up  as  higher  inflation  than  otherwise.  Even  if  we  had  perfect
foresight, we cannot adjust policy in a way which would avoid these outcomes altogether.
The best we can hope for is a combination which minimises the longer-run disruption
to  our  economy.  Choosing  the  monetary  policy  to  achieve  this  is  not  an  easy  task.  It  involves
constantly reviewing our position in the light of changes to the economy, and our forecasts of future
events. Importantly, it will be heavily influenced by how the Asian situation develops. I repeat that
the only reason we are foreseeing any slowdown in growth in 1998 is because of the Asian crisis -
there was nothing in the domestic economy that pointed in that direction - in fact, it pointed to higher
growth. I suspect that in the future evolution of our policy, Asia will be the major influence.
As you know, the Board of the Reserve Bank met on Tuesday and did not make any
change to the setting of monetary policy. There had been some speculation over the preceding month
that we might ease, but the majority of observers expected no change. Our on-balance view is the
same as the majority of outside observers: that is, we judged that the present setting is the right one.
As we see it:
BIS Review   41/1998
    - 5 -
The  present  stance  of  monetary  policy  provides  a  low  interest  rate
environment  which  is  working  to  support,  rather  than  restrain,
growth. Credit is readily available, borrowers seem to regard current
interest  rates  as  attractive,  financial  wealth  is  rising,  as  is  private
sector leverage.
Developments  in  the  exchange  rate  and  interest  rates  charged  by
financial  intermediaries  since  the  last  reduction  in  the  cash  rate  in
July  last  year  have  worked  to  magnify  the  effects  of  lower  official
rates.  The  exchange  rate  has  come  down  against  major  currencies,
and competition among banks has  reduced  interest  rates  to  business
and personal borrowers.
The  most  likely  outcome  over  the  next  12  months  at  the  present
policy  setting  is  for  inflation  to  return  to  its  target  range  and  for
domestic  demand  to  remain  at  or  above  trend  growth.  With  a
significant reduction  in  net  exports,  GDP  will  probably  grow  below
its  trend  rate,  but  some  growth  slowdown  in  the  short  run  is  an
unavoidable result of the external shock.
Our  measured  approach  to  date  has  served  us  well  in  that  it  has
maintained  confidence  in  Australian  financial  markets.  That,  of
course, does not rule out further changes in policy, but it does impose
a  constraint  in  that  it  means  monetary  policy  has  to  be  adjusted
credibly.  We  do  not  wish  to  jeopardise  Australia’s  current  good
international  standing  or  revive  memories  of  when  Australia  was
regarded  as  a  “boom  and  bust”  economy.  We  gain  a  lot  from  our
current reputation for stability - not only does it reduce our borrowing
costs, but we can raise equity more cheaply, and we have become a
more attractive place for direct foreign investment.
Of course, we recognise that it would also be a mistake to stick too long to a setting
of policy in the name of stability if there were good reasons to move. We have to be conscious of the
risks to our current assessment, and constantly review them. The major downside risk which we can
see  is  the  possibility  that  the  effect  of  the  Asian  and  Japanese  situations  might  produce  a  larger
slowing  in  the  Australian  economy  than  our  current  expectations,  perhaps  indirectly  by  slowing
growth substantially in other trading partners or by seriously dampening domestic demand through
income or confidence effects. Such an outcome is not in our view the most likely one - but it has
some probability.
BIS Review   41/1998
