Mr. Carse speaks on banking supervision in Hong Kong and the lessons learned
from  the  financial  crisis  in  Asia      Speech  by  the  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong
Monetary  Authority,  Mr.  David  Carse,  at  the  Asian  Investment  Conference  “Asia:  Meeting  theChallenge” held in Hong Kong on 27/3/98.
1. I am pleased to be here this morning to speak to you on the topic of the supervisory
lessons which Hong Kong can learn from the region and specifically from the crisis which has engulfed
Asia since July of last year. This is a drama that is still being played out and we have not yet reached the
final act. But I do not think that it is too early to make some kind of judgment about what went wrong and
the lessons that can be drawn for the future.
The Asian Crisis
2. I think that it is fair to say that the Asian crisis has surprised almost everyone by its
speed and intensity and the ease with which it spread from country to country. Even those who were
sceptical  about  the  Asian  miracle  did  not  really  expect  anything  like  this.  Of  course,  there  were
warning  signs  such  as  the  current account  deficits  in  a  number  of  countries  such  as  Thailand.  But
these could be regarded as the natural consequence of the heavy demand for investment in growing
economies.  The  Asian  economies  were  certainly  not  fault-free,  but  in  general  they  not  exhibit  the
classic signs of gross macroeconomic weakness that normally lead to a balance of payments crisis.
Governments ran fairly prudent fiscal policies, savings were high and inflation rates reasonably low.
Even if policy mistakes were made, the punishment does not really seem to fit the crime.3.  Why  then  have  exchange  rates  fallen  by  as  much  as  they  have  and  why  have
economies  in  the  region  been  so  severely  crippled?  It  is  generally  agreed  that  a  large  part  of  the
answer lies in the weakness of financial and banking systems in the region, which have amplified the
initial  effects  of  external  shocks  and  economic  downturn.  In  essence,  banking  systems  that  were
already in weak health before the crisis broke were not up to the task of intermediating large inflows
of capital. They have been part of a vicious circle whereby loss of confidence in the currency leads to
loss of confidence in the banking system that further undermines the currency. This is the “run on the
country” syndrome. It therefore follows that strengthening of the banking system must be part of the
cure  of  the  Asian  disease  and  the  means  of  preventing  a  recurrence.  Banking  supervision  has  an
important part to play in this strengthening - hence the topic of my speech today.
The weaknesses in Asian banking systems
4. Before I go on to discuss the supervisory lessons that can be learned, It is necessary
to consider in more detail the precise nature of the weaknesses that were apparent in some, though
not all, of the regional banking systems.
Over-expansion of bank lending
5. A number of economies experienced rapid growth in bank credit during the 1990s,
often  fuelled  by  inflows  from  abroad.  Much  of  this  lending  was  made  without  proper  credit
assessment and went into unproductive sectors such as property and the equity markets. This pushed
up  asset  prices  and  encouraged  further  lending.  When  capital  outflows  reversed  (because  of  the
realization that exchange rates were over-valued) this led to a decline in asset prices which weakened
BIS Review   28/1998
˝
- 2 -
the  position  of  both  banks  and  borrowers.  The  resultant  rise  in  bad  debts  undermined  market
confidence  in  the  solvency  of  the  banking  system,  making  it  difficult  for  banks  to  roll  over  their
external  borrowing  and  provoking  further  outflows.  The  weakness  of  the  banks  made  them  more
reluctant  to  lend,  which  further  weakened  the  financial  position  of  borrowers.  This  is  the  pattern,
which Paul Krugman has described as “financial excess and then financial collapse”1.
Excessive reliance on short-term foreign currency borrowing
6. What was particularly dangerous was that a combination of pegged exchange rates,
relatively high domestic interest rates and moves towards financial liberalization encouraged banks
in a number of economies to borrow heavily in foreign currencies to fund the lending boom. Much of
this  borrowing  was  short-term,  giving  rise  to  a  maturity  as  well  as  a  foreign  currency  mismatch,
either on the part of the banks or the companies to which they on lent. When the initial pressure on
currencies emerged, domestic borrowers that had previously never had to think about hedging their
foreign currency liabilities rushed to do so, turning a slide in the currency into an avalanche. Those
who  were  too late  were  left  with  liabilities  to  the  banks that  were  vastly  inflated  in terms  of  their
domestic  currency  -  and  the  banks  were  left  with  the  resultant  bad  debts  and  a  crippled  ability  to
finance the routine needs of their customers.
Captive banks
7. Why were banks not more discriminating in their credit choices and decisions? Part
of  the  explanation  is  that  in  a  number  of  economies  banks  were  ordered  or  persuaded  by  the
government  to  lend  heavily  to  particular  industries  and  companies.  In  other  words,  they  were
“captive  banks”.  This  allowed  the  companies  concerned  to  become  over-leveraged  (and  thus
vulnerable to economic downturn) and directed resources into unprofitable investments. The banks
concerned had little incentive to develop proper lending skills.
Concentration risks and connected lending
8. Moreover, banks in some economies were over-exposed to single borrowers, often
those connected with the lending institution. Such lending is usually of poor quality, not having been
made  at  arm’s  length,  and  means  that  the  shareholders  have  no  real  capital  at  stake  in  the  bank
(because it has effectively been lent back to them).
Failure to recognize bad debts
9. Having landed themselves with bad debts, banks failed to face up to the problem.
In  particular,  systems  for  loan  classification  and  provisioning  have  been  inadequate.  As  a  result,
capital  ratios  have  been  overstated,  and  insolvent  or  near-insolvent  banks  have  been  allowed  to
continue in business and to build up further losses. Banks have been allowed to accrue income on
non-performing loans, thus overstating revenue and capital.
Lack of transparency
                                                     
1 
BIS Review   28/1998
˝
Paul Krugman, “What happened to Asia?”, January 1998
- 3 -
10.  All  this  has  been  made  worse  by  a  lack  of  transparency  in  regional  banking
systems. Failure to disclose the true scale of bad debt problems has weakened market discipline on
bank management and reduced the need for them to face up to the problems. Public confidence in
banking  systems  has  been  undermined  because,  with  no  credible  information,  depositors  and
investors assume the worse in even relatively sound banks and rush to take their money out.
Moral hazard
11.  The  final  ingredient  has  been  the  perception  that  many  banks  in  the  region  are
effectively  government-guaranteed.  This  has  created  a  problem  of  moral  hazard  whereby  bank
management  can  afford  to  indulge  in  reckless  lending  behaviour  because  they  believe  that
government  will  bail  them  out  if  they  fail.  Similarly,  depositors  have  less  incentive  to  check  the
creditworthiness of the banks with which they place funds.
Weakness in supervision
12.  How  did  Asian  banks  get  into  this  state  of  fragility?  Inadequate  regulation  and
supervision, coupled with an explicit or implicit government guarantee, have attracted much of the
blame,  leading  Paul  Krugman  to  describe  Asian  banks  as  “over-guaranteed  and  under-regulated”.
Inadequate  supervision  cannot  be  the  whole  story  since  a  number  of  the  weaknesses  arise  from
circumstances which are not the direct responsibility of banking supervisors. There were some flaws
in macroeconomic policy, in particular the maintenance of unsustainable exchange rates. There was
undoubtedly  also  political  interference  in  banks,  in  terms  of  both  policy  lending  and  pressure  on
supervisors not to take action against well-connected owners of banks. Another fundamental problem
was weakness in the infrastructure of business laws that made it difficult for banks to take and realize
collateral and to put insolvent companies into liquidation. We must also bear in mind the fact that the
ultimate  responsibility  for  poor  lending  and  risk  management  practices  must  rest  with  the
management of  the  banks  themselves.  However,  having  said  all this,  there  have  undoubtedly  been
failures in supervisory policies and practices, as demonstrated by the reform measures that are now
being put in place in a number of countries.
The Basle Core Principles
13.  Reform  is  not  an  easy  task.  But  at  least  supervisors  in  individual  countries  are
now in a position to tap into an international network of technical cooperation and assistance to help
them  to  bring  their  systems  up  to  scratch.  At  the  centre  of  this  international  effort  is  the  Basle
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  which  is  taking  on  a  leadership  role  in  devising  supervisory
standards that can apply to all countries and not just the G-10 countries which sit on the Committee.
In particular, the Committee has produced a set of Core Principles that are intended to provide a set
of  minimum  requirements  for  effective  banking  supervision.  Supervisory  authorities  around  the
world  are  being  encouraged  to  endorse  the  Core  Principles  and  to  implement  them  as  quickly  as
possible. The IMF will have a role to play in checking that countries are indeed taking serious steps
in this direction.
14. The Core Principles are not earth shattering. They have not unveiled some new
secret of how to supervise banks. All they do is to summarize what are generally agreed to be the
fundamentals of a sound system of supervision. This includes the following main elements:
BIS Review   28/1998
˝
- 4 -
•  Clear responsibilities and objectives for the supervisor set out in a suitable legal
framework
•  Operational independence for the supervisor and the necessary resources to do
the job
•  A proper licensing regime for banks
•  Sound prudential  regulations  and  requirements  that address  the  main types  of
risk faced by banks
•  The means to enforce supervisory requirements and gather information through
on-site examination and off-site review
•  The power to take action against problem banks, including closure
•  The ability to conduct consolidated supervision and to cooperate and exchange
information with other supervisors at home and abroad
15. These may seem like statements of the obvious. But the necessary measures were
evidently  not  fully  in  place  in  a  number  of  countries  in  the  region.  Reforms  are  now  being
implemented,  in  some  cases  with  the  help  of  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank.  These  include  tighter
limits on loan growth and on lending to sectors such as property; tightening of the loan classification
framework and provisioning requirements; more disclosure of non-performing loans; strengthening
of on-site examination to introduce a more risk-based approach; and enhanced legal powers for the
supervisors  to  take  prompt  action  to  deal  with  problem  banks.  In  a  number  of  countries,  problem
banks and finance companies have been closed down or are being merged and efforts are being made
to realize as much value as possible from their bad assets. From my discussions with my supervisory
colleagues in the region I know that they are serious in their efforts and I wish them every success.
The lessons for Hong Kong
16.  This  sentiment  recognizes  that  it  is  also  in  Hong  Kong’s  interest  that  financial
stability returns to the region. As I have already indicated, one of the special features of the Asian
disease  is  that  it  has  been  extremely  contagious.  And  although  the  Hong  Kong  economy  and
financial  system  have  remained  in  pretty  good  health,  they  have  not  been  totally  immune.  This
suggests that we too have lessons to learn from the crisis.
17.  Hong  Kong’s  supervisory  system  does  indeed  compare  well  with  international
standards.  A  review  which  we  conducted  last  year  showed  that  we  had  addressed  all  the  areas
covered by the Basle Committee’s Core Principles and that we fully complied with all but a few of
them. In the latter cases, we are in partial compliance. This does not however mean that we can be
complacent for the following reasons:
•  First,  the  Basle  Core  Principles  are,  as  I  have  indicated,  minimum  standards
and we should where possible be aiming for best practice
•  Second, the environment  being  faced  by  banks  is  changing  at  an accelerating
rate and we need to be sure that our supervisory system keeps pace with this
•  Third, even our robust monetary system can be subject to external shocks and
the banks need to take this into account in the way in which they manage their
business.
BIS Review   28/1998
˝
- 5 -
18.  The  latter  point  needs  some  further  elaboration.  As  you  will  be  aware,  Hong
Kong’s monetary policy is built around exchange rate stability in the form of the link between the
Hong Kong dollar and the US dollar. This is backed up by the currency board system which requires
the monetary base of the banking sector - the notes and coins in circulation and the clearing balances
held with the HKMA - to be fully backed by foreign currency. When the Hong Kong dollar is under
pressure  as  it  was  at  the  end  of  October  1997 and  again  in  January  of  this  year,  the  HKMA  buys
Hong Kong dollars from the banks in exchange for US dollars and the monetary base shrinks. This
tightening of liquidity will in turn cause interest rates to rise, perhaps sharply so. This will choke off
the inflows and restore stability to the exchange rate.
19. It is important to realize that this is an automatic process and that the HKMA has
no  room  to  maneuver  to  prevent  the  rise  in  interest  rates  from  taking  place.  To  do  so  would  run
counter  to  the  basic  principle  of  the  currency  board  and  would  risk  prolonging  any  attack  on  the
Hong Kong dollar.
20. I think that there is now a better understanding of how the currency board system
works. In addition, our determination to adhere to the system and to defend the linked exchange rate
has been clearly demonstrated. This should help to deter future speculative attacks on the Hong Kong
dollar. However, we have to acknowledge that the possibility of short term interest rates shocks does
exist under the currency board mechanism and the banks therefore need to take this into account in
the way in which they run their business and manage their balance sheets.
21.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  I  draw  three  main  supervisory  lessons  from  the  regional
crisis and its impact on Hong Kong:
•  First,  it  is  important  for  banks  to  maintain  a  strong  balance  sheet  that  can
withstand the interest rate fluctuations to which I have referred and maintain the
confidence of the public. Banks in Hong Kong score well in this respect but it is
not something that can be taken for granted. I think that it is true to say that some
banks did expand their loan books too rapidly during the mortgage boom in 1997.
As  a  result, loan to  deposit  ratios  came  under  some  strain.  The  banks  were  also
exposed  to  growing  interest  rate  risk  because  a  substantial  proportion  of  their
assets are linked to best lending rate while their  liabilities  are  linked  to  HIBOR.
This has been a reminder of the need to maintain sound fundamentals: high capital
adequacy  and  liquidity  ratios;  prudent  loan  classification  and  provisioning;  and
sound risk management.
•  A  second  and  related  lesson  from  the  region  is  that  banks  need  to  beware  of
excessive lending to finance overheated asset markets. This increases the leverage
of their customers, exposing the banks to increased credit risk if prices fall. This of
course is what has happened in the property market in Hong Kong, although the
banks have so far been protected by their prudent lending policies and by the fact
that  much  of  their  property  exposure  is  related  to  the  residential  market.
Notwithstanding  the  good  outcome  so  far,  we  believe  that  the  Asian  crisis  has
reinforced  the  need  for  restraint  in  the  growth  in  property  lending  and  in  other
forms of asset-based finance, such as share margin financing and taxi loans.
BIS Review   28/1998
˝
- 6 -
•  The  third  lesson  is  that  increased  disclosure  and  transparency  are  necessary  to
reduce market uncertainty and limit the  risk  of  contagion.  The  disclosure  of  bad
news  can  be  uncomfortable,  but  it  does  serve  the  useful  function  of  putting
pressure on management to run their business prudently and to deal quickly with
any  problems  which  may  arise.  Hong  Kong  has  made  considerable  progress  in
recent years in terms of disclosure of information by banks. We intend to build on
this  during  the  course  of  1998  by  recommending  new  measures  such  as  more
disclosure  about  non-performing  loans  and  more  specific  guidelines  for  income
recognition by banks.
Review of the Hong Kong banking sector
22. We will be building these lessons into our supervisory approach during the course
of  1998.  More  generally,  as  I  have  already  mentioned,  we  also  have  to  ensure  that  our  approach
keeps up with market developments and takes account of new types of risk that may emerge. For this
reason,  we  have  recently  commissioned  a  firm  of  consultants  to  carry  out  a  study  of  the  banking
sector in Hong Kong over the next five years.
23  The  study  has  two  objectives.  The  first  is  to  examine  the  strategic  outlook  for  the
banking  sector  in  Hong  Kong  during  the  five-year  period.  This  will  include  an  assessment  of  the
strengths  and  weaknesses  of  the  banking  sector  and  the  opportunities  and  threats  with  which  it  is
faced, taking into account the impact of global and local trends and issues. Among the issues to be
examined will be the costs and benefits of certain features of the current regulatory system (such as
the remaining interest rate rules and the one branch policy) and the potential impact of changes to
these features. I should add however there is no presumption that changes to the current regulatory
system should, or will, be made. We are going into this with an open mind.
24. The second objective of the study is to consider the adequacy and effectiveness of
the  HKMA’s  current  approach  to  banking  supervision  and  to  make  recommendations  for  any
changes that seem required in the light of the strategic outlook for the banking sector. This would
include  any  changes  that  needed  to  be  made  to  the  organizational  structure  of  our  supervisory
function  within  the  HKMA  and  the  supervisory  policies,  guidelines  and  techniques  which  we  use.
The study will also examine whether we have the necessary resources to do the job.
Conclusion
25. In conclusion, the Asian crisis has been a major “wake-up” call to supervisors in
the  region and  has  given  fresh  impetus  to  international  efforts  to  raise  supervisory  standards.  One
point  which  bears  repeating  however  that  tightening  of  supervision  is  not  the  whole  answer,
particularly if the effect is simply to impose more rules on the banks. More external regulation may
indeed have to be the short-term response in a number of countries, particularly those where blanket
government guarantees have been given to depositors. However, the long-term solution must lie in
devising a supervisory approach which gives the right incentives for management of banks to take
responsibility for their own actions.
BIS Review   28/1998
˝
