Mr. Greenspan gives a testimony on the global financial system and the role of
the  IMF  in  the  Asian  crisis      Testimony  of  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US
Federal  Reserve,  Mr.  Alan  Greenspan,  before  the  Committee  on  Agriculture  of  the  US  House  of
Representatives on 21/5/98.
The  global  financial  system  has  been  evolving  rapidly  in  recent  years.  New
technology  has  radically  reduced  the  costs  of  borrowing  and  lending  across  traditional  national
borders, facilitating the development of new instruments and drawing in new players. Information is
transmitted instantaneously around the world, and  huge  shifts  in  the  supply  and  demand  for  funds
naturally follow, resulting in a massive increase in capital flows.
This  burgeoning  global  system  has  been  demonstrated  to  be  a  highly  efficient
structure that has significantly facilitated cross-border trade in goods and services and, accordingly,
has  made  a  substantial  contribution  to  standards  of  living  worldwide.  Its  efficiency  exposes  and
punishes  underlying  economic  imprudence  swiftly  and  decisively.  Regrettably,  it  also  appears  to
have facilitated the transmission of financial disturbances far more effectively than ever before.
Three  years  ago,  the  Mexican  crisis  was  the  first  episode  associated  with  our  new
high-tech international financial system. The current Asian crisis is the second.
We do not as yet fully understand the new system’s dynamics. We are learning fast,
and need to update and modify our institutions and practices to reduce the risks inherent in the new
regime. Meanwhile, we have had to confront the current crisis with the institutions and techniques
we have.
Many argued that the Asian crisis should be allowed to run its course without support
from  the  International  Monetary  Fund  or  the  bilateral  financial  backing  of  other  nations.  They
asserted that allowing this crisis to play out, while doubtless having additional negative effects  on
growth in Asia, and engendering greater spill-overs onto the rest of the world, would not likely have
a large or lasting impact on the United States and the world economy.
They  may  well  have  been  correct  in  their  judgment,  and  some  would  argue  that
events  over  the  past  six  months  have  proved  them  right;  we  have  so  far  avoided  the  type  of
continuing downward spiral that some feared. There was and is, however, a small but not negligible
probability that the upset in East Asia could have unexpectedly large negative effects on Japan, Latin
America, and eastern and central Europe that, in turn, could have repercussions elsewhere, including
the United States. Thus, while the probability of such an outcome may be small, its consequences, in
my  judgment,  should  not  have  been  left  solely  to  chance.  We  have  observed  that  global  financial
markets, as currently organized, do not always achieve an appropriate equilibrium, or at least require
time to stabilize. Moreover, the effects of the Asian crisis on the real economies of the immediately
affected countries, as well as on our own economy, are only now just being felt.
Opponents  of  IMF  support  for  member  countries  facing  international  financial
difficulties also argued that such substantial financial backing, by cushioning the losses of imprudent
investors, encourages excessive risk-taking. There doubtless is some truth in that, though arguably it
has been the expectation of governments’ support of their financial systems that has been the more
obvious  culprit,  at  least  in  the  Asian  case.  In  any  event,  any  expectations  of  broad  bailouts  have
turned out to have been disappointed. Many if not most investors in Asian economies have to date
suffered substantial losses.
Moreover, the policy conditionality, associated principally with IMF lending, which
dictates  economic  and  financial  discipline  and  structural  change,  helps  to  mitigate  some  of  the
BIS Review   46/1998
- 2 -
inappropriate  risk-taking  on  the  part  of  governmental  authorities.  At  the  root  of  the  problems  has
been poor public policy that has resulted in misguided investments and very weak financial sectors.
Convincing  a  sovereign  nation  to  alter  destructive  policies  that  impair  its  own  performance  and
threaten contagion to its neighbors is best handled by an international financial institution, such as
the IMF. What we have in place today to respond to crises should be supported even as we work to
improve  those  mechanisms  and  institutions.  Some  observers  have  also  expressed  concern  about
whether  we  can  be  confident  that  IMF  programs  for  countries,  in  particular  the  countries  of  East
Asia,  are  likely  to  alter  their  economies  significantly  and  permanently.  My  sense  is  that  one
consequence of this Asian crisis is an increasing awareness in the region that market capitalism, as
practiced  in  the  West,  especially  in  the  United  States,  is  the  superior  model;  that  is,  it  provides
greater promise of producing rising standards of living and continuous growth.
Although  East  Asian  economies  have  exhibited  considerable  adherence  to  many
aspects  of  free-market  capitalism,  there  has,  nonetheless,  been  a  pronounced  tendency  toward
government-directed  investment,  using  the  banking  system  to  finance  that  investment.  Given  a
record of real growth rates of close to 10 percent per annum over an extended period of time, it is not
surprising that it has been difficult to convince anyone that the economic system practiced in East
Asia  could  not  continue  to  produce  positive  results  indefinitely.  Following  the  breakdown,  an
increasing awareness, bordering in some cases on shock, that their economic model was incomplete,
or worse, has arguably emerged in the region.
As a consequence, many of the leaders of these countries and their economic advisors
are endeavoring to move their economies much more rapidly toward the type of economic system
that we have in the United States. The IMF, whatever one might say about its policy advice in the
past,  has  played  an  important  role  in  this  process,  providing  advice  and  incentives  that  promote
sound money and long-term stability. The IMF’s current approach in Asia is fully supportive of the
views  of  those  in  the  West  who  understand  the  importance  of  greater  reliance  on  market  forces,
reduced  government  controls,  scaling  back  of  government-directed  investment,  and  embracing
greater transparency -- the publication of all the data that are relevant to the activities of the central
bank, the government, financial institutions, and private companies.
It  is  a  reasonable  question  to  ask  how  long  this  conversion  to  embracing  market
capitalism in all its details will last in countries once temporary IMF financial support has come to
an end. We are, after all, dealing with sovereign nations with long traditions, not always consonant
with market capitalism. But my sense is that there is a growing understanding and appreciation of
the  benefits  of  market  capitalism  as  we  practice  it,  and  that  what  is  being  prescribed  in
IMF-supported programs fosters their own interests.
Similarly,  it  is  a  reasonable  question  to  ask  whether  the  US  authorities  should  not
seek greater assurance that the ongoing process of reform in the IMF’s policies and operations will
produce additional concrete results before we agree to augment the IMF’s resources. I have reason to
believe that the management and staff of the IMF are committed to a process of change. We face a
somewhat  more  difficult  task  in  convincing  the  IMF’s  membership  as  a  whole  of  the  need  for
change.  However,  I  am  confident  that  our  leverage  in  this  regard  would  be  reduced  if  the  United
States failed to agree promptly to the proposed increases in the IMF’s resources.
Accordingly,  I  continue  fully  to  back  the  Administration’s  request  to  augment  the
financial  resources  of  the  IMF  by  approving  as  quickly  as  possible  US  participation  in  the  New
Arrangements to Borrow and an increase in the US quota in the IMF. Hopefully, neither will turn out
to  be  needed,  and  no  funds  will  be  drawn.  Although  the  tendency  in  recent  months  toward
stabilization in the East Asian economies is encouraging, clearly those economies are not out of the
woods  as  recent  events  attest.  Moreover,  we  have  not  yet  put  in  place  the  strengthening  of  the
BIS Review   46/1998
- 3 -
international  financial  architecture  that  would  enable  us  in  the  future  to  place  less  reliance  on  the
IMF to deal with potential systemic crises. Thus it is better to have the IMF fully equipped if a quick
response to a pending crisis is essential.
BIS Review   46/1998
