Mr. Tietmeyer discusses prospects and  challenges  for  European  integration
in  the  run-up  to  EMU      Speech  by  the  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Prof.  Hans
Tietmeyer,  on  the  occasion  of  the  awarding  of  the  Special  Prize  1997  of  the  German-British
Forum in London on 15/12/97 (slightly abridged).
 As Christmas is very close, I would like to quote David Marsh. He once described
all  the  wishes  and  hopes  Germans  are  pinning  on  Europe,  including  the  hope  that  the  future
European  currency  will  be  as  stable  as  the  D-Mark.  And  his  comment  on  the  multitude  of
German hopes regarding Europe was: “ That is just as if Santa Claus came every day!”  Well, it
seems to me - at least as far as the stability of the euro is concerned - that we should not foist the
responsibility onto Santa Claus. Though I do think very highly of him. After all, he is somebody
who is independent of political influence, and stands for long-termism and consistency.
I  have  read  that  in  this  country  there  is  the  custom  of  the  Christmas  pudding.
Before it is cooked, a coin is hidden in the mixture. Finding it in one’s helping of the pudding is
regarded as a token of good fortune and of being singled out. Personally, I cherish the hope that
some day the lucky one will bite on a euro - but  on  a  hard  euro!  Anyhow,  problems  with  the
teeth are easier to solve than the problems which a soft euro would pose.
II
Ladies  and  gentlemen!  As  you  know,  I  am  an  economist.  Anybody  who  has
studied economics properly has absorbed a good deal of Anglo-Saxon thinking. First, there are
the great ideas and perceptions of the Scottish and English economists:
    the role of the market,
the indispensable function of competition,
the advantages of free trade between nations,
and in particular: the key position of the individual, and his responsibility
for his own economic success.
A distinct difference is often noted between Anglo-Saxon economics and German
economics.  Anglo-Saxon economics is said to be more technically orientated, sometimes in a
manner reminiscent of engineering science. German economics - at least that since the Second
World  War  -  is  often  associated  with  that  neo-liberal  school  of  thought  which  we  call
“ Ordnungspolitik” .  That  is  a  word  which  is  the  despair  of  any  translator  from  German  into
another  language.    This  is  because  (perhaps  contrary  to  some  preconceived  notions  about
Germans)  “ Ordnungspolitik”   does  not  mean  that  policy  makers  will  put  everything  in  order.
Precisely the opposite is true! At least theoretically.
The  state  is  supposed  to  create  a  framework  within  which  market  forces  are  to
interact and unfold their dynamism under competitive conditions. In this respect, however, the
United Kingdom seems to have made more progress than Germany in the last decade. While our
country  has  expanded  the  already  overburdened  welfare  state  further  and  has  not  sufficiently
corrected the overregulated parts of the markets, this country seems to have changed many things
BIS Review   2/1998
- 2 -
radically in the 1980s Nowadays, the United Kingdom has very flexible structures and markets.
And - if I see it aright - there is actually some consensus about the basic stance of such a policy
in your country today. In particular, the United Kingdom is attaching increasing importance to
monetary  stability.  The  Bank  of  England  has  made  great  headway  on  the  road  towards
independence. And the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, has rejected short-termism
in terms which even please the President of the Bundesbank.
So,  all  in  all,  it  is  not  unfair  to  ask  whether,  in  terms  of  the  German  postwar
yardstick  of  “ Ordnungspolitik” ,  the  United  Kingdom  has  not  now  distinctly  outstripped  its
former mentor in this discipline. [In a way, just the opposite of developments in soccer.]
III
The  relationship  between  good  economics  and  Anglo-Saxon  thinking  is  also
reflected, in a sense, in the history of the German view as to how European integration should be
structured.    It  was  certainly  no  accident  that  Ludwig  Erhard  (the  neo-liberal  economist  and
architect  of  the  social  market  economy  in  the  postwar  years)  sought  to  include  the  United
Kingdom in the European integration process at an early stage. But Konrad Adenauer, the wily
politician, attached overriding priority to the Franco-German relationship. This was motivated by
different goals and hence different strategies.
Adenauer’s prime target was to overcome the Franco-German conflict by making
progress  in  political  integration.  In  his  view,  the  establishment  of  European  institutions  in  the
framework of a closely-knit Community -  even  if,  or  more  exactly  when,  the  latter  comprised
only a few of the free states of Europe - was an appropriate means of durably safeguarding the
political integration of the two large continental rivals, which had been enemies for centuries.
Erhard  adopted  a  different  approach.  For  him,  integration  was  not  primarily  the
establishment of common institutions. In his eyes, integration was the  dismantling  of  artificial
barriers  between  countries,  enabling  national  markets  to  merge.  He  called  that  functional
integration, as distinct from institutional integration. That was why he passionately advocated the
full  convertibility  of  currencies  and  the  abolition  of  customs  barriers  from  an  early  date.  That
was  also  why  the  French  notion  of  “ Planification”   was  highly  suspect  to  him  in  the  sixties.
Hence  he  was  likewise  very  suspicious  of  any  solution  involving  only  parts  of  Europe,  and
sought to include the United Kingdom as far as possible. At the time he met with Whitehall’s
approval for his sceptical attitude to a small Community of six nations, but not always for his
enthusiasm for far-reaching UK integration.
It is a happy stroke of fate that Europe today largely reconciles both approaches:
  Adenauer’s  desire  for  lasting  Franco-German  friendship,  embedded  at  the
same time in joint institutions;
and Erhard’s desire for the merging of the whole of free Europe, basically
along market-oriented lines.
IV
Thus, seen from a German point of view, European integration till now - despite
all the deficiencies in detail - has, all in all, been a success story. This is not because Germany
BIS Review   2/1998
- 3 -
wants to dominate Europe. Quite the contrary, it wishes to be part of a functioning integration
which is also soundly based in economic terms.  Admittedly, the European ideal is sometimes
used  to  mask  nonsense.  The  anecdotes  about  pointless  regulations  planned  by  Brussels
bureaucrats would fill volumes. But the European Community can - first and foremost - claim
one  outstanding  achievement.  It  has  contributed  substantially  to  the  fact  that  EU  countries  are
today  willing  to  agree  to  joint  political  and  economic  ground  rules,  to  regard  them  as  joint
standards and to accept them indefinitely.
To  have  binding  ground  rules  is  the  fundamental  basis  for  our  Europe,  with  its
variety  of  nations  and  cultures  and  its  truly  difficult  history.  Such  ground  will  produce  ample
crops.  After  all,  the  single  market  has  not  come  from  nowhere.  Gordon  Brown  once  used  the
phrase: “ Europe has secured peace and rising prosperity” . I think he is right.
European  integration  should  continue.  But,  from  the  German  point  of  view  as
well, it should not move in the direction of a European superstate. Europe should not be assigned
as  many  responsibilities  as  possible.  But  the  responsibilities  assigned  at  the  European  level
should certainly be met:
   clearly and unambiguously,
transparently,
and (this may be a specifically German wish) in conjunction with
the European institutions.
That, after all, is what they are there for.  This must also apply to EMU.
V
In  line  with  the  agreed  time  schedule,  the  European  Central  Bank  will  be
established in the middle of 1998. It will assume responsibility for monetary policy after the start
of EMU, and ensure monetary stability. The European Central Bank will be independent - I hope
not  only  on  paper,  but  also  in  practice.  That  is  familiar  to  German  ears.  For  British  ears  it  is
perhaps less a matter of course - at least at the moment. However, I have the impression that the
Bundesbank is nowadays increasingly getting support from the British public.
Perhaps  this  is  because  it  is  being  recognised  more  and  more  clearly  that  the
mandate of the Bundesbank to ensure monetary stability is based on a broad consensus among
the  German  public  and  not  on  the  bureaucratic  arrogance  of  a  handful  of  central  bankers  in
Frankfurt.  (Nor,  Mr  Marsh,  have  we  ever  regarded  ourselves  as  a  “ Bank  that  rules  Europe” ,
despite  the  events  of  1992.)  Even  so,  a  good  many  Britons  may  be  wondering  whether  the
European Central Bank will not become a huge, incredibly unaccountable, bureaucratic octopus.
On this point, I would like to make three comments:
First:  the  often  expressed,  primeval  fear  that  European  authorities  might  usurp
additional  responsibilities  -  so  to  speak,  behind  the  backs  of  the  public  and  the  national
parliaments  -  definitely  does  not  apply  to  the  European  Central  Bank.  Its  mandate  is
unambiguous.  And  it  is  clearly  defined  -  namely  that  of  safeguarding  monetary  stability.
Precisely that is what it will seek to do. It will certainly not fish for further responsibilities like
BIS Review   2/1998
- 4 -
an octopus. In my estimation, central bankers will be kept completely busy performing that task
alone!
Second: monetary policy is not secret diplomacy. We live in a media age. Hordes
of watchdogs from newspapers and news agencies, in banks and investment houses follow the
doings of central banks all around the clock. I am not sure that all politicians on the Continent
are monitored as strictly by a parliament as central banks are by the general public.
And  third:  anyone  who  draws  up  a  constitution  for  the  monetary  system  has  to
answer a fundamental question: what role is currency supposed to perform? Is it to provide, by
its sustained stability, as good a long-term precondition for economic success as possible, even if
it  is  known  that  monetary  stability  alone  will  naturally  not  suffice?  Or  is  it  to  be  possible  to
subordinate the target of monetary stability to other objectives (such as boosting  employment),
depending on the situation? (Then of course - as past experience has shown - there is a risk of
forfeiting  both  in  the  end,  i.e.  of  ending  up  with  higher  unemployment  and  higher  inflation
alike.)
The  governments  which  negotiated  the  Maastricht  Treaty  opted  for  the  first
answer; that is to say (no more and no less), for basically unpolitical money.
Assigning  this  mandate  of  an  independent  central  bank  is  quite  consistent,
especially in a supranational context in which there is no room any longer for divergent national
preferences.  By  their  “ Yes”   votes,  national  parliaments  have  unambiguously  approved  the
Treaty. After all, the independence of the European Central Bank is not shamefacedly concealed
in the “ small print” . It is at the very heart of the Treaty.
VI
Lord  Dahrendorf  has  criticised  EMU,  saying  that  it  is  actually  irrelevant  to  the
great topics of the epoch and only diverts attention from the really important issues. Profoundly
though  I  agree  with  him  about  the  existence  and  urgency  of  many  great  topics,  as  a  central
banker I find it rather hard to view EMU as an irrelevance. What is true is certainly that Europe
is reaching the  crossroads. And EMU is clearly not a sufficient answer to everything.
Europe  is  faced  with  major  challenges,  namely  with  the  three  Es:  enlargement,
employment  and  EMU.  Enlargement  mainly  raises  the  question  of  how  Europe  can  remain
operational  and  viable  with  20  members  and  more.  Of  course,  I  know  that  some  experienced
practitioners  remain  cool  and  argue  as  follows  on  Europe:  Well,  the  reform  of  the  institutions
virtually failed even before any round of enlargement. And it went on for all that. That may be
true  in  a  certain  sense.  But  it  will  result  precisely  in  that  often-deplored  muddling-through,  in
which the question of what Europe is doing, and how, is settled more by historical accidents than
by rational economic decisions. And the EU must not suffer the same fate as the dinosaurs.
The  greatest  challenge  facing  Europe  is  doubtless  the  issue  of  employment  -  at
least on the Continent. Especially since employment is not only a matter of the right deployment
of the  macroeconomic  instruments  -  as  in  textbook  economics.  In  Germany,  and  also  in  some
neighbouring countries, the issue reflects some very much more profound social problems. In our
country, employment touches on basic issues such as the acceptance of more responsibility by
the individual, the willingness to be more flexible, the reduction of individual demands on the
state and society.
BIS Review   2/1998
- 5 -
That  brings  me,  finally,  to  the  third  E:  EMU.  Eddie  George  once  described  the
challenges posed by EMU by referring to the fairy tale of Beauty and the Beast:
   The Beauty lies in intra-European exchange rate certainty.
The  Beast  is  the  single  monetary  policy  -  the  single,  “ one-size-fits-all” ,
interest rate.
The  crucial  question  is:  can  we  reasonably  hope  that  Beauty’s  Beast  will
turn into Prince Charming?
Or - at least into a Prince whose stability-oriented discipline will be accepted in all
participating countries?
The  next  year  will  see  some  crucial  decisions  for  Europe.  The  time  schedule
provides for the concrete decision about the member states of the first round in spring 1998. I
hope that all countries which today are pressing for participation right from the start are aware of
the economic and political implications  of  a  supranational  monetary  union.  Monetary  union  is
not  only  a  route  without  a  return.  It  also  involves  huge  challenges  to  the  flexibility  of  the
economy (especially  in  the  area  of  labour  costs)  and  also  to  the  lasting  stability-orientation  of
national  policies.  The  exchange  rate  will  then  no  longer  be  available  as  an  instrument  of
adjustment between the participating economies.
Monetary union will change Europe politically as well. That cannot be otherwise,
since the surrender of monetary responsibility signifies a fundamental break for the participating
countries. The crucial factor is
  that monetary union, through its success, lays the foundation for a rational
further development in  Europe;
and that it does not change Europe - through its failure - in the direction of a
transfer union or of stronger centralisation, which hopefully  nobody  really
wants.
For that reason, we must do all we can to ensure that the economic foundation is
and remains sustainable,
  from  compliance  with  the  convergence  criteria,  especially  in  the  sense  of
sustainability,
to an adequate level of internal flexibility and innovativeness.
I hope that the decision  which  will  be  taken  under  the  British  presidency  at  the
beginning of May will satisfy these requirements.
Then, but only then, can the D-Mark - which by then will have celebrated its 50th
anniversary  -  safely  give  way  to  a  lastingly  stable  euro.  And  then  I  will  not  mind  if  -  as  the
Financial Times wrote just a few days ago - D-Mark banknotes end up after 2002 as mulch for
the famous hock wine, which is and will continue to be produced not far from Frankfurt.
BIS Review   2/1998
- 6 -
VII
The  euro  is  both  a  chance  and  a  challenge.  The  challenges  cannot  be  met  by
short-term  compliance  with  the  selection  criteria.  What  is  necessary  is  the  ability  and  the
political  will  lastingly  to  accept  the  implications  of  a  stability-oriented  monetary  union.  To
ensure that, Europe also and above all needs British thinking.
Europe  needs  a  competitive  orientation  and  responsibility  on  the  part  of
individuals and nations alike.
These  values  are  much  too  precious  to  be  national  orientations  alone.  They
deserve to become European goals and values. They are what we are waiting for!
BIS Review   2/1998
