Mr. Sherwin reviews economic prospects and challenges for Asia and the Pacific
region      Address  by  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  Mr.  Murray
Sherwin, to the New Zealand Institute of International Affairs in Wellington on 15/10/98.
I was asked to discuss the economic prospects for Asia and the Pacific. I’m going to
take  a  fairly  liberal  interpretation  of  the  topic.  You  will  not  be  surprised  that  my  comments  are
framed within a high degree of uncertainty about the direction of the global economy. Events of the
past year or more have been dominated by a growing sense of contagion spreading from the initial
Thai problems, and now affecting most parts of the world. Even over the last couple of months, we
have  seen  Russia  and  Latin  America  faltering,  and  a  substantial  re-rating  of  corporate  profit
prospects in the USA and Europe. As we look forward to 1999 and 2000, we can do no better than
guess  at  when  these  downward  influences  will  run  their  course,  and  when  robust,  sustainable,
recovery will commence within the Asian region.
However,  I  will  offer  a  few  guesses  on  Asia’s  prospects.  I  will  also  offer  some
observations  on  the  nature  of  the  adjustments  and  transitions  now  being  worked  through  in  Asia,
especially within the financial sectors of the affected countries.
The Asian Growth Story
The  Asian  growth  story,  over  three  decades  or  more,  has  been  extraordinary,  with
sustained annual expansions of the order of 7 to 10 percent. That is more than just a statistical nicety.
Not  only  has  Asian  economic  success  supported  growth  in  the  rest  of  the  world,  it  has  been  the
driving force in the most profound process of poverty alleviation in human history. By World Bank
estimates, where 60 percent of East Asians lived in absolute poverty (i.e. less than US$1 per day) in
1975,  20  percent  were  living  in  absolute  poverty  in  1995.  The  numbers  living  in  poverty  have
declined, the severity of poverty has declined, life expectancy has climbed, infant mortality rates and
literacy indicators have all improved in tandem with economic growth. Growth created jobs for the
poor,  and  provided  opportunities  to  expand  their  productivity.  The  Asian  miracle  was  real  and
tangible.
Of  course,  Paul  Krugman  made  himself  famous,  and  unpopular  in  some  parts,  by
arguing that while Asia had generated extraordinary growth over an extended period, there was no
magic formula that the rest of us could borrow in order to imitate that growth performance. To use
Krugman’s now-famous line, perspiration, rather than inspiration, was the Asian secret. In tolerably
well-organised economies, simply adding more inputs will lead to more outputs. Certainly,  lots  of
Asians became wealthier, and were able to enjoy rapidly improving material well-being. But there
was, in Krugman’s view, no miracle. There was no productivity steroid.
The last year or so has generally given strength to Krugman’s analysis. In crude, and
rather  simplistic  terms,  the  Asian  formula  worked  so  long  as  those  new  inputs  were  directed  into
areas  where  the  real  value  added,  at  the  micro  level,  was  sufficient  to  support  real  growth  at  the
macro level. Asia was able to generate high savings rates, and to maintain similarly high levels of
investment. But as investment increased, to 30 or 40 percent of GDP in many cases, the quality of
that investment began to deteriorate. Returns on investment were driven below the cost of capital.
The legacy is a huge amount of surplus, and essentially redundant, capital stock.
Inevitably,  that  surplus  capacity  has  been  repriced.  The  internationally  tradable
capacity has been repriced by way of local currency depreciations in most cases. As currencies fall,
output becomes more competitive in  foreign  currency  terms.  The  non-tradable  component,  largely
surplus  real  estate  investment,  emerges  in  the  form  of  sharply  reduced  asset  prices,  and  in  an
enormous stock of bad debts.
BIS Review   83/1998
- 2 -
The Asian crisis has so far appeared largely as a financial crisis, at least in the eyes of
casual observers from abroad. The volatility in financial asset prices - exchange rates, interest rates,
equity prices - has been spectacular, and it is not surprising that attention has been attracted in that
direction.  Perhaps  less  visible,  and  certainly  less  reported,  is  the  still  emerging  ‘real’  impact.
Industries throughout the region now face declining markets, after years of unrelenting rapid growth.
As  already  noted,  the  surplus  capacity  in  many  industries  implies  that  asset  values  must  decline.
Companies  will  fail,  or  will  if  they  are  allowed  to.  Unemployment  is  rising,  and  will  rise  further.
Poverty levels will rise again, and the welfare of, quite literally, hundreds of millions of people will
deteriorate. Many will return to the absolute poverty that, a year ago, was a rapidly fading memory.
That will not be a permanent deterioration. But the next couple of years promise to be
harsh.
Prospects
In  the  longer  term,  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  region  will  return  to  robust  growth  -
almost certainly not as rapid as has been experienced in the past two or three decades, but still the
sorts of growth rates that the rest of the world envies. As a guess, and it is no more than that, I would
suggest a future of something closer to 4 to 6 percent annual growth rather than the 7 to 10 percent
rates of old. Lower debt levels, and closer attention to risk, will likely feature in this slower growing
Asia, and desirably so.
What gives me confidence of resumed growth?
Firstly, one of the largest investments, and without doubt the most important, made in
Asia  in  recent  decades  has  been  in  human  capital.  The  Asian  commitment  to  education  has  been
immense, and the benefits of that will be durable. To put it crudely, the wheels may have fallen off
the  Asian  economy  for  now,  but  the  engine  and  chassis  are  still  there,  willing  and  able  to  move
again. It is the human capital base that will provide the engine for recovery.
Secondly, despite the vast strides made in the past, Asia still has some ‘catch-up’ to
do.  Average  per  capita  incomes  remain  well  below  OECD  levels  in  most  of  non-Japan  Asia,  and
there remains scope for technology transfer into the region. Macro-economic management is likely
to remain sound, and that provides the basis for believing that the process of catch-up can resume.
But the short-term economic prospects are more difficult.
At the Reserve Bank, we do not undertake independent forecasts of the economies of
our trading partners. Rather, we look to the local experts, and rely on Consensus Forecasts - which
are essentially a survey of local forecasters’ views for each country.
Table  1  summarises  the  Consensus  view  of  industrial  production  for  the  region’s
economies. For 1998, I have included the results of the latest Consensus survey (September 1998)
along  with  the  corresponding  forecasts  of  a  year  earlier.  For  1999,  the  table  shows  the  latest
numbers, plus the results of the first survey of 1999, which was taken in January of this year.
BIS Review   83/1998
- 3 -
Table 1
Consensus forecasts of industrial production
annual average
Calendar     1998    Calendar     1999
       Country       Share of     Forecast as at:       Forecast as at:
                    NZ Exports    Sep-97    Sep-98    Jan-98     Sep-98
 Australia             19.3         4.3       2.9        3.3       2.4
 United States         11.0         2.8       3.3        2.2       2.4
 Japan                 14.4         2.4       -6.4       1.6       -1.9
 TWI Weighted          53.5         3.2       0.7        2.6       1.3
 South Korea            3.9         7.9       -8.1       4.3       1.6
 Taiwan                 2.6         6.4       4.6        6.0       4.7
 Hong Kong*             2.8         5.4       -4.7       4.0       -2.8
 China                  2.8        15.1       9.4       12.8       9.9
 Indonesia              1.3         9.8      -16.2       5.9       -0.3
 Malaysia               2.2        10.1       -5.1       7.1       0.5
 Thailand               1.2         4.8      -13.1       3.0       0.3
 14 countries          71.7         4.4       -0.5       3.4       1.4
 Export Weighted
               * GDP
Two  points  are  striking.  Firstly,  the  extent  and  pervasiveness  of  the  reduction  in
expected output over the course of the last year are enormous. By any historical standards, the region
has suffered a very serious growth shock.
Secondly,  the  current  Consensus  view  for  1999  does  not  envisage  any  substantive
recovery for the region. At best, it is suggestive of stabilisation at the new, lower, levels of activity.
Note that the track of the past year or so has been one in which the Consensus growth forecasts have
been repeatedly revised downward as they incorporated emerging news and data. There is no clear
sense yet that that process has run its course. Note also that the latest growth outlook still assumes a
fairly benign, and frankly implausibly optimistic, growth path for China, the USA and Europe.
As noted earlier, it is impossible to get a firm grip on the near-term prospects while
the contagion unleashed in Thailand in July of 1998 is still working its way around the globe. All
going well, China, the USA and Europe will be able to sustain their positive growth paths, and will
provide the pillars around which the affected countries can resume their growth. I think that is still
the most likely scenario. But other, realistic, and much less comforting, scenarios can be conjured up
with  disturbing  ease.  Developments  in  financial  markets  over  the  past  couple  of  weeks  tip  the
balance even more in the direction of the pessimists.
Even the scenario of continued modest growth involves some very harsh transitions
for Asia. I will focus on primarily one aspect of that transition - namely the enormous damage that
has been wrought to balance sheets in the region and what will be required to remedy that.
Financial Sector Adjustments
What has been highlighted by the Asian crash is the extent to which Asian growth has
been  debt  fuelled  and  has  proceeded  on  structures  that  were  inherently  risky.  Assumptions  were
made  about  the  ability  of  Asian  governments  to  shelter  entrepreneurs  from  those  risks.  Those
assumptions proved ill-founded.
Deals  that  involved  borrowing  in  low-interest  foreign  currency  terms  to  invest  in
rapidly inflating domestic property assets, for example, were premised on exchange rates remaining
fixed, and property prices continuing to inflate. Other investments in manufacturing capacity were
BIS Review   83/1998
- 4 -
based around assumptions of continued rapid growth in demand, continued access to loan funding,
plus stable interest and exchange rates. It was a good formula while it lasted, but it could not last.
Estimates  of  the  extent  of  balance  sheet  damage  done  in  the  Asian  collapse  carry
wide  margins  of  error,  largely  because  asset  prices  remain  uncertain  and  accounting  and  auditing
conventions do not always provide reliable guidance as to the health of entities. However, even in
accepting those wide margins of error, it seems plausible that, within the region’s financial sectors
alone, losses have been incurred which are equivalent to something of the order of 25 to 50 percent
of GDP. Even for Japan, non-performing assets of the banking system (not all of which will become
‘losses’) are estimated by one of the credit rating agencies at 30 percent of GDP. The USA Treasury
estimates for total non-performing assets of Japan’s banks run to a more modest 20 percent of GDP.
By  comparison,  the  USA  savings  and  loan  problems  of  the  early  1990’s  involved
losses of around 3 percent of USA GDP, and the Scandinavian financial sector collapses of the same
period ran closer to 6 to 8 percent of GDP. To find anything comparable to what has happened to
Asia, we have to look to the Argentinian crisis of the early 1980’s which led to loan losses of the
order of 50 percent of GDP.
It is difficult to see how robust growth can resume in Asia before these equity holes
are  filled.  The  obvious  question  is  how  to  achieve  that.  Specifically,  where  will  the  money  come
from?
First,  we  need  to  recognise  that  not  all  such  losses  need  to  be  ‘replaced’.  The
financial sectors in much of Asia were almost certainly rather larger than needed and therefore don’t
need  to  be  fully  ‘replaced’.  Indonesia,  for  example,  had  something  like  240  banks  servicing  an
economy which, at its peak, was little more than three times the size of New Zealand’s. As in other
parts  of  the  region,  most  of  those  banks  are  insolvent.  But  it  will  not  be  necessary  to  rebuild  the
capital base of each to BIS standards. Without wishing to diminish the magnitude of the task, many,
if  not  most,  of  those  banks  can  probably  be  allowed  to  disappear,  through  mergers  or  closures,
without  impairing  the  effective  functioning  of  the  economy.  Indeed,  the  priority  throughout  the
region is to quickly resurrect functioning and trustworthy financial systems around a small core of
robust institutions.
Even that will require enormous equity injections. Where will that equity be found?
The options are reasonably clear cut:
shareholders of banks
• 
•  creditors (i.e. depositors) of banks
• 
•  domestic investors
• 
foreign investors
the public purse
But those options are somewhat constrained.
In essence, existing shareholders have, to use the vernacular, ‘lost their shirts’. Some
private shareholders may be able to contribute additional capital, but most will not.
For the most part, the depositors of banks in the region have already received public
guarantees on their deposits. There seems little prospect that they will be obliged or allowed to share
directly in the losses accrued.
BIS Review   83/1998
- 5 -
The  public  purse  is  the  mostly  likely  source  of  substantial,  and  early,  new  equity.
Most countries in the region went into this crash with relatively light public debt loads. Most could
probably absorb an additional debt burden of, say, 10 to 20 percent of GDP equivalent in order to
recapitalise banks and deal, at least in part, with the bad debts. In so doing, they would, in effect,
socialise the losses, and spread the impact of the economic collapse over the next decade or two. Of
course,  as  conditions  improve,  and  perceptions  grow  that  the  worst  of  the  shock  is  over,  private
investors  will  be  increasingly  willing  and  able  to  reinvest,  enabling  the  governments  to  withdraw
from direct ownership and retire at least some of that debt.
Whatever  view  one  takes  of  the  desirability  of  public  investment  in  financial
institutions, it is difficult to see how this particular option can be avoided given the magnitude of the
problems  that  have  emerged,  and  the  profound  lack  of  confidence  on  the  part  of  private  investors
which  now  exists.  Indeed,  this  process  of  public  capital  injections  is  already  well  under  way  in
Korea, Thailand and Indonesia. Japan, it seems, is still struggling with the concept.
Asia’s domestic private investors, for the most part, have taken such an enormous hit
to net worth that it is difficult to imagine them being an early or substantial source of new capital for
banks. In any event, the need for new equity extends well into the non-financial business sector also,
and  even  with  Asia’s  renowned  savings  capacity,  the  short-term  need  for  private  savings  well
exceeds the local capacity to supply.
That  leaves  only  foreign  investment  in  Asian  financial  systems  and  industry  as  a
substantial and available avenue for prompt recapitalisation and  rapid  economic  recovery.  Foreign
investment would bring more than just capital. The region needs skills, experience, risk management
systems, accounting and auditing systems, diversification of ownership risk and, perhaps beyond all
else, high reputation and confidence in creditworthiness. Foreign investors can provide all of that.
Certainly, foreign investment in the region’s financial systems is already  occurring.
However,  my  impression  is  that  it  is  not  always  openly  welcomed.  I  am  well  aware  of  all  of  the
national  reservations  about  foreign  investment,  and  I  don’t  approach  this  issue  with  a  strongly
ideological  view  of  the  subject.  But  it  does  seem  that  without  a  more  liberal  and  welcoming
approach  to  foreign  investment,  the  recovery  will  be  slower  because  the  region’s  equity  needs  far
exceed the capacity of domestic sources - public and private - to provide.
Before  private  investors,  of  either  domestic  or  foreign  origin,  are  enticed  into
recapitalising the region’s banks, there will have to be substantial progress on issues of accounting
standards,  audit  standards,  transparency,  and  legal  underpinning  of  bankruptcy  proceedings  and
commercial  law  more  generally.  Investors  will  not  invest  unless  reasonably  confident  that  they
understand the risks they are accepting (which, as recent events prove, isn’t the same as saying that
investors  will  assess  those  risks  accurately).  Reducing  those  risks  is  one  of  the  most  productive
activities that governments in the region can now engage themselves in.
Concluding Comments
Asia has suffered a shock which, by any historical comparison, is severe. Recovery
from that shock will take time and perhaps the most useful thing that can come from the experience
now  is  to  extract  the  available  lessons  and  try  to  ensure  that  recovery  is  sound,  durable  and  less
susceptible to such crises in future.
Asia  2000  Executive  Director  Philip  Gibson  in  a  recent  speech  pointed  to  the
fundamental  strengths  of  Asian  countries,  in  terms  of  their  cohesiveness,  willingness  to  save  and
invest, commitment to improvement, especially through education, and commitment to recovery. All
BIS Review   83/1998
- 6 -
of  those  qualities  are  evident,  and  all  will  be  necessary  over  the  next  couple  of  years  as  recovery
takes root.
To  my  mind,  there  are  two  key  lessons  emerging  from  the  Asian  experience,  and
these are now being reinforced by events elsewhere around the world.
•  The crucial importance of a strong, well-capitalised financial sector, with  robust
systems  for  recognising  and  managing  risk.  The  experience  is  showing  us  again
just how financial system stress can amplify difficulties in the rest of the economy.
•  Asset  price  booms  may  be  enjoyable  on  the  way  up,  but  are  terribly  destructive
when the bubble finally pops.
If  those  two  lessons  are  well-learnt,  and  applied  in  future  policy  making,  Asia’s
future will be even more robust and durable than its past.
BIS Review   83/1998
