Mr.  Macfarlane  puts  recent  suggestions  for  improving  the  operation  of  the  international
financial system into perspective
Talk by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, Mr. I.J. Macfarlane, to CEDA Annual
General Meeting Dinner in Melbourne on 25/11/98.
It is a pleasure to be in Melbourne again for CEDA’s Annual General Meeting. The last time I
addressed this group two years ago I spoke about the Australian economy, monetary policy and
wages.  Events  have  moved  on  a  good  deal  since  then,  and  I  hope  what  I  have  to  say  tonight
reflects this.
The biggest change is that attention is now more focussed on the international economy than on
domestic  events.  This  change  can  be  dated  from  the  start  of  the  Asian  crisis  in  the  middle  of
1997,  and  has  continued  through  more  recent  episodes  which  have  affected  other  emerging
markets as well as financial institutions in developed countries. These events have led a number
of participants in international markets, myself included, to question some aspects of the present
international financial system, and to make suggestions for improvements.
I have said a number of things recently that have sounded a bit out of character from a central
banker. Both I and my deputy have shown a lot of sympathy for our Asian neighbours and felt
that it is unfair to place the blame for their current plight solely on their own policy inadequacies.
We  have  also  said  that  the  present  international  financial  system  is  unstable,  that  hedge  funds
should  be  brought  into  the  disclosure  and  supervision  net  and  that  the  western  policy
establishment  was  wrong  to  encourage  emerging  markets  to  embrace  the  free  movement  of
international capital so early in their development.
This has led some people to wonder what has come over us, and to question whether we have
deserted orthodox economics to follow more populist creeds. I have been asked whether we no
longer believe in markets, and  whether  we  have  become  proponents  of  capital  controls.  These
questions  worry  me  because  they  suggest  that,  for  some  people,  there  are  only  the  two  polar
positions, and that if you express some reservations about one, you are automatically placed in
the  other.  For  these  reasons,  I  want  to  spend  some  time  tonight  trying  to  place  the  recent
suggestions  for  improving  the  operation  of  the  international  financial  system  in  some  sort  of
perspective.
1.
From the Perspective of Australia
From the perspective of the Australian economy, the move to financial deregulation, and to the
lifting  of  restrictions  on  international  capital  movements,  has  been  a  success.  We  can  date  it
approximately from the floating of the exchange rate, and the abolition of exchange controls, in
1983. Although we characterise this 15-year period as being an era of deregulation, that is only a
very  approximate  description.  While  the  authorities  have  stopped  setting  prices  such  as  the
exchange  rate  or  the  interest  rates  banks  can  charge  on  mortgages,  there  is  still  a  large  ever-
evolving body of regulation in place aimed at ensuring financial stability and efficient and fair
markets.  The  stock  exchange  and  the  futures  exchange  have  a  comprehensive  set  of  rules  that
participants  must  adhere  to,  and,  of  course,  they  are  also  regulated  by  ASIC.  The  banks  and
insurance  companies  are  regulated  by  APRA,  the  payments  system  by  the  Reserve  Bank,  and
competition policy is enforced by the ACCC. Underlying all this, are the body of commercial law
and the accounting standards.
BIS Review   99/1998
- 2 -
This approach to organising financial markets - which, in deference to common usage, I will call
the  deregulated  approach  -  has  not  been  without  its  critics.  A  common  criticism  is  that
international capital has forced the Australian Government to run macro-economic policies that
were  not  in  the  interests  of  the  domestic  economy.  By  this,  the  critics  mean  policies  that  are
tighter than the ones they favour. I have never agreed with this proposition. There has been an
on-going struggle in Australia by governments of both sides to return fiscal and monetary policy
to sustainable long-run settings after the turmoil of the 1970s. The influence of financial markets
has  been  a  helpful  one  in  bringing  this  about.  Now  that  policies  are  in  a  sustainable  and
responsible position, I am not aware of financial markets pushing for tighter policies.
The  other  common  criticism  is  that  financial  markets  in  Australia  have  been  unstable.  The
simplest answer to this charge is to point out that they would have been more unstable over the
past 15 years if we had tried to find a path through the ups and downs of the world economy with
a  managed  exchange  rate  and  a  set  of  interest  rate  ceilings.  We  would  not  have  had  the  daily
movements as under the present system, but the pressure would have built up and when the dam
broke, as it assuredly would have, the crisis would have been worse.
While I am confident that the deregulated system performed better than a continuation of the old
regulated one would have, I do not want to give the impression that it is without fault. We are
already on record as accepting that the exchange rate went down too far in the mid-1980s, that
asset prices such as shares and, later, commercial property underwent a boom and bust at the end
of  the  1980s  and  beginning  of  the  1990s,  partly  as  a  result  of  excessive  lending  by  newly-
deregulated banks. Our whole approach to foreign exchange intervention is based on our view
that the foreign exchange market is not “efficient” in the academic sense, but that it is prone to
overshooting in both directions from time to time.
In other words, we do not have an idealised view of how deregulated asset markets behave - we
have  a  realistic  “warts  and  all”  view.  But  even  holding  that  view,  we  are  confident  that  a
deregulated model with no obstacles to capital movements is the best one for Australia. It took us
a long time to adopt it, but there is now wide support for it at the political, policy adviser and
community level, and I hear no suggestions that we should change it. But that does not mean that
we  should  be  urging  every  other  country  to  adopt  this  model  regardless  of  their  state  of
development. Eventually, I think it will be in the interest of emerging market economies to do so,
but the sequencing of this and other policies is crucial.
2. An Emerging Market Perspective
When we look at international capital movements from the perspective of an emerging market
economy, the view can be very different.
For a start, the size of the financial sector in an emerging market is often extremely small relative
to the flows of capital that emanate from developed countries. As Paul Volcker has put it:
“One  common  characteristic  of  (emerging  market)  countries,  some  large  in
population and area, is the small size of their financial sector. The aggregate size of
the banks in the typical emerging country is now the size of a single regional bank in
the United States - precisely the kind of bank that is told that it is too small to survive
in today’s turbulent markets.”1
                                                     
1 
Speech to Institute for International Finance, Washington, October 1998.
BIS Review   99/1998
- 3 -
What is a small adjustment of investment strategy for a few major banks or mutual funds may be
a large injection or withdrawal of funds for an emerging market.
Second, it is clear that for most of the Asian emerging markets, some of the capital inflow that
occurred in the mid to late 1990s was not, in any sense, needed. It was more than the amount
required to finance their current account deficit, and it certainly was not needed to support their
exchange rate because these were under unwelcome upward pressure throughout the period. The
purist would say that if they did not want the inflow they should have let their exchange rates
float  upwards.  This  would  have  eventually  curtailed  the  short-term  inflows  that  result  when  a
fixed  exchange  rate  tries  to  co-exist  with  a  positive  interest  differential.  But  what  we  do  not
know is how high the exchange rate would have needed to rise in the process and the extent to
which  this  would  have  added  to  the  economic  difficulties.  Remember  the  Thai  currency  crisis
was triggered by the perception that the baht had become over-valued because it was tied to a
rising US dollar. In short, if capital flows are very large relative to the size of the economies, they
are, one way or another, going to cause distortions.
Of course, the above considerations would not matter if the international capital markets were a
smoothly adjusting mechanism that constantly kept the exchange rate in line with the evolving
fundamentals. But this is not what people observe - they see booms and busts and do not believe
the  proposition  that  the  market  is  always  right.  Attempts  by  academic  economists  to  persuade
them  that  the  free  market  always,  or  nearly  always,  gives  the  correct  equilibrium  price  are
unconvincing. The public’s scepticism is well placed because the intellectual underpinning of the
free market position in relation to asset price determination - the Efficient Markets Hypothesis -
is  very  weak.  In  all  the  exchange  rate  tests  of  which  I  am  aware,  the  hypothesis  has  been
contradicted by the facts.
The  third  difference  from  an  emerging  market  viewpoint  is  their  relatively  under-developed
financial infrastructures and regulatory frameworks. They do not have as strongly a based system
of  regulating  stock  markets  or  banks  or  the  underlying  body  of  commercial  (including
bankruptcy) law or accounting practices. They also have serious deficiencies in the allocation of
investment which unduly favours those who are well-connected to the government, the banks or
both  (the  so-called  “crony  capitalism”).  I  have  no  intention  of  denying  that  these  are  serious
shortcomings and that they should be rectified as quickly as possible if the countries concerned
are going to achieve first world living standards. But we have to be realistic about how quickly
these things can be achieved; in our own countries, these changes took decades or generations
rather than years.
Such  problems  are  heightened  by  the  phenomenon  of  contagion,  a  fourth  element  particularly
strong among emerging markets. In cases of panic, financial markets are not very discriminating.
When one country suffers a withdrawal of capital, others come under pressure. Partly, this can be
geography,  as  physical  proximity  can  often  mean  economic  and  financial  linkages.  But  even
economies on the other side of the globe, with few direct linkages, can be affected for no other
reason than that they are classified as “emerging markets”.
Such countries might well have some weaknesses such as those noted above which, given time
and  a  measure  of  economic  and  financial  stability,  might  be  adequately  addressed.  But  under
conditions  of  widespread  desire  to  shed  risk,  they  become  immediate  stumbling  blocks  for
markets. This can put intense pressure on the policy authorities and economies of these countries
- pressure which few countries can withstand easily.
BIS Review   99/1998
- 4 -
For  these  reasons,  the  picture  looks  different  from  the  perspective  of  the  emerging  market
economies. What is good for us after a long period of evolution need not be good for another
country at a much earlier  stage  of  that  evolution.  In  modern  parlance,  it  is  essential  to  get  the
sequencing  right.  Countries  have  to  attain  a  high  standard  of  financial  infrastructure  and
regulation  before  they  can  submit  themselves  to  the  potential  instability  inherent  in  the  totally
free movement of capital. In the meantime, they should integrate themselves as closely as they
can into the international capital market and, as their markets evolve towards maturity, they can
take additional steps progressively to liberalise their regulatory regimes. To expect them to do it
in the other order is to ask them to run before they can walk.
3. What Should We Do About It?
Fortunately, there is now a widespread agreement that something has to be done to improve the
international  financial  system.  The  degree  of  instability,  if  it  continues  unchecked,  could  lead
many participating countries to question the whole legitimacy of the system. The severity of the
contractions in Asia is the most striking example, but so is the sudden recognition that a hedge
fund can become so important that its failure could pose a systemic threat to the United States
and international economy. The fact that the second most important exchange rate in the world -
the US dollar-Yen rate - could move by 20 per cent in a month without there being a material
change in fundamentals has also caused concern. I think there is now agreement that something
has  to  be  done,  and  it  is  heartening  to  see  that  the  United  States  has  taken  a  leadership  role,
including  by  convening  the  Group  of  22  and  its  three  working  parties.  I  also  think  that  the
Australian  Government  has  played  a  very  useful  role  -  first  by  its  representations  to  the  IMF
urging  more  flexibility  in  its  handling  of  the  Indonesian  crisis,  and  secondly  by  its  attempt  to
keep the momentum of APEC heading in the direction of more liberal trade policies.
Change  is  already  occurring  in  that  the  western  policy  establishment  is  no  longer  pushing
emerging market economies to move quickly to full capital account convertibility. As recently as
October last year the IMF, at its Annual Meeting in Hong Kong, was hoping to get its members’
endorsement of a change to its Articles to make it easier for it to encourage countries to adopt
full convertibility. This proposal was not put forward at the 1998 Annual Meeting in Washington
because it was clear that it would not get support. There also seems to be greater tolerance for
countries which have a generally outward-looking policy framework, but which have put in place
some  impediment  to  very  short-term  capital  movements.  I  refer  here  to  Chile’s  deposit
requirement on foreign borrowing and to Singapore’s  and  Taiwan’s  restrictions  on  their  banks
lending domestic currency offshore.
The  more  important  task  is  to  get  on  with  the  job  of  improving  the  international  monetary
system, with the specific aim of reducing the degree of instability. Some of this is the job of the
emerging  market  countries,  and  in  the  first  instance  involves  increasing  disclosure  by  these
countries’ governments, companies and banks. As well as making markets better informed, and
better able to judge the risks they are taking, the aim here is to make some progress on reducing
the previously opaque links between governments, banks and companies, or, in other words, to
improve governance. In addition, there is a lot of  work  to  be  done  to  bring  the  supervision  of
financial institutions up to standard - a task which will take a lot of personnel, training and time.
These  changes  are  extremely  important  and  require  a  lot  of  effort  on  the  part  of  the  emerging
market countries. They also mean that a lot of time-honoured ways of doing things will have to
be  replaced.  This  is  bound  to  meet  opposition,  and  it  will  require  political  courage  as  well  as
economic expertise to achieve results. It will be made a lot easier if the developed economies are
also seen to be examining whether there are aspects of their regulations that are contributing to
BIS Review   99/1998
- 5 -
the  instability  of  the  international  system.  The  most  obvious  reform  here  is  to  do  something
about the extent to which current regulations allow excessive leverage in financial markets. The
immediate focus should be the close inter-connections between hedge funds, investment banks
and commercial banks. The hedge funds have become the privileged children of the international
financial scene, being entitled to the benefits of free markets without any of the responsibilities.
Our reconstruction of the transactions that hedge funds undertook in Australia in June suggests
that they could engage in almost infinite leverage in their off-balance sheet transactions if they so
chose. One has to ask whether the Basle capital requirements are excessively generous in their
treatment  of  financial  market  activities.  A  related  problem  is  the  weakness  in  banks’  credit
assessment processes that allowed them to build up some very large exposures to hedge funds
and other financial institutions.
No matter how effective the above changes turn out to be, no-one expects that they will eliminate
economic crises altogether. There still will be a need for improved crisis management.
Here,  the  most  useful  suggestion  goes  under  the  title  of  private  sector  burden  sharing.  This  is
designed to be used in a future crisis when a country’s international reserves are exhausted and
its exchange rate is plunging as a result of capital flight. In order to reassure markets, countries
are often tempted to guarantee a variety of foreign borrowings, with the result that their taxpayers
incur large losses while foreign lenders escape unscathed. Private sector burden sharing would
stop the capital flight by bringing foreign creditors, the debtor country and the IMF together to
work  out  a  rescheduling,  probably  with  a  standfast  arrangement  to  hold  things  together  while
negotiations  take  place.  Thus,  the  burden  would  be  shared  more  evenly,  and  the  pressures  on
exchange rates could be reduced.
Another way in which crises can be handled better is illustrated by the recent IMF package for
Brazil. It was an improvement on the Asian packages in two respects. First, the conditions were
agreed  on  in  advance  in  behind-the-scenes  negotiations  between  the  IMF  and  Brazilian
authorities. This was much better than the public tug-of-war between national authorities and the
IMF that occurred in Thailand and Indonesia. Second, I also note that the conditions are not as
wide-ranging as in Indonesia, for instance. I agree with Martin Feldstein2 that the IMF conditions
should  confine  themselves  to  matters  that  bear  directly  on  the  currency  crisis,  namely  fiscal,
monetary and banking policy, rather than trying to reform the automobile, shipbuilding or clove
industry, as in Indonesia.
4. Conclusion
It  is  important  that  we  find  a  way  of  reducing  the  present  extreme  variability  in  international
capital  flows.  It  is  also  important  that  we  find  a  way  of  managing  future  crises  in  a  way  that
reduces  the  cost  to  the  crisis  country  and  shares  the  burden  more  evenly,  and  so  reduces  the
moral hazard to lenders. If we do not succeed in doing these things, we face the prospect of a
significant number of countries losing faith in open, market-based economic systems. It would be
tragic  if  our  failure  to  reform  an  unstable  international  capital  market  resulted  in  a  return  to
inward-looking  policies  in  the  international  trade  in  goods  and  services.  And  that  may  yet
happen.
One  reaction  to  the  instability  of  the  international  financial  system  would  be  for  countries  to
unilaterally impose quite restrictive controls on inward and outward capital movements, and thus
miss  out  on  the  benefits  that  access  to  foreign  capital  can  provide.  We  have  already  seen  this
                                                     
2 
“Reforming the IMF”, Foreign Affairs, March/April 1998.
BIS Review   99/1998
- 6 -
starting, and it would be regrettable if it were to spread. Even if this does not happen, there is still
a possibility of other reactions which may be equally, or more, unhelpful to the world economy.
In particular, I fear that a number of emerging market countries will take another form of safety-
first policy by building up large international reserves - a new type of mercantilism. The problem
with  this  solution  is  that  to  build  up  the  reserves  they  would  have  to  run  current  account
surpluses  for  the  foreseeable  future.  How  will  they  do  this?  Will  they  be  tempted  to  restrict
imports, subsidise exports or maintain undervalued exchange rates? All of these are what used to
be called “beggar thy neighbour” policies. The whole world cannot do this, so who will run the
corresponding current account deficits? The final irony, if this situation eventuates, would be that
we would have an international system in which the poor countries lend to the rich so they can
spend more than their income.
BIS Review   99/1998
