Mr. Duisenberg's statement to the European Parliament’s Subcommittee on
the  European  Central  Bank,
the  President  of 
 Monetary  Affairs 
Dr. W. F. Duisenberg, in Brussels on 22/9/98.
  Address  by 
This is the first time that I, in my capacity as President of the European Central
Bank (ECB), have the privilege to appear here at  the  European  Parliament  in  accordance  with
Article 109b(3) of the Treaty. Today I should like to inform you, first, of the decisions that have
been taken by the ECB since July and, second, of our schedule for the work still to be completed
during the remainder of 1998. Afterwards I shall be happy to answer your questions.
First and foremost I should like to stress that our preparatory work for Stage Three
of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) is proceeding on schedule. You may be aware that we
held two sets of meetings this month: meetings of the Governing Council of the ECB and of the
General Council of the ECB on 1 September 1998, and an additional meeting of the Governing
Council on 11 September 1998. We decided to hold a second meeting in September because we
felt that with regard to the long lead-time, especially in those areas in which the preparatory work
of  our  counterparties,  i.e.  the  credit  institutions,  is  affected  by  our  decisions,  we  should  move
things forward faster. Today I am in a position to present to you quite a long list of important
decisions taken recently by ECB bodies. I think that the list demonstrates that we have made very
good  progress  in  a  number  of  areas.  Let  me  please  elaborate  on  the  most  important  decisions
relating to the preparatory work for Stage Three of EMU.
A. State of preparatory work
1.  Exchange  rate  policy  co-operation  between  the  euro  area  countries  and  other  EU  Member
States
The General Council endorsed the text of an Agreement between the ECB and the
non-euro area national central banks, laying down the operating procedures for an exchange rate
mechanism in Stage Three (the so-called ERM II). You will recall that the European Council in
Amsterdam  in  June  last  year  agreed  to  set  up  an  exchange  rate  mechanism  in  Stage  Three  to
replace the present European Monetary System (EMS). For this reason, the EMI prepared a draft
Central Bank Agreement on the replacement of the current exchange rate mechanism with a new
one in Stage Three. It is this Agreement which has now been signed by myself, as President of
the ECB, and by the governors of the four non-euro area national central banks. The signing of
this Agreement by the latter parties implies their acceptance of the operating procedures. It does
not, however, imply their participation in ERM II.
For the currency of each Member State participating in the mechanism, a central
rate  against  the  euro  and  a  standard  fluctuation  band  of  ±15%  will  be  defined,  in  principle
supported  by  automatic  unlimited  intervention  at  the  margins,  with  very  short-term  financing
available.  However,  the  ECB  and  the  participating  non-euro  area  national  central  banks  could
suspend  automatic  intervention  if  this  were  to  conflict  with  their  primary  objective  of
maintaining price stability. In line with the Resolution of the European Council, exchange rate
policy co-operation may be further strengthened, for example by allowing closer exchange rate
links between the euro and other currencies in the exchange rate mechanism, where, and to the
extent that, this is appropriate in the light of progress towards convergence.
BIS Review   77/1998
- 2 -
2. General documentation on ESCB monetary policy: instruments and procedures
Last Friday, 18 September 1998, the ECB published a report entitled “The single
monetary policy in Stage Three: General documentation on ESCB monetary policy instruments
and procedures”. This report contains a detailed description of the monetary policy instruments
and  procedures  to  be  applied  by  the  ESCB  in  Stage  Three  of  EMU.  Hence  it  provides  credit
institutions  with  the  information  they  need  in  order  to  prepare  for  participation  in  ESCB
monetary policy operations as from 1 January 1999. The report expands upon and  updates  the
material contained in an earlier version which was published by the EMI on 23 September 1997.
The report first sets out the criteria to be fulfilled by credit institutions in order to
be eligible as counterparties to ESCB monetary policy operations. It then presents the features of
the different types of open market operations which might be conducted by the ESCB and the
ESCB’s two standing facilities (the marginal lending facility and the deposit facility). The report
also contains a detailed description of the procedures related to the various types of operations,
and  specifies  the  eligibility  criteria  and  the  risk  control  measures  to  be  applied  to  assets
underlying  the  ESCB’s  liquidity-providing  operations.  Moreover,  the  report  includes  the
description  of  the  features  of  the  ESCB’s  minimum  reserve  system  and  sets  out  specific
provisions  to  be  applied  for  the  ESCB’s  monetary  policy  instruments  and  procedures  in  the
transition to Stage Three.
In this context I should also mention that on 11 September  1998  the  Governing
Council of the ECB endorsed the statistical framework on the basis of a number of reports that
had  been  prepared  by  the  EMI  -  many  of  which  had  been  published  in  the  past  -  thereby
confirming the ECB’s statistical requirements for Stage Three. The reporting framework for the
money and banking statistics of the ECB is included in the “General documentation”.
Furthermore,  on  11  September  1998  the  Governing  Council  endorsed  a  list  of
eligible securities settlement systems following an assessment of such systems against standards
that had previously been laid down for their use in the credit operations of the ESCB. The list,
which  indicates  those  securities  settlement  systems  that  will  be  used  by  the  ESCB  and  the
conditions for their use, is set out in the “General documentation” as well.
3. Technical preparations for the euro banknotes
The  technical  preparations  for  the  euro  banknotes  are  proceeding  according  to
schedule. The origination, i.e. the process of converting the designs into banknotes, has now been
successfully  completed.  A  zero-production  run  will  be  conducted  in  the  autumn  before  mass
production starts in early 1999.
The Governing Council of the ECB decided on 11 September 1998 that there will
be  no  national  feature  on  the  euro  banknotes.  It  also  confirmed,  in  line  with  previous
recommendations  made  by  the  EMI,  that  the  following  seven  banknote  denominations  will  be
issued: 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200 and 500.
4. Schedules for the meetings of the Governing Council and General Council
In addition to its meetings scheduled for 13 October, 3 November and 1 December
1998, the Governing Council of the ECB has agreed to hold a further meeting on 22 December
1998.  The  Governing  Council’s  final  meeting  before  the  start  of  Stage  Three  will  be  devoted
BIS Review   77/1998
- 3 -
primarily  to  fine-tuning  its  last-minute  preparations.  The  Governing  Council  has  also  decided
that during the first year of Stage Three its meetings shall, as a rule, be scheduled to take place on
Thursdays every other week, starting on 7 January 1999. Furthermore, the General Council has
agreed that the current practice of holding quarterly meetings on the same day as meetings of the
Governing Council should continue in Stage Three.
As far as the information policy of the ECB is concerned, I should like to mention
that the ECB intends to hold a press conference, as a general rule, once a month. For the first
three months of 1999, it envisages holding a press conference immediately after the first meeting
of each month. It is my aim to pursue a policy of actively informing the public about the ECB’s
decisions and the rationale behind them. In addition to press conferences, the public statements
of the members of the Governing Council and the ECB’s regular publications will also contribute
to achieving this goal. In its regular publications, for example, the ECB will report thoroughly on
all aspects relevant to the conduct of the single monetary policy in the euro area. In particular,
they  will  supply  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  developments  upon  which  the  respective  monetary
policy  decisions  are  based.  Apart  from  the  publications  foreseen  in  the  Treaty,  of  which  the
Annual Report and the Quarterly Report are the most important ones, the ECB intends to publish
a Monthly Bulletin.
In order to give a well-rounded picture I should like to draw your attention to one
of  the  most  recent  ECB  publications,  the  “Report  on  electronic  money”,  before  I  turn  to  our
schedule for the remainder of 1998.
 * The “Report on electronic money”
On  31  August  1998  the  ECB  published  a  “Report  on  electronic  money”.  The
report deepens the analysis of the implications of prepaid cards conducted by the EMI in 1994
and extends it to new forms of electronic money, i.e. software-based electronic money products
which have since started to evolve. The main findings of the study were published in the Opinion
of the EMI Council on the issuance of electronic money, which is contained in Chapter III of the
EMI’s Annual Report 1997.
Although electronic money is not a widespread phenomenon at present, it is likely
to  have  significant  implications  for  monetary  policy  in  the  future.  In  this  regard,  it  must  be
ensured that, in particular, price stability and the unit-of-account function of money are not put at
risk. There are a number of additional regulatory concerns regarding electronic money which also
have  to  be  taken  into  account,  such  as  the  efficient  functioning  of  payment  systems  and
confidence in payment instruments, the protection of customers and merchants, the stability of
financial markets and protection against criminal abuse.
With a view to ensuring monetary policy effectiveness and a level playing-field,
and  in  order  to  address  the  regulatory  concerns  I  have  just  outlined,  the  ECB  regards  it  as
essential that certain minimum requirements be fulfilled (see Chapter 4 of the Report).
I would like to stress in this context that the ECB follows with interest and close
attention the European Commission’s work on a directive on electronic money and expects to be
officially consulted in due time.
B. Schedule for the remainder of 1998
BIS Review   77/1998
- 4 -
Given the huge volume of work to be completed during the remainder of the year
it  seemed  to  us  appropriate  to  give  priority  to  those  issues  relevant  to  credit  institutions’
preparatory  work  for  Stage  Three.  The  above-mentioned  “General  documentation”  is  one
example of this, since credit institutions’ preparations for participation in ESCB monetary policy
operations as from 1 January 1999 were to a large extent dependent on the decisions to be taken
by the Governing Council. Given the lead time in this field I consider the approach adopted to be
very helpful.
The  need  to  set  priorities  was  also  a  major  factor  in  opting  to  schedule  our
decision  on  euro  area’s  monetary  strategy  for  the  autumn  of  this  year.  The  determination  of  a
strategy for the single monetary policy is a very important decision to be taken. Nonetheless, the
outcome  of  our  proceedings  does  not  have  such  a  direct  impact  on  our  counterparties’
preparations for Stage Three as the operational framework. Moreover, another reason for not yet
having taken definite decisions regarding the monetary policy strategy is that the matter requires
very  thorough  consideration.  The  Governing  Council  has  already  started  with  this  discussion
which will continue for some time. I can assure you that there are no fundamentally diverging
opinions within the Governing Council concerning the orientation of our future monetary policy
strategy.  In  this  context,  allow  me  to  remind  you  that  the  EMI  had  already  achieved  a  broad
consensus  regarding  the  monetary  policy  strategy.  In  particular,  certain  strategies,  such  as
exchange  rate  targeting  or  nominal  income  targeting  were  explicitly  excluded  some  time  ago.
Moreover, it was pointed out that the  implementation  of  the  two  potential  candidate  strategies
that  had  been  identified,  namely  monetary  targeting  and  direct  inflation  targeting,  may,  in
practice, be relatively similar. A combination of elements of both strategies was also considered
as  a  possibility.  Finally,  there  was  no  doubt  within  the  EMI  Council,  that  monetary  policy
decisions  should  be  based  on  a  broad  range  of  indicator  variables  and  that  money  would  be
assigned a prominent role, with either targets or monitoring ranges set for its growth, provided
that money demand is sufficiently stable. The Governing Council of the  ECB  will  continue  to
discuss  the  specification  of  the  strategy  along  these  lines  over  the  months  to  come.  The
Governing Council will then specify the exact formulation of its strategy and its implementation
in 1999 before the start of Stage Three.
BIS Review   77/1998
