Mr.  Meister  reviews  the  response  of  bank  supervisors  to  the  growing
competition within EMU   Lecture delivered by Mr. Edgar Meister, a member of the Board of
the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Bank of Greece in Athens on 12/10/98.
I
 “panta rhei”, “all is flux”
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  these  words,  attributed  to  Heraclit,  readily  cross  one’s
mind  on  the  eve  of  EMU,  both  with  respect  to  the  previous  course  of  events  in  the  European
integration  process  and  with  respect  to  the  events  still  lying  ahead.  As  so  often  in  the  past,
politicians and businessmen must adjust to legal and structural changes, which on this occasion
have  been  triggered  by  the  forthcoming  European  Monetary  Union.  Germany  joins  EMU  next
year, and Greece will follow as soon as possible (that is likely to be in the year 2001). (Greece
has  already  immortalised  itself  on  the  Euro  banknote).  In  the  field  of  banking  supervision,
Greece will from the outset be a genuine “in” country, or actually is one already: the European
harmonisation  of  banking  law  encompasses  all  EU-countries.  In  the  Banking  Supervision
Committee of the ECB, “ins” and “pre-ins” as a rule are sitting round the same table, with equal
rights. And such co-operation round a single table will be necessary once those responsible are
required to decide on supervisory responses to the growing competition within EMU.
II
After  all,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  competition  within  the  banking  sector  in
“euroland”  will  intensify.  In  the  first  place,  the  euro  will  act  as  a  catalyst  of  trends  that  are
leading to a globalisation of financial transactions world-wide and  going hand in hand with this
to  fiercer  competition  among  banks.  The  deregulation  and  internationalisation  of  banking
business are topical buzzwords in this context. Secondly, the introduction of the euro itself will
reinforce competition: the disappearance of exchange risk and transaction costs in the future euro
area will result in a high degree of market integration, especially in the financial sphere. That is
likely to culminate in increased interbank competition, due both to changed behaviour on the part
of bank customers and changed behaviour on the part of the banks themselves.
Already  from  the  start  of  1999  the  Euro  is  going  to  be  introduced  in  form  of
deposits and prepaid cards. Thereby the capacity of bank customers to compare rates and charges
across borders, without the need to worry about exchange risks will grow. This, should enhance
competition  among  individual  products.  It  is  also  likely  that  multinational  firms  will  seek  to
consolidate Treasury operations, which were previously spread over many currency zones. Hence
competition for customer relationships might increase, too.
The  single  currency  will  also  change  the  behaviour  of  financial  institutions,
prompting them to think about the competitiveness of European and not just national markets. In
areas near national borders, small institutions, hitherto operating only locally or regionally, will
be able to operate in markets that have not been accessible to them in the past, but at the same
time they will likewise be affected by the keener competition.
However, banks will not only have to face growing interbank competition: as the
euro  will  probably  foster  the  growth  of  a  much  larger  and  more  liquid  securities  market  in
Europe, securities markets may be expected to pose a significant competitive challenge to banks
offering traditional forms of intermediated credit.
BIS Review   84/1998
- 2 -
Banks should prepare themselves thoroughly to face all these challenges. For only
well-prepared banks will be able to open up new markets in „euroland”, while ill-prepared banks
will be at risk of losing existing market shares on account of the intensification of competition.
How is this growing competition to be rated in prudential terms?
III
In line with the regulatory policy decision in favour of a market economy system,
in the EU-countries the necessity of competition as a guarantor of the viability of the market is
being  endorsed  in  the  banking  sector,  too.  Moreover,  the  beneficial  effects  of  competition  for
consumers - in the form of enhanced efficiency, innovation, a broader range of products and cost
cuts  -  are  undisputed.  Even  so,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  repercussions  of  the  increasing
competition pose additional challenges for banking supervisors.
One such repercussion is the process of concentration which already takes place in
many countries’ banking industries in the form of mergers. That process will result not only in
fewer and larger banks in continental Europe, which is already felt to be “overbanked”, but also,
no doubt, in radical structural changes.
Mergers  may  constitute  a  reasonable  adjustment,  in  terms  of  both  size  and
strategy, to an enlarged market in the context of EMU, and may help to improve banks’ viability.
The  wave  of  mergers  currently  in  progress  in  Germany  hardly  rates  as  a  cause  for  concern  in
prudential  terms.  Mergers  for  the  purpose  of  enhancing  efficiency  are  likewise  to  be  expected
among  Greek  banks.  In  addition,  the  sale  of  government  interests  in  a  number  of  banks  will
change the banking sector in this country.
Quite  generally,  however,  the  fact  of  the  matter  is  that  size  alone  by  no  means
implies  a  hallmark  of  quality.  The  hoped-for  commercial  advantages  of  such  mergers  must
materialise  first.  In  terms  of  banking  supervision,  “mega-  mergers”  involve  the  drawback  that
banking structures become less transparent and groups become more difficult to control by the
management. Overall, the number of institutions that are to be classified as “too big to fail” will
increase.
In the context of the growing competition, there is also a danger that banks will
run greater risks in order to defend their market positions and make attractive profits. That may
lead to a tendency towards increasing fragility and a  higher  probability  of  market  exits,  which
would make additional demands on banking supervisors. Furthermore, the current problems of
the  hedge  fund  LTCM  show  that  the  danger  of  excessive  risk  taking  is  not  limited  to  banks.
Against  this  background  the  precise  measurement  and  monitoring  of  risks,  sufficient
transparency,  a  strong  capital  base  and  an  adequate  supervision  become  factors  of  increasing
significance. This does not only apply to supervised banks but principally to other major players
on the financial markets.
With regard to hedge funds my preliminary conclusions are threefold:
1.
Bank loans to hedge funds should be limited in relation to the funds’ own
capital  to  contain  their  leverage  and  thus  excessive  risk  taking  (for
example ratio of own capital to loans 1:10)
Hedge funds’ exposures should be made transparent through for example
an international credit and derivatives register. And
Banks should basically not be allowed to invest in hedge funds.
2.
3.
BIS Review   84/1998
- 3 -
Coming back to my main topic, competition in EMU: In particular, the following
points will be of paramount importance to banking supervisors, to enable them to adjust to the
growing competition within EMU and cope with its consequences.
 •  The  continuation  and  deepening  of  the  harmonisation  of  European
banking legislation and of the pan-European co-operation among banking
supervisors;
the exploitation of competition to strengthen the market players’ sense of
responsibility and self-discipline;
the  creation  of  adequate  transparency  for  both  market  players  and
supervisors;
the  further  development  of  the  capital  provisions,  as  the  keystone  of
banking supervision.
  Allow me to  elaborate on these points in greater detail:
IV
In  view  of 
the  progressive 
integration  of  European  financial  markets
accompanying EMU, there is a greater need for co-ordination between the European supervisory
authorities and a need  to  press  on  with  the  process  of  the  European  harmonisation  of  banking
legislation, which has already made considerable headway. In particular the Banking Supervision
Committee set up at the newly established European Central Bank is taking due account of the
greater necessity for co-ordination at the European level. Notwithstanding this strengthened co-
operation,  banking  supervision  in  the  European  Monetary  Union  will  remain  a  national
responsibility.  That  is  in  line  with  the  principle  of  subsidiarity  and  takes  due  account  of  the
greater effectivity of close-at-hand supervision that is able to respond rapidly to regional special
developments. Regarding the advantages of a close-at-hand supervision I can not see any current
need for a centralised supervisory authority neither on the European level nor as a „super agency”
or „umbrella supervisor” on the international level.
Co-ordination in the field of supervision has to be accompanied by harmonisation
in the field of supervisory legislation. Besides risk considerations, competitive factors argue in
favour  of  harmonised  provisions  in  the  single  European  market  for  financial  services.  The
objective must be to ensure a level playing field, and to prevent national supervisory regulations
from  being  misused  as  instruments  of  competition  policy  by  proven  standards  being  relaxed
solely  in  order  to  make  one’s  own  financial  centre  more  attractive.  In  this  context  one  has  to
discuss as well, if and to what extent there is a need to extend international supervisory standards
into offshore centers in order to make sure that financial players do not try to shift their business
to such places with the aim of evading regulatory demands.
National central banks, which either play an integral part in banking supervision
(as in Germany) or actually have the primary responsibility for all aspects of banking supervision
(as  in  Greece),  are  of  outstanding  importance  in  the  field  of  banking  supervision  in  EMU.  A
weighty  argument  in  favour  of  the  participation  of  central  banks  in  banking  supervision  is,  in
particular, their great proximity to the market , which they gain from their own participation in
financial  market  operations  as  part  of  their  lending  business  and  through  their  performance  of
fiscal  agent  functions.  This  enables  a  central  bank  to  advocate  market-promoting  deregulation
measures,  which  are  at  the  same  time  acceptable  in  prudential  terms.  Furthermore,  there  are
BIS Review   84/1998
- 4 -
many  points  of  contact/interactions  between  the  duties  of  a  central  bank  and  those  of  banking
supervisors.
V
Within  EMU  it  will  be  essential  for  banking  supervisors,  on  the  one  hand,  to
exploit  the  disciplining  effect  of  fiercer  competition  by  means  of  suitable  approaches  to
regulation in order to strengthen the sense of responsibility of market players. On the other hand
supervisors  have  to  prevent  excessive  risk-taking  on  the  part  of  particular  institutions.  The
construction  of  efficient  risk-monitoring  and  risk-management  systems  in  the  banks  is  of
paramount importance in this connection. Recent turmoils caused by banks’ involvement in risky
investments of hedge funds show that the necessity to further strengthen the risk management of
financial  institutions  is  high  on  the  agenda.  In  this  context,  supervision  performs  an  initiator
function  by  prescribing  certain  standards  which  improve  market  discipline  and  the  sense  of
responsibility.  In  Germany,  for  instance,  appropriate  minimum  standards  for  the  merchandise
trading  of  banks  were  laid  down  in  a  publication  by  the  Federal  Banking  Supervisory  Office.
Conversely,  banks  sometimes  take  the  initiative  themselves,  as  was  found  when  risk-
management  models  for  gauging  market-price  risks  were  being  developed.  In  that  case,
supervisors have to ensure quality control by linking market standards with conditions of their
own.
This  strengthening  of  market  players’  sense  of  responsibility  and  self-discipline
acknowledges  the  market’s  role  as  a  “complementary  banking  supervisor”  which  supplements
traditional supervision in a useful manner. Global players are of outstanding importance in this
context. With regard to their influence on the stability  of  the  financial  markets  they  should  be
well aware of their systemic responsibility.
In  view  of  the  current  crisis  in  the  financial  markets  of  several  countries  the
international debate on the extent to which traditional banking supervision can be replaced by a
model  of  much  more  self-regulation  by  market  participants  has  lost  some  of  its  original
attractiveness.  It  is  precisely  in  the  area  of  systemic  risk  that  the  gravest  weakness  of  self-
regulation proposals lies: they generally ignore the connection between the right to lay down risk
containment standards and the responsibility for preventing systemic risks. Thus, a shifting to the
institutions  themselves  of  the  authority  to  lay  down  the  law  is  called  for  without  this  being
accompanied to the same extent by a shifting to the private sector of the responsibility for coping
with systemic risks.
But,  in  my  opinion,  stronger  self-regulation  would  entail  the  assumption  of  the
responsibility for avoiding systemic risks and therefore the establishment of extensive safety nets
by banks for coping with problem cases on their own responsibility. The safeguarding package
quickly set up by international investment banks for the American hedge fund LTCM last month
is a positive step in this regard. Hopefully it can also be seen as a sign of a growing readiness of
banks to create a liquidity-safeguarding fund on a permanent basis.
VI
However,  mitigating  systemic  risks  would  be  better  than  transferring  them  to  a
newly  created  fund.  Increased  transparency  could  make  a  major  contribution  to  that.  After  all,
greater  transparency  enhances  market  discipline  and  is  a  precondition  for  the  establishment  of
early warning systems for credit institutions, markets and supervisors. The Basle Committee has
initiated important provisions for improving transparency at the international level. Key-words in
BIS Review   84/1998
- 5 -
this  context  are  the  improved  disclosure  requirements  for  derivative  transactions  and  the
recommendations  on  appropriate  public  reporting  of  merchandise  transactions.  As  mentioned
before the need of greater transparency is not limited to banks’ information policy. The business
of other market players, and their role in different markets, must become really transparent, too.
At the European level, the main issue in the next few years will be meeting the
growing needs of banking supervisors and credit institutions for information on the borrowers of
banks in other European countries. It will be necessary to further step up the co-operation that
has prevailed for a number of years between the credit registers already existing in the EU (in
Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Portugal and Spain), and to foster the construction of
such systems for reporting cross border loans in other EU countries. As part of such European
co-operation between credit registers, it is intended to make that information, which has hitherto
been exchanged only for prudential purposes, accessible to the lending banks as well in future. In
my  opinion  the  need  for  a  central  credit  register  is  not  limited  to  the  European  level.  An
international credit register and the publication of aggregated figures could play an important role
in making existing risks in the global financial markets more transparent.
VII
In  EMU,  too,  capital  standards  as  a  protection  against  loss  will  remain  the
cornerstone  of  banking  supervisory  provisions.  An  adequate  capital  base  both  in  terms  of
quantity and quality stabilises not only the institutions themselves but also the banking system as
a whole.
In this context, the Capital Adequacy Directive lays down an EU-wide foundation,
which relates to market risks. In the course of the further development of the Directive, banks
were given the option, as an alternative to the prescribed standard procedure for computing the
required  capital  backing  of  market-price  risks,  of  using  their  own  risk-management  models,
subject to certain conditions. By thus modifying their instruments, European banking supervisors
have  responded  swiftly  to  the  changes  in  the  markets,  and  have  shown  themselves  to  be
consistent with market economy principles and close to the market as well. In addition, this new
quality of supervision is geared more closely to individual business practices and a bank’s risk
situation.
The European capital provisions are based on the Basle capital standards adopted
in 1988. Of late, increasing criticism has been levelled at those standards. They are accused, in
particular,  of  providing  for  an  overly  imprecise  and  schematic  measurement  of  hazards  in  the
field  of  credit  risks  and  of  failing  to  take  account  of  up-to-date  hedging  techniques.  To  some
extent this criticism is generally shared. However, a model based approach has not always given
the banks the safety level which they might have expected. The recently experienced losses of
banks demonstrate what should have been already known that risk models are not an instrument
to predict future developments.
Regarding the Basle capital provisions in general, which meanwhile constitute a
standard that is accepted world-wide, they are adaptable enough for more recent developments in
the markets to be integrated in that approach. That also goes for the topics under consideration at
present,  such  as  on-balance-sheet  netting,  credit  derivatives  and  new  capital  elements.  The
dispute  whether  the  standards  should  be  developed  further  or  whether  a  complete  break  with
their  approach  is  necessary  in  part  seems  to  me  a  semantic  problem  rather  than  a  material
controversy. Where does modernising end and where would redesigning start exactly?
BIS Review   84/1998
- 6 -
Hitherto, some major risks - notably operational risks and legal risks -  have  not
been measured and are therefore not included in the Basle standards. But they should likewise be
covered  implicitly  by  the  capital  currently  required.  Hence,  if  it  is  decided  to  leave  risk
measurement to the banks, as a basis for the computation of the necessary capital base in the case
of the credit risks as well, it must be assured that all the other risks faced by a bank are taken into
account  in  a  suitable  form,  too.  For,  given  the  rising  trend  of  risks,  more  precise  risk
measurement by the  banks  must  not  result  in  a  decline  in  the  capital  base.  This  applies  to  the
amount  of  capital  required  as  well  as  to  its  qualitative  features.  With  respect  to  both  aspects
capital standards should not be designed in such a loose way that even countries with crises in
their banking systems could meet the requirements. Special situations require special measures
and possibly exceptions of the rules. However, the standard as such should be kept high enough
to ensure credibility in the banking systems and the role supervisors play.
Regarding global players, who have a special responsibility for the stability of the
financial system, even an increase of their capital base might be appropriate to take into account
their systemic importance.
“panta rhei”, “all is flux”.
VIII
That is equally true of the development of the European financial sector, and the
associated  further  course  of  banking  supervision.  I  shall  assume  for  a  moment  that  Heraclit
would have endorsed a “flux”, i.e. an evolutionary development of banking supervision, rather
than an abrupt change of system.
Despite  the  recent  turmoils  in  the  financial  markets  the  obvious  readiness  of
private market players, supervisors, International Financial Institutions and politics to co-operate
and to contribute to the stability of the financial system forms a valuable basis in order to handle
the challenges lying ahead successfully.
BIS Review   84/1998
