Mr. Bäckstöm remarks on the Swedish economy   Address by the Governor of
the Bank of Sweden, Mr. Urban Bäckström, at Svenska Handelsbanken’s seminar in New York
on 7/10/98.
First  of  all  I  should  like  to  thank  Svenska  Handelsbanken  for  the  invitation  to
meet with you today here in New York. I arrived late yesterday from the 1998 Annual Meeting of
the  International  Monetary  Fund  in  Washington  D.C.  The  discussions  in  Washington  over  the
weekend focused on the current problems in the world economy. At the centre was of course the
crises in emerging markets that began in Thailand last year, which spread to other economies in
East Asia and Russia and which most recently have been pressuring economies in Latin America.
Lately,  we  have  also  seen  some  contagion  effects  spreading  to  the  industrial  countries.
Stockmarkets have been falling and there have also been some problems in connection with the
Long-Term Capital hedge fund.
However, today I will talk about the Swedish economy. I shall be using a fairly
broad brush to paint you a picture of how our economy has developed in recent years and I will
conclude by saying a few words about the present situation in my country.
Positive trend in recent years
The  Swedish  economy  is  now  entering  its  sixth  consecutive  year  of  favourable
growth.  The  average  annual  GDP  growth  rate  since  the  summer  of  1993  is  almost  3  per  cent.
This is an improvement compared to the average that has characterised our economy in the past
twenty-five years. It has been accompanied by external surpluses that are larger than for many
years,  making  it  possible  to  repay  foreign  debt.  Government  finances,  moreover,  now  show  a
surplus instead of the earlier deficits, which means that government debt is already being reduced
in relation to GDP.
The latest figures show that prices in Sweden’s economy are virtually stationary.
The falling trend in market interest rates in recent years has been a major factor here in that it has
reduced house mortgage interest expenditure and thereby temporarily exerted a downward effect
on inflation. The underlying price trend is not, in fact, as low as the CPI figures might suggest
but that does not alter the conclusion that in the years ahead, inflation will continue to be low.
If Sweden sticks to disciplined fiscal and monetary  policies,  together  with  other
ways of enhancing economic policy’s credibility, we have  a  real  opportunity  of  reinstating  the
tradition of price stability that existed in Sweden prior to the 1970s and 80s. Let me give you a
short historical background to our current economic policy strategy.
Tradition of price stability
In the period from 1830 to the late 1960s, the annual rate of inflation in Sweden
averaged around 2 per cent. So if one disregards the 1970s and 80s, low inflation has been the
norm for almost a century and a half. There are indeed grounds for saying that price stability is a
long Swedish tradition.
The tradition of price stability did not obstruct the economy’s development. This
is shown by the fact that from the mid 19th century up to the late 1960s growth in Sweden was
BIS Review   80/1998
- 2 -
among the highest in the world. It is rather the case that the favourable outcome was promoted by
low inflation and the stability this represents.
The decades immediately after World War Two were particularly notable for high
growth,  low  inflation,  external  balance  and  an  optimistic  mood  that  resulted  in  the  Swedish
economy’s  successive  expansion.  That  was  a  prosperous  period  with  a  good,  stable  economic
trend, a rising standard of living and high employment.
After  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  in  the  early  1970s  it  proved
difficult  to  establish  an  equally  robust  fixed  exchange  rate  regime.  A  firm  anchor  no  longer
existed for economic policy in general and wage formation in particular. Sweden experienced a
series of devaluation cycles, with an expansionary fiscal policy, inefficient wage formation and
growing structural problems. With the deregulation of the financial sector the problems became
all too evident.
During  the  1970s  and  80s  economic  growth  in  Sweden  became  weaker  than  in
other countries. But the economy still became overheated and this, together with an expansion of
public sector activities, meant that unemployment was restrained for the time being.
The  situation  was  of  course  unsustainable.  An  inflationary,  speculative  bubble
cannot grow indefinitely; sooner or later it is bound to burst. There was also a limit to the public
resources for financing employment.
New direction in economic policy
In the late 1980s there was a growing awareness that something would have to be
done. The structural problems, high inflation and relatively low growth called for an economic
policy realignment.
This  realignment  involved  a  variety  of  measures.  The  tax  system  was  reformed
and so were certain components of transfers. Sweden, moreover, applied for membership of the
European Union. Sweden’s currency was linked to the ecu and in the autumn of 1992, during the
wave  of  currency  speculation,  the  exchange  rate  was  defended.  Short  term  interest  rates  were
raised to high levels. The idea was to demonstrate the determination to re-establish low inflation.
However,  Sweden’s  economic  policy  realignment  coincided  with  a  profound
economic crisis. Output fell around 5 per cent over a three-year period, open unemployment shot
up  to  over  9  per  cent  and  total  unemployment  to  around  13  per  cent,  figures  that  had  been
completely  unknown  in  modern  Sweden.  The  government  finances  deteriorated  sharply  and
budget  deficit  reached  a  high  of  more  than  12  per  cent  of  GDP,  which  was  almost  without
precedent  in  the  industrialised  countries.  In  the  middle  of  this  crisis,  moreover,  virtually  the
whole  of  the  banking  system  was  threatening  to  collapse.  In  the  light  of  the  crisis  in  the  East
Asian economies, all this sounds very familiar.
Researchers  will  no  doubt  be  studying  whether  this  dramatic  setback  in  the
Swedish economy could have been managed differently. Some things could definitely have been
arranged  in  another  way  both  in  the  late  1980s  and  once  the  crisis  was  over  us  in  the  early
nineties.
BIS Review   80/1998
- 3 -
But the vital conclusion is, I believe, that the roots of the profound crisis stretched
a  long  way  into  the  past.  An  economic  policy  realignment  was  essential;  a  credible  stability
oriented policy had been lacking ever since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in the early
1970s. It was high time to put this right.
Making the new regime credible
After  the  long  period  of  high  inflation,  together  with  extensive  economic
problems and massive government deficits, the task of inspiring confidence in economic policy’s
new direction proved difficult at first. Economic agents listened to the new approach with doubts
and hesitation.
As we know from other countries, however, creating confidence in a new regime
with  low  inflation  is  a  rather  long  process  that  takes  time.  Moreover,  if  the  work  of  keeping
inflation  low  and  government  finances  in  order  is  to  be  combined  with  low  interest  rates  and
stable growth, it is a task that never ends.
In recent years the low-inflation regime has gained increased credibility. Besides a
disciplined  monetary  policy  for  price  stability,  a  major  contribution  to  this  has  come  from  the
consolidation of government finances. In just a few years a budget deficit at 12 per cent of GDP
has been turned into today’s surplus.
In  order  to  underscore  its  ambitions  for  public  finances,  the  Government  has  a
long-term  objective:  as  the  average  level  over  a  business  cycle,  government  finances  are  to
generate a surplus at 2 per cent of GDP. A surplus will make it possible to reduce public debt so
that  future  challenges  which  the  Swedish  economy  may  encounter  can  be  accepted  without
leading to problems for government finances.
Considering  the  public  debt  that  has  accumulated  in  the  1990s  and  the  fact  that
government finances in Sweden are relatively sensitive to cyclical factors, I find this objective
reasonable.
Besides  the  increased  awareness  of  the  importance  of  stable  finances,  the
conditions for achieving Sweden’s budget target have been improved by institutional changes in
the budget process. Sweden now has a budget process that is inherently more disciplined and can
thereby contribute to maintaining sound finances.
Further steps are being taken to consolidate economic policy’s focus on stability.
The independence which the Riksbank already has in practice is to have a formal legal status as
of next year. The monetary policy objective of price stability will be enshrined in law and the
Riksbank will be accountable for fulfilling it.
This  new  Riksbank  legislation  has  already  been  approved  once  by  the  Riksdag
(Sweden’s parliament) and the final decision is due this autumn. The reform is backed by five
political parties, whose combined representation in the newly elected Riksdag is over 80 per cent.
According  to  the  timetable  for  the  new  legislation,  the  Riksdag’s  final  decision
will be made sometime in the middle of November. It will be followed by the appointment of the
Riksbank’s new Governing Board, which will consist of eleven Delegates. One of its major tasks
BIS Review   80/1998
- 4 -
will be to appoint the Riksbank’s new Executive Board. This Board will consist of six full-time
members who will direct the Riksbank and decide monetary policy as of January 1999.
The present situation
Sweden’s monetary policy is conducted in a flexible exchange rate regime and has
an  explicit  inflation  target.  We  sometimes  use  the  following  simple  rule  of  thumb  to  describe
what governs our actions: if the overall assessment of inflation indicates that in one to two years
time  the  rate  of  inflation  will  deviate  from  the  2  per  cent  target,  then  the  repo  rate  should  be
adjusted accordingly. Our approach is symmetrical, which means that it is equally important to
avoid undershooting the target, as it is to avoid overshooting it.
The Riksbank’s appraisal of inflation up to the autumn of 2000 and the monetary
policy conclusions that can be drawn from this are presented in the Inflation Report we published
last  week.  In  order  to  visualise  the  consequences  for  the  future  path  of  monetary  policy,  the
report is based on the working assumption of an unchanged repo rate. As the Swedish krona is
judged to be undervalued at present, we also assume that the exchange rate follows a path that
represents a gradual appreciation.
The technical assumption of an unchanged repo rate and the presumed path for the
exchange  rate  are  then  incorporated  in  the  main  scenario  for  inflation.  As  inflation’s  future
course is not a straightforward matter, we also include assessments of uncertainties. The overall
picture of inflation prospects amounts in practice to an estimate of probabilities.
The assessments in the main scenario imply favourable economic fundamentals: a
growth  rate  between  2.5  and  3  per  cent  between  1998  and  2000,  low  inflation  and  a  rising
government surplus. Domestic demand in the main scenario is expected to generate a relatively
limited increase in inflation’s underlying rate, from 1.1 per cent at present to 1.6 per cent at the
end of next year and 2 per cent in the autumn of 2000.
The  12-month  change  in  CPI  inflation  is  expected  to  be  somewhat  below  the
inflation target in one to two years time but the figure at the end of the period is judged to be
approximately 2 per cent. All this means that at the end of the period under review, inflation is
relatively well in line with the Riksbank’s target.
It  should  be  underscored,  however,  that  the  assessment  of  inflation  prospects  is
more  difficult  than  usual  on  account  of  the  financial  turbulence.  This  naturally  reflects  the
international unrest but the political situation after the general election in Sweden has also left its
mark on price setting, above all in the currency market.
Inflation prospects and the future path of monetary policy accordingly depend on
two - contrary - factors: on the one hand, the international economic trend could be weaker than
we have counted on and thereby lead to lower inflation; on the other, a sustained weak exchange
rate  that  has  no  counterpart  in  a  weaker  real  economy  could  generate  increased  inflationary
pressure.
Our  monetary  policy  conclusion  is  that  we  will  go  on  analysing  the  course  of
events and appraise monetary policy continuously in the light of new information. Hopefully, the
analysis  in  the  Inflation  Report  should  give  an  indication  of  our  line  of  reasoning  about  the
BIS Review   80/1998
- 5 -
inflation outlook in Sweden and the future path of monetary policy that is as clear as possible in
the global economy’s present state of uncertainty.
The unsettled situation in international financial markets has meant that investors
are shifting to currencies which are historically secure. As a result, other currencies, particularly
those  of  smaller  economies,  have  weakened.  This  tendency  has  been  evident  for  the  Swedish
krona in recent weeks and very clear in the last few days. The recent path of the Swedish krona is
not consistent with the development of our economy’s fundamentals. Under these circumstances
the Riksbank has chosen to use currency interventions to underscore that the movements in the
krona’s exchange rate have been unduly abrupt and exaggerated.
BIS Review   80/1998
