Bank  of  Japan  presents  summaries  of  articles  published  in  the  November  edition  of  its
Quarterly Bulletin
Bank of Japan, Communication, 1/12/98.
Profits and Balance-Sheet Developments of Japanese Banks in Fiscal 1997
Overview
Operating profits of Japanese banks in fiscal 1997 amounted to ¥5.4 trillion, down by 14% from
the  previous  fiscal  year.1  This  decrease  was  primarily  due  to  the  following  factors:  (1)  the
disappearance of a temporary increase in trust fees (income) of trust banks in fiscal 1996; (2) the
modest  fall  in  net  interest  income  on  domestic  operations  due  mainly  to  narrowing  interest
margins; and (3) the slight decrease in gross profits on international operations as a result of the
expansion of the “Japan premium” and the downsizing of overseas branches and subsidiaries.2
Transfer  to  the  special  loan-loss  provisions  (SLP)  and  loan  write-offs  including  those  in  trust
accounts3  amounted  to  ¥13.3  trillion,  which  is  almost  the  same  figure  as  the  peak  recorded  in
fiscal  1995.4  Due  to  a  considerable  amount  of  transfer  to  the  SLP  and  loan  write-offs,  both
recurring losses (¥5.2 trillion) and net losses (¥4.8 trillion) marked record highs.5
Risk-based  capital  adequacy  ratios  at  end-March  1998  at  many  banks  exceeded  those  at  end-
March 1997. This  improvement  was  due  mainly  to  banks’  efforts  to  reduce  their  risk-adjusted
1
2
3
4
5
“Japanese  banks”  refers  to  All  Banks,  comprising  the  member  banks  of  the  Federation  of  Bankers
Associations of Japan (Zenginkyo), which consists of 10 city banks, three long-term credit banks, seven trust
banks (excluding foreign-owned trust banks and trust banks that started business after October 1993), the 64
member  banks  of  the  Regional  Banks  Association  of  Japan  (referred  to  as  regional  banks),  and  the  64
member banks of the Second Association of Regional Banks (excluding Hanwa Bank, which was liquidated
in January 1998; referred to as regional banks II). Figures in this report exclude data for Hokkaido Takushoku
Bank, Tokuyo City Bank, and Kyoto Kyoei Bank.
“Operating profits” signifies earnings from core banking operations and is calculated by subtracting “transfer
to the allowance for possible loan losses,” “general and  administrative  expenses,”  and  “debenture  issuance
expenses” from the sum of “net interest income” (the excess of interest income on such items as loans and
securities over interest expenses on such debts as deposits and debentures), “net fees and commissions” (net
income on fees and commissions received/paid on funds transfers and other service transactions), “net trading
revenue” (applied to banks with trading accounts; gains/losses on transactions for trading purposes such as
trading-related  derivative  transactions  and  gains/losses  on  year-end  valuation  at  market  or  fair  value),  and
“net other operating income” (e.g. net gains related to bond and foreign currency transactions).
The temporary increase  refers  to  profits  resulting  from  the  write-back  of  the  special  reserve  funds  held  by
trust banks. Special reserve funds are accumulated to provide for situations in which the value of a loan trust
falls below the amount of the principal. The ratio of required reserve funds to the amount of the principal was
lowered  from  3%  to  0.5%  by  a  revision  of  a  government  ordinance.  Trust  banks  wrote  off  nonperforming
loans  in  trust  accounts,  using  part  of  the  temporary  profits  in  trust  fees.  The  remainder  of  the  profits  was
accounted as trust fees included in net fees and commissions in banking accounts.
In accordance with the Loan Trust Law and the Trust Business Law, trust banks guarantee the principals of
banking-type  trusts  (loan  trusts  and  jointly  managed  money  trusts).  Therefore,  loan  write-offs  in  trust
accounts are included in the total figures of transfer to the SLP and loan write-offs.
The amount includes loan write-offs, transfer to the SLP, losses from the sales of nonperforming loans to the
Cooperative Credit Purchasing Company (CCPC), and other renunciations of claims.
Reflecting the fact that banks began to be allowed to value listed stocks at cost, losses from stock write-downs
declined significantly. As a result, net stock-related gains increased to ¥2.9 trillion, three times higher than
those in the previous fiscal year. Net stock-related gains/losses are calculated by subtracting the sum of losses
from stock selling operations and stock write-downs from gains on stock selling operations.
BIS Review  104/1998
– 2 –
assets and various measures taken by the government in December 1997 to stabilize the Japanese
financial system.
Although several years have elapsed since the bursting of the economic “bubble”, transfer to the
SLP and loan write-offs reached levels as high as the peak recorded in fiscal 1995. This reflected
the  emergence  of  large  corporate  bankruptcies  and  the  introduction  of  a  new  self-assessment
system on banks’ asset quality to primarily determine appropriate loan-loss provisioning and loan
write-offs under the Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) directives.
One  of  the  key  policies  for  Japanese  banks  will  be  to  remove  nonperforming  loans  from  their
balance sheets by such means as selling collateral real estate, in addition to steadily disposing of
nonperforming loans and disclosing further information about their business. These efforts could
moderate  serious  impacts  of  fluctuations  in  collateral  real  estate  prices  on  the  asset  quality  of
Japanese  banks,  and  thus  ensure  the  reliability  of  the  information  included  in  their  balance
sheets,  and  finally  restore  market  confidence  in  their  soundness.  In  addition,  the  sales  of
collateral real  estate  enable  banks  to  plan  flexible  management  strategies;  and  reinvestment  of
the cash inflow from the sales will improve banks’ profitability.
Checklist for Risk Management (Revised 1998 Edition)
Objectives of the Checklist
 The Bank Supervision Department of the Bank of Japan initially compiled the Checklist for Risk
Management (hereafter: the Checklist) in December 1987. To provide examiners with guidance
in reviewing the adequacy of risk management at individual banks during on-site examinations,
the  Bank  completely  revised  the  Checklist  in  May  1996,  and  it  was  distributed  to  financial
institutions under the Bank’s supervision as well as to various other financial institutions in the
belief that it could serve as a reference as they undertake initiatives to check and strengthen their
risk management systems.
Over  the  two  years  since  the  last  revision,  major  revisions  of  institutional  systems  have  been
undertaken  in  Japan  reflecting  drastic  changes  in  the  financial  and  social  environment,  and  in
order  to  deal  with  the  deterioration  in  business  performance  of  Japanese  financial  institutions.
Furthermore, consensus has been reached and various reports have been released relating to risk
management  in  the  international  arena  such  as  that  of  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking
Supervision, against the background of steady progress in financial deregulation and refinement
of risk management skills.
Meanwhile, as part of the review of its bank supervision functions accompanying the enactment
of the Bank of Japan Law of 1997, the Bank Supervision Department revised and expanded the
1996 edition of the Checklist for Risk Management, and distributed the revised 1998 edition of
the Checklist to financial institutions under the  Bank’s  supervision  and  various  other  financial
institutions on June 19. With a view to securing transparency of bank  supervision,  the  revised
1998 edition of the Checklist has been made generally available as much of it should be useful to
nondepository  financial  institutions  not  directly  subject  to  the  Checklist  (securities  companies,
tanshi companies, etc.), depository financial institutions not under the Bank’s supervision (some
BIS Review  104/1998
– 3 –
shinkin banks, credit cooperatives, agricultural cooperatives, labor credit associations, etc.) and
nonfinancial business firms.6
Major Features of the Revised 1998 Edition
The new edition of the Checklist for Risk Management has been revised and expanded to reflect
developments  in  the  financial  conditions  and  institutional  reforms  in  Japan  since  the  previous
revision  (May  1996),  as  well  as  international  discussions  regarding  risk  management.  In
compiling  this  edition,  the  Bank  also  considered  and  applied  experience  gained  using  the
previous  editions  of  the  Checklist  and  opinions  and  comments  gathered  from  financial
institutions under the Bank’s supervision.
The overall framework in the new edition is unchanged from the 1996 edition. The Checklist is
categorized by type of operation (I. Management and Internal Controls, II. Lending Operations,
III. Market Operations and Asset and Liability Management [ALM], and IV. Business Operations
and Electronic Data Processing [EDP]). The sample questions for examining the progress in risk
management  of  financial  institutions  under  each  checkpoint  are  organized  starting  from  basic
matters  and  progressing  to  technical  details.  Like  its  predecessor,  the  revised  1998  edition
includes some items which even banks with advanced risk management skills require more time
to achieve. The Checklist is therefore not a minimum standard by which all banks must abide;
rather, it is meant to be used flexibly by as many financial institutions as possible as a guideline
for their business operations.
Concretely,  items  related  to  legal  compliance  have  been  largely  expanded  in  Section  I
(Management  and  Internal  Controls)  to  include  important  points  such  as  whether  the
management  fully  recognizes  the  importance  of  legal  compliance  and  takes  the  lead  in
establishing  compliance  awareness  within  the  financial  institution,  and  whether  there  is  a
systematic framework with concrete procedures for implementing legal compliance and whether
it functions adequately. In its revision of Section I, the Bank considered and included the aims set
forth  in  the  “Framework  for  the  Evaluation  of  the  Internal  Control  Systems”  released  by  the
Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision.  In  Section  II  (Lending  Operations),  a  new  item
regarding  financial  institutions’  self-assessment  of  assets  has  been  added  in  response  to  the
introduction of the self-assessment system. Necessary amendments have been made in Section III
(Market  Operations  and  ALM)  to  deal  with  the  inclusion  of  the  trading  account,  with  due
consideration given to the “Principles for the Management of Interest Rate Risk” released by the
Basle Committee on Banking Supervision.
Application of the Checklist in the Bank’s Examinations of Risk Management
The  Bank’s  examinations  review  both  the  strength  of  financial  institutions  and  their  risk
management ability, which prevents the emergence of losses and sustains their soundness. The
Checklist  for  Risk  Management  is  used  as  a  handbook  by  examiners  when  assessing  the  risk
management  capability  of  financial  institutions.  Simultaneously,  with  a  view  to  smoothly
carrying out our on-site examination of risk management and to have a  sufficient  exchange  of
opinions  with  the  subject  financial  institution,  the  Bank  requests  the  institutions  concerned  to
evaluate their abilities using the Checklist at each examination.
6
The full text of this article is available on the Bank of Japan website at www.boj.or.jp/en/index.htm.
BIS Review  104/1998
– 4 –
Needless  to  say,  financial  institutions  must  take  the  initiative  in  establishing  their  own  risk
management system based on their own judgment, hence the actual system will differ according
to the individual institution’s management strategy and business performance. In this sense, the
Bank does not intend to apply the Checklist uniformly to all financial institutions, but will utilize
it giving full consideration to the situation of each bank.
Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Markets Turnover Survey (April 1998)
Outline of Survey
 In  April  1998,  the  Bank  of  Japan  conducted  the  Foreign  Exchange  and  Derivatives  Markets
Turnover  Survey.  This  survey  is  conducted  once  every  three  years  by  the  central  banks  or
monetary authorities of participating countries and regions, and is coordinated by the Bank for
International Settlements (BIS).7
The  April  1998  survey  was  conducted  by  the  central  banks  or  monetary  authorities  of  43
countries and regions, which collected the data from approximately 3,200 reporting institutions
in total.8
The Bank of Japan obtained the data from 255 Japanese banks, 101 foreign banks, 3 Japanese
securities companies, 6 foreign securities companies, and 10 FX brokers.9
The  BIS  will  aggregate  and  publish  the  data  collected  from  participating  central  banks  or
monetary authorities on a global basis.
In this survey, the foreign exchange transactions are classified into three instrument types, and
derivatives  activities  are  classified  into  five  instrument  types.10  Transactions  of  each  type  of
instrument are further broken down by currency or currency pairs, category of counterparties, and
location of counterparties (local or cross-border).
The daily volume of turnover is adjusted for the local double-counting of transactions between
7
8
9
10
The  first  survey  coordinated  by  the  BIS  started  in  1986  for  foreign  exchange  activity,  and  the  derivatives
section was added to the survey in 1995.
Participating  countries  and  regions  are  as  follows  (the  26  countries  and  regions  that  participated  in  the
previous  survey  are  underlined):  Argentina,  Australia,  Austria,  Bahrain,  Belgium,  Brazil,  Canada,  Chile,
China,  the  Czech  Republic,  Denmark,  Finland,  France,  Germany,  Greece,  Hong  Kong,  Hungary,  India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
the  Philippines,  Poland,  Portugal,  Russia,  Saudi  Arabia,  Singapore,  South  Africa,  Spain,  Sweden,
Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
Foreign  exchange  brokers  are  to  report  only  foreign  exchange  transactions  (including  cross-currency
swaps and FX options), and securities companies are to report only derivatives activities.
Classification of transactions:
(1) 
Foreign exchange activities:
Spot, outright forwards, foreign exchange swaps
(2)  Derivatives activities:
Interest rate-related derivatives: forward rate agreements (FRAs), interest rate swaps (IR swaps),
interest rate options (IR options)
Foreign  exchange-related  derivatives:  cross-currency  swaps,  foreign  exchange  options  (FX
options)
BIS Review  104/1998
– 5 –
two  reporting  institutions  in  Japan.  Meanwhile,  double-counting  of  cross-border  transactions
between two reporting institutions will be adjusted by the BIS. Thus, a simple aggregation of the
results  of  all  participating  countries  and  regions  will  not  be  equivalent  to  the  global  statistics
released by the BIS.
 Regular Derivatives Market Statistics in Japan (Yoshikuni Statistics) (end-June 1998)
Outline of Survey
The central banks of the G-10 countries11 and the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) have
combined efforts to introduce new global derivatives market statistics based on the “Proposals
for Improving Global Derivatives Market Statistics (Yoshikuni Report)” published by the BIS in
July  1996.  The  data  were  first  collected  at  end-June  1998.  In  this  paper,  the  Bank  of  Japan
releases the results of this first Regular Derivatives Market Statistics pertaining to Japan.12 The
BIS  will  later  publish  the  global  results  of  outstanding  derivatives  positions  of  the  reporting
institutions.
The aim of the BIS in implementing a survey on global derivatives markets is to increase market
transparency  and  to  facilitate  monitoring  by  central  banks  of  these  markets  in  regard  to  the
macroeconomic and macroprudential concerns through two reporting frameworks, the first being
semiannual statistics on  derivatives  outstanding  covering  only  primary  dealers,  and  the  second
being  triennial  statistics  on  derivatives  turnover  and  outstanding  covering  a  wider  range  of
dealers. This first release of the Regular  Derivatives  Market  Statistics  corresponds  to  the  first,
while the April 1995 Central Bank Survey of Derivatives Market Statistics13 and the succeeding
April 1998 Derivatives Market Turnover Survey – whose results in Japan are also published at
the same time – correspond to the second.
The survey is based on the voluntary cooperation of reporting institutions, and 18 primary dealers
participated from Japan (out of 75 institutions globally).
The survey consists of data on consolidated outstanding derivatives positions (notional amounts,
gross positive and negative market values) of the reporting institutions, broken down by four risk
factors  (foreign  exchange,  interest  rate,  equity,  and  commodity),  instrument,  currency,
counterparty type, and maturity.
The main features of  the  survey  results  for  Japan  are  summarized  in  the  following  annex.  For
more details, please refer to the Bank of Japan website at www.boj.or.jp/en/index.htm.
 Responses  to  Comments  on  the  Proposed  Revision  of  the  Flow  of  Funds  Accounts:  The
11
12
13
Belgium,  Canada,  France,  Germany,  Italy,  Japan,  Netherlands,  Sweden,  Switzerland,  the  United
Kingdom, and the United States.
The results were released on September 30, 1998.
For the results of the April 1995 survey in Japan, please refer to “Results of the Survey of Derivatives
Market Activity in Japan” in the May 1996 issue of the Bank of Japan Quarterly Bulletin.
BIS Review  104/1998
– 6 –
Bank of Japan’s Final Decisions on the Revision
Introduction
The Bank of Japan compiled the flow of funds accounts (hereafter: FFA) first in 1958, covering
data for the years from 1954 to 1957. Since 1996, it has been conducting a study aimed at the
comprehensive revision of the FFA. Based on this study, the Bank made provisional proposals on
details  of  the  revision  in  early  1997,  inviting  users  of  the  statistics  to  submit  their  views  and
suggestions to the Bank.14
The comments submitted were generally in favor of the revision. They also indicated that users
hoped to employ the new FFA as a tool for monitoring the effects of financial system reform (the
so-called Japanese “Big Bang”) and the continuing internationalization of the financial market.
With  regard  to  the  details  of  the  proposed  revision,  some  comments  supported  the  Bank’s
approach, while others suggested alternatives relating to such aspects as sectoral and transaction
classifications, and the methods and format used for publishing the FFA.
Substantial  progress  has  been  made  with  regard  to  the  detailed  treatment  of  Japan’s  national
accounts and the availability of data, both of which were not entirely clear when the provisional
proposals  for  the  revision  were  drafted.  In  conducting  the  study  on  the  details  of  the  revision
since  mid-1997,  the  Bank  has  kept  these  developments  in  mind  and  examined  whether  the
comments submitted meet such criteria as (1) appropriateness of statistical treatment and data-
recording methods; and (2) the usefulness of revisions based on those comments. The Bank has
also  reviewed  issues  that  were  still  undecided  in  the  provisional  proposals.  The  Bank’s  final
decisions made through the above process are shown in tables, and this paper tries to explain the
thinking behind them.15
Based on these final decisions, the Bank is now in the process of compiling the new statistics
with a view to publishing them in 1999.
Year 2000 Readiness in the Financial Industry in Japan
Introduction
 With less than one and a half years before the year 2000, various industries in Japan are currently
making  a  wide  range  of  efforts  to  address  the  “Year  2000  problem”.  The  Year  2000  problem
arises  because  many  computers  and  application  programs  recognize  the  year  by  the  last  two
digits  instead  of  four.  On  January  1,  2000,  those  computers  and  application  programs  will
represent the year as “00” and may assume the year to be 1900 instead of 2000. This can lead to
incorrect processing of date-sensitive calculations by computers, which may cause disruptions in
computer systems.
14
15
For  details,  refer  to  “Revision  of  Japan’s  Flow  of  Funds  Accounts”  in  the  August  1997  issue  of  the
Bank of Japan Quarterly Bulletin.
In addition to the points covered in this paper, numerous minor changes were made from the provisional
proposals. This paper covers only the major points, and detailed explanations of individual sectors and
transaction classifications will be provided separately.
BIS Review  104/1998
– 7 –
If  computer  disruptions  materialize,  the  adverse  effects  on  financial  institutions  will  be
substantial because financial institutions rely heavily on computers, for example, host computers
for the main accounting systems and information systems, and decentralized systems (i.e. local
area networks [LANs] and personal computers [PCs]). If a financial institution fails to achieve
Year  2000  readiness,  it  may  not  be  able  to  confirm  or  manage  settlement  dates  or  transaction
data, calculate interest rates or carry out accounting procedures, which can be a potential threat to
its fundamental business of taking deposits, extending loans, and carrying out settlements.
There  is  a  possible  systemic  risk  if  one  financial  institution  or  one  payment  and  settlement
system  fails  to  achieve  Year  2000  readiness.  Banks  and  securities  companies  are  mutually
connected through various payment and settlement systems for settling transactions. If a financial
institution fails to achieve Year 2000 readiness, the computer disruption could be passed on to
other ones through their interdependence in financial transactions and settlement. If a computer
failure  due  to  a  lack  of  Year  2000  readiness  materializes  in  a  settlement  system,  not  only
financial institutions but also end-users or customers will be affected because they may not be
able  to  withdraw  or  transfer  funds  through  cash  dispenser  (CD)  and  automated  teller  machine
(ATM) networks.
The Year 2000 problem could seriously affect the business of individual financial institutions as
well as the stability of payment and settlement systems. The Bank of Japan, with the cooperation
of  market  participants,  is  therefore  promoting  Year  2000  readiness  of  individual  financial
institutions and payment and settlement systems.
This  paper  discusses  how  Japan’s  financial  sector  is  addressing  key  issues  of  the  Year  2000
problem and provides information on its progress in achieving Year 2000 readiness.16 After an
overview of the results of the Year 2000 problem survey of financial institutions conducted by
the Bank of Japan in June 1998, the paper presents (1) plans for external tests of payment and
settlement systems; (2) global initiatives taken by international organizations including the Bank
for International Settlements (BIS); and (3) an upcoming issue.
The  paper  focuses  exclusively  on  the  preparations  being  made  by  financial  institutions  and
payment and settlement systems for the Year 2000 problem. It does not deal with preparations
made  by  social  infrastructures,  such  as  telecommunications  or  utilities  that  support  computer
system  operations,  nor  does  it  cover  Year  2000  preparations  of  companies  supplying  host
computers and software, although these deserve careful attention of financial institutions.
 16
This  paper  was  originally  published  in  the  form  of  a  brochure  on  August  14,  1998.  For  inquiries
regarding the brochure, please contact the Financial and Payment System Office (tel: +81-3-3279-1111
[x2954],  fax:  +81-3-5255-6752)  or  the  Bank  Supervision  Department  (tel:  +81-3-3279-1111  [x6442],
fax: +81-3-5255-6755), Bank of Japan, at 2-1-1, Hongoku-cho, Nihonbashi, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 103-8660,
Japan.
BIS Review  104/1998
