Mr. Stals comments on the need for greater financial flexibility in a volatile
global financial environment   Address by the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,
Dr. Chris Stals, at the Annual Dinner of the Institute of Bankers in Cape Town on 5/11/98.
1. Increasing volatility in financial markets
Developments  in  the  global  financial  markets  over  the  past  year  focused  the
attention  on  the  ability  of  countries  to  adapt  to  rapidly  changing  conditions  in  an  extremely
volatile  global  environment.  With  a  strong  trend  towards  globalisation  and  the  worldwide
integration  of  financial  markets  that  swept  through  the  world  economy  over  the  past  decade,
most countries of the world, big and small, have now become more exposed to volatile capital
inflows and outflows. The cross-border (and therefore cross-currency) transfers of huge amounts
of investment funds disrupt domestic and foreign currency markets in many countries almost on
a regular basis.
From the experience of the past year, it is clear that many of the smaller countries
with rapidly expanding domestic economies and emerging financial markets find it increasingly
more  difficult  to  maintain  domestic  financial  stability  and  remain  within  the  unstable
environment of an integrated global financial market. The amounts involved in volatile capital
transfers  are  too  large  for  the  smaller  economies  to  absorb.  Countries  find  it  difficult  to  adapt
internal situations to sudden and unpredictable turnarounds in the flow of  funds  that  may  take
place from time to time.
A second major problem that surfaced during this year of financial turmoil centred
around the diverse economic needs of many countries that find themselves at different stages of
economic development, different phases of the business cycle, and pursuing different objectives
with their overall economic strategies. The integrated global financial markets set high standards,
based on the needs and norms of the more developed economies, being the main source of the
supply  of  funds.  Ambitious  fund  managers,  seeking  to  maximise  the  yield  on  investments
managed on behalf of demanding clients, have little loyalty to the needs or the circumstances of
the countries where they make their investments. There is, indeed, little diversification in their
thinking or in their computer programs when they invest in the global markets -- all emerging
markets are, for example, treated as just one group of countries.
Given  the  environment  of  volatile  capital  movements,  a  third  deficiency  of  the
present  system  has  been  identified,  and  that  is  the  lack  of  a  global  “lender  of  last  resort”  or
“discount  window  facility”  that  can  serve  to  provide  temporary  assistance  in  times  of  sudden
outflows of capital from a country. The resources of the International Monetary Fund turned out
to be completely inadequate in the present volatile environment. Even after the completion of the
current round of increases in the quotas of the Fund, the IMF will not be in a position to supply
the  needs  of  its  member  countries  in  times  of  serious  global  financial  crises.  Many  recipients
over the past year of IMF assistance are also of the opinion that the conditionalities attached to
IMF  loans  are  no  longer  appropriate  for  the  present  world  environment.  Disruptions  in
international  financial  markets  are  no  longer  created  by  structural  or  temporary  imbalances  in
international trade, but rather by volatile international capital inflows and outflows. The IMF’s
conditionalities  are  still  directed,  however,  to  the  restoration  of  equilibrium  in  the  current
account of the balance of payments.
A  fourth  conclusion  from  the  developments  of  the  past  year  is  that  the  present
international  financial  system  of  floating  exchange  rates  and  free  capital  movements  provides
BIS Review   95/1998
- 2 -
increasing  incentives  for  speculators  and  short-term  profit  explorers  to  exploit  weaknesses  of
individual countries, often at the cost of the impoverished and the poor people of the world.
2. A Hobson’s choice for the emerging markets
Smaller countries such as South Africa can do little to change the world financial
system, but may still be able to isolate themselves from the volatility of the world environment.
This  will,  however,  require  comprehensive  restrictive  exchange  controls  on  both  residents  and
non-residents  in  respect  of  all  international  capital  transactions.  In  the  process,  a  country  that
moves  in  this  direction  will  most  probably  be  excluded  from  the  ongoing  process  of  financial
globalisation, and will be barred from access to international capital markets.
A  few  countries  recently  nevertheless  opted  for  this  alternative  and  rather
preferred  the  route  of  isolation  to  the  continued  exposure  of  their  economies  to  fickle  foreign
fund managers and international currency speculators. In the case of Malaysia, it was judged that
the country’s high domestic savings rate will generate sufficient funds to provide for its needs for
future economic development. In the case of Russia, the government had no other choice but to
close  its  financial  markets  after  a  major  collapse  in  the  public  and  private  sector  financial
systems.
South Africa, with its low level of domestic saving and massive needs for future
economic development, has no choice. Unless this country can rely on some regular substantial
inflow of capital from the rest of the world, its economic growth rate will not create sufficient
jobs for the already large number of unemployed and the annual addition to the labour force, or
provide  the  resources  needed  for  the  social  upliftment  of  the  population.  South  Africa  must
therefore remain part of the global financial markets, and must pursue macroeconomic policies
and  introduce  structural  adjustments  regarded  as  necessary  to  make  the  country  attractive  for
foreign investors.
It is not precluded that some important changes may be introduced to the world
financial system over the next few years. South Africa will, to the extent that it participates in
this debate in various international fora, press for the introduction of measures that will reduce
the volatility of the markets. We know from experience, however, that proposals for change to
the global financial architecture can take a long time to find consensus, and changes will most
probably only be introduced gradually.
In  the  meantime,  South  Africa  will  be  exposed  from  time  to  time  to  volatile
capital movements, and the domestic economy will remain  vulnerable  to  external  disturbances
that may in the short term force macroeconomic policies  inconsistent  with  domestic  economic
objectives.  The  question  remains,  what  can,  or  should,  South  Africa  do  to  make  sure  that  the
domestic  economy  will,  over  the  medium  and  longer  term,  be  better  protected  against  the
disadvantages of international financial market volatility and still gain maximum advantage from
international capital inflows?
BIS Review   95/1998
3. The need for financial flexibility
- 3 -
Globalisation  is  about  markets.  It  is  markets  that  are  being  integrated  in  a
worldwide system of unrestricted capital movements, and markets that are being opened up for
participation  by  investors  from  all  around  the  world.  Acceptance  of  any  country  in  the  global
financial markets therefore requires a recognition of the principles of the market economy, and
an adherence to the rules of the game.
One of the basic rules of the game in a market economy is that governments must
allow market forces of demand and supply to determine prices. Intervention by governments in
the markets for whatever purpose, if necessary, must always work through the markets, without
suspending or restricting the forces of demand and supply. The price mechanism indeed provides
the core discipline of the market economy, and through price changes, markets signal messages
and activate automatic adjustment processes intended to hold demand and supply in equilibrium.
In the context of international capital  flows,  the  exchange  rate  is,  of  course,  the
most  important  price.  It  is  important  for  the  smaller  countries  therefore  to  ensure  flexible
adjustment processes for exchange rate changes in the environment of a volatile global financial
environment.  It  is  almost  impossible  to  maintain  a  fixed  exchange  rate  for  any  currency  once
large amounts of capital start flowing out of or into a country. Efforts to maintain a fixed and
unrealistic exchange rate in such circumstances will only entice speculative transactions that will
eventually exacerbate the problem.
This  does  not  mean,  however,  that  the  authorities  may  never  intervene  in  the
foreign exchange market, for example to maintain orderly conditions, to smooth out short-term
fluctuations,  or  to  provide  liquidity  to  the  market.  Such  interventions,  which  must  preferably
always be conducted through the market system, are often confused with a policy of fixing the
exchange rate through more direct means of control.
In  South  Africa,  there  is  a  misguided  perception  that  the  Reserve  Bank  must
intervene in the foreign exchange market to prevent any appreciation of the rand, but must refrain
from intervention whenever the rand comes under pressure for depreciation. Such a policy will,
of course, create a one-way bet for speculators and will encourage short-term investors to take
positions against the rand and then force the exchange rate down to generate capital profits for
themselves.  The  Reserve  Bank  prefers  to  intervene  in  the  market  on  a  discretionary  basis,  to
work  discreetly  through  the  market  forces  of  demand  and  supply,  and  to  keep  speculators
guessing on what the Bank’s next step will be.
South Africa adheres to a policy of a floating exchange rate system. As long as we
still maintain exchange control restrictions on the foreign assets that South African residents may
hold, the Reserve Bank will have to continue to intervene in the foreign exchange market from
time to time, both as a buyer and as a seller of foreign exchange. As in the past, the Bank will
exercise cautious discretion, will respect the underlying forces of demand and supply, and will
accept  the  need  at  times  for  a  depreciation  and,  in  different  circumstances,  also  for  an
appreciation  of  the  rand.  In  other  words,  we  believe  the  present  South  African  exchange  rate
policy  has  sufficient  flexibility  built  into  the  system  to  accommodate  the  vicissitudes  of  a
globalised financial market system.
Another  very  important  price  that  must  be  flexible  and  adjustable  in  this  new
world financial environment is the interest rate. Interest rates are prices: the prices of loanable
BIS Review   95/1998
- 4 -
funds with different maturities and different risk exposures. As is the case with all other prices in
a  market  economy,  interest  rates  are  determined  by  forces  of  demand  and  supply.  If  the
authorities  do  not  want  to  accept  interest  rates  as  determined  by  market  forces,  they  should
preferably  work  through  the  markets  to  either  reduce  the  demand  for  funds  (for  example  by
reducing  government  expenditure),  or  increase  the  supply  of  funds  (by  creating  more  money
through the central bank). This latter course may reduce interest rates in the short term, but holds
the danger of higher inflation, and therefore also higher interest rates, in the longer term.
In  March  this  year,  the  Reserve  Bank  moved  away  from  the  conventional  fixed
Bank  rate  for  its  loans  to  banking  institutions  and  introduced  the  more  flexible  daily  tender
system  for  repurchase  transactions,  where  the  effective  lending  rate  of  the  Reserve  Bank  is
determined on a day-to-day basis through a process of the interaction of demand and supply. The
repo  rate  is  now  more  closely  linked  to  movements  in  short-term  market  interest  rates  as
determined by overall demand and supply conditions in the money market. Short-term  interest
rates can adjust very quickly to changes in underlying conditions. The repo rate can be influenced
by the Reserve Bank by changing the amount of central bank funds supplied to the market. In the
process, the basic principle of the market mechanism is adhered to.
Here once again there is a misguided perception in South Africa that the Reserve
Bank  should  intervene  more  actively  in  the  markets  to  prevent  interest  rates  from  rising,  even
when  there  is  a  fundamental  shortage  of  funds,  but  should  not  prevent  interest  rates  from
declining  in  times  of  increases  in  the  supply  of  funds.  Such  an  asymmetrical  approach  will,
unfortunately,  not  be  tolerated  by  the  disciplines  of  the  global  market  economy.  In  the  recent
turmoil  in  the  international  financial  markets,  a  number  of  smaller  countries  experienced  the
vengeance of the international market forces when they tried to keep exchange rates or interest
rates fixed at artificial levels not associated with the underlying market fundamentals.
A  third  area  where  greater  flexibility  in  the  price-fixing  process  has  become  of
more  importance  in  the  situation  of  global  financial  integration  is  in  the  determination  of  the
prices of financial assets such as share and bond prices. A decision by the Hong Kong Monetary
Authority recently to buy shares in the stock exchange when sales by non-residents pushed prices
down  was  exploited  by  speculators,  but  nevertheless  contributed  to  some  stabilisation  as  the
authorities operated mainly through the market mechanism of demand and supply. As  with  all
other interventions by the authorities in the financial markets, buying or selling of paper in the
financial markets should be done with discretion, and should not prevent normal market forces
from  continuing  to  function  effectively.  For  a  country  such  as  South  Africa,  it  is  therefore
important  to  encourage  well-functioning,  efficient  and  flexible  financial  markets  where  prices
can adjust quickly to changes in the underlying demand and supply conditions.
Many  other  examples  of  a  need  for  greater  flexibility  in  the  process  of  price
determination can be conjectured, for example, prices of commodities, of financial services, and
of  labour.  Without  flexible  prices  in  all  markets,  smaller  countries  will  find  it  increasingly
difficult to survive in an integrated worldwide economy.
BIS Review   95/1998
- 5 -
4. South Africa’s experience with global financial volatility
Over  the  past  six  months,  South  Africa  has  experienced  the  full  force  of  the
uncontrollable volatility of the international financial markets. A few statistics will illustrate the
impact these forces had on the South African economy:
•  During the first four months of 1998, non-residents increased their holdings of
South  African  bonds  by  R16.3  billion.  During  the  next  five  months,  that  is
from May to September, non-residents reduced their holdings of South African
bonds by R22.4 billion.
•  The exchange rate of the rand, which was relatively stable throughout 1997 and
the first four months of 1998, depreciated by 21.4 per cent from 22 May 1998
to 31 August 1998. Since then, the rand has appreciated slightly but is still, at
this stage, on average about 16 per cent down from the beginning of the year.
•  The yield on long-term government bonds rose from below 13 per cent in April
1998 to 20.09 per cent on 28 August 1998, and then declined again to below 16
per cent at this stage.
•  The prime overdraft rate of banking institutions was raised from 18.25 per cent
at the end of April 1998 to 25.5 per cent on 28 August 1998. During the past
few weeks, the major banks have reduced their prime overdraft rates again to
23.5 per cent.
•  The  average  prices  of  all  shares  listed  on  the  Johannesburg  Stock  Exchange
increased  by  32.3  per  cent  from  December  1997  to  an  all-time  high  in  May
1998, but then declined by 38.7 per cent to the end of September 1998. Since
the  end  of  September,  the  all-shares  price  index  of  the  Johannesburg  Stock
Exchange has increased again by about 19 per cent.
These erratic movements in major financial aggregates created many problems for
the  authorities,  financial  institutions,  businesses,  private  individuals,  and  indeed  for  the  total
economy.  And  yet,  nobody  can  be  blamed  for  it.  It  is  part  of  the  globalisation  of  financial
markets, and of South Africa’s participation in this process. South Africa went through a similar
experience  in  1996.  On  both  occasions,  that  is  in  1996  and  so  far  in  1998,  we  succeeded  in
restoring financial stability in a relatively short period of time, but not without painful adjustment
and a high social cost in terms of low economic growth.
There  is  no  guarantee  that  somewhere  down  the  road  our  economy  will  not  be
tested  again  by  the  increasing  volatility  of  an  integrated  world  financial  market  system.  It  is
therefore important that we shall all learn from the two experiences of the past three years, and
shall  prepare  our  economy  to  prosper  even  within  the  environment  of  volatile  international
capital movements.
We have learnt that sound macroeconomic policies at all times make it easier to
absorb  the  fluctuations  in  the  financial  markets.  Countries  that  do  not  apply  sound
macroeconomic  policies  are  punished  more  severely  during  times  of  international  currency
turmoil.
BIS Review   95/1998
- 6 -
We have  learnt  that  flexibility  in  domestic  financial  and  other  markets  makes  it
easier to absorb the shocks of the periodic global financial market disturbances. In particular, we
have learnt that prices as determined by market forces must be allowed to respond quickly and
decisively to changes in underlying market conditions.
We  have  learnt  that  government  policies  are  important,  but  that  government
actions alone cannot solve the problem once it has infiltrated into our markets. The disciplines of
the market economy must be allowed to function in a flexible way.
We  have  learnt  above  all  that  sound,  well-managed,  and  healthy  banking
institutions  can  form  a  major  bastion  against  total  economic  collapse  in  a  situation  of  large
capital  outflows.  In  a  number  of  East  Asian  countries,  the  economies  collapsed  completely
because weak banking systems could not survive in the adverse climate of sudden large outflows
of capital.
South  Africa  must  be  grateful  for  the  strength  of  our  banking  system,  and  must
protect  it  to  make  sure  that  we  shall  also  be  able  to  withstand  the  future  storms  of  a  volatile
global financial market environment. Weak banking systems lead to weak economies.
BIS Review   95/1998
