Mr.  Hartmann  discusses  the  introduction  of  the  euro  and  its  impact  on
payment  systems      Speech  by  Mr.  Wendelin  Hartmann,  a  member  of  the  Directorate  of  the
Deutsche Bundesbank, at Sibos Helsinki, Closing Plenary Session on 24/9/98.
It is a great honour for me to say a few words, here at this major conference, on
the forthcoming, important changes that will accompany the introduction of the euro.
We are all aware that payment systems have long since moved from the seclusion
of pure settlement arrangements to become the focus of political and strategic attention. It is not
just a question of payments to settle the cost of economic activities. Much greater importance is
attached  to  financial  transactions  in  particular;  over  the  past  few  years  they  have  grown  at  a
furious pace - not least as a result of globalisation and technological progress. The establishment
of efficient and, above all, - as far as possible - risk free payment systems is therefore a necessity.
Payments will also play a significant role in the introduction of the euro: a major
part of the preparations undertaken by the banks and central banks in Europe deals with that area.
European  economic  and  monetary  union  (EMU)  will  undoubtedly  transform  the  payments
landscape in Europe and - as a result - worldwide.
What is indisputably the most important project for the European central banks is
the  introduction  of  TARGET  -  meanwhile  well  known  to  the  financial  industry  world-wide  -
which  has  been  in  the  simulation  phase  since  July  of  this  year.  The  tests  are  proceeding
satisfactorily  overall  and  give  cause  for  optimism;  the  credit  institutions  are  now  actually
involved in all the countries of the European Union (EU).
The most recent decision of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank
(ECB) to include the four EU countries not (yet) participating in EMU has also settled the last
undecided points which were the subject of animated  discussion  in  the  past.  Confirmation  has
been given that the RTGS systems of the “out” countries will be connected to TARGET but that
they will be subject to special conditions regarding the provision of liquidity. The “out” central
banks  may  maintain  interest-bearing  deposits  with  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks
(ESCB)  and  initiate  payment  orders  from  them.  However,  they  may  not  receive  non-interest-
bearing  overdrafts  from  the  EMU-central  banks,  a  facility  for  which  there  is  provision  in  the
settlement  of  TARGET  payments  for  “in”  central  banks.  The  “out”  central  banks  may  grant  a
maximum  intraday  credit  of  1  billion  euros  per  bank  to  credit  institutions  in  their  euro  RTGS
systems against the deposit of appropriate collateral. Spilling over into an overnight credit and
the associated monetary policy implications are to be prevented by repossession of the intraday
credit at an earlier closing time and the setting of high penalty rates.
I would like to venture a brief look forward to the future payments landscape in
Europe.
Features of foreign payments
Owing to the comparatively small number of cross-border transactions, there has
so far been no real pressure for rationalising foreign payments. Most cross-border payments are
still settled through a large number of correspondent banking relationships and, typically, with a
two-day value date. Apart from the exchange of SWI.F.T. messages, very little is standardised -
there are only the beginnings of a standard international  bank  code,  for  example.  Complicated
pre-printed forms and statistical reporting obligations make a simple exchange of payments more
BIS Review   84/1998
- 2 -
difficult.  However,  this  should  not  be  regarded  as  an  excuse  for  the  existing  shortcomings  in
cross-border payments, such as long settlement times and high charges still mainly occurring in
the retail segment. In the euro area, these differences when compared with the efficient and cost-
effective  operations  of  the  national  systems  will  become  very  obvious  and  create  political
pressure on us all. In the interests of a fully functional European market, foreign payments will,
at all events, need further improvements.
Large-value payments
As  a  result  of  their  importance  for  monetary  policy,  large-value  payments  are
especially “close to the heart” of the central banks. In order to guarantee a single money market
and  the  necessary  interest  rate  arbitrage  in  Stage  Three  of  EMU,  it  will  be  necessary  to  settle
payments  -  including  cross-border-payments  -  not  just  within  one  business  day  but,  where
possible, within a matter of a few minutes. The TARGET system which has been developed by
the central  banks  is  thus  the  key  medium  for  implementing  the  single  monetary  policy  and  an
efficient euro money market.
TARGET  will  not  be  the  only  large-value  payment  system  in  the  EU,  however.
Net  settlement  systems,  too,  may  continue  to  operate  if  they  meet  what  are  known  as  the
Lamfalussy minimum standards and settle payments through central bank accounts. Thus, the net
settlement  system  of  the  Euro  Banking  Association  (EBA),  which  still  settles  transactions  in
private ECU, is being re-equipped to process euro payments in future. In addition to this cross-
border system, there will be other national net  settlement  systems:  SNP  in  France,  the  Madrid
Clearing House in Spain, the Finnish POPS system, and the LIPS system in Luxembourg. The
German  EAF  (Electronic  Access  Frankfurt)  combines  the  positive  elements  of  gross  and  net
settlement  systems.  As  a  hybrid  system,  it  will  thus  provide  -  also  after  the  euro  has  been
introduced  -  what  is,  in  our  view,  an  optimum  combination  of  early  finality  of  payments  and
liquidity saving, as will CHIPS in New York in the future.
The  distinction  between  cross-border  and  national  payment  systems  will
fundamentally become less important. Firstly, all systems will process the same currency - the
euro - in future. Secondly, national systems will become increasingly international in character as
a result of the expansion of the group of participants. Foreign banks, both from the EU and from
third countries, will be able to participate in domestic systems through their branch offices or use
the  option  of  remote  access  without  even  having  a  local  presence.  Along  with  other  central
banks,  the  Bundesbank  has  been  opening  its  large-value  payment  systems  for  remote  access
worldwide since the beginning of this year and offers interested banks indirect participation with
their own clearing address. There has been a great response to this international stance, especially
from outside the EU area.
The large number of different payment systems and the various  forms  of  access
will inevitably lead to fiercer competition among the systems and thus among financial centres.
There are some who regard the coexistence of the various payment systems as problematical on
the grounds that it will make liquidity management more difficult. Since the transaction currency
will no longer be the major factor determining the channel of payment, they fear that the situation
in Europe will be - to quote from the Financial Times - “at best a mess, at worst chaos”1. This is
a view which I am totally unable to share.
                                                     
1  Financial Times, August 3, 1998: “ 'What you would have is at best a mess, at worst chaos', said Eric Sepkes,…”
BIS Review   84/1998
- 3 -
On the contrary, I regard competition as fundamentally desirable in this  respect,
too, since it is likely to lead to payment systems being organised in a more efficient and cost-
effective manner. This statement also applies without qualification to the systems operated by the
central banks (TARGET and EAF). That is because, just as the commercial banks operate their
systems,  such  as  EBA  Clearing  or  SNP,  without  gainful  intent,  the  central  banks  work  theirs
according to the principle of full cost recovering. The costs structure is regularly examined by
independent auditors, for example. The Directorate General of the EU Commission responsible
for  issues  relating  to  competition  ensures  that  the  EU  central  banks  do  not  operate  an  unfair
charges policy.
Besides charges, it will, above all, be quality features, such as speed and freedom
from  risk,  that  will  play  a  crucial  role  in  the  choice  of  the  payment  channel.  The  TARGET
system established by the central banks will settle large-value payments extremely efficiently in
real  time  and  with  immediate  finality.  In  the  view  of  the  central  banks,  this  system  should
therefore  be  used  for  time-critical  and  very  large  payments,  particularly  for  transactions  in
connection  with  money  and  foreign  exchange  market  operations.  This  would  make  a
considerable contribution to the EU-wide reduction of systemic risks.
One further advantage of TARGET is its comprehensive market coverage - almost
all credit institutions in the EU will directly be accessible via TARGET. This will also enable
institutions  outside  the  EU  to  restructure  and/or  streamline  their  correspondent  banking
relationships with a view to gaining access to the euro area, since they will generally need only
one link into the euro area for access to TARGET. Net settlement systems, such as EBA Clearing
or  the  hybrid  system  EAF,  tend  to  be  geared  more  to  a  limited  number  of  direct  or  indirect
participants; other banks can be reached only through correspondents. These systems provide the
particular advantage of liquidity saving, but do not ensure the finality of payments in real time.
For that reason, they will probably be used for payments of lesser importance but with same-day
settlement.
I  therefore  regard  the  coexistence  of  gross  and  net  settlement  systems  as  quite
consistent  with  market  requirements.  One  of  these  two  types  does  not  necessarily  have  to
displace the other. Rather, they are complementary. Participants in payments will thus have the
option  of  deciding  which  system  is  the  more  suitable  in  a  given  situation  depending  on  the
purpose and size of their payments.
The choice of the payment channel will therefore depend on customer needs. I feel
that cartel agreements in the banking industry or regulation by the central banks are unnecessary.
Even the “Heathrow Group”, a grouping of 31 clearing banks, has arrived at the conclusion that
there ought be no binding regulations on the use of certain payment systems. Instead, the existing
principle of the channel of payment being agreed bilaterally or multilaterally between the credit
institutions involved should be maintained. Standard Settlement Instructions (SSI) are helpful in
this but must not lead to cartel agreements and thus clash with fair competition.
Despite all the optimism in respect of the major function of competition, it should
not be forgotten that there must be a given volume of payments overall  in  order  to  ensure  the
viability of several coexisting large-value payment systems. According to a 1996 estimate by the
EBA,  a  daily  volume  of  between  318,000  and  473,000  crossborder  commercial  and  financial
payments in euros is to be expected from the start of next year. Furthermore, the EBA estimates
that the volume will increase by 15% to 20% by the year 2004. The actual  future  trend  in  the
volume  of  payments  is,  in  my  view,  difficult  to  predict,  however.  The  adoption  of  the  single
BIS Review   84/1998
- 4 -
currency  will,  at  least,  mean  that  there  will  be  no  transactions  which  aim  at  exchange  rate
positioning among the disappearing European currencies, as there are now. The current efforts to
limit the foreign exchange settlement risk will have a similar impact. A significant increase in the
use of netting procedures in foreign exchange dealings or the successful implementation of the
CLS  initiative  might,  in  all  probability,  lead  to  a  perceptible  reduction  in  the  number  of
transactions. The possibility of excess capacity arising in large-value payments cannot therefore
be  ruled  out.  Nevertheless,  the  effect  might  be  tempered  by  new  payment  activities  due  to  an
increase in transactions resulting from enhanced efficiency in the EU market and an increase in
the volume of payments involving third currencies. Again, the creation of the European money
market itself is likely to impart a major stimulus to the volume of transactions.
I  feel  there  are  two  conceivable  developments  if  there  really  is  excess  capacity.
Firstly,  it  might  become  necessary  to  close  down  individual  systems  because  of  a  lack  of
sufficient use. Secondly, I could also well imagine that spare capacity might increasingly be used
to settle retail payments, too, in the new, efficient large-value payment systems.
Retail payments
This  would  give  a  considerable  boost  to  cross-border  retail  payments  in  Europe
since these still do not meet the requirements of the single market in terms of speed, efficiency
and cost.
A survey that was recently conducted in Frankfurt, for example, showed that the
settlement of a cross-border payment still takes between 2 and 14 days and that a transaction to
the  equivalent  value  of  around  800  euros  costs  10-30  euros.  If  these  costs  are  compared  with
those of the large-value payment systems, it becomes clear how much catching-up is still to be
done in the area of retail payments. Depending on the amount submitted, a TARGET payment
will cost no more than 0.80-1.75 euros. The EBA and the EAF will charge 0.25 and 0.15 euros,
respectively, per transaction.
In my opinion, the banks have failed to eliminate these long-familiar shortcomings
at  the  right  time.  A  few  years  ago,  in  fact,  there  was  a  promising  initiative  to  make  retail
payments  more  efficient  and,  above  all,  cost-effective  by  means  of  the  ACH  (Automated
Clearing House) solution. The ACH approach would have offered the advantage of there being
only one link for cross-border payments per country. Unfortunately, this solution was sacrificed
to the short-term interests of the banking groups. The totally unsatisfactory level of technological
standardisation in Europe has remained largely unchanged.
Instead, individual groups, such as the cooperative and savings bank sector, have
now established their own linking systems. In terms of efficiency and cost, these initiatives are
not  enough,  however.  Rather,  technological  diversity  has  resulted  in  settlement  that  is
uneconomic in the long term. The situation is unsustainable - especially in the light of the cost-
effective  settlement  of  large-value  payments  -  and  is  likely  to  call  the  consumer  protection
associations  into  action  again.  The  banking  industry  must  seriously  consider  how  substantive
improvements can be achieved.
In  my  view,  this  requires  progress  in  the  area  of  standardisation,  in  particular.
Linking  the  national  retail  payment  systems  throughout  Europe  has  failed  so  far  because  the
national standards are not compatible with each other. The bank code has a different number of
digits in the individual countries, for example; the IBAN is only gradually gaining acceptance.
BIS Review   84/1998
- 5 -
Differing standards mean that foreign payments are, in most cases, still passed on in systems that
are  separate  from  domestic  payments  and  encumbered  with  special  charges.  A  complete
conversion to combined processing in a given country’s domestic payment system is not always
possible  and  is  also  fairly  labour-intensive  on  account  of  the  large  number  of  possible
combinations. It is only gradually that bridging standards are being developed for a link of this
kind,  one  example  of  which  is  the  message  type  S.W.I.F.T.  MT  102.  These  bring  about  a
significant  reduction  in  the  amount  of  work  needed,  since  there  only  has  to  be  one  single
conversion from the national standard to the S.W.I.F.T. message type or, alternatively, from the
S.W.I.F.T.  message  type  into  the  national  standard.  A  complete  cost-effective  harmonisation
would  require  standardisation  throughout  Europe,  however.  The  EU  central  banks  and  the
European  Monetary  Institute  (EMI)  have  repeatedly  drawn  attention  to  this  problem;  I  cite
merely  the  seminar  on  standardisation  that  the  EMI  held  at  the  beginning  of  this  year  with
representatives of the European banking industry. The private sector still has a lot to do in this
respect. In their payments oversight function, the central banks repeatedly find themselves in the
situation of being compelled to point out the existing failings. They are also willing to take an
active part in supporting the work on European standards.
The role of S.W.I.F.T.
Naturally,  whenever  the  subject  of  standardisation  is  mentioned,  I  immediately
think of our host, S.W.I.F.T.. Looking at this audience, it once again becomes clear what a major
role  S.W.I.F.T.  plays  in  terms  of  payment  systems  worldwide.  We  are  all  users  of  S.W.I.F.T..
And  that  has  led,  of  course,  to  the  S.W.I.F.T.  formats  now  being  more  or  less  the  only
international  standard  for  payments  between  banks.  A  wide  range  of  participants  uses  the
S.W.I.F.T.  telecommunications  network  for  international  correspondent  banking  business.
National large-value payment systems, too, such as the Belgian RTGS system ELLIPS or TBF in
France, use the S.W.I.F.T. network for communication between their participants. By  contrast,
participation  in  the  Bundesbank’s  large-value  payment  systems,  EAF  and  ELS,  is  based  on
proprietary solutions; the Datex P of Deutsche Telekom AG is used for telecommunications. The
Bundesbank  thus  takes  due  account  of  the  variety  of  systems  operated  by  its  customers  by
providing  them  with  open  and,  in  the  broadest  terms,  neutral  access,  to  its  services.  This
principle is also being applied to the opening of large-value payment procedures for worldwide
remote access. Nevertheless, for those interested in remote access to EAF and ELS, we are also
developing a cost-effective access option which uses the S.W.I.F.T. network as a platform and
the  customary  S.W.I.F.T.  standards  for  communication.  This  means  that  banks  abroad  will  be
able to use their normal foreign payments procedures without additional modification work, and
this will make installation and communication easier. This solution is expected to be available
from the start of 1999.
S.W.I.F.T.’s role in Stage Three of EMU is being extended, since the EU central
banks  have  decided  to  use  S.W.I.F.T.  as  a  carrier  for  the  cross-border  TARGET  system.  This
means that S.W.I.F.T. has taken on an even greater amount of responsibility. In particular, this
includes the commitment to ensuring smooth and trouble-free operation. It is my belief that the
high  standard  set  by  S.W.I.F.T.  in  the  past  will  ensure  that  the  TARGET  system  will  operate
smoothly,  too.  This  is  borne  out  by  the  first-rate  spirit  of  cooperation  and  the  transparency
provided  by  S.W.I.F.T.  -  not  least  with  respect  to  the  auditing  by  the  Belgian  central  bank.
Overall, I am optimistic that SWI.F.T. will also master future challenges, such as the year-2000
problem.
Outlook
BIS Review   84/1998
- 6 -
However pressing and topical the centennial project of EMU may be, the example
of the year-2000 problem makes us realise - if we have not done so already - that cooperation in
the  field  of  payments  must  not  stop  at  Europe’s  borders.  Europe  must  look  beyond  its  own
immediate  concerns  in  order  not  to  become  isolated.  The  EU  central  banks  will  therefore
continue  their  dialogue  with  central  banks  throughout  the  world.  The  introduction  of  the  euro
will,  in  any  case,  not  leave  third  countries  unaffected.  Credit  institutions  outside  the  EU  will
restructure  their  correspondent  banking  relationships  and  possibly  find  new  counterparties.
Concentration on a small number of access points to the euro area will offer them the opportunity
of  easier  liquidity  management.  This  will  also  strengthen  competition  between  European
financial centres. Issues of this kind relating to competition also came into the, often animated,
negotiations on connecting the “out” central banks to TARGET. At times these central banks had
feared discrimination. On the other hand, they do happen to be outside the euro area and cannot
therefore benefit from all the advantages of the single currency area. Off-shore centres must play
a neutral role in terms of monetary policy - something which, in my view, made the imposition of
conditions indispensable. I believe, however, that we must not forget that these countries will one
day become fully-fledged members of EMU and that procedures will then be harmonised in any
case.  In  terms  of  the  restructuring  of  payments  in  EMU  and  the  rearrangement  of  business
relationships  -  in  other  words,  including  acquisitions  -  fairness  should  take  priority  over
everything  else.  What  matters,  after  all,  is  successfully  realising  the  joint  project  of  monetary
union on an enduring basis.
BIS Review   84/1998
