Mr.  McDonough  gives  his  perspective  on  the  Year  2000  problem  and  the
challenges  it  poses      Remarks  by  the  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,
Mr. William J. McDonough, before the Regional Y2K Meeting for Financial Regulators in the
Asia/Pacific Region, held in Sydney on 19/10/98.
I am delighted to be here today at the first of several regional forums on the Year
2000  problem  that  the  Joint  Year  2000  Council  is  organizing.  As  an  original  sponsor  and  ex
officio  member  of  the  Council,  I  am  especially  pleased  that  it  has  been  successful  in  rapidly
organizing  today’s  events  to  coincide  with  the  International  Conference  of  Bank  Supervisors
meetings.  This  gathering  provides  another  example  of  how  financial  market  supervisors  and
regulators such as yourselves are leading the way in tackling this issue around the world.
In my remarks today, I will provide my perspective on the Year 2000 problem and
the  challenges  it  poses.  My  experience  with  the  issue  draws  first  on  my  role  at  the  Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, where we are addressing Year 2000 challenges as a central bank, as
a bank supervisor, as a payment system operator and as a business much like any other business.
Internationally, I became involved with the issue through the G-10 Committee on Payment and
Settlement  Systems  and  spoke  out  about  the  need  for  payment  system  operators  worldwide  to
address  the  Year  2000  problem.  More  recently,  on  the  Basle  Supervisors’  Committee,  I  have
been learning about the Year 2000 issues that confront bank supervisors around the globe.
Scope
Simply put, I do not think it would be possible to overstate the importance of the
Year  2000  problem  as  an  issue  for  the  financial  markets.  Naturally,  the  tendency  in  these
turbulent times is to focus on day-to-day concerns, and to leave future problems to be dealt with
later. This tendency must be resisted strongly if we are to succeed in addressing the Year 2000
problem.
I  say  this  because  the  Year  2000  problem  is  an  issue  for  every  country,  firm,
organization,  government  agency,  bank  and  piece  of  critical  infrastructure  in  the  world.  If  the
Year 2000 problems that exist within software programs and embedded computer chips are not
repaired  by  January  1,  2000,  the  affected  systems  will  cease  to  function  or  will  malfunction.
Those  firms  that  have  checked  for  Year  2000  problems  overwhelmingly  have  found  that  their
systems were affected and would not have functioned normally in the Year 2000 without being
fixed. Moreover, the efforts of firms around the world have demonstrated that while the extent of
the Year 2000 problem varies, no country or sector is immune from it or can afford to ignore its
impact.
Financial  sector  organizations  such  as  banks,  securities  firms  and  insurance
companies  are  typically  among  the  most  highly  affected  organizations.  National  and  local
government  systems  and  services  are  affected.  Critical  infrastructure  such  as  transport,  water,
power and telecommunications systems are also likely to be affected. Nearly all aspects of the
economy in every country are therefore potentially at risk because of the widespread dependence
on a country’s core infrastructure.
The unprecedented scope of the Year 2000 problem means that a critical aspect of
the  issue  is  the  management  challenge.  Substantial  management  resources  are  needed  to
coordinate the efforts to assess, repair,  and  test  affected  systems  prior  to  the  fixed  deadline  of
BIS Review   85/1998
- 2 -
January 1, 2000. At the Federal Reserve, for example, we have created a number of management
positions within our organization that are focused exclusively on different aspects  of  our  Year
2000 preparations.
A  final  point  that  underscores  the  need  for  urgent  and  sustained  action  is  the
increasing focus on the issue by the media, by the public and by market observers such as the
rating  agencies.  Over  the  course  of  1999,  the  extent  of  Year  2000  preparations  by  financial
organizations will become the subject of ever more intensive scrutiny. As supervisors, therefore,
we  must  do  all  we  can  to  support  the  efforts  of  market  participants  to  address  the  problem
effectively, and to build confidence among others that this is being accomplished. While we must
make it clear that supervisors cannot solve the problem, we can help mobilize others to take the
necessary steps.
Of  course,  I  realize  that  most  of  you  are  already  fully  convinced  of  the  need  to
seriously  address  the  Year  2000  issue  and  are  more  interested  in  advice  on  how  to  tackle  the
problem.  In  this  regard,  I  will  focus  on  approaches  that  supervisors  can  take  in  five  areas:
(1) encouraging  cooperation  and  coordination;  (2)  encouraging  information  sharing  and
disclosure;  (3)  developing  assessment  plans;  (4)  encouraging 
testing  programs;  and
(5) developing and supporting contingency plans.
Cooperation and Coordination
The  single  most  important  piece  of  advice  that  can  be  given  on  the  Year  2000
problem  is  to  work  cooperatively  with  others.  This  applies  at  a  number  of  levels.  First,  every
organization  should  develop  an  internal  Year  2000  plan  that  encourages  cooperation  between
different  parts  of  the  organization.  For  example,  a  successful  Year  2000  program  for  an
organization  will  encompass  not  only  the  software  programs  that  are  maintained  by  the
information technology department, but will also address the Year 2000 risks that may be posed
by the embedded chips in the firm’s buildings, including heating and cooling, building security
and safety systems.
The  benefits  of  cooperation  include  the  sharing  of  information,  so  that  the
resources  required  to  obtain  valuable  information  can  be  reduced.  Cooperation  across
organizations is also essential to the development of joint industry initiatives, including testing
programs. For example, we have seen industry associations play a very valuable role in raising
industry  awareness  and  providing  a  focal  point  for  the  sharing  of  information  and  the
development of joint Year 2000 initiatives. I strongly urge each of you here today to challenge
the industry associations in your countries to develop an aggressive Year 2000 program for the
mutual benefit of all their members.
In fact, a largely unprecedented amount of cooperation already is taking place with
respect to Year 2000. For instance, the Joint Year 2000 Council brings together more regulators
and supervisors in one organization than has ever been done before. In April of this year, the four
sponsoring  organizations  realized  that  they  needed  to  pool  resources  and  bring  together  their
respective experts to discuss the issue collectively and to develop a common dialogue with the
global  supervisory  community.  The  efforts  of  the  Council  to  date  have  been  valuable  in
communicating  Year  2000  information  to  this  community,  and  I  support  the  continuation  and
expansion of these efforts.
BIS Review   85/1998
- 3 -
The  Global  2000  Coordinating  Group,  which  consists  of  internationally  active
financial institutions, is another example of an important effort to foster cooperation on the Year
2000 issue. The firms represented on Global 2000 are working together to tackle several different
aspects  of  the  problem,  especially  the  international  dimension.  They  have  approached  this
collective effort with a high degree of transparency and I applaud their efforts at cooperation.
Cooperation  is  also  needed  between  the  supervisory  community  and  the  private
sector.  The  New  York  Fed  has  hosted  a  series  of  informal  meetings  in  New  York  bringing
together banks, securities firms, settlement systems, insurance companies and regulators to help
each  understand  better  the  perspectives  of  others  around  the  table.  The  New  York  Fed  also  is
participating  in  joint  efforts  with  several  industry  associations  that  focus  on  Year  2000
contingency planning and on testing. For these two issues, in particular, it is critical that an active
dialogue be established between the public and private sectors.
The final element of cooperation needed for an effective approach to Year 2000 is
cross-industry cooperation. Most financial market participants  are  not  accustomed  to  gathering
extensive  information  from  other  industries,  such  as  the  telecommunications  industry.  Yet
financial  firms,  among  others,  depend  critically  on  the  proper  functioning  of  sectors  such  as
transportation, electric power generation, and government services. In the absence of cooperation
and coordination, the lack of information flowing across sectors can create serious obstacles to
achieving  successful  Year  2000  outcomes.  Errors  of  omission  in  coordinating  your  efforts
broadly can be far more significant than you might realize.
Based on our experience in the United States, the creation of a government body
to  assist  in  coordinating  preparations  can  play  an  important  role.  In  the  United  States,  the
President’s Council on  the  Year  2000  Conversion  has  been  active  in  promoting  cross-industry
discussions and tracking the progress of different industries. Governments in other countries such
as Australia, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Saudi Arabia and the United Kingdom have also implemented
national Year 2000 strategies.
As supervisors, our first task is to address the Year 2000 issues in the sectors for
which we have responsibility. However, we cannot lose sight of the dependence of the financial
sector  on  the  broader  national  and  international  infrastructure.  Year  2000  issues  affecting  this
infrastructure must be addressed. Each of us must seek to ensure that these concerns are being
appropriately  tackled  within  our  own  countries  and  that  information  on  these  preparations  is
being made available to financial market participants.
Information Sharing and Disclosure
This last point brings me to my next topic – information sharing and disclosure. In
the absence of good information on Year 2000 preparations, we would naturally expect market
participants  to  take  a  conservative  approach  and  to  protect  their  own  interests.  It  is  vital  that
market  participants  be  encouraged  to  be  as  forthcoming  as  possible  about  the  steps  they  have
taken to prepare for the Year 2000 conversion.
There  are  a  variety  of  different  types  of  disclosure,  and  all  may  play  a  role  in
fostering  better 
is  voluntary
self disclosure, which is a form of information sharing, such as when firms discuss Year 2000
issues  and  strategies  among  each  other.  In  addition,  financial  organizations  need  to  provide
information on their Year 2000 efforts to their customers and counterparties, their investors and
information  about  Year  2000  preparations.  First, 
there 
BIS Review   85/1998
- 4 -
others.  In  the  case  of  banks,  for  example,  it  is  important  for  correspondent  and  custodial
customers to develop comfort that the bank will be able to function normally in the new century.
Banks  and  other  firms  need  to  develop  strategies  for  conveying  appropriate
information efficiently to these constituents. In response to a flood of Year 2000 questionnaires
from  their  customers,  some  banks  in  New  York  are  beginning  to  hold  forums  to  convey
information and build confidence that they are addressing the problem. Another practice we are
seeing is organizations declining to fill out  questionnaires  regarding  their  Year  2000  readiness
unless the firm asking the questions discloses the same information. It is clear to me that this sort
of market discipline is going to become a powerful force in the coming months for firms that are
perceived  to  be  lagging  and  failing  to  disclose.  A  solid  program  of  self-disclosure  is  the  best
available approach to ensuring that all parties are willing to share information.
Of  course,  supervisors  and  regulators  may  also  need  to  develop  mandatory
disclosure programs or to interpret existing disclosure requirements to cover Year 2000-related
issues.  In  the  United  States,  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  has  progressively
strengthened  its  efforts  to  require  meaningful  disclosure  by  all  types  of  firms.  Clearly,
supervisors  considering  increased  transparency  need  to  act  rapidly  to  ensure  that  any  new
requirements will become effective in time to be useful to market participants.
An important challenge in considering either voluntary or mandatory disclosure is
the question of what information should be disclosed. Some information can in fact be downright
misleading.  For  example,  a  firm  may  engage  in  internal  testing  and  locate  a  number  of  Year
2000-related problems in its systems. Of course, it is the process of this testing that will enable
the  firm  to  locate  and  overcome  these  problems.  Thus,  disclosing  its  internal  test  results  in
isolation could give a false impression of its readiness. In general, comprehensive self-disclosure
in written form, supplemented by a willingness to answer specific questions, is proving to be the
most effective way of sharing information.
Another issue that often comes up in this context is the question of certification.
External  parties,  whether  auditors  or  examiners,  cannot  realistically  certify  Year  2000
compliance.  The  best  that  they  can  do  is  focus  on  the  effectiveness  of  the  process  that  the
organization has established. Oversight by these third parties should not be seen as a substitute
for  an  organization’s  own  due  diligence,  an  area  in  which  internal  audit  departments  have
traditionally played a leading role. Internal auditors also could be useful in helping firms develop
their Year 2000 disclosures.
Another concern is the existence of possible legal obstacles that may stand in the
way of Year 2000 information sharing. In the United States, several efforts have been made to
limit or remove these obstacles, and such efforts may be needed in other countries as well. For
example, a ruling was issued by our Justice Department limiting the extent to which Year 2000
information sharing could be viewed as a violation of antitrust laws. Recent legislation reduces
the  legal  liability  for  statements  made  in  good  faith  that  later  turn  out  to  be  inaccurate.
Supervisors  have  been  supportive  of  these  efforts,  and  I  encourage  each  of  you  to  consider
whether  substantial  impediments  to  meaningful  information  sharing  may  exist  in  your  own
countries.
The  final  point  that  I  will  make  in  this  area  concerns  the  power  of  leading  by
example.  As  supervisors  and  regulators,  we  should  each  strive  to  communicate  frequently  and
openly  with  our  constituents  about  our  own  Year  2000  programs.  At  the  Federal  Reserve,  we
BIS Review   85/1998
- 5 -
have testified before Congress on our efforts and have made available a large amount of material
through the World Wide Web and numerous publications. As leaders in the financial markets, it
is important that we set the right tone in promoting information sharing and transparency in our
own preparations.
Assessment and the Role of the Supervisor
I will now turn to the role of supervisors in promoting Year 2000 readiness among
the  firms  that  we  supervise.  The  primary  effort  must  be  to  communicate  the  seriousness  and
urgency  of  the  problem  to  the  firms  under  our  jurisdiction.  In  the  United  States,  the  bank
supervisors  are  examining  every  bank  operating  in  the  United  States  regarding  its  Year  2000
program. As part of this program, the Federal Reserve conducted reviews of approximately 1,600
organizations, including a significant number of foreign banking organizations.
These reviews have had a very substantial effect in increasing bank awareness of
the  issue  and  in  focusing  senior  management’s  attention  on  the  problem.  Initial  reviews,
completed  by  mid-1998,  indicated  that  10-15%  of  domestic  banks  had  inadequate  Year  2000
programs, with the US operations of foreign banks showing an even higher percentage. In almost
all cases, the supervisory attention led to immediate steps being taken by the banks involved, and
the percentage of banks now in this category is well below 5%.
What can we do if we find banks that are not progressing rapidly enough? If an
institution is judged to be deficient, we can communicate these findings through meetings with
senior management and the board of directors. We can call for the submission of detailed plans
and formal responses to the deficiencies noted. Naturally, such institutions also will be subject to
increased monitoring and supervisory review. We can and have put restrictions in place that limit
expansion by banks judged to be behind schedule. As a result of these measures, we have found
virtually all banks willing to take seriously their Year 2000 responsibilities.
We  are  now  in  the  second  phase  of  our  supervisory  program  for  Year  2000.
During this second phase, which will last through March 1999, we will conduct another round of
supervisory  reviews  focused  on  Year  2000  testing  and  contingency  planning.  We  also  will  be
looking  at  how  banks  are  addressing  Year  2000  risks  arising  from  their  relationships  with
vendors,  customers  and  counterparties.  Even  if  banks  are  successful  at  tackling  their  internal
Year  2000  concerns,  they  may  still  face  risks  from  critical  services  that  they  receive  from
vendors. In addition, banks should assess their credit exposures to customers that face significant
Year 2000 challenges of their own.
I  hope  that  all  financial  organizations  sufficiently  address  the  Year  2000
conversion  in  time  to  limit  possible  disruptions.  If  they  do  not,  we  will  find  it  increasingly
difficult  to  deal  with  the  issues  arising  from  deficient  organizations  over  the  course  of  1999.
There will likely be some chance that vigorous catch-up efforts on their part will allow them to
avert  serious  problems.  On  the  other  hand,  the  closer  the  time  until  January  2000,  the  more
difficult  it  will  be  for  the  customers  of  that  firm  to  find  an  alternative  provider  of  financial
services. Many banks already are indicating that they will be reluctant to take on new wholesale
customers  in  the  latter  half  of  1999.  To  avoid  this  bottleneck,  supervisors  need  to  take  all
possible steps to identify firms whose progress to date has been insufficient, and to pressure them
to adopt a plan that will address their Year 2000 problems.
BIS Review   85/1998
- 6 -
Inevitably,  however,  supervisors  may  face  difficult  enforcement  issues  during
1999  regarding  those  institutions  that  are  not  making  appropriate  progress.  The  timing  and
severity  of  these  enforcement  steps  will  not  be  easy  to  gauge,  and  I  hope  that  the  Basle
Committee’s  Year  2000  efforts  will  provide  some  guidance  for  supervisors  on  the  issues
involved in making these choices.
A key concern that I would have today about an organization is whether its senior
management truly understands the scope of the Year 2000 problem and the need to tackle it as a
critical management challenge and not simply as a technical issue. If appreciation of the problem
is lacking at the upper levels of an organization, experience suggests that the lack of concern will
filter through to the entire organization, with potentially devastating results.
Testing
Of the many different elements of a sound Year 2000 project plan, perhaps none is
more crucial than testing. In that regard, I will now turn to some of the most important issues
related to Year 2000 testing. As a first step, it is important to distinguish the different types of
testing and test programs that are in place or being developed. The Joint Year 2000 Council’s
recently published paper, “Testing for Year 2000 Readiness” contains a valuable discussion of
these different types of tests.
Internal  tests  are  those  over  which  the  testing  institution  has  full  control  and  in
which  external  parties  are  not  directly  involved.  Firms  that  have  engaged  in  multiple  types  of
tests have reported that the internal future date testing phase was the most important in terms of
uncovering  remaining  Year  2000  problems.  Uniformly,  every  institution  that  has  engaged  in
internal testing  also  has  indicated  that  this  process  indeed  located  further  Year  2000  problems
that  needed  repair.  Thus,  in  spite  of  extensive  repair  efforts,  some  problems  were  not  isolated
until  internal  future  date  tests  were  performed.  This  underscores  why  every  organization  must
build in a program of rigorous internal testing as a part of its Year 2000 project schedule, even
for  applications  designed  to  be  Year  2000  compliant.  Moreover,  the  internal  testing  process
cannot wait until the last minute. Experience has shown that testing programs overall typically
consume over 50% of the resources allocated to Year 2000 projects.
External tests are conducted by  an  institution  to  assess  the  risks  in  repaired  and
internally tested systems where they  interface  with  systems  of  other  institutions.  External  tests
are particularly important where the interface is proprietary or specific to the particular business
activity and the dependency on the external interface is critical. For the most critical systems, in
particular  payment  and  settlement  systems,  external  testing  must  be  done,  and  should  be  done
carefully.
External tests can take a variety of forms. Point-to-point tests verify the ability of
an institution to transmit and receive data with another entity. End-to-end tests take this one step
further and verify the ability of an institution originating a transaction to transmit test data to a
recipient  through  an  intermediary  which  correctly  performs  business  functions  using  that  data.
End-to-end  tests  are  particularly  appropriate  for  real-time,  interactive  applications.  Some
organizations  are  using  a  series  of  point-to-point  tests  to  effectively  simulate  an  end-to-end
testing process.
With regard to Fedwire, the Federal Reserve’s large-value funds transfer system,
we have made the system available for external tests from July of this year. We have also begun
BIS Review   85/1998
- 7 -
a program of shared testing days that allows multiple customers to simultaneously perform end-
to-end testing over the system. These tests will cover the full range of payments and accounting
applications that we provide and will address both the century date conversion and the leap year
date in 2000, which many systems also may not handle correctly.
One of  the  key  lessons  that  has  come  out  of  our  test  process  for  Fedwire  is  the
importance of extensive planning for each aspect of the testing program. For example, both the
testing schedule and test scripts required extensive efforts to develop. Furthermore, without the
very substantial amount of communication and advance planning by the Federal Reserve and the
banks  involved,  we  could  not  be  confident  that  the  tests  would  provide  a  meaningful  output.
Naturally, appropriate internal testing must also be completed in order to derive maximum value
from the external testing program.
These lessons are particularly pertinent in the case of industry-wide external tests
that are designed to permit most or all system participants to test simultaneously with each other.
For  example,  the  Securities  Industry  Association  in  the  United  States  has  developed  a  very
ambitious program of this type for the US stock market. I believe that the Association would be
the first to admit that the amount of work required to pull this off has been staggering. As time
grows ever shorter, such industry-wide tests may prove impractical for some markets.
Many market participants are also considering the role of proxy testing, in which
the tests are conducted by a third party, such as a user group, rather than by each institution for
itself. Needless to say, there is some risk in such an approach. However, proxy testing may be
appropriate where it is not practical for every user of a service to conduct point-to-point testing
with every other user.
In terms of advice, Year 2000 testing obviously is critical, but each market must
consider what is achievable in the time that remains. Internal testing is the most critical, and no
institution should be allowed to go forward with a Year 2000 plan that does not allot ample time
for  internal  testing.  External  testing  also  is  important,  and  payment  and  settlement  systems  in
particular should make external test facilities available to participants. The degree of elaborate
external testing that can be achieved will then be a function of the time available to adequately
plan for such a test. It simply does not make sense to devote considerable resources to a test plan
that is not likely to be realized. A key goal of testing programs is to build confidence that systems
will work as expected on January 3, 2000. There is no doubt that having to call off a test at the
last minute because of insufficient planning will be counter-productive to reaching such a goal.
Contingency Planning
The final issue I will discuss today is contingency planning. Much has been said
about the need to develop contingency plans for the Year 2000 conversion, and I fully support
these efforts. We need contingency plans in place for two main reasons. First, to ensure that we
have considered how to handle the inevitable disruptions that will occur as a result of Year 2000,
and, second, to help build confidence that disruptions will not have systemic consequences. In
the process of contingency planning, we must also keep in mind that it is prudent to consider the
possibility of some very serious, but improbable, events.
Contingency  planning  for  Year  2000  will  not  be  limited  to  the  century  rollover
itself. As my colleague, Roger Ferguson, has described it, there will be a Year 2000 “shadow”
that will affect financial markets both before and after the event itself. This shadow will relate to
BIS Review   85/1998
- 8 -
the  uncertainty  among  market  participants  about  the  possible  consequences  of  Year  2000
disruptions  for  particular  firms  and  markets.  In  some  cases,  this  concern  will  lead  market
participants to consider conventions and procedures for limiting risks during the rollover itself.
For  example,  some  transactions  that  normally  would  be  executed  for  settlement  on  January  3,
2000  may  be  postponed.  In  other  cases,  uncertainty  about  the  possible  consequences  of  Year
2000 disruptions could lead to over-reactions on the part of market participants. As supervisors,
we will need to be increasingly alert to the possibility of Year 2000 rumors affecting the liquidity
of firms during the latter half of 1999, and should support the disclosure of accurate information
in response.
The Basle Committee’s Year 2000 Task Force will be developing a contingency
planning document focused on issues relevant for bank supervisors. I am pleased to see that the
Joint Year 2000 Council also has formed a sub-group to address contingency issues, including
sound practices for financial institution contingency planning as well as market-wide aspects. As
I see it, there are three broad areas to consider in developing contingency plans. First, each firm
should have a contingency plan that covers business continuity issues in the case of operational
problems  affecting  its  own  systems.  Institutions  also  should  develop  contingency  plans  that
would help address Year 2000 problems arising from their vendors or customers, or as a result of
disruptions to public infrastructure. These plans should seek to assess the risks that firms face in
each instance and should focus on the possible measures that may be available to mitigate those
risks.
Second, supervisors and regulators need to develop their own contingency plans
for how they will deal with problems affecting them or the institutions under their jurisdiction.
Most organizations have some experience in contingency planning for various types of market
disruptions, so this will not be entirely new ground. However, several aspects of the Year 2000
problem  are  unique  and  will  require  fresh  thinking.  For  example,  the  potential  scope  of
operational problems that may be experienced across different markets globally is new. At the
time of the century change, there also may be significant uncertainty about how long problems
will last, as well as the extent to which some participants are facing more than simply operational
problems. On both of these fronts, I am hopeful that the transition to the euro at the end of this
year will give us some insight into how supervisors and regulators should cope with these issues.
The third major element of contingency planning that needs to take place is both
cross-industry and cross-border in scope. The Year 2000 problem has reminded us of the extent
of interdependencies in our global economy. Financial markets in particular are dependent on a
mix  of  firms  to  provide  liquidity  in  all  of  the  various  markets.  These  firms  are  dependent  on
vendors  for  market  information  and  communications,  on  payment  and  settlement  systems  to
complete transactions, and on power generators and other infrastructure providers to support all
of their activities. In turn, these infrastructure providers are dependent on receiving and paying
for adequate supplies to keep their plants operating, as well as on relevant insurance coverage to
ensure that they can operate without unlimited liability.
We  must  consider  the  scope  of  these  dependencies  in  formulating  contingency
plans.  Needless  to  say,  there  is  no  way  that  the  financial  sector  can  completely  insulate  itself
from  more  widespread  Year  2000  disruptions  by  developing  contingency  plans.  However,  we
should do what we can to prepare realistically for a wide variety of outcomes, including some
that  may  not  be  very  likely.  We  also  should  open  lines  of  communication  with  relevant
associations and regulatory bodies outside the financial sector in order to better understand their
preparations and contingency plans, and so that they could understand ours.
BIS Review   85/1998
Conclusions
- 9 -
These  thoughts  represent  my  perspective  on  the  key  issues  facing  the  global
supervisory community regarding the Year 2000 challenge. As you can infer, I am a very serious
believer in the need for vigorous efforts to address the problem. The scope of the challenge is
enormous and much work remains to be done before January 1, 2000.
Nevertheless,  I  am  not  a  doomsayer.  I  believe  the  financial  sector  can  and  will
successfully  address  Year  2000.  I  say  this  because  I  believe  we  are  capable  of  harnessing  an
unprecedented level of cooperation to tackle the problem. I see this happening here today.
I say this because the resources that are being devoted to address Year 2000 are
large  and  growing.  We  see  a  number  of  firms  and  systems  testing  successfully  ahead  of  the
schedules they have set for themselves, demonstrating the value of the Year 2000  investments
that these organizations have made.
I  say  this  because  I  see  governments  taking  the  problem  seriously  and  devoting
significant  attention  to  Year  2000  issues  throughout  the  economy.  I  support  these  steps  and
encourage each of you to urge your government to move in  this  direction  if  it  has  not  already
done so.
As supervisors and regulators, we must continue our efforts to promote solid and
transparent programs covering Year 2000 information sharing, testing, and contingency planning.
I am convinced that through the aggressive efforts of the global supervisory community and the
firms that we supervise, we can build confidence that the financial sector will rise to the occasion
long before January 1, 2000, which I might remind you is only 439 days from today.
BIS Review   85/1998
