Mr McDonough discusses the role of central banks in the global financial markets
Remarks  by  the  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  Mr  William  J.
McDonough, before the Economic Club of New York, New York City, on 14/12/98.
Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. I am delighted to be here tonight and to share the podium
with my good friend Dick Grasso. Dick and I have worked together for many years now, and I
have come to value greatly both his warm friendship and his thoughtful counsel.
Dick  has  spoken  eloquently  about  how  equity  markets  have  developed  globally  over  the  past
several years and some of the concerns he has going forward. For my part, I will focus on the
global debt markets and the interests of central banks in the stability of these markets.
The role of central banks in the fixed-income and related capital markets may not be immediately
obvious because, one can argue, debt markets are a zero-sum  game.  One  side  of  a  trade  gains
what the other loses. If only it were as easy as that! In fact, trading in the global debt markets
serves  an  important  purpose  and  it  does  not  follow  that  central  banks  have  no  interest  in  the
stability of these markets. Quite the contrary. Central banks are and should be deeply concerned
about the functioning of these markets, their dependability, their liquidity, and their transparency.
Before explaining why I hold such a view, and therefore why we at the Federal Reserve were so
concerned when these markets faltered this past summer, I would like to stand back for a few
moments  and  highlight  how  the  global  capital  markets  have  changed  over  the  past  several
decades.
No one doubts that there has been a sea change in the global capital markets in recent years and
the  ways  business  is  transacted  in  these  markets.  These  changes  are,  of  course,  rooted  in  the
remarkable  technological  advances  we  have  been  witnessing.  Today,  the  technology  for
processing information and making this information widely available has fundamentally altered
the  way  the  world  channels  saving  into  investment.  No  longer  does  the  global  economy  rely
primarily on loans from commercial banks to meet its financing and investment needs. Rather,
more than ever before, the global economy of today looks to funds from the fixed-income and
related capital markets to intermediate its credit needs.
Because  the  global  capital  markets  have  become  so  important  in  the  credit  intermediation
process, the economic well-being of us all depends on the orderly flow of funds in these markets.
The flow of these funds, in turn, increasingly relies on price signals generated by trading activity
that  takes  place  daily  in  these  markets.  The  reliance  on  secondary  market  trading  for  price
discovery  constitutes  the  fundamental  difference  between  funds  from  securities  markets  and
loans from banks.
Let me be a bit more specific. In securities markets, investment decisions are driven by prices
that arise from a trading process that reconciles differential information from a diverse group of
investors. In bank loans, investment decisions are based on the bank’s private information about
specific borrowers. While a bank makes its own investment decisions, securities markets rely on
the consensus of a multitude of investors.
When securities markets work well, they provide efficient ways of aggregating information and
allocating  risks  among  a  wide  range  of  investors.  In  order  to  function  well,  however,  these
markets  require  a  trading  infrastructure.  This  infrastructure  may  consist  of  an  exchange,  a
network  of  brokers  and  dealers,  and  a  clearing  system.  These  markets  also  rely  on  a  cadre  of
relatively well-informed investors, who confidently judge asset prices and take positions on the
BIS Review   108/1998
– 2 –
strength of their judgments. If the trading infrastructure fails or investors lose confidence, trading
will grind to a halt.
The global fixed-income markets are unlike equity markets. In equity markets, everyone knows
something about the trading infrastructure, which is centralized in exchanges. Thus, there is no
question  as  to  the  focal  point  of  trading  information.  But  the  importance  of  fixed-income
markets,  which  are  multiple-dealer,  over-the-counter  markets,  is  sometimes  hard  to  appreciate
because they are so decentralized.
In the United States, the bond market is where companies have been raising most of their funds
in recent years. During the last ten years, for example, U.S. nonfinancial corporations borrowed a
net amount of $785 billion in the form of bonds, three times the net amount they borrowed from
banks. Over this same period, these companies as a group spent $600 billion more to retire stock
– through buybacks and mergers – than they raised in new offerings.
Accompanying these increased levels of debt market activity has been a continuous process of
financial innovation. This innovation has served to unbundle different kinds of risk and, thereby,
to enlarge the menu of risks that investors may choose to bear. For example, interest-rate swaps,
futures  and  options  help  reconfigure  various  interest-rate  risks.  Total  return  swaps  and  credit-
spread  options  are  tools  for  reallocating  the  payment  risks  primarily  of  emerging  market  debt.
Credit-default swaps and credit-linked notes are ways to redistribute default risks.
In  practice,  this  unbundling  of  risk  means  that  a  broad  range  of  financial  institutions  today
performs  the  credit  intermediation  process,  eroding  the  historical  comparative  advantage  of
banks  in  bearing  credit  risk.  At  various  times,  some  institutions  will  be  underwriting  issues,
while  others  will  be  making  bridge  loans,  providing  credit  enhancements,  writing  derivative
contracts and taking up riskier components of securities.
Within  the  United  States,  the  fixed-income  market  is  today  a  market  of  some  $13  trillion,
roughly the same size as the total equity market. Trading activity in fixed-income instruments is
concentrated in Treasury securities. On an average day, over $150 billion in Treasury securities
changes  hands,  about  seven  times  the  value  of  stocks  traded  daily  on  the  New  York  Stock
Exchange.
All of this trading activity serves the very important function of price discovery. More than any
other  securities  market  in  the  United  States,  the  Treasury  market  responds  forcefully  to  new
information  about  macroeconomic  fundamentals.  The  days  when  the  most  intense  trading
activity takes place are also the days when major reports are released on such indicators of U.S.
economic performance as the employment report, the consumer price index or the producer price
index.  These  releases  allow  market  participants  to  digest  important  new  information  and  to
review  their  expectations  about  where  the  economy  is  going.  The  interest  rates  on  Treasury
securities  of  varying  maturities  are  the  market’s  most  important  signals  about  the  U.S.
economy’s prospects for growth and risks of inflation.
In the rest of  the  fixed-income  market,  trading  in  corporate  bonds,  mortgage-backed  securities
and  sovereign  debt  also  serves  the  price  discovery  process.  This  trading  activity  acts  to
differentiate,  for  example,  a  triple-A  risk  against  a  triple-B  risk,  the  prepayment  risk  of
mortgages against the prepayment risk of credit card receivables, and OECD country risk against
emerging market risk.
What  then  is  the  role  of  central  banks  in  this  new  financial  landscape,  where  institutional
investors and other nonbank financial institutions hold a larger share of assets and a larger share
BIS Review   108/1998
– 3 –
of credit risk than they ever have before – and where an increasing share of conventional credit
risk is intermediated through the capital markets? I would argue that the role of a central bank in
this new environment is very much in keeping with its traditional responsibilities. Central banks
in  all  countries  fundamentally  care  about  the  flow  of  credit  in  their  economies,  whether  this
credit flows from banks, nonbank financial institutions, or institutional investors.
Why is this so? The answer is simple. It is because the credit intermediation process is ultimately
what  determines  how  well  our  economies  function  and  therefore  how  well  our  economies  are
able to grow and allow their citizens to prosper. When the credit intermediation process does not
work  well,  when  there  are  disruptions  to  the  supply  of  credit  to  the  economy,  as  history  has
amply shown, the  costs  for  our  businesses  and  our  people  can  be  enormous  in  terms  of  lower
output and fewer jobs. A well-functioning credit intermediation process is, in short, critical to the
sustainability of any economy’s success.
It is for these reasons that central bankers are interested in the flows of credit from the global
securities  markets,  just  as  we  have  needed  to  know  about  the  flows  of  credit  from  the  banks
whose operations we are charged with overseeing. At the end of the day, the flow of credit from
securities markets has the same impact on our respective societies as that from banks. Therefore,
central bankers have an obligation to understand the nature of these flows and the risks that they
raise. Crucial to our obligations to our citizens is the need to be certain that these credit markets
work smoothly and that credit flows efficiently from those most willing and able to bear the risks
to those most able to put the funds to good use. This is as true for the United States as it is for
any other country, developed or developing.
Does this mean that central banks believe that capital markets should be supervised in the same
ways banks are overseen? Clearly the answer to this question is no. This is not our role.
In my view, central banks broadly have two main responsibilities with respect to the global debt
markets. The first is to enhance the price discovery process by promoting transparency in their
own  actions.  The  second  is  to  ensure  that  the  banks,  as  providers  of  liquidity,  perform  their
proper role in supporting the trading process by making sound credit decisions.
In the United States, the Federal Open Market Committee or FOMC has a pronounced effect on
the fixed-income market, both through its policy decisions and in the way the Federal Reserve
conducts  monetary  policy.  Indeed,  an  important  part  of  the  price  discovery  process  is  the
anticipation  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  future  actions.  Because  the  Federal  Reserve  is  such  a
critical player in the market, it is important that it not create unnecessary uncertainty. That is, the
Federal  Reserve  has  a  responsibility  to  be  as  transparent  as  possible  in  the  conduct  of  its
monetary  policy.  Since  February  1994,  there  have  been  direct  and  immediate  announcements
following FOMC meetings of the Committee’s policy decisions, which, in my view, have helped
remove uncertainty.
In addition, in implementing monetary policy through its trading role, the Open Market Desk has
made numerous changes in recent years to add clarity and transparency to its day-to-day market
interventions. The thrust of these changes has been to reduce uncertainty and enhance the price
discovery process in the Treasury market.
As to the Federal Reserve’s responsibility for ensuring that banks support the trading process by
making sound credit decisions, let’s not forget that, despite the increase in market players, banks
in the United States, as elsewhere, continue to play an extremely important role in the financial
markets. Not only do banks often underwrite bond issues and structure hedging instruments for
BIS Review   108/1998
– 4 –
these  bonds,  but  they  also  provide  much  of  the  financing  that  allows  market  makers  to  take
positions. Dealers in the U.S. bond markets finance themselves through repurchase agreements
with bank counterparties. In many cases, banks are also the source of backup liquidity. It is in
these ways that bank credit supports the price discovery process.
In its role as a bank supervisor, the Federal Reserve has the responsibility to see to it that this
credit  support  does  not  dry  up  at  critical  times.  One  of  our  primary  tasks  is  to  be  certain  that
nothing interferes with the credit intermediation process of banks. This is why bank soundness is
so important to us.
The events of last August illustrate what can go wrong with financial markets and why we were
so concerned when the global credit markets seemed to seize up following the announcement by
the Russian government of an effective devaluation of the ruble and a debt moratorium. These
actions were so unexpected that they shocked investors all over the world.
In the United States, the correction of stock prices in the wake of Russia’s announcements was
not of exceptional size or concern, and had even been anticipated by some astute observers. But
the abrupt and simultaneous widening of credit spreads globally for both corporate and emerging
market  sovereign  debt  was  an  extraordinary  event  beyond  the  expectations  of  investors  and
financial intermediaries. The abrupt shift in investor behavior, in fact, served to intensify price
movements and to undermine confidence in market dynamics. It was not just the rebalancing of
portfolios  that  was  of  concern  in  the  days  and  weeks  following  the  Russian  government’s
announcements, but also the rush away from risk altogether. In short, it was this seizing up of the
credit intermediation process that was of most fundamental concern to us as central bankers.
What we learned as a result of this experience was, among other things, that years of historic data
on fixed-income market yields and spreads could not have anticipated the size of the movements
in credit spreads that in fact occurred in August and September.  We  also  learned  that  markets
that did not previously move together can suddenly do so, that trends that were under way for
several years can abruptly come to an end, and that spreads that have been consistently narrow
for years can suddenly widen. In the wake of these events, we have become all too aware that
liquidity can be illusory – that individual traders may be able to exit a position when they wish
but that not all traders can exit their positions at the same  time.  For  many,  these  lessons  have
been humbling.
Going forward, it is important to bear in mind that there most certainly will be further instances
when the credit intermediation process is disrupted, when we will face other threats to the well-
being  of  our  market  positions,  our  institutions  and  the  global  economy.  These  risks  are  in  the
nature of the intermediation process itself.
As the global capital markets continue to grow and become ever more sophisticated – as I believe
they will – what is most important for us as central bankers is to operate with a disciplined sense
of priorities. It is clear that we as central banks cannot be responsible for any single bond holder,
any  single  bank  or  any  single  financial  institution.  Nor  can  we  control  the  functioning  of  the
global debt markets or become the regulators of all financial market intermediaries.
What we as central bankers can do, however, is to understand the dynamics of the global debt
markets – how they are evolving and whether they are sufficiently liquid and transparent. We can
also ensure that banks perform their proper role in supporting the trading process through making
sound credit decisions. Furthermore, we can enhance the price discovery process by promoting
transparency in our own actions. Finally, and most importantly, we can help create conditions in
BIS Review   108/1998
– 5 –
our own economies that will support sustainable, non-inflationary growth. In these ways, we as
central banks can encourage the efficient functioning of the credit intermediation process in our
countries, and in so doing, promote the welfare of the world economy, of which we are all a part.
 BIS Review   108/1998
