Mr. Hartmann’s welcoming remarks at the Year 2000 meeting in Frankfurt
Welcoming  remarks  by  Wendelin  Hartmann,  a  member  of  the  Directorate  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank and Chairman of the G-10 Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS),
at the Year 2000 meeting of the European central banks and financial regulators organised by the
Joint Year 2000 Council and the Deutsche Bundesbank in Frankfurt/Main on 30/10/98.
Ladies and gentlemen, On the occasion of a regional conference of the Joint Year
2000 Council, I warmly welcome you here to Frankfurt. As chairman of the CPSS and a member
of  the  Joint  Year  2000  Council  it  is  an  honour  and  a  pleasure  for  me  to  act  as  host  to  this
distinguished  audience.  Thank  you  all  for  coming  to  Frankfurt  from  Europe,  Israel  and  The
United  States.  I  wish  you  a  pleasant  stay  on  the  Main,  and  I  hope  our  meeting  gives  us  the
opportunity not only to gain new insights but also to produce some useful results that may help
us to meet the enormous challenges that still lie before us.
Joint Year 2000 Council
In April 1998, the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, the Committee on
Payment and Settlement Systems, the International Association of Insurance Supervisors and the
International Organization of Securities Commissions announced the formation of the Joint Year
2000 Council. The sponsors´ decision was motivated by their recognition of the severity of the
challenges  posed  by  the  century-date  change  and  of  the  potentially  grave  implications  for  the
financial markets associated with a lack of readiness.
The Joint Year 2000 Council views its main task as being that of ensuring a high
level of attention to the Year 2000 challenge within the global financial supervisors´ community.
At a number of regional meetings - of which this Frankfurt conference is one - financial market
regulators  and  supervisors  from  both  within  and  outside  Europe  have  an  opportunity  to  share
strategies and experiences, to discuss possible contingency measures and establish contacts with
national and international private sector initiatives. The first regional event took place in Sydney
for the Asia-Pacific region in mid-October. The present Frankfurt meeting gathers regulators and
supervisors from all over Europe. Further conferences are to be held in Miami for The Americas,
in Riyadh for the Middle East, and in Pretoria for the African continent.
The  programme  of  our  conference  today  includes  three  panel  discussions.  The
first one, on “the challenges to the private and public sector relating to Y2K problem”, addresses
Year 2000 issues in a more general manner, whereas the second on “remediation and testing”,
and  the  third,  on  “contingency  planning”  treat  specific  aspects  related  to  Y2K.  In  a  final
summary  panel  we  will  try  to  find  an  answer  to  the  question:  “Where  do  we  go  from  here?”
(Good question, indeed.)
A press conference will take place after the first panel at 10.30 am. Our Joint Year
2000  Council  chairman,  Mr  Roger  W.  Ferguson  Jr,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Directors,  Fed
Washington, and I are going to present the Year 2000 problem and its implications for the global
financial markets via all media to a - hopefully - broad public.
Around 12:30  you  will  be  invited  to  lunch  here  at  the  hotel.  Mr  Edgar  Meister,
Member  of  the  Board  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  chairman  of  the  Banking  Supervision
Committee of the European Central Bank, is going to give a luncheon address.
Scope and impact of the Year 2000 problem
BIS Review   91/1998
- 2 -
Although generally well known, it has to be repeated: the cause of the Year 2000
computer  problem  is  ridiculously  simple.  In  the  days  when  computer  memory  was  scarce,
programmers got into the frugal habit of using only two digits to write a date, so that 1998 was
represented as 98. But, as 99 is a higher number than 00, millions of computers simply cannot
place the year 2000. Instead, they may read the first year of the new millennium as the first year
of the century, or as a date that does not exist. Even if they pass that test, they still may fail to
notice that 2000, unlike most centennial years, is a leap year. Thus, at the century-date change -
or  even  before  -  a  large  number  of  computer  systems,  software  programs  and  embedded  chip
devices currently used will produce errors or will malfunction – unless the date or program logic
is  modified.  With  regard  to  embedded  processors,  any  operation  that  functions  using  data-
sensitive technology may be affected, be it medical pacemakers, heating systems, electricity or
transportation.
For financial market participants, the Year 2000 problem is especially acute. Since
financial  institutions  rely  heavily  on  automation  to  manage  information,  it  will  be  difficult  or
even impossible to conduct business if automated applications fail to work properly. Given the
number and complexity of the date-dependent computerprograms in use, the remediation effort
will often have to be colossal.
The interdependence of the world’s markets and economies makes the Year 2000
risk a true global problem and perhaps the biggest challenge ever faced by the world’s financial
industry. Difficulties are bound to arise in every region across the globe, and could have adverse
(if temporary) economic effects. Unless resolute steps are taken to resolve the Year 2000 issues
in all parts of the world, serious consequences are inevitable.
The Bundesbank’s preparation for Y2K
Although  you  may  get  a  different  impression  from  recent  media  reports,  in
Germany  preparation  for  the  century-datechange  is  in  full  swing  and  not  at  all  behind  the
progress  in  other  Western  European  countries.  Let  me  describe  briefly  the  activities  in  the
financial sector, seen from a central banker’s perspective.
The  Bundesbank  -  like  other  EU  central  banks  -  is  confronted  with  the  Y2K
problem in many respects. Internal preparatory work for the Year 2000 change started in good
time. The Bank’s management set July 1, 1999 as the deadline for making all affected systems
and  technical  devices  year-2000-proof.  By  that  date,  all  computer-infrastructure  facilities
(systems  and  networks)  and  data-processing  application  procedures  will  be  available  in  tested
year  2000-proof  versions.  An  earlier  date  is  not  possible,  because  conversion  work  for  Stage
Three of European monetary union is to be completed as a priority. In this context, by the way, a
lot  of  preparatory  work,  mainly  in  applications  for  accounting  and  payment  systems,  will
automatically be included with respect to Y2K.
With regard to the context of national payment and settlement systems, however,
the  Bundesbank  acts  as  a  key  service  provider  but  also  as  a  central  co-ordinator  for  cashless
payments.  The  Bank’s  clearing  facilities  offer  all  credit  institutions  involved  in  payments  a
competitively neutral payment service for settling large-value and retail payments. Naturally, we
have a strong interest in the smooth functioning of our IT- infrastructure. So I am happy to tell
you that the Bundesbank has created a test environment for its public and private clients that is
already  in  use.    In  the  area  of  large-value  payments  as  in  the  other  procedures  of  electronic
BIS Review  91/1998
- 3 -
access,  the  Bundesbank  is  offering  interface  tests  for  verifying  year-2000-compatibility  in
interbank  settlements.  The  electronic  access  test-centers  are  also  available  for  the  tests.
Customers  and  software  manufacturers  can  make  direct  arrangements  with  the  relevant  test
center  for  the  tests  to  be  conducted.  In  the  field  of  retail  payments,  the  Bundesbank,  as  the
primary  “interface”,  provides  its  customers  with  the  year-2000-compatible  processing  of
payment data. It will also ensure that its data-processing procedures are robust enough, should
individual customer systems fail to operate in a year-2000-compatible manner.
As you all know, the Bundesbank is responsible for monetary policy in Germany
till the end of this year, but will also continue to form part of the banking supervision authority
after the start of Stage Three of European monetary union. In his luncheon address, my colleague
Mr Edgar Meister, who is in charge of the Bundesbank´s Banking Supervision Department, and
chairman of the ECB-Committee on this subject, is going to outline the Bank’s actions in that
field in detail.
Co-ordination with other institutions’ activities
The Bundesbank is not only a part of the financial sector, but also a fiscal agent
for the government. At the administrative level, the Bank isworking closely with other official
institutions  to  ensure  the  year-2000-compatibility  of  public  authorities.  The  activities  of  the
public  financial  sector  are  managed  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance.  In  June  1998,  a  “Year  2000
Forum” was called into being by the German banking and insurance supervisory authorities, the
Bundesbank and private banking associations as a platform for regulators and official and private
credit institutions to exchange their views and experiences.
in  general.  In  particular,  given 
The government activities relating to the Y2K challenge as a whole are being co-
ordinated  by  the  Ministry  of  Economics.  In  this  position,  the  ministry  is  also  overseeing  the
preparatory activities of the industrial sector in Germany. Special attention is being given to the
readiness  of  core  infrastructure  providers  because  of  their  major  significance  for  economic
activity 
the  financial  sector’s  heavy  dependence  on
telecommunications,  water,  energy  and  transportation,  any  failure  to  meet  the  Year  2000
challenge  in  any  of  these  sectors  could  lead  to  serious  disruptions  at  the  national  and
international levels. In addition to that, it would probably adversely affect all contingency plans
of the entire economy. As you know, our latest Joint Year 2000 Council Bulletin also focuses on
this matter, and I hope that we will have an opportunity to attract public attention in this respect
at the forthcoming press conference.
Preparations at the European level
At the European level, the Bundesbank, being a member of the ESCB, is taking
part in the activities of the ECB to ensure the Year-2000-compliance of ESCB-wide systems and
applications.  The  necessity  for  the  ECB  and  the  ESCB  to  give  EMU  top  priority  poses  an
additional challenge to their activities in connection with Y2K. However, all the new payment
and  accounting  systems  which  will  be  implemented  next  year  will  be  Y2K-proof,  so  that  it
should be possible to cope with the remaining challenges during 1999.
In operational terms, the newly developed large-value-payment system TARGET
is  going  to  function  by  joining  together  the  15  EU  central  banks´  existing  real-time  gross
settlement (RTGS) systems, using what is known as the Interlinking System. S.W.I.F.T. is being
used as the carrier for the „Interlinking System” , S.W.I.F.T. is therefore going to assume even
BIS Review   91/1998
- 4 -
greater  technical  responsibility.  That  will  mainly  include  ensuring  steady  and  trouble-free
operation  -  in  particular,  we  are  relying  on  S.W.I.F.T.  having  a  firm  grip  on  the  Year  2000
challenge. This will be ensured by a joint task force of several central banks under the direction
of the National Bank of Belgium. As S.W.I.F.T. is the main service-provider world-wide for the
financial industry, a smooth transition to the next millennium is of paramount importance to us
all.
Since  our  schedule  today  only  allows  me  the  time  to  make  a  few  welcoming
remarks,  I  don’t  want  to  make  a  short  story  long.  I  hope  that  we  will  all  work  successfully
together at this conference, and thereby contribute to minimising the Year 2000 risk.
BIS Review  91/1998
