Mr. Greenspan testifies on private-sector refinancing of the large hedge fund,
Long-Term Capital Management   Testimony by the Chairman of the Board of Governors of
the  US  Federal  Reserve  System,  Mr.  Alan  Greenspan,  before  the  Committee  on  Banking  and
Financial Services of the US House of Representatives on 1/10/98.
Mr.  Chairman  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I  thank  you  for  this
opportunity to report on the Federal Reserve’s role in facilitating the private-sector refinancing of
the large hedge fund, Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM). In my remarks this morning, I
will  attempt  to  put  into  some  perspective  the  events  of  the  past  few  weeks  and  discuss  some
questions of importance to public policy makers that they raise.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s efforts were designed solely to enhance
the  probability  of  an  orderly  private-sector  adjustment,  not  to  dictate  the  path  that  adjustment
would take. As President McDonough just related, no Federal Reserve funds were put at risk, no
promises  were  made  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  and  no  individual  firms  were  pressured  to
participate. Officials of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York facilitated discussions in which
the private parties arrived at an agreement that both served their mutual self-interest and avoided
possible  serious  market  dislocations.  Financial  market  participants  were  already  unsettled  by
recent global events. Had the failure of LTCM triggered the seizing up of markets, substantial
damage  could  have  been  inflicted  on  many  market  participants,  including  some  not  directly
involved  with  the  firm,  and  could  have  potentially  impaired  the  economies  of  many  nations,
including  our  own.  With  credit  spreads  already  elevated  and  the  market  prices  of  risky  assets
under considerable downward pressure, Federal Reserve officials moved more quickly to provide
their good offices to help resolve the affairs of LTCM than would have been the case in more
normal times. In effect, the threshold of action was lowered by the knowledge that markets had
recently become fragile. Moreover, our sense was that the consequences of a fire sale triggered
by cross-default clauses, should LTCM fail on some of its obligations, risked a severe drying up
of market liquidity. The plight of LTCM might scarcely have caused a ripple in financial markets
or  among  federal  regulators  18  months  ago--but  in  current  circumstances  it  was  judged  to
warrant attention.
 What is remarkable is not this episode, but the relative absence of such examples
over the past five years. Dynamic markets periodically engender large defaults.
Events of the Past Few Weeks
LTCM is a hedge fund, or a mutual fund that is structured to avoid regulation by
limiting its clientele to a small number of highly sophisticated, very wealthy individuals and that
seeks high rates of return by investing and trading in a variety of financial instruments. Since its
founding in 1994, LTCM has had a prominent position in the community of hedge funds, in part
because  of  its  assemblage  of  talent  in  pricing  and  trading  financial  instruments,  as  well  as  its
large initial capital stake. In its first few years of business, it earned an enviable reputation by
racking up a string of above-normal returns for its investors.
 LTCM appears principally to have garnered those returns by making judgements
on interest rate spreads and the volatility of market prices. In its search for high return, LTCM
levered its capital through securities repurchase contracts and derivatives transactions, relying on
sophisticated  mathematical  models  of  behavior  to  guide  those  transactions.  As  long  as  the
configuration  of  returns  generally  mimicked  their  historical  patterns,  LTCM’s  mathematical
BIS Review   77/1998
- 2 -
models  of  asset  pricing  could  be  used  to  ferret  out  temporary  market  price  anomalies.  Their
trading both closed such price gaps and earned an extra bit of return on capital for them. But it is
the nature of the competitive process driving financial innovation that such techniques would be
emulated, making it ever more difficult to find market anomalies that provided shareholders with
a high return. Indeed, the very efficiencies that LTCM and its competitors brought to the overall
financial  system  gradually  reduced  the  opportunities  for  above-normal  profits.  Indeed,  LTCM
acknowledged  this  when  returning  $2¾  billion  of  capital  to  investors  at  the  end  of  1997.  To
counter these diminishing opportunities, LTCM apparently reached further for return over time
by employing more leverage and increasing its exposure to risk, a strategy that was destined to
fail.  Unfortunately  for  its  shareholders,  LTCM  chose  this  exposure  just  as  financial  market
uncertainty and investor risk aversion began to rise rapidly around the world.
 In  that  environment  -  so  at  variance  with  the  experience  built  into  its  models  -
LTCM’s embrace of risk on a large scale produced stunning losses. As we now know, by the end
of  August  the  firm  had  lost  half  its  capital  base.  And  as  September  unfolded,  the  bleeding
continued. The firm, however, apparently did not unwind its positions significantly.
 In  our  dynamic  market  economy,  investors  and  traders,  at  times,  make
misjudgements.  When  market  prices  and  interest  rates  adjust  promptly  to  evidence  of  such
mistakes,  their  consequences  are  generally  felt  mostly  by  the  perpetrators  and,  thus,  rarely
cumulate to pose significant problems for the financial system as a whole. Indeed, the operation
of an effective market economy necessitates that investment funds committed to capital projects
that  do  not  accurately  reflect  consumer  and  business  preferences  should  incur  losses  and
ultimately be liquidated. What value is left needs to be redirected to profitable uses - those that
more accurately reflect market preferences. By such winnowing of inefficiencies, productivity is
enhanced and standards of livings expand over time.
 Financial  markets  operate  efficiently  only  when  participants  can  commit  to
transactions  with  reasonable  confidence  that  the  risk  of  non-payment  can  be  rationally  judged
and compensated for. Effective and  seasoned  markets  pass  this  test  almost  all  of  the  time.  On
rare  occasions,  they  do  not.  Fear,  whether  irrational  or  otherwise,  grips  participants  and  they
unthinkingly  disengage  from  risky  assets  in  favor  of  those  providing  safety  and  liquidity.  The
subtle distinctions that investors make, so critical to the effective operation of financial markets,
are  abandoned.  Assets,  good  and  bad,  are  dumped  indiscriminately  in  circumstances  of  high
uncertainty  and  fear  that  are  not  conducive  to  planning  and  investment.  Such  circumstances,
were  they  generalized  and  persistent,  would  be  wholly  inconsistent  with  the  functioning  of
sophisticated economies supported by long-term capital investment.
 Quickly unwinding a complicated portfolio that contains exposure to all manner
of risks, such as that of LTCM, in such market conditions amounts to conducting a fire sale. The
prices  received  in  a  time  of  stress  do  not  reflect  longer-run  potential,  adding  to  the  losses
incurred. Of course, a fire sale that transfers wealth from one set of sophisticated market players
to another, without any impact on the financial system overall, should not be a concern for the
central  bank.  Moreover,  creditors  should  reasonably  be  expected  to  put  some  weight  on  the
possibility  of  a  large  market  swing  when  making  their  risk  assessments.  Indeed,  when  we
examine  banks  we  expect  them  to  have  systems  in  place  that  take  account  of  outsized  market
moves. However, a fire sale may be sufficiently intense and widespread that it seriously distorts
markets  and  elevates  uncertainty  enough  to  impair  the  overall  functioning  of  the  economy.
Sophisticated economic systems cannot thrive in such an atmosphere.1
BIS Review   77/1998
- 3 -
The  scale  and  scope  of  LTCM’s  operations,  which  encompassed  many  markets,
maturities, and currencies and often relied on instruments that were thinly traded and had prices
that  were  not  continuously  quoted,  made  it  exceptionally  difficult  to  predict  the  broader
ramifications of  attempting  to  close  out  its  positions  precipitately.  That  its  mistakes  should  be
unwound  and  losses  incurred  was  never  open  to  question.  How  they  should  be  unwound  and
when those losses incurred so as to foster the continued smooth operation of financial markets
was much more difficult to assess. The price gyrations that would have evolved from a fire sale
would have reflected fear-driven judgements that could only impair effective market functioning
and generate losses for innocent bystanders.
 While the principle that fire sales undermine the effective functioning of markets
may  be  clear,  deciding  when  a  potential  market  disruption  rises  to  a  level  of  seriousness
warranting central bank involvement is among the most difficult judgements that ever confronts
a central banker. In situations like this, there is no reason for central bank  involvement  unless
there is a substantial probability that a fire sale would result in severe, widespread, and prolonged
disruptions to financial market activity.
 It was the judgement of officials at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, who
were monitoring the situation on an ongoing basis, that the act of unwinding LTCM’s portfolio
in a forced liquidation would not only have a significant distorting impact on market prices but
also  in  the  process  could  produce  large  losses,  or  worse,  for  a  number  of  creditors  and
counterparties, and for other market participants who were not directly involved with LTCM. In
that  environment,  it  was  the  FRBNY’s  judgement  that  it  was  to  the  advantage  of  all  parties  -
including the creditors and other market participants - to engender if at all possible an orderly
resolution  rather  than  let  the  firm  go  into  disorderly  fire-sale  liquidation  following  a  set  of
cascading cross defaults.
 As President McDonough has detailed, officers of the Federal Reserve Bank  of
New  York  contacted  a  number  of  creditors  and  asked  if  there  were  alternatives  to  forcing  the
firm into bankruptcy. At the same time, FRBNY officers informed some of their colleagues at
the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  the  Treasury,  and  other  financial  regulators  of  their  ongoing
activities.  The  troubles  of  LTCM  were  not  a  complete  surprise  to  its  counterparties.  After  all,
LTCM’s  earlier  statements  regarding  its  August  losses  were  well  known,  and  sophisticated
counterparties  understood  the  difficulties  in  closing  out  large  losing  positions.  In  addition,  the
commercial banks among its creditors had already begun taking normal precautionary measures
associated with exposure to counterparties whose condition is deteriorating. Still, creditors as a
whole  most  likely  underestimated  the  size  and  scope  of  the  market  bets  that  LTCM  was
undertaking, an issue that is currently under review.
 On September 23, the private sector parties arrived at an agreement providing a
capital  infusion  of  about  $3½  billion  in  return  for  substantially  diluting  existing  shareholders’
stake  in  LTCM.  Control  of  the  firm  passed  from  the  current  management  to  a  committee
determined  from  the  outside  by  the  new  investors.  Those  investors  intend  to  shrink  LTCM’s
portfolio so as to reduce risk of loss and return the remaining capital to the investors as soon as
practicable. I do not rule out the possibility that the new owners of what is left of LTCM may
decide to keep part of it in business. That is their judgement to make.
This agreement was not a government bailout, in that Federal Reserve funds were
neither provided nor ever even suggested. Agreements  were  not  forced  upon  unwilling  market
participants. Creditors and counterparties calculated that LTCM and,  accordingly,  their  claims,
would be worth more over time if the liquidation of LTCM’s portfolio was orderly as opposed to
BIS Review   77/1998
- 4 -
being subject to a fire sale. And with markets currently volatile and investors skittish, putting a
special premium on the timely resolution of LTCM’s problems seemed entirely appropriate as a
matter of public policy.
 Of  course,  any  time  that  there  is  public  involvement  that  softens  the  blow  of
private-sector losses - even as obliquely as in this episode - the issue of moral hazard arises. Any
action by the government that prevents some of the negative consequences to the private sector
of  the  mistakes  it  makes  raises  the  threshold  of  risks  market  participants  will  presumably
subsequently  choose  to  take.  Over  time,  economic  efficiency  will  be  impaired  as  some
uneconomic investments are undertaken under the implicit assumption that possible losses may
be borne by the government.
 But  is  much  moral  hazard  created  by  aborting  fire  sales?  To  be  sure,  investors
wiped out in a fire sale will clearly be less risk prone than if their mistakes were unwound in a
more  orderly  fashion.  But  is  the  broader  market  well  served  if  the  resulting  fear  and  other
irrational  judgements  govern  the  degree  of  risk  participants  are  subsequently  willing  to  incur?
Risk taking is a necessary condition for wealth creation. The  optimum  degree  of  risk  aversion
should be governed by rational judgements about the market place, not the fear flowing from fire
sales.
 The Federal Reserve provided its good offices to LTCM’s creditors, not to protect
LTCM’s  investors,  creditors,  or  managers  from  loss,  but  to  avoid  the  distortions  to  market
processes  caused  by  a  fire-sale  liquidation  and  the  consequent  spreading  of  those  distortions
through contagion. To be sure, this may well work to reduce the ultimate losses to the original
owners of LTCM, but that was a by-product, perhaps unfortunate, of the process.
 I should add that, in order to keep incentives working in their favor, the creditors
of  LTCM  apparently  also  understood  the  importance  of  some  cushioning  of  the  losses  to  the
owners and managers of the firm. The private creditors and counterparties in the rescue package
chose  to  preserve  a  sliver  of  equity  for  the  original  owners  -  one  tenth  -  so  that  some  of  the
management  would  have  an  incentive  to  stay  with  the  firm  to  assist  in  the  liquidation  of  the
portfolio. Regrettably, the creditors felt that, given the complexity of market bets woven into a
bewildering  array  of  financial  contracts,  working  with  the  existing  management  would  be  far
easier than starting from scratch.
Some Questions for Policy Makers
Without doubt, extensive study will be required to put the events of the past few
weeks  into  proper  perspective.  As  a  member  of  the  President’s  Working  Group  on  Financial
Markets, I support Secretary Rubin’s call for a special study on the public policy implications of
hedge  funds.  While  the  affairs  of  LTCM  are  by  no  means  settled,  I  would  like  to  pose  some
tentative questions that may have to be addressed.
 First, how much dependence should be placed on financial modelling, which, for
all  its  sophistication,  can  get  too  far  ahead  of  human  judgement?  This  decade  is  strewn  with
examples of bright people who thought they had built a better mousetrap that could consistently
extract an abnormal return from financial markets. Some succeed for a time. But while there may
occasionally be misconfigurations among market prices that allow abnormal returns, they do not
persist. Indeed, efforts to take advantage of such misalignments force prices into better alignment
and  are  soon  emulated  by  competitors,  further  narrowing,  or  eliminating,  any  gaps.  No  matter
BIS Review   77/1998
- 5 -
how skilful the trading scheme, over the long haul, abnormal returns are sustained only through
abnormal exposure to risk.
 Second,  what  steps  could  counterparties  have  taken  to  ensure  that  they  had
properly  estimated  their  exposure,  particularly  in  markets  that  are  volatile?  To  an  important
degree, the creditors of LTCM were induced to infuse capital into the firm because they failed to
stress test their counterparty exposures adequately and therefore underestimated the size of the
uncollateralized exposure that they could face in volatile and illiquid markets. In part, this also
reflected an underappreciation of the volume and nature of the risks LTCM had undertaken and
its relative size in the overall market. By failing to make those determinations, its fellow market
participants failed to put an adequate brake on LTCM’s use of leverage. To be sure, sometimes
decisions are based on judgements about the soundness of borrowers that are accepted from third
parties  or,  possibly  in  this  case,  that  are  founded  on  the  impressive  qualifications  of  LTCM’s
principals.  In  some  cases,  such  truncated  risk  appraisals  may  be  accurate,  but  they  are  not  a
substitute for a rigorous analysis by the lender of the  borrower’s  overall  credit  worthiness  and
risk profile.
 Third,  in  this  regard  what  lessons  are  there  for  bank  regulators?  Domestic
commercial bank exposure to LTCM included both direct lending and acting as counterparties to
the  firm  in  derivatives  contracts.  A  preliminary  review  of  bank  dealings  with  LTCM  suggests
that the banks have collateral adequate to cover most of their current mark-to-market exposures
with LTCM. The unexpected surge in risk aversion and the dramatic opening up of interest rate
spreads  in  August  obviously  caught  LTCM  wrong  footed.  Counterparties,  including  banks,
continued to collect collateral for marks to market. What they were not collateralized against was
the losses that might have occurred when prices moved even further and market liquidity dried
up in a fire sale.  Supervisors of banks and security firms must assess whether current procedures
regarding  stress  testing  and  counterparty  assessment  could  have  been  improved  to  enable
counterparties to take steps to insulate themselves better from LTCM’s debacle. More important
will be the assessment of whether those procedures are adequate for the future. But this is an area
in which much work has been ongoing. During the fourth quarter of 1997 and the first quarter of
1998,  supervision  staff  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  and  the  Board  met  with
managers at several major New York banking institutions to discuss their current relationships
with hedge funds, updating a similar study conducted 3½ years earlier.
 Fourth, does the fact that investors have lost most of their capital  and  creditors
may take some losses on their exposure to LTCM call for direct regulation of hedge funds? It is
questionable whether hedge funds can be effectively directly regulated in the United States alone.
While  their  financial  clout  may  be  large,  hedge  funds’  physical  presence  is  small.  Given  the
amazing communication capabilities available virtually around the globe, trades can be initiated
from almost any location. Indeed, most hedge funds are only a short step from cyberspace. Any
direct US regulations restricting their flexibility will doubtless induce the more aggressive funds
to emigrate from under our jurisdiction. The best we can do in my judgment is what we do today:
Regulate them indirectly through the regulation of the sources of their funds. We are thus able to
monitor far better hedge funds’ activity, especially as they influence US financial markets. If the
funds move abroad, our oversight will diminish.
 In the first line of risk defense, if I may put it that way, are hedge funds’ lenders
and counterparties. Commercial and investment banks especially have the analytic skills to judge
the degree of risk to which the funds are exposed. Their self-interest has, with few exceptions but
including  the  one  we  are  discussing  today,  controlled  the  risk  posed  by  hedge  funds.  Banking
BIS Review   77/1998
- 6 -
supervisors  are  the  second  line  of  risk  defense  in  their  examination  of  lending  procedures  for
safety and soundness.  We  neither  try,  nor  should  we  endeavor,  to  micro-manage  bank  lending
activity. We have nonetheless built up significant capabilities in evaluating the complex lending
practices in OTC derivatives  markets  and  hedge  funds.  If,  somehow,  hedge  funds  were  barred
world-wide,  the  American  financial  system  would  lose  the  benefits  conveyed  by  their  efforts,
including arbitraging price differentials away. The resulting loss in efficiency and contribution to
financial value added and the nation’s standard of living would be a high price to pay - to my
mind, too high a price.
 Fifth,  how  much  weight  should  concerns  about  moral  hazard  be  given  when
designing mechanisms for governmental regulation of markets? By way of example, we should
note that were banks required by the market, or their regulator, to hold 40 percent capital against
assets as they did after the Civil War, there would, of course, be far less moral hazard and far
fewer  instances  of  fire-sale  market  disruptions.  At  the  same  time,  far  fewer  banks  would  be
profitable, the degree of financial intermediation less, capital would be more costly, and the level
of output and standards of living decidedly lower. Our current economy, with its wide financial
safety net, fiat money, and highly leveraged financial institutions, has been a conscious choice of
the American people since the 1930s. We do not have the choice of accepting the benefits of the
current system without its costs.
Conclusion
For  so  long  as  there  have  been  financial  markets,  participants  have  had  on
occasion to weigh the costs and, especially, the externalities associated with fire-sale liquidations
of troubled entities against short-term assistance to tide the firms over for a time. It was such a
balancing  of  near-term  costs  and  longer-term  benefits  that  presumably  led  J.P.  Morgan  to
convene the leading bankers of his age - both commercial and investment - in his library in 1907
to  address  the  severe  panic  of  that  year.  Such  episodes  were  recognized  as  among  those  rare
occasions  when  otherwise  highly  effective  markets  seize  up  and  temporary  ad  hoc  responses
were required. The convening of LTCM investors and lenders last week at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York could be viewed in that long tradition. It should similarly be viewed as a rare
occasion,  warranted  because  of  the  potential  for  serious  disruptions  to  markets.  We  must  also
remain mindful where to draw the line at which public-sector involvement ends. The efforts last
week were limited to facilitating a private-sector agreement and had no implications for Federal
Reserve resources or policies.
Footnotes
1  At  the  same  time,  not  all  fire  sales  are  without  merit.  The  Resolution  Trust  Corporation  earlier  this
decade chose to offer commercial real estate in what might be termed a fire sale because it was the only
way  an  otherwise  seized-up  market  could  be  galvanized.  Some  level  of  market  prices  had  to  be
established - even if below “intrinsic” or longer-run value in order to re-establish a two-way market. This
was a special case.
BIS Review   77/1998
