Mr. Tietmeyer’s statement as Governor of the Fund for Germany   Statement
by  the  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  Prof.  Hans  Tietmeyer,  at  the  Joint  Annual
Discussion in Washington, D.C. on 6/10/98.
The  situation  in  the  world  economy,  without  doubt,  has  turned  out  to  be  more
difficult than we expected a year ago in Hong Kong. In some regions, growth has slowed down
and global financial markets have become more volatile. It must be recognized, however, that the
existing international economic and monetary system has brought advantages to all of us in the
past  .  Particularly  those  countries  that  are  at  present  undergoing  temporary  setbacks  have
benefited from the inflow of foreign investment. This has been reflected by impressive and - until
last year - sustained economic growth in the emerging markets.
It  is  true  that  globalization  is  bringing  several  new  challenges  but,  overall,  the
advantages  for  people  throughout  the  world  are  clearly  prevailing.  The  response  to  today’s
problems should, therefore, not be to question international integration, which would jeopardize
the  progress  in  development  that  has  been  achieved  so  far.  Rather,  the  international  economic
and  monetary  system  should  be  developed  further  in  such  a  way  that  it  will  be  ready  for  the
challenges of the 21st century.
II
There  is  certainly  no  panacea  for  overcoming  the  present  problems.  We  know
today that the problems in the countries currently undergoing crises are different in some respects
from those of the eighties. Therefore, the prescriptions must in some respects be different, too,
being no longer solely an issue  of  macroeconomic  stabilization  following  periods  of  lax  fiscal
and  monetary  policies,  but  also  one  of  good  governance,  a  reliable  legal  framework,  stable
financial  markets,  efficient  banking  supervision  and  the  phenomenon  of  an  excessive  and  ill-
structured private debt. Market economies in particular, require a reliable legal framework and
well-functioning institutions. It has become evident that restoring confidence also requires social
and political reforms.
Especially at this juncture, we need a strong IMF, both in crisis prevention and in
crisis  management.  Regrettably  some  responses  to  the  crises  in  recent  years  and  months  may
have  contributed  to  the  distortion  of  the  incentive  structures  for  financial  market  players,  and
lulled investors into a false sense of security. Excessively large financial assistance by the IMF
can  undermine  the  proper  working  of  the  markets.  Consequently,  market  players  may  easily
underestimate  the  risks,  trusting  in  government  guarantees  or  a  bail-out  by  the  international
community. This moral-hazard problem has to be taken seriously. In future, therefore, the private
sector must be integrated better and earlier into crisis management and bear full responsibility for
its actions.
IMF  programs  up  to  now,  regrettably,  have  not  always  produced  convincing
results. Not in all cases did the Fund’s conditionality address the underlying causes sufficiently.
In particular, its financial support was not sufficiently effective whenever the country concerned
did  not  clearly  subscribe  to  radical  corrective  measures.  Ultimately,  it  is  the  countries
themselves, which are responsible for the success of their programs. Shortcomings in their own
efforts cannot be offset by providing international liquidity.
III
BIS Review   80/1998
- 2 -
The  free  movement  of  capital  is  a  key  element  in  the  efficient  allocation  of
resources  and  therefore  a  precondition  for  increasing  prosperity  worldwide.  For  this  reason,  it
continues  to  be  appropriate  to  give  the  IMF  a  mandate  for  the  liberalization  of  capital
movements.
Experience  in  many  industrial  countries  and  emerging  markets  clearly  shows,
however,  that  liberalization  must  be  accompanied  by  the  establishment  of  stable  financial
markets and efficient prudential structures. The World Bank and the IMF can and must play a
major role in that respect. Capital controls, however, are normally not an effective instrument of
monetary policy.
IV
I  am  concerned  that  the  present  difficulties  might 
trigger  pressure  for
protectionism, not only in crisis regions but also in other countries. To give in to these pressures
would be highly detrimental to the prospects for a worldwide recovery. Therefore, it is crucial to
keep markets open, even if competition intensifies.
Similarly, it is also crucial to avoid a renewed round of competitive depreciation.
In the long run, nobody would benefit, but everyone would suffer. The exchange rate policy has
to be credible and in line with the development of the fundamentals.
V
On  January  1,  1999,  for  eleven  countries  of  the  European  Union,  the  single
European currency will become a reality. This will create a currency area with a population of
almost 300 million. The euro, the future European currency, will start on an - all in all - positive
economic basis, notwithstanding that unemployment is still too high. The commitment of the EU
countries to a stability-oriented fiscal policy and continuing structural reform is a key to the long-
term success of the European Monetary Union and also for continued improvement of prospects
for growth and employment. Also, the incoming euro must inherit the stability of the D-Mark.
For  this  purpose,  it  is  important  that  the  European  Central  Bank  is  committed  to  the  primary
objective of price stability and enjoys genuine independence, secured under international law. A
stable and strong euro is a major contribution by Europe to the stability of the global monetary
system and to ongoing economic prosperity.
VI
The  involvement  of  the  World  Bank  in  overcoming  the  financial  crises  in
Southeast Asia and in Russia is of great importance.  The  World  Bank  has  unique  expertise  in
addressing the underlying structural problems. At the same time, its main task, to fight poverty,
should not be neglected.
We should not forget that many countries, including the poorest ones, have been
implementing structural measures with great effort and commitment for a number of years. IDA
is  the  largest  concessionary  aid  fund  in  the  world.  Countries  trust  its  advice  and  welcome  its
financial support which lays the foundation for sustained growth and fighting poverty.
It will be very difficult to fully integrate these countries into the world economy
without  efficient  institutions  in  the  financial  sector,  without  a  coherent  development-oriented
BIS Review   80/1998
- 3 -
government strategy and without a reliable legal framework. This has been demonstrated again
by recent crises.
IDA’s  development  policy  mandate  and  its  success  in  implementing  reform
programs  encourage  us  to  successfully  conclude  the  current  negotiations  for  the  12th
replenishment by the end of the year. Also against the backdrop of the current negotiations, we
note with great concern that armed conflicts jeopardize the first fruits of structural reforms and
arduous reconstruction measures.
In the wake of the financial crises, structural shortcomings have also surfaced in
the  World  Bank’s  income  development.  The  negative  trend  in  the  World  Bank’s  profitability
must be tackled quickly so that it can regain its former scope for action. The recently adopted
measures for improving the profitability of the Bank are a major step in the right direction.
VII
For the IMF to play its key role in the international monetary system, the increase
in quotas agreed in Hong Kong must be speedily implemented. This must have absolute priority.
Germany has already notified the IMF of its consent to the quota increase. We hope that others
will follow without further delay so that the IMF will again have sufficient quota resources as
soon as possible. The IMF’s key role in overcoming the crises should encourage all members to
fulfill  their  obligations  speedily.  The  New  Arrangements  to  Borrow  (NAB)  should  also  come
into force as soon as possible. This “reserve tank”, however, can only be a supplement to raising
the quotas, and by no means a substitute. Germany is prepared to notify its consent to the NAB.
Similarly, we are prepared to ratify the special one-time allocation of SDR.
VIII
The activities of the IMF and the World Bank complement each other. They are
not  competing  organizations.  Close  cooperation  between  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  is
particularly important when responding to crisis situations in order to avoid conflicting signals.
We therefore welcome the ongoing efforts to improve cooperation between the two institutions.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank  management  and  staff  of  the  IMF
and the World Bank for their sometimes extremely difficult work during the past months. You
may rest assured that Germany will continue to attach great importance to the work of the IMF
and  the  World  Bank.  Finally,  I  am  pleased  to  join  my  fellow  governors  in  welcoming  the
Republic of Palau as a new member.
BIS Review   80/1998
