Mr. McDonough describes the role of the FRBNY in the events leading up to
private-sector  recapitalization  of  Long-Term  Capital  Management      Testimony  by  the
President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  Mr.  William  J.  McDonough,  before  the
Committee on Banking and Financial Services of the US House of Representatives on 1/10/98.
Good  morning  Mr.  Chairman  and  members  of  the  Committee.  I  am  pleased  to
appear before you today to describe the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s role in the events
leading up to the recent private-sector recapitalization of Long-Term Capital Management and its
fund, Long-Term Capital Portfolio.
I  will  cover  four  points.  First,  I  will  provide  some  background  on  Long-Term
Capital’s financial problems. Second, I will explain our judgment that an abrupt and disorderly
close-out  of  Long-Term  Capital’s  positions  would  have  posed  unacceptable  risks  to  the
American economy. Third, I will explain the limited role we played in facilitating the private-
sector  resolution  to  this  private-sector  problem.  Fourth,  I  will  identify  some  of  the  issues  that
should concern us as we begin to understand the lessons of this experience.
Background
Long-Term Capital  is  an  investment  partnership  that  was  started  in  1994.  It  has
many of the characteristics of a “hedge fund” in that it borrows money to leverage its capital and
is only available to wealthy investors. The strategy of Long-Term  Capital  was  to  use  complex
mathematical formulas to identify temporary price discrepancies between different interest rates.
For example, the firm might notice that the yield on corporate bonds relative to Treasury yields
was  higher  than  the  range  observed  in  recent  years.  If  Long-Term  Capital  believed  the  former
relationship would reassert itself, it would buy corporate bonds and sell short Treasury bonds. If
the  spread  narrowed  as  expected,  the  firm  would  profit.  If,  however,  the  spread  continued  to
widen,  the  firm  would  incur  losses.  This  basic  strategy  and  many  complex  variations  was
followed across many interest rate products in the US and many overseas markets as well. The
firm  was  active  both  in  traditional  securities  markets,  and  perhaps  more  importantly,  in
derivative product markets such as futures, swaps, and options. Anticipating that some positions
would move in their favor and some would move against them, the firm relied on diversification
across  a  large  number  of  product  and  geographic  markets.  Long-Term  Capital  proved  quite
successful at this strategy, generating returns in excess of 40 percent in 1995 and 1996, though
somewhat less in 1997.
Perhaps their success went to their heads. Long-Term Capital took on larger and
larger positions. They also leveraged their investments at higher levels, returning capital to their
investors  but  not,  apparently,  reducing  risks.  We  now  also  know  that  they  took  on  significant
positions  in  equity  markets,  through  both  swap  and  options  contracts.  The  reputations  of  the
Long-Term Capital partners, as traders and economists, and their initial success, appear to have
contributed to so many counterparties’ willingness to deal with them.
While hubris may have set them up for a fall, it was the extraordinary events of
August in global markets that appears to have tripped them.
On August 17, the Russian government announced an effective devaluation of the
ruble  and  declared  a  debt  moratorium,  shocking  investor  confidence  all  over  the  world.  Over
subsequent days and weeks, equity and debt markets the world over became increasingly volatile,
BIS Review   78/1998
- 2 -
with  US  equity  markets  falling  and  the  spreads  between  US  Treasury  securities  and  higher-
yielding debt instruments widening sharply. The correction of stock prices was not of exceptional
size  or  concern  and,  indeed,  had  been  anticipated  by  a  number  of  astute  market  observers.
However,  the  abrupt  and  simultaneous  widening  of  credit  spreads  globally,  for  both  corporate
and  emerging-market  sovereign  debt,  was  an  extraordinary  event  beyond  the  expectations  of
investors and financial intermediaries.
The  unusual  widening  of  credit  spreads  also  caused  significant  losses  at  Long-
Term Capital. As markets around the world moved in the same direction at the same time, the
diversification  on  which  Long-Term  had  previously  relied  failed  them  utterly.  Instead  of
offsetting  positions,  their  losses  were  compounded.  At  the  same  time,  the  volatility  in  equity
markets  caused  further  losses.  On  September  2,  the  partners  of  Long-Term  Capital  sent  their
investors a letter acknowledging 52 percent losses on the year through August 31 and that they
were  seeking  an  injection  of  capital  to  sustain  the  firm.  The  existence  of  this  letter  became
widely known and reported within a few days.
Because  of  this,  during  the  first  two  weeks  of  September,  concern  about  Long-
Term Capital was a widespread topic of conversation in financial markets. It is a traditional and
essential  role  for  the  President  and  senior  officers  of  the  New  York  Fed  to  be  talking  to,  and
receiving  calls  from,  market  participants  regarding  significant  developments  and  potential
dislocations. In fact, the partners at Long-Term Capital called me early in September to notify me
of their difficulties and their discussion with investment houses about plans to raise new capital.
By Friday, September 18, with the efforts to raise new capital still unsuccessful -
and with an increasing number of people now aware of Long-Term’s plight because of the efforts
to bring in new investors - events seemed to come to a head. With market conditions particularly
unsettled that day, I made a series of calls to senior Wall Street officials to discuss overall market
conditions. Let me take a moment to put those calls in context. One important objective of the
Federal Reserve is to assure financial stability. Particularly in times of stress, it is essential that
the  Federal  Reserve  continue  to  take  the  pulse  of  the  market.  One  way  to  do  that  is  through
candid  and  open  communication  with  key  market  participants.  Everyone  I  spoke  to  that  day
volunteered concern about the serious effect the deteriorating situation of Long-Term could have
on world markets.
Also on the 18th, one of the firms that had been working with Long-Term to raise
new capital asked the Long-Term Capital partners if the firm could share the information it had
with  us.  The  partners  at  Long-Term  Capital  responded  that  they  would  prefer  to  present  the
information themselves and called me to arrange such a presentation.
After conferring with Chairman Greenspan and Secretary Rubin, we agreed that a
visit to Long-Term Capital’s offices was needed. A team from the New York Fed, led by Peter
Fisher, the head of our Markets Group, and joined by Treasury Assistant Secretary Gary Gensler,
met with the Long-Term Capital partners at their offices on Sunday, September 20. During this
meeting,  we  learned  the  broad  outlines  of  Long-Term  Capital’s  major  positions  in  credit  and
equity markets, the difficulties they were having in trying to reduce these positions in thin market
conditions,  their  deteriorating  funding  positions  and  an  estimate  of  their  largest  counterparty
exposures. The team also came to understand the impact which Long-Term Capital’s positions
were already having on markets around the world and that the size of these positions was much
greater than market participants imagined.
BIS Review   78/1998
The New York Fed’s Judgements
- 3 -
Mr. Chairman, I would like now to turn to my second point, and focus explicitly
on the question of our judgment that the abrupt and disorderly close-out of Long-Term Capital’s
positions would pose unacceptable risks to the American economy.
There are several ways that the problems of Long-Term Capital could have been
transmitted to cause more widespread financial troubles. Had Long-Term Capital been suddenly
put  into  default,  its  counterparties  would  have  immediately  “closed-out”  their  positions.  If
counterparties would have been able to close-out their positions at existing market prices, losses,
if any, would have been minimal. However, if many firms had rushed to close-out hundreds of
billions  of  dollars  in  transactions  simultaneously,  they  would  have  been  unable  to  liquidate
collateral or establish offsetting positions at the previously-existing prices. Markets would have
moved sharply and losses would have been exaggerated. Several billion dollars of losses might
have been experienced by some of Long-Term Capital’s more than 75 counterparties.
These direct effects on Long-Term Capital’s counterparties were not our principal
concern. While these losses would have been considerable, and would certainly have adversely
affected the firms experiencing them, this was not, in itself, a sufficient reason for us to become
involved.
Two factors influenced our involvement. First, in the rush of Long-Term Capital’s
counterparties  to  close-out  their  positions,  other  market  participants  -  investors  who  had  no
dealings with Long-Term Capital - would have been affected as well. Second, as losses spread to
other market participants and Long-Term Capital’s counterparties, this would lead to tremendous
uncertainty about how far prices would move. Under these circumstances, there was a likelihood
that  a  number  of  credit  and  interest  rate  markets  would  experience  extreme  price  moves  and
possibly cease to function for a period of one or more days and maybe longer. This would have
caused  a  vicious  cycle:  a  loss  of  investor  confidence,  leading  to  a  rush  out  of  private  credits,
leading to a further widening of credit spreads, leading to further liquidations of positions, and so
on. Most importantly, this would have led to further increases in the cost of capital to American
businesses.
Let  me  be  clear:  had  we  not  just  experienced  in  August  precisely  this  type  of
shock  to  our  credit  markets,  had  we  not  just  seen  a  sudden,  world-wide  straining  of  investor
confidence, had there not already been underway a flight of capital away from private credit and
into  Treasury  securities,  were  much  of  the  world  not  experiencing  financial  strain,  then  our
judgements  about  the  risks  to  the  American  economy  of  an  abrupt  and  disorderly  close-out  of
Long-Term Capital may well have been different. But, in the circumstances that did in fact exist,
it was my judgment that the American people, whom we are pledged to serve, could have been
seriously  hurt  if  credit  dried  up  in  a  general  effort  by  banks  and  other  intermediaries  to  avoid
greater risk.
In light of these risks, the responsible public policy objective was to get together
those  with  a  direct  financial  interest  in  an  orderly  rescue  of  Long-Term  Capital,  to  discuss  its
problems openly and objectively, to provide a sounding board for solutions, and if necessary, a
calming influence. In my view, we achieved this objective.
What did the New York Fed do?
BIS Review   78/1998
- 4 -
Because  events  were  moving  swiftly,  and  with  my  approval  and  support,  my
colleague  Mr.  Fisher  invited  representatives  of  the  three  firms,  which  we  felt  had  the  greatest
knowledge of the situation at Long-Term Capital and a strong interest in seeking a solution, to an
early morning meeting on September 22nd. The three firms were Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch,
and J.P. Morgan.
Continuing  discussions  which  commenced  the  day  before,  Mr.  Fisher  explained
our interest in being aware  of  developments  and  in  reducing  the  risk  of  an  abrupt  and  chaotic
close-out of Long-Term Capital. The firms present stated that they were not aware of any other
initiatives then being actively  pursued,  to  resolve  Long-Term  Capital’s  problems.  They  voiced
their own concerns about the risks to the markets of a close-out scenario. They discussed various
approaches to stabilizing Long-Term Capital including the concept of a “collective industry” or
consortium  approach.  However,  they  all  agreed  that  work  on  a  collective  option  should  not
preclude  parallel  efforts  by  anyone;  indeed,  that  if  any  firm  or  group  of  firms  wished  to  step
forward and take Long-Term Capital itself or Long-Term Capital’s positions onto their balance
sheets that this would be the most desirable outcome. In the absence of any other solutions, the
firms dispatched two working groups to Long-Term Capital’s offices in Connecticut to consider
the feasibility of “lifting” the fixed-income and the equity positions out of Long-Term Capital. A
third  working  group  met  at  one  of  the  firm’s  offices  downtown  to  develop  the  idea  of  a
consortium approach. By mutual agreement another firm, UBS, a Swiss bank, was added to this
core group and to each of the three working groups. However, no one from the New York Fed
participated in any of the working groups.
At no point in this early morning meeting, nor at any stage last week, was there
discussion of the use of public monies - Federal Reserve  or  otherwise.  No  Federal  Reserve  or
government guarantees, actual or implied, were offered, discussed or solicited.
Later that afternoon, we participated in a conference call to review the progress of
the working groups. Two of the working groups concluded that a “lifting” of the fixed income
and equity positions was not feasible. The third group developed a consortium approach, which
was deemed feasible. Every one agreed that the consortium approach should be “last ditch”, and
that parallel solutions should still be encouraged.
The  four  firms  met  at  the  Federal  Reserve  at  7:00  p.m.  A  draft  term  sheet  was
reviewed  which  provided  detail  with  respect  to  the  consortium  approach.  The  terms  and
conditions  were  debated,  altered  in  some  places,  and  ultimately  refined  so  that  the  four  firms
could present it to a wider group. Although Federal Reserve officials were present at the meeting,
we did not participate in the discussion about terms and conditions.
At  about  8:30  p.m.,  a  meeting  of  a  wider  group  involving  13  firms  began.
Meanwhile,  some  representatives  of  the  Core  Group  called  Long-Term  Capital  to  discuss  the
terms and conditions of the consortium approach. Federal Reserve officials did not participate in
any  conversations  with  Long-Term  Capital  regarding  the  terms  and  conditions.  In  the  meeting
with the wider group, Peter Fisher explained the importance of avoiding a disorderly close-out of
Long-Term Capital’s positions. He also underscored the desirability of parallel efforts to resolve
the problem. It was agreed that the group would reconvene at 10:00 a.m. the following morning.
It was clear to everyone that time was of the essence.
I returned to New York from London around midnight. During the early morning
hours,  I  called  various  foreign  central  bank  officials  to  inform  them  of  the  situation.  At  about
9:30 a.m. my colleagues and I met with the Core Group to review the status of the situation. A
BIS Review   78/1998
- 5 -
few minutes before the start of the scheduled 10:00 a.m. meeting, one of the Core Group firms
told me that an investor group would make an offer to acquire the Long-Term portfolio. I called
one  of  the  representatives  of  the  investor  group  to  confirm  this  development.  The  offer  was
subsequently  conveyed  to  Long-Term  Capital  by  that  investor  group  and  a  response  was
requested by 12:30 p.m.
After a brief consultation with the Core Group, I decided that the effort to proceed
with the consortium approach needed to be suspended for a short time until the alternative offer
could  be  considered.  As  noted  earlier,  the  consortium  approach  was  seen  as  a  “last  resort”.
Consequently, the meeting about the consortium approach was adjourned at about 10:50 a.m., to
reconvene at 1:00 p.m.
At 12:30 p.m., I learned that the alternative offer had not been accepted and would
not be extended. Shortly after 1:00 p.m., the meeting about the consortium approach resumed.
This  was  now  the  only  solution  being  pursued.  During  the  next  five  hours,  the  private  sector
participants discussed every aspect of the terms and conditions. At the end of that discussion, 14
banks  and  securities  firms  agreed  to  participate  in  the  recapitalization,  with  three  firms
contributing smaller amounts than the other eleven. Two firms declined to participate.
I  want  to  emphasize  a  few  points.  First,  this  was  a  private  sector  solution  to  a
private-sector problem, involving an investment of new equity by Long-Term Capital’s creditors
and counterparties. Second, although some have characterized this as a “bailout”, control of the
Long-Term Portfolio passed over to this 14 firm creditor group and the original equity holders
have taken a severe hit. Finally, no Federal Reserve official pressured anyone, and no promises
were made. Not one penny of public money was spent or committed.
Issues that should concern us
It is far too early to state categorically the lessons to be learned from Long-Term
Capital. What I can say is that we are focused on three specific issues, all relating to leverage and
how we are able to observe it through the eyes of our bank examiners. Let me emphasize, yet
again, that the Federal Reserve has no regulatory authority over hedge funds and no regulatory
authority over Long-Term Capital.
The first issue relates to credit analysis. Our supervisory guidance generally, and
with respect to hedge funds specifically, stresses the importance of knowing the borrower and the
business  purpose  of  the  borrower’s  transactions.  In  1994,  the  Federal  Reserve  issued  a
supervisory letter emphasizing the importance of financial analysis of counterparties, including
hedge funds, which can quickly adjust their  risk  profile.  There  is  a  question  whether  adequate
credit analysis was performed by creditors of Long-Term Capital, which needs to be examined
carefully during the next few weeks. If credit analysis was deficient, we need to learn how and
why before we can make pronouncements that will avoid repetition of our Long-Term  Capital
experience.
The  second  issue  relates  to  derivatives  activities  and  a  concept  called  future
potential  exposure,  which  is  a  measure  of  the  likely  price  movements  based  on  recent  years
experience.  With  respect  to  derivatives,  the  current  market  value  is  captured  by  financial
statements  prepared  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles,  but  not  the
potential future exposure. To fully understand  the  degree  and  effect  of  leverage  in  Long-Term
Capital’s  derivatives-related  strategies,  it  would  have  been  necessary  to  measure  the  potential
future exposure in a rigorous and conservative manner. Whether sufficient information was made
BIS Review   78/1998
- 6 -
available to Long-Term Capital’s counterparties, including its banks, and adequately analyzed by
those counterparties, remains to be seen.
A third question concerns stress testing in the credit analysis of hedge funds and
the structuring of margin agreements. Stress testing simulates the effects on a portfolio if many
asset  relationships  simultaneously  move  adversely  far  beyond  historical  observation.  We
recognize that stress testing is a developing discipline, but it is clear that adequate testing was not
done with respect to the financial conditions that precipitated Long-Term Capital’s problems. In
a  recent  supervisory  letter  on  credit  underwriting  generally,  we  emphasized  the  importance  of
stress testing. Effective risk management in a financial institution requires not only modelling,
but models that can test the full range of financial transactions across all kinds of adverse market
developments. Whether such models existed and, if so, whether they were effective, are issues
that we need to address.
In the aftermath of Long-Term Capital, we need to pursue these leverage-related
issues,  and  others,  in  conjunction  with  our  colleagues  at  the  Federal  Financial  Institutions
Examinations Council. The insights that we gain should be of value to bank supervisors, and for
the study of the Long-Term Capital matter that is to be done by the President’s Working Group
on Financial Markets, announced by Secretary Rubin last Friday.
BIS Review   78/1998
