Mr.  Thiessen  discusses  the  Canadian  experience  with  targets  for  inflation
control   Text of the 1998 Gibson Lecture by the Governor of the Bank of Canada, Mr. Gordon
Thiessen,  at  Queen’s  University  in  Kingston,  Ontario  on  15/10/98  (charts  and  references
omitted).
It is an honour to have been asked by the School of Policy Studies and the John
Deutsch Institute to deliver the 1998 Gibson Lecture.
As an economist who worked as a banker for most of his career, Douglas Gibson
brought  an  interesting  perspective  to  public  policy  issues,  to  the  relationship  between
government and business, and to the contribution of outside economists to government policies. I
noted with particular interest a comment by Gibson in his 1981 essay in honour of John Deutsch.
He points out that few academic economists in Canada up to that time “appeared to appreciate
the destructive influence of inflation on the economy and on society”.1
That  comment  provides  a  convenient  link  to  my  topic  for  this  year's  Gibson
Lecture. What I propose to do is to reflect on Canada's experience using explicit targets aimed at
low rates of inflation as the focus for conducting monetary policy.2 But let me first set the scene
by putting the inflation targets in the context of various approaches to monetary policy.
With  the  sharp  rise  in  worldwide  inflation  in  the  1970s,  the  costs  of  inflation
became more and more evident. Consequently, central banks increasingly focused their attention
on how to get inflation down and keep it down. One lesson that came out of this period was the
importance of having some sort of “nominal anchor” to ensure that monetary policy does not lose
sight  of  the  objective  of  inflation  control,  given  the  long  lags  in  the  operation  of  monetary
policy.3
The traditional nominal anchor for small countries has been a fixed exchange rate
that  links  the  currency  of  the  small  country  to  that  of  a  larger  trading  partner  that  has  been
successful  in  controlling  inflation.  Among  the  larger  countries,  many  central  banks  turned  to
monetary  aggregates  as  an  intermediate  target  for  monetary  policy  around  the  mid-1970s  as
relatively high inflation became entrenched in the world economy. Subsequently, with inflation
and inflation expectations persisting at uncomfortable levels in many countries during the 1980s,
the policy innovation in the early 1990s was the introduction of explicit inflation-control targets
in eight countries.4
The  main  factor  that  countries  choosing  to  use  explicit  inflation-control  targets
have in common is a history of higher-than-average inflation. In some cases, they had previously
used  monetary  aggregates  and/or  a  fixed  exchange  rate  without  success  or  with  only  limited
success.  And,  unlike  countries  with  a  history  of  relatively  low  inflation  (such  as  the  United
                                                     
1 Gibson (1981).
2  Broad assessments of the experience to date with inflation targeting in industrial countries can
be found in Almeida and Goodhart (1998) and Bernanke et al. (1998). Individual country experiences can be found
in  Leiderman  and  Svensson  (1995).  For  an  assessment  of  the  potential  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  inflation
targeting in developing countries, see Masson et al. (1997).
3  See Bouey (1982).
4    New  Zealand,  Canada,  the  United  Kingdom,  Sweden,  Finland,  Australia,  Israel  and  Spain
adopted inflation targets in the first half of the 1990s.
BIS Review   82/1998
- 2 -
States,  Germany  and  Japan),  the  history  and  consequent  problems  of  policy  credibility  in
inflation-targeting  countries  meant  that  they  were  unable  to  rely  upon  a  general  qualitative
commitment to low inflation.
The  key  objectives  of  Canada’s  inflation  targets,  when  they  were  originally
announced in 1991, were to prevent inflation from accelerating in the short run in the face of the
introduction of the new Goods and Services Tax (GST) and a sharp rise in oil prices and, in the
longer  run,  to  bring  inflation  down  to  a  level  consistent  with  price  stability.  Over  time,  the
importance  of  other  favourable  characteristics  of  inflation  targets  as  a  permanent  operating
framework for monetary policy has become increasingly apparent to us at the Bank of Canada.
The  most  notable  of  these  characteristics  are  increased  transparency,  better  accountability,
improved  internal  decision-making,  and  a  mechanism  for  responding  to  demand  and  supply
shocks that reduces potential fluctuations in output.
I would not argue that explicit inflation targets are the only way to achieve good
macroeconomic  results.  Indeed,  the  worldwide  reduction  of  inflation  in  the  1990s  across
countries with different frameworks for monetary policy clearly indicates that there are a number
of  ways  to  achieve  low  inflation.  Rather,  I  will  argue  that  explicit  inflation  targets  bring  a
discipline  to  monetary  policy  that  is  helpful  in  providing  a  more  stable  and  predictable
environment for the economic decisions of businesses and individuals. Moreover, I believe that
the  benefits  of  the  clear  operating  framework  provided  by  such  targets  will  make  them
increasingly attractive in democratic societies that demand accountable public institutions.
I will begin this lecture with a brief history of inflation targets in Canada and go
on  to  an  assessment  of  the  performance  of  the  Canadian  economy  during  the  period  in  which
inflation  targets  have  been  in  place.  I  will  then  turn  to  a  discussion  of  the  favourable
characteristics  of  inflation  targets,  over  and  above  achieving  a  low  rate  of  inflation.  After
examining the main criticisms of explicit targets for low inflation, I will offer some concluding
remarks about the contributions that the targets have made to the conduct of monetary policy in
Canada over the last eight years.
A brief history of inflation targets in Canada
In  response  to  the  persistence  of  high  inflation  during  the  1970s,  the  Bank  of
Canada  adopted  a  narrowly  defined  monetary  aggregate  (M1)  as  a  target  in  1975.  When  this
aggregate  became  increasingly  unreliable  and  turned  out  not  to  have  been  all  that  helpful  in
achieving  the  desired  lessening  of  inflation  pressures,  it  was  eventually  dropped  as  a  target  in
1982.  Subsequently,  the  Bank  embarked  on  a  protracted  empirical  search  for  an  alternative
monetary aggregate target, but no aggregate was found that would be suitable as a formal target.
Thus, from 1982 to 1991, monetary policy in Canada was carried out with price stability as the
longer-term  goal  and  inflation  containment  as  the  shorter-term  goal,  but  without  intermediate
targets or a specified path to the longer-term objective.
In February 1991, explicit targets for reducing inflation were introduced through
joint announcements by the Bank and the federal government.5 These announcements confirmed
price stability as the appropriate long-term objective for monetary policy in Canada and specified
                                                     
5  The  government’s  announcement  came  as  part  of  its  annual  budget,  while  the  Bank  issued  a
press release and a background note setting out practical details regarding the operation of the targets. A discussion
of some of the practical issues surrounding the operational use of the targets can be found in Freedman (1995).
BIS Review   82/1998
- 3 -
a target path to low inflation. The first guidepost was set for the end of 1992 at a target rate of 3
per cent for the 12-month increase in the consumer price index (CPI). This was to be followed by
a reduction to 2.5 per cent for mid-1994 and to 2 per cent by the end of 1995. These targets had a
band of plus and minus 1 percentage point around them. The announcements specified that after
1995 there would be further reductions of inflation until price stability was achieved.
At the time the targets were announced, there was upward pressure on prices in
Canada  from  two  major  shocks  --  the  sharp  rise  in  oil  prices  following  the  Iraqi  invasion  of
Kuwait  and  the  effect  on  the  price  level  of  replacing  the  existing  federal  sales  tax  at  the
manufacturers’  level  by  the  broader-based  GST.  These  shocks  had  led  the  Bank  and  the
government to be concerned about a deterioration of inflation expectations and the possibility of
additional ongoing upward pressure on wages and prices. The fact that Canada had recently gone
through a period of inflationary pressure induced by excess demand added to those concerns. By
providing a clear indication of the downward path for inflation over the medium term, the key
near-term aim of the targets was to help firms and individuals see beyond these price shocks to
the underlying downward trend of  inflation  at  which  monetary  policy  was  aiming,  and  to  take
this into account in their economic decision-making.
In  the  longer  term,  the  inflation-reduction  targets  were  designed  to  make  more
concrete  the  commitment  of  the  authorities  to  the  goal  of  achieving  and  maintaining  price
stability.  In  addition,  by  providing  information  on  the  specific  objectives  to  which  the  Bank’s
monetary policy actions would be directed, the targets were intended to make those actions more
readily understandable to financial market participants and to the general public. In this way, the
targets would provide a better basis than before for judging the performance of monetary policy.
In December 1993, on the  occasion  of  the  announcement  of  my  appointment  as
Governor,  the  Bank  and  the  Minister  of  Finance  issued  a  joint  statement  on  the  objectives  of
monetary  policy.  In  this  statement,  the  newly  elected  government  and  the  Bank  recommitted
themselves to price stability as the goal of monetary policy. It was also agreed that the 1 to 3 per
cent  target  range  for  inflation  would  be  extended  through  1998,  and  that  a  decision  on  the
definition of price stability would be postponed. There were two reasons for this extension. First,
because it had been a long time since Canada had had low rates of inflation, it was felt that more
experience in operating under such conditions would be helpful before a long-term objective was
set. Second, since inflation had dropped rather dramatically and unexpectedly during 1991, it was
unlikely that Canadians had completely adjusted to the improved inflation situation. More time
was  therefore  needed  to  make  that  adjustment  before  announcing  any  further  changes  to  the
target.
In February 1998, the government and the Bank announced that the 1 to 3 per cent
target range would be extended again, this time to the end of 2001. This extension reflected the
fact that the economy had not yet reached full capacity in the current cyclical upswing. It would,
therefore,  be  helpful  to  have  the  economy  demonstrate  more  fully  its  ability  to  perform  well
under conditions of low inflation before determining the appropriate long-run  target  consistent
with  price  stability.  The  government  and  the  Bank  now  plan  to  determine  this  long-run  target
before the end of 2001.
Inflation targets and economic performance in Canada
What  did  we  expect  in  the  way  of  economic  performance  from  the  inflation
targets? First, we expected a lower rate of inflation and reduced inflation expectations. Second,
BIS Review   82/1998
- 4 -
the  achievement  of  a  lower  inflation  rate  and  the  commitment  embodied  in  the  targets  to
maintain  that  lower  inflation  rate  were  expected  to  result  in  lower  interest  rates.  Third,  with
lower inflation, we anticipated that the economy would function more efficiently and without the
sharp fluctuations caused by inflationary booms and subsequent recessions.6
What has the outcome been thus far?
Chart 1 shows the rate of inflation over the period of inflation targets. Following
the initial announcement of the targets in February 1991 (when the 12-month rate of increase in
the total CPI was at 6.8 per cent), inflation fell rapidly. Indeed, for much of 1992 it was below
the bottom of the target range. Since then, with the exception of a brief period in 1995, the trend
of inflation has been in the lower half of the target range.
The  speed  of  the  decline  in  inflation  during  1991  was  surprising.  It  reflected  a
much  more  severe  economic  slowdown  than  either  the  Bank  or  most  other  forecasters  had
expected.  In  part,  the  depth  of  the  1990-91  recession  was  due  to  international  factors,  such  as
lower-than-expected  growth  in  the  United  States  and  an  unexpectedly  sharp  decline  in  raw
materials prices. But in Canada, it also reflected the unwinding of distortions in asset prices and
debt accumulations associated with the preceding period of inflationary pressures.
It is unlikely that the 1991 announcement of the path for inflation reduction had a
significant immediate impact on the expectations of individuals, businesses, or financial market
participants. On balance, I think that it is the low realized trend rate of inflation in Canada since
1992  that  has  been  the  major  factor  in  shifting  expectations  of  inflation  downwards.  But  the
targets have probably played a role in convincing the public and the markets that the Bank would
persevere  in  its  commitment  to  maintain  inflation  at  the  low  rates  that  had  been  achieved.
Moreover, there are some recent indications that the 2 per cent mid-point of our target range is
becoming an important anchor for current expectations and for long-range corporate planning.
If we examine interest rates and  the  growth  of  output  and  employment  over  the
period of inflation targets, the first point to note is that the recovery from the 1990-91 recession
was  less  vigorous  than  typical  in  the  post-war  period.  The  growth  of  domestic  demand,  in
particular, was subdued until mid-1996 (see Chart 2).
Moreover, the economic expansion in Canada was considerably less robust than
that in the United States. While some observers have attributed the sluggishness of the recovery
to the adoption of inflation targets and the associated conduct of monetary policy, this criticism
overlooks the major restructuring that took place in Canada in both the private and public sectors
over  this  period.7  Whereas  the  United  States  had  undergone  a  period  of  intense  private  sector
restructuring  starting  in  the  mid-1980s,  the  corresponding  Canadian  restructuring  did  not  take
place until the first half of the 1990s. At about the same time, after two decades of continuous
fiscal deficits and public sector debt accumulation in Canada, unprecedented corrective actions
were required to put public finances onto a sounder path.
 6 See Bank of Canada (1991) on the benefits of price stability.
7 This critique of Bank policy can be found in Fortin (1996). A detailed response can be found in
Freedman and Macklem (1998).
BIS Review   82/1998
- 5 -
Both sets of actions were essential to move Canada towards a better-functioning
economy. The short-run consequences, however, included a weak employment situation and an
associated lack of consumer confidence. And these resulted in sluggish domestic demand and a
weaker-than-expected recovery in the Canadian economy.
Monetary conditions were easing through much of this period.8 However, for quite
a long time the Bank was unable to provide as much monetary stimulus as it would have liked
because  of  fiscal,  political,  and  international  developments  that,  at  times,  caused  financial
markets to be nervous and volatile. It was only after 1995, with improved credibility on the fiscal
front and subsequent to the Quebec referendum campaign, that the Bank was able to achieve a
durable  reduction  in  short-term  interest  rates.  As  the  credibility  of  both  monetary  and  fiscal
policy  improved,  Canadian  interest  rates  across  the  maturity  spectrum  moved  to  levels  below
comparable  interest  rates  in  the  United  States.  In  response  to  easier  monetary  conditions,
domestic  demand  in  Canada  recovered,  with  a  strong  expansion  beginning  in  mid-1996  and
continuing through 1997.
One of the main conclusions that I would draw from the Canadian experience of
the  1990s  is  that,  while  low  inflation  is  necessary  for  good  economic  performance,  it  is  not
sufficient by itself. While monetary policy was able to achieve a rate of inflation that was within
the target range for most of the period, other factors also played an important role in determining
interest rate movements and output and employment growth.
Does  the  important  role  played  by  non-monetary  factors  mean  that  the  inflation
targets  and  the  low  rate  of  inflation  were  not  helpful?  Not  at  all.  The  ability  of  businesses  to
undertake  a  major  restructuring  was  greatly  enhanced  by  the  stable  low-inflation  environment.
And while fiscal and political uncertainty resulted in appreciable financial market volatility, as
well  as  vulnerability  to  external  shocks  in  the  period  before  1996,9  I  believe  that  the  situation
would  have  been  considerably  worse  without  the  anchor  provided  by  low  inflation  and  the
inflation  targets.  And,  in  conjunction  with  improved  fiscal  policy,  they  have  facilitated  better
economic  performance  in  the  more  recent  period  and  have  allowed  us  to  weather  the  current
international financial problems with fewer difficulties than before. Targets should continue to
provide a sound foundation for good economic performance and for coping with the international
shocks that are bound to hit us from time to time.
Increased monetary policy transparency and accountability
When the government and the Bank agreed on the initial targets in 1991, the main
concern was to lay out a path for the reduction of inflation on the way to price stability. Despite
the  emphasis  that  the  Bank  had  for  some  years  placed  on  price  stability  as  the  objective  of
monetary  policy,10  the  period  over  which  the  objective  was  to  be  achieved  was  a  source  of
uncertainty  among  the  public.  Thus,  one  of  the  key  benefits  of  the  targets  was  expected  to  be
increased transparency with respect to the objective of monetary policy, leading to a reduction of
public and financial market uncertainty.
 8 The concept of monetary conditions includes movements in short-term interest rates and in the
exchange rate, the two channels through which monetary policy operates. See Freedman (1994) and Thiessen (1995).
9 Clinton and Zelmer (1997).
10 See Bank of Canada (1987) and Crow (1988).
BIS Review   82/1998
- 6 -
The announcement in 1991 also noted that the targets should provide a better basis
for  judging  the  performance  of  monetary  policy.  Criticisms  of  monetary  policy  had  often
implicitly assumed that the Bank should be pursuing policy objectives other than price stability.
By setting out a clear objective, and with the commitment of the government to that objective,
the  Bank  hoped  that  future  public  assessments  of  monetary  policy  performance  would  focus
more clearly on its record of achieving price stability.
There is no question that explicit targets for inflation control make the objective of
monetary policy more transparent and provide a better basis than before for holding the central
bank accountable for its conduct of monetary policy. I have not tried to pull together evidence
that,  with  a  clearer  objective,  public  commentary  on  monetary  policy  since  1991  has  involved
fairer assessments of the performance of the Bank of Canada. And it is difficult to demonstrate
conclusively that, overall, financial and economic uncertainty in Canada have been less than they
would  have  been  without  targets.  Nonetheless,  it  is  my  qualitative  assessment  that  those
improvements have taken place.
And the targets have certainly had a major impact on the Bank itself.
With  respect  to  transparency,  we  found  that  explicit  targets  provided  a  strong
incentive  that  encouraged  us  to  become  more  forthcoming  about  how  we  would  operate  to
achieve those targets. As I have discussed elsewhere,11 we have taken initiatives to explain more
fully  our  assessment  of  economic  developments  and  our  outlook  for  output  and  inflation.  We
have clarified how we make judgments about the actions needed to achieve the inflation target,
and how we operate in markets to implement those judgments.
Moreover,  the  Bank’s  senior  staff  now  spends  much  more  time  than  before  on
public explanations and discussions across the country about monetary policy and central bank
operations.
All these initiatives were designed to make the implementation of monetary policy
and the achievement of the targets more effective.
Explanations  and  discussions  are  also  part  of  the  process  whereby  the  Bank  is
accountable to the public for its actions. Accountability implies that the central bank must either
achieve the target or explain what unanticipated events caused it to miss the target and what it is
doing to rectify the situation. Thus, we have a strong incentive to ensure that the public is well
informed about the circumstances that could affect our achievement of the objective.
It is not surprising that in some countries inflation targets and increased autonomy
for the central bank have gone hand in hand. An autonomous central bank has traditionally fitted
somewhat awkwardly into a democratic society.12 However, once targets are set and the central
bank  is  charged  with  achieving  those  targets,  it  is  much  more  feasible  for  Parliament  and  the
public to hold the managers of monetary policy to account for their performance.
                                                     
11 Thiessen (1995).
12 See Rasminsky (1966).
BIS Review   82/1998
- 7 -
In Canada, no new arrangements for central bank accountability have been put in
place since 1991. But in fact the existing arrangements have adapted quite well to an inflation-
targeting  environment.  The  Bank  of  Canada  Act  gives  the  Bank’s  Board  of  Directors  the
responsibility  for  ensuring  that  the  institution  is  well  run.13  This  includes  assessing  the
performance  of  the  Governor  and  of  the  other  members  of  the  Governing  Council,  who  are
responsible for managing the Bank.14
The 
those  performance  assessments  more
straightforward. When it comes to monetary policy -- the Bank’s most important responsibility --
there is now a clear measure of what constitutes successful performance.
targets  have  made 
inflation 
The second part of the accountability arrangement for the Bank of Canada is the
directive power given to the Minister of Finance under Section 14 of the Bank of Canada Act.
With the new practice of agreed targets between the Bank and the Minister, the directive power,
which has never been used, now seems even less likely to be used. Nonetheless, if there were a
fundamental  disagreement  on  the  targets  when  they  came  up  for  renewal,  the  Minister  could
impose his will via a directive. That would likely lead to the Governor’s resignation and a new
Governor, who was prepared to accept the desired targets, would have to be chosen.15
As long as no directive is in force, the Bank must take full responsibility for its
monetary policy actions. However, this directive power implies that the Minister must also take a
broad,  ultimate  responsibility  because  he  has  the  power  to  change  monetary  policy.  Quite
evidently,  this  is  a  power  to  be  used  only  in  extreme  circumstances.  Nevertheless,  this
arrangement defines the nature of the Bank’s relationship to the Minister of Finance in the area of
monetary policy.
In today’s world, the accountability of public institutions goes beyond traditional
legislated  arrangements.  In  democratic  societies,  the  general  public  now  demands  much  more
information  and  accountability  for  performance  from  public  institutions.  Here  again,  by
establishing a clear performance objective, the inflation-control targets  have  made  it  easier  for
the Bank to account for its stewardship to Parliament and the general public.
Improved internal decision-making
The  explicit  target  for  policy  and  the  associated  increase  in  transparency  and
accountability of the Bank of Canada have also had an impact on our internal decision-making
processes.
Other  central  banks  that  have  adopted  inflation  targets  have  also  noted  the
improvement  in  the  process  of  internal  decision-making  that  has  resulted.16  The  improved
                                                     
13 The directors of the Bank are appointed by the government for three-year terms. By tradition,
there are two directors from Ontario, two from Quebec and one from each of the other provinces.
14 The Governing Council is composed of the Governor, the Senior Deputy Governor and the four
Deputy Governors.
15  In  addition,  if  the  Minister  decided  that  the  actions  that  the  Bank  was  taking  to  achieve  the
agreed targets were inappropriate, he could use the directive power. Once again, this would be an expression of no
confidence, which would probably lead to the Governor’s resignation and replacement.
16 Haldane (1995).
BIS Review   82/1998
- 8 -
decision-making can be attributed largely to the focus on a clear  objective  and  the  consequent
need to develop a robust framework that maximizes the likelihood of realizing that objective in
the light of the long lags between monetary policy actions and their effects on inflation.
The  inflation-targeting  framework  typically  has  a  number  of  components  --  a
procedure  for  projecting  the  future  rate  of  inflation,  a  set  of  quantitative  estimates  of  the
relationships that link the central bank actions and the rate of inflation, and the development of
information variables that provide early warning to the authorities that economic and  financial
events are, or are not, proceeding in line with the inflation outlook.
In Canada, the policy process works as follows. The Bank makes a projection of
inflation one to two years ahead. This is based in large part on our assessment of international
and  domestic  economic  developments  and  their  implications  for  the  path  of  real  output  in  the
Canadian  economy  relative  to  potential  output.  In  this  framework,  minimizing  the  difference
between  the  projected  rate  of  inflation  six  to  eight  quarters  in  the  future  and  the  target  rate
becomes  the  effective  intermediate  objective  for  monetary  policy.17  A  full  projection  is
undertaken every quarter, reassessed mid-quarter and carefully monitored in between. The idea is
to  re-examine  the  scenarios  on  which  policy  actions  are  based  as  new  information  becomes
available. In this context, I would note that we are very aware of the uncertainty surrounding both
the projection and the transmission mechanism that links our actions to demand and inflation.18
While it is still early to offer any definitive judgments, I would suggest that so far
one of the most important results of the targets has been an increase in the internal discipline of
the policy-making process. The Bank’s commitment to the targets and the need  to  explain  and
justify any inability to meet the targets have resulted in a better-focused internal debate on the
appropriate policy actions to take and has probably reduced the likelihood that decisions to take
such actions will be put off.
The response to demand and supply shocks under inflation targeting
In  addition  to  their  positive  effects  on  transparency,  accountability  and
decision-making,  the  inflation  targets  also  provide  a  mechanism  that  helps  monetary  policy  to
deal with demand and supply shocks in a way that reduces economic fluctuations.
If  the  inflation  forecast  suggested  that  aggregate  demand  was  expanding  at  an
unsustainable rate and would be pressing on capacity so that the trend of inflation would likely
go through the top of the target range, the Bank would tighten monetary conditions to offset the
demand and inflationary pressures. Conversely, if demand was weak relative to capacity and the
trend  of  inflation  looked  likely  to  move  below  the  bottom  of  the  range,  the  Bank  would  ease
monetary  conditions,  thereby  providing  stimulus  to  the  economy  and  reducing  the  downward
pressure on inflation. By operating in this way, the Bank effectively reduces the magnitude of the
fluctuations in real output and income that are inherent in a market-based economy. Because of
 17 Svensson (1997).
18 For a detailed discussion of the Canadian framework for making policy, see Duguay and Poloz
(1994) or Longworth and Freedman (1995). See Haldane (1995) for descriptions of the policy frameworks of those
countries using inflation targeting as the basis of their policy. For a discussion of  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the
transmission mechanism, see Thiessen (1995).
BIS Review   82/1998
- 9 -
this economic-stabilizer characteristic of targets in response to demand shocks, and the helpful
role of the top and bottom of the range in communicating the way in which the Bank responds to
such shocks, the Bank has recently been giving more emphasis to the target range than was the
case initially.
Moreover, to the extent that explicit targets and their successful achievement give
Canadian  monetary  policy  more  credibility,  the  Bank  of  Canada  has  more  potential  room  for
manoeuvre in dealing with demand shocks. For example, following an upward demand  shock,
policy credibility can give the Bank more room to see how large and how long-lived the shock is
likely to be and how much pressure it seems to be putting on the economy’s capacity to produce.
The  Bank  will  have  this  greater  latitude  only  insofar  as  inflation  expectations  are  more  firmly
anchored by the targets and are not dislodged by a delay in responding to a shock.19
Inflation targets have also turned out to be helpful in dealing with certain types of
supply shocks. For temporary shocks to food and energy prices, our operational focus on a core
rate  of  inflation  (the  CPI  excluding  food,  energy  and  the  effect  of  changes  in  indirect  taxes)
makes  it  clear  that  the  focus  of  monetary  policy  is  on  the  trend  of  inflation  and  not  on  such
temporary fluctuations.
Removing indirect taxes from our core measure of inflation implies that the Bank
will accommodate first-round effects of tax changes on the price level. However, we have also
made  it  clear  that  we  would  not  accommodate  any  ongoing  inflation  effects  that  might  come
from attempts to adjust salaries and wages to seek compensation for tax increases.
Another type of supply shock that may become relevant in the period ahead is the
possibility that the widespread restructuring that we have seen in the Canadian economy, along
with new technology and high levels of business investment, will lead to growth rates and levels
of  potential  output  higher  than  currently  estimated  on  the  basis  of  past  experience.  In  such  an
event,  the  economy  will  be  able  to  expand  faster  and  operate  at  higher  levels  of  output  than
previously thought without generating inflation pressures.
A credible inflation target can help the Bank probe to find out where the limits of
potential  output  really  are.  Consider  a  case  where  inflation  remains  under  downward  pressure
even as the economy operates at levels of activity that the Bank believes to be consistent with
full capacity. The risk of having inflation go below the target, and the accountability issues that
this would raise, should ensure that the Bank will not make persistent errors in underestimating
potential output.20
This  operational  framework  should  help  to  make  clear  to  Canadians  that  a
monetary  policy  focused  on  inflation  targets  does  not  ignore  fluctuations  in  employment  and
output, or result in a persistently underperforming economy.
Some criticisms of targeting low inflation
 19  See  Freedman  (1996).  The  ability  of  the  US  monetary  authorities  to  adopt  a  wait-and-see
position in response to shocks in recent years is closely related to the very high degree of credibility that the Federal
Reserve has achieved.
20 Thiessen (1997).
BIS Review   82/1998
- 10 -
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  main  criticisms  that  have  been  levelled  at  the  Bank’s
targets for low inflation. They are:  the  possibility  of  downward  rigidity  in  nominal  wages;  the
floor of zero on nominal interest rates; and a concern about deflation. You will note that none of
these criticisms is directed at inflation targeting as such, but at the choice of a target for inflation
control that is very low.
Wage rigidity
Are wages rigid to the degree that they would be slow to decline even in the face
of slack in the labour market? And what are the implications of such a situation for the working
of the  economy  and  for  monetary  policy?  In  other  words,  is  some  level  of  inflation  needed  to
“grease the wheels” of the economy and eliminate the potential effect of such rigidity?21
The evidence thus far, although still fragmentary, suggests that wages can and do
decline.22 It is also worth emphasizing that, with positive productivity growth, the average wage
will  normally  rise  over  time  even  in  an  environment  of  stable  prices.  In  such  circumstances,
unchanged  nominal  wages  will  enable  a  decline  in  unit  labour  costs  equal  to  the  rate  of
productivity growth, if such a decline is needed.
Furthermore, the resistance to downward adjustments of nominal wages that built
up during the period of high inflation is likely to lessen as the public becomes accustomed to low
inflation.  Given  that  the  behaviour  of  nominal  wages  adjusted  to  the  period  of  high  inflation
starting in the 1970s, I see no reason why it will not adjust equally to the current period of low
inflation. Indeed, there is now some evidence, in Canada and in other low-inflation countries, of
an  increase  in  the  relative  importance  of  variable  pay  schemes  (bonuses,  etc.)  as  opposed  to
increases  in  base  wage  rates.23  If  sustained,  this  development  would  help  to  increase  wage
flexibility.
As I have said in the past, I have a great deal of difficulty with the idea that wage
earners in Canada are subject to a permanent money illusion that can, and should, be exploited by
the monetary authority.24
How can monetary policy be eased when inflation is very low and interest rates
are close to zero?
One of the criticisms of the goal of price stability, or a very low inflation rate, is
that  it  rules  out  using  negative  real  interest  rates  (i.e.  interest  rates  lower  than  the  rate  of
inflation)  to  provide  stimulus  to  the  economy  should  this  become  necessary.  This  line  of
argument  implies  that  one  should  avoid  targeting  a  very  low  rate  of  inflation  because  of  the
added flexibility that the possibility of having negative real interest rates gives to policy-makers
at a time of economic weakness.
                                                     
21 See Fortin (1996) and Akerlof et al. (1996).
22 See Crawford and Harrison (1997).
23 Crawford and Harrison (1997).
24 See Thiessen (1996-97).
BIS Review   82/1998
- 11 -
In  assessing  this  criticism,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  the  achievement  of
price stability is likely to lead to a lessening in the amplitude of business cycle fluctuations. In
the post-war period, deep recessions (of the sort that might, in extreme cases, call for negative
real rates) have typically been preceded by periods of strong inflation pressures. These pressures
resulted in significant economic distortions, which, in turn, affected the depth of the subsequent
downturn. In the absence of such inflationary distortions, the downturns are  likely  to  be  much
milder. Hence, there is less likelihood that a period of negative real interest rates would ever be
called for.
Moreover, while nominal short-term interest rates cannot be less  than  zero,  it  is
worth  underlining  that  a  near-zero  nominal  rate  will  still  imply  a  real  interest  rate  that  is
appreciably below its equilibrium value and will provide considerable stimulus to the economy.
Finally, in a small open economy with a flexible exchange rate regime, monetary
conditions can become easier as a result of both interest rate and exchange rate movements. Even
if  there  were  only  limited  easing  possible  via  the  interest  rate,  there  could  still  be  a  sufficient
adjustment of monetary conditions to support a recovery and avoid having inflation persistently
below the target range.
Is there a “deflation” problem?
Some critics have suggested that targeting a low inflation rate, such as the present
1  to  3  per  cent  range,  raises  the  potential  problem  that  a  negative  shock  could  readily  push
Canada into deflation.
The first point to clarify is that  what  is  relevant  here  is  a  decline  in  the  general
level  of  prices  of  goods  and  services,  not  in  asset  prices  as  some  people  seem  to  think.
Furthermore,  the  use  of  the  term  “deflation”  to  describe  a  small  decrease  in  prices  for  a  short
period  of  time,  rather  than  a  period  of  sustained  price  declines,  can  be  very  misleading.  In
Canada,  the  term  deflation  is  associated  in  the  public  mind  with  the  depression  of  the  1930s,
when prices fell more than 20 per cent over a four-year period.
The  concerns  about  persistent  deflation  are  that  households  will  decide  to  defer
consumption expenditures in the expectation that prices will be significantly lower in the future
than at present and that the economy will enter into a debt-deflation spiral. Such responses are
highly unlikely in the case of small price declines over short periods of time. The fact that under
inflation  targeting  the  authorities  are  committed  to  bringing  the  rate  of  change  in  prices  back
inside  the  target  range  would  reduce  even  further  the  likelihood  that  deflationary  expectations
would take hold in such circumstances.
I would contend that inflation and deflation are equally to be avoided. Both imply
increased  uncertainty  for  economic  agents,  and  both  have  negative  implications  for  economic
performance. That is why the Bank treats the risk of inflation moving above the top or below the
bottom of the range with equal concern.
Concluding remarks
It  is  too  early  to  be  able  to  draw  very  strong  conclusions  about  the  impact  of
inflation targets on actual economic performance in Canada. We really do require a longer period
of time for targets to demonstrate their ability to deal successfully with the peak of an economic
upturn without the trend of inflation moving persistently outside the target range.
BIS Review   82/1998
- 12 -
Nonetheless, some conclusions can be drawn at this point. In Canada, inflation has
remained within the target range for most of the period in which targets have been set. Because
of this, the outlook for inflation has, in recent years, been more stable and predictable than at any
time since the 1960s. And, consequently, most nominal interest rates have been lower than at any
time since the 1960s.
It would appear that business investment in Canada has been encouraged by the
low interest rates and stable inflation outlook.
Among individuals, stable inflation has encouraged both savers and borrowers to
move further out along the maturity curve. This provides greater security for these individuals --
a benefit that is particularly important for those who are not expert in, or do not wish to devote a
great deal of time and energy to, financial matters.
A  common  criticism  of  inflation  targets  in  Canada  is  that  the  United  States  has
managed to achieve better output and employment performance since 1991, with an inflation rate
that is currently only 1 percentage point higher than in Canada.
However, as I have argued in this lecture, there have been a number of factors at
work  that  account  for  differences  in  economic  performance  between  Canada  and  the  United
States, of which the most important probably were fiscal policy and the resulting higher public
debt levels in Canada.
I  would  add  that  monetary  policy  credibility  has  been  less  of  a  problem  in  the
United States than in Canada. To an important extent, this reflects the somewhat lower average
US inflation rate from the early 1970s to the beginning of the 1990s. It also reflects the fact that
the  US  dollar  is  the  major  international  reserve  currency,  and  for  that  reason  there  is  strong
ongoing demand to hold US dollar denominated assets that  does  not  exist  for  Canadian  dollar
assets. In these circumstances, the commitment provided by inflation-control targets will be far
more useful in attracting and holding investors to a relatively small, open economy like Canada’s
than to the United States.
However,  I  would  argue  that  the  transparency  and  accountability  of  monetary
policy  and  the  resulting  discipline  in  central  bank  decision-making  that  the  targets  encourage
would be good for any country. And the  greater  predictability  of  the  inflation  outlook  under  a
targeting  regime  should  contribute  to  good  long-term  economic  performance  everywhere.
Moreover,  the  automatic-stabilizer  feature  of  targets  should  reassure  those  who  worry  that  the
central bank is overly concerned about inflation to the exclusion of the real economy.
Finally,  I  would  argue  that  transparency  and  accountability  give  autonomous
central  banks  legitimacy  in  a  democratic  society.  Since  I  am  persuaded  that  central  bank
autonomy provides the strongest guarantee of having a low-inflation monetary policy over time, I
believe  that  it  is  important  to  ensure  that  such  autonomy  remains  acceptable  in  democratic
societies.  Only  with  explicit  performance  targets  will  accountability  arrangements  be  truly
effective.
Inflation-control targets are by no means a miracle solution for monetary policy.
But I believe that they provide a framework that leads to better policy decisions, better economic
BIS Review   82/1998
- 13 -
performance  over  time,  and  a  more  accountable,  and  therefore  more  sustainable,  position  for
autonomous central banks.
BIS Review   82/1998
