Mr Wellink considers monetary relations between the euro zone and new member states
Speech by the President of the Netherlands Bank, Dr A.H.E.M. Wellink, at the European Finance
Convention in Vienna on 23/11/98.
I  should  start  with  a  warning  to  those  who  favour  early  accession  of  Central  and  Eastern
European countries to the European Union. Somebody once said the following about the part of
Europe I live in: “I do not find Northern Europe an ideal zone for human habitation. It is a fine
place  for  industrial  productivity,  but  its  climate  breeds  puritans  and  the  terrible  dictates  of  the
Protestant  Work  Ethic.  The  Romans  were  right  to  pull  out  when  they  did.”  So  please  be  well
aware  of  whom  you  seek  to  live  with  in  a  more  institutionalized  setting.  But,  let  me  add
immediately  that  times  have  changed.  For  instance,  the  Romans  have  found  it  attractive  to  be
reunited with us in EMU.
Today, I want to discuss the issue of monetary relations between Central and Eastern Europe and
the  European  Union.  Accession  to  the  EU  is  understandably  a  hot  issue  in  the  countries
concerned  and  it  rightly  guides  their  medium-term  macroeconomic  policy  orientation.  At  the
same  time  the  turbulence  in  the  global  financial  markets  poses  some  immediate  policy
challenges. Two issues are particularly at stake: (1) to what extent is Eastern Europe hit by the
consequences of the Asian and Russian financial crises? and (2) what is the best policy approach
in  the  current  international  environment?  I  will  first  discuss  these  two  issues.  Later  on,  I  will
broaden my horizon and raise some issues related to the future accession of these countries to the
EU.
Contagion? Economies in transition have not been shielded from contagion effects, which started
after  the  Russian  financial  crisis.  Financial  market  volatility  increased  sharply.  Headline  stock
market  indices  significantly  dropped  in  August  and  exchange  rates  were  under  downward
pressure. However, the situation seems to have improved meanwhile. Although it is probably too
early  for  a  final  assessment,  until  now  the  effects  on  the  real  economy  have  been  relatively
limited, also because trade relations have dramatically changed in the past and their focus is now
much more towards the West. The countries that had made significant strides since the beginning
of  the  1990s  in  establishing  a  well-functioning  market  economy  have  weathered  the  financial
storms rather well. This is ample proof that they are on the right track. Their main challenge is
therefore to ensure that the ongoing stabilization and reform efforts continue even if, or should I
say especially if, external conditions deteriorate further.
External conditions
Let me say a few words about these external conditions. I believe that we should not be overly
pessimistic about economic growth in the industrial countries. The euro zone remains an area of
stability, even though we have seen some downward adjustments to growth expectations for next
year.  Growth  performance  in  the  United  States  was  quite  strong  in  the  third  quarter,  even
stronger than had been expected. Interest rates in a number of countries – the US, the UK and
several  European  countries  –  have  been  lowered.  Signs  are  that  the  economic  downturn  in
Southeast  Asia  has  bottomed  out.  With  the  help  of  the  IMF,  Brazil  has  established  a  strong
adjustment package. These are all hopeful signs that we might have reached a turning point and
that things should now gradually show a turn for the better. But at the same time, given recent
growth expectations, we should not be overly optimistic either.
Inside  and  outside  the  European  Central  Bank,  there  is  much  discussion  about  the  level  of
interest  rates  in  Europe.  Supporters  of  interest  rate  reductions  are  pointing  to  the  worsening
BIS Review   100/1998
– 2 –
economic  conditions  in  the  world  and  to  the  lead  given  by  the  US  central  bank,  the  Federal
Reserve System. Let me try to put things in perspective here. In the Governing Council of the
ECB  we  are  carefully  considering  developments  in  economic  and  monetary  conditions  in  the
euro zone. So far, the internal dynamics of the euro zone are still relatively strong. At the same
time,  we  are  certainly  not  blind  to  developments  in  the  “outside”  world.  One  should  take  into
account, however, that for the euro area as a whole the average three-month market interest rate
has  come  down  from  4.2%  early  this  year  to  3.7%  now.  The  current  level  is  about  150  basis
points lower than that in the US. In addition, we need to keep in mind that the US and Europe are
at different stages of the business cycle. Therefore, monetary conditions seem easier here than in
the  US.  I  would  stress  that  aggressive  calls  for  lowering  interest  rates  from  politicians  –  apart
from  being  against  the  letter  and  the  spirit  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty  –  involve  the  danger  of
making  the  interest  rate  issue  the  acid  test  for  the  independence  of  the  ECB.  Europe  and  the
world are better off with a monetary policy that is consistently oriented at the medium term than
with efforts on our side to fine-tune the development of the business cycle.
Current monetary policy challenges in Eastern Europe
This brings me to the issue of current monetary policy challenges in Eastern Europe. In a general
sense, key words are credibility and transparency. These words are used quite often, but they are
all the more relevant in turbulent times. The overall aim should be to create “sound money”. This
implies (1) price stability and (2) a sound financial and payments system. For a central bank to
attain the goal of price  stability,  it  must  have  not  only  full  power  to  formulate  and  implement
monetary  policy  but  also  the  confidence  of  the  general  public  and  financial  markets.  That  is
where transparency comes in. Being transparent is essential in order to educate people and make
them understand the reasons for policy changes.
The  current  monetary  policy  approach  in  most  Eastern  European  countries  recognises  the
importance of the basic principles of credibility and transparency. Through July of this year, we
have seen the “costs of success” in several countries. Improved confidence on the part of foreign
investors led to capital inflows that were very large compared to the size of the economies of the
recipient countries. Coping with the inflationary pressures created by these capital inflows was
the  main  challenge  facing  monetary  policy.  Following  the  aggravation  of  the  crisis  in  Russia,
however, the countries experienced significant capital outflows. Obviously, such sudden shifts in
investor behaviour do create severe strains for the day-to-day management of monetary policy.
The authorities from these countries have skilfully reacted by adjusting their monetary strategy in
a practical manner. In Poland and Hungary, for instance, the central banks have provided clarity
about  the  medium-term  development  of  the  exchange  rate,  thus  contributing  to  anchoring
expectations. Most laudably, the countries in Eastern Europe have refrained from imposing new
restrictions  on  capital  movements.  This  is  very  important  indeed  and  it  seems  to  have  been
rewarded in financial markets.
Accession to the EU
Let me now turn to the future relationship between the European regions, more specifically to the
intended enlargement of the European  Union  towards  the  East.  Many  years  ago,  fathers  in  the
United States would tell their sons to go West in search of fortune. Perhaps fathers in Western
Europe may in the not too distant future tell their sons: “Go East, young man.”
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe are catching up quickly and may one day become
the most dynamic economies and societies in Europe. In  the  meantime,  it  is  clear  that  Eastern
Europe is looking towards the West.
BIS Review   100/1998
– 3 –
The so-called “fast-track” countries of Central and Eastern Europe will hopefully be ready to join
the European Union some time from now, although a number of further reforms still need to be
implemented.  This  is  especially  true  for  financial  markets  and  the  banking  sector.  There  have
been  many  political  statements  on  the  most  likely  year  for  accession.  It  is  of  course,  for  the
politicians to decide on this. In my view, the countries of Central and Eastern Europe should be
given  enough  time  to  prepare  themselves  properly  for  becoming  part  of  the  Single  Market.
Moreover, given the substantial differences among them, the candidate member states should be
looked at on a case-by-case basis.
Some transitional provisions are likely to be necessary for new member states after joining the
European Union. Without such provisions the expansion of the European Union may need to be
postponed for many years, which  is  clearly  undesirable.  Moreover,  in  the  past  such  provisions
have also been applied to new entrants, including Spain, Portugal and Greece.
It is essential to strike a proper balance. The acquis, the body of legislation which applies to all
EU member states, must remain the  common  denominator.  Member  states  can  decide  to  work
more closely in some areas, but they cannot detract from the acquis. Member states must satisfy
certain requirements in the monetary and financial sphere, even those member states that have a
derogation with respect to monetary union. These requirements are essential for the functioning
of the single market. Transitional provisions may be required. However, permanent exemptions
or  lengthy  transitional  periods  would  be  inappropriate  as  they  could  threaten  the  internal
cohesion of the Union.
Monetary relations
Let me be a bit more specific about monetary relations and let me start with the period before
membership.  In  the  run-up  to  the  accession  to  European  Union,  prospective  member  states
should take a pragmatic approach to the implementation of monetary policy. It seems only logical
that the exchange rate against the euro will gradually be assigned an increasing importance in the
monetary policy considerations of candidate member states. An implicit or explicit orientation of
monetary policy towards the exchange rate against the euro can also be justified by the relative
importance  of  trade  relations  between  the  two  regions.  Some  50–60%  of  foreign  trade  of  the
countries of Central and Eastern Europe is with the European Union.
Where pragmatism is called for, it does not make sense to establish all kind of institutional bells
and  whistles  in  the  monetary  field.  Rather  than  participating  in  any  formal  exchange  rate
mechanism  with  the  euro  before  EU  membership,  countries  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe
should  focus  on  economic  reform.  During  such  a  period,  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies
should provide for sufficient flexibility and should take account of the specific circumstances of
the country concerned. For instance, given the current levels of inflation, it may be wise for some
countries to maintain a crawling currency peg for the time being. For other countries a stronger
commitment – a fixed peg or a currency board – may be more appropriate. Before accession, this
can only be a unilateral decision. Only after joining the European Union can new member states
participate in ERM-II, as indeed they are expected to, assuming that a credible peg against the
euro can be established at that time.
Preconditions for stable monetary relations
Of course, linking the currency to the euro cannot be a substitute for conducting stability-oriented
macroeconomic and structural policies. Rather, any formal link to the euro should be preceded by
policy measures which make the intended currency link a credible one. Given today’s importance
BIS Review   100/1998
– 4 –
of  capital  flows  to  exchange  rates,  such  policy  measures  should  also  cover  areas  that  are
important to capital flows.
Allow  me  to  say  a  few  words  on  the  approach  towards  capital  movements.  Undoubtedly,  hot
money is a hot issue at the moment. Restrictions on capital flows have proven less than effective
in times when investor confidence turns sour. Introducing controls to limit capital outflows in the
middle of a crisis is doomed to fail. They may afford some temporary  relief,  but  when  people
want  to  get  their  money  out  of  the  country,  they  will  succeed  in  doing  so  in  the  end.  What
remains is long-term damage to investor confidence. Liberalizing the capital account further is
the more promising route.
Adequate  sequencing  of  short-term  capital  inflows  may  be  required  in  order  to  gain  time  for
adjusting  the  domestic  financial  sector  to  the  competitive  pressures  that  follow  from  capital
liberalization. It should be realized, though, that such an approach should go hand in hand with
an improvement of supervision and a strengthening of the financial sector. This should be high
on  the  policy  agenda  in  Eastern  Europe.  There  has  been  considerable  progress  on  capital
liberalization in these  countries  and  it  is  expected  that,  under  OECD  rules,  capital  movements
will  be  free  of  restrictions  pretty  soon.  The  major  challenge  now  is  to  ensure  that  the
restructuring of the financial sector keeps pace, an area where there is still much to be done.
It is well-known that in the communist past many banks used to be a part of, or closely related to,
the central bank. In addition, many of the borrowers used to be companies with close ties to the
government.  As  a  result,  there  were  few  incentives  for  risk  control  and  return  enhancement.
Instead,  some  banks  used  to  generate  profits  by  exploiting  certain  privileges  which  no  longer
exist.
What  is  necessary,  and  what  has  been  done  to  some  extent  in  some  countries,  but  not  all,  is
privatizing  state-controlled  banks  and  promoting  free  market  entry.  This  will  provide  bank
managers with the right incentives to make risk/return assessments. Adequate bank supervision
and  financial  markets  oversight  are  required  to  ensure  that  sufficient  weight  is  given  to  risk
control.  Foreign  ownership  may  help  to  transfer  certain  specific  banking  skills  to  candidate
member  states,  even  though  I  do  not  favour  a  big  January  sale  of  financial  institutions  in  the
countries concerned.
The  current  problems  in  certain  Asian  countries  show  that  a  bad  loan  overhang  can  severely
impede the functioning of the economy. Balance sheet restructuring in countries in Central and
Eastern Europe may require intervention by the competent authorities in some cases. It may be
necessary  to  let  some  banks  fail.  It  may  be  necessary  for  governments  to  take  over  bad  loans
inherited from the communist era. This would enable some credit institutions to conduct business
more effectively. In order to prevent moral hazard, the rescue of selected credit institutions can
only take place under certain conditions, most likely including the lay-off of those responsible for
making these loans.
Importantly from a macroeconomic point of view, any debt restructuring involving government
money  should  find  expression  in  official  figures  for  government  debt.  This  would  provide  a
better insight into the actual financial situation in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe.
Reducing uncertainties in this respect is likely to build up confidence and attract rather than deter
foreign investors.
BIS Review   100/1998
Concluding remarks
– 5 –
I have spoken on the monetary relations between the euro zone and the countries of Central and
Eastern  Europe.  Let  me  conclude  by  presenting  some  ideas  about  the  relations  between  the
European System of Central Banks (ESCB) and the central banks of the candidate member states.
Although  candidate  member  states  obviously  cannot  take  part  in  ESCB  meetings  before  their
accession to the European Union, it could be useful to invite the governors of the central banks of
the “fast-track” countries once a year to attend a special meeting of the General Council of the
ECB. This would be similar to the current practice for the Council of Economics and  Finance
Ministers (Ecofin). Apart from that, the ECB staff could be asked to make a yearly assessment of
the state of progress in applicant countries.
Finally, the Governing Council of the ECB will be requested to give its opinion on the expansion
of the European Union towards the East. For now, I would like to conclude that the authorities of
the candidate member states seem to be very capable of taking the right decisions in providing
their people with a stable economic environment.
BIS Review   100/1998
