Mr McDonough discusses issues of credit risk management and the level playing field
Speech by the President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
and Chairman of the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision, Mr William J. McDonough, at a
conference on “The Challenge of Credit Risk” in Frankfurt am Main on 24/11/98.
I am pleased to be here today to discuss issues of credit risk management and the level playing
field.  This  conference  on  credit  risk  provides  a  focal  point  for  discussion  at  a  time  when  the
credit risk management process is undergoing rapid change. I congratulate President Tietmeyer,
the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  the  Zeitschrift  fuer  das  gesamte  Kreditwesen  on  bringing  us
together for this thought-provoking program.
Ensuring a level playing field was one of the two major goals of developing the Basle Capital
Accord, the other being to ensure a safe and sound banking system through adequate capital. The
Basle  Committee  now  is  engaged  in  a  fundamental  review  of  the  Accord,  and  one  important
aspect receiving careful consideration is the changed landscape of the playing field since 1988.
The supervisors’ interest in the playing field, to be sure, is not limited to the nature of the players
and  their  competitive  positions.  Given  the  importance  of  credit  and  liquidity  to  the  overall
economy, supervisors also have a strong interest in the broader issues of how capital rules will
affect the shape and functioning of the financial markets overall.
One  implication  is  already  clear  --  that  the  capital  rules  need  to  have  the  broadest  possible
applicability to be effective not just to meet both goals of the Basle Accord, but also to ensure the
soundness and stability of the financial system more generally. Thus, after describing some of the
challenges  in  designing  a  21st  century  capital  framework  for  an  altered  playing  field,  I  will
address  two  broad  risk  management  considerations.  The  first  is  how  competition  has  been
reshaping  the  credit  cycle  in  the  recent  past.  I  believe  strongly  that  increased  competition  has
raised the ante for financial institutions and supervisors alike in their need to develop improved
tools to assess risk and to evaluate the relationship between risk and return. The second is how
competition is redistributing credit risk in the financial system and how that affects the credit risk
that remains with financial institutions. Here, too, I believe that competition has raised the stakes
for  all  financial  institutions,  and  banks  in  particular,  in  their  need  for  a  comprehensive  and
consistent credit strategy across all product lines. Moreover, these changes have implications for
the  supervision  of  capital  adequacy,  and  not  only  the  design  of  a  regulatory  minimum  capital
standard, an issue I will return to later.
Changes in Competition
The competitive landscape of the credit markets has shifted dramatically in the decade since the
announcement  of  the  Basle  Accord.  Three  features  in  particular  stand  out.  First,  international
competition now reaches banks in developed and emerging market countries alike, even in what
were previously thought to be solely domestic markets. Second, large banks now compete head-
to-head  with  nonbank  financial  institutions,  especially  securities  firms,  in  a  variety  of  product
markets globally. Probably nothing has underscored the extent of this head-to-head competition
more than the entry of investment banks into the syndicated lending business in the mid-1990s
and the subsequent erosion of spreads and nonprice lending terms, while commercial banks have
entered the high-yield bond underwriting business.
Third,  the  relationship  between  banks  and  their  highest  quality  government  and  business
customers  has  changed,  to  varying  extents  in  different  countries.  Even  here  in  Germany,  the
BIS Review   102/1998
– 2 –
country  virtually  holding  the  patent  on  the  concept  of  Hausbank,  we  see  change.  Whether  in
Germany  or  elsewhere,  customers  have  turned  to  the  capital  markets  to  obtain  less  costly
financing.  The  top-rated  customers  often  provide  more  business  to  banks  in  foreign  exchange
and over-the-counter derivatives than in traditional lending. In addition, large nonbank pools of
capital, such as mutual funds and pension funds, have shown an increasing appetite for less than
investment-grade  securities,  at  least  until  recently.  These  nonbank  pools  of  capital  themselves
represent one of the most important forces reshaping the playing field,  since  they  significantly
erode the historical comparative advantage of banks in bearing credit risk.
International competition and nonbank competition have clear implications for the future capital
framework if it is to meet the goal of a level playing field. We must ensure that bank supervisors
in every country have in place meaningful minimum capital requirements based on a  common
notion of bank soundness and the power to enforce those requirements. With respect to minimum
capital  requirements,  it  seems  unlikely  that  one  size  will  fit  all.  We  can,  however,  strive  to
develop a capital framework in which banks bearing similar risks face similar levels of minimum
capital while complying with requirements that are appropriate to the bank’s activities and level
of sophistication. Analogously, a long-run goal of bank and nonbank supervisors alike should be
to put their capital regimes on a more nearly common conceptual footing -- not necessarily with
identical requirements, but with a greater degree of comparability.
Risk, Return and the Credit Cycle
Increasing  competitive  pressures  and  the  changed  playing  field  have  contributed  to  important
changes in the dynamics of credit markets. A concern for supervisors is the tendency of credit
markets to bid down spreads rather sharply in the optimistic phase of the credit cycle, often to the
point where returns no longer seem commensurate with risk. Then, as problems emerge, lenders
in the credit markets pull back and cause spreads to reverse sharply. This is by no means always
a simple, up and down process. I recall the bumpy landing of the high-yield bond and leveraged
buyout  lending  markets  in  the  United  States  at  the  end  of  the  1980s.  After  several  liquidity
interruptions  resulting  from  failed  deals  in  the  late  1980s,  the  market  finally  settled  into  a
pronounced downturn which culminated in the failure of Drexel Burnham Lambert in 1990 and
substantial losses from bridge loans and leveraged  buyout  credits  at  many  securities  firms  and
banks.
Those events from the late 1980s illustrate market dynamics which have been repeated more than
once  in  the  last  decade  --  in  Latin  American  investment  and  lending  in  the  mid-1990s,  for
example, and in Asia, Russia, and related markets in the late 1990s. Credit to highly leveraged
hedge funds and similar institutions probably falls into this pattern as well. The common theme
is an initial rapid expansion of credit accompanied by falling spreads, followed by a curtailment
of  activity  and  a  dramatic  widening  of  spreads.  Usually,  market  participants  suffer  substantial
losses in that second phase. Often it seems that the longer and more buoyant the optimistic phase
of the cycle, the greater the damage when the pessimistic phase sets in.
After  the  early  1990s,  when  many  banks  experienced  severe  credit  losses,  some  set  about
identifying ways to better assess and control credit risks. That early 1990s experience appears to
have sharpened the awareness of banks of the asymmetric and cyclical nature of returns in credit
markets.  That  is,  credit  involves  a  limited  upside  and  a  large  potential  downside,  with  the
potential  depth  of  the  downside  becoming  convincingly  apparent  only  after  the  downturn  has
begun.
BIS Review   102/1998
– 3 –
The losses in the early 1990s prompted banks to find new methods to evaluate both the risks and
the returns in credit activities. These methods included more refined internal rating systems to
describe  credit  quality,  analysis  of  historical  loss  rates,  default  probability  models,  portfolio
credit risk models and, more recently, stress testing. As new tools are developed, they are being
combined with others to refine the bank’s understanding of its credit risk relative to its return.
Because the returns in credit activities are asymmetric and cyclical, new approaches to measuring
and analyzing credit risk easily become data-intensive and analytically complex.
Can  we  moderate  the  sharp  turns  in  the  credit  cycle?  I  believe  that  targeting  returns
commensurate  with  risk  over  an  appropriately  long  time  horizon  is  probably  the  single  most
important  defense  against  the  violent  swings  in  the  credit  cycle  experienced  in  the  1980s  and
1990s. Individual banks can protect themselves if they recognize when margins become too thin
to cover risk by restraining their credit activities at those rates, and they can benefit by expanding
them when returns have risen enough to cover risk once again.
To  limit  those  market  swings,  however,  the  discipline  of  seeking  returns  commensurate  with
risks has to be practiced widely and consistently throughout the financial system. While a single
bank  may  protect  itself  in  the  first  instance  from  making  loans  that  allow  a  borrower  to
overextend  itself,  the  borrower  may  still  be  able  to  borrow  elsewhere,  to  the  detriment  of  its
current lenders.
Risk-return discipline is achievable with even the most basic tools. Discipline has been greatly
enhanced  at  some  large,  international  banks  by  the  simple  comparison  of  credit  spreads  with
historical  loss  rates  on  well-defined  categories  of  credit.  A  useful  approach  to  furthering  risk-
return analysis is the enhancement of methods to assign internal risk ratings to individual credit
exposures. Ratings have long been seen as powerful summary indicators of risk, but a fresh burst
of  activity  appears  underway,  in  which  some  banks  have  increased  the  number  of  rating
categories  in  order  to  sharpen  distinctions  within  the  credit  portfolio.  Some  banks  also  are
exploring the possibility of validating their internal ratings through the use of information from
the equities markets.
Finer risk distinctions, when they reflect the likelihood of default, deterioration and loss, offer
banks  the  possibility  of  more  accurate  pricing.  An  article  in  the  August  1998  Federal  Reserve
Bulletin provides some evidence of that. Based on data from some 250 U.S. banks and 29 foreign
banking  organizations,  the  authors  found  that  the  relationship  between  internal  ratings  and
pricing  was  very  similar  to  the  credit  rating  and  pricing  relationships  that  exist  in  the  bond
market, especially for high-grade customers.
Banks  which  are  developing  credit  models  are  doing  so  to  deepen  their  understanding  and
analysis of the relationship between risk and return in credit activities at the portfolio level. The
developers  of  models  believe  that,  when  well  thought  out,  soundly  estimated,  and  designed  to
capture the relationships between the risks of individual exposures, credit risk models produce
risk measures that can reflect portfolio diversification or the lack of it. Such credit models also
offer the ability to look at the marginal risk and the marginal return of adding a new transaction
to an existing credit portfolio, or removing an old  one,  allowing  a  credit  officer  to  understand
better whether a loan diversifies the bank’s portfolio or increases its concentration.
Taken together, these new tools are expanding the capacity to run realistic stress tests and get a
fuller picture of credit risk. Stress testing is the leading technique to assess the direct and indirect
effects of unusual market and economic events. It is fundamentally a qualitative and judgmental
process,  usually  superimposed  on  a  more  formal,  statistical  approach  to  risk  measurement.
BIS Review   102/1998
– 4 –
Management’s  goal  is  to  identify  scenarios,  usually  low-probability,  high-stress  events,  that
could  jeopardize  the  health  of  the  bank.  While  stress  testing  has  gained  prominence  in  these
turbulent times, running “what if” scenarios and following up with management actions has long
been a hallmark of excellent financial management.
Although stress testing of market risk exposures has been developing rapidly for several years,
credit risk stress testing until recently has been a more difficult, manual process. The description
of  credit  exposures  through  internal  ratings  and  the  use  of  risk  models  helps  to  automate  the
process, allowing the bank to analyze a larger number of scenarios in more depth. Such stress
tests begin at the level of the individual credit or obligor, where able credit officers have long had
the  ability  to  identify  scenarios  most  likely  to  have  an  adverse  effect  on  the  borrower  or
counterparty. Stress tests then can be taken to the portfolio level to measure the broader effects of
adverse  market  and  economic  conditions.  I  believe  the  real  key  to  this  kind  of  analysis  is  not
extensive  data-crunching  but  fully  understanding  the  credit  strategies  of  the  bank  and  where
those strategies may be vulnerable.
Analyzing Risk and Return as Part of the Supervisory Process
While these new methods of assessing risk and return  are  to  a  large  extent  works  in  progress,
they are likely to have great value well before they are perfected -- if they ever can be perfected.
The use of new methods -- initially as a complement to more traditional approaches -- is often a
powerful  test  of  their  efficacy.  For  example,  many  bankers  feel  that  their  market  risk  models
were  not  helpful  enough  in  clearly  identifying  the  risks  that  generated  losses  in  the  market
turbulence of the last 18 months and have begun an assessment of their performance. As a result
of that review, it is likely that banks will modify their models and the way they use them, most
especially  by  placing  more  emphasis  on  and  expanding  stress  testing.  Moreover,  many  are
considering ways to integrate the analysis of major risk categories given the links between those
risks  revealed  in  the  recent  market  turmoil,  such  as  the  link  between  market  and  credit  losses
associated with the Russian default.
As  banks  use  and  continue  to  refine  new  frameworks  for  evaluating  risk  and  return,  a  natural
question for supervisors is what use they should make of the new  approaches.  Let  me  suggest
three reasons why we supervisors should devote attention to them in our own supervisory -- in
contrast to regulatory -- activities, and sooner rather than later.
First,  by  using  new  methods  of  relating  risk  and  return,  we  come  to  better  understand  the
measures  themselves,  as  well  as  how  the  bank  understands  what  risks  it  is  taking  and  why.
Understanding the bank’s perception of its performance and comparing it with the supervisor’s
perspective is a crucial first step to effective supervision and the resolution of problems.
Second,  if  we  believe  that  a  more  rigorous  consideration  of  return  relative  to  risk  is  a  crucial
discipline for banks and the financial system, we need to know whether an appropriately rigorous
decision-making process is in place and well-functioning. This requires supervisors to consider
not only asset quality, that is, the risk in the portfolio, but also the bank’s pricing process. This
broader consideration of both risk and return may then suggest new methods to supplement or
deepen our current, well-established approaches to judging the adequacy of credit loss reserves
and capital based on the review of asset quality.
Supervisors traditionally have stayed away from forming judgments about the pricing of credit.
In part, this stemmed from an appropriate desire to avoid interfering with the basic market forces
that set prices for individual credits, and we must continue to avoid such interference. However,
BIS Review   102/1998
– 5 –
asset quality alone cannot answer the question of how well a bank manages its credit risk, since it
sheds no light on whether the bank is adequately compensated for its expected losses and its risk.
Third, new, more incisive measures of risk open up the possibility to increase the comparability
across  banks.  One  of  our  greatest  advantages  as  supervisors  is  our  ability  to  look  across
institutions and compare them. The better we can estimate the risk in financial institutions, with
these  and  other  measures,  the  more  powerful  our  comparisons,  especially  cross-institutional
comparisons  of  risk  management,  earnings,  liquidity  management,  loan  loss  reserves,  and,  of
course, capital adequacy. To the extent that banks also disclose robust measures of these risks,
market  participants  will  be  able  to  make  the  same  kind  of  comparisons  and  exert  greater
discipline on financial institutions.
The Importance of a Comprehensive Credit Risk Strategy
A bank’s choices about risk and return lie at the heart of developing a credit strategy. Choosing a
credit strategy has become more challenging in light of changing competition, not only because
larger  financial  institutions  have  become  more  diversified  and  global,  but  also  because  the
market distributes credit risk far differently than it did a decade ago. Institutional investors and
other nonbank financial institutions hold a larger share of assets and a larger share of credit risk
than they did earlier. While this is notoriously difficult to measure, given the many changes in
the financial system over the last 10 years, a recent study on systemic risk by the Euro-currency
Standing  Committee  under  the  G-10  Central  Bank  Governors  documents  a  shift  of  financial
activity away from the traditional banking sector in many countries.
While an increasing share of conventional credit risk is being intermediated through the capital
markets, over time larger banks have increased their involvement in intermediating other risks --
market,  operational  and  settlement  risks,  for  example.  Experience  is  showing  us  that  this
intermediation of other risks appears always to involve some element of  credit  risk.  It  may  be
explicit credit risk-taking in the form of margin lending, or transactions in the over-the-counter
derivatives business, which is basically a credit business. It may take more subtle forms, such as
the  short-term  credit  risks  in  futures  brokerage,  where  the  clearing  broker  stands  between  the
customer  and  the  exchange,  or  the  often  underestimated  but  substantial  credit  risks  in  settling
foreign  exchange  contracts.  Credit  risk  may  derive  from  operational  risks,  buried  deep  in  the
details of specific operations which make use of intraday funding or other very short-lived credit.
In its broadest definition, credit risk may take the form of the reputational risk that stems from
involvement with the wrong customer in a deposit transaction.
Underappreciated  and  unconventional  credit  risks  have  been  a  theme  in  major  market  events
since the stock market break in 1987. Such surprises include losses and  temporary  gridlock  in
clearance and settlement associated with the stock market break in 1987, the failures of Drexel
and  Barings,  and  the  emergence  of  large  credit  exposures  in  non-deliverable  forwards,
repurchase  agreements  and  derivatives  associated  with  emerging  market  currencies  and
government securities over the last year.
Credit risk at large banks therefore appears to be becoming less traditional and more complex in
nature.  That  in  turn  heightens  the  urgency  of  the  need  for  every  bank  to  study  and  update  its
broad  credit  strategy.  Such  a  strategy  would  cover  the  types  of  customers,  the  acceptable
relationship between risks and returns, the role of active portfolio management and the degree of
diversification  that  the  bank  would  seek  in  its  businesses.  In  the  days  when  the  predominant
credit business in the bank was lending, credit strategy could be largely a matter of the lending
area’s  business  plan.  Today,  however,  the  board  of  directors  and  senior  management  of  a
BIS Review   102/1998
– 6 –
financial  institution  need  to  know  that  their  strategy  covers  the  many  activities  of  the  bank  in
which credit exposure, wherever it is found, is a significant risk.
One  lesson  we  can  take  away  from  the  events  of  the  last  18  months  is  that  the  bank’s  credit
strategy needs to take explicit account of downside scenarios and stress events. Over the last few
months, as markets were most unsettled, supervisors and central  banks  became  concerned  that
banks  and  other  financial  intermediaries  would  not  perform  their  crucial  intermediation  role.  I
see it as important that credit strategy in a bank reflects an analysis of potential vulnerabilities of
major customers or groups of customers and consideration of reasonable actions the bank could
take  when  distressed  circumstances  occur.  When  difficult  times  as  well  as  good  times  are
factored into the credit strategy, bank management is in a stronger position to develop its plans
for capital and liquidity.
Supervisors  can  pay  more  attention  to  the  bank’s  credit  strategy,  for  the  same  three  reasons  I
cited earlier: to promote sound practices, to ensure that those sound practices are in place and to
strengthen our basis for comparisons across banks. Supervisors can explore ways to increase the
coherence in the review of credit risk management across the bank, especially to ensure that bank
management  has  articulated  a  comprehensive  credit  risk  strategy  and  is  measuring  its
performance  against  it.  Supervisors  also  can  verify  that  seasoned  credit  judgment  as  well  as
technical analysis is reflected in the credit-granting and monitoring process for trading activities.
Many  problems  of  the  last  18  months  might  have  been  reduced  or  avoided  by  more  in-depth
questioning of the business purpose or strategy of transactions.
Credit Risk Management and Capital
Let me talk about one last area in which the bank’s risk-return discipline within a comprehensive
credit  strategy  matters.  That  is  the  assessment  of  capital  adequacy.  My  comments  here  are
directed less at minimum capital standards than at the way supervisors form judgments about a
bank’s capital adequacy.
For  virtually  all  banks,  credit  remains  the  single  largest  risk.  Credit  remains  a  difficult  risk  to
offset, despite advances in credit hedging techniques, and even diversification has its limitations.
As banks think through their own capital adequacy, how they factor in their credit risk profile has
a major impact on the amount of capital they will need.
Capital  supports  the  credit  risk-bearing  activities  of  the  bank  in  many  ways.  Clearly,  together
with  reserves,  capital  should  protect  the  bank  against  expected  and  unexpected  losses  in  the
credit portfolio, including losses related to reasonable and plausible stress scenarios. But capital
also  protects  the  bank  against  its  business  risk,  that  is,  the  risk  that  a  bank  will  lose  ground
relative  to  its  competitors  or  competing  products,  and  fail  to  earn  a  market  rate  of  return  in  a
business. Capital also provides a cushion against the enormous costs of fast-paced technological
change, especially in the information systems arena. For example, consider the urgency and the
rising cost estimates of Year 2000 remediation, testing and contingency planning efforts.
It follows that every bank needs to assess its risk profile and evaluate  what  capital  it  needs  to
cope with adverse outcomes in normal times and under reasonable stress scenarios. Many banks
have started to do so. At some banks, the starting point for that analysis is a set of assessments of
market,  credit  and  perhaps  operational  risk,  with  some  method  for  adding  them  up.  Another
approach  might  be  to  build  up  capital  needs  business  by  business,  using  peer  analysis  or
information from the equities markets. Other approaches are conceivable.
BIS Review   102/1998
– 7 –
Such self-assessments of capital adequacy appear to be an important step toward introducing new
methods of risk evaluation into the capital process. As bank management works through its self-
assessment,  I  would  encourage  participation  by  its  supervisors,  so  that  management  and
supervisors have the opportunity to compare perspectives on the nature and amount of the bank’s
risks, the quality of its risk management, and the adequacy of its capital.
I see informed supervisory review of capital adequacy self-assessments as one part of a three-part
framework  for  capital  supervision  that  consists  of  a  minimum  capital  requirement,  hands-on
supervision  and  enhanced  market  discipline.  The  Basle  Committee’s  Steering  Group  on  the
Future  of  Capital,  chaired  by  Claes  Norgren  of  the  Swedish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority,
plans to bring its thinking on the Capital Accord to the December meeting of the full Committee.
The  Committee  is  committed  to  undertaking  substantial  work  in  1999  in  order  to  be  able  to
publish  a  consultative  paper  with  its  proposals  toward  the  end  of  1999,  with  the  goal  of
beginning the transition to a new capital framework roughly a year later.
Of  course,  some  of  the  many  minimum  capital  standard  options  being  studied  by  the  Steering
Group make use of the new tools of risk-return evaluation I’ve discussed today, such as internal
ratings and credit models. My message today is that we can begin now to place more emphasis
on risk-return discipline with an appropriately long time horizon and on a comprehensive credit
strategy  both  in  the  risk  management  processes  at  banks  and  in  our  own  supervisory  process.
And we should not allow making further progress in the risk management arena to be dependent
on the outcome of discussions of an appropriate minimum capital standard.
As  we  move  forward  with  the  review  and  revision  of  the  Accord,  we  plan  to  stress
communication  with  banking  supervisors  globally  and  with  supervisors  in  other  key  financial
industries, such as securities and insurance. We have an especially strong interest in ensuring that
the  capital  framework  we  develop  meets  the  needs  of  banking  supervisors  outside  the  G-10
countries. At the meeting of the International Conference of Banking Supervisors in Sydney last
month, regional associations of banking supervisors discussed the obstacles and challenges they
face in implementing the Basle Committee’s Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision.
That  discussion  underscored  the  importance  of  simplicity,  clarity  and  continuity  with  existing
approaches for supervisors in many parts of the world.
A  parallel  dialogue  also  is  necessary  with  the  broad  financial  community.  We  will  need  their
input  and  participation  to  enable  us  to  develop  the  structure  and  key  elements  of  a  capital
framework,  understand  its  efficacy  and  incentive  effects,  and  evaluate  its  robustness.  Our
intention is to begin an active dialogue with the industry in the next few months, so as to have
their involvement from the beginning. That dialogue, I hope, can be extended to rating agencies
and securities analysts, who play an important role in market discipline.  To conclude, the Basle
Committee on Banking Supervision has taken on a challenging agenda; the work on the future
capital framework is likely to involve all of the Committee’s working groups and a large part of
its resources. We look forward to the challenge in the coming year. Our hope is to see through
the  complexity  of  financial  activity  and  the  variety  of  supervisory  needs  across  countries  and
financial  institutions  in  order  to  identify  the  most  simple,  straightforward  outlines  of  a  capital
framework. If we can identify that framework, we can differentiate it and apply it to banks at the
cutting edge of financial engineering or those new to the international markets, to banks large or
small, and to nonbank financial institutions.
Ideally, I believe such a framework will include an approach to quantitative capital requirements
that  offers  the  possibility  of  translating  our  expectations  for  all  types  of  financial  institutions
across  countries;  integrating  the  quantitative  capital  requirements  with  a  set  of  qualitative
BIS Review   102/1998
– 8 –
expectations for banks in managing their risk and evaluating their capital needs; and relying as
much as possible on market discipline, with emphasis on transparency and disclosure.
We will actively seek your suggestions and reactions.
BIS Review   102/1998
