Mr.  Bäckstrom  discusses  the  economic  situation  in  Sweden      Speech  by  the
Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Sweden,  Mr.  Urban  Bäckström,  at  a  seminar  organised  by  The  Swedish
Shareholders Association, held in Malmö on 10/10/98.
First  of  all  I  should  like  to  express  my  thanks  for  the  invitation  to  visit  Malmö  to
discuss the economic situation. A major phenomenon in the current economic situation is, of course,
the  international  financial  turbulence.  The  crisis  in  the  Japanese  economy  has  been  developing
throughout the 1990s and the problems in Asia as a whole are now in their second year. The Asian
crisis,  which  is  having  widespread  real  economic  repercussions  in  that  region,  has  in  turn
accentuated  the  problems  in  Russia  and,  to  some  extent,  in  Latin  America,  with  associated
contagious effects in Western financial markets. Stock exchanges have fallen around the world and
some players in the financial markets have incurred losses.
This  in  turn  raises  a  number  of  questions  about  the  global  economic  trend.  How
negative may the real economic effects become in the United States and Europe? What part are the
central  banks  playing?  The  US  Federal  Reserve  has  recently  lowered  its  instrumental  rate  and  so
have other central banks. Will that affect the Riksbank’s actions? Matters to do with world economic
development and what should be done - not just to mitigate the short-run effects but also to construct
systems and institutions so that similar events can be avoided in the future - have been high on the
agenda for economic policy discussions in various fora this autumn. The latest instance is the 1998
Annual  Meeting  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  in  Washington  D.C.  earlier  this  week.  In
connection with that meeting, finance ministers and central bank governors from all over the world
assembled in various groups to discuss the situation.
Background to the global economic problems
Just a year or so ago, many observers foresaw a golden future for the world economy.
There  was  talk  in  some  places  of  a  new  economic  era,  with  strong  growth  and  permanently  low
inflation, at least in the United States. Today, the discussion has shifted in general to deliberations
about  the  risks  of  a  world  economic  slowdown.  The  challenges  the  global  economy  is  facing  at
present are a combined result of several factors. One of these factors is, of course, the situation in
Japan, where the economic problems, as I just said, have been at work throughout this decade. The
inability  to  take  sufficiently  resolute  action  has  led  the  Japanese  economy  into  a  serious  decline.
Japan has the world’s second largest economy and is of primary importance for the outlook in Asia
as a whole.
A crisis in other Asian countries then materialised almost a year ago. The problems
showed  up  first  in  Thailand  but  soon  spread  to  South  Korea,  Malaysia  and  Indonesia.  While  the
deterioration  in  these  countries  was  partly  a  consequence  of  the  economic  stagnation  in  Japan,
perhaps the main cause of the acute crisis was that a strong capital inflow from the West, above all
from  the  United  States,  suddenly  turned  into  an  outflow.  For  various  reasons,  political  as  well  as
economic, assessments of the development potential in the countries in question had been gradually
revised.
More recently the problems have spread to Russia, where the economic situation - as
in Japan - was already troublesome. The situation became so precarious that the Russian government
suspended  payments  on  government  debt  denominated  in  the  domestic  currency.  That  was  a  very
far-reaching decision. Since then, capital outflows have also hit  Latin  America.  For  a  long  time  it
seemed that the Asian crisis would not have sizeable repercussions in industrialised countries in the
West. The direct real economic impact was judged to be small and at first it looked as though the
main  effect  would  be  a  tendency  to  keep  inflation  down,  while  growth  would  remain  good.  As
Russia  also  encountered  increasing  problems,  however,  there  was  growing  concern  and  the  crisis
BIS Review   83/1998
- 2 -
accordingly began to spread even to financial markets in the West. During the summer, share prices
began to fall. Credit risks rose. Investors and banks started to become increasingly cautious, partly
on account of some losses. When a highly reputable hedge fund, Long-Term Capital Management,
was hit by major setbacks, the international banks became even more wary.
Investors have fled to assets that are generally regarded as secure. Lending rates to all
but  the  most  creditworthy  borrowers  have  therefore  risen  around  the  world.  In  the  last  few  days,
moreover,  long  bond  rates  have  moved  up  in  many  countries,  which  is  a  sign  that  investors  are
increasing the cash component of their portfolios. Expressions like “flight to quality” and “flight to
cash” are common in the course of a development such as that we are now experiencing.
How great will the repercussions be?
Observers throughout the world are now engaged in appraising the global economic
effects of the crisis in Southeast Asia, the inability to tackle the problems in the Japanese economy,
the uncertainty about the situation in Russia and the risk of contagious effects in Latin America.
The world economic impact of the problems in the emerging markets can be divided
into effects on real economic activity and influences via financial markets. The latter are transmitted
both by falling prices for shares and possibly other assets and by a higher degree of prudence on the
part of firms, households and banks.
Let  me  begin  with  the  real  economic  effects.  In  the  emerging  economies  that  are
currently affected, the problems have led to sharply falling demand and output. Imports from the rest
of the world are therefore declining, too. At the same time, currency depreciation has improved the
competitiveness of exports. Thus, a weakening of Western exports to the emerging markets is being
accompanied by a gradual increase in Western imports from these countries. For overall growth in
the OECD area, however, the aggregate real economic effects are probably not all that large.
So  what  about  the  effects  transmitted  by  financial  markets  in  the  West?  A  falling
stock  exchange  reduces  the  value  of  households’  share  portfolios,  which  may  influence  the
propensity to consume. It also increases the cost of capital procurement, which may likewise affect
demand via a weaker propensity to invest. The recent global fall in share prices - more or less wiping
out the increase in the past two years or so - should be seen in the light of the strong upward trend
that share prices have followed in the 1990s. In Sweden the OMX Index is still around 300 per cent
above the low in the autumn of 1992. In the United States the Dow Jones Index is about 200 per cent
higher  than  at  the  beginning  of  1991.  This  provides  a  perspective  for  the  impact  of  falling  share
prices  on  international  growth.  It  should  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  US  economy  is  more
sensitive than Europe to a falling stock exchange.
When  it  comes  to  confidence,  it  is  more  difficult  both  to  quantify  and  to  arrive  at
more  definite  conclusions  about  consequences  of  the  crisis.  We  do  not  know  to  what  extent  the
present  course  of  events  is  affecting  how  households  and  firms  appraise  both  their  own  and  their
country’s economy. A good many people and businesses will no doubt become more cautious about
buying a car or making investments for the future, for example. Here we have a potentially larger
effect  that  must  be  monitored  very  carefully.  Some  guidance  is  to  be  had  from  various  countries’
survey data. A number of the results point to a fall in consumer confidence.
Neither can one draw any precise conclusions about the magnitude of the effect that
may come from increased prudence in banking around the world. The global unrest has left its mark.
No  one  foresaw  that  Malaysia  would  introduce  foreign  exchange  controls.  Nor  did  any  banker
believe that Russia would go so far as to suspend payments on debt denominated in roubles. People
BIS Review   83/1998
- 3 -
seem  to  be  thinking  that  if  such  things  could  happen  in  Malaysia  and  Russia,  perhaps  they  can
happen elsewhere.
The  problems  with  the  hedge  fund  Long-Term  Capital  is  another  matter  that  has
made  international  bankers  more  wary.  Although  their  loans  to  this  fund  were  secured,  the  total
stock of loans from all banks and the total amount of collateral were too large for direct disposal in
the  market;  that  would  have  caused  prices  to  fall,  leading  to  losses  for  the  banks.  Under  such
circumstances it is hardly surprising that international banks also review their lending commitments
to other funds.
The key question is whether the international banks’ review of lending commitments
will be extended to include other groups of customers. Perhaps their lending policies will  become
generally  more  restrictive.  One  sign  of  this  is  that  the  flow  of  loans  to  many  countries  which  are
regarded as emerging markets has virtually dried up. The interest rate differential between treasury
securities  issued  by  such  countries  and  by  the  US,  for  instance,  has  widened  dramatically  this
autumn.  In  turbulent  times,  moreover,  banks  have  difficulty  in  fulfilling  their  function,  which  is
highly important in a market system, of distinguishing sound borrowers from others. The result may
be that their provision of credit is completely suspended.
It is already evident that in their assessments, various players are tending to disregard
more fundamental factors. An example of this is the weakening of the krona. Despite good economic
fundamentals  in  Sweden,  since  the  summer  the  krona  has  weakened  sharply  and  last  week  this
tendency accelerated. In a matter of days the exchange rate with the German mark declined by up to
5 per cent. In that situation the Riksbank decided to intervene in the foreign exchange market, which
nowadays is unusual. We did so to demonstrate that we considered the krona’s fall was excessive in
relation  to  the  fundamental  state  of  the  economy  and  that  the  time  had  to  come  to  pause  and
reconsider  the  situation.  Instances  of  “follow-the-leader”  behaviour  occur  not  just  in  bullish
stockmarkets  but  also  in  the  currency  market  when  many  countries  with  different  conditions  are
lumped  together  in  a  general  assessment.  Market  players  must  assess  each  country  separately.
Central bank interventions under certain circumstances are uncommon with a flexible exchange rate
regime but they do occur. I cannot exclude the possibility of the Riksbank intervening again if this
were to be called for.
Growth  in  the  industrialised  countries  may  thus  be  affected  by  the  real  economic
crisis which has hit the emerging markets and resulted in a sharp fall in output there. The magnitude
of such an effect will be highly dependent on confidence - confidence among households and firms
so  that  they  are  prone  to  consume  and  invest,  confidence  among  banks  so  that  they  are  prone  to
provide credit.
The Riksbank’s appraisal
In the Riksbank’s most recent Inflation Report we counted on an OECD area growth
rate of around 2 per cent in the years ahead. It should be borne in mind that this figure represented
the latest in a series of downward revisions over the past twelve months.
Since the publication of the September Report, our assessment of tendencies in  the
rest  of  the  world  has  not  changed.  Considering  the  mechanisms  to  which  I  have  just  referred,
however,  it  is  not  surprising  that  our  Report  highlighted  the  risks  associated  with  the  external
situation. This situation is unusually difficult to evaluate and has to be followed closely.
In the situation that has arisen, why doesn’t the Riksbank lower the repo rate? After
all, other central banks have done so.
BIS Review   83/1998
- 4 -
The answer is that our assessment includes all the factors which have a  bearing  on
developments in  Sweden  and  future  inflation.  To  date  in  1998,  economic  development  in  Sweden
has been very good. At present, moreover, it is very difficult to foresee the krona’s future path. As I
mentioned  earlier,  the  economic  fundamentals  point  to  a  definite  appreciation.  If  that  is  not
sufficiently  marked,  however,  export  production  will  be  strongly  stimulated.  It  is  difficult  to  tell
whether that in turn would alter inflation prospects for the period of twelve to twenty-four months
that  is  relevant  for  monetary  policy.  That  is  something  to  which  we  will  be  returning  when  the
international picture becomes clearer. It is also a consideration that has to be  weighed  in  with  the
outlook for the domestic economy. A repo rate cut is not topical in Sweden at present.
How did it happen?
Why  is  it  that  the  unrest  in  Southeast  Asia  and  Russia,  with  some  tendencies  to
spread to Latin America, is beginning to affect the financial system in the industrialised countries?
What has gone wrong in the global financial system?
There is no simple answer to these questions. But let me briefly mention a couple of
factors.  First,  however,  it  is  important  to  underscore  the  advantages  that  accrue  from  a  global
financial  system  of  the  type  that  has  been  developed  in  the  past  decade.  The  countries  which
participate in the international capital market tend to have higher per capita growth rates than other
countries.  The  globalisation  of  production  and  trade  calls  for  new  solutions  for  payments  and
financing.  It  is  also  a  great  advantage  to  have  a  financial  system  that  is  capable  of  channelling
savings to those parts of the world that need them most for investment.
However, participation in the international capital market presupposes that a country
has an adequate banking system with accounting regulations and other institutions, such as thorough
supervision that ensures sound banking practices. This has evidently not been the case in a number
of the countries that are now affected by the crisis. Nor should we forget that the banking system in
Sweden was not fully prepared at the time when our credit market was deregulated.
If loans from the international capital market are channelled to a country where the
banking system and other financial institutions are not ready to function in this community, the result
may thus be loan losses. But, as you know, it takes two to tango. It may well be asked why banks in
the industrialised countries have arranged loans to countries that evidently were not yet sufficiently
sound borrowers. Capital has been flowing to emerging markets in a broad stream in recent years. It
has been channelled directly through the banks as well as indirectly, for instance via hedge funds. A
good many such funds have obtained large loans from banks in the industrialised countries and, in
pursuit of favourable yields, invested the money in emerging markets. This indirect lending can be
likened to the Swedish banks’ earlier lending to finance companies.
This brings us to the nature of banking in a more profound sense. Traditional banking
involves accepting deposits from the non-bank public and lending these funds to various borrowers.
Moreover, the equity capital on which banking is based is small, which implies high leverage and
low solvency.
If  all  the  banks’  capital  had  consisted  instead  of  equity,  incurred  losses  could  have
been handled more or less painlessly. With a large proportion of borrowed capital, however, there
are liable to be chain reactions that successively spread through the banking system. It is precisely
this that necessitates comprehensive, efficient supervision and a functional set of regulations in order
to avoid unnecessary losses. That is also why central banks around the world have been assigned the
function of safeguarding the financial system’s general stability.
BIS Review   83/1998
- 5 -
What can be done?
The current problems in the global financial system need solutions for both the short
and the longer run. In the short run it is a question of resolving the acute crises. Work for the longer
run must focus on the creation of an international rule system that prevents crises of this type from
occurring. In the work that has  begun  on  a  new  architecture  for  the  financial  system,  measures  of
three  kinds  have  been  singled  out  as  particularly  important:  more  transparent  accounting  for
financial institutions as well as for governments and central banks; a greater involvement of private
investors in crisis management; and a reinforcement of the financial system.
For work on the third category, there are in principle two different approaches or a
combination  of  these.  One  involves  tightening  up  the  supervision  of  banks  and  the  other  the
introduction of higher capital standards to raise the proportion of equity capital in the bank sector.
My guess is that the future work to create a more functional banking system will be conducted along
both these approaches.
In the prevailing situation it is important that the international banks do not become
unduly cautious. Banks should take risks but their risk-taking should be properly managed. It would
be unfortunate if more countries were to start imposing restrictions on capital exports. That would
exacerbate the present state of affairs. Similarly, it would be directly counterproductive to introduce
some  type  of  turnover  tax,  as  proposed  earlier  by  Professor  James  Tobin.  That  was  tried  out  in
Sweden in the late 1980s and simply resulted in trading being transferred to other countries. Even if
agreements  were  to  be  reached  between  many  countries,  there  would  always  be  countries  that
refrained  from  joining  the  arrangement.  Moreover,  the  poorer  liquidity  that  would  accompany
turnover taxes might actually impair the workings of some financial markets. New regulations may
simply do more harm in the present situation. But the players in international financial markets do
need to review their systems for evaluating risks. Risk assessments based on historically determined
correlations  between  different  assets  may  be  inadequate  when  earlier  patterns  are  broken  and  the
supply of liquidity changes.
In the short run the problems in the global economy must be solved at their origins.
Via  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  in  certain  situations  the  international  community  can
contribute  liquidity  if  the  countries  in  question  are  prepared  to  take  measures.  It  is,  indeed,  an
enigma that the world’s second biggest economy, Japan, has not managed, year after year, to tackle
the problems in its banking system. Economic development in Japan is highly important, not least
for other countries in the region. All  observers  are  agreed  that  the  problems  in  the  banking  sector
must be rectified. Fiscal measures are also called for. Nor would I rule out the introduction, as part
of  a  stability  programme,  of  a  numerical  inflation  target  that  might  help  to  modify  the  negative
expectations. It is my hope that the current signals about future measures will be fulfilled.
The  US  Federal  Reserve  is  also  strongly  focused  on  the  problems  in  the  global
economy. In Europe the action of central banks will be determined by the extent to which Europe is
affected by what is now happening. To date, however, it looks as though Europe is moving in the
right direction.
The  Riksbank,  too,  is  keeping  a  close  watch  on  the  financial  system’s  stability.  In
times of financial unrest, such as recently, the Riksbank steps up its oversight as a matter of routine,
above all as regards financial enterprises. If problems were to arise with bank liquidity, for instance,
they  would  create  difficulties  not  only  for  monetary  policy,  in  that  the  interbank  market  would
function less well, but also for other parts of Sweden’s economy. The Riksbank therefore monitors
the potential effects that financial unrest could have on the financial sector’s solvency and liquidity.
BIS Review   83/1998
- 6 -
The  analysis  of  the  situation  is  supplemented  with  an  ongoing  exchange  of  information  with  the
competent  authorities  in  this  field.  Stockmarket  unrest  of  this  kind  also  leads  to  heightened
surveillance of the flow of payments in the Riksbank’s payment system, RIX.
Judging from the available statistics, the Swedish banks are in a better position than
many of the international banks, with lower direct exposures to the countries involved in the crisis.
Perhaps one could say that Sweden’s bank crisis did at least result in Swedish banks becoming much
more efficient at risk management.
Central banks throughout the world have accordingly become more watchful. No one
can  remain  passive  if  world  economic  growth  continues  to  slacken  as  a  consequence  of  financial
problems.
BIS Review   83/1998
