The euro-area economy and the recent monetary policy decisions
Speech by Ignazio Visco 
Governor of the Bank of Italy
Giornate di economia “Marcello De Cecco” 
Lanciano (Italy), 28 September 2019
First of all, thank you for your kind invitation to take part in this panel on “Europe 
for All” which concludes this second day of the “Giornate di economia” in memory of 
Marcello De Cecco. Marcello followed the ECB Governing Council’s decisions and the 
related  analyses  and  discussions  with  great  interest  and  with  the  acumen  for  which 
he was known. Today I would like to touch upon three points: 1) the monetary policy 
decisions that we have just taken; 2) the economic analyses behind them; and 3) the 
debate concerning, and our assessment of, the effectiveness of the various measures that 
were adopted.
1. At its September meeting the ECB Governing Council introduced a very broad 
package of expansionary measures. It lowered the interest rate on deposits that banks 
make with the Eurosystem (the deposit facility), which has been in negative territory since 
June 2014, by 10 basis points to -0.5 per cent. It decided to restart net asset purchases 
at a monthly pace of €20 billion beginning in November, after they were interrupted in 
December of last year, when they amounted to €2,600 billion since their launch at the 
end of 2014. It relaxed the terms of its new series of targeted longer-term refinancing 
operations (TLTRO III) compared with those of the June decision by lowering their cost (to 
-0.5 or 0.0 per cent depending on the lending performance of the individual banks) and 
by extending their maturity (from two to three years). It introduced a zero interest rate, as 
opposed to a negative interest rate, on part of the banks’ liquidity reserves (“tiering”) to 
attenuate the risk, feared by some observers, that increasingly negative interest rates on 
the deposit facility could have counterproductive effects on banks’ balance sheets and, 
in turn, on lending.
In addition, we have strengthened our forward guidance concerning the future path 
of monetary policy, signalling our expectation to keep the key ECB interest rates at their 
present or lower values until inflation gets to a level consistently close to 2 per cent over 
the medium term.
2. These decisions were not made in haste: they are the natural conclusion to the 
analyses started quite some time ago by the Governing Council and, taken together, are 
an  appropriate  and  proportional  response  to  the  worsening  macroeconomic  outlook 
for the euro area. In previous meetings, there was already broad agreement that the 
outlook for economic activity and prices was disappointing. In July, we reiterated our 
determination  to  intervene  decisively  if  the  medium-term  inflation  outlook  failed  to 
improve. 
Over the last few months, the signs of economic slowdown and weakening inflation 
have instead intensified. Geopolitical tensions, including those relating to trade tariffs, 
and  the  sharp  decline  in  international  trade  recorded  in  the  last  few  quarters  have 
continued to weigh on firms’ confidence, on investment and on industrial production. 
The assessments of those who, one year ago, expected that the weakening in economic 
activity would prove temporary and would eventually subside have been shown to be 
increasingly optimistic.
The  slowdown  was  substantial  for  German  and,  though  less  so,  Italian  industrial 
production,  but  it  would  be  naïve  to  underestimate  its  scope  by  considering  it  an 
asymmetric shock. If the worsening in the manufacturing sector proves to be persistent, 
it will inevitably reverberate across the other sectors of the economy. This is confirmed 
by the most recent data, which point to an area-wide slowdown in activity in the service 
sector, especially in Germany.
In a slowing economy, it is no surprise that inflation has remained very moderate 
and well below the objective of a close to 2 per cent annual increase in consumer prices 
in  the  euro  area;  even  with  all  the  margins  of  uncertainty,  the  forecasts  indicate  that 
inflation is expected to remain weak over the next two years. 
We must counter the significant risk that the economic slowdown and the low 
level  of  inflation  translate  into  a  permanent  reduction  in  inflation  expectations  or  a 
re-emergence of the threat of deflation. The analyses conducted by the Bank of Italy 
clearly  demonstrate  this  risk,  regardless  of  the  measure  of  expected  inflation  used: 
similar  trends  have  been  observed  in  the  expectations  derived  from  the  financial 
markets, which may be affected by excessive reactivity on the part of investors, and in 
those obtained from surveys of professional forecasters, firms and households.
A very recent study by Bank of Italy economists finds that the medium- and long-
term inflation expectations in the ECB’s Survey of Professional Forecasters are now much 
more susceptible to negative surprises to current inflation than they were in the past. 
This is a finding that confirms the one that our researchers had already obtained based 
on inflation expectations derived from inflation swaps. By all measures, in recent months, 
expectations  have  remained  far  from  the  objective  of  price  stability;  they  increased 
slightly in the spring, but then turned down again.
The Governing Council deemed it necessary to respond promptly to the worsening 
economic situation, in order to reiterate its intention to confront weakening aggregate 
demand and its effects on prices, to not fall behind the curve and to counter low inflation 
expectations with determination. The global financial crisis and the sovereign debt crisis 
2
have taught us that in these circumstances excessive prudence is counterproductive: by 
not responding swiftly to the risks of too low inflation for too long, a lengthier and more 
incisive measure, which carries greater risks of unintended side effects, is then needed to 
counter the risk of deflation. 
3. There was extensive discussion in the Governing Council on the decisions and 
measures to introduce; of course, opinions varied and some reservations were expressed 
regarding certain individual instruments and some of their characteristics. The package of 
measures adopted received the approval of a majority of the members of the Governing 
Council. The analyses conducted by the Bank of Italy indicate that there is no reason to 
doubt their overall effectiveness.
In  the  current  circumstances,  uncertainty  about  the  effects  of  the  individual 
instruments  is  naturally  widespread,  but  our  analyses  suggest  that  the  purchase 
programme is, in the present conditions, the most effective instrument (aside from being 
the most “conventional” one, given that open market operations have always featured in 
central bankers’ “toolbox”). Our estimates suggest that the impact of the new purchases 
on economic activity and on inflation, through the contraction of term premia and the 
transmission to the yields of all financial assets, can be much bigger today than that of a 
cut in the official rates. From a conceptual and empirical perspective, there is no reason 
to rule out the possibility of further contractions in term premia, which in any event had 
already occurred with the consolidation of expectations of the new measures.
As I have often observed, the effects of a reduction in official rates to negative values 
– the truly “unconventional” instrument among those introduced so far by the Governing 
Council – are surrounded by greater uncertainty. We estimate that so far, the cuts in the 
reference rates have had significant expansionary effects; down the road, however, their 
effectiveness could prove more doubtful, especially in view of the downwards rigidity of 
interest rates on deposits.
In any event, it should not be forgotten that the persistence of negative nominal 
interest  rates  across  a  broad  spectrum  of  maturities  for  lengthy  periods  cannot  be 
attributed  solely  to  the  decisions  of  central  banks,  which  react  to  macroeconomic 
conditions, but rather reflects the enduring underlying weakness of the economy and a 
possible market response to a resurgence of Fisherian debt deflation. We are still quite 
far from the “normal” economic conditions to which we ought to return (also in view 
of the structural factors that could explain lower growth rates worldwide than in recent 
decades). 
The introduction of a two-tier system for bank reserve remuneration – which was 
also adopted in other jurisdictions – is intended to prevent the reduction in official rates 
to negative values from having, beyond a certain level, the undesirable side effect of 
impairing banks’ ability to grant credit and, therefore, from being transformed into a 
restrictive  factor.  Nevertheless,  encouraging  greater  trading  between  banks  seeking 
higher returns on their liquidity may spark tensions on money market rates, a risk that 
is countered by the calibration chosen but one which must still be carefully monitored.
3
In  its  forward  guidance,  the  Governing  Council  confirmed  its  determination  to 
respond  symmetrically  to  inflation  developments,  in  other  words  to  intervene  when 
inflation falls below the target with the same determination as when it rises above it. The 
aim is to avoid a further downward revision of inflation expectations, or the resurfacing 
of the deflation risks we successfully countered three years ago, whilst simultaneously 
guaranteeing financial conditions capable of supporting the economic cycle.
Monetary policy resolutely pursues the objective of price stability. To achieve the 
maximum  benefits  from  our  action,  the  Governing  Council  unanimously  agrees  that, 
given the slowdown in production and the significant downside risks that weigh on the 
outlook, fiscal policy must make a more incisive contribution to strengthening aggregate 
demand.  During  this  phase,  the  countries  that  have  room  to  intervene  can  play  an 
important stabilizing role; those with a high public debt must prioritize a rebalancing 
of expenditure towards measures that are better able to support growth, such as public 
investment, and to reduce the tax burden on businesses and employment. 
 In conclusion, I think that the package of measures we adopted was necessary and 
appropriate to counter the cyclical risks and the weak inflation outlook, and fully in line 
with  our  previous  decisions.  In  the  past,  I  have  always  avoided  giving  my  opinion  of 
monetary policy decisions immediately after Governing Council meetings. I have decided 
to do so today, a few weeks after the last decisions were taken, mainly because of the 
recent media attention given to the discussion that followed that meeting.
Intense  and  detailed  internal  discussions  on  the  monetary  policy  options  are 
indispensable,  and  always  take  place.  Many  observers  have  wondered  whether  the 
dissemination of comments immediately following a common decision is a practice that is 
counterproductive, useful or even necessary. We can debate the merits of introducing at 
the ECB the procedure followed by other central banks, where, following their monetary 
policy meetings, they publish the positions of the participants (as well as the reasons for 
any disagreements). This solution, which I personally find appropriate, was at one point 
considered but then rejected by the Governing Council.
In  his  remarkable  scientific  output,  as  in  his  numerous  articles  for  the  public  at 
large, Marcello De Cecco always highlighted the close ties between geopolitical issues 
and economic events. It is interesting today to go back and read one of his last articles 
published in Affari e Finanza at the end of 2015. It dealt with the decision adopted by 
the ECB Governing Council in December of that year to expand asset purchases. Just as 
happened a few days ago, a member of the Council had publicly expressed disagreement 
with that decision; I am not sure that today the disagreement regarding the possible 
results of that decision would have been expressed quite so forcefully. 
I do not think that the comments made by some Governors at the end of the Governing 
Council meeting were guided by preconceived ideas or by political considerations, as 
Marcello seemed to think was the case back then, nor were they guided by an abstract 
4
division  into  “hawks”  and  “doves”  as  the  press  sometimes  likes  to  believe.  I  am  sure 
that these comments reflect the genuine conviction of Council members about the most 
useful measures for the euro-area economy. However, in the institutional context of the 
Economic and Monetary Union, it is still important to avoid the risk that, also due to the 
extemporaneous  nature  of  the  remarks  made,  the  positions  of  the  individual  Council 
members be interpreted as an expression of national perspectives or interests, rather 
than as relating to the area as a whole. For this reason, I believe we all need to work to 
make our decision-making process as transparent as possible.
5
