Carlos da Silva Costa: The challenge of inclusive growth
Address by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the Delphi Economic
Forum IV "The challenge of inclusive growth", Delphi, 1 March 2019.
As prepared for delivery.
Good morning ladies and gentlemen,
 I would like to thank the organisers for the kind invitation to join you today and to Mr Mitropoulos
for his introductory remarks. It is an honour to be here.
Ten years on from the start of the great financial crisis, the Portuguese economy is in a growth
phase. Economic activity has accelerated in recent years, economic agents continue to benefit
from favourable financing conditions, public accounts are improving and the banking sector is
getting stronger. 
While growth is a critical ally in this rebalancing process, we cannot ignore the fact that growth
periods  involve  a  greater  propensity  to  take  on  excessive  risk.  This  is  why  it  is  crucial  in  the
current environment to bear in mind the lessons from the crisis and, above all, to prevent the
resurgence of the factors that led up to it.
With this in mind, I thought now was the right time to speak about: (i) the process leading up to
the  crisis  that  hit  the  Portuguese  economy,  (ii)  the  adjustment  process  initiated  through  the
financial assistance programme, and (iii) the current challenges to sustainable growth.
1.  1995–2007  –  Capital  inflows  from  euro  adoption  were  misallocated,  leading  to
macroeconomic imbalances
This is a story that begins in the mid-1990s, a period when we might argue the economy was
broadly in (internal and external) balance.
By then, the prospect of euro adoption translated into cheaper and more accessible financing,
leading to strong credit expansion, and to a contraction in private savings. The stock of credit to
the private sector increased by more than ¾ of GDP, whereas the private savings rate almost
halved during this same period.
The  increase  in  indebtedness  was  mainly  used  to  finance  consumption  and  low-return
investments, mostly in the non-tradable sector. As a result, imports expanded and large current
account deficits emerged, without a corresponding expansion of the economy’s growth potential. 
Between  1995  and  2007,  the  general  government  budget  deficit  averaged  4.3%  of  GDP  and,
according to the most recent data, was never below the 3% upper threshold. The large interest
savings and windfall tax revenue coming from the plummeting interest rates and booming private
spending of the second half of the 1990s were used to finance higher current public spending.
Following the introduction of the euro, interest rates stabilised as they had broadly converged to
the best performers and tax revenue fell as a result of decelerating activity in the early 2000s,
causing a sharp deterioration in the public accounts.
Large  and  persistent  current  account  deficits  translated  into  a  sharp  deterioration  of  the
Portuguese economy’s international investment position, which also went from being close to net
zero in the mid-1990s to almost –90% of GDP in 2007. The behaviour of gross external debt over
the same period – growing from around 60% to 195% of GDP – is even more striking.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
This rising external indebtedness was largely intermediated by the Portuguese banking system.
Banks raised (mostly short-term) funds in the international financial markets and converted these
into (long-term) loans to the private sector. The banking sector’s loan-to-deposit ratio increased
from  nearly  89%  in  1998  to  around  156%  in  2007.  The  public  sector  also  resorted  to  foreign
finance extensively.
2. 2008–2010 – Global crisis tackled through fiscal expansion disregarding accumulated
imbalances
These  imbalances  made  the  Portuguese  economy  extremely  vulnerable  to  the  international
financial crisis and its contagion effects. 
When the crisis hit, a highly expansionary fiscal policy was pursued, disregarding the existing
imbalances and the lack of fiscal space. In 2010, the public budget deficit was above 11% of
GDP and gross public debt was around 96% of GDP – of which, more than half was external
debt.
With potential output growing very slowly, rising external indebtedness fuelled investors’ doubts
about the country’s ability to service its debt. As a result, domestic banks and the government
found it increasingly difficult to obtain external financing: banks had to turn to the Eurosystem,
whereas public debt was increasingly placed in domestic banks. A perfect doom loop embrace.
Investors’ concerns eventually led the country to be shut out of the international financial markets
in the first half of 2011, after the 10-year yields had nearly doubled in the previous year. This led
to  a  request  for  official  financing  under  a  financial  assistance  programme  negotiated  with  the
European Union and the International Monetary Fund.
3.  2011  onwards  –  Macroeconomic  rebalancing  and  financial  deleveraging:  notable
progress, but no room for complacency
Notable progress was achieved with the implementation of the financial assistance programme:
The budget deficit significantly declined and public debt is now on a downward trend;
Private sector deleveraging is ongoing; and
The banking sector is more robust, with a stronger liquidity position, higher solvency ratios
and improved asset quality.
The adjustment programme has widely been regarded as a success. In my view, this success
was due to three factors:
1.  First,  programme  ownership.  Portugal  was  committed  to  the  implementation  of  the
programme,  which  was  accepted  by  the  population.  A  constructive  dialogue  with  social
partners was possible and this was key to ensuring the success of the quarterly reviews.
2.  Secondly,  the  speed  and  intensity  of  the  response  from  the  tradable  sector,  in  particular
exports, was key to the rapid rebalancing of external accounts and mitigation of the impact of
lower domestic demand on the non-tradable sector.
3.  Third, the maintenance of confidence in the banking sector, as evidenced by the behaviour
of deposits. This was crucial to preventing the economy from collapsing with a credit crunch
and avoiding the imposition of capital controls.
It is important to remember that an adjustment programme is always a short-term programme
whose  effects  are  only  sustainable  if  there  are  structural  and  institutional  adjustments  that
prevent repetition of the conditions that led to the need for adjustment.
As such, notwithstanding the undisputable progress, there is no room for complacency. 
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
A lasting trajectory of growth and convergence towards our European partners depends on our
capacity  to  generate  and  maintain  high  levels  of  employment  and  productivity.  This  is  a
necessary condition to (i) bring our workers’ wage levels closer to European standards; and (ii)
finance the welfare state in a context of unfavourable demographic developments.
The challenge is thus one of activating the ‘levers’ of employment and productivity. I will briefly
highlight the four most critical ones.
1.  First, investment. It is vital to increase both the stock of capital and investment in intangibles,
learning from past mistakes, particularly by scrutinising investment projects in a far more
demanding  way.  Of  course,  we  cannot  ignore  the  fact  that  the  recovery  in  investment  is
constrained  by  the  (still)  high  indebtedness  level  and  low  savings  rate  of  the  Portuguese
economy. This means that higher investment will have to be financed through an increase in
equity,  either  from  existing  shareholders,  or  the  entry  of  new  domestic  or  foreign
shareholders. 
2.  Second, skills. In Portugal, employees’ skills have improved considerably in recent years but
important  gaps  remain  in  relation  to  European  averages,  which  we  need  to  continue  to
close. 
3.  Third, management.  We need management frameworks that encourage openness to risk
and  favour  decentralised  decision-making.  It  is  well  documented  that  firms  with  a  more
decentralised  management  and  higher  educated  managers  are  more  open  to  disruptions
and thus more innovative. 
4.  Fourth,  innovation  policies.  Public  policies  that  are  innovation-friendly  are  also  critical  to
stimulate productivity and employment. 
Let me conclude.
The  challenge  we  are  confronted  with  is  that  of  generating  and  maintaining  high  levels  of
employment and productivity to ensure a lasting trajectory of growth and convergence with our
European partners.
We’re talking about the deep institutional and structural foundations of the economy. The task is
hard and will take time to complete before it bears fruit. This means we need to be determined
and tenacious and focus on what really matters from a long-run perspective.
I will of course be happy to take questions, or listen to any comments you may have.
Thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
