Luis de Guindos: Interview in Corriere della Sera
Interview with Mr Luis de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, in Corriere della
Sera, conducted by Mr Federico Fubini on 13 June 2019.
 The 5y5y forward inflation rate is at an all-time low and clearly below where it was when
Mario Draghi first hinted at quantitative easing (QE) in 2014. The ECB has already done
some more easing and President Draghi himself mentioned that there was an interesting
discussion at the latest Governing Council meeting on different tools to do some more
easing – the asset purchase programme (APP) and others. What do you need to see in
order to decide to do more?
What  we  need  to  see  is  a  de-anchoring  of  inflation  expectations.  This  has  not  yet  happened,
despite the fact that there has been a drop in market-based inflation expectations. If you look at
the  survey  of  professional  forecasters,  the  situation  is  a  little  bit  different  –  expectations  have
remained stable. Then we need to see if there is a significant additional drop in economic activity
–  a  crystallisation  of  the  downside  risks  that  we  have  indicated.  We  can  always  try  to  look
forwards to get an idea of what might happen, but ultimately the reality is the reality. And, well,
let’s see what happens. But I think the important part of our stance is that we are totally ready to
react. We will have time enough to know the future when it arrives.
Does  that  imply  that  the  current  stance  is  appropriate,  if  your  staff  forecasts  are
confirmed?
Yes. And if there is a further deterioration, then we will react. But for now, our monetary policy
stance is fully compatible with both inflation and real activity. The important element is that we
are  totally  ready  to  react.  And  I  would  add  another  element,  if  I  may:  risks  are  tilted  to  the
downside.
Do you mean, in terms of real activity?
Both in terms of real activity and in terms of inflation. So if those risks materialise, then we will
react.
Can you think about different monetary policy tools to address different problems? If the
issue is with the exchange rate, official rates are probably the answer; if it’s real activity,
then  QE;  if  it’s  monetary  transmission,  then  it’s  targeted  longer-term  refinancing
operations (TLTRO)…
We do not allocate our instruments to different objectives. Something that I think is relevant, but
is sometimes a bit overlooked, is that monetary policy is not almighty. If there is a problem with
price stability, that’s within our mandate. But this is something everyone has to keep in mind to
avoid creating expectations that will not be met: we do not have the philosopher’s stone.
Are you implying that having something of a policy mix would be good, in total respect of
the ECB’s independence?
Sure.  But  my  point  is  that  wherever  there  is  a  problem,  for  instance  a  problem  with  trade
disputes,  that  is  a  real  economic  problem  that  is  going  to  have  real  consequences.  You  can
certainly smooth the impact with monetary policy, but you will not be able to address and fix this
kind of problems with monetary policy. The real role of monetary policy is price stability. And in
order  to  guarantee  price  stability,  we  have  to  monitor  the  evolution  of  the  real  economy  –
domestic demand, external demand, the exchange rate, and the rest. But you cannot fix all the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
economic problems of the world with monetary policy.
President Draghi hinted recently that if there is a slowdown and those downside risks
materialise, fiscal policy might also play a role.
Yes, sure. It’s the policy mix. Of course there is monetary policy, and we have been the main
game in town since 2012. Monetary policy has been key to understanding the recovery of activity
and employment creation, among other things. But it’s not the only policy in place. Fiscal policy
has  to  play  a  role,  as  do  structural  reforms. And  in  the  case  of  fiscal  policy,  it’s  not  only  the
nominal deficit level, it’s the composition as well: the quality of public finances.
Are  you  saying  that  the  public  investment-to-GDP  share,  which  has  remained  flat,  at
2.6%, during the QE years, could now increase?
It’s not even only public investment. One of the problems in Europe now is low productivity, which
is  caused  by  the  fact  that  we  are  not  investing  enough  in  education,  R&D  and  public
infrastructure. But public infrastructure is not a stabilisation instrument. When you start building a
road, for instance, the project is delivered much later, when the business cycle may have already
turned. But education and R&D are levers that have to be used. And at the same time I think it’s
important  that  we  look  at  the  composition  of  taxation  and  its  impact  on  long-term  growth  and
productivity.
Do you mean it would be better to have lower taxation on labour, compensated by other
areas of the tax base?
It depends; there is no single recipe. But you can’t take the tax structure that we have now as a
fait  accompli.  You  should  use  a  combination  that  takes  into  account  new  elements,  such  as
climate change. All these aspects have to be taken into consideration. That is why fiscal policy is
very relevant; it’s not only the nominal deficit that matters.
So  when  you  and  President  Draghi  go  to  Eurogroup  and  Ecofin  meetings,  you  might
have concepts to share with the ministers in this respect?
Sure,  when  we  go  to  Eurogroup  and  Ecofin  meetings  we  are  fully  coordinated,  also  on  fiscal
policy matters.
Italy and Spain were trading at very similar levels during the crisis. Today the Bonos-
BTP spread on 10-year maturities is over 180 basis points. What do you think explains
such divergence: the fiscal situation, growth rates or redenomination risk?
First, I do not want make comparisons between Spain and Italy. But focusing on Italy, I think the
main problem has been very low growth. You have not recovered the level of GDP that you had in
2008.
What do you think is the reason for that?
I  think  there  are  two  elements.  The  first  is  the  extremely  high  level  of  public  debt,  which  is  a
sword of Damocles hanging over your head. Second, there is a problem with structural reforms.
But there are pros and cons in the Italian economy. The cons are slow growth, public debt, a lack
of structural reforms and so low productivity growth. But Italy also has some advantages that we
have  to  acknowledge.  The  first  is  that  it  has  a  current  account  surplus.  The  net  investment
position is good, and that reduces the vulnerability of the economy. And when one looks at the
country’s  budgetary  track  record,  it  has  not  been  bad  because  it  has  had  a  primary  surplus
almost every year. This is not something that is very easy to achieve, so it’s a very good track
record, especially when compared with other countries. So we come back to the problem of slow
growth,  which  immediately  leads  us  on  to  structural  reforms,  barriers  to  market  entry,  labour
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
market efficiency… These are the kinds of things that are sometimes a little bit overlooked.
There is nothing unfair in comparing Italy to Spain in June and July 2012. The situation
was very similar.
We were very close, we were on the edge…
The  situation  was  the  same  and  the  two  countries  took  two  different  paths.  Spain
decided to take an EU programme for the banks, whereas Italy committed itself to making
it  on  its  own.  Do  you  think  that  decision  explains  the  divergence  between  the  two
countries since then?
Again, I don’t want to make a direct comparison. The situation in Spain in 2012 was different –
the government had an absolute majority in Parliament, we were lucky in that. And the clean-up
of banks in Spain was far-reaching. It was not easy; it was bloody, I can assure you. But we did it
and, after that, we were able to deal with an issue like Banco Popular. That was not easy, either.
Then, Spain gained a lot of competiveness because of labour market reforms. Those are the two
factors. But I don’t want to make a comparison with Italy. I am only focusing on Spain now. By
2013 Spain had started to grow again, and it has outperformed its peers for the last five or six
years.
So do you think frontloading that effort paid off?
Yes, I think so. In Spain there was a government with an absolute majority, but even then we had
a  difficult  time,  politically  speaking,  after  that.  But  in  Spain,  regardless  of  the  political  party  in
power, the pro-European approach is guaranteed, even when you look at the two extremes, Vox
and Podemos.
They don’t question the euro.
Maybe  they  have  different  approaches  regarding  fiscal  policy,  but  they  don’t  say  they  want  to
leave the euro. No, not at all.
In fact, when you look at credit default swap (CDS) markets, the implied probability of
Spain  leaving  the  euro  is  very,  very  low.  In  the  case  of  Italy,  it  is  not  very  low.  Is  it
possible,  then,  that  part  of  the  spread  between  Bonos  and  BTPs  is  due  to  that
redenomination concern for Italy?
Again, it’s not a matter of making comparisons between countries. In the case of Spain, the main
reforms were labour market reforms and cleaning up the banks. Those are the drivers of Spain’s
good performance, in my view. And those are the elements that have to be maintained over the
coming years.
De Nederlandsche Bank President Klaas Knot recently said that divergence among euro
area countries is making it increasingly difficult to set a single monetary policy that fits all
of  them.  He  expressed  concerns  about  the  sustainability  of  ever-diverging  trends.
Would you agree with him?
There are no ever-diverging trends. There is the concrete case of Italy, which is underperforming.
But six or seven years ago the underperformers were Spain, Greece and Ireland, and now they
are overperformers. It’s changed quite a lot. For instance, now in 2019 Germany is going to be
one of the countries with a lower growth rate. And yet it was the euro area’s growth engine two or
three  years  ago.  There  is  not  an  accumulation  of  divergences,  but  situations  change.  Some
countries  that  were  underperforming  are  now  overperforming,  and  vice  versa. And  this  is  not
going to depend on monetary policy. Monetary policy has to take care of price stability and some
real factors that can explain inflation levels across the euro area. But it’s exactly the same in the
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
United States.
Do you think a single currency area can work in the long term without having a single
budget to address shocks, banking problems or competiveness issues?
I think the institutional architecture of the euro area has not been finalised at all. We have made
some progress with the creation of the European Stability Mechanism, and we have launched the
banking  union,  but  this  project  is  not  complete.  We  have  to  finish  the  European  Deposit
Insurance  Scheme  (EDIS)  and  we  need  to  complete  the  capital  markets  union.  I  am  fully  in
favour of having an instrument with a stabilisation capacity. It can take different forms.
Of the kind French president Emmanuel Macron is proposing?
If you look at what was agreed in the European Council, it was a first step in the right direction.
But that should not be the steady state of the instrument. It could grow and have a very clear
purpose – countercyclical stabilisation. Now it’s more like a sort of competiveness instrument.
We have to share more risk, for sure, if we want to improve the performance of the euro area
and reduce the burden of monetary policy because, as I said, monetary policy is not almighty.
And there is one element that is going to be key to achieving these steps: trust.
You have to trust other countries to behave. But when a country misbehaves, as seems
to be the case with Italy now, are you concerned that this may hamper trust?
In the case of Italy, if you look at the fundamentals there are pros and cons. Italy is not a very
vulnerable economy on financial grounds, if you take into account the net investment position and
other factors. If you want an example of a vulnerable economy, look at Spain in 2010. It had an
external deficit of 10% of GDP and a net investment position of 90% of GDP in the red. That’s not
the situation Italy is in now. My point is that trust sometimes depends on the political intentions of
the government.
You mean the Italian government must provide some clearly stated objectives that are
acceptable to the rest of the club.
Yes, on both sides. This is a bilateral game, so it’s from both sides. And I think it’s very difficult to
make  progress  if  we  can’t  build  trust. And  since  we  are  talking  about  trust  and  uncertainty  in
difficult times, I think this idea of discussing mini-BOTs was a mistake. President Draghi said
that if it’s legal tender, it’s illegal and if it’s debt, then it piles up more debt. Also, in my view, the
worst consequence of this kind of decision is that it destroys trust.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
