laundering  and  counter 
John  A  Rolle:  Fostering  training  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of
anti-money 
terrorism
outcomes
Welcome remarks by Mr John A Rolle, Governor of the Central Bank of The Bahamas, at the
launch  of  the  Association  of  Certified  Anti-Money  Laundering  Specialists  (ACAMS)  Bahamas
Chapter, Nassau, 24 May 2019.
financing  of 
 It is a pleasure to be here at the launch of The Bahamas Chapter of the ACAMS network.
We  all  appreciate  the  importance  of  having  skilled  professionals  to  manage  the  money
laundering  and  related  risks  posed  to  the  financial  system.  We  also  appreciate  that  The
Bahamas must demonstrate increasingly greater effectiveness in countering attempts to exploit
its  financial  system  for  illicit  purposes.  To  this  end,  ensuring  a  critical  mass  of  skills  and
certifications across our industry is essential. Perception wise, it signals to the outside world that
our jurisdiction is not a haven for, nor does it intend to be known as a haven for illicit financial
flows.
My expectation is that as the critical mass of skills in the industry increases, The Bahamas will
demonstrate more in practice, and in the experience of customers, that it is applying risk-based
principles, which do not undermine the quality of services on supply.
I  believe  we  still  have  gaps  in  how  risk-based  outcomes  are  being  achieved.  The  pressure
persists for regulatory guidance to be overly prescriptive and check-list based, with the result that
the retail customer experience is still too degraded. We will only arrest this trend through—in
addition  to  all  of  our  other  interventions—strengthening  competence  around  the  application  of
AML/CFT safeguards. I expect that we will make more progress in this regard, thanks to AML
certifications of this nature.
My own position, which is not yet the institutional view of the Central Bank of The Bahamas, but
which I will work to become the institutional view, is that the Money Laundering Reporting Officers
(MLROs) and Compliance Officers ought to be subjected to an ongoing certification process to
satisfy the regulatory requirements for holding their posts.
Some of the recent initiatives of the Bahamian regulators and the Government were to identify
that our compliance culture was not sufficiently risk-based. The result was that financial inclusion
and access was hindered for those on the margins of the system. Thanks to the provisions of
the  Financial  Transactions  Reporting Act  (FTRA),  the  Central  Bank  has  been  able  to  provide
guidance  that  streamlines  “know  your  customer"(KYC)  requirements  for  access  to  retail
domestic banking services. For low-risk customers, a passport is adequate documentation in
itself  for  account  opening.  In  the  absence  of  the  passport,  a  list  of  other  government  issued
identity documents is acceptable. Verification of address by proof of a utility bill has given way to
establishing  proof  that  the  client  can  be  contacted  by  electronic  or  other  means.  The  Central
Bank of The Bahamas has also made it clear that high risk does not mean than an extra burden
should be imposed to identify oneself—rather more due diligence should be exerted around the
other  dimensions  of  how  a  relationship  is  established  and  monitored. Also,  for  low-risk  retail
prospects, the Central Bank has gone on record to state that the potential customer does not
have to offer proof of employment in order to open a bank account.
The Central Bank of The Bahamas has already placed its support behind this ACAMS training
initiative. It will allow The Bahamas to make more necessary, qualitative process in perfecting its
national AML/CFT regime. For all of the Bahamian financial sector regulators, and the rest of the
financial services industry, this provides more concentrated opportunities for in country training.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
I  congratulate  the  founding  Steering  Committee  and  the  Executive  Board  of  the  ACAMS
Bahamas Chapter and assure you of the Central Bank’s sustained support.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
