SAFEGUARDING CENTRAL BANK INDEPENDENCE1 
Javier Guzmán Calafell2 
The broad turn towards central bank independence can be traced back to the 
1970s and 1980s. Many countries were experiencing high inflation. Therefore, 
attention focused on overcoming ‘time inconsistency’, a problem inherent to 
monetary policy. This is the risk that policymakers, for political reasons, will 
aim for short-term gains through expansionary policies, since their costs will 
not be visible immediately. Proposals to enhance central bank independence 
emerged as a viable device to face these challenges. 
The  case  for  independence  has  strong  underpinnings,  but  there  has  been 
growing doubt over its merits. This was initially a consequence of the monetary 
policy response to the 2008 financial crisis, particularly in the largest advanced 
economies. First, amid low inflation, some argued central bank independence 
was  no  longer  justified.  Second,  as  major  central  banks  implemented 
quantitative easing  measures, there were concerns these institutions would 
end up shaping fiscal policy, which is beyond their remit. Third, greater central 
bank  involvement  in  financial  stability  raised  doubts  about  entrusting  them 
with  too  many  endeavors,  and  on  the  consistency  of  these  tasks  with 
independence. Fourth, detractors of independence identified it as an obstacle 
to  coordinate  monetary  and  fiscal  policies,  while  also  worrying  about  the 
distributional implications of quantitative easing. 
                                                           
1 This is a slightly edited version of an article prepared for “Global Public Investor 2019”, published by the 
Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF) on June 12, 2019. 
2 Deputy Governor at the Banco de México. The views and opinions expressed in this document are the sole 
responsibility of the author and do not necessarily represent the institutional position of the Banco de México 
or of its Board of Governors as a whole. 
1 
 These arguments are paradoxical. In the absence of an adequate and timely 
reaction by fiscal and structural policies in the aftermath of the financial crisis, 
monetary policy became the only tool to bolster the world economy. There are 
also  strong  indications  that,  without  independence,  central  banks  would 
probably not have been able to undertake the measures needed to face the 
crisis. 
Furthermore,  the  above-noted  question  marks  about  the  merits  of  central 
bank independence can be easily refuted:  
  Independence  is  still  needed  in  a  low-inflation  environment.  Inflation 
declined partly as the result of the recessionary effect of the financial 
crisis.  There  are  other  factors  helping  to  contain  inflation,  but  their 
future potential impact is uncertain.  
  Trade-offs with financial stability goals have always existed, as well as 
incentives to consider them.  
  Consistency of public finances with central banks’ goals is the key issue 
for proper coordination between fiscal and monetary policies. This does 
not  imply,  though,  that  central  banks  should  be  stripped  of  their 
independence.  
  Over the long run, the distribution of resources owes mostly to fiscal, 
structural and institutional factors. 
Fresh  criticisms  against  central  bank  independence  have  come  to  the  fore 
recently. These are politically motivated and their dissemination across both 
advanced  and  emerging  market  economies  is  alarming.  They  are  again  the 
result  of  developments  following  the  financial  crisis  and  have  found 
widespread  support  among  those  disenchanted  with  globalization.  This  is 
 2 
particularly worrying in emerging markets, since their institutional frameworks 
are more vulnerable to tensions. 
Failing to protect central bank independence would cost the economy dearly, 
especially in emerging markets. Their central banks’ primary mandate—price 
stability—would be jeopardized. It could entail a return to time-inconsistent 
monetary  policies,  with  potentially  severe  macroeconomic  and  financial 
implications. 
Many arguments support central bank independence. To deal effectively with 
price  pressures,  institutions  need  a  long-term  perspective,  insulated  from 
political considerations. They should be able to respond quickly to changing 
conditions, and have the technical competence and credibility to do so. Central 
bank 
independence  has  been  key  to  stabilizing 
long-term 
inflation 
expectations  and  overcoming  episodes  of  distress  in  many  countries. 
Destroying  the  institutional  framework  that  has  made  these  achievements 
possible would be irrational.  
Granted,  central  bank  independence  must  be  accompanied  by  checks  and 
balances. Clear and transparent goals must be in place, and central banks must 
be  held  accountable.  Existing  concerns  cannot  be  ignored.  This  is  a  time  to 
reflect on what actions are needed to improve public understanding of the role 
of  these  institutions  and  the  importance  of  their  independence.  Elected 
officials usually define central banks’ mandates and the mechanisms to ensure 
accountability.  However,  central  banks  should  guarantee  that  policies 
implemented  are  fully  consistent  with  their  mandates,  and  continuously 
evaluate means to enhance their transparency and accountability. 
 3 
