Shaktikanta Das: Speech at Annual Statistics Day Conference
Speech by Mr Shaktikanta Das, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, on the occasion of the
Annual Statistics Day Conference, Mumbai, 28 June 2019.
 I am honoured to inaugurate this year’s Statistics Day Conference, the thirteenth in the series
organised  by  the  Reserve  Bank  to  commemorate  the  contributions  of  Professor  Prasanta
Chandra Mahalanobis. While paying tribute to him, I would like to take this opportunity to review
some of the recent challenges in the field of statistics and in that context, to envision our future
plans.
2.  Professor  Mahalanobis’s  achievements  in  the  field  of  statistics  are  pioneering  and  widely
acclaimed.  In  many  ways,  his  contributions  have  pushed  outwards  the  frontiers  of  human
understanding  and  endeavour.  Very  appropriately,  therefore,  he  is  regarded  as  the  father  of
modern  statistics  in  India.  Professor  Mahalanobis  was  also  a  great  institution  builder.  He  will
always be remembered for founding the Indian Statistical Institute (ISI); for his path-breaking work
on nationwide sample surveys; and for providing the architecture of the second five year plan
(FYP) model of rapid industrialisation, among his many landmark contributions to nation building
in those early days of independence. Professor Mahalanobis was the recipient of the prestigious
award,  the  Padma  Vibhushan.  He  also  received  international  recognition,  including  as  the
Honorary President of International Statistical Institute and Fellow of the Royal Society of London
for Improving Natural Knowledge.
3.  Professor  Mahalonobis  was  also  the  founder  editor  of  the  Indian  Journal  of  Statistics
‘Sankhya’. In the editorial of its first issue, Professor Mahalanobis summarised the ethos of the
discipline, and I quote: “ …the history of the word sankhyā shows the intimate connection which
has  existed  for  more  than  3000  years  in  the  Indian  mind  between  ‘adequate  knowledge’  and
‘number.’ As we interpret it, the fundamental aim of statistics is to give determinate and adequate
knowledge  of  reality  with  the  help  of  numbers  and  numerical  analysis.”  These  words  would
inspire  our  deliberations  on  the  theme  of  the  Conference  today,  which  is  ‘Statistics  for  the
Future’.  The  shared  understanding  that  statistics  is  a  ‘key  technology’  in  dealing  with  real  life
problems is resonating across the world. Aptly, the 50th session of the United Nations Statistical
Commission (UNSC) held in March 2019 had ‘Better Data Better Lives’ as its leit motif.
4. The Reserve Bank’s statistics and information management system has evolved over several
decades  in  response  to  demands  for  national  level  statistics  of  the  highest  quality  and  their
dissemination as a ‘public good’. Over the years, more and more information is being compiled
and released in the public domain, including those data that form inputs in policy-making. With
India’s  growing  integration  with  the  global  economy  and  the  sophistication  and  complexity  of
economic  activity,  information  needs  have  exploded.  This  has  thrown  up  challenges  to
practitioners to exploit innovations in analytical tools so as to keep pace with the fast changing
dynamic. For instance, in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, statistical systems across
the central banks have undergone a paradigm shift. The focus is increasingly on monitoring of
risks  in  the  financial  sector,  global  linkages,  and  sectoral  accounts  in  terms  of  analysis  of
vulnerabilities,  interconnectedness  and  spillovers. At  the  same  time,  information  management
and  dissemination  has  become  technologically  more  advanced,  with  an  emphasis  on  higher
frequency,  granularity,  better  validation  and  integration  into  multi-purpose  and  structured  data
production  processes.  In  the  Reserve  Bank  too,  we  propose  to  leverage  our  new  age  data
warehouse  to  support  a  granular  data  access  lab  to  facilitate  research,  and  a  sandbox
environment for evaluating regulatory tools.
5. Let me turn to some other modern-day challenges confronting professional statisticians, in the
Reserve Bank as also outside the Bank. Big data is the new buzzword in the world of statistics,
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
and it has already started changing the way the world views itself. Corporations are making large
investments to predict the behaviour of consumers by exploiting the advances made in the field
of  data  analytics.  This  information  technology  revolution  has  also  created  problems  of  plenty,
underscoring the need for rigorous processes of classification, aggregation and analysis. Given
the large amount of information, extracting ‘signals’ and ignoring ‘noise’ is vital in the productive
use of new age technologies for analytical needs and policy decision support. Big data analytics
are  being  increasingly  employed  to  assess  food  inflation,  to  develop  risk  profiles  and  stress
scenarios for the corporate sector and to conduct sentiment analysis with artificial intelligence
and machine learning techniques.
6. In recent times, there have been animated discussions on the precision of statistical methods.
The doctrine – even tradition – of statistical significance in scientific research has come under
some cloud for its veracity and the journal American Statistician published a special edition on
this issue earlier this year. Critics allege that these tests are susceptible to manipulation in order
to  make  desired  results  significant,  and  undesired  results  non-significant.  Further,  some
important results may be discarded at the conception level itself just because they are highly
unlikely. Similarly, an opportunity to cherry-pick variables is available. In other words, correlations
can  conveniently  be  extended  to  establish  spurious  causality.  In  this  context,  do’s  and  don’t’s
have  been  cited:  ‘don’t  say  statistically  significant’  is  one  of  them.  Yet,  as  the  global  financial
crisis  demonstrated,  tail  risks  materialised  and  the  world  was  not  the  same  again.  These
lessons inform our modelling of corporate financial risks on an ongoing basis. As the American
Statistician  recommends,  “Accept  uncertainty.  Be  Thoughtful,  Open,  and  Modest”;  in  short,
“ATOM.”
7. In my view, in an era marked by the widespread usage of the internet and social media, there
is no substitute for rigorous statistical testing for establishing empirical regularities. In a deluge of
data and results, what is vital is not just knowing which facts warrant importance, but also which
are to be ignored, or even strongly refuted. Deviations from stylised facts and common sense
should be investigated, but backed by robust analysis, peer reviews of the data used and the
methods employed before deriving conclusions. So, the solution might not be less statistics, but
actually more of them, but used in a manner that they are supposed to be. In most countries
today, the profession of statistics is required to meet increasing analytical demands for decision
support.  The  rising  demands  on  the  profession,  as  pointed  out  recently  by  the  US  Bureau  of
Labour  Statistics,  speak  for  the  public’s  expectations  about  and  reliance  on  the  quality  of
statistics, statistical methods and the statistician. In the Reserve Bank, we will continue to refine
the methodologies used for forecasting and assessment of macroeconomic developments on an
ongoing  basis.  Research  and  analytics  using  cutting  edge  techniques  will  be  pursued  and  in
particular, nowcasting of growth and inflation will be further strengthened.
8. I am glad to note that renowned statisticians like Professor T.C.A. Anant, Professor T.J.Rao
and Professor Srikanth Iyer have accepted our invitation and agreed to share their views on the
theme of the Conference. We look forward to Professor Anant’s thoughts on the challenges for
statisticians in the context of the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as part
of our commitment to the G20 process. The Reserve Bank has been conducting several surveys
to provide forward-looking inputs for policy purposes. In this context, Professor Rao’s guidance
will be extremely valuable; moreover, he has had a long-standing relationship with the Bank in the
Technical Advisory  Committee  on  Surveys.  We  are  also  eager  to  listen  to  Professor  Iyer  on
Random  Connection  Models  that  help  in  reducing  dimensions,  compressing  information  and
designing efficient algorithms in the era of Big Data.
I  am  also  happy  to  learn  that  experts  such  as  Dr.  Subrata  Sarkar,  Dr.  D.V.S.Sastry,  Shri
D.K.Joshi and Dr.Bornali Bhandari will discuss the research work done and the future research
agenda with young researchers in the afternoon session. Their expertise would immensely help
our young professionals in setting their own goals.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
9. I wish all participants the very best for today’s conference. I hope your deliberations will keep
burning the flame of knowledge that illuminates human endeavour.
Thank you!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
