François Villeroy de Galhau: 75 years later – thinking about the next
75
Welcome address by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the G7
high-level conference, Paris, 16 July 2019.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It is a great pleasure to welcome you to this G7 high-level conference dedicated to the next 75
years  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system…  which  is  a  sign  of  confidence.  75  years  ago,  John  M.
Keynes for Britain, Harry Dexter White for the US, Pierre Mendès-France for France inaugurated
what we now see as the “golden age” of multilateralism and cooperation. Quite remarkably, the
Bretton Woods Conference preceded peace: economic cooperation was seen as a prerequisite
for peace. Today, we are unfortunately far away from this spirit: multilateralism is facing a major
crisis.  Yet  the  Bretton  Woods  institutions  (BWI)  are  remarkably  resilient,  thanks  to  the
commitment of their successive leaders – many of them are here – and to the strength of their
history. They are priceless assets – we are probably all convinced of this. But we also know that
the  current  situation  is  not  stable.  So,  where  do  we  go  from  here?  The  worst-case  scenario
would be an implosion of the system, implying a real step backward, with a rise of protectionism
and bilateralism. A more promising scenario – and this is what we should fight for – would be to
come out of this crisis stronger by re-building common solutions. For that, we can boast two
major achievements, while acknowledging that each of them poses two challenges that we will
discuss today:
Thanks  to  international  cooperation  including  the  IMF,  we  successfully  responded  to  the
Great Financial Crisis (GFC). But, today, we are being challenged on monetary policies, and
on the safeguarding of financial stability.
Along with the World Bank and the IMF, we have well supported the prodigious development
of globalisation. But today, we are being challenged by the calling into question of free trade,
and by aspirations for other “global public goods” – starting with climate change and social
inclusion.
A. Two challenges after managing the GFC
I. Monetary policies, ten years after
There  is  no  doubt  that  monetary  policies  played  a  key  role  in  helping  to  overcome  the  GFC,
thanks to two major differences compared to the 1930s, innovations and cooperation. However,
they  are  now  being  challenged,  on  the  “upside”  –  by  ever  increasing  demands  –  and  on  the
“downside” – by criticism of prolonged low interest rates and non-standard policies.
Today, it seems all the more important to me to restate three principles:
Monetary policies cannot do everything, and cannot perform miracles. They cannot repair
the  damage  caused  by  protectionist  uncertainties;  they  can  neither  replace  reforms
conducive to long-term growth, nor more growth-enhancing fiscal policies.
Monetary  policies  in  the  major  advanced  economies  are  guided  by  their  sole  domestic
mandate:  price  stability  and  contracyclical  demand  management.  They  are  not  targeting
exchange rates. This is the fruitful paradox of recent years: the coexistence of “domestically
focused” policies that results in a “globally-cooperative” monetary environment.
 And  for  this  purpose,  monetary  policy  must  be  conducted  in  full  independence.  That  is,
independently of political powers, of course, and we regret to have to say it again. But also
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
independently  of  short-term  pressures  or  any  particular  economic  interests.  So  we  take
account  of  market  indications,  but  we  must  not  be  market  dependent;  this  includes  not
relying  too  exclusively  for  inflation  expectations  on  market-based  measures.  We  are  data
dependent  and  I  say  this  in  particular  for  the  ECB:  in  our  coming  Governing  Council
meetings,  we  will  assess  actual  economic  data  and  we  will  act  accordingly  if  and  when
needed.
II. Financial stability issues and crises
On financial stability issues, the Bretton Woods system has undergone numerous disruptions
and crises since its inception, including its quasi break-up in 1971. And a decade after the GFC,
we still have to define the future of our current international monetary system, or “non-system” as
many describe it.
Today we will discuss financial stability risks caused by the growth of cross-border flows and
financial assets. Over the past few years, international capital flows have been too abundant in
good times, – potentially fueling domestic bubbles and destabilising national financial systems –
but  also  prone  to  “sudden  stops”  in  bad  times.  The  exponential  increase  of  contagion  effects
through cross border flows and stocks, but also asset price volatility, has led to an evolution of
the IMF’s view on capital flows, from its original doctrine of liberalisation, into a more pragmatic
Institutional View.
More  importantly  we  need  to  enhance  the crisis prevention toolkit and avoid excessive risk-
taking.  Our  first  line  of  defense  to  address  financial  stability  issues  should  be sound
macroeconomic, prudential and structural policies. It is the reason why it is so important to
strengthen the bilateral and multilateral surveillance of the IMF.
But, prevention can never cover all risks. The Global Financial Safety Net (GFSN) has been
reinforced over the past few years, thanks to the increased IMF capacity – whose total resources
amount  to  about  1.3  US$  trillion,  and  should  be  at  least  maintained  in  the  future  –,  the
development  of  regional  financing  agreements  (RFAs)  in  Europe  and  Asia,  and  networks  of
central banks swaps. But the GFSN is still imperfect in coverage, and of insufficient size:  total
IMF resources have dropped from about 4 % of global external liabilities in 1980 to less than 1%
in recent years.  Besides, the coordination between the different layers of the GFSN should be
more  effective  in  case  of  a  systemic  crisis.  There  is  also  scope  to  make  better  use  of
precautionary instruments, and to protect sound by-standers without increasing moral hazard, as
suggested  in  particular  in  the  report  of  the  G20  Eminent  Persons  Group  on  Global  Financial
Governance.
B. Two new challenges after extending globalisation
1
I. International trade and FDI
Let me now turn to international trade and Foreign Direct Investment (FDI). Over time, trade and
FDI integration have contributed to productivity growth and prosperity. But important distortions in
the international trade system remain, as shown by large global imbalances. These are linked,
for example, to the export-led growth model in Asia and managed exchange rate regimes in most
emerging  countries,  as  trade  issues  have  become  intertwined  with  other  concerns:  growing
inequality,  environmental  damage,  security,  etc.  The  issues  are  real,  and  partly  explain  the
resurgence of protectionism; but protectionism doesn’t solve any of these problems. Bilateralism
cannot solve bilateral imbalances and even less global imbalances.
A renewed multilateralism needs to be more effective, in at least three ways. First, on trade,
the G20 has agreed – in principle – that action is necessary to improve the functioning of the
WTO. Concrete progress is now needed on a package of reforms, in particular regarding the
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
dispute settlement mechanism. The WTO needs to strengthen and broaden the Most-favoured-
nation  principle,  and  it  should  continue  to  strongly  support  trade  liberalisation,  including  in  the
services  sector  where  it  is  lagging.  Secondly,  we  need  to  better understand  and  address
global imbalances. At 40 percent of world GDP, global external imbalances – measured by the
sum of the absolute values of net creditor and net debtor international investment positions – are
now at a historical peak and four times larger than in the early 1990s. And finally, we must take
account of new public goods in international agreements.
II. Global public goods and development
Global public goods – notably climate and social inclusiveness – are a matter of concern for all:
politically they create rising expectations, and economically they generate externalities. Deficient
provision  of  these  goods  can  have  huge  disruptive  effects  on  economic,  financial,  and  social
systems, with large welfare costs, still more in developing countries. The simple truth is that we
have underestimated these expectations, for too long. The so called “Washington consensus”
was economically sound, but socially too weak. Nothing sustainable is achieved without a strong
economy,  so  let’s  stick  to  that  mandate.  But  globalisation  has  often  been  viewed  as  having
mainly benefited large corporates – and their tax avoidance – as the prosperous, globally mobile
class  –  and  the  rapid  growth  of  their  income.  Inequalities  between  countries  –  in  particular
between  the  North  and  the  South  –  have  fortunately  decreased,  those  within  countries  have
increased. And younger generations are demanding that we ensure the protection of the planet.
A lot has been achieved in recent years. For instance, the BWI have contributed to the significant
reduction of poverty at the global level: since 1990, the number of people living in extreme poverty
worldwide has dropped by 1.1 billion. But much remains to be done. In this respect, the BWI can
play  a  key  role  by  focusing  on  their  core  competencies,  –  namely  surveillance,  technical
assistance and lending –, and by developing new tools for the analysis of macro-critical issues
such as climate change, digitalisation, and inequalities. We should aim at a better coordination
between  the  BWI  and  other  international  organisations  including  UN  bodies  (UN  Development
Programme, UN Climate Change Conference, UN Conference on Trade and Development…).
Given the insufficient achievement of economic development in Africa and part of South Asia,
there is a need to review the functioning of development aid. We could say the same concerning
climate change, stronger coordination between UN bodies and the BWI could be achieved, with
the latter providing the macro-financial framework needed to assess risks and policies, following
the example of the NGFS.
 Let me conclude with the prophetic words of President Roosevelt, during his inaugural address
of the Bretton Woods Conference back in 1944: “Economic diseases are highly communicable
[and] the economic health of every country is a proper matter of concern to all its neighbors, near
and distant; [for that reason] the things that we need to do, must be done – can only be done – in
concert”. Most of us could not agree more: the world today needs a new harmony instead of the
dissonance of this unruly cacophony. This should be a guiding principle for the next 75 years.
With that in mind, I very much look forward to the outcome of your discussions today. Thank you
for your attention.
1
European Central Bank (2018), A quantitative analysis of the size of IMF resources, IRC task force on IMF
issues.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
