OFFICIAL LAUNCH OF THE FINANCIAL STABILITY COUNCIL AND 
SIGNING OF THE MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING 
  Opening Remarks 
 by 
 Moses D Pelaelo 
Governor, Bank of Botswana 
 February 26, 2019 
   Good morning and welcome to the Signing Ceremony for 
launch of the Financial Stability Council.   
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  I  look  back,  the  launch  is  the 
culmination of several significant steps and consultations. 
Among these are: first, the initial assessment by the Bank 
of  the  need  and  prospective  role  of  a  Financial  Stability 
Council,  articulated 
in 
the  2018  Monetary  Policy 
Statement;  second,  consultations  by  officials  within  the 
auspices of the Bank of Botswana/Ministry of Finance and 
Economic  Development  Working  Group,  and  also 
involving  the  Non-Bank  Financial  Institutions  Regulatory 
Authority  and  the  Financial  Intelligence  Agency;  third, 
approval 
for  establishment  of 
the  Council  by 
the 
Honourable  Minister  of 
Finance 
and  Economic 
Development  obtained  in  April  2018;  and  fourth  an 
inaugural  meeting 
to  consider  an  outline  of 
the 
Macroprudential Policy Framework and review of the draft 
Memorandum of Understanding in September 2018. 
 The Financial Stability Council comprises the leadership of 
the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development 
(MFED),  the  Bank  of  Botswana  (the  Bank),  Non-Bank 
Financial  Institutions  Regulatory  Authority  (NBFIRA),  and 
Financial  Intelligence  Agency  (FIA),  institutions  that  are 
involved 
in  developing 
legislation  and 
regulations, 
policymaking and supervision with respect to the whole or 
facets  of  the  financial  sector.    It  is  acknowledged  that  the 
respective  institutions  have  unique  statutory  mandates, 
objectives, oversight frameworks and operational spheres, 
albeit mostly related. In this regard, the Financial Stability 
Council is not established to usurp or dilute the role of the 
respective 
institutions,  which 
is  neither  feasible  nor 
desirable.  Rather  it  is  to  share  information  and  where, 
desirable, facilitate collective and coordinated approach to 
financial  sector  monitoring 
frameworks  and  crisis 
resolution. 
 2 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  to  reiterate,  as  indicated  in  the 
2018 Monetary Policy Statement, coordinated oversight is 
necessary  because  while  the  relevant  institutions  are 
distinctly and individually supervised at a micro level, the 
financial 
system 
encompasses 
interconnected 
relationships and activities and is subject to common and 
transferable  risks.  Therefore,  the  Council  is  designed  to 
foster collaboration and coordination in  the four areas  of: 
sharing  of  data  and 
information 
for  purposes  of 
monitoring  and  risk  assessment;  overseeing  and  guiding 
macro-prudential  policy  framework  and  implementation; 
regular  briefings,  consultations  and  policy  review  with 
respect  to  relevant  developments;  and  structured  and 
coordinated  response  to  any  financial  system  imbalances 
and resolution as may be necessary.  
 Today’s signing of the Memorandum of Understanding by 
the  respective 
institutions, 
therefore,  represents  an 
undertaking  to  collectively  safeguard  the  continuing 
soundness and integrity of the financial system. Moreover, 
going  forward,  it  also  facilitates  the  development  of 
mechanisms  and  channels  for  sharing  of  data  and 
consultation.  The  thought  process  for  establishment  of  a 
Financial Stability Council also involves consideration of a 
3 
robust  legislative  backing  for  the  work  of  the  Council  and 
this  will  accordingly  be  facilitated  in  the  revised  Bank  of 
Botswana Act; consultations between the Bank and MFED 
on the review are at an advanced stage. 
Colleagues,  before  concluding  let  me  highlight  the  more 
urgent  work  programme  for  the  Council  in  the  short  to 
medium term. First, is publication of the Financial Stability 
Report, as an anchor publication, providing accountability 
in  the  areas  of  assessment  of  financial  stability  risks  and 
mitigation  measures.  Second 
is  agreement  on  a 
Macroprudential  Policy  Framework  that  is  relevant  for 
Botswana, 
in  terms  of  risk  mitigation,  as  well  as 
recognising 
the  gaps 
in 
financial 
inclusion  and 
development.  
 Third,  there  is  a  specific  need  to  address  the  challenges 
arising 
from 
implementation  of 
the  Anti-Money 
Laundering  and  Combatting  the  Financing  of  Terrorism 
protocols and requirements. Fourth and related, thereto, is 
the  requirement  to  decisively  address  the 
incipient 
misconduct  and  governance  challenges  in  the  financial 
sector,  deriving  from  greed  and/or  misunderstanding  or 
incompetence with respect to fiduciary responsibilities, as 
well  as  opportunistic  crime  and  fraud.    Fifth,  consultation 
4 
during  2019  will  also  involve  consideration  of  a  deposit 
protection scheme for the country, to guarantee access to 
deposits  up  to  a  specified  threshold,  in  the  event  of  bank 
failure.  Lastly,  cooperation  and  collaboration  among  the 
Council  members  would  be  critical  in  the  timely  update 
and  renewal  of  legislation  and  policies  to  retain  and 
improve  effectiveness  of  supervision,  monitoring  and 
guidance for the financial sector.  
 I thank you for your attention and I now call upon Council 
members  to  comment,  before  we  proceed  to  sign  the 
MoU. 
 5 
