Gent Sejko: Albania's economic and financial developments in 2018
Address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, presenting the Annual Report 2017
to the Assembly of the Republic of Albania, Tirana, 8 May 2019.
Honourable Speaker,
Honourable Members of Parliament,
 The Bank of Albania pays particular attention to fostering institutional relations with the Assembly
of the Republic of Albania, based on the spirit of accountability and transparency, and nourished
by a constant and reciprocal dialogue.
In this light, I thank you for the invitation and the opportunity to present in a plenary session to the
Assembly, the main conclusions of the Annual Report of the Bank of Albania.
Let me start by emphasising that the Bank of Albania has made progress with regard to all the
three underlying aspects of our work:
Institutional objectives and duties set out in the legal and sublegal framework;
Internal objectives set out in our Medium-term Development Strategy; and,
Recommendations left by the Assembly of the Republic of Albania in the Resolution “On the
assessment of the activity of the Bank of Albania for 2017”.
The Bank of Albania estimates that, in 2018, the Albanian economy and financial system made
progress.  Economic  activity  and  employment  continued  to  expand,  wages  and  domestic
inflationary  pressures  trended  upward,  main  banking  sector’s  soundness  indicators  improved,
and a series of indicators of domestic and external economic balances strengthened.
Let me present a few indicators to illustrate this.
According  to  INSTAT  data,  the  pace  of  economic  growth  accelerated  to  4.1%  in  2018.
Economic growth was broad based; it reflected positive contributions from the expansion of
households’ consumption, enterprises’ investments, and exports.
According  to  INSTAT  data,  employment  in  the  economy  rose  by  1.6%,  whereas  the
unemployment rate at the end of the year fell to 12.3% from 13.4% a year earlier.
The external position of the economy improved: the current account deficit declined at 6.7%
of the GDP in 2018, and the indicators of external debt stability strengthened.
Budget deficit and public debt continued on a downward trend, reflecting the consolidation
path of the fiscal policy, the economic growth and the exchange rate appreciation.
The  main  indicators  of  banking  sector  soundness  –  in  particular  liquidity,  profitability  and
capitalisation – remained at satisfactory levels.
This dynamics of developments reflects, to a significant extent, the effect of policies, measures
and  instruments  the  Bank  of Albania  has  adopted  on  continuous  basis.  In  the  following,  I  will
focus in greater detail on the measures taken by the Bank of Albania on monetary policy, banking
regulation and supervision and financial market development.
1. Monetary policy in 2018
In line with our primary objective – achieving and maintaining price stability – our monetary policy
retained, even strengthened, the accommodative stance in 2018. This stance is consistent with
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  cyclical  position  of  the Albanian  economy,  and  aligned  with  the  consolidation  trend  of  the
fiscal policy.
Albeit  the  positive  performance  of  the  economy,  for  2018,  annual  inflation  averaged  2.0%,
remaining unchanged from the previous year and undershooting our 3% target. Inflation reflected
the effects from two developments in opposite directions: the build-up in domestic inflationary
pressures, generated by the rise in employment, wages and production costs, was offset by the
rapid appreciation of the domestic currency.
Beyond fundamental factors, the appreciation reflected the effect from specific shocks, which led
to a temporary imbalance of demand and supply for foreign currency and contributed to a change
in the behaviour of certain operators in the economy. They initiated a rapid appreciation spiral in
the  second  quarter  and  were  accompanied  by  a  disorder  in  the  functioning  of  the  domestic
foreign exchange market.
Against this backdrop, the Supervisory Council judged that the rapid appreciation of the exchange
rate  jeopardised  the  achievement  of  our  inflation  target  in  the  medium-term  horizon.
Consequently, in full compliance with the price stability objective and without affecting the free
exchange rate regime, in June, the Supervisory Council decided to:
Lower the policy rate from 1.25% to 1.00%, aiming to further ease monetary conditions in the
economy.
Initiate  a  foreign  currency  purchasing  programme,  aimed  at  curbing  the  exchange  rate
appreciation and creating the premises for a normal trading activity in the domestic foreign
exchange  market.  This  programme,  concentrated  mainly  in  the  summer  period,  was  a
temporary  and  extraordinary  monetary  policy  instrument.  Once  the  objectives  were
achieved,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  not  intervened  in  the  market  and  the  exchange  rate
stability has reflected the market equilibriums.
The accommodative monetary policy implemented by the Bank of Albania has proven successful
for  boosting  economic  growth,  a  better  utilisation  of  production  capacities  and  building  up
inflationary pressures in the economy. The monetary stimulus transmission has been evident in
several aspects:
First, the monetary stimulus has contributed to the expansion of private consumption and
investments,  by  lowering  financing  costs  and  boosting  lending.  Lek  credit  to  the  private
sector increased at 6.7%, on average, in 2018.
Second, the accommodative monetary policy has reduced the existing debt service costs,
by  alleviating  the  balance  sheets  of  borrowing  households  and  enterprises,  and  further
bolstering the expansion of aggregate demand.
Third,  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  has  supported Albania’s  financial  stability,  by
improving the solvency of the private sector, and encouraging loan restructuring. 
Thus, monetary policy-related measures undertaken by the Bank of Albania have contributed to
boosting economic growth. Our assessments suggest that the accommodative monetary policy
stance has contributed positively, on average by 0.5 percentage point, to economic growth in the
last two years. Also, the accommodative monetary policy stance has contributed to the stability
of  the  domestic  currency.  Both  transmission  channels  have  contributed  and  will  continue  to
contribute to price stability in Albania.
2. Banking supervision and financial stability
The activity of the banking sector in 2018 was stable showing good performance and resilience
indicators. The financial result was positive: the Return on Assets (RoA) stood at 1.3% and the
Return on Equity (RoE) reached 13%. In addition, capitalisation and liquidity levels were above
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the respective regulatory requirements.
The Bank of Albania judges that the capability of the banking sector to withstand risks is high.
Credit risk continues to represent the main risk to the activity of the banking sector, but the credit
quality has improved from the previous year. At the end of 2018, the non-performing loans ratio
stood  at  11.1%  from  13.2%  a  year  earlier,  whereas  the  outstanding  non-performing  loans
decreased by 20%.
In 2018, the ownership structure of the banking system underwent some changes, bringing the
number  of  banks  down  to  14,  as  at  the  end  of  the  year.  Taking  into  account  the  changes  in
ownership taking place in 2019, the actual number of banks is 12. The Bank of Albania deems
that the consolidation of the banking system is a welcomed development, which will revitalize the
banking activity, will enhance the efficiency of the banking industry and will bolster development
and innovative policies with regard to credit and payments.
The main aspects of our work for safeguarding financial stability consisted in strengthening the
stability  of  the  banking  system,  enhancing  its  resilience  to  shocks,  and  adopting  international
standards in the fields of supervision and regulation. Thus, in concrete terms:
The Bank of Albania has worked toward fulfilling all its obligations in the framework of the
national  plan  for  the  reduction  of  non-performing  loans.  In  view  of  this  goal,  the  Bank  of
Albania has: (i) prepared a draft-regulation on the out-of-court treatment of non-performing
borrowers;  (ii)  extended  the  requirements  for  using  official  financial  statements  in  the
assessment  of  credit  risk  for  all  categories  of  borrowers;  (iii)  initiated  measures  for
improving  the  Credit  Registry;  and,  (iv)  started  work  for  harmonising  credit  reporting  in
accordance with international standards.
The Bank of Albania has initiated concrete measures to promote the use of the domestic
currency  in  our  financial  system  and  has  continued  working  on  the  development  of  the
macro-prudential policy and on establishing early warning systems for systemic risks.
Increased attention has been paid to the oversight of the implementation of measures for the
prevention  of  money  laundering,  in  cooperation  with  the  Directorate  General  on  the
Prevention of Money Laundering. The final evaluation report of the Committee of Experts on
the  Evaluation  of  Anti-Money  Laundering  Measures  and  the  Financing  of  Terrorism
(MONEYVAL), rated the effectiveness of financial institutions as “substantial”. In particular,
banks show they know well their legal obligations and risks, and have generally taken due
measures commensurate to the risk level. The evaluation process was accompanied by a
plan of measures for addressing the main problems; their implementation will continue in
2019.
In the capacity of the Resolution Authority, in 2018, the regulatory and procedural framework
for  resolution  planning  was  prepared  and  the  compilation  of  individual  resolution  plans
started.  Also,  in  2018,  the  Resolution  Fund  was  established  and  the  procedure  for  its
management was put in place.
Lastly, I would like to reiterate that safeguarding financial stability is a responsibility not only of the
Bank of Albania, but also of other regulatory agencies and the Government of Albania. Policies
and measures for safeguarding financial stability and strengthening banking system’s resilience
require that all parties continue the coordinated, inter-institutional and multi-dimensional efforts.
3. Improvement of financial markets and payment systems
In  view  of  its  duties  and  commitments,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  continued  to  promote  the
development of the financial market and to improve further the payment system.
Thus, in cooperation with the Ministry of Finance and Economy, the project for promoting the
development  of  the  primary  and  secondary  markets  for  government  securities  continued
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
successfully.  This  project  paves  the  way  for  deepening  the  financial  market,  expanding  and
diversifying the base of investors in government debt and reducing its cost in the long term.
Moreover, the Bank of Albania has dedicated particular attention to guaranteeing the security and
efficiency of the core infrastructure of payments in lek, through its role as operator, overseer and
catalyst of the payment systems. The finalisation of the draft-law “On Payment Services”, which
transposes  the  relevant  EU  Directive  (PSD  2),  is  one  of  the  main  achievements  on  the
improvement  of  the  legal  framework.  Its  approval  and  implementation  is  expected  to  foster
competition and promote innovation in retail payments, cut costs, enhance transparency of these
services, and provide a framework on consumer’s protection.
In parallel, the National Payment System Committee, chaired by the Bank of Albania and bringing
together public and private stakeholders in the field of payments, approved the Albanian National
Retail  Payments  Strategy  (2018–2023).  The  scope  of  the  strategy  is  to  improve  the  retail
payments market, promote the use of electronic payment instruments and broaden the financial
inclusion of the population.
4. Governance and other activities
The accomplishment of our primary development objectives evidences the professional work of
Bank of Albania staff and of the constant prudence of the Supervisory Council, as the steering
and monitoring body over the activity of the Bank of Albania.
In addition to the monetary policy and financial stability-related issues, other important decisions
of the Supervisory Council in 2018, were: (i) approval of the policy for the oversight of payment
and settlement systems;(ii) approval of the Accounting Policy in accordance with the International
Financial Reporting Standards; and, (iii) approval of the Medium-term Development Strategy of
the Bank of Albania for 2019–2021. The strategy upheld the existing mission, vision, and values
and updated the list of duties for fulfilling them. In parallel, the Supervisory Council has monitored
continuously the governance of the institution and has worked towards its improvement.
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  the  Bank  of Albania  has  realised  its  duties  and
accomplished its commitments in other fields of its activity, which have a direct or indirect impact
on economic and financial developments in Albania. More specifically, progress has been made
on:
Support  for  European  integration  processes,  through  both  specific  contributions  to  the
respective chapters and constant dialogue with European partners;
Administration of the circulation of the national currency and the adaptation of its structure to
the needs of the economy;
Management of the foreign exchange reserve, in line with reserve-holding objectives and in
the presence of a challenging external financial environment;
Improvement of scientific research, to support informed and efficient decision-making;
The quantitative and qualitative improvement of financial statistics, in accordance with the
best relevant standards;
Continuation of financial education of the public, by increasing the role of the Museum of the
Bank of Albania and continuing with targeted educational programmes;
Enhancing  institutional  transparency,  by  expanding  the  span  of  the  published  information
with a view to foster trust and confidence in the institution and its reputation.
Honourable Speaker,
  4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Honourable Members of Parliament,
The  outlook  on Albania’s  development  remain  positive;  yet,  challenges  lie  ahead. Addressing
them requires the attention and the commitment of all policy makers and regulatory agencies in
the country.
In  particular,  in  Bank  of  Albania’s  opinion,  guaranteeing  sustainable  and  long-term  growth
requires maintaining the focus on monetary and fiscal policies that are oriented toward stability,
by  using  in  a  wiser  and  more  efficient  way  the  available  space  for  stimulating  the  economy,
without  affecting  the  stability  of  public  finances  and  of  the  financial  sector.  In  parallel,
development  policies  should  aim  to  reduce  risks  and  mitigate  structural  vulnerabilities  in  the
economy.
In the long term, the further acceleration of the economic growth pace and a fairer allocation of
resulting benefits from it to various economic and social categories will require continuing and
revving up the structural reform agenda.
I would like to assure you that the Bank of Albania will continue to be committed to complying with
our legal objectives, and to realise our institutional duties and commitments.
Thank you for your attention!
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
