Christopher  Kent:  Financial  conditions  and  the Australian  dollar  -
recent developments
Address by Mr Christopher Kent, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of
Australia, to the XE Breakfast Briefing, Melbourne, 15 February 2019.
I thank David Jacobs for excellent assistance in preparing these remarks.
Introduction
 Thanks to XE for the opportunity to be here in Melbourne to speak to you. A lot has happened in
financial  markets  globally  and  in Australia  since  late  last  year.  I  thought  it  would  be  helpful  to
summarise the key developments, including revisions to the global economic outlook, concerns
about downside risks and changes to market expectations for monetary policy paths. I'd also like
to discuss their implications for the Australian economy and the Australian dollar.
But first, a brief caveat is in order on the topic of exchange rates. It's often said by Reserve Bank
staff that we are not in the business of forecasting exchange rates. But, just as importantly, we
also need to be humble when explaining the past behaviour of exchange rates. In that regard, it is
worth  recognising  that  models  of  exchange  rates  provide  only  rough  estimates  of  the  more
enduring relationships.
The International Backdrop
After a lengthy period of relative stability, global financial markets have been more volatile over
the past few months. The incoming data from around the end of 2018 was associated with a
tightening in financial conditions: global equity prices declined; corporate credit spreads widened;
issuance of corporate debt eased; and volatility picked up across most markets (Graph 1). And in
the space of only a couple of months, the market's expectations for monetary policies changed
markedly and there was a notable downward shift in yield curves.
Graph 1
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
What prompted these changes? In part, market participants reassessed their expectations for
global growth. This reflected a run of data that was a bit weaker than had earlier been expected,
particularly for the industrial sectors and trade. However, this was not true of all of the incoming
data. Indeed, labour markets have remained in good health; the US labour market data of late
have  been  especially  strong.  Moreover,  labour  market  tightness  is  evident  more  broadly  and
wages growth is picking up in a range of advanced economies.
Forecasts for growth of global economic activity have been revised lower, but only marginally. In
late January, the IMF's forecasts for global growth were trimmed for 2019 and 2020, by 0.2 and
0.1  percentage  points,  respectively  (Graph  2).  Growth  of Australia's  major  trading  partners  is
expected to decline slightly in 2019 to around its historical average. It is also worth noting that at
least  some  of  this  moderation  in  growth  has  been  by  design.  Over  the  past  year  or  more,
policymakers  in  both  China  and  the  United  States  have  sought  to  ensure  that  growth  in  their
economies was placed on a more sustainable footing.
Graph 2
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
But that's a story about what is most likely to happen (the central tendency of the distribution of
possible outcomes). Much of the market reaction of late has been prompted by greater concern
about the potential for adverse, but less likely outcomes – the so called ‘downside risks’.
From Australia's standpoint, at the top of the list of risks is the outlook for our largest trading
partner, China. One concern relates to the extent and nature of leverage. The Chinese authorities
had earlier moved to contain the growth in leverage, particularly where it was funded using so
called ‘shadow financing’ channels. While proceeding broadly as intended, this earlier tightening
in  financial  conditions  has  contributed  to  the  slowing  in  Chinese  economic  activity.  And  yet
leverage  remains  high  and  there  is  still  much  to  do  to  ensure  the  soundness  of  the  Chinese
1
financial  system.  So  the  tension  between  sustaining  growth  and  financial  stability  remains.
While the authorities may want to help support growth of economic activity, they recognise that a
broad-based  easing  of  policies  runs  the  risk  of  undoing  what  has  been  achieved  with  the
deleveraging to date. Another concern for China is the adverse effects of trade tensions with the
United States. The dispute is weighing on Chinese economic activity and trade. Softer demand
from China has weighed on growth elsewhere in Asia, and the region would be relatively exposed
to a more marked slowing in China if that was to occur.
Consistent with the focus of global financial markets on downside risks, price adjustments have
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
been  in  the  form  of  a  rise  in  risk  premia  in  equity  and  corporate  bond  markets.  In  US  equity
markets, for instance, price declines in late 2018 were accompanied by only small downgrades
to  analysts'  expectations  for  earnings  growth  over  the  medium  term.  This  implies  that  the
willingness  of  investors  to  pay  for  earnings  declined  materially  (Graph  3).  In  other  words,  the
equity risk premium went up.  Similarly, in corporate bond markets, future default rates expected
by  analysts  hardly  moved  over  this  period.  And  yet  spreads  widened  sharply,  reflecting  an
increase in credit risk premia. While early 2019 has seen a partial retracement of these moves,
both equity and credit risk premia remain higher than a year ago.
2
Graph 3
This  rise  in  equity  and  credit  risk  premia  follows  an  extended  period  where  they  had  been
unusually low, and even uncomfortably low, particularly in the United States. Some adjustment to
these was inevitable, and welcome from the perspective of financial stability. While these premia
remain a bit higher than a year ago, they are still not that high by historical standards.
At  the  same  time  that  markets  became  more  concerned  about  downside  risks  to  economic
activity,  they  became  less  concerned  about  upside  risks  to  inflation.  Part  of  that  reflected  the
revisions to the outlook for growth. But lower oil prices have had a significant effect on the near-
term outlook for inflation, and breakeven inflation expectations have shifted down accordingly.
The  combination  of  all  of  these  changes  –  reduced  expectations  for  growth  and  inflation,
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
increased  concerns  about  downside  risks,  and  higher  corporate  risk  premiums  –  has  seen
market participants revise down their expectations for the paths of monetary policy rates. Longer-
term sovereign yields have also declined noticeably (Graph 4).
Graph 4
The change in expectations for monetary policy has been most pronounced in the United States
(Graph 5). As recently as December, market pricing implied an expectation that the US Federal
Reserve  would  increase  interest  rates  in  2019.  Indeed,  this  was  supported  by  the  so-called
‘dots’, which show the median of individual Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) members'
projections of the most likely outcome. Currently, market pricing implies no increases in 2019
and even some chance of a reduction in the fed funds rate in 2020. Once again, the repricing
appears to reflect concern over what could happen, as much as what is considered most likely
to happen. One way to illustrate this is by examining the survey-based expectations of primary
dealers  in  the  US  money  market.  These  data  show  that  primary  dealers  are  increasingly
concerned about the ‘tail risk’ that the fed funds rate will return to zero in the next few years.
3
Nevertheless, their most likely forecast remains for further rate increases.
Graph 5
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Central bank policy expectations have shifted elsewhere as well, although generally by less than
in the United States (Graph 6). That difference is likely to have contributed to a depreciation of the
US dollar after its trend appreciation last year.
Graph 6
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
I  will  return  to  foreign  exchange  markets  in  just  a  moment,  but  let  me  briefly  take  stock.  The
upshot of these recent developments is that global financial conditions have tightened a little. The
cost for corporations to raise capital through equity and debt markets has increased a bit in the
advanced  economies.  But  overall  conditions  are  not  tight,  with  monetary  policy  rates  still  low
(relative to most estimates of neutral) and government bond yields also low. Indeed, bond yields
are generally lower than they have been for a couple of years.
Implications for Australia
Over  recent  months,  developments  in Australian  financial  markets  have  been  similar  in  many
respects to those offshore. Equity prices fell, credit spreads rose, and so did various measures
of financial market volatility; although, some of the more pronounced moves seen late last year
have been retraced in early 2019. These changes have again largely been a story of risk premia
increasing from low levels and were associated with rising concerns about downside risks, both
internationally and domestically.
The  outlook  for  the  domestic  economy  has  also  shifted,  and  the  Bank  has  revised  down  its
forecasts  for  both  growth  and  inflation.  Our  forecasts  continue  to  project  a  further  gradual
reduction  in  spare  capacity  in  the  economy,  with  the  unemployment  rate  trending  lower.  That
should  see  wages  growth  pick  up,  although  only  gradually,  and  inflation  is  also  expected  to
increase gradually. The Bank's Statement on Monetary Policy and the Governor's recent speech
4 
7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
provided comprehensive updates to this picture.
In response to this shift in the international and domestic outlooks, market expectations for the
next move in the cash rate have switched signs: the markets have assessed that the next move
is more likely to be down than up. That has been reflected in lower bond yields, alongside the
effect  of  lower  oil  prices  on  market-implied  inflation  expectations.  Two-year  bond  yields  in
Australia have tended to decline by a bit more than in many other major markets (Graph 7). Part
of that change is somewhat mechanical given that in both Japan and the euro area policy rates
are  close  to  their  effective  lower  bounds.  This  latest  change  in Australia's  interest  differential
extends the trend decline that has been underway for five or more years.
Graph 7
Over the past couple of months, the Australian dollar has depreciated by about 4 per cent on the
basis of the trade-weighted index (TWI). This largely reflects the effect of the appreciation of the
yen  and  the  renminbi,  which  collectively  comprise  nearly  40  per  cent  of  the  TWI.  The  yen
appreciation may have been driven by the tendency of Japanese investors to bring some of their
funds back home during ‘risk-off’ periods in global financial markets.
Graph 8
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  decline  in Australian  bond  yields  relative  to  other  advanced  economies  is  likely  to  have
contributed  somewhat  to  the  modest  depreciation  of  the  Australian  dollar  of  late  (Graph  8).
However,  over  much  of  the  past  18  months  or  so,  higher  commodity  prices  appear  to  have
worked  to  limit  the  extent  of  Australian  dollar  depreciation.   Indeed,  commodity  prices  have
increased noticeably of late. This largely reflects disruptions to supply, particularly of iron ore. In
short, there are a number of forces affecting the Australian dollar, but they have been pulling in
different directions. Accordingly, the Australian dollar remains within its relatively narrow range of
the past few years.
5
6
Having noted the low volatility of the exchange rate over recent years, I need to briefly touch on
the recent flash event in currency markets that no doubt caught the attention of many of you in
this room.  On 3 January, in the span of a few minutes, a sharp appreciation in the yen against
the US dollar quickly cascaded into the Australian dollar, which depreciated by up to 7 per cent
against  the  yen  (Graph  9).  At  the  same  time,  bid-ask  spreads  had  widened  significantly.
However,  trading  conditions  quickly  returned  to  normal  and  currencies  largely  retracted  their
earlier moves.
Graph 9
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is difficult to draw firm conclusions on the causes of such events, but as we outlined in the
recent Statement on Monetary Policy, three factors are likely to have contributed. First, there was
the  liquidation  of  ‘carry-trade’  positions,  notably  from  highly  leveraged  Japanese  retail  investor
accounts. These appear to have been automatically triggered following the initial appreciation of
the yen. Second, these liquidations occurred at a time when market liquidity was seasonally low,
such that the foreign exchange market was more exposed to imbalances between buy and sell
orders. Recent flash events have tended to occur around this same time of day, in between the
close of US markets and the start of Asian trading. It was also early in the new year and a public
holiday  in  Japan.  Third,  as  in  previous  flash  events,  algorithmic  trading  strategies  may  have
amplified the move, for example, by adding to demand to buy the yen as it appreciated.
It is also difficult to be definitive about what restored orderly market functioning. Market contacts
suggest  that  discretionary  buying  of Australian  dollars  by  traditional  market-making  banks  and
institutional  accounts  helped  to  stabilise  conditions  and  re-establish  the  process  of  price
discovery.
Ultimately,  this  event  did  not  lead  to  wider  disruption.  But  the  growing  list  of  such  disorderly
moves in key financial markets in recent years clearly bears close watching.
Conclusion
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
There  have  been  modest  revisions  to  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  inflation  globally.
Additionally,  downside  risks  are  attracting  more  attention,  from  both  market  participants  and
central banks. These changes have been accompanied by a rise in the markets' assessment of
risks relating to the corporate sector – albeit from relatively low levels. There has also been a
reassessment of the outlook for monetary policies, and interest rates have shifted down across
the yield curve. The decline in sovereign yields has worked to partially offset the effect of higher
risk premiums and so finance is still readily available to borrowers at relatively low rates. Broadly
similar changes in economic and financial conditions have also occurred domestically. And while
commodity  prices  have  risen  of  late,  Australia's  terms  of  trade  are  still  forecast  to  decline
gradually over the next couple of years. Pulling all of this together, it is not so surprising then that
the Australian dollar has depreciated a little over recent months. While the exchange rate is still
within the relatively narrow range of the past few years, the recent depreciation is helpful at the
margin  given  that  there  remains  spare  capacity  in  the  economy  and  inflation  remains  below
target.
1
2
3
4
5
6
See  Lowe  P  (2018),  ‘Australia’s  Deepening  Economic  Relationship  with  China:  Opportunities  and  Risks’,
Address to the Australia-China Relations Institute, Sydney, 23 May.
It is also possible that investors viewed those forecasts as being too optimistic. While higher bond yields can
also see investors apply a larger discount to future earnings, bond yields have declined in recent months.
The FOMC dots represent the median of FOMC members’ expectations of the most likely (modal) outcomes. In
contrast, observed market prices reflect not the central scenario but rather a probability-weighted average of all
expected outcomes (that is, the entire distribution). Because of this, tail risks can move market pricing, even if
the most likely outcome has not changed in the eyes of market participants.
See Lowe P (2019), ‘The Year Ahead’, Address to the National Press Club of Australia, Sydney, 6 February.
For a description of the factors that influence the Australian dollar see, Chapman B, J Jääskelä and E Smith
(2018), ‘A Forward-looking Model of the Australian Dollar’, RBA Bulletin, December, viewed 13 February 2019.
See also Hambur J, L Cockerell, C Potter, P Smith and M Wright (2015), ‘Modelling the Australian Dollar’, RBA
Research Discussion Paper No 2015–12.
This event was covered in greater detail in the Bank’s recent Statement on Monetary Policy. See RBA (2019),
‘Box B: The Recent Japanese Yen Flash Event’, Statement on Monetary Policy, February, pp 24–27.
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
