February  28,  2019 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
 
 Economic Activity, Prices,   
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Ibaraki 
Hitoshi Suzuki 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
I. Recent Economic and Price Developments 
A. Developments in Overseas Economies 
I would like to begin my speech by talking about overseas economies. 
 Overseas economies have continued to grow firmly overall, although the business sentiment 
of manufacturing firms has been mixed across economies and regions recently. In terms of 
the  outlook,  overseas  economies  are  expected  to  continue  growing  firmly  on  the  whole, 
amid firm domestic demand, although various developments of late warrant attention, such 
as the U.S.-China trade friction. 
 The  U.S.  economy  has  continued  to  grow  firmly,  supported  in  part  by  a  favorable 
employment  and  income  situation.  It  is  likely  to  maintain  its  expansion,  underpinned  by 
expansionary fiscal measures. 
 As for the European economy, growth in production has been decelerating, due in particular 
to the tightening of gas emission regulations on automobiles, and the economic growth rate 
also  has  been  on  a  downtrend  recently.  The  economy  has  continued  on  a  recovery  trend, 
albeit  at  a  slower  pace,  as  seen  in  exports  having  shown  signs  of  a  pick-up  and  business 
fixed investment having been on an increasing trend; however, attention needs to be paid to 
the outlook for the economy. 
 The  Chinese  economy  has  continued  to  see  stable  growth  on  the  whole.  It  is  likely  to 
broadly follow a stable growth path as the authorities conduct fiscal and monetary policy in 
a  timely  manner,  despite recent concerns  including  fluctuations in  exports  --  namely,  their 
front-loaded  increase  following  the  United  States  having  raised  import  tariffs  imposed  on 
China and their subsequent decline -- as well as the effects of authorities' measures to push 
forward with deleveraging and a decline in business sentiment of manufacturing firms. 
 Emerging  economies  other  than  China  and  commodity-exporting  economies  have  been 
recovering moderately on the whole, mainly reflecting an increase in exports and the effects 
of  economic  stimulus  measures.  Going  forward,  as  domestic  demand  has  remained  firm, 
1 
those economies are likely to continue their moderate recovery, partly supported by trading 
with advanced economies. 
 B. Outlook for the Global Economy 
According  to  the  January  2019  World  Economic  Outlook  Update  released  by  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), the global economy is projected to continue growing at 
around 3.5 percent in 2019 and 2020, although the projections for both years were revised 
downward from those made in October 2018 (Chart 1). 
 Developments  in  stock  markets  and  foreign  exchange  markets,  however,  were  somewhat 
unstable  from  the  end  of  2018  to  the  turn  of  the  year,  as  investors'  risk  aversion  had 
heightened  since  autumn  2018,  mainly  reflecting  uncertainties  over  the  U.S.-China  trade 
friction  and  over  political  developments  in  Europe,  as  well  as  relatively  weak  economic 
indicators in China. The fundamentals of the global economy do not seem to have changed 
substantially  thus  far,  but  due  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  gradual  heightening  of 
uncertainties  that  could  pose  a  downside  risk  to  economic  activity,  including  the  risk  of 
turmoil in financial markets seen around the turn of the year leading to deterioration in the 
economy. Specifically, close attention should continue to be paid to the following risks: U.S. 
protectionist moves and responses by its trading partners; developments in negotiations on 
the United Kingdom's exit from the European Union (EU); developments in crude oil prices 
that declined significantly from autumn 2018 to the end of the year; geopolitical risks; and 
deceleration  in  the  Chinese  economy.  Moreover,  in  the  United  States,  the  amount 
outstanding of leveraged loans (with financial covenants) extended to firms with low credit 
ratings  has  increased  to  about  1  trillion  U.S.  dollars.  The  amount  outstanding  of 
covenant-lite loans  (with eased  financial  covenants)  has  been  increasing  recently,  and  that 
of  collateralized  loan  obligations  (CLOs)  (a  securitized  instrument  in  which  several 
leveraged  loans  are  packaged)  has  increased  significantly  over  the  past  five  years.  So  far, 
the default rate on leveraged loans has been at a low level; however, as has been pointed out 
in the very first issue of the Financial Stability Report, released by the Federal Reserve in 
November  2018,  risks  of  an  increase  in  the  number  of  firms  with  high  leverage  warrant 
attention. 
 2 
C. Current Situation of Japan's Economy 
I will now discuss the economic situation in Japan. 
 Japan's economy is expanding moderately, with the output gap  being maintained in excess 
demand  and  a  virtuous  cycle  from  income  to  spending  operating.  In  2018,  the  real  GDP 
growth rate for the January-March quarter was negative for the first time in nine quarters, 
mainly reflecting weather conditions. That for the April-June quarter picked up and became 
positive, but for the July-September quarter, the growth rate fell into negative territory again, 
partly  due  to  natural  disasters  exerting  downward  pressure  on,  for  example,  private 
consumption  and  exports.  Despite  these  fluctuations,  the  recently  released  preliminary 
estimate  for  the  October-December  quarter  returned  to  positive  territory  on  the  back  of  a 
pick-up in business fixed investment, private consumption, and exports (Chart 2). 
 According to the Regional Economic Report released by the Bank of Japan in January 2019, 
out of a total of nine regions across Japan, six -- including the Kanto-Koshinetsu region, in 
which  Ibaraki  Prefecture  is  located  --  reported  that  their  respective  economies  had  been 
expanding,  amid  the  progress  in  restoration  and  reconstruction  in  the  Hokkaido  and 
Chugoku regions affected by natural disasters such as the earthquake and heavy rain (Chart 
3).  In  the  Kanto-Koshinetsu  region,  business  fixed  investment  had  been  increasing  and 
private consumption had been doing so moderately, albeit with fluctuations, on the back of 
steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation.  Ibaraki  Prefecture  reported 
that exports were at a high level, particularly those of parts for maintenance, in view of an 
increase  in  demand  from  emerging  economies  making  an  improvement  in  infrastructure 
including  railways  and  roads. The  prefecture  also  reported  that,  in  response to  acute  labor 
shortage,  an  increasing  number  of  small  and  medium-sized  firms  were  boosting 
labor-saving investment, and that those firms had mainly utilized a manufacturing subsidy 
program provided by the government. 
 As  Japan's  economy  has  continued  on  an  expanding  trend,  labor  market  conditions  have 
tightened  steadily.  The  unemployment  rate  has  been  at  a  low  level  of  around  2.5  percent, 
and the active job openings-to-applicants ratio has remained at a high level (Chart 4). Firms' 
perception of labor shortage suggested by the diffusion indexes for employment conditions 
3 
in  the  December  2018  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan) 
released  by  the  Bank  remained  at  a  high  level  in  a  wide  range  of  industries.  Against  this 
background,  firms  in  many  industries  have  been  proceeding  proactively  with  labor-saving 
investment  with  a  view  to,  for  example,  using  artificial  intelligence  (AI),  robotic  process 
automation  (RPA),  and  other  means.  On  this  point,  although  labor  force  participants  in 
Japan have been at a record high level recently, they are likely to start declining in the near 
future,  considering,  for  example,  a  shrinking  national  population  and  rapid  progression  of 
the declining birth rate and aging population (Chart 5).1  Given this situation, the innovative 
use of AI and RPA is not only a temporary measure to addressing current labor shortage but 
also  could  serve  as  an  important  means  to  compensating  for  shortage  of  the  working  age 
population that Japan may face in the future. If the introduction of new technologies allows 
firms to provide goods and services at lower costs, output per worker will increase, pushing 
up corporate profits and wages. That being said, if human labor is to be replaced rapidly by 
new  technologies,  wages  and  employment  might  be  affected  following  a  decline  in  labor 
demand, and the gap between industries with sufficient labor and those with labor shortage 
might widen. Thus, in adapting new technologies, it also is important to foster  resources in 
terms  of  know-how  and  skills  so  that  human  employees  can  effectively  use  such 
technologies. In other words, if three capital components  -- labor force, facilities, and new 
technologies -- are combined appropriately,  the challenges of a declining birth rate and an 
aging population and of a decline in labor force participants can be overcome, pushing up 
Japan's potential growth rate and the natural rate of interest accordingly. 
 D. Outlook for Japan's Economy 
With  regard  to  the  outlook,  Japan's  economy  is  likely  to  continue  on  an  expanding  trend 
throughout  the  projection  period  --  that  is,  through  fiscal  2020.  In  fiscal  2019,  private 
consumption is expected to see an increase in its growth momentum in the first half of the 
fiscal  year,  reflecting  the  front-loaded  increase  in  demand  prior  to  the  scheduled 
consumption tax hike in October 2019, but is likely to be pushed down in the second half of 
the fiscal year by the subsequent decline in demand following the tax hike and the decline 
                                                   
1  According to the Population Statistics released in 2019 by the National Institute of Population and 
Social Security Research, it is estimated that labor force participants in Japan will total 63.81 million 
in 2020, declining to 61.69 million in 2030. 
4 
in real income. However, public investment is likely to increase clearly, due mainly  to the 
implementation  of  the  supplementary  budgets  to  address  the  natural  disasters  that 
successively  occurred  in  fiscal  2018,  as  well  as  the  promotion  of  policy  measures  for 
national  resilience. Exports  are  projected to maintain  their  increasing  trend  on  the  back  of 
firm growth in overseas economies. With regard to business fixed investment, although it is 
likely  to  decelerate  gradually,  mainly  reflecting  the  effects  of  Olympic  Games-related 
investment  peaking  out,  its  increasing  trend  is  projected  to  be  maintained,  due  partly  to 
demand for investment underpinned by the increase in exports. 
 In fiscal 2020, private consumption and housing investment, which are likely to decline in 
the second half of fiscal 2019 due to the effects of the consumption tax hike, are expected to 
gradually  head  toward  a  recovery.  Under  such  circumstances,  although  business  fixed 
investment is likely to decelerate somewhat against the background of heightening pressure 
stemming  from  cyclical  adjustments  in  capital  stock,  the  economy  is  projected  to  be 
underpinned mainly by the continued increasing trend in exports and an expansion in public 
expenditure  owing  to  the  Olympic  Games.  Therefore,  Japan's  economy  is  expected  to 
continue on an expanding trend in fiscal 2020.   
 According to the Bank's January 2019 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook 
Report), the medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts  for the real GDP growth rate 
are 0.9 percent for both fiscal 2018 and fiscal 2019, and 1.0 percent for fiscal 2020 (Chart 
6). 
 For the scheduled consumption tax hike, the government will deliberate various measures to 
reduce  the  household  burden.  Taking  this  into  consideration,  private  consumption  is 
expected  to  continue  on  a  moderate  increasing  trend,  supported  mainly  by  the  effects  of 
those  government  measures,  an  increase  in  employee  income,  and  the  wealth  effects 
stemming from the past rise in stock prices. 
 5 
E. Prices in Japan 
Next, I will elaborate on price developments in Japan. 
 The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh 
food  (core  CPI)  increased  to  1  percent  in  February  2018  but  thereafter  declined  slightly. 
After recovering to 1 percent, it has been in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent recently (Chart 7). 
With  the  price  stability  target  set  at  2  percent,  the  Bank  has  been  conducting  large-scale 
monetary easing, but there is still some way to go before achieving the target. 
 There are three aspects to consider when assessing price developments toward achieving the 
2 percent target: the supply and demand conditions in the overall economy,  factors from a 
micro perspective, and firms' and households' mindset. 
 1. Supply and demand conditions in the overall economy 
Let  me  first  explain  the  supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the  overall  economy.  The  Bank 
estimates  the  output  gap,  which  is  the  economic  measure  of  the  difference  between 
aggregate  demand  (actual  output)  of  the  economy  and  average  supply  capacity  (potential 
output) that is smoothed out for the business cycle. According to its estimation, the output 
gap  has  remained  positive  for  eight  consecutive  quarters  since  the  October-December 
quarter of 2016, on the back of the steady tightening of labor market conditions and a rise in 
capital  utilization  rates  (Chart  8).  This  suggests  that,  in  terms  of  the  supply  and  demand 
conditions, the economy has been in excess demand and upward pressure  has been exerted 
on prices. 
 2. Factors from a micro perspective 
Now,  I  will  touch  on  the  second  aspect:  factors  from  a  micro  perspective.  The  CPI  that  I 
mentioned  earlier  is  an  indicator  of  prices  that  represents  the  aggregation  of  prices  of 
various  goods  and  services.  Breaking  down  the  CPI  by  item,  energy  prices  --  which  had 
been  pushing  up  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  --  are  reducing  their  upward 
pressure on overall prices, reflecting the decline in crude oil prices since autumn 2018, and 
communication charges for mobile phones are likely to decline further. With regard to the 
producer price index (PPI) -- one of the measures of prices of goods traded in the corporate 
6 
sector -- the year-on-year rate of change for 2018 showed an average increase of 2.5 percent, 
due to rises in prices of raw materials and personnel expenses. Prices of goods traded in the 
corporate  sector  have  been  raised  by  more  than  2  percent;  however,  the  rise  has  not  been 
fully passed on to retail prices. Nevertheless, there has been a gradual rise recently in prices 
of  such  items  as  household  wheat  flour,  ice  cream,  bottled  beverages,  and  frozen  and 
refrigerated food; if such price rises are to spread to a wider range of industries, they likely 
will be a steppingstone to a rise in overall prices. 
 3. Firms' and households' mindset 
The  third  aspect  to  consider  when  assessing  price  developments  is  firms'  and  households' 
mindset.  I  often  hear  concerns  from  corporate  managers  across  various  industries  that,  by 
raising  prices,  they  may  lose  customers,  and  consequently  their  market  share.  This  is 
because  the  competitive  environment  surrounding  firms  has  become  increasingly  severe 
amid  an  expansion  of  online  shopping,  and,  in  the  case  of  Japan,  firms'  and  households' 
mindset and behavior based on the assumption that wages and prices will not increase easily 
have  been  deeply  entrenched,  due  mainly  to  the  experience  of  prolonged  low  growth  and 
deflation. Moreover, consumers seem to be reluctant to increase their consumption, as  it is 
now considered reasonable to expect to live for 100  years and therefore they have to save 
for  future  life  events.  Under  these  circumstances,  firms'  and  households'  medium-  to 
long-term  inflation  expectations  are  more  or  less  unchanged  (Chart  9).  Theoretically, 
inflation expectations are influenced by both the backward-looking (or adaptive) component 
that  reflects  past  rates  --  i.e.,  the  observed  inflation  rate  --  and  the  forward-looking 
component  that  reflects  the  progress  in  the  Bank's  pursuit  of  monetary  easing  through  its 
strong  commitment  to  achieving  the  price  stability  target.  In  practice,  they  seem  to  be 
greatly  influenced  by  the  observed  inflation  rate,  as  shown  in  the  recent  figures  for  firms' 
and  households'  inflation  expectations.  This  suggests  that,  if  prices  start  to  rise  gradually, 
inflation  expectations  will  be  pushed  up,  which  in  turn  will  lead  to  an  increase  in  future 
actual prices. In other words, to start a virtuous cycle, a rise in prices is the key, as this will 
change the perception of firms and households regarding future prices, which can accelerate 
the pace of increase in actual prices.   
 7 
On the consumer front, in a wide range of age groups, consumption based on preference or 
experience  has  begun  to  be  observed  recently.  These  categories  of  consumption  are 
value-oriented,  in  that  consumers  actively  make  expenditures  on,  for  example,  products, 
services, and entertainments that fit well with their values. If consumption of items in such 
categories  further  expands  and  firms  accordingly  can  set  prices  based  on  developments  in 
consumer behavior, consumers will gradually become more tolerant of price rises. 
 F. Outlook for Prices in Japan 
Based on these three aspects -- the supply and demand conditions in the overall economy, 
factors from a micro perspective, and firms' and households' mindset -- I will touch on the 
outlook for prices. Going forward, amid the positive output gap, firms' efforts to raise prices 
are  likely  to  be  seen  broadly,  and  firms'  and  households'  mindset  is  expected  to  change 
accordingly.  As  this  virtuous  cycle  among  the  three  aspects  starts  to  operate  gradually, 
prices are likely to rise. The momentum toward achieving the price stability target has been 
maintained,  and  thus  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  is  likely  to  increase 
gradually toward 2 percent, albeit with fluctuations caused by the effects of such factors as 
developments  in  crude  oil  prices.  Specifically,  the  medians  of  the  Policy  Board  members' 
forecasts for the year-on-year rate of change in the core CPI presented in the January 2019 
Outlook Report are 0.8 percent for fiscal 2018, 1.1 percent for fiscal 2019, and 1.5 percent 
for fiscal 2020 (Chart 6). 
 In  order  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  and  thereby  contribute  to  the  sound 
development  of  the  economy,  it  also  is  essential  for  the  Bank to  not  solely  focus  on  price 
rises  but  also  ensure  subsequent  rises  in  corporate  profits  and  real  wages.  Corporate 
managers are making various efforts on a daily basis in terms of improving productivity and 
efficiency,  cutting  costs,  and  providing  high-quality  products  and  services.  As  a  result  of 
these  efforts,  in  an  environment  where  prices  rise  moderately  through  an  increase  in  the 
value-added  of  products and  services,  corporate  profits  are  likely  to  increase.  In  this  case, 
wages of employees also would rise, as would household income. With increased household 
income, people are likely to spend more on products and services, making corporate profits 
increase even more. I consider it important to ensure that this virtuous cycle can operate. 
 8 
II. Conduct of Monetary Policy 
A. Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control 
Let me now turn to the Bank's monetary policy. 
 Following  the  introduction  of  QQE  in  April  2013,  the  Bank  has  been  pursuing  QQE  with 
Yield Curve Control since September 2016 toward achieving the price stability target of 2 
percent. 
 Under this policy framework, controlling short- and long-term interest rates -- the so-called 
yield curve control -- facilitates the formation of term structure of interest rates that is most 
appropriate for achieving the price stability target. Specifically, in the guideline for market 
operations, the Bank sets the short-term policy interest rate at minus 0.1 percent and decides 
to  purchase  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  so  that  10-year  JGB  yields  will  remain  at 
around zero percent (Chart 10). 
 Since  the  introduction  of  QQE  with  Yield  Curve  Control  in  September  2016,  short-  and 
long-term interest rates have been maintained at levels consistent with the Bank's guideline 
for  market  operations,  and  the  output  gap  has  remained  positive.  As  for  prices,  the 
year-on-year rate of change in the core CPI has increased by more than 1 percentage point 
over the past two and a half years, from minus 0.5 percent for September 2016 to the range 
of  0.5-1.0  percent  for  January  2019.  With  regard  to  inflation  expectations,  results  of  the 
Bank's  December  2018  Opinion  Survey  on  the  General  Public's  Views  and  Behavior 
showed  that,  while  medium-  to  long-term  expectations  remained  low,  the  proportions  of 
respondents  who  answered  that  prices  would  go  up  one  year  from  now  have  increased 
recently, and that seems to be a sign of change in people's perception of future prices (Chart 
11).  Although  there  is  still  some  way  to  go  for  the  core  CPI  to  increase  toward  the  price 
stability  target  of  2  percent,  it  is  crucial  to  resolutely  continue  with  powerful  monetary 
easing under QQE with Yield Curve Control. 
 B. Durability of Monetary Easing 
Almost six years have passed since the introduction of QQE in April 2013. As I mentioned 
earlier, firms' efforts to raise prices and changes in firms' and households' mindset are likely 
9 
to gradually proceed on the whole. However, firms' cautious wage- and price-setting stance 
and households' cautiousness toward price rises remain deeply entrenched, and attention is 
warranted on the possibility that the rise in CPI inflation will continue to be constrained for 
a  long  period.  With  these  factors  in  mind,  durability  of  monetary  policy  should  be 
considered in the future policy conduct. 
 So,  what  are  the  keys  to  enhancing  the  durability  of  monetary  policy?  I  believe  there  are 
three points in this regard. Just like a distance runner, we need (1) a commitment to keep on 
running,  (2)  flexibility  to  adapt  to  changes  in  conditions,  and  (3)  a  running  economy  to 
maintain good performance.   
 1. Commitment to keep on running 
The first point -- the commitment to keep on running -- refers to the Bank's clarification of 
its future policy stance, so as to secure and maintain public confidence in its policy actions. 
In  July  2018,  the  Bank  introduced  forward  guidance  in  which  it  made  clear  that  it  would 
"maintain  the  current  extremely  low  levels  of  short-  and  long-term  interest  rates  for  an 
extended period of time, taking into account uncertainties regarding economic activity and 
prices including the effects of the consumption tax hike scheduled to take place in October 
2019." By doing so, the Bank has been working to strengthen its commitment to achieving 
the price stability target (Chart 12). 
 2. Flexibility to adapt to changes in conditions 
On  the  second  point,  the  flexibility,  it  is  important  --  much  like  an  athlete  preparing  to 
perform  by  stretching,  so  as  to  mitigate  risk  of  injury  --  to  have  a  certain  degree  of 
flexibility in the monetary policy conduct. In this regard, the Bank implemented measures 
to enhance the durability of QQE with Yield Curve Control in July 2018. Specifically, upon 
maintaining the target level of 10-year JGB yields at around zero percent, the Bank made it 
clear  that  they  "may  move  upward  and  downward  to  some  extent  mainly  depending  on 
developments in economic activity and prices" (Chart 12). Given that interest rate formation 
became  somewhat  rigid  since  the  introduction  of  yield  curve  control,  the  Bank  has  taken 
this  new  measure  --  through  the  flexible  JGB  purchases  --  in  further  consideration  of  the 
impact on the JGB market functioning.  Let me note that the Bank does not intend to raise 
10 
the level of yields at present; it will purchase JGBs promptly and appropriately in the event 
of a rapid increase in the yields. In addition to this measure, the Bank has allowed flexibility 
in  purchasing  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts 
(J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding will increase at annual paces of about 6 trillion 
yen  and  about  90  billion  yen,  respectively.  Specifically,  the  Bank  decided  that  it  "may 
increase or decrease the amount of purchases depending on market conditions" with a view 
to lowering risk premiums of asset prices in an appropriate manner. In these ways, the Bank 
has  worked  to  enhance  the  flexibility  and  sustainability  of  the  current  monetary  policy 
framework. 
 3. Running economy to maintain good performance 
The  third  point  is  the  running  economy,  which  means  the  efficient  use  of  energy  when 
running long distance. In a similar way, it is important to  maintain the optimal conduct of 
monetary policy while weighing its positive effects against the accompanying costs and the 
side effects. The framework of  yield curve  control has the function of efficiently  reducing 
short- and long-term interest rates to extremely low levels, through the large stock effect of 
reducing  interest  rates  reflecting  the  cumulative  amount  of  the  Bank's  JGB  holdings,  and 
thereby leading to stimulating economic activity. On this point, let us focus on a more micro 
perspective  of  the  structure  of  the  JGB  market.  At  present,  a  considerable  amount  of  the 
newly  issued  10-year  JGBs  are  withdrawn  from  the  market  about  six  months  after  their 
issuance and are purchased by the Bank, and the amount outstanding of JGBs in the market 
continues  to  decline.  Even  in  this  situation,  financial  institutions  need  to  hold  a  certain 
amount  of  JGBs  under  a  low  interest  rate  environment  for  various  purposes  such  as  for 
funding;  namely,  collateral  held  at  the  Bank  through  market  operations,  that  under 
derivative  contracts,  that  for  foreign  currency  funding,  and  that  for  repo  transactions  in 
Japanese yen. If the amount outstanding of JGBs in the market continues to decrease, it is 
likely  that  the  amount  outstanding  of  JGBs  held  by  some  financial  institutions  gradually 
will approach the minimum level needed. The Bank considers it important that, by carefully 
monitoring their demand, it will continue to appropriately adjust to the situation through, for 
example, changing the amount of JGB purchases at each auction. 
 11 
C. Durability of Financial Institutions 
It  is  essential  for  the  Bank  to  not  only  enhance  the  durability  of  monetary  policy  but  also 
pay  due  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  effects  of  monetary  policy  spread  to  the  overall 
economy  mainly  through  financial  institutions.  In  that  sense,  the  Bank  should  closely 
monitor the durability of financial institutions so as to ensure that they can continue to fully 
carry out their financial intermediation function.   
 Financial institutions have been underpinning their profits by realizing gains on the sales of 
securities  and  reversing  allowance  for  doubtful  accounts,  as  downward  pressure  on  their 
profits has been increasing mainly against the background of the declines in the population 
and  the  number  of  firms  across  regions,  in  addition  to  the  current  low  interest  rate 
environment. Taking a look at their core profitability, average contract interest rates on new 
loans  have  been  at  extremely 
low 
levels  with  financial  conditions  remaining 
accommodative. The numerical value obtained by subtracting overhead cost ratios from said 
rates  shows  that  the  value  for  regional  banks,  for  example,  currently  stands  at  around  10 
basis points, which is significantly below the average credit cost ratio over the past 20 years. 
In  addition,  regional  banks  and  shinkin  banks  have  been  registering  higher  growth  in 
lending than major banks, and they have been extending loans such as to middle-risk firms 
with relatively high credit risk and to rental housing businesses. 
 Going forward, if the economy were to enter a recessionary phase, a worsening of financial 
conditions  at  such  firms  and  businesses  might  materialize  as  credit  risk.  Moreover,  if 
borrowing  firms'  default  rates  increase,  it  will  be  necessary  for  financial  institutions  to 
accumulate  reserves  for  doubtful  accounts  across  the  entire  range  of  loan  portfolios,  and 
attention  is  warranted  on  this  point  as  it  could  be  a  factor  triggering  an  acceleration  of 
deterioration in such institutions' profits. 
 On this point, at least for now, I believe that financial institutions in Japan as a whole have 
strong  resilience  against  stress  in  terms  of  both  capital  and  liquidity,  and  stability  in  the 
financial system has been maintained. However, close attention should continue to be paid 
to  developments  in  the risk-taking  stance  and  financial  soundness  of  financial  institutions, 
12 
including  regional  ones,  from  the  perspective  of  monitoring  those  effects  on  the  financial 
system and the functioning of financial intermediation. 
 As  the  Bank  resolutely  continues  with  the  current  monetary  easing  policy,  it  will  conduct 
monetary  policy,  while  examining  all  relevant  risks,  in  an  appropriate  manner  so  that  the 
momentum toward achieving the price stability target will be maintained. 
 13 
Economic Activity, Prices, 
and Monetary Policy in Japan
Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Ibaraki
February 28, 2019
Hitoshi Suzuki
Bank of Japan
Global Economy
Chart 1
IMF Projections (as of January 2019)   
Real GDP Growth Rate
Source: World Economic Outlook Update, International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Note: Figures in parentheses are the difference from the October 2018
CY
Source: IMF.
projections.
Japan's Real GDP
Chart 2
s.a., ann., q/q % chg.
s.a., tril. yen 
s.a., q/q % chg.
Real GDP (nominal, right scale)
Real GDP growth rate
(left scale)
CY
Source: Cabinet Office.
Source: Cabinet Office.
Regional Economic Assessments
Comparison of Previous and Current Assessments by Region 
Chart 3
Region
Assessment in October 2018
Hokkaido
The economy has been recovering 
moderately as a trend, although 
downward pressure due to the effects 
of the 2018 Hokkaido Eastern Iburi
Earthquake is being observed.
Changes 
from the 
previous 
assessment
Assessment in January 2019
The economy has been recovering moderately
as a trend, and downward pressure due to the 
effects of the 2018 Hokkaido Eastern Iburi
Earthquake has continued to ease.
Tohoku
The economy has continued to recover 
moderately.
The economy has continued to recover 
moderately.
Hokuriku
The economy has been expanding.
The economy has been expanding.
Kanto-
Koshinetsu
The economy has been expanding
moderately.
The economy has been expanding moderately.
Tokai
The economy has been expanding.
The economy has been expanding.
Kinki
Chugoku
The economy has been expanding
moderately, although effects of 
Typhoon No. 21 are being observed in 
economic activity.
Although the economy was damaged 
by the heavy rain in July 2018, it has 
been expanding moderately as a trend, 
amid the effects of the heavy rain 
waning, mainly reflecting the 
restoration of social infrastructure.
The economy has continued to expand 
moderately.
The economy has been expanding moderately.
Shikoku
The economy has been recovering.
The economy has been recovering.
Kyushu-
Okinawa
The economy has been expanding 
moderately, with its growth gaining a 
more solid footing.
Source: January 2019 Regional Economic Report, Bank of Japan.
The economy has been expanding moderately, 
with its growth gaining a more solid footing.
Labor Market Conditions
Unemployment Rate and 
Active Job Openings-to-Applicants Ratio
Diffusion Index (DI) for 
Employment Conditions
s.a., ratio
s.a., %
reversed, DI ("excessive employment" minus "insufficient employment"), 
% points
Unemployment rate (right scale)
Insufficient employment
Chart 4
Active job openings-to-applicants 
ratio (left scale)
Excessive employment
Active job openings-to-applicants ratio for 
full-time employees (left scale)
CY
CY
Sources: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications;
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare.
Source: Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan),  
Bank of Japan.
Labor Force Participation and Employment
Chart 5
s.a., mil. persons
Labor force participants
Employed persons
CY 2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
2017
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications.
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices as of January 2019
Forecasts of the Majority of Policy Board Members
y/y % chg.
Chart 6
Source: January 2019 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices, Bank of Japan.
Notes: 1. Figures in brackets indicate the medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point estimates).
2. The forecasts assume the following: (1) the consumption tax will be raised to 10 percent in October 2019 and a  
reduced tax rate will be applied to food and beverages -- excluding alcohol and dining out -- and newspapers, and 
(2) with regard to policies concerning the provision of free education, free early childhood education and such 
measures as free higher education will be introduced in October 2019 and April 2020, respectively. 
CPI
Chart 7
s.a., y/y % chg.
All items less fresh food and energy
All items less fresh food (core CPI)
CY
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications.
Note: Figures are adjusted for the effects of consumption tax hikes.
Output Gap
Chart 8
 Excess demand
(upward pressure on prices)
Excess supply
(downward pressure on prices)
CY
Source: Bank of Japan.
Note: Based on staff estimations.
Inflation Expectations
Chart 9
y/y, ann. avg., %
Firms (five years ahead)
Households (over the next five years)
CY 2005
Source: Bank of Japan.
Notes: 1. Figures for households are from the Opinion Survey on the General Public's Views and Behavior 
(Opinion Survey), estimated using the modified Carlson-Parkin method.
2. Figures for firms are those for the "outlook for general prices (all industries and enterprises, average)"
in the Tankan.
Yield Curve Control
Chart 10
 1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2 
Target level of the long-term interest rate: 
around zero percent
Short-term policy interest rate: 
minus 0.1 percent
0      1      2     3     4     5     6     7     8     9     10     15     20        30        40   
residual maturity, year
Perception of Future Prices
 Chart 11
Prices will go up over the next five years
Prices will go up one year from now
CY
Source: December 2018 Opinion Survey, Bank of Japan.
Notes: 1. Disregarding the effects of consumption tax hikes.
2. Figures for both one year from now and over the next five years comprise the choices "will go  
up significantly" and "will go up slightly" that are found in the questionnaire.
Strengthening the Framework for Continuous 
Powerful Monetary Easing
Chart 12
Likely to take more 
time than expected to 
achieve the price 
stability target of 2%
Appropriate to 
maintain the output 
gap within positive 
territory for as long 
as possible
Persistently Continuing 
with Powerful Monetary Easing
Forward guidance for policy rates 
"The Bank intends to maintain the current extremely low levels of 
short- and long-term interest rates for an extended period of time, 
taking into account uncertainties regarding economic activity and 
prices including the effects of the consumption tax hike scheduled to 
take place in October 2019."
”
Yield curve control and ETF purchases
The long-term interest rate: The Bank will purchase JGBs so that 
10-year JGB yields will remain at around zero percent.  While doing 
so, the yields may move upward and downward to some extent 
mainly depending on developments in economic activity and prices.
ETF purchases:  The Bank will purchase ETFs so that their amount 
outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about 6 trillion yen.  
The Bank may increase or decrease the amount of purchases 
depending on market conditions. 
Achieving the price stability target of 2% at the earliest possible time 
while securing stability in economic and financial conditions
