     Renewing the RBNZ’s approach to 
financial stability 
A speech delivered to 15th Financial Markets Law Conference in Auckland  
 On 26 June 2019 (2:10pm) 
By Geoff Bascand, Deputy Governor & Head of Operations 
   
2 The Terrace, PO Box 2498, Wellington 6140, New Zealand 
Telephone 64 4 472 2029 Online at www.rbnz.govt.nz  
     2 
Renewing the RBNZ’s approach to financial stability  
 
Good afternoon, it’s good to be here today. I’m going to talk about the Reserve Bank’s role in 
ensuring financial stability and how our approach to prudential regulation and supervision is 
evolving in line with our own, and society’s, risk tolerance.1  
You’ll hear me talk about how the Bank’s approach is expanding and becoming more 
intensive, so that we are more active in addressing vulnerabilities in the financial sector. This 
is in response to our own experience, and a publicly identified need in formal reviews of our 
approach.2 We are building our capabilities to undertake deeper analysis of risks to the 
financial system and shift to a more intensive supervisory model. 
It’s a busy time at the Bank as we also undertake with Treasury a fundamental review of the 
statutory framework for delivering financial stability. The government has announced in-
principle decisions to modernise how the Reserve Bank is governed and its objectives, 
powers and regulatory perimeter. These decisions strengthen our financial stability focus 
and set the foundations for enhanced performance, capability and accountability of our 
financial stability functions. Our ‘soundness and efficiency’ objective is to be replaced with an 
explicit financial stability objective. The single decision-maker model is to be replaced with a 
governance board responsible for financial policy. And the artificial distinction between 
banks and non-bank deposit takers is set to be removed.  
Meanwhile, we are reviewing key aspects of the regulatory system, for example upgrading 
the capital framework for banks and commencing a review of insurance legislation and 
solvency standards, while the government has declared its intention to introduce deposit 
insurance. 
These significant developments raise the question: how do the different parts of our financial 
stability regime fit together?  
Answering that question is not easy – financial stability is complex and we use a large 
number of tools to promote it. And there is no single, quantifiable numerical target like the 
inflation target for monetary policy. Hopefully on conclusion of my speech you will have a 
greater understanding of the Reserve Bank’s role and where we are heading in terms of how 
the components of our regulatory and supervisory regime fit together.  
First I’ll outline why financial stability is important, the risks to the financial system and the 
market failures that create the need for regulation and supervision. 
Next I’ll set out the Bank’s role, alongside regulated entities and other agencies, in 
supporting a dynamic and sustainable financial system and economy. 
Finally I’ll focus on the Bank’s approach to financial stability, and the outlook in terms of 
regulation, supervision, strategy and the ongoing modernisation of the Reserve Bank, before 
covering off some recent announcements that will change the way we work. 
 
                                                 
1 I am very grateful to Piers Ovenden for considerable assistance in the preparation of this speech, 
along with valuable comments from other Reserve Bank colleagues. 
2 For example the IMF’s FSAP recommendations. 
Ref #8022722 v2.0 
   3 
 Part 1 – Why we regulate and supervise 
Financial stability is important 
The financial system has a critical role in supporting economic activity. Households and 
businesses need avenues for saving and credit to fund consumption and investment, 
payment systems to facilitate local and international transactions, and insurance to manage 
their risks.  
In order to facilitate economic growth, the public need to be confident that banks, non-bank 
deposit takers (NBDTs) and insurers can and will continue to provide these services, and 
that the payment and settlement systems will work as expected. The continued and reliable 
provision of financial services to the economy is a pre-condition for ensuring that the 
financial system makes its maximum contribution to the prosperity and wellbeing of all New 
Zealanders.  
Financial stability means having a resilient financial system that can withstand severe but 
plausible shocks and continue to provide the financial services we all rely on. It is something 
we tend to take for granted – financial crises have been uncommon in this country. But 
evidence from a wide range of countries over many decades shows us that when they do 
happen, crises are damaging with long-lasting effects. They impact businesses and 
households, with reduced economic activity and lost output. They result in increased 
unemployment and costs for taxpayers. Not only that, recovery can take over a decade and 
is often halting in nature.  
Put another way, financial instability creates inefficiency and waste on a large scale. 
Reducing the likelihood and severity of these episodes is therefore at the heart of our 
mission. Our aim is for New Zealand to have a dynamic and efficient financial system that 
contributes to a sustainable and productive economy.  
The financial system is exposed to risks… 
Risks to financial stability come from a wide range of sources. External – New Zealand’s 
financial system is heavily reliant on external funding, which makes us vulnerable to 
dislocation in overseas funding markets. Domestic – risks related to lending to our dairy 
industry and to our already highly indebted households. And our most recent Financial 
Stability Report notes the risks from technology disruptions, misconduct and cybercrime, 
insurance affordability and climate change.  
We also have to consider the vulnerabilities of our financial system. It is relatively small, and 
is dominated by a handful of institutions that have similar underlying business models. That 
means the distress or failure of one of the major institutions is likely to have significant 
implications for the system as a whole.  
And we have to remain alert to new risks. History tells us that there are a wide variety of 
triggers for financial instability. Every financial crisis is different.  
…and is subject to market failures 
Financial stability is a common resource that benefits us all. But because it is a common 
resource, it is also prone to the tragedy of the commons – the risk that it is abused and 
degraded by individual agents who do not have the right incentives to look after it, or at least 
to internalise the cost that instability imposes on others. Viewed through this lens, 
Ref #8022722 v2.0 
   4 
 maintaining financial stability depends on market participants being willing and able to 
identify, price, allocate and manage their risks appropriately.3  
Information asymmetries – where one party to a transaction knows more than the other – 
exacerbate this free-riding problem. Small retail savers are likely to find it difficult to detect 
and price for higher risk-taking at a financial institution, although wholesale investors will 
exert discipline. In addition there are factors that limit the incentive for financial institutions to 
internalise the costs to society of a financial crisis. For example, moral hazard can result if 
institutions believe the taxpayer will bail them out in the event of a crisis. The larger the scale 
of this distortion, the greater the risk to financial stability and the greater the risk to other 
regulated entities, investors, depositors and ultimately taxpayers.  
These structural market failures tend to be reinforced by behavioural factors. It is well 
recognised that individually rational people make decisions on the basis of other people’s 
credit and risk assessments.4 This herd behaviour can create market momentum that drives 
the price away from the underlying risks and returns. In the absence of objective information 
about the fundamental economic value of an asset or trade, this reinforces the mis-pricing of 
risk.  
Alongside herd behaviour, add myopic decision making and irrational exuberance and we 
are well on our way to boom-bust cycles. If asset prices rise, people borrow more and invest 
more heavily in that asset class. For a time, this becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. However 
this also increases the risk of contagion and fire sale dynamics once market sentiment turns. 
As I said, financial stability is complex.  
Part 2 – The Reserve Bank’s role 
 
The importance of financial stability as a common resource and the risks and market failures 
that it is prone to, create the need for prudential regulation and supervision. Nonetheless 
there is an important role for both the regulator and the regulated in ensuring that the 
financial stability regime is operating effectively as intended.  
 
The three pillars remain relevant… 
 
The three, inter-dependent, pillars of self-, market- and regulatory discipline remain relevant 
to our role as prudential regulator. Our regulatory actions do not occur in a vacuum, and 
there is an important role for regulated entities and market participants in supporting financial 
stability. 
 
Market discipline refers to the influence that market participants have on a regulated entity’s 
behaviour and risk-taking, where influence is exerted by market participants changing the 
cost or amount of funding they are willing to provide based on financial and other information 
about the entity. In a functioning market this creates an incentive for regulated entities to 
manage their risks appropriately. Transparency initiatives, such as the Financial Strength 
Dashboard and mandatory disclosure statements support market discipline5. 
 
Self-discipline refers to a regulated entity’s own processes and risk management 
frameworks, the responsibility for which lie primarily with its directors and senior managers. It 
                                                
3 See Orr, A, ‘Towards a framework for promoting financial stability in New Zealand’, March 2006,  
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research-and-publications/speeches/2006/speech2006-03-22 
 
4 See Orr (2006). 
5 As noted earlier, market discipline works best at the wholesale level, and is less meaningful for ‘Mom and 
Pop’ savers. 
Ref #8022722 v2.0 
   5 
 remains the starting point of the Reserve Bank’s supervisory philosophy. However as the 
conduct and culture review, the Reserve Bank’s attestation review, and various regulatory 
incidents demonstrate, we cannot assume that it is operating as intended and that self-
discipline is effective.  
 
Even when market and self-discipline are effective, they are not enough on their own 
because of market failures.6 Regulatory discipline – the imposition of requirements on 
regulated entities – is necessary to improve the effectiveness of market and self-discipline, 
and to minimise the costs of that could be visited on the financial stability commons. Our role 
as regulator means setting robust requirements that are fit for purpose – that address risks 
and market failures at source, taking into account the costs of regulation and of supervision 
on our regulated entities and the wider economy. 
 
Setting rigorous but not too stringent requirements is our challenge, informed by research, 
experience and feedback.7 We need to understand New Zealanders’ appetite for risk, 
analyse the costs and benefits of regulatory requirements, and have processes for decision-
making that provide confidence that in high quality decisions being made.  
 
…and we do not run a zero failure regime 
 
Achieving financial stability does not mean eliminating all risks. This would create 
inefficiencies of its own – it would potentially stifle new entrants, and remove the incentives 
for growth, innovation and healthy risk-taking. So we do not run a zero failure regime. 
Allowing institutions to fail provides the incentives for self- and market-discipline to operate 
effectively.  
 
However, in order to allow individual institutions to fail we need a robust financial system that 
can continue to function even when individual entities are experiencing distress or failure. In 
those situations the Bank is tasked with minimising the impact of distress or failure of an 
institution on the financial system and the economy.  
 
Our role is dynamic 
 
By necessity our role is a dynamic. The financial system is constantly evolving, as are the 
risks and challenges. This means that establishing baseline standards is not a set-and-forget 
exercise. Our requirements and expectations of regulated entities continue to evolve. While 
it is impossible to predict the future, it is incumbent upon us, when we do impose 
requirements and set expectations, to think about their effect, and how they might be 
adapted, in different states of the world. 
 
We monitor the financial system… 
We continuously monitor the financial system in order to identify and assess:  
•  Structural risks: ever-present risks related to the composition of the financial 
system, in terms of its institutions, and their assets and funding. New Zealand is 
exposed to external shocks and standards must recognise these risks and shield the 
domestic system and economy.  
•  Emerging risks: risks related to traditional areas of focus like credit or funding risks, 
or to new and emerging technologies or to climate change. We are particularly 
                                                
6 Fiennes, T, ‘New Zealand’s evolving approach to prudential supervision’, September 2016, 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research-and-publications/speeches/2016/speech2016-09-01 
7 See Bascand, G, ‘Financial Stability – risky, safe or just right?’, November 2018,  
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/news/2018/11/financial-stability-risky-safe-or-just-right. 
Ref #8022722 v2.0 
   6 
 focused on innovation that presents risks to the regulatory perimeter – whether 
institutions are operating inside or outside our supervisory and regulatory reach, and 
whether this is appropriate.  
•  Cyclical risks: the risk that boom-bust cycles are amplified by, and to the detriment 
of, the financial system, due to the procyclicality of credit and asset price growth, 
when the failure of participants to account for the broader economic and social costs 
of their actions is exaggerated.  
We publish our assessment of risks in the Financial Stability Report both to increase 
awareness and so that institutions can adapt and develop resilience, and improve their self-
discipline.  
Supervision has a key role to play both in helping us understand risks to individual 
institutions, and question whether banks are managing those risks adequately. Our thematic 
reviews, where we delve into the detail of specific issues, help us and our regulated entities 
better understand specific risks. Our periodic stress testing, where we subject individual 
institutions to a significant yet plausible downturn in the economy and distressed funding 
markets, help us to understand the system’s resilience to macro risks.  
 
 
Financial 
stability 
approach 
Monitor the financial 
system
Enhance the resilience 
of the financial system
Manage distress or 
failure
Identify and monitor risks; 
support effective self and 
market discipline 
Establish rigorous 
baseline 
requirements, and 
adapt as necessary 
Minimise the costs of 
institutional distress or 
failure  
  
 
…enhance the resilience of the financial system… 
We enhance the resilience of the financial system by establishing rigorous baseline 
requirements and ensuring these are complied with through supervision. Our baseline 
requirements address enduring and identifiable sources of risk to the financial system, with 
the aim of achieving resilience to most probable shocks or adverse events. We then adapt 
our regulatory and supervisory approach to reflect newly emerging and/or cyclical risks and 
the impact they could have on the financial system.  
Ref #8022722 v2.0 
   7 
 For example, we require banks to meet prescribed capital and liquidity ratios to minimise the 
risk of insolvency due to sudden losses or a disruption in funding markets (We have been 
consulting on whether baseline requirements should be set to ensure solvency of the 
banking system in all but the rarest occasions (a 1:200 year event) or only sufficient for 
something more frequent). If cyclical risks become excessively heightened we can enhance 
resilience by increasing capital and/or liquidity ratios. We can tighten loan-to-value ratio 
(LVR) restrictions if we are concerned about banks’ lending standards and the growth of 
household credit together with the risk of a correction in the housing market.  
 
Our regulatory requirements aim to support effective self and market discipline by providing 
a basis for directors and the market to assess the well-being of individual institutions. Again, 
supervision has a key role to play, in verifying that regulated entities are complying with 
regulations and that self and market discipline are operating as intended.  
 
…and manage the impact of distress or failure 
Prevention is best, and most of our effort is focused there. Nevertheless, despite our efforts 
to monitor and enhance the resilience of the financial system, institutions may become 
distressed and even fail. This means we need to be well placed, in terms of information and 
regulatory tools, to manage these events if and when they do occur.  
Supervision is crucial in helping us understand the balance sheets, operations and the risks 
facing institutions. This means working closely with firms on their recovery and resolution 
plans and having a clearly articulated ladder of supervisory intervention.  
The Reserve Bank also stands ready to act as the lender of last resort in situations where a 
liquidity shortfall threatens the viability of solvent banks and causes a significant tightening in 
credit supply.  
And a new element of our resolution framework is being proposed. The government has 
stated its intention to introduce a deposit protection regime that, in the event of failure of a 
deposit taking institution, would provide that deposits in the range of $30,000- $50,000 were 
insured. While protecting bank customers and taxpayers, this could make it easier to close 
down a failing institution, sharpen incentives on wholesale investors to exert market 
discipline, and help reduce the likelihood of financial instability through ‘runs’ on banks. 
The Reserve Bank is uniquely placed… 
As a full service central bank we are uniquely placed to fulfil our role in maintaining financial 
stability. That means that, alongside our regulatory and supervisory function, we undertake 
monetary policy, we oversee payment and settlement systems, and we stand ready to use 
our markets functions to provide liquidity in exceptional circumstances.  
We also have a role in promoting a vibrant and healthy financial ecosystem. This relies on 
the input of a wide range of stakeholders, regulators and regulated, as well as the 
consumers and businesses who rely on the financial system. As a member of the Council of 
Financial Regulators, we work with Treasury, the FMA, the Commerce Commission and the 
Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment to identify, manage and address issues, 
risks and gaps in the financial system, so that it is both safe and efficient. 
We welcome the ten year review of New Zealand’s capital markets by the FMA and NZX.8 
Capital markets are a key component of a sound and efficient financial system – they 
                                                
8 NZX and the FMA have initiated an industry-led review of New Zealand’s capital markets. Capital Markets 
2029 is designed to deliver a ten-year vision and growth agenda for the sector. See 
Ref #8022722 v2.0 
   8 
 diversify the funding sources that businesses rely on, and they perform a crucial function in 
regulated entities identifying, pricing, allocating and managing risk appropriately. That is 
more likely to occur when capital markets are liquid and accurately capture the fundamental 
value of assets.  
Part 3 – Our approach to financial stability 
Our approach to financial stability is expanding and becoming more intensive, in terms of 
both regulation and supervision. How do we operationalise our financial stability role, and 
what aspects of this role are changing?  
 
Our regulatory approach 
We choose the appropriate regulatory tool to address the identified risk to financial stability, 
bearing in mind efficiency costs, the level of effective self and market discipline, and the 
regulatory framework as a whole. Our requirements are complementary, with some 
substitutability at the margin – we view them as a package. And as I mentioned earlier, our 
baseline settings are not set-and-forget, we adapt them as risks and the resilience of the 
financial system evolve.  
We are bolstering the regulatory pillar through a wide range of initiatives. Most notably we 
are consulting on a material increase in bank capital requirements. Bank capital is a crucially 
important component of the regulatory framework for banks. ‘Skin in the game’ reinforces 
self-discipline – the responsibility on boards and senior managers to manage and disclose 
risks appropriately. Our proposals reflect our experience and the evidence on the 
consequences of financial crises.  
 
However, capital is not a complete mitigant. Our other initiatives reflect that banks can fail for 
many reasons. And it is not efficient to require banks to hold more and more capital in order 
to address all the different sources of risk. That’s why we have a range of policies that aim to 
address potential problems at source. For example, liquidity standards are important in 
ensuring banks can meet their cash flow demands; outsourcing requirements are needed so 
that banks can continue to operate in a situation where a key service provider fails; and 
macroprudential interventions may be necessary during periods of excessive credit and 
asset price growth.  
Other regulatory initiatives include new legislation to grant us more extensive powers to 
supervise FMIs. Given our dependence on payment and settlement systems, their 
lightweight regulation and supervision is a crucial vulnerability. We are working with banks 
and other stakeholders on a new mortgage bond standard, which will provide banks with an 
additional funding source, as well as provide banks and investors with a new tradeable 
instrument. It will also create a larger pool of standardised and transparent securities that the 
Reserve Bank can lend against as lender of last resort. Phase 2 of the review of the Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand Act is looking in more detail at our macroprudential and crisis 
management tools.  
The table below illustrates how our prudential banking tools work together to deliver financial 
stability. Each of our policies contributes to financial stability by addressing a separate risk, 
with its own transmission channel. Some are more targeted at prevention (limiting the 
likelihood of a financial crisis) while others are more targeted at management (mitigating the 
impact of a crisis if it does occur). 
                                                
https://www.fma.govt.nz/news-and-resources/media-releases/nzx-and-fma-initiate-industry-review-capital-
markets-2029/ 
Ref #8022722 v2.0 
       n
o
i
t
n
e
v
e
r
P
s
 i
s
i
r
C
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
M
s
 9 
 Purpose 
Relevant tools 
Impact on financial system resilience 
Impact on wider economy 
Macroprudential policy 
Borrower restrictions 
(LVRs) 
Reduce risk that the 
financial system amplifies a 
severe economic downturn 
Reduced losses in a severe economic 
downturn 
More resilient households and banks 
reduce potential severity of an economic 
downturn 
Lowers incentives on banks to 
deleverage in a downturn; supports 
higher credit supply and economic 
activity 
   Banks remain solvent through the  
economic cycle 
Maintains market confidence   
and lowers risk of sudden increases in 
funding costs for households, 
businesses and the economy 
Banks remain functioning parts  
of financial system 
Maintains availability of credit and 
banking services necessary for 
economic activity 
Mitigates costs for creditors9 and 
taxpayers 
     S
u
p
e
r
v
i
i
s
o
n
 i
o
v
e
r
s
g
h
t
 
a
n
d
d
s
c
o
s
u
r
e
 i
l
      Prudential policy 
Maintain baseline resilience 
of the financial system  
Manage and limit impact of 
distress or failure 
    Capital and liquidity 
instruments 
(CCyB/SCR)  
Capital buffers  
Liquidity policy 
Governance and local 
incorporation 
Collateral standards 
 Outsourcing 
Open Bank Resolution 
i
s
i
r
C
  Minimum capital  
Losses absorbed first by shareholders 
                                                 
9 The government has announced its ‘in-principle’ decision to introduce deposit insurance. 
Ref #8022722 v2.0 
   10 
 There may, at the margin, be some substitutability between our different regulatory tools and 
settings. However, as I’ve said, our regulatory tools are intended to be complementary. For 
example, even if we have higher bank capital ratios, LVRs will continue to have a role to play 
if there is excessive credit growth in household balance sheets.  
Our supervisory approach – a tougher stance 
While a robust regulatory approach gives us confidence in the financial system and its 
stability, it does not imply a lower level of supervisory intensity or that we can shirk our 
supervisory role. Our supervisory approach is intended to complement our regulatory 
approach in terms of its reach, and its intensity.  
Supervision plays a key role in monitoring, and deepening our understanding of, the financial 
system and the risks it faces; in enhancing resilience by verifying that our requirements are 
operating as intended, and enforcing them as necessary. Supervision provides us with the 
necessary intelligence to manage the consequences of distress or failure of individual 
institutions.  
Effective self-discipline is the starting point of our supervisory philosophy. Firms must want 
to achieve good outcomes for their customers and owners, not because regulators wish 
them to. We aim to leverage the incentives on directors, senior managers and shareholders 
to improve the soundness of institutions, and by extension the resilience of the system as a 
whole, as efficiently as possible.  
However, our experience over the last decade has been that regulations have not always 
been well applied or complied with, and that tells us that we cannot rely solely on self-
discipline. Crucially, it is not just the fact of non-compliance that concerns us – regulated 
entities have not been as proactive as we would have liked in identifying and remedying 
issues before the risks become more significant.  
Last year’s conduct and culture review (run jointly with the FMA) highlighted specific 
shortcomings in governance and risk management at banks and insurers, notably in relation 
to sales incentives. The court judgement on CBLI’s liquidation stated that “aspects of CBLI’s 
management had indicated a lack of commercial probity”. And “a lack of candour in dealing 
with the company’s auditors and the regulator”. More recently we revoked ANZ’s 
accreditation to model its own operational risk capital requirement because of persistent 
failures in its controls and attestation process. It is clear that institutional self-discipline has 
been lacking.  
There is therefore a strong case for further increasing the intensity of our supervisory model 
in line with the recommendations from the IMF’s Financial Sector Assessment Program 
(FSAP) assessment of New Zealand.10 This applies even if, on paper, individual regulated 
entities appear to be sound. Banks should expect our more intensive supervisory approach 
to apply even if capital requirements are increased as a result of the ongoing Capital 
Review.  
Regulated entities can expect our supervision to be more intrusive, in seeking evidence that 
attestations are merited and verifying compliance, and that we will intervene and enforce our 
requirements. We will be more pro-active in holding directors and managers to account, 
particularly in areas where we have already identified shortcomings.  
Our regulated population can expect us to continue with our thematic reviews in order to 
enhance self-discipline and our own understanding of risks. In the near future there will be a 
                                                
10 See https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/CR/Issues/2017/05/08/New-Zealand-Financial-Sector-
Assessment-Program-Financial-System-Stability-Assessment-44886 
Ref #8022722 v2.0 
   11 
 thematic review on banks’ liquidity standards and another on the appointed actuary regime 
in the insurance sector. We will continue to periodically stress test the banking system.  
We are working towards more transparency about how our supervisory response would 
escalate if institutions come under stress. As part of the Capital Review we have sought 
feedback on the proposed supervisory consequences for banks if they breach their capital 
buffers. The starting principle is that our response will vary depending on the extent to which 
a bank needs to use its capital buffers to absorb losses. A minor breach of the proposed 
capital buffers would result in increased monitoring and potentially a formal request for the 
bank to submit a capital plan detailing how it planned to remedy the breach and by when. 
More significant breaches could result in increasingly restrictive supervisory actions and 
requirements.  
Figure: Stylised escalated supervisory response 
 We continue to boost core supervisory capability in order to deliver on our supervisory 
approach. This means more skilled resource but it also means building and maintaining the 
necessary monitoring and supervisory frameworks, and it means being analytically strong, 
suitably sceptical, and willing to act. Being clear and up-front on our supervisory approach – 
on our greater willingness to intervene and to enforce our requirements – is desirable not 
only in terms of transparency but also accountability. Setting out our approach publicly, 
which we will do in more detail in coming months, will help build confidence and commitment 
to our enhanced supervisory model.  
A more intensive approach also means working more closely with industry. We are 
committed to establishing a ‘best regulator-regulated’ relationship; to open, knowledgeable 
and constructive discussions, recognising that that there can be a divergence of views and 
interests. 
 
 Ref #8022722 v2.0 
   12 
 Modernising the financial stability framework 
Our Statement of Intent (released yesterday) outlines how we are implementing our financial 
stability approach within the Bank. Our vision of ‘great team, best central bank’ means we 
use and maintain rigorous and up-to-date frameworks for regulatory policy development and 
supervisory decisions. In doing so we take into account the best theory and evidence 
available. We act as responsible steward of the rules and policies which we create and apply 
to regulated entities. We consult openly and are committed to communicating our approach 
in a timely and accessible manner. We work hard to raise awareness across our regulated 
populations about our objectives, priorities and expectations. We foster co-operation and 
mutual trust among our domestic co-regulators, wider stakeholders and global peers. 
Earlier this week the government announced the ‘in-principle’ decisions to (a) replace the 
Reserve Bank’s ‘soundness’ and ‘efficiency’ objective with a high-level financial stability 
objective, (b) establish a new governance board for the Reserve Bank with statutory 
responsibility for financial policy, (c) merge New Zealand’s two existing prudential regimes 
for regulating banks and non-bank deposit takers into a single regime, and (d) introduce a 
deposit insurance scheme. Further changes are being consulted on in the documents just 
released by Treasury.  
The Governor is scheduled to talk on 11 July about the government’s review and what that 
means for the future of the Reserve Bank and the prosperity and wellbeing of New 
Zealanders. 
Financial stability objective 
The new financial stability objective is consistent with how the Reserve Bank has interpreted 
its responsibilities to date and with our increasingly intensive approach to regulation and 
supervision. Financial stability – the soundness or resilience of the financial system – relates 
directly to the existing purpose of our prudential philosophy and is consistent with our intent 
to have a dynamic regulatory framework; a framework with rigorous and adaptable baseline 
standards and a more searching approach to supervision. 
‘Financial stability’ has the advantage of clarity, providing a sharp focus for the Reserve 
Bank, but potentially downplays the importance of efficiency and dynamism that are equally 
relevant to our over-arching purpose: contributing to a sustainable and productive economy 
and the prosperity and wellbeing of New Zealanders. Aspects of efficiency – regulatory 
efficiency and promoting innovation and competition – are expected to be recognised 
through sub-objectives that are also being consulted on. Increased transparency and 
accountability for decision-making will also serve to ensure good regulatory decisions are 
made.  
RBNZ Governance board 
The Reserve Bank will have a new governance board, with statutory responsibility for 
financial policy. The board will be accountable for all prudential decisions, including 
regulation, supervision and enforcement, as well as crisis management. It is expected that 
the board will be able to delegate powers and the exercise of day-to-day functions and 
powers to the Governor, and in turn Reserve Bank staff (supported by internal committees 
as at present). The board will set our risk appetite and scrutinise management’s efforts to 
implement it. 
The new governance structure supports our vision and objectives of being a transparent and 
accountable organisation. Not only will the new board bring diversity of perspectives and 
experience to key decisions, it will set our strategic direction (our risk appetite, our policy 
frameworks) and explain its decisions and regulatory outcomes to a broad audience, from 
Ref #8022722 v2.0 
   13 
 the Minister of Finance and Treasury, through to regulated entities and the general public. It 
will also create more robust accountability by creating a clearer distinction between 
governance and management functions, and establishing a delegation framework.  
ADI perimeter 
 
The government’s decision to merge our regimes for regulating banks and non-bank deposit 
takers into a single regime for deposit takers will create a simpler, more unified regime, more 
clearly aligned with our financial stability objective. It will minimise duplication and treat 
similar activities on the same basis, while continuing to allow our risk-based approach to 
supervision. It will also help future-proof the regime against a shift in lending and deposit-
taking activity from banks to finance companies that are currently outside of our banking 
perimeter, although in a sector as dynamic as the finance industry perimeter issues will 
never be settled entirely. More work will be required to design the details of this new regime, 
particularly to ensure that it can be applied proportionately to the biggest Australian-owned 
bank or the smallest credit union.  
 
Deposit insurance 
 
The government has proposed introducing a depositor insurance scheme with a coverage 
limit in the range of $30,000 to $50,000. There is still a great deal of detail to work through in 
terms of how the scheme will be funded and operate but we expect the scheme will 
complement our role as resolution authority. As we work through the details, we will consider 
the consequences of the scheme for self- and market-discipline, and the need to adapt other 
aspects of our regulatory and supervisory framework accordingly.  
 
Part 4 – Conclusion 
Financial stability is important for New Zealand and all New Zealanders. The cost of a 
financial crisis would be significant and wide-ranging. Its effects – in terms of lost output and 
unemployment – would persist, likely for a decade or more. This means focusing not just on 
risks to our financial system but on the market failures that can exacerbate these risks and 
undermine financial stability.  
The Reserve Bank’s approach to maintaining and promoting financial stability in New 
Zealand is expanding and becoming more intensive, in terms of both regulation and 
supervision. We are recalibrating the rules and our enforcement of them. This is in response 
to our own experience and a publicly perceived need for us to do more, and better.  
By necessity our approach is dynamic: we monitor and enhance the resilience of the 
financial system and intervene in times of crisis in order to manage the fallout. We do this 
through fit-for-purpose regulation and risk-based supervision. And we do so in a way where 
each of the moving parts is complementary in creating a financial system that is sound and 
efficient.  
The Reserve Bank is uniquely placed to do this. As a full service central bank we can 
leverage our different tools and market functions. That means that, not only can we adapt 
our regulatory or supervisory response as circumstances dictate, we can also use our 
markets functions to provide liquidity to the financial system at times of stress. We work with 
other agencies to promote a dynamic and healthy financial system.  
We are working hard to set robust requirements that address structural, cyclical and 
emerging risks in the financial system. Our requirements are not set and forget – we adapt 
them as vulnerabilities evolve and as risks emerge (and recede). Supervision has a crucial 
role to play in complementing the regulatory regime, and will continue to intensify. Regulated 
Ref #8022722 v2.0 
   14 
 entities can expect us to verify that self, market and regulatory discipline are operating as 
intended, and to take enforcement action in cases of non-compliance. 
The government’s ‘in principle’ decisions to modernise the Reserve Bank and our financial 
stability framework give us a clearer objective, a simpler perimeter and strengthen resolution 
options. The new governance framework, with a board responsible for our regulatory and 
supervisory approaches, will make us more transparent and accountable in how we deliver 
on our financial stability objective. These and other changes are being consulted on now and 
I encourage everyone to read the Phase 2 consultation documents on the Treasury’s 
website and to have their say.11 We are increasing our capability to deliver our approach and 
our vision for financial stability within this new architecture.  
We expect that together these initiatives will provide the basis for a dynamic and efficient 
financial system that contributes to a sustainable and productive economy and promotes the 
prosperity and wellbeing of all New Zealanders.  
 
                                                
11 See https://treasury.govt.nz/news-and-events/reviews-consultation/reviewing-reserve-bank-act 
Ref #8022722 v2.0 
  