Mario Draghi: 20th anniversary of the euro
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  session  of  the
plenary of the European Parliament to mark the anniversary of the euro, Strasbourg, 15 January
2019.
 It is with great pleasure that I am here today to celebrate with you the first 20 years of the euro.
The euro is the most tangible representation of European integration that our citizens encounter,
on  a  daily  basis.  It  is  fitting,  then,  to  celebrate  this  anniversary  here  with  the  directly  elected
representatives of all our citizens.
Over the years, elected representatives and leaders here and in other parliaments have rightly
recognised  that  ensuring  economic  prosperity  and  stability  over  the  long  term  is  a  shared
challenge that is best faced collectively. We are stronger together.
With the Single Market, we have a powerful engine of sustainable growth to underpin our living
standards. The euro has safeguarded the integrity of the Single Market. Today, our economies
are integrated to a point that was not imaginable when the euro was designed. Intra-EU exports
rose from 13% of EU GDP in 1992 to 20% today and value chains are everywhere in the euro
area.
The euro has produced two decades of price stability also in countries where this was a long lost
memory. Stable prices have fostered people’s confidence in the value of their savings, which is
one of the conditions for prosperity. Based on such confidence, firms invest and create new jobs.
Today most challenges are global and can be addressed only together. It is this “togetherness”
that magnifies the ability of individual countries to retain the sovereignty over the relevant matters,
sovereignty that would otherwise be lost in this global world. It is precisely in this sense that the
single  currency  has  given  to  all  members  of  the  euro  area  their  monetary  policy  sovereignty,
compared with the pre-existing monetary arrangements.
It is together that we have a voice in the regulation of international financial markets; a voice,
which has been fundamental in reshaping the world financial regulation after the global financial
crisis.
But  in  some  countries,  not  all  of  the  euro’s  benefits  have  been  realised  in  full.  Partly,  this  is
because  reforms  at  national  level  are  necessary,  and  they  would  be  so  under  any  monetary
system,  to  produce  sustainable  growth;  partly,  because  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union
(EMU) remains incomplete.
Great progress has been achieved since the crisis struck, but more work still needs to be done;
and there is no alternative to a future where we will continue to work together to make our EMU
an even stronger engine of prosperity for all its member states.
The European Parliament will have a fundamental role in guiding and designing our European
future. In the past, together with the EU leaders, the European Parliament took the fundamental
decisions to create the Single Market, and in its wake the euro.
Today, we are all reaping the benefits of their commitment and we want the future generations of
Europeans to similarly benefit from our commitment as well. Today, our duty is to complete what
was started two decades ago.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
