For release on delivery 
10:00 a.m. EDT (8:00 a.m. local time) 
August 23, 2019 
Challenges for Monetary Policy 
Remarks by 
Jerome H. Powell 
Chair 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
at 
“Challenges for Monetary Policy,” a symposium 
sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Jackson Hole, Wyoming 
August 23, 2019 
 This year’s symposium topic is “Challenges for Monetary Policy,” and for the 
Federal Reserve those challenges flow from our mandate to foster maximum employment 
and price stability.  From this perspective, our economy is now in a favorable place, and I 
will describe how we are working to sustain these conditions in the face of significant 
risks we have been monitoring.   
The current U.S. expansion has entered its 11th year and is now the longest on 
record.1  The unemployment rate has fallen steadily throughout the expansion and has 
been near half-century lows since early 2018.  But that rate alone does not fully capture 
the benefits of this historically strong job market.  Labor force participation by people in 
their prime working years has been rising.  While unemployment for minorities generally 
remains higher than for the workforce as a whole, the rate for African Americans, at 
6 percent, is the lowest since the government began tracking it in 1972.  For the past few 
years, wages have been increasing the most for people at the lower end of the wage scale.  
People who live and work in low- and middle-income communities tell us that this job 
market is the best anyone can recall.  We increasingly hear reports that employers are 
training workers who lack required skills, adapting jobs to the needs of employees with 
family responsibilities, and offering second chances to people who need one.  
Inflation has been surprisingly stable during the expansion:  not falling much 
when the economy was weak and not rising much as the expansion gained strength.  
Inflation ran close to our symmetric 2 percent objective for most of last year but has been 
running somewhat below 2 percent this year.   
                                                   
1 The National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) has classified business cycle turning points back to 
1854 (see https://www.nber.org/cycles.html). 
 - 2 - 
Thus, after a decade of progress toward maximum employment and price 
stability, the economy is close to both goals.  Our challenge now is to do what monetary 
policy can do to sustain the expansion so that the benefits of the strong jobs market 
extend to more of those still left behind, and so that inflation is centered firmly around 
2 percent.   
Today I will explore what history tells us about sustaining long, steady 
expansions.  A good place to start is with the passage of the Employment Act of 1946, 
which stated that it is the “continuing policy and responsibility of the Federal 
Government . . . to promote maximum employment, production, and purchasing power.”2  
Some version of these goals has been in place ever since.  I will divide the history since 
World War II into three eras organized around some well-known “Greats.”  The first era 
comprises the postwar years through the Great Inflation.  The second era brought the 
Great Moderation but ended in the Great Recession.  The third era is still under way, and 
time will tell what “Greats” may emerge.  
Each era presents a key question for the Fed and for society more generally.  The 
first era raises the question whether a central bank can resist the temptations that led to 
the Great Inflation.  The second era raises the question whether long expansions 
supported by better monetary policy inevitably lead to destabilizing financial excesses 
like those seen in the Great Moderation.  The third era confronts us with the question of 
                                                   
2 See Declaration of Policy, section 2 of the Employment Act of 1946, Pub. L. 79-304, ch. 33, 60 Stat 23 
(1946), available at 
https://fraser.stlouisfed.org/scribd/?title_id=1099&filepath=/files/docs/historical/congressional/employment
-act-1946.pdf. 
   A modified version of those goals formally became the Fed’s dual mandate in 1977.  For further 
discussion, see “Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of 1978 (Humphrey-Hawkins)” on the 
Board’s website at https://www.federalreservehistory.org/essays/humphrey_hawkins_act. 
 - 3 - 
how best to promote sustained prosperity in a world of slow global growth, low inflation, 
and low interest rates.  Near the end of my remarks, I will discuss the current context, and 
the ways these questions are shaping policy.   
Era I, 1950–1982:  Policy Breeds Macroeconomic Instability and the Great Inflation 
The late 1940s were a period of adjustment to a peacetime economy.  As the 
1940s turned to the 1950s, the state of knowledge about how best to promote 
macroeconomic stability was limited.  The 1950s and early 1960s saw the economy 
oscillating sharply between recession and growth above 6 percent (figure 1, panel A).  
Three expansions and contractions came in quick succession.  With the benefit of 
hindsight, the lack of stability is generally attributed to “stop and go” stabilization policy, 
as monetary and fiscal authorities grappled with how best to modulate the use of their 
blunt but powerful tools.3   
Beginning in the mid-1960s, “stop and go” policy gave way to “too much go and 
not enough stop”—not enough, that is, to quell rising inflation pressures.  Both inflation 
and inflation expectations ratcheted upward through four expansions until the Fed, under 
Chairman Paul Volcker, engineered a definitive stop in the early 1980s (figure 1, 
panel C).  Each of the expansions in the Great Inflation period ended with monetary 
policy tightening in response to rising inflation.   
Policymakers came out of the Great Inflation era with a clear understanding that it 
was essential to anchor inflation expectations at some low level.  But many believed that 
                                                   
3 Romer and Romer (2002) document that the Federal Open Market Committee understood the essence of 
sound policy.  Nonetheless, as Nelson (2013) discusses, many authors argue that the way those principles 
were applied contributed to the fluctuations of the time. 
 - 4 - 
central bankers would find it difficult to ignore the temptation of short-term employment 
gains at the cost of higher inflation down the road.4   
Era II, 1983 through 2009: the Great Moderation and Great Recession 
As the second era began, inflation was falling, and it continued to fall for about a 
decade (figure 2, panel C).  In 1993, core inflation, which omits the volatile food and 
energy components, first fell below 2.5 percent, and has since remained in the narrow 
range of 0.9 percent to 2.5 percent.5  Greater success on price stability came with greater 
success on employment.  Expansions in this era were longer and more stable than before 
(figure 2, panel A).  The era saw two of the three longest U.S. expansions up to that point 
in history.6   
Anchored inflation expectations helped make this win-win outcome possible, by 
giving the Fed latitude to support employment when necessary without destabilizing 
inflation.  The Fed was cutting, not raising, rates in the months prior to the end of the first 
two expansions in this era, and the ensuing recessions were mild by historical standards.  
And twice during the long expansion of the 1990s, the Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC) eased policy in response to threats to growth.  In 1995, responding to evidence 
                                                   
4 As discussed by Faust (1996), the structure of FOMC governance was motivated by the traditional view 
that governments are tempted to resort to inflation in times of stress.  With the post–World War II emphasis 
on full employment and understanding the role of inflation expectations, this tendency was reformulated as 
seeking near-term gains on employment at the cost of long-term inflation (Kydland and Prescott, 1977; 
Barro and Gordon, 1983).  
5 Overall inflation, which is the subject of our symmetric 2 percent objective, has been somewhat more 
volatile, but it is neither practical nor wise to try to smooth purely transitory inflation fluctuations.  As such 
transitory fluctuations are frequently driven by volatile food and energy prices, I am citing the stability of 
core inflation on a four-quarter basis as a proxy for Fed performance in achieving the relevant sense of 
stability. 
6 Analysts debate the role that monetary policy and other factors, such as luck and structural change in the 
economy, played in bringing about the Great Moderation.  For example, Ahmed, Levin, and Wilson (2004) 
find an important role for luck.  Stock and Watson (2003) attribute much of the change to an unexplained 
improvement in the tradeoff between inflation and output variability.  Like Bernanke (2004), I believe that 
better policy was an important factor behind the better outcomes, perhaps allowing other factors to show 
through.   
 - 5 - 
of slowing in the United States and abroad, the FOMC reduced the federal funds rate over 
a few months.  In 1998, the Russian debt default and the related collapse of the hedge 
fund Long-Term Capital Management rocked financial markets that were already fragile 
from the Asian financial crisis.  Given the risks posed to the U.S. economy, the FOMC 
again lowered the federal funds rate over a period of months until events quieted.  The 
10-year expansion weathered both events with no discernible inflation cost.7  
By the turn of the century, it was beginning to look like financial excesses and 
global events would pose the main threats to stability in this new era rather than 
overheating and rising inflation.  The collapse of the tech stock bubble in 2000 and the 
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks played key roles in precipitating a slowdown that 
turned into a recession.8  And the next expansion, as we are all painfully aware, ended 
with the collapse of a housing bubble and the Global Financial Crisis.  Thus, this second 
era provided good reason for optimism about the Fed’s ability to deliver stable inflation, 
but also raised a question about whether long expansions inevitably lead to destabilizing 
financial excesses. 
Era III, 2010 and After:  Monetary Policy and the Emerging New Normal   
The third era began in 2010 as the recovery from the Great Recession was taking 
hold.  My focus in discussing this era will be on a “new normal” that is becoming 
apparent in the wake of the crisis.  I will fast-forward past the early years of the 
expansion and pick up the story in December 2015.9  The unemployment rate had fallen 
                                                   
7 Indeed, as I noted at this symposium last year, inflation ran surprisingly low in the second half of the 
1990s (Powell, 2018). 
8 This was an odd recession to classify.  The collapse of the tech bubble was followed by several quarters of 
generally slow positive growth.  Regarding declaring the 2001 recession, the NBER Business Cycle Dating 
Committee stated, “Before the [September 11] attacks, it is possible that the decline in the economy would 
have been too mild to qualify as a recession” (NBER, 2001, p. 8).  
9 Ben Bernanke (2012) surveyed the early years of the recovery at this symposium in 2012. 
 - 6 - 
from a peak of 10 percent to 5 percent, roughly equal to the median FOMC participant’s 
estimate of the natural rate of unemployment at the time.  At this point, the Committee 
decided that it was prudent to begin gradually raising the federal funds rate based on the 
closely monitored premise that the increasingly healthy economy called for more-normal 
interest rates.  The premise was generally borne out:  Growth from the end of 2015 to the 
end of 2018 averaged 2.5 percent, a bit above the 2.2 percent rate over the previous five 
years (figure 2, panel A).  The unemployment rate fell below 4 percent, and inflation 
moved up and remained close to our 2 percent objective through much of 2018 (figure 2,  
panels B and C).   
That brings us to 2019.  Before turning to issues occupying center stage at 
present, I want to address a long-running issue that I discussed here last year:  tracking 
the “stars” that serve as guideposts for monetary policy.10  These include u*, the natural 
rate of unemployment, and r*, the neutral real rate of interest.  Unlike celestial stars, 
these stars move unpredictably and cannot be directly observed.  We must judge their 
locations as best we can based on incoming data and then add an element of risk 
management to be able to use them as guides.  
Since 2012, declining unemployment has had surprisingly little effect on inflation, 
prompting a steady decline in estimates of u* (figure 3).11  Standard estimates of r* have 
declined between 2 and 3 percentage points over the past two decades.  Some argue that 
the effective decline is even larger.12 Incorporating a lower value of u* into policymaking 
                                                   
10 Powell (2018). 
11 The fact that inflation did not react much to changing unemployment also led some to reassess other 
structural features such as the slope of the Phillips curve.  
12 As discussed in Rachel and Summers (2019), many factors combine to determine the normal growth rate 
of the economy and r*.  Persistent movements in longer-term interest rates in a stable inflation environment 
are one indicator of r* movements.  
 - 7 - 
does not require a significant change in our approach.  The significant fall in r*, however, 
may demand more fundamental change.  A lower r* combined with low inflation means 
that interest rates will run, on average, significantly closer to their effective lower bound.   
The key question raised by this era, then, is how we can best support maximum 
employment and price stability in a world with a low neutral interest rate.   
Current Policy and the Three Key Questions 
Let me turn now to the current implications for monetary policy of the questions 
raised by these three eras.  The first era raised the question of whether the Fed can avoid 
excessive inflation.  Inflation has averaged less than 2 percent over the past 25 years, and 
low inflation has been the main concern for the past decade.  Low inflation seems to be 
the problem of this era, not high inflation.  Nonetheless, in the unlikely event that signs of 
too-high inflation return, we have proven tools to address such a situation.  
The second era’s question—whether long expansions inevitably breed financial 
excesses—is a challenging and timely one.  Hyman Minsky long argued that, as an 
expansion continues and memories of the previous downturn fade, financial risk 
management deteriorates and risks are increasingly underappreciated.13  This observation 
has spurred much discussion.  At the end of the day, we cannot prevent people from 
finding ways to take excessive financial risks.  But we can work to make sure that they 
bear the costs of their decisions, and that the financial system as a whole continues to 
function effectively.  Since the crisis, Congress, the Fed, and other regulatory authorities 
here and around the world have taken substantial steps to achieve these goals.  Banks and 
other key institutions have significantly more capital and more stable funding than before 
                                                   
13 See, for example, Minsky (1991). 
 - 8 - 
the crisis.  We comprehensively review financial stability every quarter and release our 
assessments twice a year to highlight areas of concern and allow oversight of our efforts.  
We have not seen unsustainable borrowing, financial booms, or other excesses of the sort 
that occurred at times during the Great Moderation, and I continue to judge overall 
financial stability risks to be moderate.  But we remain vigilant.   
That leaves the third question of how, in this low r* world, the Fed can best 
support the economy.  A low neutral interest rate presents both near-term and longer-term 
challenges.  I will begin with the current context.  Because today’s setting is both 
challenging and unique in many ways, it may be useful to lay out some general principles 
for assessing and implementing appropriate policy and to describe how we have been 
applying those principles.   
Through the FOMC’s setting of the federal funds rate target range and our 
communications about the likely path forward for policy and the economy, we seek to 
influence broader financial conditions to promote maximum employment and price 
stability.  In forming judgments about the appropriate stance of policy, the Committee 
digests a broad range of data and other information to assess the current state of the 
economy, the most likely outlook for the future, and meaningful risks to that outlook.  
Because the most important effects of monetary policy are felt with uncertain lags of a 
year or more, the Committee must attempt to look through what may be passing 
developments and focus on things that seem likely to affect the outlook over time or that 
pose a material risk of doing so.  Risk management enters our decisionmaking because of 
both the uncertainty about the effects of recent developments and the uncertainty we face 
regarding structural aspects of the economy, including the natural rate of unemployment 
 - 9 - 
and the neutral rate of interest.  It will at times be appropriate for us to tilt policy one way 
or the other because of prominent risks.  Finally, we have a responsibility to explain what 
we are doing and why we are doing it so the American people and their elected 
representatives in Congress can provide oversight and hold us accountable.   
We have much experience in addressing typical macroeconomic developments 
under this framework.  But fitting trade policy uncertainty into this framework is a new 
challenge.  Setting trade policy is the business of Congress and the Administration, not 
that of the Fed.  Our assignment is to use monetary policy to foster our statutory goals.  In 
principle, anything that affects the outlook for employment and inflation could also affect 
the appropriate stance of monetary policy, and that could include uncertainty about trade 
policy.  There are, however, no recent precedents to guide any policy response to the 
current situation.  Moreover, while monetary policy is a powerful tool that works to 
support consumer spending, business investment, and public confidence, it cannot 
provide a settled rulebook for international trade.  We can, however, try to look through 
what may be passing events, focus on how trade developments are affecting the outlook, 
and adjust policy to promote our objectives. 
This approach is illustrated by the way incoming data have shaped the likely path 
of policy this year.  The outlook for the U.S. economy since the start of the year has 
continued to be a favorable one.  Business investment and manufacturing have weakened, 
but solid job growth and rising wages have been driving robust consumption and 
supporting moderate growth overall.   
As the year has progressed, we have been monitoring three factors that are 
weighing on this favorable outlook: slowing global growth, trade policy uncertainty, and 
 - 10 - 
muted inflation.  The global growth outlook has been deteriorating since the middle of 
last year.  Trade policy uncertainty seems to be playing a role in the global slowdown and 
in weak manufacturing and capital spending in the United States.  Inflation fell below our 
objective at the start of the year.   It appears to be moving back up closer to our 
symmetric 2 percent objective, but there are concerns about a more prolonged shortfall. 
Committee participants have generally reacted to these developments and the 
risks they pose by shifting down their projections of the appropriate federal funds rate 
path.  Along with July’s rate cut, the shifts in the anticipated path of policy have eased 
financial conditions and help explain why the outlook for inflation and employment 
remains largely favorable.   
Turning to the current context, we are carefully watching developments as we 
assess their implications for the U.S. outlook and the path of monetary policy.  The three 
weeks since our July FOMC meeting have been eventful, beginning with the 
announcement of new tariffs on imports from China.  We have seen further evidence of a 
global slowdown, notably in Germany and China.  Geopolitical events have been much in 
the news, including the growing possibility of a hard Brexit, rising tensions in Hong 
Kong, and the dissolution of the Italian government.  Financial markets have reacted 
strongly to this complex, turbulent picture.  Equity markets have been volatile.  Long-
term bond rates around the world have moved down sharply to near post-crisis lows.  
Meanwhile, the U.S. economy has continued to perform well overall, driven by consumer 
spending.  Job creation has slowed from last year’s pace but is still above overall labor 
force growth.  Inflation seems to be moving up closer to 2 percent.  Based on our 
assessment of the implications of these developments, we will act as appropriate to 
 - 11 - 
sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 
2 percent objective. 
The Three Questions in the Longer Run 
Looking back over the three eras, monetary policy has evolved to address new 
challenges as they have arisen.  The inflation targeting regime that emerged after the 
Great Inflation has led to vastly improved outcomes for employment and price stability 
around the world.  One result has been much longer expansions, which often brought 
with them the buildup of financial risk.  This new pattern has led us to understand that 
assuring financial stability over time requires much greater resilience in our financial 
system, particularly for our largest, most complex banks.   
As we look back over the decade since the end of the financial crisis, we can 
again see fundamental economic changes that call for a reassessment of our policy 
framework.  The current era has been characterized by much lower neutral interest rates, 
disinflationary pressures, and slower growth.  We face heightened risks of lengthy, 
difficult-to-escape periods in which our policy interest rate is pinned near zero.  To 
address this new normal, we are conducting a public review of our monetary policy 
strategy, tools, and communications—the first of its kind for the Federal Reserve.  We 
are evaluating the pros and cons of strategies that aim to reverse past misses of our 
inflation objective.  We are examining the monetary policy tools we have used both in 
calm times and in crisis, and we are asking whether we should expand our toolkit.  In 
addition, we are looking at how we might improve the communication of our policy 
framework. 
- 12 -
Public engagement, unprecedented in scope for the Fed, is at the heart of this 
effort.  Through Fed Listens events live-streamed on the internet, we are hearing a 
diverse range of perspectives not only from academic experts, but also from 
representatives of consumer, labor, business, community, and other groups.  We have 
begun a series of FOMC meetings at which we will discuss these questions.  We will 
continue reporting on our discussions in the FOMC minutes and share our conclusions 
when we finish the review next year. 
I will conclude by saying that we are deeply committed to fulfilling our mandate 
in this challenging era, and I look forward to the valuable insights that will, I am 
confident, be shared at this symposium. 
- 13 -
References 
Ahmed, Shaghil, Andrew Levin, and Beth Anne Wilson (2004).  “Recent U.S. 
Macroeconomic Stability:  Good Policies, Good Practices, or Good Luck?” 
Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 86 (August), pp. 824–32. 
Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon (1983).  “Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a 
Model of Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 12 (1), 
pp. 101–21.  
Bernanke, Ben S. (2004).  “The Great Moderation,” speech delivered at the meetings of 
the Eastern Economic Association, Washington, February 20, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2004/20040220. 
——— (2012).  “Monetary Policy since the Onset of the Crisis,” speech delivered at 
“The Changing Policy Landscape,” a symposium sponsored by the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30–September 
1, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20120831a.htm. 
Faust, Jon (1996).  “Whom Can We Trust to Run The Fed?  Theoretical Support for the 
Founders’ Views,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 37 (April), pp. 267–83. 
Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott (1977).  “Rules Rather Than Discretion:  The 
Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 85 (June), 
pp. 473–91. 
Minsky, Hyman P. (1991).  “Financial Crises:  Systemic or Idiosyncratic,” paper 
presented at “The Crisis in Finance,” a conference held at the Jerome Levy 
Economics Institute of Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., April 4–6, 
www.levyinstitute.org/pubs/wp51.pdf. 
National Bureau of Economic Research, Business Cycle Dating Committee (2001).  The 
Business-Cycle Peak of March 2001.  Cambridge, Mass.:  NBER, November 26, 
https://www.nber.org/cycles/november2001/recessions.pdf. 
Nelson, Edward (2013).  “Milton Friedman and the Federal Reserve Chairs, 1951–1979,” 
paper presented at the Economics History Seminar, University of California, 
Berkeley, October, 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.404.5347&rep=rep1&ty
pe=pdf. 
Powell, Jerome H. (2018).  “Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy,” speech delivered 
at “Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy,” a 
symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in 
Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 23–25, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/powell20180824a.htm. 
- 14 -
Rachel, Lukasz, and Lawrence H. Summers (2019).  “On Falling Neutral Real Rates, 
Fiscal Policy, and the Risk of Secular Stagnation,” paper presented at the 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings 
Institution, Washington, March 7–8, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2019/03/On-Falling-Neutral-Real-Rates-Fiscal-Policy-and-the-
Risk-of-Secular-Stagnation.pdf. 
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer (2002).  “A Rehabilitation of Monetary Policy 
in the 1950s,” American Economic Review, vol. 92 (May), pp. 121–27. 
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2003).  “Has the Business Cycle Changed?  
Evidence and Explanations,” paper presented at “Monetary Policy and 
Uncertainty:  Adapting to a Changing Economy,” a symposium sponsored by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 28–30, 
https://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2003/pdf/Stockwatson2003.pdf. 
Challenges for Monetary Policy
Jerome H. Powell
Chair
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
at
“Challenges for Monetary Policy,” a symposium sponsored by
The Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Jackson Hole, Wyoming
For release at 10:00 a.m. EDT (8:00 a.m. MDT)
August 23, 2019
   Figure 1. Era 1: 1950−82
A. Real GDP Growth
Quarterly
Percent
B. Unemployment Rate
Quarterly
Percent
15
10
5
0
−5
1950 1956 1962 1968 1974 1980
1950 1956 1962 1968 1974 1980
C. PCE Inflation
Quarterly
Percent
D. Federal Funds Rate
Quarterly
Percent
Overall
Core
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
−2
12
10
8
6
4
2
15
10
5
0
1950 1956 1962 1968 1974 1980
1950 1956 1962 1968 1974 1980
             Note:  Unemployment and federal funds data are quarterly averages; overall personal consumption expenditures
       (PCE) are the four−quarter change in the PCE price index; core PCE is the four−quarter change in the PCE price
       index less food and energy; real gross domestic product (GDP) growth is the four−quarter change in the level of real
       GDP; federal funds data start in July 1954; core PCE data start in January 1960; all data extend through 1982:Q4.
       Shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research.
             Source:  For overall PCE, core PCE, and real GDP growth, the Bureau of Economic Analysis;
       for the unemployment rate, Bureau of Labor Statistics; for the federal funds rate, Board of Governors of the
       Federal Reserve System; all series retrieved from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, FRED.
   Figure 2. Eras 2 and 3: 1983−2009 and 2010−present
A. Real GDP Growth
Quarterly
Percent
B. Unemployment Rate
Quarterly
Percent
15
10
5
0
−5
1983
1991
1999
2007
2015
1983
1991
1999
2007
2015
C. PCE Inflation
Quarterly
Percent
D. Federal Funds Rate
Quarterly
Percent
Overall
Core
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
−2
12
10
8
6
4
15
10
5
0
1983
1991
1999
2007
2015
1983
1991
1999
2007
2015
             Note:  Unemployment and federal funds data are quarterly averages; overall personal consumption expenditures
      (PCE) are the four−quarter change in the PCE price index; core PCE is the four−quarter change in the PCE price
      index less food and energy; real gross domestic product (GDP) growth is the four−quarter change in the level
      of real GDP; all data extend through 2019:Q2.  Shaded bars indicate periods of business recession as defined by
      the National Bureau of Economic Research.
             Source:  For overall PCE, core PCE, and real GDP growth, the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis;
       for the unemployment rate, Bureau of Labor Statistics; for the federal funds rate, Board of Governors of the
       Federal Reserve System; all series retrieved from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, FRED.
    Figure 3.  Real−Time Estimates of r* and u*
FOMC
Blue Chip
CBO
r* − Neutral Real Rate of Interest
u* − Natural Rate of Unemployment
Percent
Percent
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
2012
2014
2016
2018
2012
2014
2016
2018
               Note: The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) data are quarterly, extend through June 2019, and are projections of longer−term normal. The Blue Chip
         data are biannual, extend through June 2019, and are projections for 6 to 10 years in the future.  The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) data are biannual
         and extend through January 2019. For the left panel, the projections are for 10 years in the future; the right panel shows the natural rate projection for the current
         quarter at the time of the projection.  The neutral real interest rate is the 3−month Treasury bill rate projection (CBO) or the federal funds rate projection
         (FOMC and Blue Chip) minus the source’s inflation projection.
              Source:  For FOMC, Summary of Economic Projections, available on the Board’s website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm;          
for Blue Chip, Wolters Kluwer, Blue Chip Economic Indicators and Blue Chip Financial Forecasts; for CBO, Congressional Budget Office (The Budget and          
Economic Outlook) and Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (ALFRED).
