Eddie  Yue:  Financial  markets  in  Asia  -  turning  challenges  into
opportunities
Speech by Mr Eddie Yue, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the
International  Swaps  and  Derivatives  Association  (ISDA)  34th  Annual  General  Meeting,  Hong
Kong, 10 April 2019.
 Thank you for inviting me to speak at the ISDA Annual General Meeting.  For those of you coming
from overseas, let me welcome you to Hong Kong and the very dynamic Asian region.  By now, I
hope you have experienced and enjoyed the vibrancy of the city.  Indeed, this same vibrancy runs
through Asia,  which  has  got  strong  economic  momentum  with  a  promising  outlook.    But  as
central bankers, our job is to be on the lookout for future challenges and how to overcome them. 
So today I’d like to start by outlining two near-term risks on my radar screen, and then discuss
two longer-term challenges for Asia.  I would then offer some thoughts on how financial sector
developments, including a lot of the efforts that ISDA has been involved in, can help overcome
these challenges.
Challenges for the Asian Economies
Asia  has  seen  remarkable  economic  growth  over  the  past  several  decades  –  its  GDP,  on  a
purchasing power-adjusted basis, now accounts for more than 44 percent of global output, up
from just 30 percent in year 2000.  Living standards have improved dramatically, and per capital
income has more than tripled over this period.  Behind this incredible economic momentum are
globalisation, investments, and supportive government policies, factors expected to continue to
drive the region for the foreseeable future.  Indeed, the Asian region is expected to grow at 5
percent per year through 2023, easily topping all other regions of the world.
Robust  regional  economic  development  has  benefitted  Hong  Kong,  just  as  the  services  we
provide  as  an  International  Financial  Centre  has  benefitted  the  region.    Hong  Kong  offers  an
excellent  platform  for  global  businesses  and  investors,  governed  by  a  well-established  legal
system,  backed  by  a  resilient  banking  sector,  and  supported  by  its  geographic  and  cultural
proximity  to  China.    Our  city  has  become  a  global  leader  in  IPO  fundraising,  bond  issuance,
asset  management,  and  renminbi  products.  In  addition,  innovation  –  both  financial  and
technological – is a key policy priority and is at the heart of the city’s future plans.  
But  underlying  this  promising  trend  for Asia  is  a  number  of  challenges.    The  most  important
downside risk to our region at this juncture is the China-US trade war.  Some negative spillover
effects of the three rounds of tariffs have already been experienced by various Asian economies,
as  we  have  seen  exports  slowing  in  a  number  of  economies.    Here  in  Hong  Kong  re-export
volumes destined for China or the US that are on the tariff lists fell in the fourth quarter of 2018. 
While we’re all hopeful that a resolution is on its way, we should also be prepared for further
damage to businesses and confidence if the conflict continues to linger.
Another  near-term  risk  is  the  recent  shift  in  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  in  the  advanced
economies  from  tightening  to  accommodative.  In  principle,  this  could  be  beneficial  to  Asian
currencies and investor sentiments; but it could also be the impetus to new rounds of capital flow
“surges-and-flights”.  It’s therefore imperative for our region to manage and allocate the surges
efficiently with the view that there may be a potential reversal later on. 
Turning to longer-term challenges, a key one for Asia is adaptation to China’s ongoing economic
transformation.    We  have  already  seen  some  economies  in  the  region  benefitting  from  this
transformation  in  recent  years,  by  stepping  into  certain  manufacturing  sectors  that  China  has
exited,  while  others  have  boosted  participation  in  China’s  value  chain,  especially  in  high-tech
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
sectors.  The continued  opening  up  of  capital  markets  means  that  financial  linkages  between
China and other Asian economies will also become tighter. 
But amid this transition is the possibility that an economy ends up being left out because it didn’t
adapt effectively.  I’d imagine, for example, that economies overly dependent on exports geared
toward  filling  China’s  investment  demand  may  lose  out  to  those  that  focus  on  supplying
consumption  goods  and  providing  financial  services.  So  while  I  don’t  see  China’s  economic
transition leading to “black swans” for Asian economies, the risk would be for economies to “fall
behind” in the process. 
Another  longer-term  challenge—and  one  that’s  perhaps  most  important—is  the  chance  that
some  economies  in  our  region  might  fall  into  the  so-called  “middle  income  trap”.  The  middle
income trap is the phenomenon that many emerging economies slow markedly as per capita
income approaches a certain level, typically estimated to be around US$20,000.  Many important
economies  in Asia  are  already  approaching  that  level,  so  we  should  all  be  thinking  about  this
challenge before it’s too late.  Trends such as population ageing, a slowdown of urbanisation, low
productivity  as  a  result  of  overinvestment,  and  the  lack  of  financial  market  development  are
generally cited as the causes of the middle income trap.  One would think that the reversal of
these trends could help economies evade the trap, but this of course is easier said than done. 
Crucial Role of Financial Market Development
While issues such as population ageing are probably best left to other forums, those of us here
today  are  well-suited  to  think  about  how  financial  market  developments  can  help  Asian
economies overcome the two longer-term challenges.  Informed by Hong Kong’s blueprint as an
International Financial Centre, let me share a few thoughts on this issue.    
First,  both  longer  term  challenges  –  navigating  China’s  economic  transition,  and  evading  the
middle income trap – require Asia’s financial institutions to be tech-forward. Around the world, we
have seen fintech play a key role, with innovations ranging from the digitalisation of traditional
banking activities, to ones aimed at promoting financial inclusion.  At the HKMA, we have been
proactive  in  using  technologies  to  make  financial  services  more  accessible,  especially  for
consumers and SMEs.
Over the past year, we have launched Open API, a framework that allows third party providers to
aggregate information about the products and services offered by different banks for the benefit
of end-users.  Licences have now been granted to three virtual banks, with potentially more on
the way, which will enhance the spectrum of products and services available to retail customers
and SMEs.  Another application launched was Faster Payment Systems or FPS, a 24/7 retail
payment platform that offers cross-bank, cross-eWallet transfers in Hong Kong dollar or RMB. 
All that’s needed is the recipient’s phone number or email address.  We have also introduced
applications that help corporations: the eTradeConnect platform, for example, uses DLT-based
technology to bring the paperwork-heavy trade financing business into the digital era.       
Other Asian  economies  have  also  been  actively  engaged  in  fintech  solutions  that  help  make
access to financial services easier for their constituents.  Without a doubt, a lot more work still
needs to be done on fintech, especially when compared with other areas such as e-commerce
and social networking where the impact of technology has been and continues to be immense. 
Second, Asian economies need to continue to promote long-term investments and stable capital
markets.  Research has firmly established that well-functioning financial systems are crucial to
economic  development,  and  that  capital  mobility  in  particular  is  beneficial  for  middle  income
economies.    One  particular  development  I’d  like  to  highlight,  and  one  that’s  quite  fitting  for
discussion at today’s forum, is the development of derivatives markets.  Derivative markets offer
cost-effective  ways  to  manoeuvre  investments;  more  importantly,  they  are  effective  risk
mitigation  tools.    In  the  context  of  Asia,  where  cross-border  flows  are  large  and  where
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
opportunities  for  foreign  investors  are  plentiful,  derivatives  can  help  investors  deploy  capital
without  being  subject  to  excessive  short-term  price  fluctuations,  by  hedging  out  currency  and
interest rate risks.  The upshot here is that capital can then be allocated to usages that benefit
long-term economic development in the region.
Now,  I  note  this  as  a  “development”,  because  there’s  plenty  of  room  for  growth  in  Asia’s
derivative markets: according to a recent report by the Committee on Global Financial Systems,
or the CGFS, in  most Asian  economies,  average  daily  trading  volumes  for  derivatives  remain
strikingly low compared to advanced economies, even those that are not major financial centres. 
In  addition,  almost  half  of  the  market  participants  surveyed  by  the  CGFS  expressed  at  least
“some”  concerns  that  the  functioning  of  derivative  markets  in  emerging  market  economies  in
general do not adequately complement their respective capital markets, with about 20 percent
indicating “significant concerns”.  Aside from the limited turnover size, I suspect that geography
also plays a role in this rather downbeat assessment – many Asian-related derivative trades are
in fact not booked or risk-managed in Asia!
To me, the market’s opinion is clear: derivative markets in Asia need to be further developed.  Let
me  share  some  recent  experiences  in  Hong  Kong  in  this  regard.    By  daily  average  trading
volume, our interest rate and FX derivative markets have almost doubled since 2013, and are
now  first  and  second,  respectively,  in  terms  of  regional  market  share.    Notwithstanding  this
growth,  Hong  Kong  still  only  accounts  for  a  small  global  market  share,  and  the  products  we
cover – both in terms of contract type and underlying currency – has a lot of room to expand. 
We have therefore taken a proactive approach by encouraging international banks to establish
derivative  hubs  serving  Asian  risks  in  Hong  Kong  as  long  as  they  meet  capital  adequacy
requirements and our risk management standards.  Establishment of these hubs can help banks
take  advantage  of  Hong  Kong’s  double  tax  agreements  with  all  key  economies  in  the  region;
more importantly, our city’s growing status as a nexus between Mainland China and the rest of
the  world  means  that  Hong  Kong  will  play  an  increasing  role  in  providing  risk  management
solutions for international investors going into China and, increasingly, Chinese investors going
global, just like how we successfully facilitate those investments through our Connect schemes. 
Our commitment to further developing the derivatives market is strong and we stand ready to
work with various partners on this.
One  key  current  issue  is  benchmark  reform.    As  discussed  over  the  past  two  days,  many
economies in Asia have been working on this, as this reform is important not only to derivative
markets, but also to bank lending.  The HKMA has actively engaged our banks to identify their
exposures  to  the  benchmark  rates  of  relevance  (i.e.,  LIBOR  and  HIBOR)  and  to  prepare  for
various  scenarios  that  could  play  out  during  this  process.    At  the  same  time,  the  Treasury
Markets Association  in  Hong  Kong  has  proposed  HONIA  as  an  alternative  risk  free  overnight
reference rate to HIBOR and is consulting industry stakeholders.  I should take this opportunity to
mention that ISDA’s leadership on two important implementation issues – namely, how to adjust
new  overnight  reference  rates  for  longer  tenors  and  how  to  ensure  credit  risk  premiums  are
reflected – helped pave the way for constructive discussions in Hong Kong.  So overall, progress
is being made.
Managing the Risks in Financial Market Development
Whether it’s facilitating fintech innovations or deepening derivatives markets, it’s critical that a
robust and adaptive regulatory framework and effective international coordination are in place to
mitigate potential financial stability risks.  The types of regulatory framework would depend on the
stage  of  development  in  the  market  itself.  For  markets  that  are  going  through  innovation,
particularly  those  that  are  adopting  new  technologies,  regulations  should  focus  on  “nurturing”
rather than “restraining”. 
As an example, the HKMA and our peer authorities in the region have adopted fintech sandbox
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
regimes, which are effectively testing grounds with a well-defined scope and a clear timeline. 
The authorities do not generally stipulate an exhaustive list of regulatory requirements in these
sandboxes;  rather,  the  products  are  to  be  developed  flexibly,  and  requirements  would  be
evaluated during the process.    Coordination  among  regulators  has  also  already  begun  as  the
Global Financial Innovation Network (GFIN) is now inviting applications for cross-border testing of
financial innovations. That said, while providing a conducive environment to support innovation,
central  banks  and  regulators  would  have  to  strike  a  good  balance  with  its  other  functions  in
consumer protection and financial stability, especially as the new and innovative services grow in
scale or become widely adopted.  Cross-border coordination is also required to address potential
arbitrage across jurisdictions, given the much wider reach of fintech products and services.
Derivatives markets, on the other hand, have a much longer history.  The regulatory framework
should therefore be informed by history, and lessons from the global financial crisis must not be
forgotten.    Regulators  need  to  guard  against  the  problems  that  plagued  derivatives  markets
before the crisis: namely, the overuse of leverage, excessive interconnectedness, and opacity.  I
don’t need to “preach to the choir” on the tremendous efforts exerted by regulators and market
participants internationally to solve these problems.  But I do want to remind ourselves to stay
vigilant  and  ensure  that  implementation  is  seen  through,  as  this  work  has  not  yet  been
completed.
For  example,  initial  margin  requirements  on  non-cleared  derivatives,  which  guard  against  the
overuse  of  embedded  leverage  in  derivatives,  are  still  being  phased-in  in  a  number  of
jurisdictions  including  Hong  Kong.    At  the  same  time,  while  derivative  transactions  that  are
intended to be cleared has increased five-fold in the past four years in Hong Kong, according to
data from our Trade Repository, there is more room for further standardisation.  Finally, solutions
such as deference mechanisms, which helps eliminate cross-jurisdictional regulatory arbitrage,
are still works-in-progress between the HKMA and our overseas counterparts.  As we embark on
further deepening of the derivatives markets in the Asian region, the high standards set up by
regulators  and  by  the  industry  over  the  past  ten  years  should  be  well  respected,  and
strengthened regulations on margins, clearing, and transparency should be taken seriously as
safeguards against potential risks.   
Let  me  close  by  saying  a  few  words  about  our  host  today.    ISDA  has  been  instrumental  in
promoting  standardisation  of  documentation  and  practices  in  derivatives  markets.    In  the
process, it has played a key role in navigating the industry through post-crisis reforms.  ISDA is
and will continue to be an important platform for consensus building and knowledge sharing.  I’m
certain that ISDA will remain a valuable partner for everyone in Asia as we continue to overcome
the challenges I discussed today.  I look forward to more fruitful collaboration going forward.    
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
