26/03/2019 
Deputy Governor Cecilia Skingsley 
Entreprenörskapsforum, Stockholm 
   SVERIGES RIKSBANK 
SE-103 37 Stockholm 
(Brunkebergstorg 11) 
 
Tel +46 8 787 00 00 
Fax +46 8 21 05 31 
registratorn@riksbank.se 
www.riksbank.se 
SPEECH 
     DATE: 
SPEAKER: 
VENUE: 
CLASS:  
  The effects of digitalisation on the econ-
omy* 
Thank you for the invitation to come here and speak at Entreprenörskapsforum. I 
cannot imagine a better place to talk about digitalisation and its potential effects 
on the economy.  
One example of technological advances and the effects of digitalisation is right 
here – in our mobile phones. Four out of five Swedes in the age range 16-85 had 
access to the internet via a mobile phone in 2018.1 It is difficult to imagine, but to-
day's smart phones actually have greater processing power than the computers 
that enabled the Apollo moon landing in 1969!2 Smart phones also give us access 
to inconceivable amounts of information and entertainment that did not even ex-
ist in 1969. The answer to a question is only a few clicks away.  
As a consumer it is easy to see the value of these technological advances, alt-
hough we do not in our daily lives use the capacity for anything comparable to the 
giant leap for mankind the moon landing entailed…  
The new technology provides us with entertainment, but not only that. It also af-
fects our working lives and the economy in general. Rapid developments in tech-
nology gradually lead to higher productivity and increase our welfare, but they are 
also a source of concern for many people. Will my job still exist in the future, or 
will it be done by a robot or an algorithm? How can my company compete in 
these days of rapid technological advances? 
 * I would like to thank Erik Frohm for helping prepare this speech, Elizabeth Nilsson for translating and Meredith 
Beechey-Österholm, Charlotta Edler, Rebecka Hallerby, Jesper Hansson, Åsa Olli Segendorf, Marianne Sterner 
and Ulf Söderström for valuable comments. 
1 Refers to Statistics Sweden's figures on private individuals’ access to and use of IT. 82% of all Swedes in the age 
range 16-85 years had access to the internet via a mobile phone in 2018. http://www.statistikdata-
basen.scb.se/pxweb/sv/ssd/START__LE__LE0108__LE0108D/LE0108T14/?rxid=8f4a0041-1be9-4ed3-b6fb-
182251a2b5cd 
2 https://www.zmescience.com/research/technology/smartphone-power-compared-to-apollo-432/ 
  1 [12] 
   My speech today will not provide all the answers. Instead, I intend to discuss my 
thoughts on how digitalisation can affect various parts of the economy and what 
role it plays for monetary policy. Can the Riksbank attain its target of 2 per cent 
even in a world of digitalisation? Is it still desirable to aim for this target? My reply 
to both of these questions is yes, but I will return to that later. 
Focus on digitalisation – where are we now? 
What is digitalisation and how does it differ from the concepts of automation and 
technological advances? Jesper Roine, professor at the Stockholm School of Eco-
nomics has divided them up in a useful manner.3 
  Automation – a machine doing the work of a person. 
  Digitalisation – converting information to a digital form. 
  Technological advances – broader concept that covers the other two but 
also other things.  
The concepts are of course related. Digitalisation can enable automation and is an 
example of technological advances. In this speech I focus on digitalisation, but will 
also touch on the automation that follows on from digitalisation. I wish to include 
in the concept of digitalisation here machine learning, artificial intelligence, 3D 
printers and the use of cloud services and Big Data. A common collective name of-
ten used for several of these technologies is Industry 4.0 or the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution.  
Will productivity increase?  
How far have we come with regard to the digitalisation of the business sector? 
One hears an awful lot about technological developments in the media and in 
business journals. From what is written one might easily gain the impression that 
we can do more and faster. But official data on productivity does not confirm this. 
The fact that statistics and reality sometimes appear to be disconnected from one 
another is nothing new. In 1987 economist Robert Solow wrote “you can see the 
computer age everywhere but in the productivity statistics”, when describing the 
emergence of information and communication technology (ICT) and the relatively 
low productivity growth in the United States in the 1980s.  
If we look at Sweden, productivity growth in the business sector has been very 
weak since 2006, a year or so before the global financial crisis occurred. We have 
often had to revise down our productivity forecasts as a result of the surprisingly 
weak development. Productivity has also shown weak development in other de-
veloped countries recently, which indicates that it is the result of a joint trend.  
There are many possible explanations for the decline. Some economists, such as 
Robert Gordon, say we are in a period of very low productivity growth that will be 
the new normal for a rather long time. According to this point of view, a large 
share of the fruits of digitalisation have already been harvested. As early as 2005, 
for instance, several economies had adapted their business methods and models 
 3 Roine (2016). 
  2 [12] 
   to the internet. The conclusion of this point of view is, put simply, that more re-
cent innovations have not been as significant as those during earlier industrial rev-
olutions.4 
Others, such as Andrew McAfee and Erik Brynjolfsson at MIT, say that the effects 
of digitalisation have passed under the radar and that we will see major produc-
tivity increases in the future when the new technologies are used more broadly in 
the business sector.5 Economic historian Joel Mokyr also points out that the pro-
ductive potential in new technologies will lead to strong pressure for change in 
the economy.6  
As you can hear, there are very differing views on the subject and the assessment 
of future productivity growth is a question we are constantly struggling with. 
We are in the “installation phase” 
Personally, I think that that model from Bart van Ark (2016) is useful when consid-
ering the different views. This distinguishes between an “installation phase” and a 
“deployment phase” for new technology.  
The first phase involves exploring new markets and growth is limited to a couple 
of companies. During the second phase the markets are consolidated and there is 
broad growth in the economy.  One can imagine that Brynjolfsson and McAfee 
consider we are in the first phase, while Gordon thinks we have already passed 
the second phase.  
My assessment is that we are probably somewhere in the installation phase with 
regard to digitalisation. I base this on some, few, companies having seen their 
market power increase in recent years.7 These companies are often known as “su-
perstars” and have high profit margins and have experienced high return on in-
vested capital. They are often multinational corporations that sell products and 
services all over the world. At the same time, it appears as though smaller compa-
nies have fared less well. The difference in productivity between superstars and 
ordinary companies has also increased.8 
When we talk to companies in our Business Survey, they largely confirm this pic-
ture. The companies that have long been subjected to international competition 
on global markets have a greater tendency to regard digitalisation as an oppor-
tunity than the consumer-related companies with most of their operations in 
Sweden.  
Change is a necessary condition for a prosperous society... 
Regardless of what stage of technological development we are at, it is clear that 
technological advances revolutionise lives and entire societies. The internal com-
bustion engine transformed transportation in society. Electricity gave us light, 
 4 Cowen (2011). 
5 Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2011). 
6 https://voxeu.org/article/technological-progress-thing-past 
7 See, for instance, De Loecker and Eekhout (2017, 2018). 
8 OECD (2015). 
  3 [12] 
   heat and energy. Digitalisation, and above all the internet, has given us almost di-
rect access to enormous amounts of information. 
Each new innovation replaces other products or changes their areas of use. Our 
behaviour changes and we make new demands of companies and decision-mak-
ers.  
In some branches the changes have been particularly marked over the past dec-
ade. One example is traditional media. More people are reading the news online 
or on Twitter instead of printed newspapers or listening to podcasts instead of the 
radio and watching YouTube instead of TV. The financial sector has also experi-
enced a major revolution. Fewer and fewer transactions are made with cash and 
banking services that were previously provided at bank offices have moved online. 
Swish payments are now as common as cash payments.9 In a few years’ time, it 
may be the case that the use of cash is at such a low level that the general public 
no longer has access to any form of central bank money that can be used to make 
payments in ordinary shops. This would be a step into the unknown, and is some-
thing I have mentioned on earlier occasions when I discussed the potential intro-
duction of an e-krona.10 
Change and “creative destruction” are positive in the long run.11 It is important to 
point this out, even if it seems obvious.  In 1850, almost four in five people in Swe-
den worked in the agricultural sector. It was hard work, done under difficult con-
ditions and entailed long working days. Just over 100 years later, less than one in 
five people in Sweden were working in agriculture. Many had instead sought their 
fortunes in the growing industrial sector, which reached an employment peak in 
the mid-1960s. Gradually, jobs in the industrial sector were then replaced by jobs 
in the service industries, including the public sector. This process has continued 
during the 1990s and 2000s and in 2018 more than 50 per cent of all private sec-
tor employees in Sweden were working in service industries. At the same time, 
GDP per capita has shown rapid trend growth from 1850 until now. 
Productivity growth means we have time and money over to invest in other things 
than work and output. Ultimately, it increases our welfare, makes our workplaces 
better and improves our health. A somewhat hackneyed but nevertheless descrip-
tive quote from Nobel Prize winner Paul Krugman is “Productivity isn’t everything, 
but, in the long run, it is almost everything”.12  
...but also creates distinct challenges 
Despite changes and productivity improvements in the long run lying behind al-
most all of the growth in welfare, there are of course important challenges in the 
short run. Behind every statistic there are people and families. Owning horse-
drawn coaches when the internal combustion engine was commercialised or be-
ing a seamstress when Spinning-Jenny came into operation was probably quite 
tough. Similarly, there can be major upheavals in our lives if driverless trucks push 
 9 Sveriges Riksbank (2018a). 
10 Skingsley (2018). 
11 The concept of creative destruction was coined by Joseph Schumpeter in 1942. 
12 Krugman (1997). 
  4 [12] 
   out lorry drivers or software and algorithms take over administrative tasks. Or, to 
take changes in my own job as members of the Executive Board of the Riksbank, 
when a combination of algorithms, machine learning and Big Data become better 
than human analysts at making forecasts, or even designing well-balanced mone-
tary policy. 
Such changeovers can create gaps between different sections of the population. 
Those with the right skills to make use of the technological developments will find 
it easy to get jobs and can see their salaries rise because of higher productivity. In 
economist speak this is called being a complement to technology. Routine and 
less complicated work tasks can be replaced by automatic processes, which leads 
to lower demand for these jobs and thus lower wages. Such jobs are substitutes 
for technology. Then there are also jobs which are not tangibly affected by tech-
nological developments. These are jobs with a high service content and many hu-
man elements. Psychologists, preschool teachers, health and medical care special-
ists and hairdressers are the examples usually put forward as difficult to replace 
with automatic processes and AI.  
I am fairly convinced that we in Sweden can use today's technology as comple-
ment to the strengths we already have. Smart automated solutions give us more 
time and resources to invest in other important issues. They also give us new tools 
to manage new challenges. What is obvious is that we cannot stand still in terms 
of competence. We must embrace life-long learning as a motto.  
Otherwise there is a risk of further differences between those who have skills that 
benefit from the new technology and those who are replaced. How long these dif-
ferences prevail will depend on how quickly people with outdated skills can adopt 
new skills, change their way of thinking and benefit from the new conditions. But, 
as I said, this isn't really anything new. As we saw earlier, the agricultural society 
was replaced by an industrial society that has been replaced by a services society. 
The number of jobs has not declined and GDP per capita shows a rising trend. But 
we need to also see the human fates beneath the statistical surface. The fact that 
welfare is increasing on a general level does not mean that the changes are being 
made without any frictions at individual level. 
The effects of technological advances may be different from be-
fore 
An important difference between the current technological developments and the 
previous revolutions is that the new economy requires increasing elements of 
purely human traits. Muscle power was needed in both agriculture and the manu-
facturing industry. Both sectors had many routine and relatively simple work 
tasks. But in the new economy creativity, inventiveness and the “human touch” 
are considered important. These are abilities that often require adaptation to the 
situation, they are difficult to teach and therefore difficult to copy, even with new 
technology. The new skills we need to acquire make high demands of our educa-
tional systems and of skills development in companies and in the public sector. 
And if technological advances continue at a rapid pace, we must all be ready to 
update our knowledge. 
  5 [12] 
   The effects of digitalisation can also be much greater than the effects of earlier in-
dustrial revolutions. Online robots and AI have the potential to replace large sec-
tors of the human workforce. Some analysts think that the whole labour market 
will change fundamentally, and that this will be fairly soon.13 In such a situation, it 
will not only be groups of employees with different skills that will be polarized. 
Here I am not even talking about the most dystopic forecast for the future – of an 
almost omniscient artificial intelligence with its own agenda that takes over the 
world. Instead I mean a changeover to where many tasks and jobs are no longer 
done by people. Such a development will create tension between those who own 
capital in the form of equity and funds and those who do not. This is because the 
capital owners will receive the productivity gains generated by the machines.  
Digitalisation can lead to concentrated product markets. 
There are other problems with digitalisation for market economies. We see al-
ready now social networks like Twitter, Facebook and Instagram dominate their 
respective markets. Few people use search engines other than Google. These 
companies are not only dominant in their respective fields; they also determine 
who may market themselves or express themselves on their platforms. In this 
way, they govern how other companies reach out to prospective customers.  
Of course, size and influence need not necessarily be negative from a competition 
perspective. The problems arise when new companies experience difficulty start-
ing up their operations and are forced to deal with various entry barriers to be 
able to “challenge”14  the established players on the market in question. Both 
economies of scale and network effects can function as entry barriers, however. 
Starting up a new Facebook would be difficult and require major investments, but 
it is not impossible.15  
A further problem that can arise from digitalisation is that companies can use the 
different price comparison sites to observe one another’s pricing. One often 
claims that these platforms are really good for consumers trying to find the lowest 
prices, but they also make it easier for companies to monitor one another’s prices 
and coordinate their prices with one another.16 This can be a problem from the 
point of view of competition. 
Challenges can be tackled 
The short-term challenges I have described should not be underestimated. They 
are real problems that affect real people. And problems experienced now are not 
helped by knowing that humanity will benefit in the long run. But what is the best 
 13 Stefan Fölster replicated a study by Frey and Osborne (2013) using Swedish data and found that more than 50 
per cent of all jobs could be replaced by digital and automated technology in the coming 20 years. A study by the 
OECD shows instead that around 35 per cent of Swedish professions have a high or significant risk of automation.  
14 Baumol et al (1982). 
15 Facebook was far from the first social network. In Sweden there were similar platforms such as Skunk, Lunar-
storm, MySpace and other local variations such as Apberget https://www.svd.se/lunarstorm-tillbaka--men-vad-
hande-med-skunk#sida-2 long before this. However, none of these platforms succeeded in becoming as large or 
maintaining popularity for as long as Facebook.  
16 The European Commission found in a branch study that a majority of companies monitor their competitors’ 
prices. Two thirds use software to automatically adjust their prices when other companies adjust theirs.   
  6 [12] 
   way of dealing with these problems? I think there are three areas that are particu-
larly important. However, I say this in the knowledge that they are far beyond the 
Riksbank's sphere of influence. Others hold the tools and the responsibility for 
them. 
 I would say that opportunities for education and life-long skills develop-
ment are entirely decisive here. Even highly-educated professional 
groups, who have previously had a low level of unemployment, will need 
further development many times during their professional lives. Quite 
simply, we need to embrace a life-long learning to be able to meet and 
benefit from technological advances. 
  Taxation and income transfer systems are primary tools to change the 
gaps in society that follow on from digitalisation. 
  New technology also brings new actors and some of these have become 
very large. Markets characterised by high entrance barriers, synergies and 
network effects can easily be concentrated in the hands of a few domi-
nant actors. The competition authorities in different countries must 
therefore have cross-border cooperation to monitor and when necessary 
regulate various markets and in this way safeguard the interests of the 
general public.  
Effects of digitalisation – a conceptual framework for monetary 
policy 
So far I have focused on the potential effects of digitalisation and what problems 
they can entail. I have also taken up various areas where I think we need to meet 
and make use of the technological advances. But we also need to investigate what 
effects digitalisation has had on the Swedish economy and to ask ourselves what 
monetary policy should do. This is often a question that is not so easy to answer, 
as structural transformations and their effects can be difficult to identify, despite 
often affecting the economy over long periods of time.  
For a general description of how digitalisation can affect inflation, one can use a 
model that we presented in our Monetary Policy Report in February 2015.17 It pro-
vides a general view of the channels through which inflation can be influenced 
when a change such as digitalisation occurs.  
Firstly, digitalisation affects companies’ output capacity via automation, which re-
duces their cost pressures in total. Secondly, consumers can more easily find in-
formation through price comparison sites or e-commerce platforms. This can in-
crease competition and reduce the companies’ mark-ups when costs increase.18 
Thirdly, the consumer price index (CPIF) is directly affected by lower costs for in-
formation and communication technology.  
 17 See Monetary Policy Report, February 2015. 
18 Apel et al (2014). 
  7 [12] 
   Productivity and the labour market 
Let's begin with companies’ production capacity and the consequences for the la-
bour market. In the manufacturing industry digitalisation appears to have to in-
creased productivity, but this is not the case in the service industries. The devel-
opment in employment appears to have been poorer in professions where digital-
isation has been stronger. The labour market appears to have become more po-
larized as a larger number are either employed in high salary or low salary profes-
sions.19  
Companies responding to our own Business Survey often confirm that digitalisa-
tion leads to a competence shift in the labour force. They see a substantial need 
to recruit specialists with, for instance, digital competence and they have less 
need to recruit general staff.20  
In consumer-related sectors companies believe to a greater extent that digitalisa-
tion will lead to fewer employees within a few years, while the responses from 
manufacturing companies are more neutral. The explanation is often that the 
manufacturing industry has already made major changeovers and that digital 
technology is already a complement to large groups of employees. In the retail 
trade there are larger groups of cashiers, stocks workers and shop assistants who 
can be replaced by automated solutions. 
Consumer behaviour 
Digitalisation also affects us as consumers. The use of internet and online shop-
ping have increased in Sweden and are at a high level compared with other Euro-
pean countries. We now have access to more information than before and can 
compare prices of various products and various sellers very quickly.  
Previously, if you wanted to buy a new pair of shoes you had to go into several 
shops to compare prices. First you needed to have an idea of where to find a spe-
cific model of shoe, say a pair of Converse all-stars in size 39, and then you 
needed to travel round to find the best price. Now you can quite simply visit a 
price comparison site online and enter the name of the model and get price infor-
mation, stocks status and suggested sales points that are online. This has reduced 
the search costs enormously.21  
Companies’ pricing 
At the same time, e-commerce is changing the playing field for many trading com-
panies and changing their pricing. Why should customers pay more for something 
in a shop when they can buy it cheaper online? 
 19 Heyman et al (2016).  
20 Sveriges Riksbank (2018c).  
21 The Swedish Competition Authority commissioned researchers Niklas Rudholm and Charlie Lindgren to analyse 
how price transparency through price comparison sites affects prices and price spread between companies.  
They used information from the comparison site Prisjakt to compare how prices of games differ between various 
online traders. They saw that the development of prices for a particular product was highly correlated among the 
largest companies. This indicates a reduction in price spread. 
  8 [12] 
   The studies comparing pricing in shops and pricing online for the same company 
point to the differences between the two sales channels being less than one might 
believe.22 Nevertheless, there are differences. Within e-commerce prices are 
changed more often, the cost increases are passed on to consumer prices faster 
and the margins tend to be somewhat lower23,24.  
In Sweden, e-commerce now accounts for almost 9 per cent of all turnover in the 
retail trade, according to the Retail and Wholesale Research Institute (HUI). But 
there are substantial differences between different branches. In the music and 
film branch the majority of income is from online sales, while e-commerce is 
much less common in other branches.25 Despite increasing in significance, digital-
ised goods have not affected CPIF inflation more than before.  
When we talk to companies about how the use of digital technology will affect 
their future prices, there is a clear difference between consumer-related compa-
nies and business to business companies. In the consumer-related companies, 
sales prices are expected to fall somewhat, while the others consider that the new 
technology will make it possible to raise prices as it will strengthen the companies’ 
positions on international markets.  
Digitalisation and an inflation target 
So how shall we take digitalisation into consideration in our monetary policy and 
our forecasts? Well, to a great extent it is a question of qualitative assessments of 
what effects are reasonable. But that sounds simpler than it really is. As I said be-
fore, structural changes can affect the economy over a long period of time. Even 
afterwards it is difficult to know how much a specific factor has affected the la-
bour market or inflation, for instance.  
We have seen in our own evaluations that lower price mark-ups as a result of, for 
instance, digitalisation, may have contributed to holding back inflation, particu-
larly during the period 2014-2015. At the same time, the most important reason 
for the low inflation during this period appears to have been low domestic cost 
pressures.26 And as resource utilisation has increased, inflation has also risen to-
wards the target. It is evidently possible to attain a quantified inflation target.   
When I follow the debate on monetary policy in Sweden, the argument keeps 
cropping up that the two-per cent target for inflation will be impossible to attain 
as the economy becomes increasingly digitalised. However, one should also look 
at events in other developed countries with similar targets. Because of course 
Sweden is not alone in being affected by digitalisation. There does not seem to be 
any clear relationship in these other countries between for instance the spread of 
e-commerce and inflation.  
However it is possible that the lack of simple correlations in data hides some 
causal relationship. Better indicators of the spread of digitalisation may give other 
 22 Cavallo (2017). 
23 Cavallo (2018). 
24 Gorodnichenko and Talavera (2017). 
25 Swedish Trade Federation (2018). 
26 Sveriges Riksbank (2018b). 
  9 [12] 
   results. My point is therefore that it is up to the critics to present proof of why 
more digitalisation would necessarily mean that inflation was held below the tar-
get for a long period of time. In the longer run inflation is determined by the mon-
etary policy that is conducted on average and its effects on inflation expectations. 
A better explanation for the differences in inflation rates between countries 
around the world is therefore that they conduct different monetary policies. 
Having a credible benchmark for price setting and wage formation facilitates long-
term planning for both individuals and companies. The inflation target is needed 
in particular when the world is changing rapidly as a result of major upheavals 
such as digitalisation. The alternative would be a less stable development and 
poorer opportunities for good economic growth.  
Clear game rules for a smoothly-functioning economy 
Let me summarise my thoughts: My assessment is that digitalisation contributes 
to a new way of producing, pricing and demanding goods and services. By main-
taining a stable rate of inflation close to our target, monetary policy helps this 
changeover. To do so, we need to understand the development of economic ac-
tivity, as well as the effects of structural changes in the economy.  
What we know is that labour markets change. They become more polarized, 
which makes it more important for people to update their skills to the new cir-
cumstances. The game plan for companies is changing. E-commerce can for exam-
ple mean that companies’ prices change more often and become more sensitive 
to shocks. Increased consumer power and greater competition slow down prices 
and thereby margins for the companies. 
The changes are necessary to increase our welfare, even if they create problems 
for some people in the short term. To manage these challenges, we should jointly 
strengthen the opportunities for education and skills development, even out 
some of the gaps arising during the upheavals and safeguard the interests of the 
general public by strengthening competition on the new markets.  
In a changing world we need to have clear game rules to ensure the economy 
functions smoothly. Reliable price stability, in terms of purchasing power, is one 
such game rule. It makes it easier for individuals and companies to plan for the fu-
ture, it improves price setting and wage formation and thus contributes to more 
stable economic activity. So, attaining our inflation target of two per cent will help 
to accomplish the changeover following on from digitalisation.  
       10 [12] 
  References 
 Apel, Mikael, Frohm, Eric, Hokkanen, Jyry, Nyman, Christina and Palmqvist, Stefan 
(2014), Why haven't companies raised their prices? Results from a survey on com-
pany pricing”, Economic Commentaries No. 4, 2014, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Baumol, J William, Panzar, C John, and Willig, D Robert (1982) “Contestable Mar-
kets and the Theory of Industry Structure”, New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 
Inc. 
Brynjolfsson, Erik and McAfee, Andrew (2011) “Race Against The Machine: How 
the Digital Revolution is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and Irre-
versibly Transforming Employment and the Economy”, New York: W. W. Norton & 
Company. 
Cavallo, F Alberto (2017), “Are Online and Offline Prices Similar? Evidence from 
Large Multi-Channel Retailers”, American Economic Review 2017, 107(1): 283-
303. 
Cavallo, F Alberto (2018) “More Amazon Effects: Online Competition and Pricing 
Behaviors”, National Bureau of Economic Research, No. w25138. 
Cowen, Tyler (2011), The Great Stagnation, New York, Dutton  
De Loecker, Jan and Eeckhout, Jan (2017), ”The rise of market power and the mac-
roeconomic implications”, National Bureau of Economic Research, No. w23687. 
De Loecker, Jan and Eeckhout, Jan (2018), ”Global market power”, National Bu-
reau of Economic Research, No. w24768. 
Frey, C Benedickt and Osborne, Michael (2017),”The future of employment: How 
susceptible are jobs to computerisation?”, Technological Forecasting and Social 
Change, Vol. 114, pp. 254-280.  
Fölster, Stefan (2014), “Vartannat jobb automatiseras inom 20 år – utmaningar för 
Sverige” (Every second job will be automated in 20 years – challenges for Swe-
den), Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research. 
Gordon, J Robert (2012), “Is US Economic Growth over? Faltering Innovation con-
fronts the six Headwinds”, NBER Working paper series, 18315, August 
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Talavera, Oleksandr (2017) “Price Setting in Online Mar-
kets: Basic Facts, International Comparisons, and Cross- Border Integration”, 
American Economic Review 2017, 107(1): 249-282. 
Heyman, Fredrik, Norbäck, Pehr-Johan and Lars Persson (2016) ”Digitaliseringens 
dynamik – en ESO-rapport om strukturomvandlingen i svenskt näringsliv” (The dy-
namics of digitalisation – en ESO report on structural transformation in the Swe-
dish business sector), report to the Expert group for studies in public sector eco-
nomics (ESO), 2016:4. 
https://voxeu.org/article/technological-progress-thing-past 
  11 [12] 
   Krugman, Paul (1997) “The age of diminished expectations: US economic policy in 
the 1990s”, MIT press. 
Nedelkoska, Ljubica and Quintini, Glenda (2018), “Automation, skills use and train-
ing”, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, No. 202, OECD 
Publishing, Paris.  
OECD (2015), “The Future of Productivity”, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
Roine, Jesper (2016) ”Automatiseringens effekter på arbete och fördelning – en 
översikt av trender och mekanismer” (The effects of automation on work and dis-
tribution of income – an overview of trends and mechanism), Fores policy paper 
2016:3 
Rudholm, Niklas and Lindgren, Charlie (2019), ”Prisspridning på e-handels-
marknader med låga sökkostnader” (Price spread on e-commerce markets with 
low search costs), Commissioned research 2019:1, Swedish Competition Author-
ity. 
Schumpeter, Joseph (1942) “Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy”, New York: 
Harper, 1975, [orig. pub. 1942]. 
Skingsley, Cecilia (2018), “Considerations for a cashless future”, speech at SNS fi-
nance panel, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Swedish Trade Federation (2018) ”Det stora detaljhandelsskiftet” (the major retail 
trade shift). 
Sveriges Riksbank (2015), Monetary Policy Report February, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2018a) ”The Riksbank’s e-krona project, Report 2”, Sveriges 
Riksbank. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2018), “A review of the Riksbank’s forecasts”, Riksbank Studies, 
March 2018, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2018c) Riksbank Business Survey in November, Sveriges Riks-
bank. 
   12 [12] 
