Benoît  Cœuré:  The  case  for  cooperation  -  cross-border  CCP
supervision and the role of central banks
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central  Bank,  at  a  conference  on  CCP  risk  management,  organised  by  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, the European Central Bank and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Frankfurt
am Main, 27 February 2019.
 It is with great pleasure that I welcome you to Frankfurt. I thank you all for coming, especially
those who have travelled from far away.
I  am  delighted  to  open  this  conference,  which  has  been  organised  jointly  with  our  colleagues
from  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago.  The  idea  behind
today’s  event  is  to  establish  a  regular  forum  to  exchange  views  on  pressing  issues  around
central clearing and its challenges in terms of risk management.
Before  briefly  outlining  what  we  hope  to  learn  from  this  conference,  I  would  like  to  say  a  few
words in memory of our colleague and friend, Robert T. Cox, who passed away in December.
Bob was not only a driving presence in all matters surrounding central counterparties (CCPs) –
in his words: a CCP is a CCP is a CCP  – he was also one of the pioneers behind this event.
We will think of him, his family and his colleagues at the Chicago Fed as we discuss issues
close to his heart today. This conference is a monument to his memory.
1
To open what I hope will be a day of thoughtful and lively discussion, I would like to share a few
thoughts on today’s three topics, in my capacity as both member of the ECB’s Executive Board
and Chair of the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI).
Global CCPs require enhanced cooperative oversight across borders
Let  me  begin  with  the  challenges  we  face  in  regulating  and  overseeing  global  cross-border
clearing activities.
As  the  clearing  landscape  evolved  after  the  crisis,  some  derivatives  markets  became  highly
concentrated. Major markets are now cleared through a few global CCPs, which, as a result,
have become systemically important for multiple jurisdictions besides the one in which they are
headquartered.   If  not  managed  appropriately,  risks  channelled  through  these  CCPs  could
spread  rapidly  across  borders  with  potentially  destabilising  effects  for  financial  markets  more
widely.
2
For example, for many EU CCPs, including the most important clearing hubs, over two-thirds of
the derivatives transactions they clear are submitted by financial institutions incorporated outside
the  CCP’s  home  Member  State.  Credit  risks  and  potential  losses  are  thus  borne  mainly  by
financial institutions in other EU or non-EU countries, and –once bank shareholders and creditors
have been bailed in – taxpayers in those countries may ultimately have to foot the remaining bill.
For this reason, market authorities, prudential supervisors and central banks have a keen interest
in other countries complying with the highest financial and operational CCP risk management
standards. They rely on home authorities to carry out prudent due diligence. Such cooperation
with  other  authorities  has  been  enshrined  by  the  CPMI  and  the  International  Organisation  of
Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  as  Responsibility  E  of  the  Principles  for  Financial  Markets
Infrastructures (PFMI).
Given the stakes involved, blind trust is not enough. I would argue that we must strike a balance
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
between facilitating market integration through cross-border access and safeguarding the ability
of authorities to fulfil their statutory tasks and objectives. Finding this equilibrium is, of course, a
challenge and I welcome the work carried out by the Financial Stability Board, at the behest of the
3
Japanese G20 presidency, to address potential regulatory causes of market fragmentation.
As I see it, fragmentation is not always caused by overlapping regulations, but often by a failure to
cooperate.  Mutually  acceptable  solutions  can  and  should  be  found  to  meet  the  legitimate
expectations of all the authorities involved.
The scope of these solutions may differ depending on the degree of interconnectedness.
At  the  European  level,  for  example,  where  financial  markets  are  highly  interdependent  and
integrated, it is clear that the cross-border stability implications are significant and in many ways
exceed those of our banking sector. Supervisory coordination at the EU level should reflect this
close nexus.
Unfortunately,  however,  the  competence  for  CCP  supervision  remains  almost  exclusively
national. In this respect, despite significant legislative efforts, the lack of ambition of the current
revision of the European Market Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR) is regrettable.  Given that the
brunt of default risk in EU CCPs is borne by their clearing members, most of whom are directly
supervised at the European level, the principle of aligning liability and responsibility clearly implies
European supervision of EU CCPs. The current text can at best be seen as a modest step in
that direction.
4
At  the  global  level,  we  should  strive  for  an  international  framework  based  on  two  pillars:
proportionality and cooperation.
Proportionality  means  that  where  financial  stability  implications  are  limited,  outcomes-based
equivalence and full deference mechanisms, based on compliance with international principles,
can allow for cross-border activities that meet minimum standards of safety and soundness.
Where  global  CCPs  are  systemically  important  for  financial  systems  or  currency  areas,
however, each authority should have the right and duty to ensure that imported risk is managed
at least as diligently as its own standards would dictate.
This  is  the  core  purpose  of  the  revisions  to  the  EU’s  recognition  framework  for  third-country
CCPs.  The  European  Commission  and  EU  legislators  have  taken  a  balanced  approach  to
ensure that this can be implemented in a pragmatic, flexible and efficient manner.
The success of this framework, however, relies on enhanced cooperation between authorities.
Cooperation fosters trust, thus facilitating deference among supervisors to the extent possible. It
also helps the authorities in implementing overlapping expectations based on different mandates
in a coherent and mutually satisfactory manner.
Cooperation has, in fact, always been the ECB’s preferred approach to the oversight of financial
market infrastructures (FMIs). This cooperation should rely on two elements, as agreed at the
international  level:  first,  effective  cooperative  oversight  arrangements  and,  second,  crisis
management groups to allow for mutual consultation in recovery and resolution planning.
Unfortunately, for several global CCPs, these arrangements do not yet exist, or do not involve all
relevant authorities, despite international commitments. These delays are a source of concern,
not least as seven years have passed since the adoption of the PFMIs , and almost five years
since international standards were adopted for both the recovery  and resolution  of FMIs.
5
6
7
I urge all parties involved to accelerate progress in this area.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Eurosystem needs to be able to conduct effective oversight
Cooperation  is  also  indispensable  for  the  second  topic  of  today’s  conference,  namely  CCP
liquidity and the role of the central bank of issue. In Europe, cooperation ensures that the ECB
and  the  Eurosystem  can  conduct  effective  oversight  of  euro-denominated  clearing  activities,
wherever they may be established.
In  2017  the  ECB  recommended  an  amendment  to  its  Statute  to  clarify  its  competence  over
CCPs  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  out  its  monetary  functions.   The  ensuing  debate  among
legislators and policymakers in the EU and beyond was marred by some misunderstandings,
however, which I would like to dispel today.
8
As  you  all  know,  some  central  banks  are  CCP  supervisors.  The  ECB  is  not,   and  has  no
intention of becoming one. In our role as central bank of issue for the euro, we focus solely on the
interplay between central clearing and our monetary mandate.
9
Let me clarify this  by  highlighting  three  channels  through  which  central  clearing  interacts  with
core central bank objectives.
First, CCPs play a key role in the euro money market, which is essential for monetary policy
transmission. In the EU, 70% of repos are cleared through a CCP, making repo CCPs critically
important to this market. CCPs also act as major repo counterparties when reinvesting the large
amounts of collateral they collect. Disruptions affecting, or caused by, a CCP can have ripple
effects through the euro repo market, which may affect the conduct of monetary policy. The ECB
therefore has a clear and legitimate interest in preventing or mitigating such disruptions.
Second,  CCPs  are  financial  market  hubs  connecting  banks  as  well  as  other  market
infrastructures, including payment systems. As a result, large payment flows are settled on a
daily basis between CCPs and their participants. Deficiencies in CCP financial risk management
can  transfer  liquidity  strains  to  banks,  thereby  affecting  both  their  capacity  to  extend  credit  to
firms and households and their reliance on the provision of central bank liquidity, not least as
banks are key participants in large-value payment systems operated by central banks.
Moreover, given the growth of central clearing and the promotion of settlement in central bank
money, cleared markets themselves increasingly rely on these payment systems. The smooth
functioning  of  our  payment  systems,  in  turn,  depends  on  the  safe  operation  of  clearing
infrastructure and the mitigation of liquidity risk.
Finally, central banks can act as a liquidity backstop or a lender of last resort. Such action could
be needed if a banking default were coupled with severe market stress. In such a scenario, a
CCP  would  certainly  hold  high-quality  collateral,  but  it  may  be  unable  to  generate  cash  in  the
market in the very short time it has to manage a default.
Given the systemic importance of CCPs and the scale of potential funding needs, it is essential
that CCPs have sound liquidity self-insurance so that a liquidity shortage remains an extreme tail
risk and the associated moral hazard is mitigated.
In light of these considerations, which apply across all locations, the ECB has a clear interest in
ensuring the safety and soundness of euro clearing. To this end, we need to have a clear legal
competence that, importantly, should cover both EU and third-country CCPs.
Proposals to differentiate between EU and third-country CCPs would not only leave considerable
pockets  of  euro  clearing  without  appropriate  ECB  oversight,  they  would  also  raise  concerns
about  market  distortions  or  an  unlevel  playing  field.  For  example,  a  responsible  central  bank
cannot extend liquidity to any entity without having a minimum level of information and control
over it. It would be rather strange if such differentiation were to make it more difficult for us to
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
provide liquidity to EU than to third-country CCPs.
This  does  not  mean  that  we  would  seek  to  substitute  our  judgement  for  that  of  EU  or  third-
country CCP supervisors: their primary responsibility to guarantee the resilience of CCPs, and
more broadly the stability of our financial system, cannot and should not be questioned.
But we need a set of safeguards so that our concerns are appropriately taken into account in the
regulation and supervision of CCPs. I see three such safeguards:
The first is adequate information on the operation and risk management of CCPs clearing in
euro, and the capacity to assess how they would fare in times of market stress, including
through stress testing.
A  second  is  meaningful  involvement  in  the  supervisory  process,  to  ascertain  that  CCPs’
compliance with prudential and operational requirements provides sufficient guarantees from
our perspective as a central bank.
And  third,  we  should  be  able  to  adopt  requirements  to  address  critical  central  bank
concerns. For instance, it would be our prerogative to determine when CCPs should hold
central  bank  accounts  for  deposit  and  settlement  purposes,  and  to  require  targeted
enhancements  to  CCP  liquidity  risk  management  when  necessary  in  exceptional  market
environments.
Everyone should be clear that our ability to carry out our mandate and, where appropriate, to
provide liquidity to CCPs, relies on enshrining these safeguards in our regulatory framework.
CCP default management can and should be enhanced
Before concluding, let me say a quick word on today’s third topic, the complex challenges CCPs
face in managing defaults.
 CPMI-IOSCO is currently working on default management auctions,
which  is  very  welcome  as  this  area  of  CCP  risk  management  could  benefit  from  further
convergence towards shared best practices.
10
11
The recent default at Nasdaq Clearing has certainly focused the minds of policymakers on this
issue. There is much ground to cover for CCPs to converge towards best practices, from setting
the  right  incentives  for  auction  participants  to  properly  calibrating  their  financial  resources  to
cover  concentrated  positions  in  thin  or  illiquid  markets.  I  am  sure  this  workstream  will  yield
valuable conclusions for both regulators and the industry.
Conclusion
In sum, today’s conference shows that we are continuing to ensure that CCPs steadily become
more resilient and sophisticated in their role as systemic risk managers and so can truly manage
any  situation.  At  times,  this  requires  imagination  to  understand  the  interaction  of  participant
behaviours, complex portfolios and stress scenarios, which is a prerequisite for setting the right
incentives. It also requires humility to understand the limitations of this exercise and the need for
fall-back plans. Extreme and unexpected events do happen and the very purpose of CCPs is to
act as a circuit-breaker during crises.
For CCPs to perform this role as adequately as possible, all relevant authorities, including central
banks, need to pull on the same rope. Europe, with its deep financial interconnectedness and
high risk of spillovers, requires a particularly close level of information-sharing and cooperative
oversight  –  the  prerequisite  for  the  Eurosystem  to  provide  liquidity  to  CCPs.  The  role  of  the
central bank of issue thus needs to be acknowledged appropriately.
On  this  note,  I  hope  that  I  have  been  able  to  whet  your  appetite  for  a  vigorous  and  fruitful
exchange  of  views  during  today’s  conference  and  leave  you  in  the  capable  hands  of  the
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
organisers.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
See Cox, R. T. and Steigerwald, R. S. (2017), “A CCP is a CCP is a CCP”, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,
Policy Discussion Paper, Vol. PDP, No 2017–01.
See BSCB-CPMI-FSB-IOSCO: Analysis of central clearing interdependencies, 9 August 2018 (second analysis)
and 5 July 2017 (first analysis).
See FSB work programme for 2019, 12 February 2019.
The  revision  of  EMIR  as  regards  the  regulatory  framework  for  CCPs  was  proposed  by  the  European
Commission  (Commission  proposes  more  robust  supervision  of  central  counterparties  (CCPs),  13  June
2017).  Significant  amendments  have  been  made  to  the  text  during  the  legislative  process,  including  the
introduction of different frameworks for the supervision of EU and non-EU CCPs.
Committee  of  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS)  and  Technical  Committee  of  the  International
Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO): Principles for financial market infrastructures, April  2012.
CPSS was renamed as CPMI as of 1 September 2014.
CPMI and the Board of IOSCO: Recovery of financial market infrastructures, October 2014 (revised July 2017).
FSB: Guidance on central counterparty resolution and resolution planning, 5 July 2017.
ECB recommends amending Article 22 of its Statute, 23 June 2017.
Article 1 of Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013 of 15 October 2013 (the SSM Regulation) explicitly states that
it would “not confer on the ECB any other supervisory tasks, such as tasks relating to the prudential supervision
of central counterparties”.
See also Cœuré, B. (2018), “A cooperative approach to CCP recovery and resolution”, panel intervention by at
the ILF Conference on “Resolution in Europe: the unresolved questions”, Frankfurt am Main, 23 April.
On  5  July  2017,  CPMI-IOSCO  announced  follow-up  work  in  the  area  of  good  practices  for  CCPs’  default
management  auctions  (Cover  Note  to  the  CPMI-IOSCO  revised  report  on  Recovery  of  financial  market
infrastructures).
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
