Ahmed Naseer: The need for increased efficiency and dynamism of
the financial sector
Speech  by  Mr  Ahmed  Naseer,  Governor  of  the  Maldives  Monetary  Authority,  at  the  45th
anniversary of State Bank of India’s Malé branch, Malé, 11 February 2019.
Your Excellency the President of Republic of Maldives Honorable Ibrahim Mohamed Solih,
 Vice President Honorable Faisal Naseem,
Managing Director State Bank of India Mr. Dinesh Khara
Country Manager State Bank of India Mr. Amritesh Mohan
Distinguished guests
Ladies and Gentlemen:
AssalamAlaikum and a very Good Evening to you all.
It is an honour and a pleasure to say a few words this evening, on the proud occasion of the 45th
Anniversary of SBI Male’. I take this opportunity to congratulate SBI – the wisdom, the leadership
and the vision of the management and the hard work of the staff for having made SBI a proud, I
must  say  an  inseparable,  business  partner  of  the  Maldives.  Over  the  past  four  and  a  half
decades, the management and staff of SBI has contributed selflessly to the development of the
Maldivian economy and the financial sector of the Maldives
Mr.  President,  your  presence  here  today  demonstrates  the  importance  you  attach  to  the
development of the financial sector in the Maldives. I am confident that your presence would be a
reassurance for all the businesses and individuals who continue to foster a close relationship
with SBI – known to its customers as India Bank or State Bank.
SBI Male’ was the very first bank established in the Maldives which started its operations in 1974
– A big milestone for Maldives; a defacto central bank that would handle all the banking activities
of  the  Government  of  Maldives  came  into  existence;  MMA  was  institutionalized  almost  half  a
decade  later  in  1981.  SBI  has  continued  to  play  a  prominent  role  in  the  development  of  the
financial  sector  and  the  Maldivian  economy.  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  SBI  is  the  largest
foreign bank in the Maldives, holding a significant market share of around 20 percent in terms of
total assets and deposits of the industry. As of December 31, 2018, SBI has extended 5.3 billion
Maldivian Rufiyaa as loans and advances to the private sector, representing almost a quarter of
the total loan portfolio of the industry. More than half of the portfolio is extended towards tourism;
construction and real estate; and trade and commerce activities. I applaud your commitment to
the economic growth of the country.
The Maldivian economy continues its rapid transformation, undoubtedly the financial sector plays
an important role in the development activities of the country, and to support this transformation,
we  need  financial  sector  to  be  more  efficient,  competitive  and  dynamic;  with  abundant
opportunities that are accessible to individuals as well as new investments.
Your Excellency, ladies and gentlemen
In  a  small  economy  like  the  Maldives,  access  to  finance  is  the  key  foundation  on  which  the
country can prosper. Therefore, introduction of innovative financial products based on electronic
financial transactions is crucial. Adoption of various Financial Technologies would be the enabler
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
of choice that would facilitate transparent, cost effective and efficient transactions and enhance
financial  inclusion  in  the  Maldives  –  especially  given  its  unique  demography  and  geography.
However, one has to be careful of the fact that financial sector can be especially vulnerable to
either too little or too much exposure to technology – due to these inherent risks, we need parallel
development  of  human  resource  and  infrastructure  along  with  regulations  and  methods  for
evaluation.
Institutions need to develop, retain and tap into promising talents within the sector. These talents
would be able to support the required change or may be agents of change. However uncertain
the  future  maybe,  change  is  certain  –  being  prepared  will  make  institutions  more  adaptive  to
accepting any future opportunity that may arise in this rapidly changing financial landscape of the
Maldives.
Let  me  assure  you  that  MMA  will  continue  to  work  towards  building  the  required  stability,  the
public  confidence  in  the  financial  sector  through  effective  regulation  and  supervision  and  the
development of a modern, robust, reliable and dependable financial infrastructure for the country.
A regulatory framework that is hinged on maintaining the stability of the financial sector is vital to
increase public confidence and trust; also definitive timely actions to abate the untoward effects
of  any  market  reaction  to  speculation.  MMA  is  working  on  further  strengthening  the  legislative
framework of the financial sector – regulating the corporate governance of the financial sector,
financial  consumer  protection,  establishing  a  secured  transaction  registry,  broadening  the
services of the credit information bureau are important projects that require the participation and
support of all stakeholders. Especially from contributors like the SBI.
Excellency, ladies and gentlemen!
I would like to once again thank Your Excellency President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih for gracing
this ceremony and; congratulate and thank SBI for their immense contributions made towards
the development of the Maldivian economy and the financial sector.
I wish SBI every success in their operations in the Maldives and thank the management and staff
of SBI for inviting me.
Thank you all. WassalaamAlaikum
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
