John  A  Rolle:  The  importance  of  financial  inclusion  in  mending
social and economic disparities
Welcome remarks by Mr John A Rolle, Governor of the Central Bank of The Bahamas, at the
Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  (AFI)  Convergent  Meetings  of  the  Digital  Financial  Services
Working Group and the Consumer Empowerment and Market Conduct Working Group, Nassau,
26 March 2019.
Welcome to The Bahamas.
 We are pleased to host both the Digital Financial Services Working Group and the Consumer
Empowerment  and  Market  Conduct  Working  Group  meeting  in  The  Bahamas  this  week.  The
Central  Bank  of  The  Bahamas  joined AFI  less  than  one  year  ago,  in  order  to  benefit  from  a
structured approach to promoting financial inclusion goals, and to learn first-hand from countries
that are actively pursuing such ideals.
The range of countries that make up this alliance illustrate aptly that financial inclusion is intended
to  mend  social  and  economic  disparities  that  are  often  obscured  in  average  measures  of
economic wellbeing and income.
The Bahamian experience draws this out.
On a per capita basis, The Bahamas has the third highest GDP in the Western Hemisphere. Our
financial sector is highly developed, when considered in terms of the size of the deposit base and
outstanding credit of the domestic banking system, relative to GDP; and in terms of the share of
the population that has access to basic banking services.
Moreover,  relative  to  the  size  of  the  population  we  enjoy  the  35th  highest  density  of  bank
branches in the world and the 15th highest density of automated banking machines in the world.1
From  an  identity  perspective,  members  of  the  population  do  not  have  extreme  difficulties
acquiring birth certificates or primary documentation needed to apply for identity documents.
But financial access is very uneven.
On  many  of  our  rural  island  communities  basic  banking  services  are  not  available,  or  only
available in very constrained conditions. The rising costs of providing banking through traditional
physical channels have further scaled-back this access. Also, high concentrations
See  the  IMF’s  2018  Financial  Access  Survey  Database: data.imf.org/?sk=388DFA60–1D26–
4ADE-B505-A05A558D9A42.  of  undocumented  immigrants  are  excluded  from  access  to
financial services, even when these services are available in the same spaces for documented
persons.
Equally problematic for countries like The Bahamas, there has been a dilution of access from the
disproportionate application of global anti-money laundering and counter financing of terrorism
standards, on low-risk, retail segments of our financial community. We are now attempting to
reverse this through more proportionate risk-based systems.
Beyond  banking,  affordability  of  access  is  more  constrained  in  property  insurance  markets,
where financial vulnerability is heightened because of the increasing frequency and intensity of
hurricanes, which can in a single season push households into ruin.
Finally, relevant to the themes of consumer empowerment, we recognise the scope for improved
literacy and conduct regulations to improve financial welfare.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
As it should be, political pressures to address financial inclusion deficits are mounting in The
Bahamas, and there has to be comprehensive constructive responses. In the strategies that the
Bahamian Central Bank is formulating, we understand that the private sector will not optimally
achieve  all  of  the  outcomes  that  we  desire.  We  recognise  that  an  enabling  environment  that
embraces the aspirations of the Maya Declaration, with a focus on Fintech, to promote digital
inclusion is critical.
This is defining very critical elements of our approach.
However,  we  also  have  to  identify  those  elements  of  both  the  policy  space  and  technology
infrastructure that ought to be supplied by the public sector. For example, the Central Bank of
The  Bahamas  is  engaged  in  the  creation  and  promotion  of  a  digital  version  of  the  national
currency which is expected to close vital payments system gaps for The Bahamas that many
countries are able to leave up to the private sector to resolve. At the same time, the Bank has
volunteered to coordinate development of a national financial inclusion strategy that would enlist
all relevant stakeholders, and focus on more than just payments and banking.
We are already seeing the benefits of our membership in the AFI, in bringing sharper focus to our
financial inclusion initiatives. In that spirit, we look forward to a continued build out of this network
of peers, capturing all of the accessible knowledge and experiences that you have to offer.
Coming  into  these  working  group  meetings  I  expect  that  we  have  broadly  similar  goals,  and
expectations; and that there will be mutual gains from our exchanges over the next four days.
Indeed, we have two very stimulating agendas.
As  we  have  received  you  as  our  guests,  we  hope  too  that  you  will  find  time  to  experience  a
sampling of our culture and the beauty of our people and country.
Welcome again and my best wishes for a productive week!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
