      26TH SWIFT AFRICAN REGIONAL CONFERENCE 
  WELCOME ADDRESS  
Dr. ERNEST ADDISON 
GOVERNOR, BANK OF GHANA 
      KEMPINSKI HOTEL, GOLD COAST CITY IN ACCRA, 
JUNE 18, 2019 
Your  Excellency,  President  Nana  Addo  Dankwa  Akufo-
Addo, 
 Honourable Ministers, 
Directors and Management of SWIFT, 
CEOs of Financial Institutions, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
  1.  It is an honour for me to officially welcome you all to Accra 
and  the  26th  Society  for  Worldwide  Interbank  Financial 
Telecommunication  (SWIFT)  Africa  Regional  Conference. 
Before  I  proceed  any  further,  let  me  first  say  that  we  are 
privileged to have H.E. President Nana Addo Dankwa Akufo-
Addo to grace the occasion. Your Excellency, we very much 
appreciate taking time off your busy schedule to join us today. 
 2.  Let  me  also  thank  the  management  of  SWIFT  for  choosing 
Ghana to host this year’s session which has brought together 
more  than  500  professionals  from  over  45  countries  across 
Africa and beyond, including policy makers, industry leaders 
1 
and FinTechs to meet and shape market practices in Africa’s 
 financial services sector.  
 3.  Your Excellency, digital innovation is creating unprecedented 
opportunities for Africa to grow its economy, create jobs and 
transform  people’s  lives.  New  technologies  and  business 
models are opening alternative pathways to economic growth 
in  emerging  markets,  offering  opportunities  to  reshape  our 
lives and improve economic growth.  In this regard, I believe 
the chosen theme; ‘Enabling the Digital Economy’ is most 
appropriate and timely.  
 4.  Ladies  and  Gentlemen, 
the  Government  of  Ghana’s 
commitment  to  formalize  the  Ghanaian  economy  through 
digitisation is laudable. Digitisation is a key component of the 
“Ghana  Beyond  Aid  Agenda”  which  is  firmly  anchored  in 
leveraging  technology  to  promote  economic  efficiency  and 
inclusiveness  for  accelerated  development  and  poverty 
reduction. Indeed, the President has shown keen interest and 
remains  committed  to  building  an  inclusive  modern  society. 
2 
  This  drive  has  seen  the  roll-out  of  several  digital  initiatives 
such as, the digital property addressing system, the National 
biometric  ID  cards  which  will  be  linked  to  Government 
agencies  to  help  ease  identification  processes  and  promote 
integrity and efficiency in business transactions.  
 5.  Also,  to  enhance  the  ease  of  doing  business  in  Ghana,  the 
Government  has  introduced  several  other  digital  initiatives 
such  as  the  paperless  port  operations  to  ensure  smooth 
operations  at  the  ports,  and  the  E-Justice  project  or  the 
paperless  courts,  which  seeks  to  automate  existing  manual 
filing systems in the court’s registry and improve efficiency of 
the justice system. These digitization processes will ultimately 
improve Ghana’s business environment. 
 6.  The  Bank  of  Ghana  recognizes  the  importance  of  the  role 
digital  innovations  play  in  creating  a  financially  inclusive 
economy.  Consequently,  the  Government  through  Bank  of 
Ghana 
is 
collaborating  with 
stakeholders 
including 
 3 
 telecommunication  companies  and  FinTechs  to  digitize  the 
financial landscape and deepen financial inclusion. 
 7.  Leveraging  on  mobile  phone  technology,  Ghana  made 
significant progress in improving financial inclusion. With the 
fastest  growing  market  in  Africa  with  an  estimated  voice 
subscriptions  rising  by  60.0  percent  (25.6  million)  to  (40.9 
million)  between  2012  and  2018,  mobile  money  accounts 
have also increased over nine - fold reaching 32.6 million from 
about  345,000  over  the  same  period.  At  the  end  of  2018, 
active mobile money accounts were estimated at 13.1 million 
accounts.   
 8.  In  collaboration  with  payment  service  providers,  financial 
technology  companies  (fintechs)  have  designed  innovative 
products and services to promote digital savings, lending and 
investments to unbanked customers at affordable costs. Some 
of  these  products  and  services  include  online  payment 
platforms,  mobile  banking  services,  Quick  Response  codes, 
money transfer services, deployment of Point of Sale devices, 
 4 
 termination  of  inward  remittances  into  mobile  wallets,  and 
agency banking. More recently, mobile money processes have 
been  integrated  with  the  interbank  payment  systems 
infrastructure.  
 9.  As  part  of  the  broader  strategy  to  create  an  enabling 
regulatory  environment  for  convenient,  efficient  and  safe 
retail payments and funds transfer mechanisms, the Bank of 
Ghana  has  consolidated  all  the  various  regulations  and 
guidelines into the Payment Systems and Services Act. 
 10. 
In March this year, the Payment Systems and  Services 
Act 2019 (Act 987) was passed by Parliament as part of the 
continued  efforts  to  establish  a  strong  payment  regulatory 
framework for the country. In May, the Act was subsequently 
assented  to by, the President of the Republic, reflecting  His 
Excellency’s  commitment  to  the  establishment  of  a  modern 
payments regulatory framework. This is another milestone in 
Ghana’s  strategy  to  develop  an  efficient  payment  systems 
framework to underscore the digitization process.  
  5 
 11. 
Broadly,  implementation  of  the  Act  is  expected  to 
liberalize the country’s payment system further and allow for 
the entry of non-banks, direct licensing of fintechs by the Bank 
of  Ghana,  and  ultimately  promote  financial  inclusion  to 
facilitate  electronic  means  of  payment.  In  the  long-run, 
Ghana’s new Payment Systems and Services Act is expected 
to help improve not only the payments system but also create 
an  enabling  environment  for  the  on-going  digitization 
processes in the economy. 
 12. 
By and large, the SWIFT network provides data, reports 
and  important  information  for  regulators,  banks  and  other 
financial  institutions,  as  well  as  policy  makers  across  the 
globe.  For  example,  the  2018  SWIFT  report  on  ‘Africa 
Payments: Insights into African Transaction Flows’ indicated 
an increasing number of clearing payments are being routed 
through  Africa,  instead  of  banks  outside  Africa.  The  data 
showed  that  between  2013  and  2017,  intra-African  clearing 
payments  increased  from  10.2%  to  12.3%.  SWIFT  also 
highlighted an emerging trend of increasing use of some local 
6 
  African  currencies  for  cross-border  payments.  This  has  the 
potential  to  moderate  foreign  exchange  risks  and  lower 
transaction  costs,  which  is  a  positive  development  for  the 
Continent.  
 13. 
To conclude my brief remarks Ladies and Gentlemen, let 
me  say  that  leveraging  on  digital  technology  requires  the 
commitment  and  collaboration  of  all  stakeholders.  And,  I 
believe,  the  august  gathering  of  policy  makers,  industry 
leaders and the broad financial community at this 26th SWIFT 
Conference  provides  the  unique  forum  for  networking, 
broader consultations, education and discussions, all within a 
collaborative environment. I wish you a successful three-day 
Conference and hope you will find time to visit some of our 
nearby tourist attractions.  
 Thank You. 
 7 
