Benjamin  E  Diokno:  Policy  continuity  and 
independence
Statement by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), during a press conference, Manila, 8 March 2019.
institutional
Good morning.
 I am happy to be with you all today at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas.
I would like to thank the BSP family for their warm reception on my first day at work in BSP and
the Monetary Board for our very collegial discussions yesterday.
Invariably,  one  cannot  speak  about  the  BSP  without  mentioning  my  immediate  predecessor,
Nestor A. Espenilla Jr. who spent his career spanning 38 years here. I am sure that he is and will
be greatly missed for pushing an agenda centered on financial inclusion, financial learning and
consumer  protection.    Rest  assured,  I  will  be  adopting  this  agenda  with  the  aim  of  making
financial services more accessible to our larger population.
The  BSP  has  fostered  an  environment  for  the  ideal  convergence  of  stable  prices  and  high
economic growth by implementing much-needed reforms during the past 20 years. 
This has certainly led to favorable and wide-ranging results, including the country’s maintenance
of  its  investment-grade  credit  ratings.  As  of  end-2018,  the  country  is  rated  BBB/Positive  by
Standard and Poor’s, BBB/Stable by Fitch, and Baa2/Stable by Moody’s Investors Service.
A STRONG INSTITUTION
I am certain that the BSP would not have been able to pursue such difficult reforms without a
highly competent workforce that is led by outstanding, capable and intelligent leaders.
Under the BSP’s Strategy Map 2018–2023, I have been duly informed that the officers and staff of
this  institution  are  collectively  working  towards  being  “recognized  globally  as  the  monetary
authority and primary financial system supervisor that supports a strong economy and promotes
a high quality of life for all Filipinos.”
I would say that you have done this with clear results, as I am now joining a Credible Central
Bank that enjoys the trust and confidence of the market in pursuing its mandate of price stability,
financial stability and efficient payments system.
It is also noteworthy that the BSP is committed to promoting Dynamic Stakeholder Engagement
to constantly seek ways to improve delivery of mandates; Organizational Agility amid a changing
operating  environment;  and  Organizational  Capability  by  constantly  developing  agile,
collaborative, motivated, and skilled BSP workers.
While  I  am  still  taking  stock  of  the  full  breath  of  my  responsibilities  here  at  the  BSP,  I  am
confident that this strong, professional and well-respected organization will see me through the
challenges  of  governorship.  I  truly  am  honored  to  join  this  esteemed  institution  as  its  fifth
Governor.
STRONG REGULATORY FRAMEWORK
 Aside  from  the  quality  of  this  institution,  I  am  also  glad  to  note  that  the  BSP  is  now  better
equipped to pursue its path of excellence with the enactment of new laws.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
  First  and  foremost,  “Republic  Act  No.  11211,  or  An  Act  Amending  Republic  Act  No.  7653,
Otherwise  Known  as  the  ‘New  Central  Bank  Act’,  and  for  Other  Purposes”  signed  on  14
February 2019 by President Rodrigo Duterte strengthens the BSP’s  regulatory framework for
pursuing its mandate. The law (a) strengthens policy framework for promoting price stability; (b)
enhances the framework for prudential regulation and systemic risk management to foster the
safety and soundness of the financial system; and (c) empowers the BSP to oversee payment
and settlement systems.
 Immediately after the signing of R.A. No. 11211, Standard and Poor’s upgraded the Philippine
banking  system’s  Banking  Industry  Country  Risk Assessment  (BICRA)  score  from  “6”  to  “5,”
indicating lower risk assessment for our banking system. BICRA scores range from 1 to 10, with
10 reflecting assessment of highest risk.
 Alongside the New BSP law, Republic Act No. 11127 or the “The National Payment Systems
Act” further bolsters the BSP’s capacity to foster the efficiency of payments systems as pipelines
of funds in the financial market. These laws bolster the BSP’s capacity to provide a steadying
hand to the financial system.
Moreover, these payment systems initiatives dovetail with BSP’s efforts to continuously enhance
the  financial  system’s  management  of  cyber  risks.  Knowing  that  IT  security  issues  have
systemic implications, the BSP, under my leadership, shall continue strengthening the system’s
ability to address these threats.
 Moving forward, I see these multifaceted undertakings ultimately benefiting the Filipino people in
terms of stable prices and a sound financial system that ably manages funds entrusted to it by
savers and investors.
Last year presented a challenge for the conduct of monetary policy. Shocks from high oil and
food  prices  brought  average  inflation  to  5.2  percent  in  2018,  exceeding  the  National
Government’s target of 2-4 percent. To ensure that we avoid propagating second-round effects
and upsetting inflation expectations, the BSP tightened monetary policy by a total of 175 basis
points.
With inflation slowing down in recent months, authorities have further opportunity to assess the
stance of monetary policy. Given the impact of non-monetary measures to relieve food supply
bottlenecks, including the implementation of the rice tariffication law, the BSP expects inflation to
settle  within  the  target  band  of  3.0  percent  ±  1.0  percentage  point  for  2019–2020.  Inflation
expectations  have  also  started  to  stabilize  within  the  BSP’s  target  band,  while  domestic
economic activity remains firm.
Nevertheless, various risks, both here and overseas, require the BSP to continue to keep a close
eye on developments that could affect the outlook for inflation. As always, our decisions on the
monetary policy stance will remain data-dependent.
INSTITUTIONAL INDEPENDENCE
In  pursuing  policy  continuity,  let  me  also  assure  you  that  the  BSP  will  sustain  its  institutional
independence with the Monetary Board acting as a collegial body. We shall continue to pursue
monetary and financial sector policies that are data-driven, evidence-based, and attuned to the
evolving market environment.
Thank you very much and have a good morning.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
