Denis  Beau:  Emerging  supervisory  priorities  -  technology,  risk
culture and sustainability
Opening remarks by Mr Denis Beau, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, at the BCBS-
BSCEE-FSI  High-level  Meeting  for  Europe  on  Banking  Supervision,  Session:  “Emerging
supervisory priorities: technology, risk culture and sustainability”, Vienna, 21 May 2019.
 Accompanying slides of the speech.
Along with some other national central banks, in particular the Bank of England and the
Dutch  National  Bank,  the  Banque  de  France  ant  its  supervisory  arm,  the ACPR  has
started to work on sustainability risks since 2015, in particular on financial risks arising from
climate change. This willingness to take ownership of this issue was linked with the requirement
from the French Energy Transition Act of 2015 to prepare a report discussing the feasibility of
stress-testing exercises focusing on climate change-related risks, though the scope of the report
was finally broader as it discussed the relevance of these risks for French banks.
Our  conclusions,  published  in  March  2017,  were  that  climate-related  risks,  in
particular transition risks in the case of French banks, were relevant for financial
stability, although  the  horizon  of  materialization  was  perceived  way  beyond  the  one
underlying most of the risks we currently supervise and horizon of decision of banks. From
this  point  of  view, it  was  deemed  within  the  mandate  of  the  supervisor  to  raise
awareness and enhance ownership of these potential risks throughout the banking
sector via regular meetings with institutions. It also emphasized the need to collectively think
how, as a supervisor and a central bank, we should deal with risks and avoid the build-up of
new vulnerabilities (e.g. helping to enhance the financing shift towards low-carbon sectors).
Those reflections gave birth to the Network for Greening the Financial System in December
2017.
As  a  continuation  of  this  work  and  also  in  the  spirit  of  bringing  our  contribution  to  the
reflections of the NGFS, the ACPR surveyed both main French banking and insurance
companies  in  2018  to  take  stock  of  progress  they  have  achieved  in  dealing  with
climate change-related financial risks. The main takeaways from both surveys have been
1
published last April 10  2018 in two reports .
2
The report dedicated to the banking sector  includes three main observations:
th
implementation  could  be 
There  is  a  shift  in  the  governance  of  climate  change-related  risks  from  a
“Coporate and Social Responsability-only” perspective towards a two-pronged
approach which integrates traditional risk departments. This trend is nevertheless
mainly  observable  in  the  biggest  and  most  internationally  active  institutions  and  the
operational 
(lack  of  metrics,
improved  significantly 
specification of strategic orientations at the business-line level…).
The development of risk analysis tools is mainly focused on transition risks as
related  exposures  represent  a  potentially  much  larger  share  of  their  balance
sheet  (net  credit  exposure  to  the  most  carbon-intensive  sectors  indeed  averaged
12.2% of total exposures in 2017 among 6 of the 7 main French banks) compared to
physical risk-related exposures (as most of assets are located in countries displaying a
low vulnerability to climate change e.g. Western Europe). A wide variety of tools have
been reported but each of them has still important drawbacks arguing for further
refinement and more data collection with certainly a need for support from supervisors.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Finally,  liability  risk  is  not  viewed  as  a  material  one  at  this  stage  despite  a  growing
number of climate change-related litigation cases.
Therefore,  there  is  ample  room  for  progress  leading  the  ACPR  to  lay-out
recommendations directed to institutions on the one hand and to regulators and the
supervisors  on  the  other  hand.  In  particular,  as  a  supervisor  we  should  be  able  to
quickly  come  up  with  a  prudential  reporting  of  exposures  to  unsustainable  activities.
From this point of view, the forthcoming taxonomy from the European Commission will
certainly  be  useful  but  not  enough  to  achieve  this  as  a  taxonomy  of  unsustainable
activities is needed. We should also anchor expectations of financial institutions about
climate-related  risks  by  publishing  strategic  roadmap  about  the  way  the  supervisor
intends to scale-up the supervision of these risks along the different regulatory pillars.
Also, developing stress-testing frameworks remains a collective challenge about which
central banks and supervisors should strengthen their works.
At our level, the next stage of our works is to organize work streams with banks in order to
specify together the best practices of the sector in terms of governance and to reflect on
scenarios and metrics to best assess the vulnerability of banks, liaising with the work carried
out with the NGFS. At the end, the release of these surveys and their follow-up signal the
willingness  of  the ACPR  /  Banque  de  France  to  gradually  “mainstream”  climate  change-
related risks. This willingness is also growing among European Institutions as attested by
the recent move from the SSM to launch its own internal network combined with an NCA
Climate contact group. The ambition is to contribute to European and international fora as
well as be in the position to adopt resulting guidelines or requirements (in the EBA case).
Nevertheless,  at  a  moment  where  networks  or  work  streams  are  burgeoning,  especially
within European institutions, we should be very careful about the good coordination of these
different initiatives to avoid redundancy and duplication. It is also important that the NFGS,
which  remains  a  club  of  the  willing,  ensure  some  minimal  degree  of  cooperation  and
harmonization by issuing high-level recommendations. From this point of view, I welcome
the six very important recommendation issued in April directed to supervisors, central banks
and the financial sector: i) integrating climate-related risks into financial stability monitoring
and  supervision;  ii)  integrating  sustainability  factors  into  own-portfolio  management;  iii)
bridging  the  data  gaps  ;  iv)  building  awareness  and  intellectual  capacity  and  encouraging
technical assistance and knowledge sharing ; achieving robust and intentionally consistent
climate and environment related disclosure ; vi) supporting the development of a taxonomy
of economic activities.
In  the  longer-run,  when  there  will  be  a  global  convergence  about  the  necessity  to  issue
global standards and regulatory requirements, global standard setter such as the BCBS and
FSB would need to take the lead on addressing climate change-related risks.
12
1
2
findings 
:  Climate 
Main 
insurers?  acpr.banque-
france.fr/sites/default/files/medias/documents/as_cover_note_en.pdf Analysis  and  synthesis  no.  102: “French
2019 acpr.banque-
insurers 
france.fr/sites/default/files/medias/documents/as_102_climate_change_insurers_en.pdf
change:  which 
change 
climate 
banks 
facing 
risks” 
risks 
April 
and 
for 
Analysis  and  synthesis  no.  101, “French  banking  groups  facing  climate  change-related  risks”, April
2019acpr.banque-france.fr/sites/default/files/medias/documents/as_101_climate_risk_banks_en.pdf
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
