      
Is All Economics Local? 
 
 
Speech given by 
 Andrew G Haldane 
Chief Economist 
Bank of England 
 Sheffield Political Economy Research Institute (SPERI) Annual Lecture 
University of Sheffield 
7 May 2019 
       The views expressed here are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy 
Committee.  I would like to thank Shiv Chowla, Fergus Cumming, Alastair Firrell, Ryan Lovelock, 
Rebecca Mari, Georgina Parker and Doug Rendle for their help in preparing the text.  I would like to 
thank Arjun Ahluwalia, Mike Anson, Kate Barker, Paul Clarke, Diane Coyle, Tom Forth,  
Clare Macallan and Rachael Muir for their comments and contributions.  
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
1 
    It is wonderful to be here at the University of Sheffield, my alma mater, to give the SPERI Annual Lecture.  I 
have been a great admirer of SPERI’s work over the years.  It has played an important role in shaping the 
conversation  about  public  policy,  economically  and  socially,  locally  and  nationally.    My  topic  today  echoes 
many  of  the  themes  SPERI  has  championed  –  the  role  of  local  perspectives  and  policies  in  better 
understanding the economy and in shaping a better society. 
 Tip O’Neill, the former Speaker of the United States House of Representatives, famously said “all politics is 
local”.  Those words probably apply to politics everywhere.  They have also probably been true at every point 
in  history.    But  at  this  particular  point  in  history,  with  local  or  national  identities  becoming  an  increasingly 
potent force shaping our economies and societies, those words have a particular resonance.     
 That set me thinking.  Does the O’Neill hypothesis hold for our economies too?  Is all economics local?  Are 
our economies better understood as a nation-state solid or as a set of  loosely-linked local clusters?  Might 
this  have  implications  for  how  we  map,  model  and  manage  the  economy?    And  might  it  even  have 
implications for central banks, despite their policies operating nationally rather than locally? 
 I  want  to  explore  these  questions,  tentatively  and  provisionally,  first  by  drawing  some  simple  maps  of  the 
economy at different spatial resolutions.  These maps provide some insight into how “local” economies really 
are.  How large are differences between-region?  How do they compare with differences within-region?  And 
what do we know about flows of factors, including people, between and within regions? 
 This  local  lens  poses  some  interesting  questions  about  how  the  economy  should  be  modelled.    Existing 
models  of the macro-economy operate at a high  level of aggregation.   When is  this  telescopic lens  on  the 
economy the most useful one?  When might a microscopic, or local, lens offer additional insights?  And how, 
practically, can those microscopic perspectives be pieced together to give a macroscopic overview? 
 When it comes to managing the economy, this has been fertile ground for policy debate recently.  Several 
reports have made the case for rethinking local economic policies, including Michael Jacobs’ work as part of 
the IPPR Commission on Economic Justice.1  The Government has put “place” centre-stage in its own policy 
agenda.2  I discuss ways in which analytical techniques and data might help in shaping those policy choices. 
 Some areas of public policy can only operate at the national rather than local level, such as monetary policy.  
Even  then,  however,  a  local  perspective  can  be  important  for  better  understanding  the  economic  issues 
people face and for building understanding and trust among those people.  That is why the Bank of England 
has recently augmented its own local initiatives, as I will discuss.  Other central banks are following suit.   
                                                       
1  IPPR Commission on Economic Justice (2018).  See also Collier (2018). 
2  Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (2017). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 2 
 
2 
  In his recent book, Raghu Rajan blames neglect of the Third Pillar of society – community – relative to the 
market  and  the  state  (the  first  two  pillars)  for  rising  societal  disconnection  and  mistrust.3   Rajan  is  right.  
Economic policymakers, including central banks, have a pivotal role to play in resurrecting that Third Pillar, in 
making economic policy local, to better support our economies and societies.  Here is how. 
 Mapping the Economy 
 Let me begin with some simple mapping of the economy.  The most widely-used metric of economic success 
is  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP).4   In  simple  terms,  this  measures  how  much  the  average  person  has 
available  to  spend  on  the  good  things  in  life.    If  asked,  most  people  would  say  this  is  a  decent,  if  partial, 
proxy for their overall economic health, even if they express bafflement at the concept of GDP. 
 Aggregate GDP is far from being the only possible proxy for economic health.  The lived experience of most 
people depends on more than their income.  A rich strand of literature has developed alternative measures of 
people’s well-being.  As well as economic and financial health, these measures include physical and mental 
health, their families,  friends and communities.5  This work  tells us  that people’s sense of well-being, if not 
their GDP, is shaped by local factors, underpinned by the Third Pillar. 
 Another  reason  why  aggregate  GDP  may  not  chime  with  most  people’s  lived  experience  is  because,  by 
definition, most people are not “average”.  Economists use the idea of the average or representative agent 
as a convenient shortcut.  But that agent is a fiction.  People’s lived experiences often differ very materially, 
even within a single country or region – spatially, socially and financially.  For most people’s everyday lives 
and everyday decisions, all economics is local. 
 These imperfections in GDP are well-understood.  They certainly do not fatally undermine its usefulness as a 
means of keeping economic score.  They do, however, suggest it can usefully be complemented by looking 
at the economy through different lenses.  One of those different lenses comes from mapping the economy 
bottom-up, rather than top-down, aggregating microscopic experiences into a macroscopic view.   
 In  medicine,  we  use  a  variety  of  different  tools,  at  different  resolutions,  to  diagnose  problems  and  when 
prescribing solutions:  thermometers, blood pressure monitors, X-rays, CT scans, ultrasound and blood tests.  
Rarely does one of these measures provide all of the diagnostic answers.  Using them in combination can, 
however, help reach robust clinical conclusions.  And that “micro-to-macro” approach is commonplace when 
understanding other complex adaptive systems like the body, natural, physical and social. 
                                                       
3  Rajan (2019). 
4  Coyle (2014).   
5  For example, Helliwell, Layard and Sachs (2019), Ngamaba (2017) and Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance 
and Social Progress. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
3 
 
3 
   Like our bodies, the economy is also a complex, adaptive system.  As in medicine, it can be measured using 
different tools at different resolutions.  There are various metrics of societal health, in addition to GDP.  For 
example, there has been increasing interest recently in measures of physical and mental health.6  A number 
of  statistical  agencies,  including  in  the  UK,  now  gather  direct  and  indirect  metrics  of  people’s  well-being.  
Here we map a selection of those alternative metrics, based around health, wealth and happiness. 
 A  different  sort  of  lens  comes  from  viewing  these  metrics  at  different  spatial  resolutions  –  regional,  local 
authority, postcode  even.   This allows a  “micro-to-macro” jigsaw of the economy to be  pieced  together, as 
with other complex systems.  Patterns in these systems often self-replicate at different resolutions;  they are 
“fractal”. 7  One interesting question is whether economic systems also exhibit self-replicating patterns.  If so, 
this has implications for how we understand and model them. 
 We consider these questions using a sequence of maps.  Many of these maps are not new.   For example, 
Philip  McCann  from  the  University’s  Productivity  Insights  Network  (PIN)  has  published  an  excellent  book 
setting out a range of fascinating regional facts and maps.  So too have others.8  These maps provide useful 
context when testing the Tip O’Neill hypothesis and when modelling and managing the economy. 
 To provide the clearest visual guide, these maps are scaled by economic rather than geographic size  
– so-called cartograms.9  Each region is initially scaled to have the same geographic area and then rescaled 
in line with economic differences.  This means some areas shrink (such as Scotland) while others expand 
(such as London) even without differences between them.  This helps when visualising local differences. 
 (a) 
  Differences between regions 
 To fix ideas, Charts 1a and 1b plot a map and an accompanying cartogram of population by region in the UK 
and,  by  way  of  comparison,  Germany.    It  uses  a  resolution  one-level  below  the  national  –  administrative 
“regions” in England and each of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.  Comparing the map and cartogram 
suggests  the  UK  has  a  significant  demographic  skew  towards  London  and  the  South-East.    Germany  has 
nothing like the same skew, with the cartogram and map little different.10 
 A  key  focus  of  work  among  economic  geographers  is  the  importance  of  agglomeration  effects  –  that  is, 
increasing returns to economic scale at the spatial level.11  If those effects are powerful, and if workers are 
one of their most important sources, we would expect cartograms to have similar properties when looked at 
by population, income (per head) and wealth (per household).  More should not only be merrier but wealthier.   
                                                       
6  For example, Case and Deaton (2017). 
7  For example, Viscek, Shlesinger and Matsushita (1994). 
8  McCann (2016), Centre for Cities (2019), What Works Centre for Local Economic Growth (2018). 
9  See Dougenik, Chrisman and Niemeyer (1985). 
10  Put differently, the correlation between geographic area size and population in the UK is in fact slightly negative (-0.05) while it is 
relatively high and positive (0.7) in Germany.  
11  Viladecans-Marsal (2004) and Rosenthal and Strange (2003), example. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
4 
 
4 
  Chart 1a:  Map (LHS) and cartogram (RHS) of population in the UK  
                    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
5 
 
5 
  Chart 1b:  Map (LHS) and cartogram (RHS) of population in Germany 
 
Sources:  Eurostat and Bank calculations. 
Notes:  Charts show population in 2018 for NUTS 1 regions.  Cartograms resized by population. 
 
   As  Charts  2  and  3  show,  broadly-speaking  that  is  the  case.    The  income  per  head  cartogram  suggests  a 
shrunken  North  and  a  swollen  South.    The  gap  between  richest  and  poorest  region  is  around  150%.    For 
wealth per household, the North-South divide is also large, with a gap between richest and poorest of 130%.  
These are striking differences.  But are they unusual compared either with the past or other countries? 
            
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
6 
 
6 
  Chart 2:  Cartogram of UK income per head  
  
Sources:  Eurostat and Bank calculations. 
Notes:  Purchasing power standard (PPS) per inhabitant for NUTS 1 regions. 
 
        
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
7 
 
7 
  Chart 3:  Cartogram of Great Britain wealth per household  
  
Sources:  ONS Wealth and Assets Survey and Bank calculations. 
Notes:  Data refer to 2014-16 for NUTS 1 regions, re-sized and coloured by median household  wealth.  No equivalent 
data available for Northern Ireland. 
 
      
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
8 
 
8 
   On  the  first  of  those,  Chart  4  plots  the  distribution  of  income  per  head  across  UK  regions  on  three  dates:  
1997, 2007 and 2016.  All of the distributions are centred on mean levels of income in 2016.  This suggests a 
modest increase in the degree of regional income dispersion over time.  The 2016 distribution has somewhat 
fatter tails, lower and upper, than in earlier periods.12 
  Chart 4:  Distribution of UK income per head over time (mean-aligned) 
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations. 
Notes:  Chart shows regional gross disposable income for different time periods at current basic prices, centred around 
the 2016 mean.  Observations for each region are weighted by the population of each region. 
 
Chart  5  compares  the  regional  distribution  of  income  per  head  in  the  UK,  France  and  Germany  in  2016, 
again centred on mean income levels in the UK in 2016.  It suggests a materially wider regional dispersion in 
incomes in the UK than in France and Germany.  The gap between richest and poorest regions in the UK is 
almost twice as large as in France and three-quarters larger than in Germany.13        
                                                         
12  Comparing NUTS 3 regions. 
13  Figures refer to income differences at the NUTS1 regional level, using Purchasing Power Standard (PPS). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
9 
 
9 
  Chart 5:  Distribution of UK, France and Germany income per head in 2016 
Île de  
France 
Oberbayern 
Inner London - 
West 
  Sources:  Eurostat and Bank calculations. 
Notes:    Purchasing  power  standard  (PPS)  per  household  in  NUTS2  regions  for  2016  centred  around  the  UK  mean.  
Excludes NUTS region ‘FRY’ (‘Départements d'outre mer'). 
 
These  regional  differences  in  GDP  are  found  in  alternative  metrics  of  economic  health,  such  as  pay  
(Chart 6).14  They are also mirrored in medical health.  Chart 7 plots one measure of medical health by region  
– average life expectancy.  This mirrors regional income differences.  Richer people tend to live longer.  The 
gap between highest and lowest life expectancies regionally is around 3.4 years, or 4.2% of the UK average.   
                                                                 
14  Haldane (2019). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
10 
 
10 
  Chart 6:  Cartogram of UK pay  
 Sources:  ONS Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings (ASHE). 
Notes:  UK NUTS 1 regions re-sized and coloured by median gross weekly earnings (£) in 2018. 
 
        
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
11 
 
11 
  Chart 7:  Cartogram of UK life expectancy  
   
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations. 
Notes:  Life expectancy at birth by local area in the UK (years) for UK NUTS 1 regions, re-sized and coloured by mean 
life expectancy in 2010-12. 
 
If  we  turn  to  an  alternative  measure  of  health  –  psychological  health  –  the  picture  changes  dramatically.  
Chart  8  plots  a  subjective  measure  of  well-being  on  a  regional  basis.15   This  is  the  mirror  image  of  the 
income and wealth maps.  Well-being is lowest in the richest region (London) and highest in a region where 
incomes are low (Northern Ireland).  Income may buy you many things, but happiness is not one of them.16 
 
                                                      
15  This is based on answers to the question:  “Overall, how satisfied are you with your life nowadays?”  Other questions regarding well-
being yield very similar conclusions.   
16  Easterlin (1974) and Easterlin (2013), for example, point out that while wealthier people tend on average to be happier, happiness 
does not increase in line with GDP per head.  Unemployment and debt arrears also have a large adverse psychological impact on 
individuals, above-and-beyond their direct impact on income and wealth (Wildman (2003) and Taylor et al (2007)). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
12 
 
12 
   While simple, these maps suggest there is important information on economies and societies to be found by 
peering  through  different  lenses:    lenses  that  operate  at  different  resolutions,  as  the  striking  UK  regional 
differences  in  income,  wealth  and  health  demonstrate;    and  lenses  that  focus  on  different  economic 
attributes, as the striking differences between the UK’s regional income and well-being maps demonstrate.     
 Chart 8:  Cartogram of UK well-being  
Sources:  ONS Annual Population Survey (APS) and Bank calculations. 
Notes:    Responses  to  the  question,  “overall,  how  satisfied  are  you  with  your  life  nowadays?”  where  0  is  ‘not  at  all 
satisfied’ and 10 is ‘completely satisfied’ for 2016/17.  UK NUTS 1 regions re-sized and coloured by mean response. 
 
 (b) 
Differences within regions 
 Given  these  striking  regional  differences  in  health,  wealth  and  happiness  across  the  UK,  an  interesting 
supplementary  question  is  how  those  differences  compare  within-regions.    As  we  alter  the  resolution  at 
which  we  view  the  economy,  do  these  differences  narrow?    Do  economic  patterns  look  different  when 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
13 
 
13 
   comparing them within and between regions?  Or are these patterns self-similar at different resolutions, as 
when we use a microscope to study the shoreline? 
 Chart 9 provides one visualisation of these patterns at different resolutions.  These “violin” plots compare the 
distribution of income per head at the regional (NUTS 1) level with the distribution at NUTS 2 and NUTS 3 
level.    If  between-region  income  differences  were  much  larger  than  within-region  differences,  we  would 
expect the violin to be much longer on its left than on its right hand side.   
 This is clearly not the case.  The distributions of income within and between regions are in fact quite similar, 
at both the NUTS 2 and 3 levels.  If anything, the distribution of outcomes within each region appears to be a 
little larger than the distribution between regions.  If anything, income inequalities within a region appear to 
be larger than income inequalities between regions.   
 Chart 9:  ‘Violin’ plot of GVA per head  
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations. 
Notes:  Regional gross value-added (GVA, income approach) per head of population at current basic prices for 2017 for 
NUTS  1,  2 and 3,  log-scale.    Regional  figures  weighted by  population.    Dark  bar  shows  interquartile range,  dots  show 
median and circle shows mean. 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
14 
 
14 
    Charts 10, 11 and 12 are violin plots for wages, health and well-being at higher resolutions.  For health and 
well-being,  differences  within  a  region  or  local  authority  are  materially  larger  than  differences  between 
regions.  The standard deviation of health outcomes at the local authority level is almost 3 times larger than 
at  the  regional  level.    The  difference  between  the  highest  and  lowest  life  expectancy  among  UK  local 
authorities is 12 years, or 15% of the average expected lifespan. 
 Chart 10:  ‘Violin’ plot of wages  
 
Sources:  ONS Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings (ASHE) and Bank calculations. 
Notes:    Median  gross  wages  in  2018.    Regional  figures  weighted  by  number  of  jobs  per  region.    Dark  bar  shows 
interquartile range, dots show median and circle shows mean.  No Northern Ireland wage data available at NUTS 3 level. 
 
         
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
15 
 
15 
  Chart 11:  ‘Violin’ plot of health (life expectancy) 
   
Sources:  ONS and Bank calculations. 
Notes:  Life expectancy at birth for NUTS 1, 2 and 3 regions in 2010-12.  Regional figures weighted by population in each 
region.  Dark bar shows interquartile range, dots show median and circle shows mean.   
 
              
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
16 
 
16 
  Chart 12:  ‘Violin’ plot of well-being (life satisfaction) 
  Sources:  ONS Annual Population Survey (APS) and Bank calculations. 
Notes:  Responses to the question, “overall, how satisfied are you with your life nowadays?” for NUTS 1, 2 and 3 where 
0  is  ‘not  at  all  satisfied’  and  10  is  ‘completely  satisfied’  for  2016/17.    Regional  figures  weighted  by  population  in  each 
region.  
  
 
Chart  13  plots  health  perceptions  by  electoral  ward  in  four  big  UK  cities:    Belfast,  Cardiff,  Edinburgh  and 
(inner) London.17  The differences are big, with nearly twice as many people perceived to be in bad or very 
bad health in Belfast than Edinburgh.  Even more striking are the differences in the same city, however, with 
adjacent districts reporting bad health differences of between 3% and 25%. 
                                                            
17  Data refer to percentage of people in the census rating themselves in “bad” or “very bad” health. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
17 
 
17 
  Chart 13:  Heat maps of health in Belfast, Cardiff, Edinburgh and Inner London  
      Sources:  2011 Census. 
Notes:    Data  show  percentage  of  respondents  declaring  themselves  to  be  in  bad  or  very  bad  health  at  electoral  ward 
level. 
 
I draw two conclusions from these micro-level visualisations.  First, however striking the regional differences 
in  economic  and  societal  health  across  the  UK  relative  to  historical  and  international  standards,  these 
conceal  even  more  striking  differences  in  levels  of  health,  wealth  and  happiness  within  regions.    To  the 
extent there is an inequality issue in the UK, it is as much or more a local rather than regional one. 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
18 
 
18 
   A  second,  nerdier,  point  is  what  this  means  for  our  understanding  the  economy.    Many  systems  –  social, 
natural  and  physical  –  exhibit  a  pattern  in  which  the  distribution  of  outcomes  does  not  converge  at  higher 
resolutions;  it remains constant or even expands.  These systems have a fractal property with patterns that 
are self-similar at different levels of resolution.  Snowflakes and shorelines are the best-known examples. 
 The  violins  charts  suggest  economic  systems  may  also  exhibit  some  of  these  properties,  with  distributions 
which  do  not  converge  at  higher  resolutions  and  may  even  expand.    Outcomes  in  these  systems  are  not 
distributed  like  a  bell-shaped,  Normal  distribution.    Instead,  outcomes  are  drawn  from  a  Power  Law 
distribution, which has fatter tails and a much greater probability of extreme outcomes.18 
 Chart 14 plots the distribution of health, wealth and happiness across the UK.  The straight line shows where 
outcomes  would  lie  if  they  were  Normally-distributed.    Deviations  from  that  line,  at  its  extremities,  signify  
fat-tails.  For health and income there is strong evidence of fat tails and Power law distributions.19 
 Chart 14:  Power Law tests  
  GVA per head 
  Well-being 
                                                             
18  Haldane (2012) discusses Power Law distributions as they apply to economic and financial variables. 
19  Haldane (2012). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
  19 
 
19 
  Wages 
Health (life expectancy) 
  Sources and notes:  as per violin plots in Charts 9-12. 
 
 
Fat-tails and Power Law distributions are associated with systems that are complex and adaptive.  The best 
definition of complexity is, for me, the one provided by Herbert Simon back in 1962:  “one made up of a large 
number  of  parts  that  interact  in  a  non-simple  way”.20   That  description  fits  our  maps  rather  well.    They  are 
certainly made up of a large number of distinct parts, even within geographically-concentrated areas. 
 If  the  economic  system  is  complex,  in  the  sense  of  Simon,  this  carries  important  implications  for 
understanding  and  modelling  these  systems.    As  with  the  body,  to  understand  the  dynamics  of  a  complex 
system it is crucial you study the micro-level moving parts.  It is equally important to understand interactions 
among these parts.  What do we know about interactions among the economy’s moving parts? 
 (c) 
Movements between regions 
 In  economic  systems,  interactions  occur  among  all  of  the  factors  involved  in  production  and  consumption 
decisions – people, money, goods and services.  Capturing flows of these factors, and their interactions, is 
crucial for understanding how a complex economic system will function.  Below I consider flows of money, 
goods and services.  Let me start by considering flows of people. 
 Chart 15 plots migration in and out of various regions in 2016-17, expressed as a proportion of the regional 
population.  Even gross inflows and outflows are relatively modest, varying between 4% (London) and ½% 
(Northern Ireland).  Net flows of people are even more modest, in all cases bar London averaging less than 
0.6%.  One of the reasons regions are distinct may be because of their ring-fenced populations. 
                                                       
20  Simon (1962). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
20 
 
20 
  Chart 15:  Migration inflows and outflows between different UK regions 
   
Sources:  ONS Local Area Migration Indicators and Bank calculations. 
Notes:  Data refer to mid-2016 to mid-2017, as a percentage of 2017 population. 
 
Of  course,  people  living  in  one  region  can  still  commute  into  another  for  work  purposes.    Table  1  looks  at 
commuting destinations across UK regions, as a percentage of each region’s population.  With the exception 
of London and the South-East, worker flows from outside of the home region are modest, averaging only 5% 
of the working population.  Even when looking at flows of workers, most regions are self-contained and local. 
             
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
21 
 
21 
  Table 1:  Commuting flows between UK regions (percentage of workers resident in each region) 
   
Sources:  Nomis and Bank calculations. 
Notes:  Percentage of each region’s workers commuting from each residential region. 
 
 These flow data provide a useful lens on  local economic eco-systems.  As an example, Chart 16 plots the 
time to get to work (in minutes) against the distance to work (in km) across the UK’s regions.  Most regions 
outside London and the South-East are tightly clustered, with an average commute time of 27 minutes and 
distance of 16 km.  Consistent with other evidence, this suggests most regions are local economically. 
                 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
22 
 
22 
  Chart 16:  Distance vs. time to work 
  Sources:  ONS Labour Force Survey, 2011 Census and Bank calculations. 
Notes:  Average distance travelled (km) and usual time (minutes) from home to work by NUTS 1 region in England and 
Wales. 
 
The situation is somewhat different in London.  The average commute distance is materially shorter (11km) 
but the average travel time almost doubles at (40 minutes).  A cartogram of commute times makes this point 
strikingly (Chart 17).  Contrary to popular belief, London is life in the slow lane.  As we know commuting often 
detracts  from  people’s  well-being,  this  cartogram  perhaps  explains  why  Londoners  are  richer  but  more 
miserable.21 
                                                              
21  For example, Office for National Statistics (2014) and Novaco and Gonzalez (2009). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 23 
 
23 
 Chart 17:  Cartogram of UK travel time to work 
 Sources:  ONS Labour Force Survey, 2011 Census and Bank calculations. 
Notes:  UK local authorities re-sized and coloured by mean travel to work time (minutes). 
 
            
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
24 
 
24 
   Modelling the Economy 
 How can these micro-level data help when modelling the economy?  Economists and policymakers typically 
use highly-aggregated models which operate at an economy-wide level, often comprising a small number of 
“representative” agents.  In their most aggregated versions, there is a single representative household and 
company.  The most widely-used is the Representative Agent New Keynesian (RANK) model.22   
 RANK-type  models  have  real  virtues.    They  are  underpinned  by  an  optimising  view  of  individual  human 
behaviour  and,  in  this  sense,  can  be  said  to  be  “micro-founded”.    They  are  explicitly  identified,  in  the 
statistical sense, and parsimonious.  These characteristics mean these models can often offer deep insight 
into comparative static questions about the impact of changes in the deep parameters of an economy, such 
as shifts in risk-aversion among households or in levels of technology among firms.23   
 There are also, of course, costs of simplicity.  The most serious is the inability of these models often to fit the 
macro-economic  facts  at  business  cycle  frequencies,  particularly  at  times  of  economic  stress. 24   RANK 
models fared poorly in capturing the dynamics of the economy either side of the global financial crisis.  At the 
very time it was most interesting and important, these models were found wanting as a guide to the fortunes 
of the economy and economic policy. 
 One  response  has  been  to  develop  models  that  relax  the  representative  agent  assumption.    So-called 
Heterogeneous Agent New Keynesian (HANK) models comprise distinct agents with distinct behaviours.  As 
importantly,  these  models  capture  interactions  among  agents. 25    While  it  is  heterogeneity  that  is  often 
emphasized, it is interactions between agents that is most important for replicating real-world dynamics. 
 Consider the dynamics of two very simple systems:  a single and double pendulum.  The single pendulum is 
a  representative  agent  model.    Once  disturbed,  its  motion  is  regular  and  its  distribution  normal  
(Figure  1,  LHS).    The  double  pendulum  involves  two  identical  representative  agents  which  interact.    Its 
dynamics are complex and highly non-linear and it is Power Law distributed (Figure 1, RHS).  Even simple 
interactions among representative agents generate complex system dynamics. 
                                                             
22  For example, Galí (2015). 
23  For example, Kydland and Prescott (1982). 
24  Haldane (2016), Haldane and Turrell (2018). 
25  For example, Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
25 
 
25 
  Figure 1 :  Single and double pendulum 
Single pendulum 
Double pendulum 
   Sources: https://codepen.io/anon/pen/XQLNaZ 
 
HANK-type models do a better job of capturing heterogeneity across agents than their RANK cousins.  The 
number of interactions among their internal moving parts is nonetheless heavily constrained.  Certainly, they 
do  not  come  close  to  capturing  the  granularity,  spatially  or  sectorally,  that  exists  in  real-world  economic 
systems.  Are there alternative modelling approaches that capture more of these moving, interacting parts? 
 Agent-Based Models (ABMs) use a larger array of distinct agents and permit a far-larger scale of interaction 
among them.26  They have been used extensively to model complex systems – natural systems (rainforests 
and  oceans),  physical  systems  (electricity  grids  and  war  zones)  and  social  systems  (swarms  of  birds  and 
bees).27  These are systems where it is recognised that an understanding of interactions among the internal 
moving parts is crucial for capturing behaviour of the system as a whole, in line with Simon’s dictum. 
 For economists used to dealing with highly-aggregated models, the very dimensionality of ABMs is striking.  
The largest in physics can now simulate interactions of up to 400 billion distinct particles at any one time.28  
That  is  around  50  times  as  many  agents  as  there  are  humans  on  the  planet.    By  way  of  comparison,  the 
largest-scale macro-models would typically have fewer than 10 distinct agent types. 
 ABMs  have  been  used  to  study  the  economy,  albeit  not  very  extensively.29   The  Bank  has  recently  used 
them  to  model  the  housing  and  corporate  bond  markets,  both  of  which  exhibit  non-linear  dynamics  due  to 
complex  interactions  among  agents. 30    These  models  have  also  been  used  to  run  hypothetical  policy 
simulations, in particular for macro-prudential policies.31  These models are no free lunch.  They pose difficult 
choices, such as where to strike the balance between realism (complexity) and parsimony (simplicity).   
                                                       
26  Farmer (2019) discusses agent-based models in the context of complexity economics. 
27  For example, Ge et al (2018), Ge and Polhill (2016) and Heppenstall et al (eds.) (2012). 
28  https://arxiv.org/abs/1112.1754 
29  For example, Cristelli, Pietronero and Zaccaria (2011) and Napoletano, Gaffard and Babutsidze (2012). 
30  Baptista et al (2016) and Braun-Munzinger, Liu and Turrell (2016). 
31  Baptista et al (2016). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 26 
 
26 
  We  typically  define  models  as  simplified  abstractions  of  reality,  partly  for  reasons  of  practicality  given 
humans’  limited  capacity  to  track  too  many  moving  parts.    But  computers  these  days  can  keep  track  far 
better  than  any  human.    If  the  largest  ABMs  have  a  dimensionality  greater  than  our  population,  why  not 
model the economy at its highest possible resolution?  Why be abstract if you can be exact?  That would be 
a very different conception of the term “micro-founded”. 
 This  may  sound  like  science  fiction.    Yet  we  already  have  practical  examples  of  just  that,  starting  at  the 
highest  level  of  resolution  –  the  firm.    In  1956,  Jay  Wright  Forrester,  an  electrical  engineer,  switched  from 
devising  systems  for  detecting  incoming  Soviet  nuclear  bombs  to  designing  systems  for  understanding 
production problems in companies.  He developed the first computer models of how companies operated.  In 
so doing, he founded the discipline that would become “system dynamics”.32 
 In line with Forrester’s initial insight, one of the most interesting developments recently when understanding 
the dynamics of companies is the creation of so-called “digital twins”.33  These are a DNA-level digital clone 
of a company, tracing the interactions among  its moving parts.  A digital twin is a high-resolution, dynamic 
model  of  a  firm-level  micro-economy  that  can  be  used  both  to  understand  and  to  simulate  a  company’s 
operations, however complex.  Their use among frontier companies is increasingly commonplace. 
 The  data  necessary  to  calibrate  these  digital  twins  is  considerable,  but  also  increasingly  commonplace.34  
Twenty years ago, the large American retailer Walmart created a system allowing them, and their suppliers, 
to  monitor  their  complex  supply-chain  in  close  to  real  time.35   This  transformed  inventory  management  at 
Walmart and its suppliers.  Twenty years on, these real-time data systems are rapidly becoming the norm.   
 At the next level of resolution, could a digital twin be created at a town or city level?  Having started with the 
firm, Jay Wright Forrester’s next project was to simulate a city, in an attempt to understand and help solve 
the US’s “urban crisis” of the 1960s.  Forrester  developed DYNAMO, a computer-simulated model of a city 
comprising 150 equations and 200 parameters.  His book Urban Dynamics, published in 1969, set out how 
these computer models could be used to understand the evolution of cities.36 
 Reading Forrester’s book in the 1980s, video-game developer Will Wright had an idea for  creating a game 
involving building a dynamic model of a city.  The result was SimCity (Figure 2).  This quickly became one of 
the most popular video games of its era.  Computer-simulated video games quickly came to be used to solve 
real-world  city  planning  problems.    Subsequently,  ABM-like  models  of  simulated  cities  have  found 
widespread use for urban planning and development.37   
                                                       
32  For example, Karnopp, Margolis and Rosenberg (1990). 
33  Shaw and Fruhlinger (2019). 
34  Bolton et al (2018) have discussed the possible guiding values for a national digital twin framework as part of work on behalf of the 
Centre for Digital Built Britain. 
35  Hardgrave et al (2006). 
36  Forrester (1969). 
37  For example, Motieyan and Mesgari (2018). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
27 
 
27 
  Figure 2:  SimCity 
  Sources:    Electronic  Arts,  available  at:  https://help.ea.com/en-us/help/simcity/simcity-buildit/all-about-regions-in-simcity-
buidlit/ 
 
 If creating a digital twin is possible at the firm and city-region level, might it be feasible economy-wide?  An 
economy-wide  map  constructed  at  the  microscopic  level,  and  an  accompanying  digital  twin  tracking  flows 
among the moving parts, is an intriguing vision of how a future economic model might be constructed.  Paul 
Clarke, Chief Technical Officer at Ocado, has recently set out a vision of smart cities and communities, with 
tracking and modelling of flows through drones, robots and smart infrastructure, which is in this same spirit.38   
 Such a model is not without precedent.  In 1949, the New Zealand economist A W Phillips built a machine in 
his  landlady’s  garage  in  Croydon  using  liquid  and  tanks  to  illustrate  the  circular  flows  of  income  and 
interactions  in  an  economy  (Figure  3).    This  early  analogue  computer  was  not  for  show;    it  was  used  to 
understand the economy and simulate policy before digital computers existed.  Working versions still exist. 
The model I have sketched is a high resolution, digital version of the Phillips machine.  
                                                             
38  Clarke (2018). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
28 
 
28 
  Figure 3:  Phillips machine 
 Sources:  Image available at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Phillips_(economist) 
 
 Building  a  microscopic-level  model  of  the  economy  is  an  enormous  undertaking  if  it  were  to  be  attempted 
top-down.  But that traditional top-down approach to model-building may itself need to be inverted.  Clarke’s 
suggested approach is to build this model bottom-up.  The map would be crowd-sourced and then stitched 
together, a Wikipedia-style or micro-to-macro approach to model-building. 
 An economy-wide digital twin would, in a very literal sense, be micro-founded, but in a diametrically-opposing 
way to existing models.  The foundations of this digital twin are constructed not on micro theory, but micro 
fact.  If you were looking for clues on the feasibility and desirability of such an endeavour, consider the way 
in which scientists have gone about understanding and simulating another complex, adaptive system which 
affects everyone’s everyday lives – the weather.   
 Weather systems are the archetypical complex, adaptive system, the very origin of the concept of chaos.39  
Yet  despite  their  chaotic  properties,  our  understanding  of  weather  systems,  globally  and  locally,  has 
improved dramatically over recent decades.  Errors in forecasting the weather have halved in a generation, a 
remarkable  improvement.    The  reason  for  that  improvement  is  not  because  of  a  great  leap  forward  in 
weather theory;  it is because of improvements in micro-level weather facts. 
 Meteorologists piece together their models of weather systems from very high resolution readings.  It is this 
improvement  in  data  resolution  that  has  held  the  key  to  improvements  in  weather  forecasting.  These 
readings  come  from  a  range  of  meteorological  agencies,  as  well  as  from  private  companies  and  citizens.  
These  data  can  be  pooled  and  stitched  to  give  a  global  map.    Weather  data  is  crowd-sourced,  
Wikipedia-style, and then centrally stitched, a micro-to-macro approach.    
                                                      
39  Lorenz (1963). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
29 
 
29 
   As these data are collected in close to real-time, weather simulations are available in close to real-time.  This 
also  allows  us  to  study  weather  systems  at  a  wide  variety  of  resolutions  –  globally,  nationally,  regionally, 
down  to  the  local  village.    This  not  only  helps  people  better  understand  the  environment  facing  them.  
Importantly, it improves the decisions they make, nationally and locally, governments and citizens. 
 Weather is by no means a unique example.  Micro-level data, digital twins and massive-scale simulations are 
being  used  to  better  understand  all  manner  of  other  systems  at  all  manner  of  resolutions  –  from  the  
sub-atomic scale when seeking the Higgs-Boson, to the global scale when modelling flows across oceans, 
the  world  wide  web  and  galaxies.    All  have  benefitted  from  drawing  on  mass  micro-level  data,  crowd-
sourced, centrally-stitched, micro-to-macro. 
 Until recently, fewer such high-resolution data existed when it came to tracking flows of goods and services, 
people  and  money  through  our  economy.    That  is  changing.    These  data  increasingly  exist  in  companies, 
whose  management  systems  capture  activity  in  close  to  real  time.    They  exist  through  now-ubiquitous 
sensor,  camera  and  satellite  technology.    And  they  exist  in  governments,  local  and  central,  in  the  form  of 
administrative data on people, goods and money flows. 
 Increasingly, these data are being put to use to understand the economy.40  In the UK, the Office for National 
Statistics recently started publishing a range of high frequency economic indicators, based on such sources 
as administrative data on VAT returns and geospatial data on traffic flows.  The Bank has made increasing 
use  of  these  sorts  of  data  in  its  own  real-time  assessment  of  the  economy.    Let  me  give  a  couple  of 
examples.   
 One topic attracting attention recently has been the economic consequences of a disruptive Brexit.  One of 
the key channels through which this economic disruption might take place  is the inability of lorries to move 
seamlessly  through  UK  ports.    To  track  this  disruption  in  the  event  of  a  disorderly  Brexit,  the  Bank  put  in 
place  a  system  for  monitoring  traffic  flow  around  the  UK’s  main  ports  using  geospatial  data  from  Google 
Maps.  This allowed close to real-time monitoring of potential port bottlenecks. 
 As  an  illustration,  Chart  18  plots  traffic  times  into  and  out  of  Dover  during  February,  March  and  April  this 
year.  The first highlighted mini-spike in traffic times is the Friday evening and Saturday morning before the 
school  holidays.   The  second is  Easter weekend.   A disruptive Brexit would  potentially have pushed these 
needles  off  the  Richter  scale.    There  is  huge  potential  for  more  extensive  use  of  geospatial  data  such  as 
these to track goods and service flows across the economy, in normal as well as abnormal times.41     
                                                         
40  Haldane (2018a).   
41  A geospatial commission has recently been set up, under Sir Andrew Dilnot, to look at precisely these questions.  See Geospatial 
Commission (2019) for a discussion of its work to date and longer-term priorities. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
30 
 
30 
  Chart 18:  Traffic times into and out of Dover 
    Sources:  Google Maps API and Bank calculations. 
  A second example concerns the housing market.  This, too, is a local market.  That is why the most popular 
house-buying  show  on  TV  is  called  “Location,  Location,  Location”.    Two  colleagues  at  the  Bank,  Fergus 
Cumming  and  Al  Firrell,  have  recently  used  a  database  on  all  mortgages  granted  in  the  UK  since  2005  to 
explore house-moving patterns.42  The results are preliminary, but let me share some of the early findings to 
demonstrate what might be feasible. 
 Chart 19 plots the frequency of house moves at different distances in 2018.  The modal distance of a house 
move is less than 10km.  This is twice as likely as the second most popular distance  – 10-20km.  In other 
words,  a  gravity  (distance)  model  of  house  moves  fits  the  data,  with  around  one-third  of  all  house  moves 
within 50km.  Most house moves are local.  Most, but by no means all.  The median move is a little below 
100km, the mean 130km.  There is a longer tail of long-distance house moves than I would have predicted.  
                                                             
42  Although this may sound simple, it involves a complex matching algorithm to identify housing chains, similar to Chakraborty, 
Gimpelewicz and Uluc (2017). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
31 
 
31 
  Chart 19:  Distribution of house moves by distance (mortgage-to-mortgage movers in 2018) 
  Sources:  Product Sales Database and Bank calculations. 
  Part  of  the  explanation  lies  in  regional  and  demographic  differences.    People  outside  London  and  the  
South-East – for example, in Scotland – are much more likely to move greater distances (Chart 20).  Older 
people (over 46) are more likely to move larger distances than younger people (under 33) (Chart 21).  And 
richer people are less likely to move larger distances than poorer ones (Chart 22). 
                
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
32 
 
32 
   Chart  20:    Distribution  of  house  moves  by  distance  in  different  regions  (mortgage-to-mortgage 
movers in 2018, moving to South-East England and Scotland) 
Sources:  Product Sales Database and Bank calculations. 
 Chart 21:  Distribution of house moves by distance for different ages (mortgage-to-mortgage movers 
in 2018, upper and lower age quartiles) 
 Sources:  Product Sales Database and Bank calculations. 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
  33 
 
33 
 Chart  23: 
(mortgage-and-mortgage moves in 2018, upper and lower income quartiles) 
  Distribution  of  house  moves  by  distance 
for  different 
 income  groups  
 Sources:  Product Sales Database and Bank calculations. 
 Take Yorkshire and Humberside.  A third of all moves are within-region.  East, West, Home’s Best.  Some do 
move to the West (around 15%) and some to the East (7%).  Although some head South-East for life in the 
slow  lane  (7%),  a  larger  number  move  North  to  Scotland  (around  10%).    This  only  covers  moves  among 
those  with  a  mortgage,  so  will  not  capture  first-time  buyers,  students,  renters  or  those  retiring  without  a 
mortgage.  It nonetheless offers a new lens on the housing market, locally and nationally.   
 It is not difficult to see how these micro-level flow data could be augmented.  Data from payments systems 
can, and are, being used to track flows of money.  Companies’ management information systems can, and 
are, being used to track flows of workers, goods and services.  And administrative data can, and are, being 
used to track people, money and goods.  These micro-level data that could, with time, be pieced together to 
provide a macro – or micro-to-macro – model of the economy.  Or that, at least, is the promise. 
 Managing the Economy 
 If  we  can  map  and  model  the  economy  at  a  high  resolution  how,  if  at  all,  might  this  affect  how  economic 
policy  is  set?    Can  analysis  of  this  granular  type  help  when  thinking  about  appropriate  forms  of  policy 
intervention?  Might it help in defining what might be a sensible geographic area for an economic strategy?  
And might it even help in defining what that economic strategy might be? 
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
34 
 
34 
   There is  already a deep and  rich literature on  these topics.  One  strand looks  at  optimal currency areas.43  
Another looks at optimal fiscal areas.44  And a third looks at optimal political or policy areas.45  This literature 
identifies a rich range of factors important for determining the optimal spatial dimension of policy.  From that 
long list, let me highlight three factors which are commonly found to play a crucial role: 
 (a) 
  Heterogeneity and Specialisation 
Other things equal, the greater are the differences in the economic characteristics of an area, the stronger is 
the case for recognising these differences in the setting of economic policy.  These economic characteristics 
include:    the  cultural  and  political  preferences  of  citizens;    economic  fluctuations  over  the  business  cycle;  
and structural features of the economy, such as industrial composition and policy transmission.46   
 A related aspect is the degree of specialisation or comparative advantage in an economic area.  The greater 
this  degree  of  specialism  or  comparative  advantage,  the  stronger  the  case  for  having  it  recognised  and 
supported in the setting of economic policy.  Specialisation is one of the ways in which an economic area can 
harvest the benefits of economies of scale and scope through the agglomeration multiplier.47 
 On  the  face  of  it,  there  is  a  considerable  degree  of  heterogeneity  across  the  UK,  including  in  terms  of 
income,  wealth,  health  and  happiness.    Other  things  equal,  this  would  support  locally-targeted  policy 
interventions.    At  the  same  time,  those  differences  are  often  as  large  locally  as  they  are  regionally.    That 
suggests a very decentralised setting of policy would be needed, which may come with costs.   
 (b) 
 Diversity and Risk-Sharing 
One  of  the  most  important  of  those  costs  is  the  loss  of  risk-sharing.    A  diverse  economic  area  allows 
aggregate fluctuations to be smoothed-out, in the same way a diverse portfolio of assets smooths out returns 
to an investor.  And by smoothing-out aggregate fluctuations, diverse economic areas can help smooth out 
local fluctuations by transferring resources between regions to insure against region-specific shocks. 
 Another set of factors weighing in the  same direction  are economies  of scale and  scope.   The  smaller  the 
geographic  area,  the  lower  the  potential  for  agglomeration  effects.    Some  of  these  agglomeration  benefits 
may  themselves  arise  from  having  a  diverse  economic  eco-system,  as  this  enables  positive  spillovers 
between sectors and skills within an area.48 
                                                       
43  Mundell (1961). 
44  For example, Berger, Dell’Ariccia and Obstfeld (2018).   
45  Alesina, Tabellini and Trebbi (2017). 
46  For example, Alesina, Tabellini and Trebbi (2017), Carlino and DeFina (1996), Cumming (2018), Dow and Montagnoli (2007) and 
Fratantoni and Schuh (2003). 
47  Krugman (1991) and Krugman and Venables (1996). 
48  Izraeli and Murphy (2003).  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
35 
 
35 
    (c) 
 Factor Mobility 
A third sector of factors influencing the choice of optimal policy area concerns the degree of factor mobility.  
Easy  movement  of  factors  between  regions  can  smooth-out  differences  between  regions.    For  example, 
people moving from low to high unemployment areas can smooth out regional differences in incomes.  In this 
way, factor mobility can serve as a risk-sharing device between areas, even without policy intervention.   
 The other side of this coin is that, people and money do not always flow in this direction.  Factor mobility can 
sometimes  increase,  rather  than  smooth  out,  differences  between  regions.    For  example,  people  or  firms 
may  move  to  areas  which  offer  strong  existing  incomes  and  jobs.    If  so,  this  will  tend  to  amplify,  not 
ameliorate, regional differences. 
 That  is  the  theory.    The  optimal  policy  strategy  involves  balancing  these  factors,  based  on  the  structural 
characteristics of an economy, its degree of diversity versus specialism and the flows of factors within it.  A 
digital  twin  of  the  economy,  of  the  type  outlined  earlier,  would  embody  these  factors  and  flows  and  would 
provide a quantitative test-bed for making policy choices. 
 In the absence of such a model, let me discuss two examples where existing data and analytical tools could 
be  used  to  inform  policy  choices.    In  line  with  theory,  the  first  looks  at  flows  of  factors  within  a  region,  the 
second  at  structural  economic  characteristics  across  regions.    These  data  and  techniques  can  be  used  to 
shed  light  on  policies  which  might  boost  economic  growth,  locally  or  nationally,  in  line  with  the  UK 
Government’s industrial strategy.49  
 My  first  example  draws  inspiration  from  recent work  by  Tom  Forth  at  the Open  Data  Institute  in  Leeds,  on 
behalf of the Productivity Insights Network (PIN) here at the University.50  This uses data on flows of people 
to assess local growth prospects.  The story starts with the observation that many UK cities appear to punch 
below  their  demographic  weight  in  income  terms.    Put  differently,  a  number  of  UK  cities  do  not  appear  to 
benefit as much as their international counterparts from agglomeration effects. 
 To  demonstrate,  Chart  22  plots  (log)  city  population  size  against  GDP  per  head  in  563  cities  in  advanced 
economies  around  the  world,  including  a  number  of  UK  cities.    It  also  shows  a  line  of  best  fit.    This  is  
upward-sloping and statistically significant, consistent with agglomeration effects.  Moving from a city the size 
of  Oxford  (population  535,000)  to  one  double  its  size  such  as  Sheffield  (around  1.2  million)  should  be 
                                                      
49  Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (2017).  In a personal capacity, I chair the Government’s Industrial Strategy 
Council which evaluates its progress. 
50  Forth (2019). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
36 
 
36 
   expected,  on  average,  to  boost  GDP  per  head  from  £27,300  per  head  to  £28,100  per  head,  or  around 
2.6%.51 
 Chart 22:  City population and GDP per head 
  
Sources:  OECD Metropolitan Areas Population and Bank calculations. 
Notes: GDP per capita in US$ in 2015 and log scale used for metropolitan area population. 
 
 In fact, GDP per head in Sheffield is around 44% lower than in Oxford.  This is not just a North-South divide.  
Income  per  head  in  Sheffield  is  little  different  than  in  Doncaster  just  down  the  road  (population  305,000).  
                                                      
51  Data set underlying Chart 22 refers to GDP per capita in US$ in 2015.  Numbers which convert to sterling in the text are based 
around average $/£ bilateral exchange rate of 1.34 in 2018. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
37 
 
37 
   And it is not just Sheffield.  Many large UK cities sit below the line:  Belfast, Glasgow, Leeds, Manchester, 
Cardiff,  Birmingham,  as  well  as  Sheffield.    Agglomeration  multipliers  seem  to  be  consistently  smaller  in  a 
number of UK cities.  Why? 
 Forth’s work suggests transport networks are a large part of the explanation.  By analysing commuting times 
into Birmingham at different times of the day, he provide a measure of the “effective” working population.  At 
peak  times,  the  effective  working  population  of  Birmingham  is  perhaps  50%  smaller  than  its  measured 
population  due  to  poor  transport  infrastructure.    This  helps  explain  why  Birmingham  punches  below  its 
demographic weight. 
 This is a terrific example of how high-resolution data can be used to understand local patterns of economic 
growth.    The  same  data  could  be  used  to  analyse  the  “effective”  working  population  in  other  UK  cities, 
perhaps  helping  explain  their  under-performance.    It  could  also  be  used  to  answer  industrial  strategy 
questions,  such  as  what  impact  new  transport routes  have  on  the  effective  working  population  of  the  UK’s 
major cities and hence on their incomes through agglomeration effects.   
 Imagine  a  transport  strategy  whose  aim  was  to  raise  the  effective  working  population  of  those  UK  cities 
currently operating below the line.  Using Chart 22, doing so would raise UK GDP per head by around 10% 
or  around  $4,100  (£3,100)  in  today’s  money.    Those  annual  benefits  could  be  compared  with  the  one-off 
costs of investment to determine the desirability of such a policy, as part of the UK’s industrial strategy.  
 My  second  example  draws  inspiration  from  recent  work  at  the  University  of  Cambridge  by  Penny  Mealy, 
including  by  my  colleague  on  the  Industrial  Strategy  Council  Diane  Coyle.52   This  looks  at  the  structural 
economic  characteristics  of  different  regions  and  provides  a  way  of  summarising  and  ranking  them.    The 
particular  way  it  does  so  is  by  measuring  their  “economic  complexity”,  following  the  work  of  Hidalgo  and 
Hausmann (2009) in the context of international trade. 
 Without  going  into  the  technicalities,  the  complexity  index  can  loosely  be  thought  of  as  weighing  the  two 
structural characteristics of an economic area which theory would suggest are crucial for economic success.  
The first is the degree of specialism or comparative advantage in a particular product or industry:  the greater 
this  specialism,  the  greater  an  area’s  complexity.    The  second  is  the  degree  of  diversity  in  this  specialism 
across products and industries:  the greater this diversity, the greater an area’s complexity.53    
 Though the construction of an Economic Complexity Index (ECI) is itself complex, the principles underlying it 
are not.  An economic area exhibits complexity when it has a diverse set of highly-specialised industries.  An 
                                                      
52  Mealy and Coyle (2019). 
53  This description sets out a stylised interpretation of ECIs as they were originally conceived by Hidalgo and Hausmann (2009).  
Recent work by Mealy, Farmer and Teytelboyn (2019), however, has re-assessed the interpretation of ECIs and found that diversity is 
mathematically orthogonal to ECIs.  In this new interpretation, ECIs instead provide a useful way to understand place-based similarly in 
industrial specialisations. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
38 
 
38 
   area  lacking  complexity  has  few  or  no  industries  or  products  which  are  specialised.    ECIs  have  been 
constructed at the nation-state level and, more recently, at the local level in the US and UK.54 
 One of the interesting features of these empirical ECIs is that they appear to match the theory:  the greater 
the  degree  of  specialisation  and  diversity,  and  the  higher  the  ECI,  the  better  the  economic  outcome.    One 
rationale for this finding, proposed by Hidalgo and Hausmann, is that ECIs serve as a proxy of the degree of 
knowledge embedded in an economic area, knowledge that comes courtesy of specialisation and diversity. 
 Charts 23 and 24 plot local authority level ECIs against measures of income per head and hourly earnings in 
the  UK.    They  show  a  positive,  statistically  significant  relationship.    The  same  has  been  found  at  national 
level and among US states.  The embodied-knowledge effect is, on the face of it, an empirically strong one.  
In a bivariate regression, ECIs account for around half of the regional variation in level of incomes and pay. 
 Chart 23:  Local authority-level ECIs and income per head 
R² = 0.4799
GVA per head, 
£000s
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
ECI
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0.25
 Sources:    ONS  Regional  Gross  Value-Added,  ONS  Business  Register  and  Employment  Survey  (BRES)  and  Bank 
calculations. 
Notes:  ONS regional gross value-added (balanced) by local authority in the UK for 2016 against economic complexity 
indices calculated using BRES.  City of London and Westminster excluded from chart. 
 
                                                         
54  Hidalgo and Hausmann (2009) for international comparisons and Mealy, Farmer and Teytelboym (2019) for regional comparisons. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
39 
 
39 
  Chart 24:  Local authority-level ECIs and hourly earnings 
R² = 0.4466
Hourly earnings,
£ per hour
 35
30
25
20
15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
ECI
10
0.25
 Sources:  ONS Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings (ASHE), ONS Business Register and Employment Survey (BRES) 
and Bank calculations. 
Notes:  Data available for Great Britain only (i.e. excluding Northern Ireland).  Mean hourly earnings excluding overtime 
against economic complexity indices calculated using BRES.    
 
 Chart  25  plots  a  cartogram  of  local  authority  level  ECIs  for  the  UK,  at  the  NUTS  3  level.    It  shows  a 
remarkable degree of difference across areas of the UK.  This matches regional differences in income and 
pay.  These metrics could help when designing the Local Industrial Strategies currently being developed by 
Local Enterprise Partnerships (LEPs) and the devolved nations in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. 
  Table 1:  Top 10 local authorities by ECI 
City of London 
Tower Hamlets 
Southwark 
Westminster 
Islington 
Camden 
Hammersmith & Fulham 
Kensington & Chelsea 
Hackney 
Cambridge 
 
 
Sources:  ONS Business Register and Employment Survey (BRES) and Bank calculations. 
 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
40 
 
40 
  Chart 25:  Cartogram of local-authority level ECIs 
 Sources:  ONS Business Register and Employment Survey (BRES) and Bank calculations. 
Notes:  UK NUTS 3 regions re-sized and coloured using estimates of economic complexity. 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 41 
 
41 
   Table 1 lists the top ten local authorities by ECI across the UK in 2017, while Table 2 shows the bottom ten.  
There is a high degree of inertia in both rankings.  The ECI framework could be used to help assess which 
industrial  strategy  interventions  might  boost  the  degree  of  specialism  and  diversity,  and  hence  the  income 
benefits, both in already-successful and struggling regions. 
 Table 2:  Bottom 10 local authorities by ECI 
Dudley 
South Derbyshire 
Wrexham 
Aberdeenshire 
North-East Lincolnshire 
Moray 
Hartlepool 
Carmarthenshire 
Breckland 
Telford and Wrekin 
 Sources:  ONS Business Register and Employment Survey (BRES) and Bank calculations. 
 
Economic complexity can also be assessed across industries using a product complexity index (PCI).  This 
proxies the embedded knowledge in an industry.  Table 3 plots the top-20 UK industries by PCI against their 
sector shares.  Financial services, the creative industries, and higher education exhibit the highest economic 
complexity  and  thus  potentially  generate  the  highest  value-added.    PCI  metrics  could  be  used  to  identify 
industries where “sector deals” could benefit most the economy, as part of an industrial strategy. 
 Table 3:  Top 20 UK industries by PCI and share of employment 
Reinsurance 
 Fund management activities 
 Television programming and broadcasting activities 
 Trusts, funds and similar financial entities 
 Motion picture, video & television programme activities 
 Sound recording and music publishing activities 
 Legal activities 
 Translation and interpretation activities 
 Software publishing 
 Creative, arts and entertainment activities 
 Activities  auxiliary  to  financial  services,  except  insurance 
and pension funding 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 0.01% 
0.16% 
0.08% 
0.03% 
0.34% 
0.03% 
1.09% 
0.02% 
0.04% 
0.32% 
0.66% 
42 
 
42 
   
Publishing  of  books,  periodicals  and  other  publishing 
activities 
 
Accounting,  bookkeeping  and  auditing  activities; 
consultancy 
tax 
 Advertising 
 Computer programming, consultancy and related activities 
 Leasing  of  intellectual  property  and  similar  products, 
except copyrighted works 
 Market research and public opinion polling 
 Organisation of conventions and trade shows 
 Higher education 
 
Sources:  ONS Business Register and Employment Survey (BRES). 
Notes:  Dates for 2017.  Only industries with 1000+ employees included in table.   
 
 0.35% 
1.29% 
0.42% 
2.43% 
0.01% 
0.14% 
0.08% 
1.61% 
These  are  partial,  though  informative,  pieces  of  micro-level  evidence,  though  no  substitute  for  an  
economy-wide  digital  twin.    This  could  be  used  as  a  general  equilibrium  test-bed  for  formulating,  and 
evaluating  the  impact,  of  industrial  strategy  interventions,  nationally  and  locally.    Those  policy  simulations 
could be complemented by controlled trials of policies, the like of which have been successfully pioneered by 
the What Works Centre for Local Economic Growth.55   
 The  economy  is  a  complex,  adaptive  system.    Behaviour  in  those  systems  is  difficult  to  predict  ex-ante, 
especially at times of policy change;  it is emergent, just as a hurricane or tornado is emergent.  Often, our 
policy intuition about complex systems is simply wrong.  No model, however micro-founded or data-rich, is 
proof against those uncertainties.  But one that embodies complex, micro-level dynamics is more likely to do 
so than one without them.  A complex systems framework can make for robust policy choice. 
 That was Jay Wright Forrester’s insight in the 1950s.  We know it to be true from more recent experience.  
The  real-time,  supply-chain  data  system  developed  by  Walmart  twenty  years  ago  transformed  inventory 
management,  at  Walmart  and  elsewhere.    The  real-time  micro-level  models  developed  by  meteorologists 
transformed weather-forecasting at around the same time.  Today, digital twinning is transforming processes 
across companies.  These are microcosms of what might be achievable at the macroscopic scale. 
                                                        
55  For example, What Works Centre for Local Economic Growth (2018). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 43 
 
43 
  Can a Central Bank be Local? 
 Finally, what are the implications of these local economic perspectives for central bank policy?  On the face 
of it, these might seem few.  Central banks are national agencies.  Their policies, such as interest rates, can 
only be set at the national level.  It is impossible for the Bank of England to set separate interest rates for 
Aberdeen and Aberystwyth, Belfast and Birmingham.  A central bank, by definition, cannot be local. 
 Or can it?  I would argue that not only is this feasible but essential.  I have spoken previously about the “twin 
deficit”  problem  facing  central  banks:    the  deficit  in  public  understanding  and  the  deficit  in  public  trust.56  
Boosting this understanding, and restoring trust, among the public is among the most pressing issues facing 
central banks.  Reconnecting communities with institutions helps strengthen Rajan’s Third Pillar. 
 But  how  is  this  best  done?    The  public’s  understanding  of  the  economy  and  policy  is  enhanced  when 
messages  are  relevant  to  their  lives  and  locality. 57   A  central  bank’s  understanding  of  the  economy  is 
enhanced if it can tap into the lived, local experiences of  companies and citizens making up the economy.  
And  a better mutual understanding  between communities  and central banks  would, in turn, help  build  trust 
between them.  Constructing a Third Pillar shrinks the twin deficits of public trust and understanding. 
 This is not a new point.  Despite being headquartered in London since 1694, the Bank of England has had a 
regional presence for much of its history.  After the UK banking crisis of 1825, the Bank set up a network of 
15  regional  branches  to  provide  commercial  banking  facilities.58   Though  their  purpose  was  operational,  it 
quickly became clear that the intelligence gathered by the Bank’s branches could help in understanding the 
economy.  This intelligence was soon being fed back to Head Office.   
 During  the  20th  century,  this  intelligence-gathering  role  was  expanded.    It  has  grown  steadily,  in  scale  and 
importance, since then.  Today, the Bank’s 12 Agencies across the UK have around 9,000 regular company 
contacts providing real-time intelligence on the economy.  Structured surveys from the Agents first appeared 
in 1997.  Agents’ National Scores were first introduced in the mid-1990s and first published in 2006.  Agent’s 
Company Visit Scores were first developed in 2007 and first published in 2015. 59 
 Brexit  provides  as  good  an  illustration  as  any  of  the  ways  the  Agents’  high-frequency,  high-resolution 
intelligence  can  improve  the  Bank’s  understanding  of  the  economy.    A  key  question  recently  has  been 
whether  and  how  companies  have  been  preparing  for  Brexit.60   The  Agents’  network  was  used  not  only  to 
track  how  prepared  companies  were  over  time,  but  what  form  this  contingency  planning  was  taking  
– stock-building, seeking alternative suppliers, building cash reserves etc (Chart 26). 
                                                       
56  Haldane (2017). 
57  For example, Agerström et al (2016). 
58  Bank of England (1963). 
59  Ellis and Pike (2005). 
60  Bank of England (2019). 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
44 
 
44 
  Chart 26:  Contingency planning by firms for Brexit 
   Sources:  Bank of England and Bank calculations. 
 Company  contacts  also  helped  the  Bank’s  Brexit  scenario  planning.    Companies  were  asked  about  the 
consequences for their businesses of a “no deal, no transition” Brexit.  The results are shown in Chart  27.  
They suggest a marked slowing in output, employment and investment under this scenario, consistent with 
the Bank’s in-house macro-economic models.  This is micro-to-macro in practice. 
 Chart 27:  Firms’ expectations for economy under a no-deal, no-transition Brexit 
  Sources:  Bank of England and Bank calculations. 
 
Recently, the Bank has used its regional network to augment its local engagement.  Two years ago, I began 
a  programme  of  “Townhall”  visits  to  some  of  the  UK’s  most  poorly-performing  regions,  often  organised  in 
conjunction with local charities, faith or community groups including Age UK, Citizens’ Advice, the Board of 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
45 
 
45 
   Deputies of British Jews, the Muslim Council of Britain, Oxfam and the YMCA.  These Townhalls engage the 
public directly on issues around the economy and finance.  They, too, are a micro-to-macro approach. 
 So far, I have undertaken 14 Townhall visits covering all parts of the UK.61  They are a direct conversation 
between the Bank and the public, typically on local economic and financial issues.  They draw on the sorts of 
listening  and  facilitation  techniques  more  familiar  from  anthropology  and  sociology.    Intelligence-gathering 
means  extracting  economic  narratives,  rather  than  facts,  about  the  forces  shaping  people’s  lives  and 
decisions.  The anthropologist Clifford Geertz calls this approach “deep hanging out”.62 
 Deep  hanging  out  is  harder  than  it  sounds.    A  day’s  talking  leaves  me  tired.    A  day’s  listening  leaves  me 
exhausted.   Entering a room as the least knowledgeable person, at least on local issues,  can be a culture 
shock.    But  it  is  those  very  things  that  make  intelligence  from  the  Townhalls  distinctive  and  valuable.  
Statistical surveys cannot capture narrative in a way conversations can.  The Townhall visits have been one 
of the most enlightening things I have done in my almost 30 years at the Bank of England. 
 The  Bank  has  recently  expanded  and  deepened  its  range  of  local  initiatives.    One  of  these  is  Citizens’ 
Panels.63  After a couple of trials last year, the Bank recently began rolling-out Citizens’ Panels across each 
of its regional agencies.  These panels have an independent external chair, drawn from the local region, to 
facilitate  discussion.    Each  is  attended  by  a  senior  Bank  policymaker.    Messages  from  the  panels  will  be 
drawn together periodically and published externally. 
 Complementing  Citizens’  Panels,  the  Bank’s  direct  engagement  with  community  groups  is  now  being 
expanded through a set of “Community Forums”, working in partnership with local charities and community 
groups.  The Governor recently launched these forums with events in Tower Hamlets and Glasgow.  Other 
Governors and Directors have their own Community Forums planned through this year and beyond. 
 The Bank’s education programme also has strong local presence.  The educational materials developed by 
the Bank for 11-16 year olds, econoME, have been taken up by a third of schools across the UK.  Last year, 
staff ambassadors visited close to 300 schools across the UK to deliver talks on the economy and economic 
policy.  These are examples of a central bank acting locally. 
 Central  banks  around  the  world  seem  themselves  to  be  moving  in  this  same  direction,  with  greater  local, 
citizen-level  engagement.    Other  central  banks  to  have  recently  launched  community-based  initiatives 
include the US Federal Reserve’s “Fed Listens” events. These involve roundtables with the general public, 
involving local leaders, policy experts and academics from across the United States.64 
                                                       
61  https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/outreach 
62  Geertz (1998). 
63  Patel, Gibbon and Greenham (2018) and Haldane (2018b). 
64  https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-fed-listens-events.htm 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
46 
 
46 
   These initiatives are a good foundation for central banks, for constructing a Third Pillar.  More of these types 
of local, citizen-based engagements may be needed in the years ahead, if policy institutions are to shrink the 
twin deficits and strengthen that Third Pillar.  There is scope to decentralise more of central banks’ activities, 
giving them greater reach, voice and engagement locally.  That would certainly get my personal vote. 
 Conclusion 
 Our  economies,  like  our  politics,  are  local.    Like  the  seashore,  the  more  you  magnify  an  economy,  the 
greater its richness, complexity, self-similarity.  Like our bodies, understanding our economic health means 
taking readings at many resolutions.  It means understanding the moving body parts, and their interactions, 
in  microscopic  detail.    It  calls  for  new  data,  at  a  higher  frequency  and  higher  resolution,  and  new  ways  of 
stitching it together.  It means making micro-to-macro a reality. 
 Our global weather systems, oceans, information networks, supply chains, solar system, galaxies and even 
our universe can these days be mapped and modelled in microscopic detail in close to real time.  We cannot 
yet do so for our economies.  I believe our economic policies would be better able to serve the public, and 
better understood by them, if we could do so.   
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
47 
 
47 
  References 
  
Agerström, J, Carlsson, R, Nicklasson, L and Guntell, L (2016), ‘Using descriptive social norms to  
increase charitable giving: The power of local norms’, Journal of Economic Psychology, Vol. 52, pp. 147-153. 
 
Alesina, A, Tabellini, G and Trebbi, F (2017), ‘Is Europe an Optimal Political Area?’, NBER Working Paper, No. 23325. 
 
Bank of England (1963), ‘Branches of the Bank of England, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 1963 Q4. 
 
Bank of England (2019), ‘Agents’ summary of business conditions’, Bank of England, 2019 Q1, available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/agents-summary/2019/2019-q1/agents-survey-on-preparations-for-eu-withdrawal 
 
Baptista, R, Farmer J D, Hinterschweiger, M, Low, K, Tang, D and Uluc, A (2016), ‘Macroprudential policy in an 
agent-based model of the UK housing market’, Bank of England Staff Working Paper, No. 619. 
 
Berger, J, Dell’Ariccia, G and Obstfeld, M (2018), ‘Revisiting the Economic Case for Fiscal Union in the Euro Area’, 
International Monetary Fund Research Department. 
 
Bolton, A, Enzer, M, Schooling, J et al (2018), ‘The Gemini Principles:  Guiding values for the national digital twin and 
information management framework’, Centre for Digital Built Britain and Digital Framework Task Group. 
 
Braun-Munzinger, K, Liu, Z and Turrell, A (2016), ‘An agent-based model of dynamics in corporate bond trading’, Bank 
of England Staff Working Paper, No. 592. 
 
Carlino, G and DeFina, R (1996), ‘Does Monetary Policy Have Differential Regional Effects?’, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Philadelphia Business Review, March-April 1996. 
 
Case, A and Deaton, A (2017), ‘Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century’, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 
Spring 2017. 
 
Centre for Cities (2019), ‘Cities Outlook 2019’, Centre for Cities, January 2019. 
 
Clarke, P (2018), ‘How Online Grocer Ocado Is Automating Warehouses Using Swarms of Robots’, Harvard Business 
Review, 22 May 2018. 
 
Chakraborty, C, Gimpelewicz, M and Uluc, A (2017), ‘A tiger by the tail:  estimating the UK mortgage market 
vulnerabilities from loan-level data’, Bank of England Staff Working Paper, No. 703. 
 
Collier, P (2018), The Future of Capitalism:  Facing the New Anxieties, Allen Lane. 
 
Coyle, D (2014), GDP:  A Brief but Affectionate History, Princeton University Press. 
 
Cristelli, M, Pietronero, L and Zaccaria, A (2011), ‘Critical Overview of Agent-Based Models for Economics’, Università 
di Roma. 
 
Cumming, F (2018), ‘Mortgages, cash-flow shocks and local employment’, Bank of England Staff Working Paper, No. 
773. 
 
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (2017), ‘Industrial Strategy – Building a Britain fit for the 
future’, HM Government. 
 
Dougenik, J, Chrisman, N and Niemeyer, D (1985), ‘An algorithm to construct continuous area cartograms’, The 
Professional Geographer, Vol. 37, No. 1, pp. 75-81. 
 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
48 
 
48 
   Dow, S and Montagnoli, A (2007), ‘The Regional Transmission of UK Monetary Policy’, Regional Studies, Vol. 41, No. 
6, pp. 797-808. 
 
Easterlin, R (1974), ‘Does Economic Growth Improve the Human Lot?  Some Empirical Evidence’, in David, P and 
Reder, M (eds.) (1974), Nations and Households in Economic Growth:  Essays in Honor of Moses Abramovitz, Academic 
Press. 
 
Easterlin, R (2013), ‘Happiness and Economic Growth:  The Evidence’, IZA Discussion Paper Series, No. 7187. 
 
Ellis, C and Pike, T (2005), ‘Introducing the Agents’ scores’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Winter 2005, pp. 424-
430. 
 
Farmer, J D (2019), ‘How complexity can resolve the crisis in economics’, speech at Santa Fe Institute, 5 May 2019. 
 
Forrester, J W (1969), Urban Dynamics, MIT Press.  
 
Forth, T (2019), ‘”Birmingham isn’t a big city at peak times”:  How poor public transport explains the UK’s productivity 
puzzle’, CityMetric, 31 January 2019. 
 
Fratantoni, M and Schuh, S (2003), ‘Monetary Policy, Housing, and Heterogeneous Regional Markets’, Journal of 
Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 35, No. 4, pp. 557-589. 
 
Galí, J (2015), Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle:  An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework 
and Its Applications, Princeton University Press. 
 
Ge, J and Polhill (2016), ‘Exploring the Combined Effect of Factors Influencing Commuting Patterns and CO2 
Emissions in Aberdeen Using an Agent-Based Model’, Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, Vol. 19, No. 3 
 
Ge, J, Polhill, J, Craig, T and Liu, N (2018), ‘From oil wealth to green growth – An empirical agent-based model of 
recession, migration and sustainable urban transition’, Environmental Modelling & Software, Vol. 107, pp. 119-140. 
 
Geertz, C (1998), ‘Deep Hanging Out’, The New York Review of Books, 22 October 1998 
 
Geospatial Commission (2019), ‘Annual Plan 2019/20’, HM Government. 
 
Haldane, A (2012), ‘Tails of the unexpected’, paper given at “The Credit Crisis Five Years on:  Unpacking the Crisis” 
conference at University of Edinburgh Business School, available at: 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2012/tails-of-the-unexpected 
 
Haldane, A (2016), ‘The Dappled World’, speech available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2016/the-dappled-world 
 
Haldane, A (2017), ‘Everyday Economics’, speech available at https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2017/andy-
haldane-speech-during-regional-visit 
 
Haldane, A (2018a), ‘Will big data keep its promise?’, speech available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2018/andy-haldane-centre-for-data-analytics-for-finance-and-macro 
 
Haldane, A (2018b), ‘Climbing the Public Engagement Ladder’, speech available at 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2018/andy-haldane-royal-society 
 
Haldane, A (2019), ‘Industrial Strategy and Institutions’, speech at Leeds Civic Hall, Industrial Strategy Council, 6 March 
2019. 
 
Haldane, A and Turrell, A (2018), ‘An interdisciplinary model for macroeconomics’, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 
Vol. 34, No. 1-2, pp. 219-251. 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
49 
 
49 
   Hardgrave, B, Waller, M, Miller, R and Walton, S (2006), ‘RFID’s Impact on Out of Stocks: A Sales Velocity Analysis’, 
University of Arkansas Information Technology Institute. 
 
Helliwell, J, Layard, R and Sachs, J (2019), ‘World Happiness Report 2019’, Sustainable Development Solutions 
Network. 
 
Heppenstall, A, Crooks, A, See, L and Batty, M (2012), Agent-Based Models of Geographical Systems, Springer. 
 
Hidalgo, C and Hausmann, R (2009), ‘The building blocks of economic complexity’, Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, Vol. 106, No. 26, pp. 10570-10575. 
 
IPPR Commission on Economic Justice (2018), ‘Prosperity and Justice:  A Plan for the New Economy’, Institute for 
Public Policy Research. 
 
Izraeli, O and Murphy, K (2003), ‘The effect of industrial diversity on state unemployment rate and per capita income’, 
The Annals of Regional Science, Vol. 37, No. 1, pp. 1-14. 
 
Kaplan, G, Moll, B and Violante, G (2018), ‘Monetary Policy According to HANK’, American Economic Review, Vol. 
108, No. 3, pp. 697-743. 
 
Karnopp, D, Margolis, D and Rosenberg, R (1990), System Dynamics:  A Unified Approach, Wiley Interscience. 
 
Krugman, P (1991), ‘Increasing Returns and Economic Geography’, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 99, No. 3, pp. 
483-499. 
 
Krugman, P and Venables, A (1996), ‘Integration, specialization, and adjustment’, European Economic Review, Vol. 40, 
No. 3-5, pp. 959-967. 
 
Kydland, F and Prescott, E (1982), ‘Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations’, Econometrica, Vol. 50, No. 6, pp. 1345-
1370. 
 
Lorenz, E (1963), ‘Deterministic non-period flow’, Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, Vol. 20, No. 2, pp. 130-141. 
 
McCann, P (2016), The UK Regional-National Problem:  Geography, Globalisation and Governance, Routledge. 
 
Mealy, P and Coyle, D (2019), ‘Economic Complexity Analysis:  A technical report for the research on Innovation & 
Global Competitiveness’, Greater Manchester Independent Prosperity Review, March 2019. 
 
Mealy, P, Farmer J D and Teytelboym, A (2019), ‘Interpreting economic complexity’, Science Advances, Vol. 5, No. 1. 
 
Motieyan, H and Mesgari, M (2018), ‘An Agent-Based Modelling approach for sustainable urban planning from land use 
and public transit perspectives’, Cities, Vol. 81, pp. 91-100. 
 
Mundell, R (1961), ‘A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas’, American Economic Review, Vol. 51, No. 4, pp. 657-665. 
 
Napoletano, M, Gaffard, J-L and Babutsidze, Z (2012), ‘Agent Based Models:  A New Tool for Economic and Policy 
Analysis’, OFCE Briefing Paper, Sciences Po, pp. 1-15. 
 
Ngamaba, K (2017), ‘Determinants of subjective well-being in representative samples of nations’, European Journal of 
Public Health, Vol. 27, No. 2, pp. 377-382. 
 
Novaco, R and Gonzalez, O (2009), ‘Commuting and well-being’ in Amichai-Hamburger, Y (eds.) (2009), Technology 
and Psychological Well-being, Cambridge University Press. 
 
Office for National Statistics (2014), ‘Commuting and Personal Well-being, 2014’, 12 February 2014. 
 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
50 
 
50 
   Patel, R, Gibbon, K and Greenham, T (2018), ‘Building a Public Culture of Economics:  Final Report of the RSA 
Citizens’ Economic Council’, Royal Society for the encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce. 
 
Rajan, R (2019), The Third Pillar:  How Markets and the State Leave the Community Behind, William Collins. 
 
Rosenthal, S and Strange, W (2003), ‘Geography, Industrial Organization, and Agglomeration’, The Review of 
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 85, No. 2, pp. 377-393. 
 
Shaw, K and Fruhlinger, J (2019), ‘What is a digital twin?  [And how it’s changing IoT, AI and more]’, Network World, 31 
January 2019. 
 
Simon, H (1962), ‘The Architecture of Complexity’, Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 106, No. 6, 
pp. 467-482. 
 
Taylor, M, Pevalin, D and Todd, J (2007), ‘The psychological costs of unsustainable housing commitments’, 
Psychological Medicine, Vol. 37, pp. 1027-1036. 
 
Viladecans-Marsal, E (2004), ‘Agglomeration economies and industrial location:  city-level evidence’, Journal of 
Economic Geography, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 565-582. 
 
Viscek, T, Shlesinger, M and Matsushita, M (eds.) (1994), Fractals in Natural Sciences, World Scientific. 
 
What Works Centre for Local Economic Growth (2018), ‘Developing effective local industrial strategies’, What Works 
Centre for Local Economic Growth, June 2018. 
 
Wildman, J (2003), ‘Income-related inequalities in mental health in Great Britain:  Analysing the causes of health 
inequality over time’, Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 22, No. 2, pp. 295-312. 
  
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
51 
 
51 
 