   The Bahamian Payment System Modernisation: Advancing Financial Inclusion 
 Initiatives 
By John A Rolle* 
Governor 
*As prepared for delivery. 
 
Central Bank of The Bahamas Blockchain Seminar 
18 March 2019 
 
Introduction 
Inclusive of a digital version of the Bahamian dollar, the Central Bank of The Bahamas has defined 
several  evolved  objectives  for  the  Bahamian  payments  systems.    On  some  levels  The  Bahamas  is 
positioned to use new technology to accelerate this transformation.  It brings into focus the need for 
new policies and regulatory reforms to address best practices in the digital supply of financial services, 
consumer protection in its multifaceted forms, cyber security, and more.   
There  are  multiple,  complementary  objectives  within  our  digitisation  and  reform  initiatives.  These 
include:  
  Making the payments system more efficient. 
 
 Using technology to achieve more inclusive, cost affordable, even access to financial services, 
across all islands of The Bahamas; providing access that avoids discrimination on the basis of 
immigration or residency status. 
  Strengthening national defenses against uses of the financial services infrastructure for money 
laundering and other illicit ends; including activities that thrive more easily in cash intensive 
environments. 
Selected Payments System Indicators 
By  international  standards,  The  Bahamas  has  a  very  developed  financial  system.    However,  the 
averages  obscure  gaps  in  who  have  access  to  services  over  our  disperse  geography,  and  the 
1 | P a g e  
 
inefficiencies that constrain services delivery.12  Banking presence is sporadic on the Family Islands, 
and absent altogether in a few cases.3  At the national level, trends point to increasing use of electronic 
payments  (see  Box  1),  but  anecdotally  the  costs  of  settling  transactions  is  a  drag  on  the  speed  of 
change.4  Cost aside, accelerated change could be also encouraged through increased comfort around 
accepting and making digital payments; and placing these capabilities universally within the reach of 
more consumers.5 
In 2018, the Central Bank conducted a baseline survey on financial literacy and garnered metrics that 
speak  to  financial  inclusion,  along  the  lines  of  templates  used  for  the  OECD  countries  (Table1).  
Although this survey does not capture what is happening among undocumented persons, it indicates 
a high degree of awareness and high degree of access to basic deposit facilities in The Bahamas. Just 
above 90 percent of the respondents had knowledge of savings accounts and debit cards. Yet, only 
about  80  percent  of  such  persons  had  use  of  a  savings  account.6    Only  about  70  percent of these 
individuals used a debit card; and fewer than half possessed a credit card.  Improvements must be 
sought  in  all  of  these  estimates,  along  with  much  higher  rates  of  access  and  usage  for  personal 
investment products. 
Fintech Driven Financial Inclusion  
The payment system modernisation initiative (PSMI) is to provide both the incentives and the means 
to spur more widespread adoption of electronic payments, and to enable greater general access to 
financial services over digital platforms.   Ultimately this means approaching 100% access  to digital 
services;  universal  access  to  banking  services  of  a  deposit  maintenance  nature;  and  fully  enabled 
electronic payments capabilities.  Reducing the size of legitimate but unrecorded economic activities 
will also be necessary, admitting particularly micro, small and medium-sized businesses into the digital 
space. 
                                                           
1 In 2013 estimates, Svirydzenka (2016) ranked The Bahamas at 40th out of 183 countries in terms of overall 
financial  development  but  at  15th  in  comparative  access  to  financial  institutions—which  took  account  of  the 
density of the physical banking infrastructure.  The relatively lower development index compared to access was 
due among other reasons to lower ranking on all other metrics including the efficiency of financial institutions 
(44th out of 183) access to financial markets (54th out of 183) and the efficiency of financial markets (in the lowest 
quartile). See: Katsiaryna Svirydzenka (2016), “Introducing A New Broad-based Index of Financial Development,” 
IMF Working Paper (WP/16/5). 
2 On a per capita basis, for 2017 there are 26 bank branches for each 100,000 persons in The Bahamas, the 35th 
highest in the world (see IMF Financial Access survey for 2018 at http://data.imf.org/?sk=E5DCAB7E-A5CA-4892-
A6EA-598B5463A34C), even though for efficiency reason this estimates is lower than the 35 to 40 branches per 
100,000 persons averaged during 2007-2014.  There has also been growth in the number of ATM available, near 
155 per 100,000 persons the 15th highest concentration in the world, according to the IMF’s (2018) data. 
3 Berry Island, Mayguana, Acklyns, Crooked Island. 
4 The Bahamian data reveal an increasing volume of transactions occurring outside of the physical branches at 
ATMs (which is still cash unfortunately), increasing use of credit and debit cards for electronic payments,  and 
declining reliance on check writing. 
5  Anecdotally,  wire  transfer  costs  have  also  slowed  the  transition  from  out  of  the  use  of  checks  for  payroll 
processing  for  some  firms.    Also,  the  merchant  fee  for  accepting  credit  and  debit  card  payments  which  can 
average  between  2%  and  5%  of  the  transactions  value,  can  act  as  a  disincentive  for  firms  that  might  cling 
exclusively to cash receipts. 
6 See The Bahamas Financial Literacy Results 2018 
(https://www.centralbankbahamas.com/news.php?id=16402&cmd=view). 
2 | P a g e  
 
For what needs to be accomplished, how results are measured and how The Bahamas progresses in 
comparison  to  other  countries,  we  will  be  guided  by  established  international  frameworks  and 
standards; and we will take full advantage of technical assistance from the network of like-minded 
peers  and  supportive  agencies.    In  this  regard  the  Central  Bank’s  2018  membership  in  the  global 
Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI), will yield returns in terms of how we build capacity to regulate 
and create more enabling frameworks to spur beneficial developments in the Fintech space. 
 Recent Bahamian Policy Reforms 
In The Bahamas, we have already made some progress on financial inclusion initiatives, but with much 
more to be accomplished.  Throughout recent regulatory reforms, the Central Bank was guided by the 
principle  that  access  to  payment  services  should  not  discriminate  between  whether  the  products 
originate from banks or from other regulated entities; and that the range of access that users of cash 
currently enjoy in services should also persist when the products are digitised.  Also, irrespective of 
whether consumers  avail  themselves  of mobile  payment  services or  traditional  bank  deposits,  the 
ease of access and risk tailored customer due-diligence should be similar. 
One of the early outcomes was that the Central Bank was able to establish regulations to license non-
banks to provide electronic money services to the public.  There are already two firms that have either 
provisionally  or  fully  met  the  requirements  for  licensing.    In  addition,  several  existing  money 
transmission businesses are in the process of developing digital payment solutions. 
On  ease  of  access,  streamlined  customer  due  diligence  standards  were  introduced  in  2018  under 
revised  AML  Guidelines7  which  simplify  the  identification  and  address  verification  requirements  to 
establish  deposit  accounts  and  to  access  other  services  from  financial  institutions.    It  shifts  more 
emphasis  to  the  important  transactions  monitoring  process  after  the  accounts  are  established.  
Further, it limits enhanced due diligence processes to relationships which banks assess to be higher 
risk. For very low-value stored products the identification process need not be invoked.8  In this regard, 
forthcoming  clarification  to  be  issued  to  banks  will  also  suppress  practices  that  mandate  proof  of 
employment as a pre-requisite to open an account.   
Not all banks have converged to these new standards, but we are actively pursuing this transition.   
The next easing, which the Central Bank undertook was to remove Exchange Control restrictions from 
non-resident  access to Bahamian dollar  (B$)  deposit facilities.  Irrespective of their immigration or 
work permit status these persons can open and maintain B$ deposit accounts with balances of up to 
$50,000 without approval from the Central Bank.  
As part of the Get Money Smart financial literacy program, and working with commercial banks we 
are formulating a new public education campaign focused on these changes.  The literacy campaign 
                                                           
7 The guidelines (see: https://www.centralbankbahamas.com/legal_policies.php?cmd=view&id=16883 ), which 
apply to entities supervised by the Central Bank: banks, credit unions, MTBs and payment services providers. 
These have been issued under provision in the amended Financial Transactions Reporting Act 2018. 
8 In the AML Guidance Notes these would be accounts that carry $500 or less and for which the monthly reload 
capacity is $300 or less. Monitoring of transactions for AML purposes, still applies for all accounts which financial 
institutions maintain.  Where higher risks are assessed supervised institutions may also  invoked processes that 
go beyond identification, such as verification of sources of income or wealth. 
3 | P a g e  
 
will also provide more education on cyber security, to increase public comfort and acceptance around 
the use of digital financial products. 
 Near-Term Priorities   
There are necessary further reforms that the Central Bank will target in the near-term. 
  Under  the  Payment  System  Act,  the  Bank  will  propose  new  regulations  to  strengthen 
consumer  protection,  along  evolving  best  international  standards.    These  would  apply  to 
savings and checking accounts; debit and credit cards, and to stored value products, where 
the common thread is the actual or potential use of such facilities to effect payments. 
  The Central Bank will also promote direct participation of credit unions and non-bank payment 
services  providers  in  the  payments  and  settlement  system.    This  would  apply  to  the  retail 
clearing house (the ACH) and to the wholesale RTGS.9 The draft new Central Bank Bill provides 
that all of these entities would be allowed to maintain settlement accounts with the Central 
Bank to clear payments. 
  As the largest originators and recipients of payments, the Public Treasury and the National 
Insurance Board are being invited to become direct participants in the RTGS and ACH systems. 
  Mechanisms will  also  be  explored  to  determine  how  international  banks  might  participate 
directly in Bahamian dollar payments and settlements, to facilitate their own local needs or 
those of clients who maintain a nexus to the local economy. 
 
Project Sand Dollar Highlights 
Through Project Sand Dollar, the Central Bank will develop and pilot a general purpose, digital version 
of the Bahamian dollar—that is, with both wholesale and retail applications. As the draft Central Bank 
Bill  anticipates,  the  Bank  would  have  statutory  authority  to  issue  currency  in  digital  form  and  to 
develop regulations to govern the instrument.  
The pilot would allow the Bank to enhance the digital system before it is deployed nationally.  To stay 
focused on the challenges that an archipelago poses, and to tackle gaps in access to services in remote 
communities, Exuma has been identified as the pilot community. The Bank will also explore how to 
enlist other selected islands that have suppressed or no banking presence.  
The digital representation of the B$ will be identical to, and not a separate version of the currency. It 
will  align  with  all  of  the  statutory  rules  that  govern  existing  liabilities  of  the  Central  Bank;  always 
exchanged at one for one with existing notes, coins and balances. 
The design will also incorporate best international practices around AML and CFT risks.  Anonymity is 
not  a  feature.    This  framework  will  rely  intimately  on  the  national  identify  infrastructure,  when 
permitting users to hold and exchange digital money. A t the onset, it will use KYC and identity features 
incorporated  into  the  system  design,  and  adopt  the  wider  public  identity  system  as  it  becomes 
available.  
A blockchain infrastructure has been proposed for the digital currency, with performance capabilities 
that would adequately satisfy the Central Bank’s requirements for swift processing of payments. 
                                                           
9 This would not impose any change on the current ownership of the ACH, which is by the commercial banks. 
4 | P a g e  
 
There will be an extensive public education process for all stakeholders potentially impacted by this 
transformation.  Also, from the outset, this project will engage with banks and other payment services 
providers, so that interoperability standards can be perfected.  
 Design Features of a Digital Currency 
There are important design features of a digital B$ that are intended to reflect the Central Bank’s role 
as a sponsor of financial sector development.  This is essentially a public good that is being provided. 
Geographic fragmentation cannot assure that the private sector, acting alone, would achieve the level 
of inclusion and access which all communities in The Bahamas deserve.10 
This instrument is intended to complement and not replace existing banking services. Its use will be 
optimised when persons in remote communities are able to deploy it to establish and maintain deposit 
accounts and other services at banks. Those who use central bank sponsored digital wallets would not 
see their funds treated as interest bearing deposits.11 However, the Central Bank will explore future 
innovations that would allow mobile wallets holders to invest in Government securities.   
While it would be possible to maintain mobile wallets independent of a bank account, the Central 
Bank intends to impose a ceiling on how much digital currency could be maintained in mobile wallets. 
High volume use will require a passthrough flow of funds to personal bank accounts. Business accounts 
would always fit this profile. The wallet’s integration with commercial banks or other licensed entities 
would be required in order for account holders to have access to foreign exchange services. 
The interoperability feature means that the digital B$ would be available for use across all payment 
platforms  and  within  existing  or  proposed  wallets  of  private  services  providers  and  financial 
institutions.  Although  the  consumer  public  would  have  the  default  option  of  establishing  a  wallet 
account  with  the  Central  Bank,  they  would  be  enabled  to  use  the  currency  within  any  product 
developed by regulated private wallet providers.  Over time, it is expected that the Central Bank would 
play a diminished role in providing front-end solutions and be left to focus on maintaining the digital 
ledger for the currency. 
At the policy level, the Central Bank is also putting emphasis on a system that would allow for effective 
maintenance  of  monetary  and  financial  stability,  safeguards  to  ensure  aggregate  stability  in  the 
deposit base of commercial banks; data privacy and data sovereignty for consumers and an aggressive 
cyber security posture. 
                                                           
10    A  Bank  for  International  Settlements  Publication  (2018)  by  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Markets 
Infrastructures  indicates  that  central  bank  digital  currencies  (CBDCs)  are  being  widely  explored  around  the 
world, but mostly for limited wholesale use in interbank markets.  (BIS (January 2019), “Proceeding with Caution 
- A Survey on Central Bank Digital Currency”, https://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/bispap101.htm). In many cases 
this reflects the wide availability of private e-money solutions that leave little value-added for central banks to 
operate in this space. Presumably, other policy complexities, and technical and operating risks, also explored by 
the BIS, limit many central banks’ interest in maintaining retail accounts for users of digital currency. (see BIS, 
March 2018), “Central Bank Digital Currencies”, https://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d174.htm).  
11 This preserves the level playing field that prevents payment services providers from paying interest on stored 
value products. It also avoids any expanded mandate for the Central Bank to intermediate savings at direct costs 
to the Bank or in competition with other financial institutions. 
5 | P a g e  
 
Conclusion and the Way Forward 
The  near-term  actions  for  the  Central  Bank  is  to  complete  the  contractual  on-boarding  of  our 
technology solutions provider, and then to deepen the preparation and outreach process for the pilot. 
The  government  is  a  lead  stakeholder  and  critical  sponsor  of  national  initiatives  that  will  help 
transform the domestic financial services sector and the payments system. The Central Bank will stay 
actively  engaged  with  the  Government  to  ensure  that  the  legal  framework  evolves  in  step  with 
payments  system  needs;  that  The  Bahamas  achieves  the  financial  inclusion  outcomes  that  are 
desirable for our archipelago and to ensure that the commercial sector benefits from a more efficient 
and secure infrastructure.  
The other key stakeholders, with whom engagement and outreach will intensify over the remainder 
of this year are the local financial institutions and public and private enterprises of all sizes.  
There will be much more to reveal about project Sand Dollar.  
  6 | P a g e  
 
Appendix of Tables and Boxes. 
Box 1: Profile of The Bahamian Payments System 
  
The  Bahamian  payment  system  is  continually  evolving,  showing  shifts  towards  greater  use  of  electronic 
transactions, and out  of branch access  to banking services.  Both consumers and business firms are using 
these electronic options in increasing numbers. In 2017, 56.8% of commercial banking branches were located 
in the capital, while the remaining 43.2% were in found in Grand Bahamas and the Family Islands.  This was 
still a shrunken access from as many as 88 branches in 2008 to 74 outlets at the end of 2017. As to access to 
ATM terminals, 71.5% were in New Providence, 13.8% in Grand Bahama and the remaining 14.6% were in the 
Family Islands.  Under electronic payments, between 2013 and 2017, payment card usage rose by 138% and 
203.2%l respectively, with equally impressive growth in the number of merchant terminals able to process 
such payments. There has also been a significant increase in the use of online banking by both consumers and 
businesses.  
 
Selected Payment Systems Data 
 2013 
    2014 
A) ATM/ABMS  (Number by Islands) 
 New Providence  
 Grand Bahama  
 Family Islands  
Total 
  B) Payments Volume by Card Type   
234 
44 
32 
310 
Debit Cards  
Credit Cards  
Stored Value Cards 
Total  
 C) Direct Credits/Credit Transfers  
Volume of Transactions 
Value of Transactions 
(B$’000) 
 1,352,857 
275,855 
15,355 
1,693,448 
347,235 
1,610,093 
  D) Number of Merchant Terminal Accounts  
Total  
5,377 
  255 
44 
35 
334 
    1,196,012 
206,521 
23,524 
1,511,097 
396,229 
1,947,990 
4,908 
2015 
262 
44 
39 
345 
2,013,084 
396,367 
64,597 
2,505,138 
452,947 
1,656,074 
8,853 
     2016 
291 
58 
53 
402 
2,771,071 
751,279 
60,957 
3,678,007 
550,389 
3,336,894 
9,146 
     2017 
259 
50 
53 
362 
3,221,699 
836,461 
105,010 
4,249,520 
564,302 
3,210,946 
11,306 
     E) Electronic Banking Users  
 Residential Users 
 Business Users 
Total  
29,252 
35077 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
63611 
2,613 
71740 
2765 
86261 
3074 
66,224 
74,505 
89,335 
Memo: Cashless Instrument Transactions 
Volume 
Value (B$’000) 
4,759,159 
3,535,739 
4,858,373 
6,712,163 
7,066,865 
4,971,567 
  4,625,916 
 5,191,732 
  7,424,147 
 7,687,696 
 
Source: Central Bank of The Bahamas 
  7 | P a g e  
 
    Table 1:  Bahamas—Selected Financial Access Measures 
Surveyed Knowledge and Use of Products 
Product or service 
% of respondent answering “yes” 
Heard of 
& 
Own 
jointly  or 
personally 
Want  to 
more 
learn 
Savings Account 
Debit card 
Checking Account 
Insurance policy 
Pension Fund 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi.  Mortgage 
vii. 
Credit card 
viii.  Mobile Phone banking 
ix. 
x. 
xi. 
xii. 
xiii. 
xiv.  Mutual Funds 
xv. 
Equity Funds 
“Asue” 
“Numbers” Account 
Bonds 
Stocks and shares 
Investment Account 
93 
91 
85 
87 
82 
88 
89 
70 
89 
56 
60 
71 
62 
60 
51 
80 
70 
37 
59 
33 
31 
48 
40 
33 
19 
13 
24 
22 
15 
13 
30 
24 
25 
34 
36 
29 
21 
26 
20 
20 
35 
39 
41 
35 
37 
Source: Central Bank of The Bahamas, Bahamas Financial Literacy Survey 2018. 
 8 | P a g e  
 
  Box 2: Using Global Standards and Peer Support to Guide Bahamian Guide Financial Inclusion 
 Initiatives 
  In  August  2018,  the  Central  Bank  joined  the  Global  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  (AFI),  an 
international network of central banks and financial sector regulators across from more than 90 
emerging market  and developing  economies  (EMDEs).  The goal of AFI is to assist members to 
improve financial inclusion in an environment supported by peer feedback, technical assistance 
and training as needed.  In keeping with the high-level commitments of the AFI membership the 
Central  Bank  of  The  Bahamas  has  adopted  the  MAYA  declaration12  that  required  the  Bank  to 
identify measurable goals to promote national financial inclusion.13  
 
The Bahamas has identified seven broad goals, which include development of the digital version 
of the currency, advancing financial literacy, consumer education and empowerment, contributing 
to  a  national  financial  inclusion  strategy  (which  takes  a  wider  perspective  than  just  banking 
services), and promoting the development of national digital identify infrastructure.  The Bank also 
has an obligation to improve compilation of data on financial inclusion. 
 
AFI has recognised that Fintech innovations offer opportunities to accelerate financial inclusion 
progress.    In  2018,  the  Sochi  Accord14 was  adopted  to  heighten  this  focus.  The  Accord  speaks, 
among other things, to building capacity to understand and promote Fintech developments, using 
Fintech solutions to help bridge gender divides in financial access, and ensuring that and official 
infrastructure is developed to support Fintech applications.  The case studies that emerge from 
AFI member countries particularly highlight the role of a digital ID infrastructure, and there is a 
recognition of the potential to develop electronic KYC on-boarding solution for banks. 
 
Just on the heels of the Sochi  Accord, the IMF and the World Bank promoted the Bali Fintech 
Agenda listing high-level principles that align with the AFI approach, again stressing the supportive 
public  framework  of  reform  that  could  allow  EMDEs  take  advantage  of  Fintech  to  promote 
inclusion and and other financial development results. The adoption of best practices is also urged 
to manage the multi-faceted risks of technology, and thwart the use of Fintech for illicit means.  A 
recurring thread in both the IMF and AFI’s work is for EMDEs to encourage and explore Fintech 
solutions  that  would  solve  or  reduce  the  de-risking  threats  around  threatened  access  to 
correspondent banking relationships. 
                                                           
12 The Maya Declaration was endorsed by AFI in 2011 at the Global Policy Forum (GPF) in Riveria Maya, Mexico. 
It  requires  AFI  members  to  make  measurable  commitments  in  four  broad  areas:    (i)  create  an  enabling 
environment  to  harness  new  technology  that  increases  access  and  lowers  the  cost  of  financial  services;  (ii) 
implement a proportional framework that advances synergies in financial inclusion, integrity, and stability; (iii) 
integrate  consumer  protection  and  empowerment  as  a  key  pillar  of  financial  inclusion;  and  (iii)  use  data  for 
informed 
link 
https://www.afi-
global.org/sites/default/files/publications/2018-08/MAYA_FS_18_AW_digital.pdf  
policymaking 
tracking 
results. 
and 
See 
at 
13 See Press Release: The Central Bank of The Bahamas Joins The Alliance For Financial Inclusion & Commits To 
The Maya Declaration, https://www.centralbankbahamas.com/news.php?id=16452&cmd=view  
14 The Sochi Accord: Fintech for Financial Inclusion (https://www.afi-
global.org/publications/2851/Sochi-Accord-FinTech-for-Financial-Inclusion)  
9 | P a g e  
 
   Box 3: Central Bank of The Bahamas Commitments under the Maya Declaration 
 Under the Maya  Declaration of the Alliance for Financial Inclusion the  Central Bank has committed 
to: 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
vi) 
vii) 
Support  the development of a National Financial Inclusion Strategy  by 
2020. 
Increase  access  to  banking  and  payment  services  by  reinforcing  our 
newly revised Customer Due Diligence (CDD) requirements. 
Introduce a digital version of the Bahamian currency by 2020, to ensure 
minimum  levels  of  access  to  banking  and  payments  services  in 
geographically remote parts of The Bahamas. 
Collaborate  with  the  government  on 
identity 
infrastructure to enhance the Know Your Customer (KYC) procedures in 
our supervised financial institutions (SFIs). 
improved  national 
Conclude  the  development  and  start-up  of  a  credit  bureau  in  The 
Bahamas by 2020 to foster trust and accountability between our SFIs and 
their customers.  
In  partnership  with  relevant  stakeholders,  pursue  the  creation  of  the 
Office of the Financial Services Ombudsman (OFSO) by 2020. 
Promote  public  awareness  of  consumer  rights  and  responsibilities 
through  our  recently  deployed  financial  literacy  program,  Get  Money 
Smart Bahamas. 
  10 | P a g e  
 
