Ravi Menon: The wellness of investing - eating well, sleeping well,
feeling well
Keynote remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at
SIAS 1st Master Series Investment Conference, Singapore, 11 July 2019.
 Mr  David  Gerald,  Founder,  President  and  CEO  of  Securities  Investor Association  (Singapore)
(SIAS), ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
Let me begin by congratulating SIAS on 20 successful years as an effective champion for retail
investors in Singapore.
You  have  been  an  ardent  voice  for  investors  –  a  voice  of  reason  and  balance,  unwavering  in
looking out for the interest of investors, but always in a co-operative way with all stakeholders.
You  have  been  a  strong  advocate  for  good  corporate  governance –  engaging  boards  to
strengthen governance practices, and facilitating a constructive dialogue between investors and
listed companies.
You have also been a valued partner of MAS.
You  are  a  long-standing  supporter  of  MoneySense,  the  national  financial  well-being
programme, helping us to deliver financial education messages so that investors can make
better informed decisions.
The journey has not been easy for SIAS.  Funding is a perennial challenge.  You have had to rely
entirely on your own fund-raising efforts and the goodwill of donors and sponsors.  This is not
ideal from a long term perspective.
MAS  is  willing  to  support  SIAS.    We  are  working  closely  with  SIAS  and  other  stakeholders  to
come  up  with  viable  funding  options,  to  achieve  financial  sustainability  while  ensuring  SIAS’
credibility as an advocate for investors.
It is important that SIAS continues and builds upon the good work it has done to-date.  As they
grow in financial sophistication, more Singaporeans are taking to investing.  At the same time,
the investment landscape is becoming increasingly complex and challenging.
The theme for today’s conference is timely – the future of investing.  I will not try to predict that
future  or,  worse  still,  offer  tips  on  what  to  invest  in.    There  are  many  experts  that  SIAS  has
gathered, who can do that better than I.
Instead, I want to talk about how we might achieve wellness in investment, taking into account
some broad trends and how MAS is working with the financial industry to create the investment
ecosystem to make possible this wellness. 
As  with  achieving  physical  and  mental  well-being,  may  I  suggest  that  achieving  wellness  in
investment comprises three things:
eating well;
sleeping well; and
feeling well.  
Eating well is about investing for good financial returns. 
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
While public markets will continue to be the mainstay of investing, the search for yield will
inevitably take us to private markets. 
The rise of private markets has been a structural trend for about two decades now. 
Identifying opportunities in private markets while minimising risk will be a key theme in the
future of investing.
Sleeping well is about securing adequacy in retirement.
Demographics is one of the few trends we can predict with a degree of certainty.
The ageing of the population will be a reality across emerging Asia in the coming years, with
the exception of South Asia.
Population  ageing  is  happening  alongside  rising  affluence  –  a  combination  that  underpins
strong demand for pension funds and retirement savings products, to provide peace of mind
in one’s golden years.
Feeling well is about investing with a purpose, to do good while doing well. 
Where we put our money drives action.  And an existential issue demanding action on a
global scale is climate change. 
Investing in sustainable assets imbues investment with a larger social purpose.
Let me elaborate on each of these dimensions of wellness in investment.
Eating Well: Investing for Yield in Private Markets
First,  eating  well  –  or  investing  for  yield  in  private  markets,  namely  private  equity  and  venture
capital investments, PE and VC in short, as part of a diversified portfolio.
Globally, private market capital has grown at more than double the rate of public capital in the last
20 years.
For  the  first  time  since  2006–07,  the  value  of  listed  US  companies  going  private  in  2018
exceeded the value of private companies going public, causing a net outflow from the US
public markets.
An allocation to investments in private markets is becoming more common – and necessary –
for a well-diversified portfolio aiming for decent returns.
Private market opportunities are growing strongly in Asia.  The PE and VC industry in the Asia-
Pacific  achieved record growth last year.
1
PE/VC assets under management have risen by a compounded annual growth rate of 22%
2
over the last five years, to reach nearly US$0.9 trillion in 2018 .
Within the Asia-Pacific, ASEAN is emerging as a hotbed of PE and VC deal flow.
2017 PE and VC investments into ASEAN was US$24 billion, almost three times the deal
3
flow in 2016  .
Bain & Company estimates at least US$70 billion of PE and VC deals and more than ten
unicorns emerging over the next five years in Southeast Asia.
The optimism is not unfounded.
There is an explosion of entrepreneurial energy across ASEAN.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The region has seen the rapid rise of well capitalized, innovative businesses such as
Grab, Go-Jek, and Tokopedia. 
With a growing middle class and widespread urbanisation, the consumer, technology, and
health care related sectors are expected to grow rapidly in ASEAN.
Growth  companies  in  these  areas  are  scaling  up  and  internationalising,  which  requires
raising new capital – with a growing volume coming from private markets.
Singapore is a natural gateway to private market opportunities in Asia.
Singapore has a diverse ecosystem of 240 global and regional PE and VC managers. They
managed S$220 billion of assets as of 2018, up 15% from the year before.
Entrepreneurs from across Asia are coming to Singapore to raise capital for their expansion.
Singapore itself has become a thriving launch pad for tech start-ups, and is a natural hunting
ground for the next unicorn.
A vibrant PE and VC ecosystem is critical for the ongoing technological and digital transformation
of Singapore and ASEAN. 
Deep  and  diverse  private  markets  offer  investors  an  opportunity  to  tap  on  the  returns
potential of Asia’s growth companies.
This is why MAS has made the growth of the private market ecosystem a key plank in its industry
development agenda, and put in place various supporting initiatives.
First, MAS has simplified the regulatory framework for VC managers.
We have streamlined the admission criteria and business conduct requirements.
This  has  facilitated  faster  time-to-market  for  VC  managers,  and  increased  access  to
financing for start-up and growth stage businesses.
Second, MAS is working with industry players to establish private market platforms in Singapore
to help match Asian growth companies with international investors.
Last  year,  Capbridge  Platform  obtained  MAS’  approval  to  operate  its  private  securities
exchange as a Recognised Market Operator in Singapore. 
Third,  MAS  launched  in  November  last  year  a  programme  to  allocate  US$5  billion  of  its  own
funds as part of its investment portfolio into the private markets asset class.
These  funds  will  be  placed  for  management  with  top  global  PE  and  Infrastructure  fund
managers who are committed to deepening their existing presence or establishing a new
and significant presence in Singapore.
There has been keen interest from PE and infrastructure managers, and MAS has already
funded a few managers who have met our investment and developmental objectives.
MAS’ total commitment to PE and infrastructure funds under this programme is currently
just over US$550 million.
Fourth,  MAS  is  partnering  Enterprise  Singapore  to  host “Deal  Fridays”  –  which  are  basically
curated  events  to  match  emerging  growth  companies  with  investors  seeking  private  market
opportunities.
Deal Fridays began last month and will take place every Friday until the Singapore FinTech
Festival cum Singapore Week of Innovation and Technology in November.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Last year, MAS surveyed angel investors, family offices, and venture capitalists to try to get a
sense of how much money is potentially on the table.
By their own account, there is about US$12 billion in total available for direct investment into
ASEAN start-ups during 2019-21.
We hope that Deal Fridays can encourage the deployment of this capital.
Sleeping Well: Investing for Retirement with Ageing Demographics
Next, sleeping well – or securing sufficient funds for retirement.  Safe investment is needed for
retirement planning, as the world’s population ages.
Populations are ageing across most countries.
2018 was a milestone of sorts: for the first time in human history, persons aged 65 or over
outnumbered children under 5 years of age.
The rate of demographic ageing will be particularly rapid in Asia.
The proportion aged 65 or over in East and Southeast Asia is expected to increase from
4
11% in 2019 to 24% in 2050  .
As people live longer and the workforce shrinks, individuals will face an uphill struggle to fund
longer retirements. 
Retirement planning should thus start young.
Starting early gives you more time to reap the benefits of compounding interest.
Financial institutions are providing a range of retirement solutions.
Insurers are selling products that encourage regular savings, in order to receive a steady
stream of income during one's retirement years.
According to Life Insurance Association, the number of such policies taken up last year
in Singapore increased by about 50%.
There are also unit trusts that provide a regular monthly dividend.
MAS has issued the Singapore Savings Bonds, or SSB in short, to provide a flexible risk-free
investment option for investors to diversify their portfolio for retirement.
Last  year,  we  doubled  the  individual  limit  for  holding  SSBs  to  S$200,000,  due  to  the
increased appetite for safe investments.
Across Asia, the focus is shifting from pure wealth creation to wealth preservation and wealth
bequest.
Succession planning and intergenerational wealth transfer have moved up the agenda.
A growing number of affluent families are consolidating their wealth through trusts and family
offices, to optimise investment and legacy planning. 
Singapore is an ideal place for families to set up such structures.
There is political and economic stability, a clear regulatory regime, a comprehensive network
of tax treaties to avoid double taxation, and a robust ecosystem of professional services.
The number of family offices in Singapore has increased four times between 2016 and 2018.
We continue to see strong interest from families to set up in Singapore
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
MAS  is  working  with  the  industry  to  strengthen  Singapore’s  value  proposition  as  a  centre  of
excellence for managing family wealth.
We are raising the level of professionalism of family wealth advisers by partnering institutes
of higher learning to develop and provide customised training.
We are also strengthening networks between family offices in Singapore, to facilitate mutual
learning and joint investments.
Feeling Well: Investing for Sustainability amidst Climate Change
Finally, feeling well – or investing to align with personal or corporate values, to make a positive
impact, to support a larger social purpose.
A  growing  number  of  investors  are  looking  at  investment  through  the  lens  of  environmental
sustainability – both with a view to managing climate-related risks as well as to support efforts to
reduce carbon emissions.
From  a  risk  perspective,  climate  change  can  impact  investments  over  the  long  term,  either
directly or indirectly.
Weather and climate-related events can potentially result in direct investment losses. 
Extreme weather events like floods can impair asset values, at least in the short-term.
Changing climactic conditions – like rising sea levels – can have much more lasting effects
on the value of exposed assets.
Dealing with catastrophic events is not new to financial markets.  And not all catastrophic events
can be attributed to climate change.  But the frequency and intensity of natural catastrophes are
increasing.
According  to  the  UN  Economic  and  Social  Commission  for  Asia  and  the  Pacific
(UNESCAP), the number of catastrophic events in the Asia Pacific rose from an average of
44 annually in the 1970s to 126 in the early 2010s.
Investors cannot ignore the implications of climate change.
CDP  Worldwide,  an  international  environmental  non-profit,  estimates  that  a  group  of  the
world's largest companies potentially faces US$250 billion in asset write-offs within the next
5 years due to climate change related risks.
The  indirect  effects  on  investments  come  from  policy  changes  and  technological  advances
aimed at meeting climate mitigation goals.
Countries that signed up to the Paris Agreement in 2015 have pledged to limit the increase in
global average temperatures to between 1.5 degrees Celsius to 2 degrees Celsius above
pre-industrial levels.
What  does  this  potentially  mean  in  practice?  According  to  the  International  Energy
Association  (IEA),  limiting  global  warming  to  1.5  degrees  Celsius  means  that  renewables
have to make up 70 - 85% of electricity production by 2050. It was only 23% in 2015.
This scenario is not far-fetched.
Technological advances and increases in production capacity have dramatically reduced the
cost of renewable energy sources like wind and solar.
If R&D on long duration energy storage technologies is successful, it will solve the problem
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
of intermittency that currently hinders the scope for renewable energy to supply electricity
round the clock.
Changes  in  technology  that  make  renewables  economically  viable  could  potentially  leave
many traditional energy assets stranded – and this has serious implications for investors.
Changes in government policy such as higher carbon taxes will also have profound investment
implications by altering the structure of industries and businesses.
This is not something happening far from home.
A study by the Carbon Tracker Initiative estimates that as much as US$60 billion of coal
assets across Southeast Asia can no longer yield the expected economic return in the next
decade  due  to  tighter  environmental  policies  and  competition  from  cheaper  renewable
energy.
Conversely,  as  climate  change  mitigation  efforts  intensify  globally,  environmentally
responsible companies can be expected to outperform their benchmarks.
Besides  technological  advances  and  policy  changes,  growing  consumer  awareness  of
environmental  issues  will  also  affect  companies’  bottom  lines  and  thereby  the  risk-return
calculations of investors in these companies.
Finally, as I mentioned earlier, beyond the cold calculation of climate-related risks and returns,
many investors want to invest in a way that contributes to leaving behind for future generations a
planet that is habitable, green, and pleasant.
Sustainable investing is becoming a live issue in Asia.  The story of Asia’s huge infrastructure
needs is well-known.
The Asian Development Bank has estimated that developing Asia needs to spend US$1.5
trillion annually on infrastructure up to 2030.
What  is  less  well  known  is  that  climate  mitigation  and  adaptation  costs  will  add  another
US$200 billion to the region’s annual investment needs.
This is a significant load.  It will require a radical change in the way public sector policies, private
sector financing, and investment decisions are made.
Ensuring sustainability is very much a part of Singapore's ethos.  Making the best use of limited
resources has, for a long time, been a key part of our nation-building process. 
We must now make our financial sector, asset markets, and investment landscape conducive to
sustainability. 
MAS  is  working  on  a  comprehensive,  long-term  strategy  to  make  sustainable  finance  a
defining  feature  of  Singapore’s  role  as  an  international  financial  centre,  just  as  wealth
management and FinTech have become.
We have made some early moves to promote sustainable investing and mobilise private capital
for environmentally-friendly projects.
The introduction of the Green Bond Grant scheme two years ago is an example.
The  grant  aims  to  level  costs  associated  with  issuing  a  green  bond  versus  that  of  a
conventional  bond  and  to  promote  the  adoption  of  internationally  accepted  standards  on
sustainability.
To-date, some S$6 billion worth of green bonds has been issued here by local and foreign
companies.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  year,  MAS  expanded  the  Green  Bond  Grant  Scheme  to  include  social  and  sustainability
bonds.
The grant is now renamed as the Sustainable Bond Grant Scheme.
We also lowered the minimum issuance size requirement for the scheme, which will allow
more qualifying issuers to gain access to the grant.
But  there  is  much  more  to  do,  to  make  Singapore  one  of  the  premier  global  centres  for
sustainable investing.  Let me quickly cite two priorities.
First, enhancing the disclosure of climate-related risks and opportunities.  This is necessary to
enable investors to channel their funds to sustainable enterprises and projects.
The  Singapore  Exchange  (SGX)  has  introduced  the  comply-or-explain  sustainability
reporting requirement for listed companies in 2016.
Second, building industry expertise in sustainable finance.
We  need  to  enhance  the  level  of  knowledge  in  sustainable  finance  amongst  industry
professionals  as  well  as  companies  that  are  reporting  on  their  sustainability  practices  or
looking to issue green bonds.
MAS is working with partners, such as the Institute of Banking and Finance, SGX, the Asia
Sustainable Finance Initiative and our universities, to introduce capacity building courses in
sustainability for finance professionals and officers of listed companies.
Conclusion
Let me sum up.
Investing – by its very nature – is an activity that focuses our mind on the future.  I have sketched
three probable investment themes, by no means exhaustive and by no means certain.
The rise of private markets offers an opportunity for investors to achieve higher returns within the
context of a well-diversified portfolio that also includes traditional assets. If we can manage the
higher risks of investing in these markets, we can eat well.
Ensuring  financial  security  in  old  age  is  becoming  a  growing  imperative  amidst  demographic
change.  If we can start saving and investing for retirement early enough and wisely enough, we
can sleep well.
Mitigating as well as adapting to climate change is likely to be one of the central issues in the
future.  If we can invest with a view to that future, recognising its risks and providing the incentive
for positive change, with a heart for future generations, we can feel well.  
I wish you fruitful deliberations on achieving a healthy, balanced, and fulfilling investment life.
And I wish you well.
1
2
3
4
Includes Southeast Asia, Greater China, India, Australia, New Zealand, South Korea and Japan
“Asia-Pacific Private Equity Report 2019”; Bain & Company
“Southeast Asia PE & VC: Investment Activity May 2018”, SVCA
“World Population Prospects 2019”; United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
