B  P  Kanungo:  India's  growing  significance  in  global  arena.  Is  it
sustainable? Are we ready for it?
Keynote  address  by  Mr  B  P  Kanungo,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the
Foreign  Exchange  Dealers Association  of  India  (FEDAI) Annual  Conference,  Beijing,  19 April
2019.
 1. It is a great pleasure to be amidst you today and I wish to thank FEDAI and the organisers of
this  conference  for  the  privilege  to  speak  to  you.  FEDAI  has  been  playing  a  seminal  role  in
steering  the  cross-border  transactions  of  the  members  of  public  as  well  as  interbank
transactions in the foreign exchange market for more than six decades now. It may be recalled
that FEDAI was formed to secularise foreign exchange transactions in the early days when only
select branches of foreign banks were conducting these transactions. Over time, the statutory
framework enjoined upon the foreign exchange dealers an additional role as authorised dealers –
a  role  so  comprehensive  that  they  share  the  responsibility  for  administering  the  regulatory
regime. FEDAI, as organisation of authorised(forex) dealers has played its role remarkably well
and if we are expanding the set of players in the foreign exchange market today, a part of the
credit goes to FEDAI in creating the necessary skill abundantly and widely in dealing with foreign
exchange.  I  am  sure  it  will  continue  to  play  a  constructive  role  and  help  market  participants
grapple  with  the  challenges  that  a  market  as  prone  to  volatility  and  uncertainty  as  the  foreign
exchange market will spring from time to time.
2. These annual conferences since 2006 have been an important event, or should I say, the most
important event that the participants in the foreign exchange market look forward to. It provides
an opportunity for networking and exchange of ideas for the market participants. It also provides a
welcome respite from the heat and dust of the marketplace. I cannot but commend the choice of
the venue this year, particularly with a view on the theme of this year’s event. China and India
have  been  comrades-at-arms  for  millennia’s,  sharing  their  journeys  in  multiple  dimensions:
commercial as well as civilizational. Angus Maddison  estimates that India and China were the
world’s two largest economies until the early 18th century. China is the world’s largest economy
today on PPP basis and India is the third largest. If you add the exports and imports, China is
India’s  largest  trading  partner  (2017–18  data).  Among  the  fastest  growing  economies,  the
engagement between the two countries can be expected to see phenomenal growth in the times
to come.
1
3. The theme chosen for this conference is: India’s growing significance in international arena: Is
it sustainable? Are we ready for it? These are interesting and important issues and as we shall
see,  quite  relevant  to  our  common  functional  domain.  Now,  importance  in  the  international
sphere has many dimensions: cultural, military, moral, strategic to name a few but the dimension
that  underpins  all  others  is  economic.  If  you  look  at  the  history  of  mankind,  it  is  economic
prosperity that has always dictated the importance of a nation. Whether we look at the Italian city
states of the 15th/16th century – many of Shakespeare’s plays were situated in these places
Verona to Venice – and one wonders whether the renaissance would have been possible but for
the  wealth  and  backing  of  the  Medicci’s  and  others,  or  the  British  of  the  18th/19th  century  –
Britain  became  the  dominant  global  power  for  two  centuries,  and  English  became  the  lingua
franca,  it  is  the  economic  prosperity  that  made  the  nations  internationally  important.  The  pre-
eminence of China today is to a great extent due to its phenomenal economic success.
4. We also must notice that economic prosperity has almost always been inextricably linked with
international trade and commerce (capital movements are recent phenomenon). The need for
free  trade  and  commerce  became  important  as  the  industrial  revolution  greatly  increased
productivity. Of course, it was not in the sense we now understand. Till middle of the nineteenth
century,  mercantilism  was  the  dominant  policy  driver  in  Europe.  Essentially,  while  it  favoured
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
exports of all commodities except gold, it sought to discourage imports through tariffs. Ultimately,
with  repeal  of  the  (British)  Corn  Laws  in  1846,  the  case  for  free  trade  had  been  decisively
established.  The  doctrine  that  free  trade  enhances  welfare  has  been  further  strengthened  by
subsequent research at least at a theoretical plane. Despite the fact that global economic growth
and  growth  in  global  trade  have  moved  in  tandem  over  the  past  two  centuries,  arguments  in
favour  of  import  substitution,  selective  protection,  subsidies  abound.  One  can  perhaps
reasonably conclude that while the global objective will continue to be less restrictive trade, local
variations  will  have  to  be  considered  keeping  in  view  other  macroeconomic  factors  like  fiscal
policy, exchange rate policy, employment policy, and so on.
5. Unlike trade in goods and services, the case for capital flows has not been clear. We must
appreciate  that  restrictions  on  capital  flows  were  enshrined  in  the  Bretton  Woods  system.
However,  after  the  breakdown  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  in  the  early  seventies,  a  set  of
strong arguments emerged in favour of free capital flows and was endorsed by IMF. In the wake
of  the  far  eastern  crisis  of  the  late  1990’s,  the  debate  about  its  desirability  was  revived.  The
debate again came to life after the global financial crisis and there has been a general agreement
since that – and I quote the words of Harry Dexter White, one of the principal architects of the
Bretton Woods, – “the desirability of encouraging the flow of productive capital to areas where it
can  be  most  profitably  employed  needs  no  emphasis,  but  there  are  periods  when  failure  to
manage flows have led to serious economic disruption.” Keynes was in agreement.
6. The reason I have dealt with the propositions relating to trade and capital flows is to bring out
the point that there is no universally acceptable policy prescription relating to either. Both theory
and empirics accommodate the possibility of specific sets of policy appropriate to a country’s
idiosyncratic requirements and it is in this backdrop that we shall consider our policies in respect
of cross-border transactions, past and present.
7. There are several dimensions of the regime for cross border transactions: but what we shall
be  concerned  with  in  this  discussion  is  that  relating  to  exchange  control  or  rather  foreign
exchange  management.  The  foreign  exchange  management  policy  ultimately  hinges  on  two
factors: the quantity of foreign exchange available and the exchange rate. This has guided the
evolution of the exchange control regime in India, and indeed elsewhere in the world.
8. The war-time exchange control through administrative fiat was converted to a statutory regime
in  1947  through  the  FERA,  1947.  The  acute  shortage  of  foreign  exchange  in  the  1960’s  and
various other factors such as food shortage, wars, etc. led to a more stringent regime through
the  FERA,  1973.  Foreign  exchange  per  se  was  considered  important  and  the  policy  regime
comprised rules to grudgingly allocate foreign exchange to various demands. Import control and
promotion  of  import  substitution  provided  complimentary  policy  instruments.  Beginning  mid-
seventies  (soon  after  the  enactment  of  FERA,1973  but  not  necessarily  because  of  it),  the
situation  relating  to  the  external  sector  started  improving  primarily  because  of  increasing
remittances from Indian diaspora and impact of green revolution. Thus, through the 1980’s, there
was  progressive  and  incremental  liberalisation  in  cross  border  transactions,  albeit  within  the
same paradigm. Two observations are in order here. First, the liberalisation in exchange control
regime was not accompanied by any significant changes in other economic policies. Second,
although  the  Bretton-Woods  regime  broke  down  in  early  1970’s  and  many  currencies  started
floating, the rupee continued to be in a pegged exchange-rate system, first to pound sterling and
then to a basket of currencies. Thus, the foreign exchange crisis once again surfaced in early
nineties.  The  policy  response  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis  this  time  was  a  comprehensive
reform. As far as regulating cross border transactions are concerned, I would like to mention
three  landmarks:  (a)  adoption  of  a  market  determined  exchange  rate  system  in  1993,  (b)
Commitment to conform to Article 8 of the IMF charter – current account convertibility – in 1994
and (c) Enactment of FEMA in 1999 – removing the shackles of a repressive regime. It was a
new paradigm.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
9. We have lived through this paradigm for nigh two and a half decades now. There have been
cadences in the policy regime from time to time, but the basic tenets remain the same and will
continue to guide the evolution of policy framework in future. Let me draw your attention to the
preamble  of  the  FEMA,  1999  which  very  aptly  summarises  the  philosophy  behind  how  we
regulate the cross border transactions. It goes: “An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating
to  foreign  exchange  with  the  objective  of facilitating  external  trade  and  payments  and  for
promoting the orderly development and maintenance of foreign exchange market in India.”
10.  As  far  as  current  account  is  concerned,  the  statute  mandates  that  there  shall  be  no
restrictions  except  such  that  are  placed  by  the  Central  Government  in  consultation  with  the
Reserve  Bank.  The  restrictions  that  figure  in  the  rule-book  mostly  relate  to  some  (socially
undesirable) non-priority activities like gambling, transactions that can be used to dress capital
accounts  transactions  as  current  account  transactions,  and  some  with  strategic  implications.
There  is  also  some  asymmetry,  in  practice  if  not  in  precept,  between  the  current  account
transactions  that  involve  an  outward  remittance  and  those  that  involve  an  inward  one.  The
regulatory framework for current account transactions has been pretty stable; I may mention in
passing that transaction in services has been growing steadily in keeping with India’s reputation
as an outsourcing hub. While a comprehensive system for collection of aggregate statistics for
compilation  of  the  balance  of  payment  is  in  place,  perhaps  we  need  to  develop  a  system  to
capture transaction level data similar to that for merchandise trade to improve our understanding
and guide policy action, wherever necessary.
11. Let me now turn to the capital account transactions. The statute provides that the Reserve
Bank  (and  when  the  2015  amendment  to  FEMA,  1999  is  notified,  the  Central  Government  in
some classes of transactions) will regulate which capital account transactions are permitted and
to what extent and subject to what conditions. Partly because of this construct of the statutory
provisions but mostly because of the evolving macroeconomic conditions during the past two
decades, majority of the policy actions have related to the capital account.
12. As I mentioned earlier, starting the 1970’s, and through the 1980’s and well into the 1990’s
there was a strong advocacy of full capital account convertibility by the free market proponents.
This culminated in the 1994 Madrid Declaration of the IMF to encourage the member countries to
remove impediments to capital flows. However, subsequent global economic developments have
modified the stance and it is now admitted that capital controls can indeed be used an instrument
for macroeconomic and financial stability. The goalpost has now shifted from convertibility, an
event  to  capital  account  liberalisation,  a  process.  This  raises  issues  about  the  pace  and
composition of the liberalisation the drivers of which are eclectic and country specific rather than
based  on  universal  principles.  Broadly,  three  determining  factors  are  important:  (a)  the  pre-
conditions  for  opening  up  of  capital  account  (b)  the  cost  and  effectiveness  of  capital  account
restrictions  and  (c)  monetary  policy  implications  of  an  increasingly  open  capital  account.  Of
course, the stability and orderly conditions in the forex market remains the proximate determinant
of the policies relating to capital flows. In our case, while capital inflows serve the twin purposes
of bridging the Export-Import gap and the savings-investment gap, the above considerations will
determine the approach to regulation.
13.  There  are  usually  three  preconditions  for  capital  account  liberalisation  discussed:  price
stability, fiscal stability and stability of the financial institutions and markets. As we speak to day,
achievements  in  respect  of  the  stated  parameters  vary.  The  fiscal  deficit  at  the  General
Government  level  needs  consolidation.  It  is  desirable  that  growth  along  with  low  inflation  and
fiscal prudence become well entrenched before we take quantum steps towards a more open
capital account. Besides, there are signs of global headwinds, though in the distant horizons.
14. While the nuances of capital account liberalisation is a matter of detail, some broad policy
prerogatives  relating  to  the  hierarchy  of  capital  flows  can  be  mentioned.  First,  capital  flows
particularly  for  the  real  sector  will  always  have  priority  over  flows  into  the  financial  sector.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Second, equity related capital inflows will have preference over debt inflows. Within the equity
flows, direct investment flows will be preferred to portfolio flows and in so far as debt flows are
concerned,  preference  for  long  term  debt  and  rupee-denominated  debt  –  whether  bilaterally
contracted  or  through  marketable  securities  –  shall  continue.  You  are  aware  of  the  policy
changes in recent times in respect of foreign direct investment, external commercial borrowing,
trade credit, etc. However, the changes constitute mostly rationalisation and consolidation rather
than any significant change in stance.
15.  The  investment  requirement  of  the  Indian  economy  is  and  will  continue  to  be  quite  large.
Apart from the usual ICOR-driven investment to support the desired growth, huge investments
are also required for the physical and social infrastructure sector. These latter investments have
their own challenges in terms of long and uncertain execution period, long payback period, etc.
The world today is flush with long-term savings in the nature of pension funds and corpus of
insurance companies, our policy regime need to be nimble and accomodative enough to direct
these to productive ventures in India. We are working towards this.
16. Talking of the need of infrastructure sectors, we cannot help notice the emergence of a new
class of investors: venture capital and private equity funds. Anecdotal reports seem to suggest
that in the last few years, investment by these funds constitute about 35–40% of the FDI inflows.
Important as the role of VC and PE funds is as the mediator between long term investors like
pension funds, insurance companies, sovereign funds, trusts, endowments etc. on the one hand
and  potential  growth  industries  on  the  other,  these  investments  have  different  structural  and
behavioural characteristics. The current regime permits wide latitude of freedom to VC investors
in select sectors perceived to be economically important but risky for normal FDI. Perhaps there
is a need to consider private equity investment in its totality and see if a modulation of policy
regime  is  warranted,  including  wider  and  innovative  debt  funding,  hybrid  instruments,  etc
particularly  in  so  far  as  they  relate  to  priority  areas  such  as  infrastructure,  non-conventional
energy, health, education and other social impact areas. This is engaging our attention.
17. The issues relating to start-ups are extremely important. Business has evolved in ways that
could not have been foreseen a short while ago. It has become a cliché to cite the examples of
the largest transportation company that does not own a cab, the largest retail company that does
not own a store and so on. Technology and internet have and are continuing to revolutionise the
service industry. Most of the start-ups have immensely contributed to employment generation.
(Should we create a preferential FDI regime for activities with large employment potential, given
the importance of employment in the economy?) The start-ups have great appetite for funds in
their growing phase and lion’s share of the funding has been coming through foreign investment,
mostly venture capital or private equity funds. We have taken some steps in the past to facilitate
fund raising by start-ups, but we will remain alive towards their evolving needs including easing
the compliance burden.
18. What should our approach be as far as capital outflows are concerned? So far it has been
almost entirely for direct investment. Moreover, there is no differentiated policy for equity and debt
outflows. The policy perspective forged during the FERA days had many negative vibes. Why
should a capital deficit countries export capital? Shouldn’t overseas investment be considered on
the basis of the returns it generates? Perhaps a time has come to take relook at it. Creation of
overseas  assets  by  resident  Indians  goes  as  a  credit  entry  in  the  international  investment
position.  Therefore,  rather  than  looking  at  dividend  earning,  there  is  a  need  to  look  at  value
enhancement. Secondly, acquisition of strategic and economic assets, eg., coalfields, oilfields,
etc. is a long-term priority. Thirdly, overseas investment can perhaps be seen as export, not of
capital but of entrepreneurship. Lastly, overseas investment is also an important phenomenon
associated  with  start-ups.  Several  start-ups,  including  individual  entrepreneurs  invest  in  India
through a holding company overseas primarily because of the ease of raising capital in a foreign
jurisdiction, whereas the economic activity is located in India, generating employment, revenue
and  economic  value.  We,  along  with  the  GoI,  shall  take  a  relook  at  any  misgivings  about
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
regulatory regime in this regard and take necessary corrective action.
19. Now I come to the foreign exchange markets. I am aware that treasury professionals dealing
with the forex market constitute a large part of this gathering and this is a theme with which you
are closely involved. As I mentioned earlier, an orderly forex market is an important objective and
also a precondition driving the evolution of the exchange management regime. We have come a
long  way  from  the  days  of  ‘RBI’s  middle  rate’.  Today,  the  Indian  forex  market  is  pretty  well
developed in terms of daily turnover as well as the range of products available. Yet, it continues
to be a regulated market and let us now turn to the motivation for and the future of the regulatory
regime.
20.  The  forex  market  determines  the  exchange  rate,  an  important  macro-variable  with
implications for balance of payments, monetary policy, capital flows, and several other derived
issues.  Now,  it  is  well  known  that  in  the  long  run  the  exchange  rate  depends  on  economic
fundamentals like inflation, interest rates, balance of payment position, etc., but in the short run
there  can  be  significant  deviations  in  the  exchange  rate  from  the  value  dictated  by  the
fundamentals.  Though  the  exchange  rate  can  be  measured  in  several  ways  such  as  REER,
NEER with different combinations of currencies and different weighing schemes, my discussion
will be centred around the headline INR-USD rate, which drives sentiments and decisions. The
fluctuations in the exchange rate are caused by sentiments and perceptions of a host of events,
some domestic and some global. As you dealers say, “Buy the rumour, Sell the news”. We have
had many such episodes. During the last one year or so the Rupee saw levels of 64 to a dollar in
March 2018, depreciated to near-75 levels in October 2018 and again appreciated to 68+ levels
by March, 2019 and has been trading almost flat since then. During this one year, there has not
been any change in the fundamentals of the Indian economy, nor any dramatic change in the
global  conditions  either.  The  cause  mostly  has  been  surge  or  ebb  in  capital  flows,  driven  by
perceptions  and  risk  aversion  or  appetite.  However,  understanding  these  gyrations  in  the
exchange rate does not provide any solace to the policy maker: there is a response necessary
lest  the  expectation  turn  to  panic  and  bring  a  great  deal  of  disorderliness  in  the  market  in  its
wake. The first line of defence is market interventions. But then the impossible trinity comes into
play: the interventions affect the rupee liquidity and may lead to a conflict with the monetary policy
stance. Sterilisation carries a cost. And sometimes, particularly when the Rupee depreciates,
there  is  a  limitation  to  the  extent  of  intervention,  rendering  intervention  strategically  ineffective.
The  second  line  of  defence  is  resorting  to  modulating  the  capital  control  regime:  diluting  or
strengthening restrictions depending on whether the Rupee is appreciating or depreciating. This
must be a last resort though: because while the forex market conditions can quickly reverse, the
control  regime  must  have  a  longer  lifetime,  lest  decision  making  by  economic  agents  is
adversely affected.
21. The second theme I want to talk about relates to derivatives in the forex market. Derivatives
evoke extreme reaction – from ‘the most significant event in finance’ (Greenspan) to ‘weapons of
mass  destruction’  (Buffet)  or  ‘license  to  kill’  (Soros).  The  primary  purpose  of  derivatives  is  to
hedge against future uncertainties. Thus, they perform economically a hugely useful function in
enabling agents to make better inter-temporal decisions. But on the other hand, they can also be
used  as  instruments  of  speculation  and  can  obfuscate  risk  allocation. As  Garber  notes,  ‘The
problems associated with rise of derivatives stem partly from the same source as the benefits:
the increased ability to separate and market risks means that some counterparties can assume
riskier positions more readily than in the past.’ The other part of the source of the problem with
derivatives is that they can be incomprehensively complex making the risk implications opaque.
In  our  markets,  we  have  both  linear  (forwards  and  futures)  as  well  as  non-linear  (options,
exchange  traded  as  well  as  OTC)  varieties.  The  later  is  mostly  plain  vanilla.  For  some  time,
complex  derivatives  not  involving  Rupee  were  allowed,  but  it  led  to  assumption  of  risks  not
understood epitomised in the Rajashree Sugar case. Another facet of the problem is unhedged
exposure.  Hedging  has  a  cost.  It  is  the  price  an  agent  pays  to  convert  an  uncertainty  to  a
certainty.  Thus,  there  may  be  a  tendency  to  remain  unhedged  and  leave  events  in  the  lap  of
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
gods.  Should  the  market  conditions  turn  hostile,  there  is  a  mad  scramble  to  cut  loss  which
exacerbates the market further. Our approach has been and will continue to be to provide an
agent who has exposure to the Rupee – resident or non-resident – with a range of derivative
products  to  enable  them  to  hedge  their  foreign  exchange  risks  but  expanding  the  range  of
products has to be gradual.
22.  The  discussion  of  foreign  exchange  market  will  not  be  complete  without  the  issue  of
internalisation  of  the  Rupee. A  currency  is  international  or  a  reserve  currency  when  it  is  held
widely  by  non-residents  and  used  to  settle  international  transactions.  Internationalisation  of  a
currency has certain advantages and disadvantages as well. The main advantage lies in getting
rid of the ‘original sin’ of inability to borrow in one’s own currency which is at the root of currency
crises.  The  disadvantage  comes  from  the  obligation  of  a  country  whose  currency  serves  as
global reserve currency to supply it to meet the global demand which may come to conflict with
its domestic policies. Over the years, global investors have shown increasing interest in Rupee
denominated assets – both equity and debt – traded in on-shore markets. Rupee denominated
bonds,  the  so-called  masala  bonds,  have  also  found  investor  appetite  in  off-shore  markets.
When Rupee assets are widely held by global investors, there will be need for rupee derivatives
to hedge currency, interest rate and credit risks. It is therefore natural that there will be a need for
such markets in offshore financial centres. The challenge that these markets pose is that while
the  on-shore  derivatives  market  is  tightly  regulated,  offshore  markets  are  beyond  regulatory
reach,  which  can  lead  to  domestic  market  being  affected  through  arbitrage  during  turbulent
episodes.  The  regulatory  framework  will  continue  to  strive  to  make  the  on-shore  derivative
markets accessible to all non-residents with a Rupee exposure.
23. Let me now conclude. India is among the world’s fastest growing countries and is the world’s
third largest economy today in PPP terms. It is among the global investors’ preferred destination.
The 
Indian  economy  has  also  shown  remarkable  resilience  against  adverse  global
developments, if not completely decoupled from it. With increasing sustained economic growth
and macro-economic stability, favourable demography and a large market, India is an important
player  in  the  global  economic  arena.  The  sustainability  of  its  global  role  will  depend  on  the
sustainability of the growth momentum and stability. While this would require continuing policy
response to emerging challenges in many spheres, integration with global economy will be an
important factor in sustaining the growth momentum. We have to be alive to the challenges of
both  growth  and  stability  and  steer  the  policy  regime  relating  to  cross  border  transactions  in
tandem with the needs of the economy. Foreign exchange dealers or rather authorised dealers,
in  so  far  as  they  provide  the  primary  interface  with  the  customers  and  give  shape  to  the
developments in the forex market, will continue to play an important role.
24. I am sure your deliberations and discussions will be rich and fruitful. I also wish you happy
vistas of this ancient yet modern city.
1
Maddison, Angus, “The World Economy: Historical Statistics”, 2003
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
