 CALBANK LTD  
OFFICAL OPENING OF NEW HEAD OFFICE BUILDING 
     SPEECH DELIVERED 
BY DR. ERNEST ADDISON 
GOVERNOR, THE BANK OF GHANA 
   May 22, 2019 
 Your Excellency the President of the Republic: Nana Addo 
 Dankwa Akufo-Addo, 
Honourable Ministers, 
The Clergy and Chiefs, 
The Board Chairman and Directors of Calbank, 
Senior Management and staff, 
Distinguished Invited Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
Good Morning, 
 
1. It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today  for  the  official 
launching of this new state-of-the-art head office for CalBank 
Limited,  and  for  the  opportunity  to  make  a  few  remarks  on 
this occasion.  
 2. I  am  delighted  because  this  commissioning  signals  what  a 
local  indigenous  bank  can  achieve  with  commitment  and 
hard work by its dedicated workforce. I have no doubt in my 
mind  that  this  office  space  has  a  cutting  edge  technology 
that  incorporates  accessibility,  safety  and  functionality  for 
both staff and customers. 
 1 
  3. Mr. Chairman, the overall contribution of CalBank Ltd to the 
banking industry in Ghana is not in doubt. It remains one of 
the  domestically  controlled 
flagship  banks  with  strong 
performance in asset growth and profitability. Starting off as 
a  merchant  bank  in  the  1990’s  and  transitioning  to  a 
universal bank in 2004, Calbank has exhibited strong growth 
over  the  years  with  an  increasing  number  of  branches  and 
several ATMs across the country.  
 4. Mr. Chairman, financial services remain crucial in promoting 
economic  growth  and  reducing  poverty.  It  is  in  this  regard 
that  the  Bank  of  Ghana  has  taken  some  tough  decisions  to 
sanitize  the  financial  sector  over  the  past  two  years.  The 
objective is to position the sector as a major growth driver, to 
support  the  much  needed  economic 
transformation  of 
Ghana.  
  2 
5. Mr.  Chairman,  our  banking  system  is  becoming  stronger  by 
 the  day,  as  the  core  Financial  Soundness  Indicators  (FSIs) 
suggest  that  the  soundness  and  stability  of  the  banking 
sector  significantly  improved  in  the  first  quarter  of  2019, 
reflecting  gains  from  the  comprehensive  set  of  reforms 
introduced by the Bank of Ghana in 2017 and 2018.  
 6. The solvency position of the sector improved on the back of 
the  recapitalization  of  the  banking  sector  and  orderly 
resolution  of  distressed  institutions.  As  a  result,  the  capital 
adequacy ratio of the banking sector, which deteriorated into 
the  worst  category  by  June  2017,  significantly  improved  to 
above 20 percent in March 2019. 
 7. The banking system remains profitable with a first quarter of 
2019  strong  after-tax 
income  of  GH¢825.96  million 
compared  with  GH¢601.76  million  for  the  corresponding 
period  of  2018.  This  represents  an  annual  growth  of  37 
percent. 
 3 
8. Liquidity  levels  in  universal  banks  as  at  December  2018 
 through to the first quarter of 2019  were among the highest 
recorded  over  the  past  12  years.  This  can  be  attributed  to 
the  increase  in  cash  and  balances  due  banks.  Similarly, 
results  from  the  liquidity  risk  assessment  indicate  that 
shocks  emanating  from  a  single 
largest  depositor  on 
solvency remain well-contained in the banking industry. 
 9. The  developments  in  the  banking  sector  soundness  index 
also  revealed  an  improvement  in  the  general  stability  and 
soundness  of  the  banking  sector  reflecting  improved  capital 
buffers,  upgrade  in  asset  quality,  and  enhanced  liquidity 
stance.  Also, 
results 
from 
the  Loan  Migration  and 
Contraction  Models  stress  testing  also  suggest  that  the 
banking  system  was  generally  resilient  to  credit  risks. 
Similarly,  results  from  the  exchange  rate  and  interest  rate 
risks  stress  testing  revealed  that  unanticipated  shocks  may 
not  significantly  affect  the  solvency  condition  of  the  entire 
system. 
 4 
  10. 
Overall, the resilience of the banking industry to shocks 
improved  significantly 
in  December  2018 
relative 
to 
December  2017  although  fragilities  exist  at  few  individual 
banks’ level.  
 11. 
These  positive  developments  on  the  banking  sector 
front  should  improve  the  efficiency  in  the  industry  which 
should  ultimately  result  in  declining  interest  rates.  With 
increased  capitalization  of  banks,  and  better  credit  risk 
assessment in the banking system, we expect the pricing of 
credit to reflect these trends. Interest rates and spreads that 
have been slow to adjust should move in line with inflation.  
 12. 
On  this  note,  Mr.  Chairman,  let  me  once  again 
congratulate  the  Board,  Management  and  Staff  of  CalBank 
Limited on the opening of this new Head office building. And 
encourage the management and staff to continue to maintain 
high  standards  of  integrity,  particularly  in  the  area  of  its 
 5 
corporate  governance  to  maintain  public  confidence  in 
 CalBank. 
 Thank you all for the attention. 
 6 
