  An address by Lesetja Kganyago, 
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB), 
at the ninety-ninth annual Ordinary General Meeting 
of the SARB shareholders 
 South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria 
26 July 2019 
 Global economic conditions 
 The past year began with significant challenges for emerging markets, including South 
Africa. In contrast to the synchronised pickup in economic growth of 2017, which had 
surprised  most  observers  by  its  magnitude,  the  major  economies  began  to  display 
divergent growth patterns in 2018. While the United States (US) maintained a strong 
pace  of  growth  amid  a  sizable  fiscal  stimulus  and  a  buoyant  labour  market,  the 
eurozone and Japan lost some momentum. Chinese demand felt the negative impact 
of  earlier  monetary  and  regulatory  tightening.  Growth  in  world  trade  volumes  also 
began to slow, a move that was exacerbated by a flare-up in trade tensions as the US 
slapped tariff increases on certain imports.  
 This  confluence  of  factors,  together  with  negative  current  account  and  price 
developments in countries like Argentina and Turkey, resulted in downward pressure 
on emerging market currencies and fixed-income assets. This move was compounded 
by the appreciation of the US dollar, as investors anticipated a further normalisation of 
US  monetary  policy  and  a  widening  of  interest  rate  differentials  with  other  major 
economies.  By  early  July 2018,  the  South  African  rand  had  depreciated  by  12% 
against the US dollar from its earlier peak of mid-February, a decline that extended to 
25% when the rand reached its trough in September 2018. 
 So what has changed since then?  
 Page - 1 - of 9 
Some  of  the  concerns  about  global  growth  that  prevailed  in  mid-2018  have  proved 
accurate. Business confidence, trade flows and economic activity have continued to 
lose  momentum  in  most  of  the  major  economies.  Now  that  the  impact  of  the  2018 
fiscal stimulus has started to fade, the US is not immune to those trends.  
 The trade tensions that sprang up more than a year ago remain unresolved, despite 
the  June  ‘truce’  between  China  and  the  US  that  prevented  an  immediate  tariff 
escalation. Geopolitical tensions, especially in the Middle East, are adding to a climate 
of uncertainty that weighs on business investment decisions globally. In this month’s 
update  on  the  World  Economic  Outlook,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  is 
projecting global economic growth of 3.2% this year, compared to a forecast of 3.9% 
a year ago. 
 Support for the global economy and financial markets, however, has come in the form 
of a quick ‘change of tack’ by the world’s major central banks, as they shifted from a 
gradual removal of stimulus to indicating renewed easing, at least in the US and the 
eurozone. The lack of inflation pressures provides room for such an approach. In fact, 
core inflation in both the US and the eurozone is currently short of its 2% target, while 
oil prices, amid slowing global demand, are off the highs reached in October 2018.  
 Meanwhile, in China, the authorities have loosened both fiscal and monetary policies 
in an attempt to limit the pace of economic deceleration. Against such a background, 
emerging  market  assets  have  rallied,  and  with  inflation  generally  showing  only  a 
limited  response  to  last  year’s  currency  depreciation  in  several  emerging  countries, 
the  scope  for  their  central  banks  to  provide  at  least  some  accommodation  has 
increased. 
 Domestic economic conditions 
 This less favourable global growth and trade environment has added to South Africa’s 
economic  concerns  at  a  time  when  the  domestic  drivers  of  growth  were  already 
stuttering.  Addressing  this  audience  a  year  ago,  I  highlighted  how  the  rebound  in 
business  optimism  following  changes  in  political  leadership  had  already  started  to 
erode in the second quarter of 2018.  
 Page - 2 - of 9 
 This  erosion  has  unfortunately  continued  over  the  past  12  months.  Both  the  Rand 
Merchant Bank (RMB) / Bureau for Economic Research (BER) survey of businesses 
as well as other indicators, such as the Absa Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) and 
the Sacci Trade Conditions Indicator, are signalling low business confidence amid a 
challenging environment in all sectors. Such low business confidence, coupled with 
uncertainty about future economic growth, has weighed particularly heavily on private 
sector fixed investment, which contracted by 2.5% year on year in the first quarter of 
2019 and, overall, has stagnated over the past half-decade. 
 Weak  private  sector  fixed  investment  has  indeed  been  a  key  cause  of  the 
disappointing  performance  of  South  African  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  growth. 
Much  has  been  said  and  written  about  the  sharp  contraction  in  first-quarter  GDP 
growth – 3.2% on an annualised basis – and whether it was a true reflection of the 
state of the economy. There is no denying that, from quarter to quarter, GDP has been 
quite volatile of late. Indeed, the SARB’s  internal econometric models estimate that 
activity will recoup part of that first-quarter decline in the second quarter of the year.  
 That said, the less volatile year-on-year comparison shows that GDP growth slowed 
to zero in the first quarter of the year, which was the weakest performance in exactly 
three years and one that was indeed consistent with other indicators of activity. And 
while our models envisage an improvement in the remaining quarters of the year, the 
SARB projects GDP growth of only 0.6% in 2019 after 0.8% in 2018. This means that 
in both years, as indeed  in all but one of the past four years, real GDP would  grow 
slower than the population growth rate of 1.6%, thus contracting on a per capita basis. 
 Weak economic growth does not just hinder efforts to reduce poverty and inequality; 
it also weakens public finances. For the current fiscal year, National Treasury projects 
that the consolidated government deficit will rise to 4.5% of GDP and will only decline 
to 4.3% next year. By contrast, in the 2018 Budget, projections were for a deficit of 
only 3.6% of GDP for both fiscal years.  
   Page - 3 - of 9 
 Inflation 
 In a constrained economic environment, it is not unexpected that some voices argue 
that monetary policy could do more to support economic growth. But what exactly is 
the SARB’s margin of manoeuvre, bearing in mind that any policy move must comply 
with our mandate of price and financial stability?  
 Encouragingly,  the  past  year  has  seen  several  favourable  developments  on  the 
inflation  front.  First,  headline  consumer  price  inflation  averaged  4.6%  between 
July 2018 and June 2019, and stood at 4.5% over the past month. Overall, this is a 
more benign pace of increase than the SARB had projected a year ago, even against 
a background of higher oil prices, significant rand depreciation, and a  1 percentage 
point increase in the rate of value-added tax (VAT) in 2018.  
 Second,  the  SARB’s  Quarterly  Projection  Model  (QPM)  now  forecasts  average 
inflation of 5.1% in 2020 and 4.6% in 2021, both well within the target range. In fact, 
our projections for the less volatile core inflation rate are even closer to the midpoint 
of that range.  
 Finally, several measures of inflation expectations, including the quarterly BER survey 
of inflation expectations among analysts, businesses and unions as well as the bond 
market-based metrics, have shown a steady decline  over the past year, after many 
years of remaining uncomfortably close to the top end of the target range. 
 Faced with rising longer-term upside risks to the inflation outlook, the SARB felt that it 
was appropriate to act against such risks, especially in light of policy normalisation in 
advanced  economies  –  which  would  most  likely  imply  a  higher  neutral  real  interest 
rate for a small and open economy like South Africa’s. Hence, in November 2018, the 
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decided to raise the repurchase rate (repo rate) by 
25 basis points, reversing the cut that had been implemented in March of the same 
year. By early 2019 though, inflation performance was more benign than anticipated 
and the risks to the inflation outlook had eased sufficiently  enough for the SARB to 
maintain an unchanged policy stance.  
 Page - 4 - of 9 
 At the time of its latest meeting held on 18 July 2019, the MPC felt comfortable enough 
with the recent downward trend in inflation outcomes, as well as the ongoing decline 
in inflation expectations, to lower the repo rate by 25 basis points. 
 Overall, when looking back at the last few years, it is important to acknowledge  the 
progress that has been made in reducing inflation volatility in South Africa, including 
in response to exchange rate shifts, and how this has allowed for a better anchoring 
of  inflation  expectations  and,  in  turn,  how  this  has  also  limited  the  need  for  sharp 
monetary adjustments. Since 2016, surveyed inflation expectations have declined by 
100 basis points. 
 A more stable and predictable path of interest rates will enhance the environment for 
sustained  economic  growth,  as  the  experience  of  many  advanced  economies  and, 
increasingly, also the emerging economies has shown. The persistence of such gains 
is, however, not certain, meaning that the MPC will continue to exercise vigilance in 
the years ahead.  
 Financial stability 
 With the implementation of the Financial Sector Regulation Act 9 of 2017 (FSR Act) in 
April last year, the SARB was provided with an explicit statutory mandate to protect 
and enhance financial stability. The FSR Act further requires the SARB to monitor and 
keep under review the strengths and weaknesses of the financial system, as well as 
any risks to financial stability. To this end, the SARB has developed frameworks for 
identifying, monitoring and mitigating systemic risks.  
 On  the  whole,  the  SARB  currently  assesses  the  financial  sector  to  be  strong  and 
stable.  Nevertheless,  potential  vulnerabilities  exist,  as  we  have  observed  a  few 
emerging  trends  over  the  past  year,  particularly  in  the  banking  sector. While South 
African banks remain adequately capitalised and profitable, the implementation of the 
new  expected  credit  loss  accounting  standard,  namely  the  International  Financial 
Reporting Standard 9 (IFRS 9), has resulted in a deterioration in the quality of credit 
on bank books. Furthermore, as persistently low domestic economic growth starts to 
 Page - 5 - of 9 
have an increasingly tangible impact on the balance sheets of both households and 
corporates, credit quality may be expected to deteriorate further.  
 During  the  course  of 2018,  the  SARB  undertook  stress  tests  on  six  major banks  to 
assess 
the  resilience  of 
the  banking  sector 
to  hypothetical  yet  extreme 
macroeconomic  shocks.  The  outcome  of  the  2018  common  scenario  stress  test 
exercise suggests that, at an aggregate level, the South African banking sector would 
be able to withstand the possible materialisation of a confluence of the main financial 
stability  risks. With  respect  to  solvency,  the banks  were  assessed to  be  capable of 
maintaining  their  capital  levels  above  the  minimum  capital  adequacy  requirements, 
under the adverse macroeconomic scenarios considered. The SARB also discovered 
that no material risks were emanating from the liquidity positions of the six major South 
African banks. 
 The SARB regularly conducts an assessment of the prevailing financial stability risks. 
These  assessments  are  reported  to  the  Financial  Stability  Committee  (FSC)  and 
published biannually in the Financial Stability Review (FSR). The risks identified since 
the  second  quarter  of  2018,  which  currently  form  part  of  the  SARB’s  assessment, 
include:  
  a deteriorating domestic fiscal position, exacerbated by, among other things, 
weak  domestic  growth,  a  poor  revenue  outlook,  and  the  fragile  financial 
positions of SOEs;  
  spillovers from weaker global economic growth;  
 the  possibility  of  renewed  and  unexpected  tightening  in  global  financial 
conditions and the subsequent potential rapid repricing of risk; and 
 rising  cyber-dependency  and  security  risks  attributed  to  the  ever-increasing 
digital interconnection of people, systems and organisations.  
 The identification and monitoring of financial stability risks, while important, would be 
rendered ineffective if we did not have the necessary tools at our disposal to mitigate 
the occurrence and/or the impact of these risks. Over the past few years, the SARB 
has been actively developing a macroprudential policy framework, complete with tools 
and instruments. This past year, work continued to enhance the framework and the 
financial stability toolkit.  
 Page - 6 - of 9 
 There is a saying about the best-laid plans ‘of mice and men’. Thus, while the SARB 
ultimately aims to mitigate systemic risks, it also needs to plan for potential crises and 
how  to  deal  with  them.  In  this  regard,  the  SARB  has  taken  a  number  of  significant 
steps towards strengthening South Africa’s resolution framework over the past year. 
Two separate but related projects were initiated in this area, namely to implement a 
resolution framework and a deposit insurance scheme.  
 The  resolution  framework,  once  promulgated  into  law,  will  bring  South  Africa’s 
resolution  framework  in  line  with  the  Financial  Stability  Board’s  Key  Attributes  for 
Effective Resolution Regimes. This framework will also formalise the SARB’s role as 
the resolution authority, and will outline the responsibilities with respect to the orderly 
resolution of designated financial institutions.  
 Meanwhile,  the  imminent  establishment  of  the  Corporation  for  Deposit  Insurance 
(CDI),  as  a  subsidiary  of  the  SARB,  will  provide  explicit  guarantees  to  protect 
depositors should a bank ever fail. As a result, not only will depositor confidence in the 
banking system be enhanced; the CDI will also assist government that, in the past, 
may have compensated depositors with taxpayers’ money. 
 Financial sector supervision and regulation 
 As you will recall, the FSR Act lays the foundation and the financial system regulatory 
architecture of the Twin Peaks model. The Twin Peaks regulators, being the Financial 
Sector Conduct Authority (FSCA) and the Prudential Authority (PA), work alongside 
the SARB and other regulatory bodies to ensure the stability of our financial system 
for the well-being of all South Africans. The PA was established on 1 April 2018 and 
has been operating within the administration of the SARB, as prescribed by the FSR 
Act.  
 While  much  of  its  first  year  was  spent  on  refining  and  implementing  the  integrated 
framework for supervision, including assuming responsibility for the insurance industry 
and market infrastructures, the PA also had to complete the resolution of VBS Mutual 
 Page - 7 - of 9 
Bank. On 25 June 2019, the PA released its first Annual Report, which reflects all its 
activities for the 2018/19 financial year.  
 The proposed nationalisation of the South African Reserve Bank 
 The debate about the proposed nationalisation of the SARB continues  in the public 
domain, fuelled by perceptions that private shareholders have control over the central 
bank.  The  SARB  has  clarified,  on  a  number  of  occasions  and  through  various 
communication  channels,  that  its  private  shareholders  participate  as  preference 
shareholders and  do not own  or  control  the  SARB,  nor do they  influence monetary 
policy or any of the other regulatory functions.  
 Let me reiterate what I have repeatedly been saying in the public domain: the Board 
of the SARB focuses on governance issues, while policy and regulatory decisions are 
the preserve of the Governor and Deputy Governors. The South African Reserve Bank 
Act  90  of  1989  (SARB  Act)  provides  for  15 Board  directors,  eight  of  which  are 
appointed by the President, including the Governor and three Deputy Governors. The 
remaining seven directors are elected by shareholders. 
 As shareholders of the SARB, you are fully aware that the SARB Act prescribes that 
no  shareholder  or  their  associates  are  allowed  to  beneficially  hold  more  than 
10 000 shares. A fixed annual dividend of 10c per share is issued if profits are made, 
resulting in the potential total annual dividend payout to shareholders by the SARB 
being limited to R200 000. After setting aside contingencies, reserves, tax and the like, 
90% of any remaining surplus accrues to government. 
 Celebrating 25 years of democracy 
 This year, we marked 25 years of democracy in South Africa through the launch of 
new commemorative circulation and collectable coins under the theme ‘SA25’. This 
series includes six new commemorative circulation coins: five themed R2 coins and a 
themed R5 coin. Through these coins, we celebrate the Constitution, more specifically 
the Bill of Rights, which is considered to be the cornerstone of our democracy.  
  Page - 8 - of 9 
We  picked  this  theme  because,  aside  from  being  the  most  iconic  feature  of  our 
democracy, the Constitution provides for independent institutions, including the SARB. 
It defines our price stability mandate. The inflation-targeting framework aims to ensure 
that  inflation  remains  low  to  preserve  the  purchasing  power  of  households  and  the 
competitiveness of firms. We have endeavoured to ensure that the financial system 
remains safe and that our policies aim to bolster the resilience of the economy. 
 Conclusion 
 As the public debate about the role of central banks continues, the SARB has ensured 
that it continues to execute its mandate in the public interest. In this regard, we have 
endeavoured to be transparent in the execution of our duties, including by providing 
clear reasons for our decisions and clarifying the limitations in our ability to influence 
long-term  economic  growth.  In  all  our  decisions,  we  must  consider  the  trade-offs 
between  short-term  and  long-term  gains.  Anchoring  inflation  expectations,  gaining 
credibility, and building institutional capability are all important elements in enhancing 
the resilience of the South African economy.  
  Thank you. 
   Page - 9 - of 9 
