Stephen  S  Poloz:  Risk  sharing,  flexibility  and  the  future  of
mortgages
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Canadian Credit Union
Association and Winnipeg Chamber of Commerce, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 6 May 2019.
Introduction
 When  people  think  about  the  Bank  of  Canada,  the  first  thing  that  comes  to  mind  is  usually
interest  rates.  But  we  do  have  other  responsibilities,  including  issuing  safe  and  secure  bank
notes—such as the new $10 note, which features Viola Desmond and Winnipeg’s spectacular
Canadian Museum for Human Rights, and which was just named the best new bank note in the
world for 2018.
Another of our core responsibilities is ensuring that Canadians can conduct their affairs in a safe
and efficient financial system. As one of the pillars of that system, Canada’s credit unions share
in this responsibility. By safe, we mean a system that is resilient to risks, and where those risks
are shared in a desirable way. By efficient, we generally mean competitive, and credit unions
bring an important competitive edge to Canada’s financial marketplace.
The forces of competition drive pricing for financial services, but they also drive consumer choice
in  financial  services.  More  choice  means  more  flexibility  and  a  greater  ability  to  adjust  when
conditions change. This concept of flexibility is very important to the functioning of our economy,
and therefore important to us at the Bank of Canada.
The most important financial decision most Canadians make is the decision to purchase a home
and to take out a mortgage in order to do so. After you sign on the dotted line, circumstances can
change, posing risks for borrowers, for lenders and for the financial system as a whole. Financial
flexibility and optimal risk sharing can help people adapt to changes in their circumstances and
help  the  overall  economy  adjust  to  shocks.  Recent  changes  to  our  mortgage  system  have
brought these issues to the fore in public debate.
In  my  time  with  you  today,  I  want  to  talk  about  how  Canada’s  housing  markets  have  been
adjusting to economic forces and recent administrative changes. I will then speculate on how our
mortgage  market  could  evolve  to  offer  more  choice  for  Canadians,  more  flexibility  for  the
economy and less risk overall.
Recent developments in housing
We do not have a single housing market in Canada; rather, we have several regional markets.
Each has certain national forces in common—such as changes to mortgage lending guidelines
and past increases in interest rates—but each also has unique local influences on supply and
demand, including provincial and municipal housing policies.
For the past four years we have been following three different housing stories here in Canada. In
Alberta and Saskatchewan, we have seen a significant slowdown in housing coupled with falling
prices, as the economy works through adjustments to lower oil prices. In sharp contrast, we saw
housing booms in Toronto and Vancouver, both of which were experiencing strong population
and  employment  growth  and  supply  constraints  on  new  housing.  Low  interest  rates  were  of
course supporting strong housing demand. Rising house prices fuelled even stronger demand,
as  first-time  homebuyers  feared  missing  out.  Foreign  buyers  were  attracted  to  both  markets,
adding more fuel. All this helped create extrapolative expectations that prices would keep rising
rapidly,  a  situation  that  was  clearly  not  sustainable.  The  third  housing  story—taking  place
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
everywhere  else—attracted  little  attention  because  it  basically  looked  normal,  driven  by  solid
employment growth and historically low interest rates.  
Since early 2016, policy-makers in Ontario and British Columbia have implemented a series of
provincial  and  municipal  policies  to  discourage  foreign  buying  and  speculative  activity.  Policy-
makers at the federal level—including the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions
(OSFI)—expanded the use of interest rate stress tests on mortgages in both 2016 and 2018.
And, with the economy growing strongly, the Bank of Canada began raising interest rates to keep
inflation  on  target.  In  the  wake  of  all  these  developments,  housing  resale  activity  has  fallen
sharply in Vancouver and Toronto.
Last month, the Bank published staff research that attempts to untangle the factors behind the
huge run-up and subsequent drop in housing activity. It is important to do this because we need
to  understand  well  the  sensitivity  of  the  economy  to  higher  interest  rates.  We  believe  that
sensitivity has gone up because of the debt loads people are carrying.
Our research shows that the big rise and fall in housing resale activity in British Columbia and
Ontario can mostly be explained by shifts in house price expectations. When house prices are
rising rapidly, people tend to extrapolate that experience and buy houses early to avoid further
price increases, or to profit from them if they are speculators. In other words, markets become
frothy. However, when those price expectations are revised down, demand for houses can cool
suddenly. And this is what has happened. The trigger could be anything, including new taxes on
foreign  buyers,  stricter  mortgage  guidelines,  rising  interest  rates,  or  simply  that  rising  prices
create an affordability roadblock for more and more people.
What we take from this is that it is not higher interest rates and changes to mortgage lending
guidelines that have had the greatest effect on housing demand. Rather, it is their interaction with
froth that matters most. How much a housing market adjusts depends on how much froth there
is. Supporting this conclusion is the fact that many other markets across the country look quite
healthy.  Resale  activity  has  been  solid  in  places  as  diverse  as  Halifax,  Moncton,  Montréal,
Ottawa and, more recently, right here in Winnipeg. This is what we would expect in an economy
that is growing, with a rising population and strong labour market, and when interest rates remain
very low by historical standards.
Meanwhile,  housing  markets  continue  to  struggle  in  Alberta  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,
Saskatchewan.  The  primary  cause  appears  to  be  the  ongoing  process  of  adjustment  to  the
2014–15 oil price shock, as well as the renewed weakness we saw late last year. Before 2014,
people and businesses were making long-range plans based on continued high oil prices. A lot
has changed since then. Most importantly, US oil production has expanded dramatically, causing
many  to  revise  downward  their  long-term  expectations  for  world  oil  prices.  Companies  have
reduced their investment budgets and worked to reduce their costs. Ultimately, the adjustments
are seen in areas that have real consequences for people, such as layoffs, lower wages and
lower house prices.
I  do  not  mean  to  suggest  that  the  new  mortgage  guidelines  have  had  no  effect  on  housing
markets, for they certainly have. The purpose of these changes was to increase the resilience of
our financial system in the face of an extremely high debt load. The stress test is designed to
ensure that new borrowers can still handle their mortgage payments even if their circumstances
change, such as a decline in income or a modest increase in interest rates.
Evidence suggests that the new guidelines have been working as designed. The quality of new
loans continues to improve, and fewer mortgages are going to highly indebted buyers. From the
house  buyer’s  perspective,  the  guidelines  look  like  a  cut  in  purchasing  power.  But  many  are
adapting  by  buying  less  expensive  housing  or  delaying  their  purchase  until  they  have  built  up
more savings. To the extent that the new guidelines have helped stop the speculative rises in
house prices in Vancouver and Toronto, they presumably have also worked to help keep houses
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
from becoming even less affordable.  
We conclude from all this that the fundamentals of the Canadian housing market remain solid,
and growth will resume once the effects of reduced expectations for house price inflation and the
new mortgage guidelines have been absorbed. Bank staff have also been monitoring the impact
of the new mortgage guidelines and higher interest rates on cash flow as households renew their
loans. From our initial look at individual loan-level data in 2019, we see that mortgage payments
did not rise for most borrowers who recently renewed a five-year, fixed-rate mortgage. Despite
increases  in  our  policy  interest  rate,  bond  yields  and  mortgage  rates  have  declined  this  year
along with global interest rates.
The Bank will present its complete analysis of housing and other issues in our next Financial
System Review, which will be out in a couple of weeks. We will also post information on our
Financial  System  Hub—a  section  of  our  website  featuring  the  latest  analysis  of  key  financial
issues.
Toward a more flexible mortgage market
Given  how  different  the  various  regional  housing  markets  can  be,  it  is  worth  looking  to  see
whether  Canada’s  mortgage  market  could  become  more  flexible,  giving  people  more  choices
and increasing the economy’s ability to adjust.
Canadian homeowners and financial institutions have been well-served by our mortgage market.
But it is still important to think about ways to innovate and make a good system better so that
borrowers and lenders can make choices that better suit their circumstances.
Of course, there have been innovations in Canada’s mortgage market over the years. Mortgage
brokers have appeared on the scene. Financial institutions are doing more business online and
reducing the time between application and approval. And mortgages combined with home equity
lines of credit, or HELOCs, have become popular. These give Canadians ready access to the
equity they have built in their homes, helping people make major purchases and smooth their
consumption over time.
Still, there has been significantly less innovation in terms of the actual mortgage product itself.
We could look at ways to develop a more flexible mortgage market that gives more choice to
customers, lenders and investors, while making the market safer and more efficient.
Diversify mortgage durations
One basic idea would be to encourage more diversity in mortgage durations. It is true that most
financial  institutions  offer  fixed-rate  mortgages  longer  than  five  years.  But  45  per  cent  of  all
mortgage loans have a fixed interest rate and a five-year term. In comparison, just 2 per cent of
all mortgages issued last year were fixed-rate loans with a term longer than five years.
There  are  historical  reasons  why  the  five-year  fixed-rate  mortgage  has  been  so  dominant  in
Canada. These include legislation from the 1800s that gives borrowers the right to prepay loans
after five years without penalty. This provision means that lenders will charge more for longer
loans to guard against the risk of a loan being paid back early. And the trend toward five-year
loans was reinforced by the Canada Mortgage Bond (CMB) program, which mainly provides five-
year funding for financial institutions.
Still, there are compelling reasons why it would be helpful to make more use of longer-duration
mortgages. From the consumer point of view, a longer term means they face the risk of having to
renew at higher interest rates less often—the longer the term, the fewer renewals take place over
the life of the mortgage. Of course, a longer-term mortgage will carry a higher interest rate, but
some homebuyers may be willing to pay more to lower their risk. And a longer-term mortgage
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
might not be much more expensive in the long run depending on the details of the loan and the
prepayment penalties that apply. At a minimum, we could do more to make people aware of the
longer-term  options  that  are  available—many  people  I  talk  to  do  not  know  that  longer-term
mortgages exist.
As a policy-maker, I see how longer-term mortgages can contribute to a safer financial system
and more stable economy. Simple math tells you that of all those five-year mortgages, roughly 20
per cent will be renewed every year. That is a lot of households. If all the mortgages were 10-year
loans, only 10 per cent of these homeowners would renew every year.
Another  point  with  longer-term  mortgages  is  that  more  equity  is  built  up  by  the  homeowner
between renewals. This equity position gives the borrower more options at renewal. Therefore,
the  longer  the  original  mortgage  term,  the  less  relevant  a  mortgage  interest  rate  stress  test
becomes.  In  other  words,  longer-term  mortgages  shift  the  risks  shared  by  the  lender,  the
borrower and the system as a whole. All of these dimensions are worth further study.
Develop a private market for mortgage-backed securities
One  obstacle  to  financial  institutions  offering  longer-term  mortgages  relates  to  their  funding
costs.  The  textbook  example  of  funding  is  a  bank  that  takes  in  deposits  from  customers  and
turns them into mortgages and other loans. The reality is more complicated. Many institutions
seek out wholesale deposits  in  addition  to  their  regular  retail  consumer  deposits.  The  biggest
banks also get funding by issuing bonds. And, since 1987, Canadian institutions have had the
ability to issue government-supported mortgage-backed securities (MBS).
A mortgage-backed security lets institutions package mortgages they have made and sell them
to other investors. The investors receive the income from the mortgage payments. The proceeds
of the sale become funding that the original institution can use to write more mortgages, or for
other purposes. This process is basically invisible to homeowners—they keep making mortgage
payments as before. 
Current rules say that only insured mortgages can be used in government-supported MBS. Since
2001,  the  Canada  Housing  Trust—which  was  set  up  by  Canada  Mortgage  and  Housing
Corporation (CMHC)—has been buying insured mortgages from institutions to use in the Canada
Mortgage  Bonds  that  I  mentioned  a  moment  ago.  CMBs  have  been  highly  successful—more
than $230 billion worth of CMBs are outstanding, equal to about 15 per cent of total mortgage
debt.
With CMBs and other forms of government support for mortgage financing, the cost for funding
insured  mortgages  is  quite  low.  This  has  lowered  mortgage  rates  for  consumers.  However,
funding for uninsured mortgages, particularly at smaller banks and mortgage finance companies,
is comparatively expensive. It is true that since 2007, Canadian institutions have been able to
fund uninsured mortgages by issuing covered bonds. But it can be difficult for smaller institutions
to do so because they do not have the same economies of scale as the  big  banks.  What  is
more, OSFI has capped the percentage of covered bonds that any single institution can have
among its assets.
So, it could be helpful for both lenders and borrowers for Canada to develop a private market for
mortgage-backed  securities.  This  could  be  a  more  flexible  source  of  longer-term  funding  for
uninsured mortgages, particularly those issued by smaller banks, credit unions and mortgage-
finance  companies.  This  is  an  increasingly  important  point  because  the  market  share  for
uninsured mortgages is increasing, and they cannot be used in CMBs.
Further, CMBs are mostly issued as five-year bonds, matching the dominant five-year mortgage
term.  If  we  develop  more  diversity  in  mortgage  duration,  lenders  will  want  different  types  of
funding to help match that. Private MBS could help in this regard.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Finally,  private  MBS  could  become  another  option  for  investors.  Such  investors  include  large
institutions like pension funds and insurance companies that need long-term assets to match
their  liabilities.  They  also  include  mutual  funds  and,  perhaps,  regular  individuals  looking  for  a
fixed-income investment that pays more than a regular guaranteed investment certificate.
There is some momentum  in  Canada  toward  developing  a  private  MBS  market.  However,  for
these securities to be successful investments, they must be designed carefully. After all, many
people remember that mortgage-backed securities were at the heart of the sub-prime debacle
that preceded the global financial crisis over a decade ago.
A private MBS market in Canada would need to be transparent to give investors more confidence
about the quality of mortgages they are investing in. This would allow investors to accept a lower
yield, reducing the price difference with regular CMBs. One way to ensure transparency is to
develop  a  public  database  of  mortgages  used  in  securitization.  Ideally,  this  database  would
include general characteristics about the borrower, property and loan, and data on how the loan
has  performed  over  time.  An  anonymized  database  would  also  preserve  the  privacy  of  the
mortgage holder.
It is worth pointing out that other jurisdictions, including the European Union, the United Kingdom
and Australia, already have this type of arrangement in place or are working toward it. We hope
that all financial institutions in Canada, from the Big Six banks to the smallest credit union, will
co-operate here. After all, such a database could benefit all institutions, not just those that might
issue MBS. If institutions can use the information to show how solid their mortgages are, they
could lower their funding costs, no matter how they obtain their funding.
New mortgage designs?
The last idea I want to discuss is the design of the mortgage itself. In its most recent budget, the
federal government announced the creation of a shared equity mortgage, to be administered by
CMHC. The final details will be put in place later this year. This proposal is intended mainly to
address housing affordability for first-time homebuyers by giving them an interest-free loan to add
to their down payment. The plan will also promote increased housing supply.
Another interesting aspect of the plan is that it should help improve the resilience of the financial
system and improve the economy’s ability to adjust to shocks. Although there are many possible
variants, this type of mortgage has been analyzed in some depth by two US economists, Atif
Mian and Amir Sufi.
Basically, the idea is a rewrite of how the risks around a mortgage are shared between borrower
and lender. Because the mortgage is shared, like equity in a company, the risks are shared. Of
course,  a  shared  equity  mortgage  does  not  make  risk  go  away.  The  important  point  is  that
lenders are better placed than borrowers to carry risk because they can diversify risks across
many borrowers. Borrowers are willing to pay to reduce risk, either through a higher interest rate
or  through  sharing  their  capital  gains  or  losses  with  their  lender.  In  Canada’s  case,  with  our
strong standards for mortgage underwriting, the net result of such a reallocation of risk would
likely be a safer financial system.
Of course, there are many other possible variations on mortgage design, so many that it makes
me wonder why so little has happened in our mortgage market in my lifetime. I hope that some of
the innovative spirit that credit unions have shown in the past will be applied to the mortgage
market in the future. After all, one of the founding principles of credit unions is the concept of risk
sharing.
Conclusion
It is time for me to conclude.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Bank of Canada’s mandate is to encourage a safe and efficient financial system—one that
evolves to foster resilience, promote flexibility and allow people to make choices that are right for
them.
Housing and mortgages are the heart of our system. The Bank of Canada is continuing to watch
closely how housing markets are adjusting to the combination of recent provincial and municipal
housing  policy  changes,  the  revised  guidelines  for  mortgage  lending  and  past  increases  in
interest  rates.  Some  previously  frothy  markets  are  still  adjusting  to  a  significant  shift  in  price
expectations, while other markets  appear  to  be  operating  in  a  manner  consistent  with  market
fundamentals. As  markets  stabilize  in  Toronto  and  Vancouver,  the  Canadian  housing  sector
should return to growth overall later this year.
The regional nature of our housing market highlights that all of us should be looking at ways to
improve the safety and efficiency of our mortgage market. More choice for borrowers and more
ways for lenders to diversify risks are desirable. To be clear, the system is not broken—it has
served  Canadians  and  financial  institutions  well.  But  we  should  not  stop  looking  for
improvements. And I invite all of you to join this effort.
I would like to thank Ron Morrow, Jason Allen, Brian Peterson, Adi Mordel and Nigel Stephens for
their help in preparing this speech.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
