Yandraduth Googoolye: How African countries can play an active
role in the Belt and Road Initiative
Remarks  by  Mr  Yandraduth  Googoolye,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  Financial
Connectivity Thematic Forum on "How African countries can play an active role in the Belt and
Road Initiative", Beijing, 25 April 2019.
Excellencies
 Good  Morning  and  Thank  You  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  address  such  an  eminent
audience.  
Last October, at the official opening of the Belt and Road International Financial Exchange and
Cooperation Seminar organised by the Bank of China, I had stressed on Africa’s eagerness to be
part of China’s vision to enhance cooperation and connectivity among countries that will be part
of the Belt and Road Initiative.
Africa is endowed with considerable human capital, millions of acres of arable land and a myriad
of  natural  resources.  Therefore,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  combination  of  China’s  capital,
technology, market, enterprises, talents and experiences and Africa’s abundant resources, huge
demographic dividend and great market potential should create economic wonders.
Testimony to Africa’s willingness to support the Belt and Road initiative is member states of the
African  Union  endorsement  of  “Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want”,  a  roadmap  for  structural
economic transformation over a fifty-year time scale.
Whilst the Initiative will undoubtedly enable a smooth flow of goods and services against efficient
mechanisms of payment flows, Africa must also see to it that adequate and timely resources are
geared towards the modernization of financial market infrastructures as well as to the opening
and promotion of free trade areas. These will be instrumental in supporting the expansion of the
trade corridor between China and Africa and in upholding cross-border e-commerce.
Ladies and gentlemen, a key target of the Initiative rests on financial integration and cooperation.
Besides  enhancing  financial  regulation  cooperation,  it  will  increase  the  scope  and  scale  of
bilateral currency swaps and settlements as well as the issuance of bonds in Chinese Yuan. It is,
therefore,  to  the  advantage  of  countries  across  Africa  to  encourage  commercial  equity
investment  funds  and  private  funds  to  participate  fully  in  the  construction  of  key  projects
stemming from the Belt and Road Initiative.
The Initiative will also push forth an additional currency of choice and set the RMB among the
reserve currencies for African countries. A currency that can be used, not only for trade between
Africa and China, but also for intra-African commercial flows.
African central banks and other regulatory entities must fully embrace the crucial role they will be
called  upon  to  play. African  monetary  policymakers  will  in  effect  be  required  to  come  up  with
strong frameworks that will build sufficient macroeconomic and institutional capacity to absorb
investment flows, tap benefits and manage associated risks.
Another key area of focus for African countries is the payment infrastructure. Indeed, while most
countries are upgrading their payment infrastructures, the African payment landscape remains
fragmented into regional blocks such as the COMESA, SADC and Western and Central African
States’ monetary unions. Though some initiatives are underway at the level of the Association of
African Central Bank for the setup of a fully integrated African payment system, I believe that this
initiative  needs  to  be  encouraged.  African  countries  equally  need  to  consider  whether  the
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
adoption of a federal approach to an integrated payment system can be a boost.
Financial Technology is another key area if Africa ambitions for an innovative financial industry as
well  as  an  inclusive  development.  Infrastructure  expansion  is  a  priority  for  effectively  linking
countries across the continent so that they are poised to tap the opportunities offered by the Belt
and Road Initiative. In that regard, our sister countries must urgently focus on the development of
appropriate land, sea and air transport logistics and framework. This will contribute to bringing
down the obstacles that stand on the path of the economic evolution of the continent.
Before concluding, let me quote a Chinese proverb that I deem fitting. I quote: “One bee cannot
produce honey; one grain of rice cannot produce a meal”. Unquote.
Ladies and gentlemen, if the common goal is the overall development of our respective nations,
then  the  only  way  forward  is  for  us  all  to  join  hands  in  furtherance  of  friendship,  unity  and
progress for our people.
I thank you for your attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
