John C Williams: Living life near the ZLB
Remarks by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  2019  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Central  Bank  Research  Association
(CEBRA), New York City, 18 July 2019.
As prepared for delivery
Accompanying slides of the speech.
 My  wife  is  a  professor  of  nursing,  and  she  says  one  of  the  best  things  you  can  do  for  your
children is to get them vaccinated. It’s better to deal with the short-term pain of a shot than to
take the risk that they’ll contract a disease later on.
I think about monetary policy near the zero lower bound—or ZLB for short—in much the same
way. It’s better to take preventative measures than to wait for disaster to unfold.
Today I’m going to talk about three things: first, the heightened relevance of the ZLB for monetary
policy;  second,  the  strategies  designed  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  the  ZLB  in  an  economic
downturn; and finally, why these strategies are so important for achieving our monetary policy
goals.
I’ve already referred to monetary policy several times. So, before I go any further, I need to give
the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily
reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or others in the Federal Reserve System.
The Global Economic Context
Over the past quarter century, a great deal of research has gone into understanding the causes
and  consequences  of  the  zero  lower  bound.   The  achievement  of  low  inflation  in  the  United
States—which, all else equal, implied lower interest rates—coupled with Japan’s long period of
deflation and near-zero interest rates, reignited concern about the ZLB back in the 1990s. And
the experience of the global financial crisis and its aftermath—with many advanced economies
facing,  or  in  some  cases,  crossing  the  zero  lower  bound—has  moved  this  from  a  mostly
theoretical exercise to a very practical one.
1
An added impetus to this research has been the growing evidence that the neutral rate of interest
rate has fallen significantly. I, working with various coauthors, have devoted a significant chunk of
my academic career to studying r-star, or the long-run neutral rate of interest, and its implications
for monetary policy.
Our current estimates of r-star in the United States are around half a percent. That’s actually now
lower  than  at  any  time  before  the  Great  Recession.   We’ve  seen  similar  declines  in  r-star  in
other advanced economies, including in Japan and the euro area.
2
As  shown  in Figure 1, the weighted average of estimates of r-star for Canada, the euro area,
Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States is now also half a percent, nearly 2 percentage
points below where it stood at the turn of this century.
These very low neutral rates are a result of long-term structural factors slowing growth. They’re
driven by demographic changes and slow productivity growth, which are unlikely to reverse any
time soon.
Low r-star implies that many central banks will be grappling with the challenges of life near the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
ZLB, which is why it’s so critical to consider how the ZLB alters strategies related to monetary
policy.
Monetary Policy Near the ZLB
And that’s exactly the question we looked at around 20 years ago. In a paper and subsequent
FOMC briefing in January 2002, my colleague Dave Reifschneider and I evaluated the effects of
the ZLB on the macro economy and examined alternative monetary policy strategies to mitigate
3
the effects of the ZLB.
This  work  highlighted  a  number  of  conclusions  based  on  model  simulations.   In  particular,
monetary policy can mitigate the effects of the ZLB in several ways:
4
The first: don’t keep your powder dry—that is, move more quickly to add monetary stimulus than
you otherwise might. When the ZLB is nowhere in view, one can afford to move slowly and take a
“wait  and  see”  approach  to  gain  additional  clarity  about  potentially  adverse  economic
developments. But not when interest rates are in the vicinity of the ZLB. In that case, you want to
do the opposite, and vaccinate against further ills. When you only have so much stimulus at your
disposal, it pays to act quickly to lower rates at the first sign of economic distress.
This brings me to my second conclusion, which is to keep interest rates lower for longer. The
expectation of lower interest rates in the future lowers yields on bonds and thereby fosters more
favorable  financial  conditions  overall.  This  will  allow  the  stimulus  to  pick  up  steam,  support
economic growth over the medium term, and allow inflation to rise.
These  first  two  conclusions  featured  in  my  paper  with  Dave  Reifschneider  from  2000.  In  that
paper,  these  ideas  were  described  as  modifications  of  an  otherwise  standard  Taylor  rule  for
monetary policy. The “forward-looking adjustment” to the Taylor rule illustrated the idea of moving
in  advance  of  a  downturn  to  provide  timely  stimulus.  The  “backward-looking  adjustment”
illustrated the idea of keeping interest rates lower for longer.
Finally,  policies  that  promise  temporarily  higher  inflation  following  ZLB  episodes  can  help
generate  a  faster  recovery  and  better  sustain  price  stability  over  the  longer  run.   In  model
simulations, these “make-up” strategies can mitigate nearly all of the adverse effects of the ZLB.
5
One particular benefit is that such strategies can be highly effective at keeping inflation near the
target on average, thereby anchoring inflation expectations at the desired level.
The Gravitational Pull of the ZLB
But why are these measures so important close to the ZLB?
The Fed has two goals: maximum employment and price stability. Our goal for prices—as I’m
sure you’re aware—is two percent. The short answer is, in order to achieve our goals.
The long answer centers on inflation and inflation expectations. I’m going to give you the long
answer!
In the last decade it’s proven particularly challenging to keep inflation at our two percent goal.
Japan and the euro area have faced similar challenges in terms of sustaining inflation at their
goals.
One reason it’s been hard to sustain inflation at the target rate is that persistently low inflation due
to policy being constrained by the ZLB can feed into inflation expectations. If inflation gets stuck
too low—below the 2 percent goal—people may start to expect it to stay that way, creating a
feedback loop, pushing inflation further down over the longer term.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The lower average level of inflation translates into a lower level of interest rates cuts available
6
during a downturn, making it even harder for policymakers to achieve their goals.
In 1980, when core PCE inflation reached a peak of 10 percent, it was hard to conceive of a
world where inflation that’s too low would be the preoccupation of central banks.
But the 10 years since the Great Recession demonstrate just how much low r-star has changed
the  economic  environment.  Unprecedented  monetary  stimulus  in  advanced  economies
supported economic recoveries and significant declines in unemployment, with unemployment
7
  Bold  monetary
rates today near, or in many cases well below, those seen before the crisis.
policy  actions  surely  played  an  important  role  in  averting  far  greater  catastrophes  and  aided
economic recovery.
Despite these actions and this success at bringing unemployment to low levels, inflation rates
have persistently been below central banks’ goals. The fact that inflation has been running below
target in most advanced countries suggests that this challenge is not due to factors specific to a
single  country.  Instead,  there  are  more  systemic  factors  at  play,  with  the  root  cause  being  a
combination of low neutral interest rates and the lower bound on interest rates.
Investors are increasingly viewing these low inflation readings not as an aberration, but rather a
new normal. This is evidenced by a broad-based decline in market-based measures of longer-
run inflation expectations since the mid-2000s, with the UK providing the exception, as shown in
Table 1.
This downward slippage of longer-run inflation expectations, if it persists, implies that in the future
central  banks  start  further  from  their  inflation  goals  and  have  even  less  room  to  maneuver,
making the problem of low r-star and the ZLB even more difficult.
Conclusion
The ZLB has been a topic of study for nearly two decades. But recent history and the outlook for
the longer-term future, make it more relevant than ever.
Low  inflation  expectations,  very  low  r-star,  and  slower  growth  all  point  to  a  challenging  world
where  policymakers  need  to  make  the  best  use  of  the  tools  at  their  disposal  to  achieve  their
goals of strong economies and price stability.
The key lessons from this research hold today and in the future. First, take swift action when
faced with adverse economic conditions. Second, keep interest rates lower for longer. And third,
adapt monetary policy strategies to succeed in the context of low r-star and the ZLB.
These  actions,  taken  together,  should  vaccinate  the  economy  and  protect  it  from  the  more
insidious disease of too low inflation.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
John C. Williams, The Research-Policy Nexus: ZLB, JMCB and FOMC, Remarks at the Conference Celebrating
the 50th Anniversary of the Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, New York (May 31, 2019).
John C. Williams, The Economic Outlook: The ‘New Normal’ is Now, Remarks at The Economic Club of New
York, New York (March 6, 2019).
David Reifschneider and John C. Williams, Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era, Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, Volume 32, Issue 4, pp. 936–66, November 2000.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FOMC Briefing. January 2002.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
6
7
This discussion abstracts from balance sheet policies such as quantitative easing, which can make financial
conditions even more favorable to growth. See, for example, Ben S. Bernanke, Vincent R. Reinhart, and Brian P.
Sack, Monetary Policy Alternatives at the Zero Bound: An Empirical Assessment, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, The Brookings Institution, Volume 35, No. 2, pp. 1–100, 2004.
Thomas M. Mertens and John C. Williams, What to Expect from the Lower Bound on Interest Rates: Evidence
from Derivatives Prices, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report No. 865, August 2018.
John C. Williams, When the Facts Change..., Remarks at the 9th High-Level Conference on the International
Monetary System, Zürich, Switzerland (May 14, 2019).
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
