 Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Opening remarks by Frank Elderson at the NGFS 
Conference 
Paris, 17 April 2019 
   
 
At the C onference of the Network for Greening the Financial System, the network presented its first 
NGFS comprehensive report. In it, the Network issued six recommendations. The first four apply to the 
work of central banks and supervisors, while the last two are for policymakers . In his opening speech 
at the conference, Frank Elderson outlined why  central bankers and supervisors have joined the 
Network. Elderson describes why they engage in greening the financial system, what the Network aims 
at and what steps are already taken during the year and a half that the Network exists. 
  1 
 
 Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap. 
In 1163 the first stone was laid of what later became the very heart of Paris. Two hundred years of 
countless hands, building, carving, constructing together. A marvelous monument. A tribute to what 
humanity can achieve. When working together, with a commonly held belief in a shared objective. The 
day before yesterday the Notre Dame - so much Notre Dame burned. And all our hearts burned with 
her. What was lost was a beautiful cathedral. What was lost was a jewel in the crown of the World’s 
Heritage. What was lost was a symbol of peace and worship. 
 
But what was not lost, is our sense of common destiny. What was not lost is our acute awareness of 
what we, humanity can achieve, when working together, with a common held belief in a shared 
objective. In December 2017 the first stone was laid of what later became the NGFS. One and a half 
years, countless hands, building, carving, constructing together. A marvelous coalition of the willing. A 
tribute to what central banks and supervisors can achieve, when working together, with a commonly 
held belief in a shared objective. 
 
It’s a therefore only appropriate that we are here in Paris.  
 
Paris, where the seed for this initiative was first planted back in 2015, at the Paris C limate Agreement. 
Paris, where the seed sprouted a couple of years later, at the One Planet Summit. I am happy to say 
that the Network for Greening the Financial System has now firmly taken root. It is growing at an 
impressive rate, with shoots popping up all over the pla net. Only yesterday two new members and an 
observer joined us. A warm welcome to The Swiss National Bank, Swiss supervisory authority and the 
European Investment Bank. Today, the NGFS has thirty six members and six observers. Our 
membership spans five continents. One planet.  
 
But before I discuss what we have achieved and what we want to go on to achieve… Let’s ask 
ourselves a question: Why is being here today so important? 
 
 
I: Why it is important?  
 
Emissions have increased since the pre-industrial era, driven largely by economic and population 
growth. This has led to increased concentrations of greenhouse gases, at higher levels in our 
atmosphere than at any time in the last 800,000 years. Temperatures are already at least 1°C above 
pre-industrial levels. In 2017, air pollution caused the deaths of almost 5 million people. In 2018, 62 
million people felt the impact of extreme weather events. Over 2 million people were displaced.  
 
The Arctic is warming up almost three times as fast as the rest of the planet. And as the ice melts, it 
will cause the sea level to rise. This will undoubtedly have an effect on where and how we live. With 
rising temperatures comes a decline in biodiversity, water scarcity, and mass migration as land 
becomes uninhabitable. Problems of poverty and inequality will become even worse. The domino effect 
of climate events will add to the already formidable challenge of rising temperatures. 
 
A transition to a low-carbon, green economy is not a niche. It’s not an optional extra for the privileged 
few. C limate change affects us all. It reaches beyond economies, borders, cultures and languages.  
 
When the world we live in is changing at such an alarming rate, who can afford to sit back?  
That’s why we need to come together and take action. To create a sustainable future. And that is 
exactly what we are doing with the NGFS.  
 
 
II: How & why Finance is involved 
 
Since the publication of the NGFS progress report last October, it’s no longer a question of asking why 
we must get involved. Climate-related risks are a source of financial risk. That is why it falls squarely 
within the mandates of central banks and supervisors to ensure the financial system can withstand 
these risks. Our mandate doesn’t restrain us. On the contrary, it forces us take a lead in addressing 
climate change. 
 
Next to managing risks, investment needs to be channeled in the right direction. To achieve the EU’s 
2030 goals of the Paris Climate agreement, including a 40% cut in greenhouse gas emissions, we need 
to bridge an investment gap of 180 billion EUR per year. This is both possible and necessary.  Because 
2 
 
 Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap. 
failing to make these investments now is just postponing the inevitable. It means we will have to 
invest even more by 2020, in order to mitigate the same or even worse effects. When faced with such 
an imminent threat, inaction is reckless. It will ultimately lead to much higher costs.  
 
 
III: Opportunities 
 
I know I may have set alarm bells ringing with this call to action, but it’s not all doom and gloom. The 
transition to a low carbon economy presents a myriad of opportunities. Opportunities for every one of 
us. Green investments for instance, offer direct advantages for the economy as a whole: more jobs 
and more scientific and technological developments. Scaling up the use of sustainable energy and 
other innovations. As well as more efficient use of our common resources. This will co ntribute to a 
more circular and sustainable economy. 
 
 
IV: On our way  
 
The NGFS offers us a platform to address these issues and take action. It is a way of taking us from 
where we are now, to where we need to be. A greener, more sustainable financial system must be our 
destination.  
 
NGFS membership has grown exponentially in under one and a half years. All continents are 
represented, a clear sign that not only climate change, but also climate change action reaches beyond 
borders, cultures, and languages. 
 
In our first NGFS comprehensive report published today, we issued six recommendations. The first four 
apply to the work of central banks and supervisors, while the last two are for policymakers. However, 
all six call for collective action and focus on integrating and implementing previously identified needs 
and best practices. Together, these recommendations aim to ensure that central banks, supervisors, 
and policymakers are able to support the financial system, in playing its role in a smooth transition 
towards a low carbon economy.  
 
I expect that implementing these recommendations, sharing experiences, and developing practical 
guidelines could create significant impact.They connect and multiply the convening power of each 
individual central bank and supervisor. Together, NGFS members supervise 2/3 of global systemically 
important banks and insurers. Financial markets that fall within the NGFS members’ jurisdictions 
represent 45% of global greenhouse gas emissions.  
 
Yet, we still have a long way to go. The challenge we face is an analytically difficult one, and it is 
unprecedented. I am sure I have left you in no doubt as to its urgency. So the benefits of us working 
together to share experience and build practical guidance are monumental.  
 
We have now reached the point that we need to move. Move from bold statements to boring but 
crucial details. From sweeping visionary speeches to the nuts and bolts of the technical eng ine rooms 
of central banking and prudential supervision. When we’re knee deep in the weeds with these details, 
we could easily be distracted from our ultimate destination. We can easily become preoccupied by the 
bushes we cut away, the path we’re finding, the progress we make. But we should never take our eyes 
off our ultimate destination. It’s not a question of being satisfied with taking a few steps forward. No. 
We need to actually get to where we want to go. Getting to Paris. On time. That’s where we wan t to 
be.  
 
This means a lot of work from you. The hard core technical part has started. The part where the 
economists and econometrists deliver. Although you may be experts in the economy rather than 
ecology, your expertise is equally valuable in both fields. I assure you. 
 
Yet climate change is not the only challenge we face. The world will need fresh water. A decline in 
biodiversity could limit the operations of businesses in a specific region. These risks too, could affect 
financial institutions. I am pleased to see that these other environmental risks are also appearing on 
our radar. 
 
3 
 
 Fout! Onbekende naam voor documenteigenschap. 
The next step we need to take, and soon, is to dedicate more resources to environmental risks and 
how they have impact on our work. A lot still needs to be done. I hope today will inspire you to be 
bold, think freely, stimulate each other, embrace competition and expand our horizons.  
 
Because next year, when we gather again, I hope we will be making the same swift progress. I hope 
we will be able to show how we have put these six recommendations into practice. And I hope we will 
have explored new territories with new members. Because with your help, the seeds that were planted 
here in Paris will grow even further and flourish.  
 
Because there is no limit to what countless hands, what humanity, can achieve. When working 
together, with a commonly held belief in a shared objective. 
 
 
4 
 
