  Ghana – EU Business Forum  
   SPEAKING NOTES: 
The Challenges on Monetary Policy and Markets  
Development in Ghana  
 DR. MAXWELL OPOKU-AFARI  
 FIRST DEPUTY GOVERNOR, BANK OF GHANA 
   JUNE 13, 2019 
 MOVENPIC HOTEL  
ACCRA, GHANA  
   H.E. Dr. Mahamudu Bawumia, Vice-President of the Republic of Ghana 
Jyrki Katainen, Vice-President of European Commission  
H.E. Diana Acconcia, EU Ambassador to Ghana 
Honourable Ken Ofori-Atta, Minister of Finance of the Republic of Ghana 
Honourable Robert Ahomka-Lindsay, Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry, Ghana 
CEOs and Representatives from the Financial Sector and Business Community 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen  
 
 
Background 
 
1. 
Let me  start by expressing our  appreciation to the organisers of the  Ghana – EU 
Business Forum. Ghana has had very good economic, trade and social relations with 
the  European  Union  (EU)  over  the  years,  and  we  believe  there  are  even  greater 
opportunities  for  further  socio-economic  and  trade  cooperation  in  the  medium  to 
long term.  
2. 
This Forum provides a unique platform for policymakers, financial sector participants 
and the business community to share ideas to help facilitate business promotion but 
also, on a larger scale, to shape the economic and structural transformation agenda 
we aspire for under the Ghana Beyond Aid agenda.  
 Let me provide a Brief Overview of Monetary Policy Implementation in Ghana 
 
3.  Monetary  policy  remains  and  will  continue  to  remain  crucial  in  the 
macroeconomic  management  process.  The  quest  to  achieve  macroeconomic 
stability, a necessary condition for sustained growth, cannot be overemphasised.  
 4. 
In line with the Bank’s primary mandate of price stability, the key goal of the Central 
Bank’s  monetary  policy  strategy  seeks  to  pursue  policies  geared  towards 
bringing down inflation to within the targeted bank. Currently, the band is 
set  at  8±2%  with  a  future  possibility  of  reviewing  the  band  target  range 
 Page | 1  
 based  on  prevailing  economic  circumstances.  With  improving  macroeconomic 
fundamentals, the Central Bank has lowered consistently its key policy rate, in line with 
the disinflation process, from a high rate of 25.5 percent at  the end of 2016 to the 
current  level  of  16  percent  as  at  May  2019.  The  Bank  has  done  this  by  carefully 
balancing the need to lower rates to help foster vibrancy in economic activity and at 
the same  maintain relatively higher  real interest rates to  sustain investor interest in 
the economy.    
Headline  inflation  has  declined  from  15.4%  at  end  2016  to  9.0%  in  January  2019, 
before edging up to 9.5% in April on the back of pass-through effects of the exchange 
rate depreciation in the first quarter of the year. 
 
5. 
 6.  While  there  is  full  commitment  on  the  part  of  the  Central  Bank  to  achieve  its  price 
stability mandate, we need to recognize that monetary policy will have to act in concert 
with  other  economic  parameters  for  full  realization  of  the  desired  effects..  In  this 
regards,  the  transmission  mechanism  through  which  policy  decisions  are 
channelled  to  the  rest  of  the  economy  matters.  In  the  context  of  the  transmission 
mechanism, the role of banks and financial institutions remain important as they are 
the  primary  conduit  through  which  monetary  policy  decisions  impact  on  the  final 
objectives of price stability and growth.   
 
7. 
 
8. 
 Monetary  policy  effectiveness  therefore  requires  an  efficient  financial  market 
system  to  ensure  that  monetary  policy  actions  have  the  desired  impact  on  the 
economy. 
Appreciating the role of an efficient financial system, in discussions of monetary policy 
and market development is very important. Under the Bank’s inflation-targeting 
framework  of  monetary  policy,  short-term  interest  rates,  including  the  rates  at 
which banks lend to each other are expected to responded to changes in the Monetary 
Page | 2  
Policy Rate (MPR) . This then serves to influence other rates in the financial markets 
 and then finally with impact effects on inflation and output.    
MP Implementation Challenges 
9. 
As simple as the transmission process may seem, , there are challenges. Key challenges 
to effective monetary policy and markets development, in our experience, have centred 
mostly on the following: 
Weak and uncompetitive banking sector  
 The  critical  role  of  banks  as  the  primary  conduit  for  monetary  policy  suggests  that  the 
transmission mechanism is more effective in a competitive banking sector environment. In a 
weak  and  uncompetitive  banking  sector,  monetary  policy  becomes  less  ineffective  because 
banks become less responsive to changes in monetary policy stance. 
   To address some of these challenges in the Ghanaian economy, the Bank of Ghana, over the 
past  two  years,  has  taken  steps  to  recapitalise  and  undertaken  significant  reforms  in  the 
banking  sector  to  strengthen  the  industry’s  capacity  to  effectively  intermediate.  The 
implementation of  new and wide-ranging  regulatory  reforms  should also serve  to  provide  a 
good-enough basis for enhancing competition and efficiency in the sector.  
Fostering banking competition, efficiency and stability therefore remains key policy objectives 
that  the  Bank  of  Ghana  will  continue  to  pursue  to  facilitate  effective  monetary  policy 
transmission. 
High Non-Performing Loans (NPLs)   
 The  prevalence  of  high  non-performing  loans  can  also  limit  banks’  lending  capacity  and/or 
interfere  with  policy  transmission  and  therefore  impair  the  effectiveness  of  monetary 
policy. Although the banking sector’s NPL ratio has declined from 23.5 percent in April 2018 to 
18.9 percent in April 2019, the current ratio still remains very high. With such high NPL levels, 
transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  to  lending  rates  is  weakened  and  financial 
intermediation to support economic activity is constrained.  
 Page | 3  
   To  make  effective  the  transmission  channel  through  the  NPL  angle  ,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  is 
engaging banks to improve their risk management frameworks while the loan loss write-off 
policy is on-going. We are also strengthening credit conditions through the collateral registry 
and the credit referencing bureaus.  
 Market development to ease transmission mechanism 
 
• 
The  need  to  broaden  the    scope  of  government  financing  needs  without  crowding  out  the 
private sector through the development of  a liquid bond market is critical to effectively help 
manage debt without repercussions on macroeconomic stability. An efficient and liquid bond 
market provides some scope for effective transmission mechanism for monetary policy. 
   With  sound  fiscal  and  monetary  policies,  improved  regulatory  environment  and  improved 
payments and settlement infrastructure,  Government has lengthened the yield curve to 15-
years on the domestic money market. 
Government re-profiling has supported the shift towards more medium-to-long term bonds to 
reduce re-financing risks, driving down interest rates at the short-end of the market and has 
helped correct the yield curve.  
 External Vulnerabilities 
 Exchange rate movements are relatively important for a small open-economy with a flexible 
exchange rate mechanism, like Ghana. Exchange rate dynamics have significant effects on the 
ultimate goal of price stability and hence on monetary policy decisions.  
  The impact effects of external vulnerabilities on the domestic economy are channelled through 
three main sources – first, with a commodity-dependent export base, the economy is highly 
vulnerable to negative terms of trade shocks. Second, the increased levels of outflows in the 
service and income accounts due to the dividends and profit repatriation by large multinational 
companies in the energy, mining and telecoms sectors pose significant risks to reserves and in 
the process constrains out ability to effectively deal with shocks. Third, the  increased  non-
Page | 4  
resident participation in the domestic bond market has exposed the economy to vulnerabilities 
 stemming  from  changes  in  sentiments  of  these  investors.  These  sources  of  vulnerabilities, 
when they materialize, can distort external sector conditions and impact adversely on economic 
conditions.  
In other words, the provisioning of foreign exchange cover for repatriation of Multi-National 
Corporations (MNCs) dividends and non-resident investors’ coupon payments, bond maturities 
and  energy-related  debt  repayments  exerts  significant  foreign  exchange  pressures.  For 
instance,  one of  the triggers  in the  recent  exchange  rate  volatility  we  experienced  was  the 
early  redemption  and  coupon  repayments  of  foreign  denominated  domestic  bonds.  These 
developments  reinforce  Ghana’s  external  vulnerability  conditions  which  invariably  results  in 
sharp currency movements which impacts inflation and remains a challenge to monetary policy 
formulation.  
The recent inflation uptick from 9% in January to 9.5% in April 2019 was largely attributed to 
the pass-through effects of the recent currency depreciation on non-food inflation. 
   Structural rigidities and supply-side constraints  
 The external vulnerability issues highlight the issues of structural rigidities that would need to 
be  addressed  alongside  ensuring  sound  macroeconomic  condition  to  ensure  exchange  rate 
stability. Issues such as pursuing export diversification, increasing local content, stepping-up 
domestic  production,  managing  services  and  income  outflows  by  MNCs,  will  all  have  to  be 
addressed head-on. Most of these structural issues are not in the domain of monetary policy, 
but could pose challenges for monetary policy conduct. 
    Structural reforms such as the Government’s industrialization drive under the ‘Ghana beyond 
Aid’ agenda to improve the manufacturing base of the economy, diversify the structure of the 
economy and create employment opportunities to  increase production should be vigorously 
pursued.  
Further, the on-going digitization of service delivery processes in the economy will help improve 
the  business  environment  of  the  country.  Other  complementary  reforms  and  institutional 
Page | 5  
arrangements to further improve the business environment and ease production bottlenecks 
 should be pursued to facilitate growth.  
 Conclusion 
10. 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  conclude  by  stating  that  the  importance  of 
maintaining macroeconomic stability and ensuring an efficient and robust banking sector are 
critical to our monetary policy implementation processes. The Bank of Ghana will continue to 
play its role in ensuring that the economic conditions are conducive to support private sector 
investment and business growth in the country.         
Thank you. 
 Page | 6  
