Sustainable development and climate risks: 
the role of central banks
Speech by Ignazio Visco 
Governor of the Bank of Italy
18th International Conference for Credit Risk Evaluation 
“Assessing and Managing Climate Change Risk: Opportunities for Financial 
Institutions”
Venice, 26 September 2019
First of all, let me thank the conference organizers for setting up this important 
event and for their kind invitation. Today’s remarks are partly based on a speech that I 
gave in May at the Italian Alliance for Sustainable Development (ASVIS).
I would like to start by noting that the issue of the compatibility between natural 
resources and the development goals of nations has been studied since at least the end 
of the 18th century, with the works of Thomas Malthus on food supply and population 
growth. It has then re-emerged a number of times in the public debate.
The less young among us may recall, for example, the simulations produced for the 
project of the Club of Rome on the “Predicament of Mankind” – The Limits to Growth – 
in  the  early  1970s.  These  simulations  came  in  the  wake  of  a  worldwide  demographic 
explosion and set off a global alarm signalling the risks to the survival of our ecosystems 
and of the human race itself. At that time, it was observed that the depletion of natural 
resources resulting from the simulations, largely based on the extrapolation of the trend 
under way, did not take sufficient account of two important mechanisms that regulate 
the functioning of the economy: the rebalancing power of prices and the endogenous 
nature of technological change. When the resources used in production become scarcer, 
an increase in prices discourages demand; at the same time, higher prices provide an 
incentive to search for new production methods that utilize fewer of those resources.
Over the last few decades, the biggest concern has been in relation to the effects 
of climate change. Is this concern different from that of the past? One key difference 
compared  with  the  issue  of  the  depletion  of  natural  resources  is  that,  in  the  case  of 
climate change, there are no “natural” market prices. Climate change is, in fact, a classic 
example of a negative externality: a cost that spills over onto other markets besides the 
one in which it originated. In addition, as pointed out by William Nordhaus in his Nobel 
lecture,  climate  change  is  a  particularly  thorny  externality  owing  to  its  global  nature, 
which puts it outside the domain not only of markets but also of national governments.
The dangers of climate change, its close link with the emissions of greenhouse gases 
(including, but not limited to, carbon dioxide) and, in turn, with the human activities of 
production and consumption, have all been known for some time. For example, Professor 
Nordhaus himself, who wrote a sharp criticism of the results of the Club of Rome almost 
50 years ago, now regards climate change as “a major threat to humans and the natural 
world” – a concern that is hard not to share. Since his pioneering studies in the mid-
1970s  on  how  the  climate  and  the  economy  co-evolve,  which  earned  him  the  2018 
Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences, the trend in the emissions of greenhouse gases has 
continued to be worrisome. In fact, the growing use of fossil fuels is pushing greenhouse 
gas concentrations to levels that, unless forceful measures are taken, is estimated to lead 
to an increase in the temperature of the planet ranging from 3 to 5 degrees Celsius by 
the end of this century. This is well beyond the threshold of 1.5 degrees that, if surpassed, 
would  bring  potentially  catastrophic  consequences  for  our  planet,  according  to  the 
United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Some effects are already evident. At the global level, the last four years have been 
the warmest since 1880; last July was the hottest month on record for our planet. In Italy, 
the year 2018 recorded the highest average temperature of the past two centuries (the 
period for which reliable data are available) and 2017 was already characterized by a 
significant intensification of extreme weather events, with severe cases of drought that 
had serious repercussions on the water supply.
Stopping climate change will require not only a strong political determination and 
a  firm  commitment  by  all  countries,  but  also  sustained  efforts  by  all  institutions  and 
individuals.  Achieving  this  objective  is  first  and  foremost  a  responsibility  of  national 
governments,  the  only  institutions  that  can  provide  incentives  to  allocate  capital  to 
“green” investments, levy taxes on carbon emissions, and introduce regulations limiting 
the  amount  of  allowable  emissions.  Reaching  international  agreements  on  a  global 
carbon tax or on shared targets for emissions also rests within their powers.
The difficulties in reducing emissions sufficiently across countries are enormous, as 
has been evident in the last few years. Therefore, all institutions and individuals should play 
their part to foster economic growth that is “sustainable” – i.e. that meets current needs 
without compromising those of future generations (as defined by the UN “Brundtland 
Commission” in 1987). Public institutions could promote sustainable business practices 
by envisioning strategies that induce firms to take into account the environment, human 
rights, consumer rights and diversity, as well as best practices in corporate governance – 
the so-called Environmental, Social and Governance (ESG) profiles.
Firms that are successful in adopting appropriate ESG profiles and in adjusting their 
investments accordingly can expect significant advantages. In fact, the “green” sectors 
are steadily growing around the globe and in Italy as well. The available data show that 
the “eco-industrial” sector expanded markedly in our country in recent years: in 2017 
2
it  contributed  2.3  per  cent  to  total  value  added,  employing  nearly  400,000  full-time 
equivalent workers.
Given its central role in the allocation of resources, the financial sector can be key 
in  influencing  the  scope,  speed  and  smoothness  of  the  transition  to  a  low-emissions 
economy. However, it can only do so effectively if banks and other financial intermediaries 
integrate sustainability in their investment decision-making processes, especially in their 
corporate governance systems and in their risk management and investment strategies.
Several challenges, however, lie ahead. Currently, there are neither widely accepted 
rules for ESG data disclosure by individual firms nor agreed auditing standards to verify 
the reported data. Moreover, there are intrinsic difficulties in deciding which indicators are 
relevant in assigning an ESG score – think, for example, of the problem of evaluating the 
“social” component – especially when compared to financial aggregates, where the key 
indicators, such as revenues, costs, earnings and cash flows, are widely available and are 
all auditable items. Apparently, ESG-score providers rely heavily on voluntary disclosure 
by firms and on subjective methodologies to select, assess and weight individual ESG 
indicators. This, of course, adds to the arbitrary nature of the scores. As a result, ESG 
scores of individual firms differ greatly across rating agencies if compared, for example, 
with credit ratings. According to our studies and in line with the existing literature, the 
correlation between the ESG scores assigned to the major listed companies in the euro 
area by three of the main providers ranges from 40 to 60 per cent, compared with a 
correlation  between  credit  ratings  that  is  over  90  per  cent.  There  is  also  evidence  of 
significant biases in ESG scores, which tend to overrate the companies that are larger and 
belong to specific industrial sectors and geographic regions.
Central banks may play their part. First of all, with respect to the methodology, they 
can help to raise awareness and nurture a better understanding of the risks related to the 
sustainability factors and the channels through which they are transmitted to the financial 
system. The objective is to make financial intermediaries move from a backward-looking 
approach  to  a  forward-looking  one,  prompting  them  to  evaluate  the  return  on  their 
assets over a longer horizon, which entails making assumptions and building scenarios. 
In this respect, it is important to foster cooperation and the sharing of best practices 
between the various stakeholders in the financial system, including academia.
Secondly,  central  banks  can  promote  the  dissemination  of  more  and  better 
information  to  bridge  the  current  gaps  in  the  quality,  consistency  and  comparability 
of available data. Important contributions will be provided by the recommendations of 
the Financial Stability Board’s Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures and 
by  the  taxonomy  and  the  transparency  obligations  that  are  being  developed  within 
the European Commission’s action plan on sustainable finance. These initiatives point 
to the setting of standards that, when widely adopted, will facilitate the disclosure of 
companies’  exposure  to  environmental  risks  and  the  measurement  and  management 
of climate-related risks by financial intermediaries. They can also limit the risk of “green 
washing”, i.e. the unfair use of the “green” label for production activities and financial 
investments intended to mislead potential customers. This risk is likely to increase with 
the  demand  for  environmentally  safe  assets.  Improvements  in  the  standardization  of 
3
data and methodologies will also help to achieve sounder approaches in the issuance of 
ESG ratings.
Central  banks  can  also  support  the  transition  to  a  low-carbon  and  sustainable 
growth by leading private investors by example, through the adoption of suitable policies 
for managing financial resources and the related risks. In this regard, let me describe the 
recent decisions taken by the Bank of Italy as portfolio manager.
This  year  the  Bank  has  adopted  a  new  investment  strategy  that  integrates  ESG 
factors into the management of its equity portfolio, as described in detail on our website. 
The principles of diversification and market neutrality already embedded in our previous 
strategy have been preserved and two ESG criteria have been added. The first discards 
companies that belong to the sectors, controversial weapons and tobacco, excluded by 
the United Nations Global Compact (an initiative that requires CEOs to commit to ten 
sustainability principles in the areas of human rights, labour, the environment and the 
fight against corruption as well as to take steps to support UN goals). The second gives 
preference to companies with the best ESG scores, according to the assessment of a 
carefully selected data provider. As we are aware of the current limits of ESG data, we 
have done everything we can to make this approach as robust as possible.
The  resulting  portfolio  achieves  a  significant  improvement  in  its  environmental 
footprint. Compared with the composition of the old portfolio, the shareholdings included 
in the new portfolio are characterized by much lower greenhouse gas emissions (down 
by 23 per cent) as well as by lower energy and water consumption (by 30 and 17 per cent 
respectively). These calculations rely on the data disclosed by the companies and, when 
these are not available, on those estimated by ESG-score providers.
Our new investment strategy was adopted after considering and comparing various 
alternatives. In general, we have found that improving the overall ESG score of the portfolio 
by  dropping  the  companies  with  the  lowest  scores  comes  at  the  expense  of  a  slight 
increase in the ex ante tracking error vis-à-vis the market benchmark, which comprises 
all the listed non-financial corporations in the euro area. This finding is in line with other 
empirical  studies  and  with  the  theoretical  argument  that  constraining  diversification 
opportunities increases the divergence from the standard market benchmark.
The  effect  on  the  tracking  error  does  not  undermine  the  risk-return  profile  of 
our  portfolio,  mainly  because,  by  filtering  for  the  higher  ESG-scored  companies,  the 
idiosyncratic component of the portfolio risk tends to diminish. A backward test over 
a ten-year horizon shows that our new portfolio would have provided, ex post, a better 
average  annual  performance  in  terms  of  both  lower  risk  and  higher  return,  thereby 
implying  a  higher  Sharpe  ratio  compared  with  the  previous  portfolio  and  the  market 
benchmark.
The  fact  that  sustainable  investment  does  not  appear  to  penalize  financial 
performance  is  not  necessarily  surprising.  Several  studies  confirm  that  sustainable 
investment leads to risk-adjusted market returns that are often higher than those achieved 
using traditional financial models. These empirical findings may be due to a number of 
factors. First, the ESG risk may have been underestimated in the past, while investors may 
4
have not anticipated the higher returns due to the faster-than-average growth of the 
green sector. Second, in its practical implementation, the traditional risk-return model 
uses historical time series, which make it backward-looking, whereas the sustainability 
assessment implies a forward-looking view and, in particular, a long-term view, which 
could  help  to  mitigate  the  “short-termism”  that  usually  drives  financial  investments. 
Third, good ESG practices seem to provide firms with a competitive advantage stemming 
from innovation; they also contribute to reducing operating, legal and reputational risks 
and lead to a more efficient resource allocation (as resources can be shifted from risk 
management to productive activities), lowering the cost of capital and fostering better 
operational and market performance.
Empirical  studies  carried  out  by  the  Bank  of  Italy  have  provided  clear  evidence 
of  a  return  premium  on  the  shares  of  European  electricity  utilities  with  lower  carbon 
emissions. Historical experience has offered many examples showing that reputational 
risks and serious losses for firms and shareholders can arise from business practices that 
are inappropriate when viewed through the lenses of ESG.
As I mentioned, our new portfolio was built in a way that preserves, in particular, 
the principle of market neutrality. It may be inquired, however, whether this principle 
should be fully preserved or be “adjusted” in a context in which, in the absence of further 
regulation, market forces are pushing greenhouse gas concentrations to levels that will 
soon be unsustainable. I believe that this is an important topic, which warrants further 
research.
A last point that I would like to touch on regards international cooperation. As a 
result of the increasing concerns about the consequences of climate change, cooperation 
in the field of sustainable finance has been strengthened, with several initiatives promoted 
by institutions and industries.
In our role as members of the Financial Stability Board, we have discussed the studies 
of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosure and we have contributed to 
those of the G20 Green Finance Study Group. We also participate in the new Network for 
Greening the Financial System, which brings together 42 central banks and supervisors 
and  8  observers  from  countries  responsible  for  half  of  the  world’s  greenhouse  gas 
emissions. Last April the Network released its first report with a list of recommendations 
on how central banks and supervisors may contribute to the achievement of the Paris 
objectives. The Network is currently studying, with our active contribution, possible ways 
to integrate environmental and climate risks into central banks’ portfolio management 
strategies as well as into micro and macro-prudential supervision.
In Europe, the Bank of Italy – together with the other national supervisory authorities – 
cooperates with the European Banking Authority in studying the risks that sustainability 
factors  pose  to  financial  stability,  drafting  methodologies  to  assess  these  risks  and 
identifying suitable prudential responses. We also take part in the analysis scheduled by 
the Single Supervisory Mechanism, which has included climate change in its risk map for 
2019.
5
In  Italy,  we  provide  technical  assistance  to  the  Italian  Ministry  of  Economy  and 
Finance for the negotiations on the legislative proposals resulting from the European 
Commission’s  action  plan  on  sustainable  finance.  As  part  of  the  Italian  Observatory 
on  Sustainable  Finance,  established  by  the  Ministry  of  the  Environment,  last  year  we 
conducted a survey of the main financial operators, finding that sustainability is mainly 
dealt  with  from  a  social  responsibility  point  of  view.  Hence,  more  has  to  be  done  to 
raise  awareness  of  the  potential  problems  deriving  from  business  strategies  and  risk 
management systems.
 Let me conclude by saying that the transition towards an economy with low carbon 
emissions is essential if we want to reduce the risks that climate change poses to our 
well-being. Central banks, supervisory authorities and the financial sector cannot stand 
in for those who can make the policies necessary to decarbonizing our energy systems, 
but they may offer their contribution to facilitate this process.
The  Bank  of  Italy  is  playing  its  part.  Although  further  progress  is  still  needed  to 
enhance the reliability of ESG ratings, we have started to introduce sustainability criteria 
in our investment policy, which is aimed at promoting corporate social responsibility and 
improving risk management. For the time being, our new investment strategy applies to 
equity investment; we are currently assessing the possibility of extending it to other asset 
classes, such as corporate bonds. As we keep working towards further improving the ESG 
profiles of our portfolio, we will provide regular reports on the results achieved, so that our 
best practices and our methodologies can serve as a reference for other investors. In our 
capacity as supervisory authority, we are actively committed to raising the awareness of the 
financial sector and of the public at large about these issues as well as to working jointly 
with other institutions to better understand how to measure and address these new risks.
It is in the interest of financial intermediaries to be fully aware of how sustainability 
factors can affect their activities: it would make it easier for them to take into account 
the corresponding risks in their strategies and governance, thereby helping to improve 
their performance. Central banks and supervisory authorities are working to prepare  the 
financial system to face this transition. Greater use of green financial instruments will be 
fostered by the EU taxonomy of environmentally sustainable activities, the introduction of 
labelling schemes (especially the standards for green bonds), a wider uptake of the new 
low-carbon benchmarks, and the forthcoming application of the new rules on disclosure. 
All these factors will bolster data standardization and foster comparability.
Italian investors have expressed considerable interest in sustainable finance in recent 
years, but the supply is still not sufficient to satisfy demand. Companies that provide the 
necessary information on the sustainability of their activities will be able to exploit the 
room that seems to be available for the financing of their projects. By doing so, they will 
also contribute to the development of a green financial market, which is still in its infancy. 
The battle to arrest climate change is under way: winning it requires the effort of each of 
us. Thank you for your attention.
6
References
Berg F., Kölbel J., Rigobon R., “Aggregate Confusion: The Divergence of ESG Ratings”, 
MIT Sloan Research Paper, Cambridge (Mass.), No. 5822, 2019.
Bernardini E., Di Giampaolo J., Faiella I., Poli R., “The Impact of Carbon Risk on Stock 
Returns: Evidence from the European Electric Utilities”, Journal of Sustainable Finance & 
Investment, 2019.
Brundtland G., Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development: 
Our Common Future, United Nations, 1987.
Ciscar  J.C.,  Feyen  L.,  Ibarreta  D.,  Soria  A.  (eds),  “Climate  Impacts  in  Europe:  Final 
Report of the JRC PESETA III Project”, Joint Research Centre Science for Policy Report, 
2018.
Clark  G.,  Feiner  A.,  Viehs  M.,  From  the  Stockholder  to  the  Stakeholder:  How 
Sustainability  Can  Drive  Financial  Outperformance,  Oxford  University  and  Arabesque 
Partners, Oxford, 2015.
Doxa, Il risparmiatore responsabile, The Sustainable Investment Forum, Milan, 2017.
Doyle T.M., Ratings that Don’t Rate: The Subjective World of ESG Ratings Agencies, 
American Council for Capital Formation, July, 2018.
Faiella  I.,  “The  demand  for  energy  of  Italian  households”,  Banca  d’Italia,  Temi  di 
Discussione (Working Papers), No. 822, 2011.
Faiella I., Cingano F., “La tassazione verde in Italia: l’analisi di una carbon tax sui 
trasporti”, Economia Pubblica, No. 2, 2015.
Faiella I., Natoli F., “Natural Catastrophes and Bank Lending: the Case of Flood Risk 
in Italy”, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), No. 457, 
2018.
Friede G., Busch T., Bassen A., “ESG and Financial Performance: Aggregated Evidence 
from more than 2000 Empirical Studies”, Journal of Sustainable Finance & Investment, 
2015.
Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change,  Global  Warming  of  1.5°C,  United 
Nations, New York, 2018.
Istat, “Il conto dei beni e servizi ambientali”, Rome, 2019.
Meadows D.H., Meadows D.L., Randers J., Behrens III W.W., The Limits to Growth: 
Report for the Club of Rome”s Project on the Predicament of Mankind, Universe Group, 
New York, 1972.
NOAA, “2018 Was 4th Hottest Year on Record for the Globe”, 6 February 2019.
7
Osservatorio Italiano sulla Finanza Sostenibile, “Il rischio climatico per la finanza in 
Italia”, available on the website of the Ministry for Environment, Land and Sea Protection.
Network for Greening the Financial System, First comprehensive report, Paris, 2019.
Nordhaus  W.,  “World  Dynamics:  Measurement  Without  Data”,  Economic  Journal, 
1973.
Nordhaus W., “Climate Change: The Ultimate Challenge for Economics”, American 
Economic Review, 2019.
Solow R., “An Almost Practical Step Toward Sustainability”, Resources Policy, 1993.
8
