    Sciences Po Paris – Paris, 18 September 2019 
Inaugural lesson at the Paris School of International Affairs, 
 by François Villeroy de Galhau 
Governor of the Banque de France 
What economic sovereignty for Europe? 
Facing the threats with lucidity, and boldly seizing an opportunity 
          Press contact: Mark Deen (mark.deen@banque-france.fr; 06 88 56 54 03).
 
Mr Director, Dean (dear Enrico),  
Ladies and gentlemen, teachers, dear students,  
Page 1 of 10 
It gives me great pleasure to speak before you today. I follow in the footsteps 
of  several  Ministers  of  Foreign  Affairs,  including  Jean-Yves  Le  Drian  and 
Nathalie  Loiseau.  Caro  Enrico,  thank  you  for  your  invitation,  knowing  this 
makes me feel all the more grateful and honoured! The decision to switch from 
diplomats  to  a  central  banker  such  as  myself  perhaps  sends  out  three 
signals.  First,  rarely  have  geopolitics  and  economics  been  so  closely 
intertwined. Faced with the rise in protectionist tensions and the verbal volleys, 
which  unfortunately  intensified  again  this  summer,  some  even  say  that 
economic  interdependence  –  the  “sweet  ties  of  commerce”  praised  by 
Montesquieu  –  is  the  only  thing  still  shielding  us  from  military  conflict. 
Conversely,  rarely  has  a  global  economic  slowdown  been  so  clearly 
attributable to political causes: nearly everywhere, public policy instability and 
uncertainty are on the rise and are damaging private sector confidence; I shall 
come back to this. 
Second signal: rarely have central banks been called upon to do so much.  I’m 
not going to bore you with a lesson on the technical delights and subtleties of 
monetary policy. Let’s just say that we have a central mandate – price stability 
– and a main instrument for achieving this – the short-term interest rate. But 
for the past ten years, since the great financial crisis, we have been using new 
instruments:  quantitative  easing  (QE),  forward  guidancei  and  even  negative 
rates.  These  non-standard  policies  have  been  effective;  but  they  can  also 
create the – mistaken – illusion that monetary policy is omnipotent.  
Third signal: rarely has Europe appeared so necessary and at the same time 
so divided. I am a French and European official, I was in Maastricht 28 years 
ago to launch the euro; every two weeks I take part in meetings of the ECB 
Governing Council which manages the currency. I stand by this conviction in 
Europe and in the belief that the joint work carried out by France and Germany 
is an indispensable driver, even if it is not enough. Nearly 30 years ago, the fall 
Page 2 of 10 
 
of the Berlin Wall injected new impetus into the construction of Europe. Today, 
Europe  is  turning  in  on  itself,  is  on  the  defensive.  Yet  it  is  vital  that  it  make 
itself heard in the face of the threats that it is facing, and that it do so with one 
voice if it doesn’t want to be inaudible. But beyond the threats, and at the risk 
of sounding paradoxical and even a little provocative, I would like to present 
you  with an  opportunity: in the current crisis of  globalisation, Europe doesn’t 
need to keep its head down; it should assert and propose a model – its own 
social, environmental and mutilateral model. I propose that we do this in the 
spirit of Stefan Zweig, who as early as 1934, admirably described the state of 
mind of the great European Erasmus of Rotterdam: “Instead of listening to the 
vainglorious  claims  of  petty  princelings,  of  fantastical  sectarians  and  of 
national egoists, the mission of the European is on the contrary to emphasise 
that which unites the peoplesii”. 
I. Lucidity in the face of two economic threats 
 There  are  currently  two  main  types  of  challenges  to  Europe’s  economic 
sovereignty: the first are linked to political decisions (“man-made”); the second 
to  the  emergence  of  technological  powers  whose  reach  extends  beyond  the 
confines  of  individual  states  (“tech-made”).  At  the  top  of  the  list  of  political 
threats  are  the  protectionist  tensions  stemming  from  the  United  States,  but 
also the uncertainties surrounding Brexit. They are weighing on our multilateral 
order and already contributing to the global economic slowdown:iii in the space 
of a year, the 2019 forecast for world growth has gone from 3.9% to 3.2%, and 
for  the  euro  area  from  1.8%  to  1.1%.iv  This  loss  of  growth  occurred  even 
before  tariffs  were  raised,  and  for  a  reason  that  is  often  underestimated: 
protectionist  uncertainty  reduces  business  leaders’  confidence  in  the  future 
and leads them to postpone their investments. Britain under the threat of Brexit 
has  been  a  clear  illustration  of  this  private  sector  confidence  deficit  over  the 
past three years [the Bank of England estimates that business investment is 
20-25% below its previous trend], and even the United States is beginning to 
Page 3 of 10 
 
suffer.  Faced  with  this  situation,  political  leaders  –  and  one  of  them  in 
particular – have the most important role to play: it is up to them to restore the 
confidence they have undermined. Monetary policies do their part by keeping 
interest  rates  low  in  the  face  of  the  slowdown,  but  they  cannot  tackle  the 
underlying cause.  
For  the  euro  area,  these  uncertainties  are  being  compounded  by  a  painful 
paradox:  the  causes  of  the  slowdown  are  largely  external,  but  the  region  is 
being  acutely  affected.  This  imbalance  is  attributable  to  the  weight  of 
Germany, which is highly specialised in the manufacture of capital goods and 
“overexposed”  to  global  trade.  It  nonetheless  also  illustrates  the  fact  that 
Europe needs to make greater use of the scope it has to respond: it has less 
public  debt  (81%  of  GDP)  than  the  United  States  (106%)  or  the  United 
Kingdom  (87%),  but  it  makes  less  use  of  fiscal  stimulus,  especially  in 
Germany.  
In  addition,  the  expansion  of  the  euro’s  international  role  would  be  a  useful 
means  of  consolidating  our  economic  sovereignty.  The  euro  is  20  years  old 
and it is our success: it ranks second in the international monetary system, but 
it still needs to increase its importance at the global level. The dollar remains a 
key pillar of America’s global power, and China is taking a greater interest in 
the internationalisation of the renminbi.  
 The other major threat to Europe’s sovereignty is technological. Of the large 
digital corporations – the GAFA and other bigtechs – whose power equals that 
of sovereign states, none is European. And Europe is seriously lagging behind 
in investment: in 2015, the euro area’s stock of information and communication 
technology (ICT) capital amounted to 7.6% of  GDP compared  with 10.9% in 
the United States.v Yet Europe has the advantage of having a single market: 
you can see what happens without it with Brexit and the cost of a “no deal” for 
the British economy. But we need to be more bold. By taking full advantage of 
the  size  effect:  there  are  still  too  many  implicit  borders  and  too  much 
Page 4 of 10 
to 
implement  an 
 
fragmentation.  By  using  the  power  of  standardisation,  notably  to  direct 
innovation,  as  illustrated  by  the  GDPR  and  data  where  Europe  is  taking  the 
lead.  By  daring 
industrial  policy  with  public-private 
partnerships, as in artificial intelligence and batteries.  And lastly, by mobilising 
our financial resources: Europe has the largest pool of private savings in the 
world, with more than EUR 300 billion of excess savings invested outside the 
region each year, but our venture capital market, and more broadly our equity 
financing market, are underdeveloped compared with the United States. 
In the financial sector, the bigtechs have the potential to cause a genuine “Big 
Bang”:  they  have  a  strong  brand  image,  a  global  client  base  and  privileged 
access  to  new  technologies.  Of  course,  financial  regulation  needs  to  remain 
neutral vis-à-vis technology: the principle of “same activity, same rules” needs 
to be applied to maintain a level playing field for all players. But we need to 
increase international cooperation in four key areas of the regulation of digital 
finance: (i) cyber-security; (ii) data protection; (iii) preserving competition in the 
face of the risk of ultra-dominant networks and private monopolies; and (iv) fair 
cross-border taxation. Facebook’s Libra is a prime example of a case where 
cooperation is imperative. The G7 under the French presidency underlined the 
challenge  this  poses  for  sovereignty,  and  wants  to  address  some  “serious 
regulatory and systemic concerns”vi before such projects can be implemented.  
 II.  Boldly  seizing  the  opportunity  of  a  social,  environmental  and 
multilateral model.  
I now come to my provocation, or rather what should be our boldness. To this 
uncertain,  troubled,  disruptive,  and  uncooperative  world,  does  Europe  have 
nothing  to  offer?  Let  us  start  with  the  very  criticisms  levelled  today  at  the 
multilateral  economic  order,  and  at  what  has  been  called  the  "Washington 
Consensus". It  was  economically sound, but  socially too  weak. Globalisation 
has often been felt to have mainly benefited large corporations – and their tax 
evasion. Inequalities between countries – notably between the North and the 
Page 5 of 10 
 
South  –  have  fortunately  decreased;  those  within  countries  have  increased. 
And  your  generation  is  demanding  that  we  guarantee  the  protection  of  the 
planet. Behind these criticisms are often our very European values. 
This  echoes  the  work  of  many  researchers  who  highlight  the  diversity  of 
capitalist  models  and  seek  to  correct  their  excesses.vii  I  am  thinking  in 
particular  of  Marie-Laure  Djelic,  co-Dean  of  the  Sciences  Po  School  of 
Management,viii  of  Michel  Aglietta  who  denounces  the  "excesses  of  financial 
capitalism"ix  or  of  Dani  Rodrik  who  highlights  the  dysfunctions  of  liberal 
capitalism.x  At  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  Michel  Albert  theorised  "Rhenish 
capitalism".xi  Jean-Dominique  Sénard 
“responsible 
capitalism” in Europe.  
Europe, if it is bold enough, is in a good position to provide concrete answers 
to the expectations of the world's citizens. The new Commission, led by Ursula 
von  der  Leyen,  has  the  means  to  achieve  this  ambition.  In  my  view,  the 
"European model" is articulated around four requirements: the fight against 
inequalities,  the  promotion  of  individual  autonomy  through  education  and 
knowledge  building,  the  preservation  of  the  climate,  and  the  renewal  of 
multilateralism. By the way, we are talking here about a “European model” and 
not a “European way of life” which has been discussed a lot in recent days. In 
short,  Europe  can  proudly  define  itself  as  a  social,  environmental  and 
multilateral model.  
2.1 The social model: the fight against inequalities  
is  now  calling 
for 
The rise in inequalities has – fortunately, in my eyes – become once again a 
major economic and social issue, as evidenced by the success of the work of 
Joseph  Stiglitzxii  and  Thomas  Piketty.xiii  This  too  long-ignored  problem  has 
been at the heart of election results – from Donald Trump to Brexit – and is 
one of the main reasons for the democratic crisis and the rise of "populism". 
On  the  economic  front,  international  institutions,  the  OECDxiv  and  the  IMF,xv 
have  studied  the  impact  of  inequalities  on  growth.  Their  findings  are  clear: 
persistent  inequalities  reduce  the  long-term  growth  potential  of  economies. 
According  to  some  OECD  estimates,  in  the  United  States  and  United 
 
Kingdom, growth in GDP per capita between 1990 and 2010 would have been 
20% higher if income inequalities had not increased. 
Page 6 of 10 
Much  can  be  learned  from  the  European  model.  Firstly,  because  it  is  less 
inegalitarian,  especially  thanks  to  redistribution.  According  to  the  World 
Inequality  Lab,  after  redistribution,  the  income  of  the  wealthiest  10%  of  US 
households is, on average, twelve times higher than that of the poorest 50%, 
compared  to  a  ratio  of  eight  in  Europe.  This  ratio  has  doubled  in  the  United 
States  since  1980,  while  it  has  remained  relatively  stable  in  Europe.xvi  Our 
social welfare system plays a key role here: it even defines Europe, whether it 
is based on a Bismarck or a Beveridge model. Secondly, the European model 
organises  industrial  relations  and  economic  power  relations  in  a  more 
balanced  way  between  employers  and  employees.  This  is  enshrined  in  the 
Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  European  Union,  whether  one  follows 
the  Nordic  traditions  of  negotiation  or  the  Latin  ones  of  regulation.  Finally,  a 
high  level  of  public  services  remains  a  key  factor  of  integration,  from 
transport  to  health.  As  regards  the  level  of  public  spending,  there  are 
significant  differences  between  European  countries:  unfortunately,  France 
displays the highest level of public spending, at 56% of GDP, and must make 
its public sphere more efficient.  But  the  euro area  average,  at 47% of GDP, 
illustrates a different societal choice to that of the United States and the United 
Kingdom,  with  ratios  of  35%  and  38%  respectively,  and  even  more  so  the 
large emerging countries 
Redistribution  and  social  welfare  system  +  industrial  relations  +  public 
services: let us call it the European social model, or "Soziale Marktwirtschaft" if 
one  is  German  and  more  liberal.  The  vast  majority  of  our  fellow  citizens, 
beyond  their  national  or  political  differences,  are  attached  to  this  common 
matrix. Let us affirm it, without shame: it is not only a legacy from the past, it is 
an asset, today. But we need to recognize that this ambition to achieve social 
justice is no longer sufficient. We cannot be content with an ex-post "repair" of 
inequalities.xvii We have to create equal opportunities for all ex ante, and this is 
the second requirement, that of individual autonomy through education. 
 
2.2  The major requirement: aspiring to autonomy through education  
Page 7 of 10 
It is clear that education must be the absolute priority: to offer all citizens the 
same opportunities for success, regardless of their social background. It is the 
best way to prepare each and every citizen for the knowledge economy and 
the  technological  transformations  that  he  or  she  will  have  to  face.  It  is  the 
prerequisite for social mobility, in order to reduce the “longitudinal” inequalities 
between  generations.  And  hence,  it  increases  growth  by  raising  the  “human 
capital” of a country.  
In  Europe,  we  have  some  of  the  best  education  and  vocational  training 
systems. For example, the effective Finish education model and the quality of 
German  and  Swiss  teaching.  The  skill  levels  of  European  students  are  on 
average higher than those of OECD countriesxviii in terms of mathematics and 
science  scores  and  of  understanding  written  texts.  As  well  as  performing 
better, our education systems are more democratic thanks to higher enrolment 
ratesxix – 90% in Europe compared to 84% in the United Statesxx – and lower 
average tuition fees.xxi 
But it is clear that there is a significant North-South divide in Europe in terms of 
education; and France – it must be said – is "southern" and inegalitarian. PISA 
studies show that France is the G7 country  where academic  performance of 
xxii  This 
pupils  is  the  most  highly  determined  by  their  social  environment.
observation illustrates  what the Nobel  Prize  winner  Jean Tirole described as 
the “délit d’initié” or rigged system.
 This collective failure also contributes to 
a structural unemployment rate that is still too high in France, i.e. around 7 to 
8%.  This  challenge  is  common  in  Southern  Europe,  and  goes  hand  in  hand 
with  another  one:  at  long  last  developing  apprenticeships  and  vocational 
training. There are now fewer young people in apprenticeships in France, Italy 
and  Spain  combined  than  in  Germany  alone...  while  there  are  many  more 
young people, and young people unemployed. It is not a paradox, but rather 
an explanation... and a call for action. The "Avenir Pro" law passed in France 
xxiii
 
in 2018 must now be implemented, and Italy’s way out of economic stagnation 
can be achieved by taking the same tack. 
Page 8 of 10 
2.3  Commitment to the environment and climate 
The  third  requirement  of  the  European  model  is  a  firm  commitment  to  the 
environment  and  climate.  This  issue  is  currently  the  largest  unifying  factor 
among the young as well as older generations throughout the world. The last 
European elections showed this clearly. The German philosopher Hans Jonas 
urges  us  to  respect  the  imperative  of  responsibility:  you  should  always 
consider the possible worst case as a likely option and act accordingly.xxiv And 
is this respect, Europe is ahead and Donald Trump's America is behind.  
But  climate  is  the  very  example  of  a  global  public  good:  no  country  has  the 
means or even the incentive to act alone. All European countries signed the 
Paris  Climate  Agreement  in  2015.  Supervisors  and  central  banks  are  also 
strongly  committed.  In  December  2017,  some  of  them  –  including  in  several 
European countries – set up the Central Banks and Supervisors Network for 
Greening  the  Financial  System  (NGFS)  at  the  initiative  of  the  Banque  de 
France. Today, this network has nearly 50 members: it works concretely – and 
with  great  enthusiasm  –  to  ensure  that  banks  and  insurers  better  integrate 
climate change risks and promote green financing. And we must, as Christine 
Lagarde  told  the  European  Parliament,  take  climate  change  into  account  in 
monetary policy: I made proposals in this respect. 
2.4  A new model to renew multilateralism 
European integration is based first and foremost on a method: multilateralism 
and cooperation. These are no longer very fashionable terms, but we must use 
them  without  wavering.  Nationalist  escalation  does  not  provide  solutions  for 
the major issues facing citizens. We still need to re-establish multilateralism on 
the basis of three convictions stemming from our European experience,  with 
its limitations: 
Page 9 of 10 
an agenda that meets people's expectations: more inclusive growth, and 
the protection of common public goods, starting with the climate 
an ability to decide and act comprehensively with regard to a few well-
identified projects, rather than discussing everything, at too much length.  
a distinction between the independence of states – which may be formal 
–  and  real  sovereignty  on  key  issues.  Emmanuel  Macron  was  among 
the first who dared to advocate a "European sovereignty", which is still 
an oxymoron for many, who only dream of national sovereignty. But it is 
this  common  sovereignty  that  Mario  Draghi  promoted  in  a  speech  in 
Bologna 
that:  “independence  does  not 
guarantee  sovereignty"  and  that  "countries  need  to  work  together  to 
exercise  sovereignty.”xxv  Let  me  give  you  a  testimony:  this  is  what  we 
have  achieved  with  the  euro.  It  is  never  easy  –  we  have  cultural 
differences,  including  economic  differences.  But  we  are  proud  to  have 
created together a sovereign currency, globally respected, with popular 
support  –  76%  of  citizens  are  attached  to  the  euro  –  and  a  federal 
institution – the Eurosystem, consisting of the ECB and the 19 national 
central  banks  –  which  is  undoubtedly  the  one  that  works  the  best  in 
Europe.  
last  February,  stressing 
     A  social,  environmental  and  multilateral  model  must  now  be  Europe’s 
message to the world. I do not underestimate any of the difficulties involved: 
we  must  first  manage  today's  threats.  We  must  involve  and  convince  the 
citizens,  who  too  often  fear  that  more  economic  integration  threatens  their 
European  social  model,  when  conversely  it  would  strengthen  it:  we  should 
state  much  more  clearly  our  commitment  to  these  common  "fundamentals". 
Finally,  we  must  have  the  courage  to  assert  our  values  openly.  But  I  will 
conclude  with  a  former  student  of  Sciences-Po,  and  one  of  the  greatest, 
Simone  Veil:  “Setting  itself  high  ambitions,  Europe  will  be  able  to  make  its 
 
voice  heard  and  defend  strong  values:  peace,  the  defence  of  human  rights, 
and more solidarity between rich and poor.”xxvi This fight is worth fighting; it is 
mine, and I believe above all that it is the fight of your generation. I wish each 
and every one of you, good luck.  
Page 10 of 10 
                                                            
 
References: 
i Communication on the future path of policy rates.  
ii Stefan Zweig, Erasmus, Grandeur and Decadence of an Idea. 
iii IMF (2019), World Economic Outlook, updated on 23 July. 
iv IMF (2019, 2018), World Economic Outlook, July 2018 and July 2019. 
v Nominal ICT capital as a percentage of nominal GDP, entire economy. Source: Gilbert Cette and Ombeline 
Jullien de Pommerol, “Have the growth gains from ICT been exhausted? Banque de France blog, 18 October 
2018; updated figures. 
vi Conclusions of the meeting in Chantilly on 17 and 18 July 2019 
vii Marie-Laure Djelic (2002) “Exporting the American Model: Historical Roots of Globalization”. J. Rodgers 
Hollingsworth; Karl Müller; Ellen Jane Hollingsworth. Advancing Socio-Economics, Rowman Littlefield, pp.351 - 
380, 2002. 
Hall PA, Soskice D. Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional Foundations of Comparative Advantage. Oxford 
University Press; 2001. 
Pontusson Jonas (2005), Inequality and Prosperity: Social Europe versus Liberal America. Cornell University 
Press. Co- recipient, Gladys M. Kammerer Award, American Political Science Association, 2006. 
viii “Guérir le capitalisme”, video of Marie-Laure Djelic, August 2018 presenting her course: “The Great 
Transition - Responsibility, Innovation, Commons”. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w2uiVqQk_wI 
ix Aglietta, Michel and Reberioux, Antoine (2014), Dérives du capitalisme financier, Albin Michel. 
x Dani Rodrik (2018), Straight Talk On Trade. Ideas for a Sane World Economy. Princeton University Press. 
xi Michel Albert (1991), Capitalisme contre Capitalisme, Seuil.  
xii Stiglitz, Joseph E., (2013), The Price of Inequality: How Today’s Divided Society Endangers our Future. New 
York: W.W. Norton and Company. 
xiii Piketty, Thomas (2014), Capital in the 21st Century, Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Belknap Press of Harvard 
University Press. 
Piketty, Thomas (2019), Capital et idéologie, Seuil (published on 12 September) 
xiv Cingano, F. (2014), “Trends in Income Inequality and its Impact on Economic Growth”, OECD Social, 
Employment and Migration Working Papers, No. 163, OECD Publishing, Figure 3.  
xv IMF (2019), Inequality of Opportunity, Inequality of Income and Economic Growth 
xvi World Inequality Lab (2019), « Has the European social model withstood the rise in inequalities? » Issue Brief 
2019-3 – March 2019 
xvii Philippe Aghion, Gilbert Cette, Elie Cohen, Changer de modèle, Odile Jacob, 2014 
xviii OECD (2016), PISA 2015. 
xix OECD 
xx OECD (2016), PISA 2015: on average, the PISA 2015 sample covers 90% of the national population of 15-year-
olds in Europe/EU/euro area. For the OECD, this coverage rate is an approximate measure of enrolment rates 
in grade 7 or higher. 
xxi OECD (2018, 2016) Education at a Glance.  
xxii OECD (2018), Equity in Education: Breaking Down Barriers to Social Mobility, PISA, OECD Publishing, Paris. 
Performances measured in science 
xxiii Column in Les Echos, 20 April 2018 
xxiv Hans Jonas (1991), The Imperative of Responsibility: In Search of Ethics for the Technological Age 
xxv Mario Draghi (2019) Sovereignty in a globalised world, Speech at the University of Bologna, 22 February 
xxvi Simone Veil, President of the European Parliament, 1979 
