Luis de Guindos: The euro area economy and our monetary policy
stance
Remarks  by  Mr  Luis  de  Guindos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  during  the
Instituto  de  Empresa  (IE)  Business  Leadership  Forum  at  the  IE  Business  School,  Madrid,  10
June 2019.
Recent economic developments
 Despite the somewhat better than expected data for the first quarter, in part due to temporary
factors, the most recent information indicates that global headwinds continue to weigh on the
euro area outlook. In particular, world trade remains subdued due to rising trade tensions and the
global  growth  momentum  has  slowed  somewhat,  mainly  on  account  of  the  weakness  in
manufacturing. Moreover, downside risks have increased on account of the re-escalated trade
dispute  between  the  US  and  China.  Also,  uncertainty  surrounding  Brexit  is  prolonged  and
fragilities in emerging market economies remain. While inflation is expected to rise gradually due
to tightening labour markets and rising wages, current dynamics of underlying inflation remain
muted.  It  is  against  this  background,  that  the  Governing  Council  decided  a  number  of  policy
measures at its last meeting, including an extension of its forward guidance on policy interest
rates,  a  confirmation  of  the  reinvestment  policy  and  favourable  pricing  conditions  for  our  new
series of targeted longer term refinancing operations (TLTRO III).
Euro  area  real  GDP  growth  came  in  at  0.4%  quarter-on-quarter  in  the  first  quarter  of  2019,
surprising  somewhat  on  the  upside.  The  better  than  expected  outcome  was  in  part  driven  by
temporary  factors,  such  as  the  mild  weather  supporting  a  pick-up  in  construction  and  some
sector  specific  developments.  Economic  indicators  suggest  that  domestic  demand  remains
resilient, as signalled by the growth of consumption, which grew 0.5% quarter-on-quarter in the
first quarter of the year, and investment, which grew by 1.1% during the same period.
While first quarter growth was somewhat stronger than previously anticipated, incoming data and
survey information point to somewhat more moderate growth over the next few quarters. This
reflects  the  ongoing  weakness  in  international  trade  in  an  environment  of  prolonged  global
uncertainties, which are weighing, in particular, on the euro area manufacturing sector. In fact,
some leading indicators such as manufacturing PMI and the ECB indicator on euro area new
orders have declined recently, confirming weakening dynamics in the euro area manufacturing
sector. At the same time, the euro area services and construction sectors are showing resilience
and the labour market is continuing to improve.
Looking  forward,  the  underlying  fundamentals  for  a  continued  expansion  of  the  euro  area
economy  remain  in  place.  In  fact,  favourable  financing  conditions,  strong  labour  market
conditions  and  rising  wages  continue  to  underpin  domestic  demand  supporting  ongoing  solid
consumption and investment dynamics.
Consumer confidence remains overall robust and has recently increased, as indicated by the EC
Consumer Survey. Moreover, households’ financial situation continues to strengthen, in line with
further declines in unemployment, which supports private consumption.
Financial conditions have slightly tightened since the April meeting, amid ongoing trade tensions,
where equity prices have declined and the euro appreciated in effective terms. Despite this slight
tightening, financial conditions remain significantly looser compared to the beginning of the year,
due to lower risk free interest rates, higher equity prices and a somewhat weaker euro exchange
rate.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  addition,  financing  conditions  for  euro  area  non-financial  corporations  (NFCs)  remain  very
favourable. Lower costs of equity and market-based debt have meant a decline in the nominal
cost of external financing for NFCs. Bank lending rates for firms and households remain close to
historical lows as bank funding conditions remain favourable, also supported by our new series
of TLTRO III. Moreover, the recent SAFE Survey reported that access to finance was considered
the least important obstacle for small and medium enterprises.
Labour markets remain robust, as figures of employment growth were higher than expected and
unemployment  continued  to  decrease.  Employment  growth  was  0.3%,  which  is  higher  than
anticipated, albeit lower than  the  average  quarterly  growth  of  0.4%  that  has  characterized  the
second  quarter  of  previous  years.  Furthermore,  euro  area  unemployment  came  in  at  7.6%  in
April, the lowest since August 2008.
Overall, our assessment on the euro area economic outlook is broadly reflected in the June 2019
Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections  for  the  euro  area.  These  projections  foresee
annual real GDP increasing by 1.2% in 2019, 1.4% in 2020 and 1.4% in 2021. Compared with the
March 2019 ECB staff macroeconomic projections, the outlook for real GDP growth has been
revised  up  by  0.1  percentage  points  for  2019  and  has  been  revised  down  by  0.2  percentage
points for 2020 and by 0.1 percentage points for 2021.
At the same time, there are clear downside risks to this central scenario, largely on account of
the  prolonged  presence  of  uncertainties  relating  to  the  international  environment.  These
uncertainties could weaken or delay the recovery in external demand and also weigh on euro
area investment and consumption dynamics.
With regards to inflation, euro area annual HICP inflation was 1.2% in May 2019, after 1.7% in
April, reflecting mainly lower energy and services price inflation. On the basis of current futures
prices for oil, headline inflation is likely to decline over the coming months, before rising again
towards the end of  year.  Measures  of  underlying  inflation  remain  rather  muted,  having  moved
largely sideways over recent months.
At the same time, inflation dynamics are supported by strengthening labour cost pressures amid
high levels of capacity utilisation and tightening labour markets. In fact, recent data on negotiated
wages point towards a continuation in the upward trend in wage growth, which is expected to
gradually push up underlying inflation.
Market based measures of long term inflation expectations have further declined, while survey-
based measures have remained stable. The probability of deflation implied by options markets
remains low and continues to suggest that deflation risks remain contained. Yet, market-based
measures of inflation expectations point to a prolonged period or low inflation, indicating only a
very gradual return to levels close to, but below 2%. Nevertheless, survey-based measures of
inflation expectations have remained anchored.
This assessment is also broadly reflected in the latest June 2019 Eurosystem staff projections,
which foresee inflation at 1.3% for 2019, 1.4% for 2020, and 1.6% for 2021. Compared with the
March  2019  ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections,  the  outlook  for  HICP  inflation  has  been
revised slightly up for 2019 and revised slightly down for 2020. Annual HICP inflation excluding
energy and food is expected to be 1.1% in 2019, 1.4% in 2020 and 1.6% in 2021.
The monetary policy stance
Against  this  overall  background,  the  Governing  Council  took  a  number  of  monetary  policy
decisions at its recent meeting in Vilnius in early June.
First,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  adjust  its  forward  guidance  on  the  key  ECB  interest
rates.  We  now  expect  these  to  remain  at  their  present  levels  at  least  through  the  first  half  of
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
2020, and in any case for as long as necessary to ensure the continued sustained convergence
of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
This formulation consists of two parts. There is a date-based element – that interest rates are
expected to remain at their present levels “at least through the first half of 2020”. And there is a
state-contingent  element  –  that  rates  will  remain  unchanged  “in  any  case  for  as  long  as
necessary to ensure the continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below,
but close to, 2% over the medium term”.
Shifting  the  date-based  part  of  our  rate  guidance  outwards  ensures  that  our  monetary
accommodation is not weakened by premature expectations of a rate hike.
In  addition,  the  state-dependent  element  ensures  that  our  monetary  policy  stance  will  remain
accommodative for as long as necessary and will evolve gradually following incoming economic
data.
Second, we reiterated our forward guidance on reinvestment. We intend to continue reinvesting,
in  full,  the  principal  payments  from  maturing  securities  purchased  under  the  asset  purchase
programme for an extended period of time, past the date when we start raising the key ECB
interest rates, and in any case for as long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity conditions
and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.
Our reinvestment policy continues to provide a significant degree of policy stimulus. In fact, by
linking the reinvestment horizon to the date when we start raising the key ECB interest rates, we
are  reinforcing  the  stimulative  effects  of  our  forward  guidance  as  market  expectations  for  the
reinvestment horizon should evolve in line with expectations for the date of rate lift-off.
Third, we decided on the pricing modalities of the new series of quarterly targeted longer-term
refinancing operations (TLTRO III), which we had already announced in March. The aim of these
operations  is  to  offer  long-term  funding  at  attractive  conditions  to  banks,  which  will  help  to
preserve favourable bank lending conditions and support the smooth and efficient bank-based
transmission of monetary policy.
This  series  of  operations  will  start  in  September  2019  and  end  in  March  2021,  and  have  a
maturity of two years each.
At our last meeting, we decided that the interest rate in each operation will be set at a level that is
10 basis points above the average rate applied in the Eurosystem’s main refinancing operations
over  the  life  of  the  respective  TLTRO.  For  banks  whose  eligible  net  lending  exceeds  a
benchmark, the rate applied in TLTRO III will be lower and can be as low as the average interest
rate on the deposit facility prevailing over the life of the operation plus 10 basis points.
We also assessed the impact of negative rates on the euro area economy and concluded that, at
this  point  in  time,  the  positive  contribution  of  negative  rates  to  the  accommodative  monetary
policy stance and to the sustained convergence of inflation is not undermined by possible side
effects on bank-based intermediation. However, we will continue to monitor carefully the bank-
based transmission of monetary policy and the case for mitigating measures.
Overall,  we  are  confident  that  the  monetary  policy  measures  will  provide  the  monetary
accommodation necessary for inflation  to  remain  on  a  sustained  path  towards  levels  that  are
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Indeed, they ensure that financial conditions will
remain very favourable, supporting the euro area expansion, the ongoing build-up of domestic
price pressures and, thus, headline inflation developments over the medium term.
At the same time, we remain alert in the wake of mounting global uncertainties. The Governing
Council is, therefore, determined to act in case of adverse contingencies and also stands ready
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
to adjust all of its instruments, as appropriate, to ensure that inflation continues to move towards
the Governing Council’s inflation aim in a sustained manner.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
