Yves  Mersch:  Promoting  innovation  and  integration  in  retail
payments to achieve tangible benefits for people and businesses
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the American European Community Association, Brussels, 7 February 2019.
 New technologies are transforming the entire economy, our daily lives and also the way we pay.
Digitalisation is a strong driver of innovation in retail payments and can help to deliver customer-
friendly  solutions.  In  a  parallel  development,  people  now  tend  to  expect  that  services  –  and
payments – should be delivered instantly. At the ECB, we are very much aware of these trends,
and we are promoting innovation in our economy by providing new services such as TARGET
Instant Payment Settlement (TIPS). We closely monitor all new developments in the market with
a view to fostering change.
However, we must bear in mind that increased digitalisation means that more and more of our
daily  actions  are  leaving  an  electronic  trail.  Data  on  our  actions  –  including  our  payment
transactions – are not only captured automatically, they are also stored. This means that they
can  easily  be  reused  for  other  purposes  or,  as  recent  events  have  shown,  misused.  Data
protection  has  therefore  become  a  matter  of  paramount  importance.  Private  data  should  be
sufficiently protected and only used with the consent of and for the benefit of consumers and
citizens. In the United States there is an ongoing social and political debate on the subject, while
here in the European Union the General Data Protection Regulation was introduced in May last
year to that end. The GDPR sets out the rights of individuals, such as the right to request access
to  their  data,  the  right  to  receive  and  forward  those  data,  and  the  right  to  be  forgotten.  The
Regulation also places obligations upon entities processing personal data.
In the context of work in Europe on retail payments, protecting users’ rights and enhancing the
right  to  data  privacy  is  vital  when  it  comes  to  developing  innovative  payment  solutions  and
strengthening  users’  trust  in  them.  This  is  especially  true  for  the  new  payment  services
introduced  in  the  context  of  the  revised  Payment  Services  Directive  (PSD2).  With  the  user’s
consent, third-party providers of payment initiation services and account information services are
able to access payment accounts. Banks and other market participants are currently dedicating
considerable  effort  to  the  implementation  of  communication  interfaces.  The  Euro  Retail
Payments  Board  (ERPB)  –  the  high-level  strategic  body  that  brings  together  the  supply  and
demand sides of the euro retail payments markets – recommends an easy, secure and, as far
as possible, automated solution in the form of a standardised application programming interface
(API). To ensure the successful implementation of such interfaces and to bring about their pan-
European  uptake  and  reach,  the  ECB  believes  that  a  harmonised  and  integrated  approach  is
necessary.
Services based on access to a payment account have huge potential, for example where third-
party providers offer competitive payment initiation services to merchants or aggregated account
information  to  consumers.  Demand  for  such  services  is  growing  worldwide,  and  several
legislative  and  regulatory  initiatives  have  been  introduced  to  encourage  competition  and
innovation in financial services. Indeed, PSD2 can be seen as a first step along the path towards
“open banking”. This is an opportunity for EU market stakeholders to shape the work on open
banking  and  to  demonstrate  that  we  are  able  to  progress  towards  that  objective  –  in  a
coordinated way, for the good of European citizens. Banks should not see third-party access to
accounts as a threat. Instead, they can capitalise on their PSD2 investments in APIs and offer
value-added  services,  for  example  by  including  in  the  API  other  accounts  beyond  the  pure
payment accounts covered by PSD2, by offering additional functionalities for payment initiation
services, or even by extending the API to other services such as customer authentication. Such
value-added services could then be fairly compensated. I believe that such an approach would
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
be mutually beneficial for banks and third-party providers. For this reason, the ERPB set up a
working group to explore the scope for an API access scheme in the Single Euro Payments Area
(SEPA), as well as the legal and governance aspects of such a scheme. The group has now
started delivering on its mandate. For the working group to be successful, banks should see the
evolution towards open banking as an opportunity to renew their innovation strategy and client
focus, in a changing global environment.
Instant  payments  are  another  enabler  for  innovative  payment  solutions.  In  Europe,  the  SEPA
instant payments scheme and the various processing and settlement arrangements, including
the  Eurosystem’s  TIPS  service,  are  all  in  place.  TIPS  was  launched  last  year  and  allows
transactions to be settled in central bank money across Europe within seconds. The capacity to
transfer  funds  within  a  few  seconds  is  a  powerful  one,  and  it  has  great  potential  beyond
traditional credit transfers. However, the market will need to tailor solutions to the specific needs
of  end  users.  One  highly  promising  area  is  the  point  of  sale,  or  more  broadly  the  point  of
interaction (POI). For merchants, instant payments at the POI could be a cost-efficient alternative
to cards. Such solutions are currently emerging across Europe. It is important to ensure that they
have pan-European reach so that end users can make and receive payments without restriction
across national borders. To this end, the ERPB set up a working group to analyse in detail the
barriers to pan-European reach and usability and ways to overcome them.
Many of the innovative payment solutions introduced over the past few years have been based on
the use of card payment schemes. Although payment cards are the most widely used payment
instrument  in  Europe,  a  true  SEPA  for  cards  has  not  yet  been  achieved.  For  example,
cardholders cannot use their national payment cards to make payments across Europe unless
they go through a global card payment scheme that can execute such intra-European payments.
The industry sees the implementation of a European infrastructure for instant payments as an
opportunity to instantly clear and settle card transactions, which would offer a possible way of
supporting  the  interlinking  and  interoperability  of  national  card  schemes.  Efforts  to  ensure  the
interoperability of schemes should be strengthened and should aim to foster a European identity,
for  example  by  using  a  common  European  logo  to  show  users  that  their  cards  can  be  used
across the EU.
Let me now conclude. Digitalisation has brought a great deal of change to the payments market,
and there is more on its way. The GDPR and PSD2 have been introduced to protect EU citizens
and  to  support  competition  in  payments.  For  its  part,  the  Eurosystem  is  helping  to  drive
innovation and integration in retail payments, not least by providing instant settlement services
through TIPS and setting up the ERPB as a forum for high-level market agreements. The main
areas for further development are standardised APIs, instant payments at the point of sale, and
the  interoperability  of  national  card  schemes.  I  look  forward  to  proactive  cooperation  with  the
payments industry in these areas, based on joint standardisation and harmonisation.
Thank you for your attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
