September  4,  2019 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
Economic Activity, Prices,   
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Hakodate 
Goushi Kataoka 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
 I. Economic Activity and Prices 
A. Overseas Economies 
I would like to start my speech by looking at developments in overseas economies.   
 With  the  growth  pace  of  the  global  economy  slowing  since  the  second  half  of  2018, 
differences in growth rates among countries are evident, and some risk factors have started 
to  materialize.  According  to  the  July  2019  World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO)  Update 
released  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  as  presented  in  Chart  1,  the  global 
economic  growth  rate  is  projected  to  decelerate  to  3.2  percent  in  2019,  picking  up  to  3.5 
percent  in  2020.  However,  downward  revisions  from  the  April  2018  WEO  forecasts  are 
evident, as seen on the right-hand side of Chart 1. As for the global Purchasing Managers' 
Index  (PMI),  shown  in  Chart  2,  the  index  for  manufacturing  has  been  below  the  neutral 
50-point  level  for  two  consecutive  months,  marking  the  lowest  level  since  October  2012, 
when the global economy faced the European sovereign debt crisis.  The index for services 
is  on  a  moderate  declining  trend,  although  it  is  still  above  the  50-point  level.  Given  these 
facts,  I  suppose  there  is  a  growing  possibility  that  the  recovery  in  the  global  economy, 
which was expected to start from the second half of 2019, may be delayed, and the degree 
may be limited. There are three specific key factors behind my thoughts: (1) the heightening 
of economic policy uncertainty; (2) developments in the U.S.-China trade friction and their 
effects; and (3) the outlook for the world semiconductor market. 
 With  regard  to  the  first  factor,  Chart  3  presents  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  global 
production  and  the  Global  Economic  Policy  Uncertainty  Index,  which  shows  the 
GDP-weighted  average  of  economic  policy  uncertainty  levels  for  20  major  countries.  The 
pace  of  increase  in  global  production  is  decelerating  while  uncertainty  over  economic 
policy conducted by each country is heightening. 
 The  second  factor  is  developments  in  the  U.S.-China  trade  friction,  which  is  particularly 
crucial among various economic policy uncertainties. Chart 4 shows the impact of the trade 
friction on GDP for the United States and China, estimated by the IMF in June 2019. The 
left-hand  bar  graph  represents  the  deviations  from  baseline  projections  of  the  real  GDP 
levels  for  the  two  countries.  The  simulations  take  into  account  the  tariff  hike  from  10 
1 
percent to 25 percent on 200 billion dollars' worth of U.S. imports from China as of May 8, 
2019, and assume an envisaged 25 percent tariff on the remaining U.S. imports from China 
as well as retaliation by China. Although the impact differs between the two countries in the 
short  run,  the  trade  friction  will  equally  exert  downward  pressure  on  real  GDP  in  both 
countries by around 0.4 percent in the long run. The right-hand chart shows the impact of 
the trade friction on the global economy. The tariff hikes implemented in 2018 are exerting 
downward pressure on global real GDP for 2019 by more than 0.2 percent. If the 25 percent 
tariff is imposed on almost all items imported from China, it is estimated that the global real 
GDP figures for 2019 and 2020 will be pushed down by around 0.4 percent and 0.5 percent, 
respectively. The United States recently announced that it will impose additional tariffs on 
the  remaining  imports,  worth  approximately  300  billion  dollars, and  will  raise  tariffs  by  5 
percentage  points  on  the  U.S.  imports  from  China  that  already  have  been  taxed.  As  trade 
negotiations have not come to a conclusion, attention should continue to be paid to the fact 
that the global economy still faces downside risks. 
 The third factor is the outlook for the  world semiconductor market.  Deceleration in  world 
semiconductor sales became notable from mid-2018. Various reasons have been pointed out 
as  the  background  to  this;  for  example,  a  halt  in  expansion  of  demand  for  data  centers,  a 
prolonged  replacement  cycle  for  smartphones,  and  a  decline  in  business  fixed  investment 
related to machine tools -- which largely are equipped with semiconductors -- due mainly to 
deterioration  in  the  U.S.-China  trade  friction. The  left-hand  side  of  Chart  5  compares  the 
forecasts for the year-on-year growth rate in the semiconductor market made by the World 
Semiconductor  Trade  Statistics  Inc.  in  autumn  2018  and  spring  2019  by  region.  The 
forecasted  market  growth  rate  for  2019  has  been  revised  sharply  downward  in  the  spring 
2019  forecast,  from  a  slight  increase  in  the  autumn  2018  forecast,  especially  for  the  U.S. 
market. The right-hand chart shows the year-on-year rate of change in world semiconductor 
shipments. As the pace of increase in shipments was fast over the past two years, recovery 
in the semiconductor market likely will take time. 
 2 
B. Japan's Economy 
Next, I would like to turn to Japan's economy, starting with recent developments.   
 In  Chart  6,  the  line  graph  shows  developments  in  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  and  the  bar 
graph  shows  the  contribution  of  each  component  to  GDP.  The  growth  rate  for  the 
July-September  quarter  of  2018  registered  negative  growth,  due  mainly  to  the  effects  of 
natural disasters, but subsequently has been positive for three consecutive quarters through 
the April-June quarter of 2019. In that quarter, the contribution of exports remained small, 
reflecting  the  slowdown  in  the  global  economy,  but  the  contribution  of  domestic  demand 
turned positive due to an increase in the contribution of private consumption, business fixed 
investment, and government spending, which had decreased in the previous quarter. Overall, 
the  increase  in  domestic  demand  more  than  offset  the  decrease  in  external  demand  in  the 
April-June quarter. 
 Turning to the outlook for Japan's economy, as shown in Chart 7, the medians of forecasts 
made by the Bank of Japan's Policy Board members for real GDP growth rates presented in 
the  July  2019  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (Outlook  Report) are  0.7  percent 
for  fiscal  2019,  0.9  percent  for  fiscal  2020,  and  1.1  percent  for  fiscal  2021.  The  Bank's 
baseline  scenario  is  that,  although  external  demand  is  likely  to  be  somewhat  weak  for  the 
time  being,  it  gradually  will  increase  thereafter,  and  with  the  firm  domestic  demand,  the 
economy  is  likely  to  continue  on  an  expanding  trend.  However,  my  projection  for  fiscal 
2019-2021 is around 0.5 percent to 1.0 percent, which is slightly below the potential growth 
rate.  I  also  am  of  the  view  that  risks  to  economic  activity  are  tilted  to  the  downside.  As 
background to my projection, I consider that an important factor is how the deterioration in 
external demand will affect domestic demand. In the following, I will explain my views on 
exports, business fixed investment, and private consumption. 
 First, real exports turned to a decline in the January-March quarter of 2019 and experienced 
weak  recovery  in  the  following  quarter,  as  seen  in  Chart  8.  The  key  to  the  outlook  is 
developments  in  the  U.S.-China  trade  friction  and  the  degree  of  recovery  in  the 
semiconductor  market, and  I  believe  that  real  exports  are  highly  likely  to  remain  sluggish 
for the time being.   
3 
Second, business fixed investment has been on an uptrend, with insufficient capacity -- as 
shown in Chart 9 -- continuing to exert upward pressure on investment. However, according 
to the Bank's Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), the diffusion 
index  (DI)  for  production  capacity  has  been  approaching  the  turning  point  between 
insufficient  and  excessive  capacity  since  the  turn  of  2019,  and  my  view  is  that  the 
increasing trend in business fixed investment may come to a halt. Business fixed investment 
plans  in  the  June  2019  Tankan  were  firm  on  the  whole,  both  in  manufacturing  and 
nonmanufacturing. As shown in Chart 10, however, within manufacturing, investment plans 
of  the  processing  industries,  which  are  highly  dependent  on  exports  --  such  as  the 
general-purpose, production, and business oriented machinery, as well as the motor vehicles 
industries  --  were  below  the  past  average.  In  particular,  investment  plans  of  the 
general-purpose,  production,  and  business  oriented  machinery  industries  were  revised 
downward  in  the  June  survey  from  the  March  survey.  The  recent  growth  in  the  plans  of 
overall  manufacturing  is  driven  by  the  basic  materials  industry,  but  considering  the  past 
average  of  revision  patterns  in  the  Tankan,  the  investment  plans  of  the  basic  materials 
industry  also  may  be  revised  downward.  Furthermore,  as  for  nonmanufacturing,  shown  in 
Chart  11,  investment  plans  of  the  construction  as  well  as  the  wholesaling  and  retailing 
industries  were  at  about  the  same  levels  as  the  past  average,  but  those  of  the  information 
communication  industry  were  relatively  weak.  Thus,  although  business  fixed  investment 
plans  are  firm  on  the  whole,  I  think  that  those  of  manufacturing  are  being  steadily 
influenced by the slowdown in overseas economies. 
 Lastly,  private  consumption  has  been  on  a  moderate  increasing  trend,  driven  by 
consumption  of  durable  goods  and  services,  as  presented  in  Chart  12.  This  reflects  the 
sustained  favorable  employment.  However,  there  have  been  signs  of  changes  in  the  labor 
market  since  the  turn  of  2019.  For  example,  the  employment-related  level  DI  in  the 
Economy Watchers Survey is at a level very close to falling below the neutral point of 50, 
and  the  number  of  active  job  openings  has  decreased  for  five  consecutive  months  on  a 
year-on-year  basis.  As  Chart  13  indicates,  developments  in  consumption  have  been 
moderate  so  far,  although  the  consumption  tax  hike  is  coming  up  in  October  2019,  and  I 
assume that consumer sentiment has deteriorated more than in the second half of fiscal 2013, 
half a year before the previous tax hike. It is difficult to predict how the measures to reduce 
4 
the household burden of the tax hike will affect consumption, and thus attention should be 
paid to future developments in consumption, including the effects of the tax hike.1   
 C. Recent Developments and Outlook for Prices 
Next, I will move on to price developments.   
 As  indicated  in  the  left-hand  side  of  Chart  14,  the  year-on-year  rates  of  increase  in  the 
consumer price index (CPI) for July 2019 both for all items less fresh food and for all items 
less  fresh  food  and  energy  were  0.6  percent.  Looking  at  the  right-hand  side  of  Chart  14, 
which  shows  indicators  that  represent  the  underlying  developments  in  consumer  prices, 
items for which prices have risen outnumber those for which prices have declined, and the 
difference  between  the  two  figures  has  been  widening  slightly  since  the  turn  of  2019. 
However, the rises in trimmed mean and weighted median have come to a halt, and it can be 
said that price rises have not spread to goods that have a high share in consumption. 
 Next,  I  will  take  a  look  at  developments  in  the  output  gap  and  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation  expectations,  which  are  indicators  that  influence  underlying  price  developments. 
The output gap, as shown in the left-hand side of Chart 15, has remained positive, reflecting 
improvements in the capital stock and labor markets.  Recently, however, it seems that it is 
no  longer  on  an  expanding  trend.  Inflation  expectations  have  been  somewhat  weak,  as 
                                                   
1  The 2019 Salaried Worker Pocket Money Survey released by Shinsei Bank shows the results of a 
survey  conducted  of  2,700  workers,  both  male  and  female,  aged  20  through  59  years.  The 
respondents were asked "If the consumption tax is raised to 10 percent, will it be a burden on your 
pocket money?" For both men and women, the proportion of respondents who answered that the 10 
percent tax "will be a great burden" was higher than that of those who answered that the current 8 
percent tax "is a great burden." The proportion of those who answered that the 10 percent tax hike 
"will be a burden" (comprising the choices "will be a great burden" and "will slightly be a burden") 
was  higher  by  more  than  10  percentage  points  than  that  of  those  with  the  same  answers  for  the 
current  8  percent  tax.  Furthermore,  Hakuhodo  Inc.  revealed  in  its  survey  that  71.3  percent  of 
respondents  answered  that  the  10  percent  tax  hike  "will  be  a  heavier  burden  compared  with  the 
previous  tax  hike."  The  ratio  was  higher  in  particular  for  women  aged  20  through  49  years.  For 
details,  see  "Shōhi  zei  taisaku  kenkyū  purojekuto  chōsa:  Zōzei  zen  go  no  ishiki-kōdō,"  Hakuhodo 
Inc., June 2019. 
 Taking account of the difficulties in projecting developments in consumption after the tax 
hike and of the time lag in releasing statistics, I consider that it has become more necessary than at 
the time of the previous tax hike to enhance analysis of real-time data. 
5 
indicated in the right-hand side of Chart 15.  I am convinced that this is attributable to the 
adverse effects of prolonged deflation in the past and to recent weak price developments. In 
addition, in my view, the credibility of achieving the Bank's 2 percent price stability target 
has  not  been  sufficiently  enhanced  among  the  public,  and  this  also  is  affecting  inflation 
expectations. 
 Turning  to  the  outlook  for  prices, the  medians  of  the  Policy  Board  members' forecasts  for 
the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) presented in the July 
2019  Outlook  Report  are  0.8  percent  for  fiscal  2019,  1.2  percent  for  fiscal  2020,  and  1.6 
percent  for  fiscal  2021,  excluding  the  effects  of  the  scheduled  consumption  tax  hike  and 
policies  concerning  the  provision  of  free  education  (Chart  7).  The  Bank's  view  is  that  the 
momentum  toward  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  will  be  maintained.  It  cannot  be 
judged, however, that the inflation rate will accelerate toward 2 percent, and thus I dissented 
from the relevant description in the July Outlook Report. 
 There are four main reasons behind my position. First, a widening of the output gap is less 
likely  to  lead  to  a  rise  in  inflation  rates.  Second,  it  takes  some  time  for  the  adaptive 
formation mechanism to bring about an increase in inflation expectations and then lead to 
price rises.2  Third, in a situation where the monetary policy is unchanged amid successive 
downward  revisions  to  the  Bank's  outlook  for  prices,  it  is  unlikely  that  inflation 
expectations  will  rise  in  a  forward-looking  manner  through  an  enhancement  of  the 
credibility  that  the  price  stability  target  will  be  achieved.  Fourth,  while  overseas  central 
banks  are  strengthening  their  monetary  easing  stance,  the  risk  that  circumstances 
surrounding  Japan's  prices  are  becoming  more  adverse,  mainly  through  foreign  exchange 
rates, is heightening. 
                                                    
2  Ichiue et al. (2019) explain the possibility that the actual mechanism of expectation formation is 
more complicated than what the simple model of adaptive expectation formation indicates. On this 
basis, they introduce three hypotheses as the reason for inflation expectations not rising in Japan: (1) 
inflation  expectations  that  are  dependent  on  the  long  period  of  individuals'  experiences;  (2)  social 
norms  that  prices  will  not  rise;  and  (3)  "rational  inattention."  See,  for  details,  Ichiue  Hibiki  et  al., 
"Kinnen no infure dōgaku o meguru ronten: nihon no keiken," Bank of Japan Working Paper Series, 
no. 19-J-3, June 2019, https://www.boj.or.jp/research/wps_rev/wps_2019/data/wp19j03.pdf. 
6 
II. Conduct of Monetary Policy 
Let me first outline the Bank's current monetary policy, based on the outlook for economic 
activity and prices that I have described. I would then like to express my opinion about the 
Bank's monetary policy conduct. 
 The  Bank  conducts  monetary  policy  under  the  framework  of  Quantitative  and  Qualitative 
Monetary  Easing  (QQE)  with  Yield  Curve  Control,  aiming  to  achieve  the  2  percent  price 
stability target. This current framework consists of three major components (Chart 16). 
 The first is yield curve control, in which the Bank sets the short-term policy interest rate at 
minus 0.1 percent and the operating target for long-term interest rates at around 0 percent. 
As  for  long-term  interest  rates,  the  Bank  purchases  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs) 
while  allowing  some  degree  of  fluctuation  in  long-term  yields,  depending  mainly  on 
developments in economic activity and prices. 
 The  second  component  is  the  purchase  of  risk  assets,  including  exchange-traded  funds 
(ETFs).  The  Bank  purchases  ETFs  so  that  their  amount  outstanding  will  increase  at  an 
annual pace of about 6 trillion yen. With a view to lowering risk premia of asset prices in an 
appropriate manner, the Bank may increase or decrease the amount of purchases depending 
on market conditions. 
 The  third  component  is  the  Bank's  public  commitment  regarding  the  future  conduct  of 
monetary policy. In April 2019, the Bank clarified forward guidance for policy rates, stating 
that it "intends to maintain the current extremely low levels of short- and long-term interest 
rates  for  an  extended  period  of  time,  at  least  through  around  spring  2020,  taking  into 
account  uncertainties  regarding  economic  activity  and  prices  including  developments  in 
overseas economies and the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike." The Bank aims 
to  strengthen market  confidence  and  expectations  regarding  the  sustainability  of  monetary 
easing by making a commitment to the levels of future policy interest rates and the duration 
for  maintaining  low  interest  rates,  in  addition  to  the  inflation-overshooting  commitment 
regarding the monetary base. 
 7 
Of  these  three  components,  I  dissented  from  two:  yield  curve  control  and  the  Bank's 
commitment  regarding  the  future  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  As  presented  in  the  joint 
statement  by  the  Bank  and  the  government,  the  Bank's  mission  is  to  achieve  the  price 
stability target at the earliest possible time. With this in mind, as for yield curve control, I 
judged  it  necessary  to  strengthen  monetary  easing  in  the  situation  where  the  observed 
inflation rate was still evidently far from the 2 percent price stability target. Based on such 
recognition,  I  pointed  out  that  it  was  appropriate  for  the  Bank  to  revise  the  forward 
guidance  for  the  policy  rates  to  relate  it  to  the  price  stability  target,  in  addition  to 
encouraging  a  further  widening  of  the  output  gap  within  positive  territory  through 
additional  easing. 3   Moreover,  to  overcome  deflation  completely  amid  heightening 
uncertainties  regarding  economic  and  price  developments,  I  considered  it  important  to 
influence  the  expectations  and  forecasts  of  market  participants  as  well  as  firms  and 
households  by  implementing  the  appropriate  means  to  further  coordinate  fiscal  and 
monetary policy.4 
 At  the  July  2019  Monetary  Policy  Meeting,  a  new  sentence  was  added  at  the  end  of  the 
Statement  on  Monetary  Policy:  "In  particular,  in  a  situation  where  downside  risks  to 
economic  activity  and  prices,  mainly  regarding  developments  in  overseas  economies,  are 
significant, the Bank will not hesitate to take additional easing measures if there is a greater 
possibility that the momentum toward achieving the price stability target will be lost." Amid 
increasing  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and  prices,  and  in  the  aforementioned 
                                                   
3  Bearing  in  mind  the  current  yield  curve,  which  has  flattened,  I  think  that  it  is  appropriate  to 
conduct  yield  curve  control  so  that  its  shape  becomes  more  accommodative  by  setting  a  greater 
negative value for the short-term policy interest rate. 
In the event that the price stability target cannot be achieved through around spring 2020, 
which is the time frame given in the current forward guidance, it may need to be extended. In my 
opinion,  it  is  not  favorable  for  the Bank  to  make  such  changes  repeatedly,  as  there  is  concern  that 
public confidence regarding monetary policy could deteriorate. I consider it appropriate for the Bank 
to revise the forward guidance for the policy rates to relate it to the price stability target. 
4  I would argue that the mindset of firms and households in Japan was formed under the prolonged 
deflationary  environment  after  the  mid-1990s,  such  that  it  has  become  rational  to  assume  that 
economic  activity  is  sustainable  without  inflation.  In  a  situation  where  the  anchor  of  inflation 
expectations has been lost, I believe that to achieve the 2 percent price stability target and maintain 
the target price level in a stable manner, it is important not only to enhance monetary easing, but also 
to further strengthen the coordination of fiscal and monetary policy -- that is, a "policy mix." 
8 
current  situation  where  the  observed  inflation  rate  is  still  evidently  far  from  the  2  percent 
price  stability  target,  it  is  important  to  make  a  preemptive  policy  response,  not  after 
confirming changes in the inflation rate which is a lagging indicator of economic conditions. 
The Bank will continue to make efforts toward overcoming deflation completely. 
 III. Changes in Japan's Labor Market 
Next, I would like to talk about Japan's labor market. 
 As  shown  in  Chart  17,  Japan's  unemployment  rate continued  to  rise  throughout  the  1990s 
and until 2002, when it marked 5.5 percent; it then declined to the 3 percent level but rose 
again  following  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers,  and  has  dropped  to  the  range  of  2.0-2.5 
percent  recently.5  Despite  such  improvement  in  labor  market  conditions,  the  growth  in 
wages  and  prices  has  been  sluggish.  As  the  background  to  this,  various  factors  have  been 
cited; for example, low wages of the "employment ice-age" generation, possible effects of 
the  upward  wage  rigidity,  the  increasing  share  of  part-time  employees,  and  subdued 
demands  by  labor  unions  for  wage  increases.6  Some  of  these  factors  are  based  on  the 
assumption that labor market conditions already have been tight. I now would like to review 
                                                   
5  To explain the rise in  the unemployment rate since the 1990s, researchers have conducted factor 
decomposition,  concluded  that  a  shortage  in  demand  and  structural  changes  in  the  labor  market 
contributed  to  the  rise,  and  then  estimated  the  contribution.  My  estimation  of  the  structural 
unemployment rate that measures structural changes in the labor market was in the range of 2.5-3.0 
percent,  as  in  Kataoka  Goushi,  "Kōzō  shitsugyō  ritsu  suitei  hōhō  no  ayamari,"  chap.  11  in 
Abenomikusu wa shinkasuru: Kin'yu ganseki riron o tou, ed. Harada Yutaka, Kataoka Goushi, and 
Yoshimatsu  Takashi  (Tokyo:  Chuokeizai-sha,  2017).  Recently,  however,  while  the  unemployment 
rate  remains  in  the  range  of  2.0-2.5  percent,  the  pace  of  increase  in  wages  has  not  accelerated.  In 
estimating  the  structural  unemployment  rate,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  changes  in  demographics, 
the  expansion  in  the  labor  force  participation  of  seniors  and  women,  and  estimation  methods  and 
errors. 
6  See  Genda  Yuji,  ed.,  Hitode  busoku  na  noni  naze  chingin  ga  agaranai  no  ka  (Tokyo:  Keio 
University Press, 2017). Ozaki and Genda (2019) analyzed the reason why wages had not shown a 
sharp increase by using the latest data, and concluded that wages, particularly of women, were likely 
to rise rapidly if the expansion of labor supply ended and the labor market for non-regular employees 
reached the Lewisian Turning Point. See Ozaki Tatsuya and Genda Yuji, "Chingin jyōshō ga yokusei 
sareru  mekanizumu,"  Bank  of  Japan  Working  Paper  Series,  no.  19-J-6,  July  2019, 
https://www.boj.or.jp/research/wps_rev/wps_2019/data/wp19j06.pdf. 
9 
whether the current labor market conditions are so tight as to have reached a level that can 
encourage rises in wages and prices. 
 In  addition  to  the  unemployment  rate,  Chart  17  shows  developments  in  the  labor  force 
participation rate, which is the ratio of persons who want to work (labor force) among those 
in the population aged 15 years and over. The rate continued to decline from around 2000, 
bottomed out around end-2012, and has been rising since then. In October 1992, when the 
unemployment  rate  was  2.2  percent,  the  same  level  as  in  July  2019,  the  labor  force 
participation rate was 64.2 percent, which is about  2 percentage points higher than that of 
July  2019.  This  implies  the  possibility  that  the  labor  market  conditions  are  less  tight  now 
than in 1992. Needless to say, the advance in the aging of the population and the decline in 
the  birthrate  have  exerted  downward  pressure  on  the  labor  force  participation  rate  from 
1992 to the present, and we should exclude such effects from our observations.   
 Chart 18 indicates the results of the decomposition of factors that contributed to the overall 
change  in  the  labor  force  participation  rate  from  October  1992  to  date.  The  demographic 
factor has pushed down the overall rate by a large margin with the aging of the population. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  increase  in  the  contributions  of  women  (aged  between  15  and  59 
years) and of the elderly (men and women aged 60  years and over) gradually have pushed 
up  the  overall  rate.  Their positive contributions  remained  small  until  around end-2012  but 
have  seen  particular  acceleration  since  then,  substantially  offsetting  the  negative 
contribution  of  the  demographic  factor.  Firms'  growing  demand  for  labor,  backed  by  the 
economic expansion, has encouraged those who had chosen not to work, mainly women and 
seniors, to join the labor force and has increased the number of workers, thereby causing the 
unemployment rate to decline. Nevertheless, the labor force participation rate of men (aged 
between 15 and 59 years) has not recovered to the level before the "lost two decades," and 
10 
this  may  be  a  reason  why  labor  market  conditions  are  not  tight  enough  to  push  prices 
upward.7 
 In  order  to  better  grasp  the  employment  situation  from  various  aspects,  the  Ministry  of 
Internal  Affairs  and  Communications  started 
to 
include 
items  related 
to 
labor 
underutilization  and  collected  data  from  January  2018  in  the  Labour  Force  Survey,  in 
addition  to  the  previously  compiled  labor  force  status;  that  is,  employed  persons, 
unemployed persons, and persons not in the labor force.8  As shown in the right-hand side 
of  Chart  19, 
labor  underutilization  consists  of 
(1)  "persons 
in 
time-related 
underemployment,"  which  are  part-time  employees  who  wish  to  work  longer  hours  or 
full-time,  including  those  who  currently  are  working  short  hours  due  to  employers' 
circumstances, such as the need to make production adjustments, (2) "unemployed persons," 
which are persons who have been seeking jobs within the previous one month and are ready 
to  work  as  soon  as  a  job  becomes  available,  and  (3)  "potential  labor  force,"  which  is 
comprised  of  those  categorized  neither as  employed  nor  unemployed  in  the Labour  Force 
Survey, potentially able to work because they are willing to do so, but did not seek jobs. The 
left-hand side of Chart 19 shows the ratio of such labor underutilization to the overall labor 
force  including  the  potential  labor  force.  This  chart  indicates  that  there  is  still  room  for  a 
further decrease in unemployed male workers, as well as a further increase in working hours 
of female workers accomplished through such means as changing their employment status 
and environment. 
                                                    
7  Nakagawa  (2018)  pointed  out  that  a  decline  in  the  men's  labor  force  participation  rate  pushed 
down  the  overall  rate  for  2017  by  0.6  percentage  point  compared  with  that  for  1994,  when  the 
unemployment rate was about the same level as 2017. She then stated that about 700,000 additional 
workers  would  be  needed  to  fill  this  gap.  Considering  the  slack  in  labor  supply  of  men,  the 
unemployment  rate  level  that  can  encourage  rises  in  wages  and  prices  was  assumed  to  be  about 2 
percent. See Nakagawa Ai, "Rōdō jyukyū ga hippaku shitemo chingin to bukka ga agaranai no wa 
naze  ka,"  chap.  2  in  Abenomikusu  no  shinka,  ed.  Harada  Yutaka  and  Masujima  Minoru  (Tokyo: 
Chuokeizai-sha, 2018). 
8  For  details,  see  Statistics  Bureau,  Ministry  of  Internal  Affairs  and  Communications,  Rōdō  ryoku 
chōsa  mikatsuyō  rōdō  shihyō  no  kaisetsu.  An  English  translation  of  the  summary  is  available  in 
Revisions of the Labour Force Survey from January 2018, March 2018. 
11 
In  sum,  labor  market  conditions  will  tighten  further  and  wages  and  prices  will  rise  if  the 
following  conditions  are  met:  a  rise  in  men's  labor  force  participation  rate,  a  decline  in 
men's  unemployment  rate,  and  an  increase  in  women's  working  hours.  As  I  mentioned 
earlier,  some  signs  of  weakness  have  been  observed  in  the  labor  market  recently. 
Accelerating  the  pace  of  growth  in  aggregate  demand  is  the  key  to  preventing  negative 
effects from spreading to the whole labor market. 
12 
Economic Activity, Prices,
and Monetary Policy in Japan
Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Hakodate
September 4, 2019
Goushi Kataoka
Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan
World Economic Outlook by the IMF
Chart 1
July 2019 forecasts
Difference from April 2018 
(y/y % chg.)
forecasts (% pts.)
2018
2019
2020
2018
2019
2020
World
Japan
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
United Kingdom
China
Brazil
India
Russia
d
e
c
n
a
v
d
A
i
s
e
m
o
n
o
c
E
 i
g
n
g
r
e
m
E
i
s
e
m
o
n
o
c
E
3.6
0.8
2.9
1.9
1.4
1.7
1.4
6.6
1.1
6.8
2.3
3.2
0.9
2.6
1.3
0.7
1.3
1.3
6.2
0.8
7.0
1.2
Note: For India, figures are presented on a fiscal year basis.
Source: IMF, “World Economic Outlook (July 2019, April 2018).”
3.5
0.4
1.9
1.6
1.7
1.4
1.4
6.0
2.4
7.2
1.9
-0.3 
-0.4 
0.0
-0.5 
-1.1 
-0.4 
-0.2 
0.0 
-1.2 
-0.6 
0.6 
-0.7 
0.0 
-0.1 
-0.7 
-1.3 
-0.7 
-0.2 
-0.2 
-1.7 
-0.8 
-0.3 
-0.3
0.1 
0.0 
-0.1 
0.2 
-0.4 
-0.1 
-0.3 
0.2 
-0.7 
0.4 
Global PMI
Chart 2
Note: Figures are from the J.P. Morgan Global PMI. Figures above 50 indicate improvement and below 50 show deterioration on a
month-on-month basis.
Source: IHS Markit (© and database right IHS Markit Ltd 2019. All rights reserved.) 
Global Production and 
Economic Policy Uncertainty
Chart 3
Notes: 1. World industrial production is a weighted average of industrial production volume for each country. The latest figure is as of June 2019.
2. Global Economic Policy Uncertainty Index is a GDP-weighted average for 20 major countries including the United States, China, Japan, 
and European countries. The latest figure is as of July 2019. 
Sources: Economic Policy Uncertainty, "Global Economic Policy Uncertainty Index"; CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis, 
"Industrial Production Volume, CPB World Trade Monitor."
Effects of the U.S.-China Trade Friction
(Estimates by the IMF) 
Impact on Real GDP of the U.S. and China
Impact on Global Real GDP
Chart 4
Notes: 1. The left-hand graph indicates the marginal (i.e. additional) impact on the level of GDP from the announced and envisaged tariffs between 
the United States and China. The figures are the deviations from baseline projections in percentage terms. Announced tariffs correspond 
to an increase in tariffs from 10 percent to 25 percent on USD 200 billion of U.S. imports from China as of May 2019. Envisaged tariffs are 
the possible 25 percent tariff on the roughly USD 267 billion of U.S. imports from China. The simulations assume retaliation by China.
2. The right-hand graph shows the marginal effect on global GDP of the tariffs that were implemented in 2018 as well as the tariffs that were 
announced and envisaged in May 2019. The figures are the deviations from baseline projections in percentage terms.
Source: IMF, "G20 Surveillance Note (June 8-9, 2019)."
World Semiconductor Market Forecasts
World Semiconductor Market 
Forecasts by Country/Region
World Semiconductor Shipments
Chart 5
Notes: 1. Figures are on a U.S. dollar denominated basis.
2.  In the left-hand graph, figures for CY 2018 in the forecasts made in spring 2019 are actual figures. Others are forecasts.
Source: WSTS Inc.
Real GDP Growth and 
Breakdown by Component
Chart 6
Source: Cabinet Office, "Quarterly Estimates of GDP for April-June 2019 (First Preliminary Estimates)."
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices
Chart 7
(July 2019 Outlook Report)
medians of Policy Board members' forecasts, y/y % chg.
Real GDP
CPI (all 
items less 
fresh food)
(Reference) Excluding the 
effects of the consumption 
tax hike and policies 
concerning the provision of 
free education
Fiscal 2019
Forecasts made in April 2019
Fiscal 2020
Forecasts made in April 2019
Fiscal 2021
Forecasts made in April 2019
+0.7
+0.8
+0.9
+0.9
+1.1
+1.2
+1.0
+1.1
+1.3
+1.4
+0.8
+0.9
+1.2
+1.3
+1.6
+1.6
Note: The direct effect of the consumption tax hike on the CPI for fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2020 is estimated to be 0.5 percentage point for each year. 
The direct effects of policies concerning the provision of free education on the CPI for fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2020 are estimated to be minus 0.3 
percentage point and minus 0.4 percentage point, respectively.
Source: Bank of Japan, "Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (July 2019)."
Breakdown by Region
Real Exports
Chart 8
Breakdown by Goods
Notes: 1. NIEs, ASEAN, etc. includes other Asian countries such as India and Bangladesh.
2. Motor vehicles and related goods includes motor vehicles, parts of motor vehicles, and power generating machine. IT-related goods includes 
computers and units, telecommunication machinery, semiconductors, audio and visual apparatus, and medical and optical instruments. Capital 
goods includes metalworking machinery, construction machines, electrical power machinery, semiconductor production equipment, and ships.
3. Figures for 2019/Q3 are those of July.
Source:  Bank of Japan, "Developments in Real Exports and Real Imports."
Business Fixed Investment 
(Ratio to Nominal GDP)
Chart 9
Note: Production capacity DI shows figures for large enterprises of all industries.
Sources:  Cabinet Office, "National Accounts"; Bank of Japan, "Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan)."
Developments in Business Fixed Investment 
Chart 10
Plans (Large Manufacturing Firms)
Note: Figures include software investment and exclude land purchasing expenses.
Source:  Bank of Japan, "Tankan."
Developments in Business Fixed Investment 
Chart 11
Plans (Large Nonmanufacturing Firms)
Note: Figures include software investment and exclude land purchasing expenses.
Source:  Bank of Japan, "Tankan."
Household Consumption (1)
Chart 12
Real Consumption
Employment-Related Indicators
Note: The latest figures are as of June 2019 for the real consumption and July 2019 for others. 
Sources: Bank of Japan, "Consumption Activity Index"; Cabinet Office, "Economy Watchers Survey"; Ministry of Health, Labour, and Welfare, 
"Employment Referrals for General Workers."
Household Consumption (2)
Chart 13
Consumption Before and After Tax Hikes
Consumer Sentiment
Note: Households with two or more persons are counted in Consumer Confidence Index (seasonal adjusted figures).
Sources: Cabinet Office, "Synthetic Consumption Index," "Consumer Confidence Survey," "Economy Watchers Survey."
Consumer Prices
Chart 14
Consumer Price Index
Measures of Underlying Inflation
Note: Figures are adjusted for changes in the consumption tax rate. 
Note: The diffusion index is defined as the share of increasing items 
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, "Consumer 
Price Index."
minus that of decreasing items. The share of 
increasing/decreasing items is the share of items in the CPI (less 
fresh food, consumption tax adjusted), for which the price 
increased/decreased from a year earlier. 
Sources: Bank of Japan, "Measures of Underlying Inflation"; Ministry of 
Internal Affairs and Communications.
Output Gap and Inflation Expectations
Chart 15
Output Gap
Synthetic Indicators of Inflation 
Expectations
Notes: 1. The data for the output gap in the left-hand graph are the estimates by the Bank's staff as of July 3, 2019.
2. In the right-hand graph, semiannual data from the Consensus Forecasts up through 2014/Q2 are linearly interpolated. Figures for the Bank’s 
Opinion Survey on the General Public’s Views and Behavior (Opinion Survey) exclude inflation expectations by respondents whose annual 
inflation expectations were ±5% or greater. The output prices DI in the Tankan represents the difference between the share of firms that raised 
prices in the preceding three months and the share of firms that lowered prices.
3. In the right-hand graph, inflation expectations of firms are taken from the Tankan and those of households are taken from the Bank’s Opinion 
Survey. For experts’ and markets’ inflation expectations, data from the Consensus Forecasts, the QUICK Survey, and inflation swap rates are used 
as indicated by their respective lines.
Sources: Consensus Economics Inc., “Consensus Forecasts”; QUICK Corp., "QUICK Monthly Market Survey (Bonds)"; Bloomberg; Bank of Japan.
Outline of the Bank's Monetary Policy
Chart 16
(1) Yield Curve Control
Short-term rate: The Bank will apply minus 0.1 percent to the Policy-Rate Balances.
Long-term rate: The Bank will purchase JGBs so that 10-year JGB yields will remain at 
around zero percent. While doing so, the yields may move upward or downward to 
some extent mainly depending on developments in economic activity and prices.
(2) Asset Purchases
The Bank will purchase ETFs and J-REITs so that their amounts outstanding will increase 
at annual paces of about 6 trillion yen and about 90 billion yen, respectively. With a 
view to lowering risk premia of asset prices in an appropriate manner, the Bank may 
increase or decrease the amount of purchases depending on market conditions.
(3) Commitment
Overshooting commitment: The Bank will continue expanding the monetary base until 
the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI (all items less fresh food) 
exceeds 2 percent and stays above the target in a stable manner.
Forward guidance for policy rates: The Bank intends to maintain the current extremely 
low levels of short- and long-term interest rates for an extended period of time, at 
least through around spring 2020, taking into account uncertainties regarding 
economic activity and prices including developments in overseas economies and the 
effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike. 
Unemployment Rate and 
Labor Force Participation Rate
Chart 17
Note: Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, "Labour Force Survey."
Factors that Contributed to the 
Chart 18
Change in the Labor Force Participation Rate
Notes: 1. Given that the labor force participation rate is the population-weighted average of all age groups, the change in the labor force participation 
rate from October 1992 to July 2019 is decomposed into a demographic factor (the effect of changes in the demographic pyramid) and 
changes in the labor force participation rate of age groups. The labor force participation rate of each age group is calculated from the 
original series.
2. Figures are cumulative from October 1992.
3. Original series are linearly interpolated from March to August 2011 when data were not released.
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, "Labour Force Survey."
Labor Underutilization Indicator 4 (LU4)
Chart 19
by Gender and Age Group
(Average of the Apr.-June Quarter of 2019)
Notes: 1. Ratios to the sum of labor force and potential labor force.
2. Labor Underutilization Indicator 4 (LU4) is the sum of unemployed persons, persons in time-related underemployment, and the potential 
labor force.
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, "Labour Force Survey (Detailed Tabulation)."
