Yaron Amir: Competition in the banking system
Speech by Mr Yaron Amir, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Banking Supervision Department
conference on competition in the banking system, Jerusalem, 2 April 2019.
Summary:
 Some of the significant measures and reforms aimed at enhancing competition have already
come to fruition, and others are in the process of coming to fruition. There are additional
supporting  processes  that  are  required  now,  such  as  the  development  and  application  of
financial and technological instruments, and the deepening of the capital market, which will
contribute to competition in the credit market and increased consumer well-being as they
advance.
These processes are becoming possible mainly in view of the development and application
of advanced technologies that were not available until just recently.
Removing information gaps, leveraging existing information, and utilizing technological ability
for  informed  analysis  and  learning  in  real  time  about  the  credit  market  will  enable  more
correct  pricing  that  is  more  in  line  with  the  risk  to  various  layers  of  the  credit  market—
households and small and medium businesses—thereby contributing to development of the
market.
The market must be developed while managing risks and developing proper regulation, in
order to make sure that, despite the risks, the benefit from these processes will make them
worthwhile.
Two financial instruments that should be advanced in order to make the capital market more
sophisticated and deeper, and which will contribute to the continuing increase in competition,
are securitization and long-term interest rate derivatives.
Good morning.
 First, I would like to congratulate the Banking Supervision Department on this conference, and
welcome  the  honored  guests.    The  issue  of  competition  in  the  financial  system  is  one  that
occupies many people in Israel and abroad.  Advancing competition has been a top priority of the
public and of the Bank of Israel in recent years, and for good reason.  Advancing competition in
the  financial  system,  when  done  properly,  has  many  positive  effects  on  all  entities  in  the
economy, first and foremost the broad public.  Today, I would like to discuss various aspects that
can enhance competition in this market, thereby increasing consumer well-being and economic
growth.  Some of the significant measures and reforms aimed at enhancing competition have
already come to fruition, and we are already enjoying the results.  Others are in the process of
coming to fruition.  And there are additional supporting measures that are now required, such as
the development and application of technological and financial instruments, and deepening the
capital  market.   As  these  are  advanced  into  the  future,  they  will  in  turn  contribute  to  market
efficiency, an increase in the variety of possibilities for competition, and to increased consumer
well-being.  Financial markets enable a more efficient allocation of sources and create the proper
mechanisms  for  risk-sharing.    Therefore,  the  extent  of  development  and  sophistication  of  the
financial markets—such as how deep they are, how liquid they are when necessary, and what
mix of instruments is available to the various participants, both firms and lenders, and customers
and end consumers—is very important.
I will discuss these in greater detail later on, but first, to the question, “What is competition?"  A
common approach to defining competition is the equilibrium result where the price is equal to the
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
marginal  cost  as  a  result  of  sophisticated  competition.    In  accordance  with  this  approach,  in
order to have a competitive market, a number of assumptions must be met, including the free
entry and exit of firms, and public knowledge of the market possibilities.  As we know, there are
significant  entry  barriers  in  the  credit  market,  some  of  which  are  natural,  since  the  banking
system is characterized by economies of scale, and there are built-in information gaps.  The
Bank of Israel, the Ministry of Finance, and others have dealt with these issues in recent years
with the proper amount of caution, and the solutions are now coming to fruition.  We will hear
during the day about various processes for removing barriers, as well as the implementation of
“open  banking",  “moving  from  one  bank  to  another  with  one  click",  removing  technological
barriers, and the implementation of advanced technology that was not available until just recently,
together with the necessary adaptation of regulation.  Each of these is important on its own, and
their  combination  makes  a  greater  contribution  than  each  one  could  when  implemented
separately.  Together, these processes can increase competitive pressure in the coming years,
and support the entry of additional participants into the market.  They deal with the removal of
information  gaps,  the  leveraging  of  existing  information,  and  the  utilization  of  technological
capabilities in the real-time analysis and informed learning about the credit market.  These will
enable more correct pricing that is more in line with risk—for various levels of the credit market,
such as households and small and medium businesses, thereby contributing to the development
of the market.
Technology and the accompanying information contain advantages not just for the private sector,
but also for the government.  For instance, they enable the transition from paper-based means of
payment to more advanced means of payment, enable tracking, and have the potential to reduce
black-market  activity  in  Israel.    At  the  same  time,  they  are  leading  the  enhancement  of
competition  by  allowing  new  participants  to  enter  the  market  and  through  the  development  of
different business models to provide a variety of payment services and increase the customer’s
ease of use.
Another aspect of competition is focused on the dynamic behavior of the supply side.  In other
words,  the  market  is  competitive  when  its  participants  are  sufficiently  aggressive  and  a
competitor has the incentive to improve in order to gain an advantage over other competitors—
whether the advantages are the result of improved quality and service, lower prices, additional
services,  and  so  forth.    These  aspects  have  also  undergone  many  changes  in  recent  years,
whether  as  part  of  a  natural  market  process,  or  as  a  result  of  regulatory  encouragement,  in
adopting  technological  advancement  alongside  significant  streamlining,  that  will  enable  the
creation of the required competition on the supply side.
In  this  regard,  there  is  an  interesting  simultaneous  link  between  efficiency  and  competition
among the banks.  Streamlining enables the banks to lower prices in order to attract customers,
or to provide new and higher-quality services for the same purpose.  Accordingly, it is possible
that  increased  efficiency  will  actually  lead  to  increased  concentration,  and  will  therefore  be
interpreted as a reduction in competition, because more efficient companies will have a higher
market share, which will lead to increased market concentration.  Our job as regulators over this
market is therefore to make sure, as the Banking Supervision Department is doing, that the fruits
of streamlining actually roll over from the banks to the broad public.
When dealing with efficiency, many tend to think mainly about the operational efficiency of some
organization.  However, a significant portion of activity in the credit market depends on the ability
of the various participants to use the various capital market instruments to “offer their wares",
and mainly to provide credit.  The extent of this mechanism’s efficiency, for instance in its ability
to allocate sources and optimally distribute risk (risk sharing), has a tremendous effect on the
ability  to  provide  products  that  are  relevant  to  their  customers  and  make  them  accessible,  in
such way that they will increase consumer well-being and support increased competition in the
credit market.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
How can we advance this?  Through continued development of the capital market, particularly by
increasing the level of sophistication of the market, which will enable the informed application of
financial  instruments  that  must  be  developed  to  advance  the  credit  market.    Thanks  to  those
instruments,  it  will  be  possible  to  allocate  sources  and  share  risk  more  efficiently,  increase
accessibility to sources of credit, and achieve more proper pricing in the market.  In this way, we
will improve the state of all participants in the credit market, particularly the end customers—
firms  and  the  broad  public,  which  will  benefit  from  increased  competition,  a  greater  variety  of
available possibilities, and more optimal decision-making capabilities.  Of course, it is important
that all these are done while managing risk and developing the proper regulation, in order to make
sure that despite the risks, the benefits from these processes will make them worthwhile.
One mechanism that enables the advancement of various financial-technological developments
with  the  proper  controls  and  balances  is  the  “regulatory  sandbox".    This  mechanism  already
exists abroad, and there are a number of examples that have come to fruition.  For instance,
England is the first country in which such a mechanism was created—back in 2016.  At the end
of the first year of the program’s operation, 75 percent of companies that were active in it had
completed  the  testing  they  were  asked  to  perform,  and  90  percent  of  them  had  significantly
expanded the market in which their product or service was offered by the end of the program.  In
addition,  most  companies  that  obtained  a  limited  license  as  part  of  the  program  began  the
process  of  obtaining  a  full  license  once  their  participation  was  complete.    The  sandbox  is
currently being advanced in Israel, where there is a broad infrastructure of fintech and financial
cyber companies.  The Bank of Israel is, of course, a partner in this process.
I would like today to discuss two financial instruments that I believe should be advanced in order
to  make  the  capital  market  more  sophisticated  and  deep,  and  which  will  contribute  to  the
continued enhancement of competition.
The first is securitization.  Naturally, institutional investors’ ability to provide credit directly to small
and  medium  businesses  is  limited,  due  to  significant  operational  and  collection  costs  and
because there is no developed securitization market in Israel that would allow the expansion of
credit with its continued operation by the banks, who have a built-in relative advantage in this
market.  While the securitization market abroad is similar in size to the corporate bond market, in
Israel, it is miniscule, with a value of just a few billion shekels. 
The advantages of a securitization market are reflected in the development of the nonbank credit
market and less expensive sources of financing.  It is a bridging tool between money held by
institutional investors and credit consumers in the real economy.  Securitization allows for the
expansion of institutional investors’ investment horizons, and also makes it possible to free up
capital and manage durations in the banking system, so that these sources can be allocated,
inter alia, for the financing of small and medium businesses. Securitization also acts to direct
sources to the Israeli economy as an alternative to investing abroad.  For instance, securitization
is a tool that can help finance the separated credit card companies. 
It  is  important  to  advance  the  law,  with  the  aim  of  enabling  the  removal  of  barriers  to  the
development of the securitization market in Israel, which will in turn increase competition in the
credit  market  while  maintaining  financial  stability.    This  should  be  done  by  establishing  the
appropriate  legal,  taxation,  regulatory,  and  accounting  framework  for  executing  only  traditional
securitization transactions in Israel.  I emphasize that the risks in this market are known, and
they are addressed in the recommendations of the interministerial team that dealt with the issue. 
A lot of attention was paid to the lessons of the global crisis, and special emphasis was placed
on the changes in regulation of the securitization market in various countries, so that we can
benefit  from  the  advantages  of  securitization  while  ensuring  market  transparency  and  a
mechanism for the lenders to jointly bear the credit risk.
Second,  we  should  examine  how  to  expand  the  use  of  interest  rate  derivatives,  which  are
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
necessary to disperse the risks derived from the various instruments in the credit market, mainly
medium-  and  long-term  credit.    The  absence  of  these  basic  instruments  creates  unwelcome
distortions in the market, whether through credit pricing that is too high, or through the allocation
of  financing  from  the  outset.    This  may  lead  to  an  equilibrium  where  the  quantity  of  credit
declines, difficulties emerge for the real sector, and the rate at which the economy can grow is
impaired.
The  Bank  of  Israel  is  acting  to  develop  and  institutionalize  the  Telbor  interest  rates  as
benchmarks  of  the  real  interest  rate.    These  rates  make  it  possible  to  use  not  only  the  fixed
nominal  or  daily  variable  interest  rates,  but  also  a  rate  that  varies  over  longer  and  predefined
periods  of  time.    They  constitute  an  important  and  central  layer  in  the  global  capital  markets,
because  they  can  be  used  to  increase  the  financing  possibilities  for  the  business  sector.
Benchmark rates also provide infrastructure for the interest rate futures market, where contracts
enable businesses and the public to mitigate and even neutralize interest rate risks. 
In many economies around the world, there are two common types of financial products based
on benchmark interest rates: (1) Deposits, loans, and mobile nominal interest bonds to various
periods;  and  (2)  interest  rate  derivatives.    In  Israel,  unlike  many  other  advanced  economies,
activity is currently conducted mainly in the assets themselves, and not through derivatives.  It is
important to note that even though activity in interest rate derivatives has grown significantly in
recent years, it is still quite low compared to other countries, mainly in the longer terms.  These
differences  indicate  the  underuse  of  financial  defenses  against  interest  rate  risks  in  Israel,
relative to what is common in other advanced economies.
In order to illustrate how the development of this type of instrument would help the broad public,
we can use the example of the early payment fee that is well-known to the representatives of the
banking system who are here, and that is relevant to almost anyone who takes out a mortgage in
Israel.  It is reasonable to assume that if the banks were able to hedge the risk of early repayment
of such a long-term loan and better manage their risk balance, this fee would be reduced.  The
banks would be able to do this by adopting a long-term IRS instrument, which replaces cash flow
from fixed interest with variable interest.  As a result, the customer would have a greater ability to
refinance  a  mortgage  in  view  of  various  developments—whether  they  are  specific  to  that
customer or they apply to the entire economy—and would improve his financial state, or what we
economists refer to as “consumer well-being".
In  contrast  with  most  advanced  economies,  where  a  significant  proportion  of  interest  rate
derivative transactions are settled through a central clearinghouse, such infrastructure still does
not exist in Israel.  In a central clearinghouse, the risks of various transactions offset each other,
and the remainder is transferred to one central entity that manages it through the appropriate
collaterals.    In  order  to  develop  the  interest  rate  derivatives  market  in  Israel,  it  is  important  to
advance a central clearinghouse that will significantly mitigate the credit risks inherent in such
transactions.
There are other advisable measures that it is worth thinking about, which I will discuss at other
occasions.  To conclude, the Israeli economy has made many steps in recent years to advance
competition in the credit market.  There are additional possible stems that would complete what
is necessary to advance competition in this market, some of which—particularly those that deal
with the structure of the financial system—I have discussed this morning.  These developments
and innovations involve some risks, but they also may open the door for more efficient financial
technologies  for  both  consumers  and  the  various  supervisory  bodies.    As  such, financial
stability  does  not  necessarily  stand  in  contradistinction  to  increased  competition  and
increased  efficiency.    The  Bank  of  Israel  will  work  to  improve  the  efficiency  and
assiduously maintain the stability of the capital market and the financial system, and will
work  to  integrate  new  financial  technologies  and  instruments  gradually  and  under
careful control.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
I again congratulate the Banking Supervision Department on this conference, and I welcome the
upcoming speakers, who contribute much to the advancements in this area and to the important
professional discussion of these issues.
Thank you.​
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
