Gent Sejko: Launching of the new Albanian banknote serie
Address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the launching of the new Albanian
banknote serie, Tirana, 12 September 2019.
Honourable Minister Denaj and Minister Shalësi,
 Your Excellencies,
Distinguished guests,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a great pleasure to have you with us in this very important day for the Bank of Albania and our
national currency.
In the history of the modern Albanian state, the establishment and modernisation of its monetary
and financial systems has a substantial place. The Albanian currency is a symbol that has been
present throughout the development of the country, bearing distinctive features of each era in the
history of Albania.
It  is  not  a  coincidence  that  one  of  the  key  objectives  in  the  creation  of  a  national  bank  was,
among  others,  the  issue  of  the  Albanian  currency,  immediately  after  the  sublime  act  of  the
Declaration of Independence that laid the foundations on which the Albanian state was created. In
1926, one year on from its founding, in 1925, the National Bank of Albania presented and put in
circulation, for the first time, a complete series of Albanian banknotes and coins.
Subsequent  developments  in  the  centralisation  and  later  modernisation  of  the Albanian  state
dictated  the  need  for  continuous  improvements  of  banknotes  in  terms  of  both  content  and
design.    It  has  always  represented,  however,  the  economic,  social  and  political  development
phases of Albania. Through the themes and art embodied in its design, the national currency
remains a faithful herald of the development, culture and history of a country. Thanks to these
attributes, the currency is in itself a significant element of the national identity.
The theme of the current series of Albanian banknotes, created more than 20 years ago, features
important historical periods of the Albanian nation, and prominent personalities of Albania.
These themes, embodied in each banknote through the portraits of some of the most illustrious
national figures, evoke notable episodes in the history of Albania in its endeavours for freedom
and prosperity. The themes lead us on a journey through historical eras, starting from Antiquity,
moving  through  the  Middle  Ages,  the  National  Awakening,  the  Independence  of  Albania,  and
concluding  with  the  symbols  of  the  national  flag  and  anthem  on  the  latest  and  largest
denomination, the 10.000 lek banknote. These symbols have been chosen as representative and
unifying elements for every Albanian.
While  the  new  series  that  we  are  presenting  today  retains  the  same  themes  of  the  already
existing  series,  its  design  is  reconfigured  and  restyled,  through  the  application  of  modern
technologies in banknote production. Thanks to cutting-edge technology, the Albanian banknote
is now more secure. Its security features – a key priority of the Bank of Albania – are enhanced.
In  addition,  innovative  printing  techniques  and  materials  have  been  used  to  increase  durability
and the banknotes’ dimensions have been optimised. The design now boasts a fresher look.
The  new  series  of Albanian  banknotes  combines  maximum  security,  modern  design,  artistic
communication of the historical message, and a longer lifespan. It consists of six denominations:
200, 500, 1000, 2000, 5000 and 10000 lek. While the first two denominations – 200 and 5000 lek,
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
issued in 2017 – are ready to be put in circulation in September 2019, the other banknotes of the
series will be put in circulation gradually over the coming years and will be legal tender alongside
the existing denominations.
The  presentation  of  the  new  series  demonstrates  the  continued  commitment  of  the  Bank  of
Albania  to  further  enhance  the  quality  and  security  of  banknotes  in  circulation.  Both  these
attributes guarantee the absolute integrity of our banknotes and represent with dignity the Bank of
Albania and the Albanian state itself.
In  addition 
In this context, today’s ceremony marks the culmination of a voluminous work started four years
ago. 
to  Bank  staff,  many  renowned  academics,  historians,  Albanologists,
numismatists  and  experts  from  the  most  experienced  companies  in  the  field  of  banknote
production have actively and intensively provided their invaluable contribution. The combination
and  cooperation  of  specialists  from  various  fields  of  expertise,  coupled  with  the  latest
technological innovations in banknote printing, enabled the refinement and presentation of a new
series of banknotes which are simple to use, boast a contemporary design and strike a balance
between innovation and current tradition.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
Safe and efficient fulfilment of the economy’s need for money, in terms of value and structure,
and  guaranteeing  the  confidence  of  the  public  in  our  currency,  which  is  one  of  our  main
responsibilities, have been at the core of our efforts in preparing this new series.
Therefore, I am very honoured to unveil today, for the first time, for the eyes of the public, this
new series of banknotes. As the Governor of the Bank of Albania, through this symbolic signing, I
open the doors for the first two banknotes of the new series to start their journey and circulate in
the Albanian economy.
In the hope that the new banknotes will be welcomed by the public, let me now present to you
their design. I would also like to call on the public to handle banknotes with due care, in order to
preserve their durability, quality and integrity. From 30 September 2019, the banknotes of the new
series 200 lek and 5000 lek will be legal tender in the Republic of Albania and will be used as
means of payment, alongside the existing banknotes.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
