Yakiv Smolii: Financial Inclusion Forum - opening speech
Speech by Mr Yakiv Smolii, Governor of the National Bank of Ukraine, at the Financial Inclusion
Forum, Kyiv, 12 June 2019.
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
 participants of the second international Financial Inclusion Forum.
Today, the slogan  Leaving No One Behind unites us all. Why this particular slogan, you may
ask.
First,  as  a  UN  member  country,  Ukraine  shares  and  supports  the  Global  Sustainable
Development Goals.  We apply the principle Leaving No One Behind.
Second, if we explain the meaning of the term “financial inclusion” in one word, this word would
be accessibility.
Technical accessibility and price accessibility.
At present, over one third of people all over the world still have no access to financial services. 
Our mutual goal is to reduce the share of Ukrainians in this huge number.
I will not be mistaken if I confidently say that all present here are aware of the fact – financial
inclusion offers broader opportunities for people.
Access to loans advances business and access to insurance creates a safety cushion.
For the least secured social groups, an access to high quality financial services means safety
today and social mobility tomorrow.
Numerous  studies,  particularly  by  such  respected  international  institutions  as  the  World  Bank
and the International Monetary Fund, have proved a strong connection between financial inclusion
and financial stability.
At the macroeconomic level this translates into the country’s capacity to tackle crises.
At  a  personal  level,  it  gives  Ukrainians  a  chance  to  be  prepared  for  rapid  changes  and
unexpected developments that have permeated the life of our country for the past two decades.
Ladies and gentlemen,
It  should  be  noted  that  financial  inclusion  is  not  only  about  an  increase  in  the  number  of
consumers of financial services, or their sales, so to say.
It is about social responsibility – transparency and clarity of products to their consumers.
Protection of consumers is important because it is the prerequisite for the safe use of loans.  It is
impossible  for  anybody  to  benefit  from  the  full  potential  of  financial  services  without  financial
literacy.
This is where the NBU sees great opportunities for everybody gathered here.
Anyone has a purpose and anyone can play a role:
commercial sector can develop new technologies and offer progressive solutions
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
nongovernmental organizations can ensure control and enhance communal capacity in
an informal way
while we at the public sector will continue creating conditions for the increased well-being
of Ukrainians.
What are our plans?
First. The NBU will improve the quality of regulation and lay the grounds for strengthening the
financial sector.
Our  foremost  task,  as  we  see  it, is  enhancing  protection  of  rights  of  financial  services
consumers.
I will be honest with you – at the NBU we truly hoped that Ukraine would get a real protection
system guaranteed by laws.
But the parliament decided otherwise.
However, this is not an excuse to abandon people with their problems with banks and nonbank
financial institutions.
Today, I am very happy to inform you of the following:
The  NBU  assumes  responsibility  for  protection  of  rights  of  financial  services  consumers  and
establishes a special unit in charge of these issues.
First  of  all,  it  will  enable  regulation  of  the  information  disclosure  system  that  will  deal  with
information on financial products and services.  Information transparency is at the core of trust in
the financial services and safeguards higher prosperity of the public.
We will continue our work on people’s complaints, but from now on it will be more systematic.
The  chain  “complaint  –  response  –  changes  in  regulations”  will  become  shorter  and  more
efficient.
This will help reduce the number of misunderstandings between financial institutions and their
customers, improve their information awareness, and teach the financial market to address their
customers’ questions and comments.
Second. The NBU has assumed the leadership and developed a vision for the future strategy of
financial literacy.
Why does the central bank need it, considering that we are not part of the education system?
Our  goal  is  to prepare young people for life in the real world full of challenges and rapid
changes.
Today, we encourage everybody present to join in common work based on our vision. I hope in a
year we will be able to sum up our first results.
Ladies and gentlemen,
I  am  confident  that  many  of  you  have  joined  the  Forum  with  brilliant  ideas  of  how  to  make
financial services more accessible for Ukrainians.
So, let’s get to work!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
