Ignazio Visco: Statement - meeting of the Development Committee
Statement by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Governor of the Constituency of
Albania, Greece, Italy, Malta, Portugal, San Marino and Timor-Leste, at the 99th Meeting of the
Development Committee (Joint Ministerial Committee of the Boards of Governors of the Bank
and the Fund on the Transfer of Real Resources to Developing Countries), Washington DC, 13
April 2019.
Introduction
 Over the past months the global macroeconomic outlook has deteriorated substantially, partly
due  to  temporary  factors.  The  global  slowdown  has  been  accentuated  by  widespread
uncertainty, which is also linked to the risk of trade dispute escalations, hurting investor and
consumer  confidence  in  many  regions,  especially  in  Europe  and  China. A  range  of  triggers
beyond the current tensions could spark further deterioration in risk sentiment. This would result
in adverse growth implications, especially given the high levels of public and private debt.
Over  the  past  twenty-five  years,  open  markets  have  contributed  to  a  dramatic  fall  in  global
poverty. However, progress has been uneven, and there are indications that the picture may be
changing  in  some  areas.  In  Sub-Saharan  Africa,  as  well  as  in  fragile  and  conflict-affected
situations, the total number of poor is on the rise. This on its own is of great concern and could
further amplify the risk of a mass exodus from those areas. In many countries, the bottom 40
percent  of  the  population  has  been  progressively  left  behind.  It  is  therefore  imperative  to
intensify the promotion of economic growth, while at the same time ensuring that the poorest
reap the benefits.
Two measures appear crucial to eradicating extreme poverty. First, emerging economies that
need  it  most  should  adopt  appropriate  redistributive  policies.  Second,  the  international
community  should  step  up  the  effort  to  ensure  that  resources  sent  to  poorer  countries  are
invested in the most effective way, to promote investment in high quality infrastructure and to
tackle conditions of marginalization, often linked to poor health and education. Encouraging the
build-up  of  institutions  to  limit  the  phenomenon  of  exploitation  –  still  too  widespread  in  these
countries – would buoy economic development and make it more inclusive.
Disruptive technologies
Technological progress and globalization can provide important development opportunities for
all countries. In the short to medium term work displacement is a risk and may well exacerbate
income inequality.
In  several  developing  economies  –  including  in  Africa  –  there  is  growing  evidence  that
information  technologies  can  create  jobs  by  raising  the  productivity  of  existing  firms  and
encouraging the entry of new ones. We should remain vigilant about the consequences of such
changes for the economies at large: disruptive technologies may not be socially sustainable if
the fruits of progress only
benefit the few; they may also not be economically sustainable, if worker displacement reduces
aggregate demand.
Global enterprises at the frontier of technological innovation – including the so-called “Big Tech”
– are in the best position to exploit economic integration by taking advantage of access to very
large  markets.  They  can  cut  prices  through  investments  in  technology,  benefitting  from
economies of scale, as well as across-country differences in the cost of labor for given skills.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  ability  to  produce  at  lower  prices  could  indeed  benefit  consumers,  but  if  “dominant
positions” emerge, there is the further risk that cost reductions may not be fully translated into
prices.
Another  competitive  advantage  of  “Big  Tech”  companies  is  the  huge  amount  of  personal
information  they  possess.  This  poses  delicate  problems  of  security,  management,  and  data
processing that go beyond the mere protection of privacy. The level of cybersecurity should be
strongly prioritized. The risk of payment service interruptions, large-scale financial fraud, and
widespread and prolonged breaks in the supply of electricity may have worse consequences
than those of the “traditional” crises that originate in the economic system. The complexity and
global nature of these issues makes any attempt at unilateral regulation bound to fail.
An answer to these challenges that would consist of slowing technological developments, or
reintroducing barriers to economic integration – a tendency that seems to be gaining ground
dramatically  in  recent  years  –  would  amount  to  a  huge  waste  of  opportunities.  Goods  and
services  that  can  improve  our  living  standards  would  only  come  with  severe  delays  and  at
much  higher  costs.  On  the  contrary,  we  should  strive  to  build  and  properly  manage  the
necessary  institutions  to  govern  these  risks  effectively  and  make  the  most  of  the  great
opportunities offered by technological progress.
Implementing the commitments of sustainable development
We  are  encouraged  by  the  advances  in  the  implementation  of  the  “Forward  Look”  and  the
commitments  agreed  upon  with  the  Capital  Package  for  the  IBRD  and  IFC.  The  narrative
underpinning the request for additional capital is predicated on the need to foster development
by creating markets in the world’s most challenging arenas. Therefore, we look forward to the
approval of the resolutions for the IFC, so that a complete implementation of the package may
be achieved through leveraging private sector resources.
The recent focus on IBRD and IFC capital needs should not diminish the crucial role that IDA
and  MIGA  are  expected  to  play  in  the  pursuit  of  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals.  We
encourage IDA to take advantage of its financial capacity and build on the lessons learned from
the  Private  Sector  Window  to  promote  better  World  Bank  Group  solutions  for  the  poorest
countries. We also expect that – in response to the call of the G20 Eminent Persons Group –
MIGA  will  take  stock  of  the  guarantee  and  de-risking  facilities  put  in  place  by  the  Multilateral
Development  Banks  and  will  explore  options  to  enhance  coordination  and  cooperation  with
these institutions.
We support the roadmap for review of the system governing IDA voting power and the aim of
presenting a paper to the Governors at the next Annual Meetings. We back the principle that the
voting  rights  system  should  ensure  protection  for  IDA  recipients,  while  providing  adequate
incentive for new and existing donors to contribute.
We  commend  the  World  Bank  Group’s  commitment  to  achieving  further  budget  efficiencies,
after  the  successful  implementation  of  the  expenditure  review.  With  the  increasing  costs  of
doing business, further efforts will be necessary to prevent recurring to IBRD capital in order to
cover administrative expenses in excess of revenues. The financial sustainability of the IBRD’s
business model is essential to ensure solid income generation which will bear future needs.
We are concerned that a large part of the projected savings may come from increased average
project size. We urge Management to ensure that this will not jeopardize the agreed-upon shift
of resources towards the poorest and most fragile contexts.
We support a more selective engagement with clients in the upper income range and expect
that intervention in these countries will be focused on strengthening policies and institutions. A
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
continuous engagement of the IFC in these countries will facilitate an orderly graduation process
from  IBRD  lending  and  a  more  systematic  reliance  on  market  mechanisms  to  pursue  each
country’s development strategy.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
