Carlos da Silva Costa: What  lessons  from  the  crisis  for  EMU  and
how will life be in the future?
Introductory remarks by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the IE
Business Leadership Forum "What lessons from the crisis for EMU and how will life be in the
future?", Lisbon, 14 February 2019.
As prepared for delivery.
Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen,
 I  would  like  to  thank  Mr  de  la  Dehesa  for  the  kind  invitation  to  join  you  today  and  for  his
introductory remarks – I was delighted to accept this invitation. 
Following the 10-year anniversary of the Great Financial Crisis and the 20-year anniversary of the
introduction of the euro, now is a good time to reflect upon the lessons we have learned and how
these must shape our reaction to the challenges ahead.
Also,  with  so  many  people  in  the  audience  taking  a  particular  interest  in  the  Portuguese
economy,  it  would  be  remiss  of  me  not  to  make  some  observations  on  the  state  of  the
Portuguese economy and the key challenges we face.
The  European  project  as  we  know  it  is  a  political  endeavour,  characterised  by  waves  of
integration over the last few decades. Each step calls for a new one, as the institutional set-up is
limited to addressing what is required at each point in time, without sufficient capacity to react to
the unforeseen. In many cases the deepening of the integration process has been motivated and
steered by successive crises. 
The Maastricht framework and its implementing agreements, such as the Stability and Growth
Pact,  put  in  place  strict  fiscal  rules  for  Member  States.  Countries  would  maintain  their  fiscal
independence,  while  respecting  limits  on  the  size  of  public  debt  and  deficits.  The  ‘no  bailout’
clause meant that no Member State could expect the Union to bail it out, while respecting the
monetary financing prohibition. 
The link between the financial system and the sovereign was absent from the Maastricht context.
As with fiscal policy, financial sector supervision, including both micro-prudential and the then still
nascent macro-prudential supervision, the resolution of financial institutions and lender-of-last-
resort functions were kept in the hands of national authorities. 
Against  this  background,  the  Great  Financial  Crisis  revealed  the  need  for  stronger  economic
governance, better coordination of EU Member States’ policies and far-reaching reforms of the
financial sector.
In response, improvements were introduced into coordination procedures with the creation of the
European  Semester  and  the  scope  of  monitoring/coordination  being  broadened  beyond  the
budgetary area by including external imbalances.
Going  forward,  monitoring  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  coordinating  economic  and  fiscal
policies will need to be further strengthened.
We must, however, be aware that, even with appropriate rules and institutions, a monetary union
is not immune to exogenous shocks and specific problems in any of its members. 
During the Great Moderation, Member States postponed structural reforms and the adjustment of
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
their  economies  to  globalisation.  Costs  were  absorbed  by  public  expenditure  until  it  was  no
longer possible to do so. 
Today  we  face  the  problem  of  finding  ways  to  increase  productivity  and  innovate  in  order  to
increase potential output and preserve our social model.
This reinforces the importance of working at the structural level, focusing on productivity growth,
sustainable employment growth and the reduction of indebtedness.
In parallel, the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) must have stabilisation mechanisms which
can  support  Member  States  facing  serious  financial  difficulties  while  safeguarding  the  stability
and cohesion of the group.
Currently,  several  proposals  for  macroeconomic  stabilisation  in  the  euro  area  have  been
presented: investment stabilisation, reinsurance of national unemployment schemes, rainy day
funds, etc. 
The need to provide EMU with a stabilisation mechanism was one of the lessons of the financial
crisis  and  the  reason  for  the  creation  of  a  permanent  institution,  the  European  Stability
Mechanism (ESM). 
The ESM is also under reform to strengthen its role, its capacity to act and the effectiveness of
its instruments. This reform needs to be ambitious. 
I  have  often  argued  that  the  ESM  should  evolve  towards  a  genuine  European  IMF-type  of
institution. An  institution  with  a  clear  mandate,  with  adequate  means  and  independence  from
Member States. It should be robust, adequately resourced and designed to respond quickly and
effectively, while promoting accountability and minimising moral hazard.
I would like to turn to the financial sector where reforms were most visible. 
In the years preceding the Global Financial Crisis there was a strong increase in risk-taking and
leverage.  Bank  credit  expanded  disproportionately  compared  to  economic  growth.  Risk  was
spread across continents and across institutions.
As  the  Great  Financial  Crisis  unfolded,  governments  of  fiscally  strong  countries  resorted  to
bailouts when banks that had become too big, complex and interconnected were at risk of failure.
Letting them fail would have meant that households and businesses would have been unable to
access their money, finance their projects or make payments. 
In Europe, the crisis evolved and morphed into the sovereign debt crisis, making the sovereign-
bank nexus even more evident. To safeguard financial stability, countries were exposed to risks
that in certain cases were not compatible with the sustainability of their public debt. 
As a result of the growing discontent that followed, to reduce the risk of moral hazard, sever the
bank-sovereign doom loop and protect the taxpayer from shouldering private sector losses, there
was a strong impetus against using public money in establishing a safety net for the financial
system.  Bail-in  principles  in  resolving  banks  prevailed,  and  there  was  a  general  aversion  to
bailout provisions.
The post-crisis financial sector reforms were thus designed to strengthen financial stability by
focusing on improving banks’ resilience, ending too-big-to-fail, breaking the bank-sovereign loop
and reducing financial fragmentation.
Efforts went into developing a harmonised regulatory framework, with stricter requirements on
capital  and  (private)  loss-absorbing  capacity  to  protect  taxpayers,  while  reinforcing  risk
prevention and reduction. 
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In the euro area, Member States launched the first steps of the Banking Union and its institutions
– the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) and the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) – but
the  political  will  to  complete  the  architecture  has  waned  in  recent  years  with  policy-makers
focusing excessively on the ‘risk reduction v. risk sharing’ debate. 
Currently,  the  Banking  Union  is  missing  critical  elements  –  a  fully-fledged  European  Deposit
Insurance Scheme (EDIS), a backstop to the Single Resolution Fund and the provision of liquidity
in resolution – which jeopardises its fundamental benefits. 
In this incomplete setup, banks are today ‘European in life but national in death’. Supervisory and
resolution decisions are mostly taken at the European level, but the ensuing consequences still
lie  with  taxpayers  at  the  national  level  as  recent  cases  have  highlighted.  This  may  have  a
potentially  serious  impact  on  national  budgets,  as  the  ultimate  guarantor  of  financial  stability
remains national.
In  view  of  the  mismatch  between  European  oversight  and  national  liability,  the  different
stakeholders’ objectives and interests are unaligned. It is important to consider who is actually
looking after financial stability.
Looking back to recent cases of banks under stress, we need to ask ourselves what political
landscape we would have today, had certain authorities not acted the way they did in order to
preserve financial stability. 
Few things can be more destructive to citizens’ trust in the European institutions than threats to
financial  stability,  perceived  as  risking  their  savings.  Such  threats  can  have  direct  effects  on
citizens’  frustration  with  European  institutions  and  traditional  political  parties  associated  with
them. 
Moreover, regulation-driven consolidation has become an imminent risk, fostering concentration
at  local  level  and  the  comeback  of  too-big-to-fail.  Existing  regulatory  requirements  were  not
thought of as a way to promote consolidation but are currently working in that direction. 
Driven  by  profitability  and  efficiency  concerns,  recent  calls  for  the  creation  of  pan-European
banks  capable  of  competing  with  larger  institutions  outside  Europe  as  a  matter  of  national
sovereignty have added pressure on regulators and policymakers to review existing rules. 
This  in  turn  has  implicitly  put  on  the  table  the  return  of  too-big-to-fail  with  the  ensuing  moral
hazard, raising further bailout expectations. It also undermines the level playing field within the
1
euro area as fiscally strong countries can support their banking systems, while others cannot.  
Looking ahead, it is essential to ensure at EU level the separation of supervisory from regulatory
functions  for  the  political  legitimation  of  regulatory  standards.  The  overlap  of  regulatory  and
supervisory  territories  guarantees  compliance  with  the  principle  of  central  responsibility  for
financial stability. 
Before concluding, and as promised at the beginning of my address, I would also like to spend a
few  minutes  on  the  challenges  faced  by  the  Portuguese  economy  in  view  of  the  interest
expressed by some of you.
As you well know, in the first half of 2011 Portugal had to resort to official financing under an
assistance programme negotiated with the European Union and the IMF. The programme ended
in 2014. Public and private indebtedness had accumulated as a result of a credit boom since the
mid-1990s,  with  the  bulk  of  credit  being  channeled  to  financing  consumption  and  low-return
investments, largely in the non-tradable sector.
As  the  international  and  European  crises  unfolded,  the  high  and  rising  level  of  external
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
indebtedness, coupled with weak growth of potential output, fuelled investors’ concerns about our
capacity to pay back our debts. This ultimately resulted in the country’s inability to fund itself on
the international markets.
The adjustment programme has widely been regarded as a success. In my view, this success
was due to three factors:
1.  Programme ownership. Portugal was committed to the implementation of the programme, it
was accepted by the population and there was a constructive dialogue with social partners.
This ensured the success of the quarterly reviews.
2.  The speed and intensity of the response from the tradable sector, in particular the exports
that rebalanced the external accounts and mitigated the impact of lower domestic demand
on the non-tradable sector.
3.  The  maintenance  of  confidence  in  the  banking  sector  as  evidenced  by  the  behaviour  of
deposits. This was crucial to preventing the economy from collapsing with a credit crunch
and avoiding the imposition of capital controls.
It is important to remember that an adjustment programme is always a short-term programme
whose  effects  are  only  sustainable  if  there  are  structural  and  institutional  adjustments  that
prevent repetition of the conditions that led to the need for adjustment.
Over the last decade, Portuguese GDP has remained 30–40% below the EU average, without
converging towards the richest economies.
A lasting trajectory of growth and convergence towards our European partners depends on our
capacity  to  generate  and  maintain  high  levels  of  employment  and  productivity.  This  is  a
necessary condition to (i) bring our workers’ wage levels closer to European standards; and (ii)
finance the welfare state in a context of unfavourable demographic developments.
The challenge is thus one of activating the ‘levers’ of employment and productivity.
Portugal has had historically low levels of capital per worker. Adverse developments in business
investment  during  the  crisis,  with  a  reduction  of  34%  between  2008  and  2013,  contributed  to
capital shortages. 
It is therefore vital to increase investment and take advantage of that recovery to learn from past
mistakes, scrutinising investment projects in a far more demanding way. The infrastructure and
support services are available, the investment in the non-tradable sector has been made. Now
that must be capitalised upon, creating capacity in the economy’s tradable sector.
The recovery in investment is, however, constrained by the (still) high indebtedness level and low
savings rate of the Portuguese economy. This means that the increase in investment will have to
be financed through an increase in equity, either from existing shareholders, or the entry of new
domestic or foreign shareholders. 
In  Portugal,  employees’  skills  have  improved  considerably  in  recent  years  but  gaps  remain  in
relation to European averages. The formal education of our workers must continue to improve. In
particular, those in employment the longest but with fewer qualifications have a lot to benefit from
life-long learning, which enables them to transform their skills and better take advantage of the
jobs of the present and future.
Moreover,  we  also  need  management  models  that  encourage  openness  to  risk  and  favour
decentralised  decision-making.  Enterprises  with  a  more  decentralised  management  are  more
open to disruptions and thus more innovative.
The promotion of innovation is also a ‘lever’ that needs to be activated. Economies’ capacity to
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
innovate depends on a whole ecosystem of factors, such as: 
The existence of a culture of merit and entrepreneurship and the capacity of society to deal
with and learn from failure;
The  spread  of  knowledge  within  the  corporate  sector  and  enterprises’  capacity  to  absorb
that knowledge, whether in the creation of new products or new production processes – so-
called ‘radical innovation’ – or in the improvement of existing products or processes – so-
called ‘incremental innovation’; and 
The suitability of the financial system, particularly the capital markets, to finance innovative
projects.  Financing  radical  innovation  or  start-ups  is  far  from  being  part  of  the  primary
mission of the banking system because innovative processes have long maturities and high
risk levels and failure rates. 
Financing innovation requires specialised operators and an institutional framework suited to
participating in such risks. In Portugal, these specialised operators are still underdeveloped
and have limited possibilities of becoming associated with larger-scale foreign operators.
Let me conclude.
First, on Europe. While we should not underestimate how much has been achieved in recent
years,  we  can’t  ignore  that  the  European  Union  architecture  needs  to  be  reinforced  further  to
withstand the impact of a future crisis to preserve financial stability and ensure social cohesion.
Secondly, as regards Portugal, the challenge we are confronted with is that of generating and
maintaining high levels of employment and productivity to ensure a lasting trajectory of growth
and convergence with our European partners.
In  both  cases  we’re  talking  about  the  deep  institutional  and  structural  foundations  of  the
economy. The task is hard, and it will take time to complete and bear fruit. This means we need
to start right away and we need to be determined, tenacious and focus on what really matters
from a long-run perspective.
Thank you for your attention. 
1
Beck, T. (2019), “Europe’s banking union – two steps backwards”, VoxEU.org, 4 February.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
