Kevin  Stiroh:  Reform  of  culture 
perspectives
Remarks  by  Mr  Kevin  Stiroh,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Institution  Supervision
Group of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the GARP Risk Convention, New York City,
26 February 2019.
from  multiple
finance 
in 
As prepared for delivery
Introduction
 I would like to begin by thanking the Global Association of Risk Professionals for the opportunity
to speak at this Risk Convention.   As a bank supervisor, I am obviously very interested in the
topics of risk management and risk measurement.  An important part of my job is to interact with
the  financial  industry  to  better  understand  the  issues  you  face  and  how  we  can  work
collaboratively toward our shared objective of promoting sustainable financial intermediation and
a safe, sound, and stable banking and financial system.
1
As  risk  professionals,  you  are  all  steeped  in  the  intricacies  of  risk  management  and  risk
measurement.    Value-at-risk,  the  three-lines-of-defense  model,  and  controls  and  testing
frameworks are second nature.  This is particularly true when we talk about the most familiar and
well-studied financial risks such as credit, market, and liquidity risk, and even non-financial risks
such as operational, compliance, and legal risk.
We all acknowledge the critical importance of these issues, but today I will talk about misconduct
risk and the need to develop a healthy corporate culture to mitigate it.  I’ll focus on the importance
of  addressing  these  issues  from  multiple  perspectives  including  those  of  boards  of  directors,
senior management, industry groups, and the official sector.  This topic might be less familiar to
some—the terms are newer and the assessment frameworks are less developed—but I believe
it is critically important.  Both the official sector and many of your firms have put considerable
emphasis on improving corporate cultures and reducing misconduct risk, but we continue to see
striking cases of misconduct both in the U.S. and abroad.  Clearly, more needs to be done.
Many of the insights I will share today are drawn from interactions with industry participants and
members of the official sector through outreach and industry conferences and workshops on the
topic, including events hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.   I am confident that
continued commitment and collaboration will contribute to better outcomes in this vital area.
2
Before  proceeding,  I’ll  emphasize  that  I  am  speaking  for  myself  and  not  the  Federal  Reserve
Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
Influencing Culture from Multiple Perspectives
Prudent risk management is a fundamental aspect of the business of banking, which means it is
a critical factor in the effective oversight of banks.  Supervisors focus on financial resilience by
requiring firms to maintain sufficient capital and liquidity and emphasize operational resilience by
promoting  effective  corporate  governance,  risk  management,  and  recovery  planning.     In  my
view,  misconduct  risk—defined  as  the  potential  for  behaviors  or  business  practices  that  are
illegal, unethical, or contrary to a firm’s stated beliefs, values, policies, and procedures—is an
integral  part  of  an  effective  risk  management  framework.    Bad  conduct  threatens  a  firm’s
resiliency  by  diverting  management  attention,  harming  a  firm’s  reputation,  depleting  a  firm’s
4
capital, and affecting the composition of its workforce.
3
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
To  further  develop  this  idea,  the  team  working  on  this  at  the  New  York  Fed  introduced  the
concept of a firm’s “cultural capital,” which is a type of intangible asset that impacts what a firm
produces and how it operates.  It is analogous to physical capital, like equipment, buildings and
property,  or  to human  capital,  like  the  accumulated  knowledge  and  skills  of  workers,  or  to
reputational capital, like the franchise value or brand recognition.  This is an intangible asset, so
we  generally  feel  the  impact  rather  than  see  the  thing  itself.    Nonetheless,  I  believe  a  firm’s
cultural capital can be measured, assessed, and ultimately impacted in ways that can improve
outcomes and enhance a firm’s resiliency.
In a firm with a high level of cultural capital, for example, misconduct risk is low and observed
structures,  processes,  formal  incentives,  and  desired  business  outcomes  are  consistent  with
the  firm’s  stated  values  and  risk  appetite.    Unspoken  patterns  of  behavior  reinforce  this
alignment. Problems are escalated to senior managers routinely, as employees feel empowered
to raise their hands and believe that their efforts will result in meaningful responses.  And senior
leaders advance through the organization because, in addition to strong business performance,
they set a credible tone from above by modeling behaviors consistent with the firm’s values. 
By  contrast,  in  firms  with  low  levels  of  cultural  capital,  formal  policies  and  procedures  do  not
reflect “the way things are really done.”  Misconduct results from the norms and pressures that
drive individuals to make decisions that are not aligned with the values, business strategies, and
risk appetite set by the board and senior leaders.  Employees do not speak freely when they have
concerns, and directors and senior managers do not find out about improper conduct until it is
uncovered  by  the  authorities.  Rules  may  be  followed  to  the  letter,  but  not  in  spirit. All  of  this
increases misconduct risk and potentially damages the firm and the industry over time.
To be clear, I am not saying this is easy.  Culture is difficult to assess because it is not a single,
point-in-time metric, but a multi-dimensional concept with different implications for different parts
of  an  organization.    This  complexity  suggests  that  no  single  metric,  solution,  approach,  or
5
template will work for every firm in every circumstance.
Consider  the  different  roles  of  key  players  in  mitigating  misconduct  risk  and  building  and
sustaining  a  healthy  culture.    The  board  of  directors,  senior  management,  staff,  investors,
industry  groups,  and  the  official  sector  might  all  see  and  assess  aspects  of  a  firm’s  culture
differently. Today, I will focus on a few of these stakeholders.
Boards of Directors
In 2017, the New York Fed hosted a culture measurement workshop that included a panel of
board members from various financial firms.  There was consensus among the panelists that
board  members  play  a  critical  role  in  a  firm’s  governance  structure  and  culture.    Moreover,
corporate boards independently assess whether management is setting the right tone and hold
management  accountable  for  any  gaps  between  a  firm’s  values  and  its  actual  business
practices.  Proposed guidance from the Federal Reserve suggests that the responsibilities of an
effective board of directors include setting strategy and risk tolerance, supporting independent
risk  management,  managing  information  flows,  ensuring  appropriate  expertise,  and  holding
senior management accountable for effective execution.    
6
Behavioral  indicators  can  help  boards  understand  their  firms’  cultures  and  identify  potential
trouble  spots  within  the  organization.    Corporate  boards  use  various  methods  to  obtain
information and assess culture, such as meeting with many levels of employees, receiving third-
party assessments, and conducting 360 reviews of the CEO and top leaders.  Organizations like
the U.K. Banking Standards Board (BSB) can provide outside benchmarking data against which
to measure the culture within one’s own firm.    Corporate boards for financial firms may also
import practices and lessons from other industries.  Finally, the board members that participated
in the New York Fed’s workshop agreed that a board’s own culture matters; it needs independent
7
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
voices, diverse perspectives, and opportunity for debate.
Senior Management
The  Federal  Reserve  published  a  proposal  on  corporate  governance  that  states  that  senior
management is responsible for the execution of strategy and day-to-day operations consistent
with the firm’s stated risk appetite, ensuring safety and soundness, overseeing business lines
and risk management, and ensuring compliance with internal policy, procedures, regulations and
laws.  Development of a firm’s cultural capital links directly to these core responsibilities and is
evidenced by behavior throughout the firm.
8
To address these concerns and build cultural capital, some firms have established culture and
conduct committees or groups that meet regularly to review cultural indicators and assessment
efforts.  Providing  these  groups  with  sufficient  stature,  developing  the  proper  infrastructure  to
support them, and defining clear roles and responsibilities are essential for success.  It is critical
that  there  is  alignment  between  the  board,  senior  management,  and  middle  and  lower
management  on  issues  of  conduct  and  culture,  as  employees  take  cues  from  their  direct
managers even more than the tone from the top.
9
The  performance  management  framework  established  by  senior  management  sets  powerful
incentives to influence conduct and culture within a firm.   Financial incentives, however, are not
the  only  drivers  of  culture  and  conduct.  Employees  alter  their  behavior  based  on  a  variety  of
formal and informal, intrinsic and extrinsic motivations.  Intrinsic motivations could include growth
opportunities, independence, power, and social factors, while extrinsic motivations could include
pay, benefits, profit sharing, or other forms of awards.
  With this range of motivating factors
and the impact they have on the culture in mind, a number of firms have integrated “how” factors
into  an  employee’s  performance  evaluations  by  assessing  the  methods  used  to  achieve  a
performance goal alongside the “what” components such as contributing to their group’s financial
performance.
Industry Benchmarking
10
Another perspective is from the industry as a whole.  I think we can gain important insights by
looking  across  the  financial  industry,  identifying  best  practices,  and  understanding  what
approaches are most effective in positively influencing conduct and culture.  Conferences and
workshops like those hosted regularly by the New York Fed and others can help.  In addition,
standardized  metrics  and  indicators  can  provide  insights  when  assessing  changes  over  time
and across firms. 
The BSB, for example, provides one lens on assessing culture change for a broad cross-section
of financial services firms operating in the U.K.
  Each firm participating in the survey has the
ability to see its outcomes relative to others and the industry average.  This type of industry-wide
assessment gives firms insight into areas they can individually focus on, as well as areas they
may want to address as an industry.    
11
The U.K. is not alone in this approach.  In December 2017, the chief executives of the five main
retail banks in Ireland informed the Department of Finance of their intention to establish an Irish
Banking Standards Board.
12
In the U.S., the idea of industry benchmarking has been raised and discussed in the past, but no
industry action has emerged to move this idea forward.  At the New York Fed’s workshop on
culture  measurement  and  assessment,  several  participants  recommended  either  joining  the
BSB’s benchmarking survey or creating a similar U.S. organization.
 Some noted that it would
be helpful to include non-banks in the effort, and to collaborate with other corporations that have
experience  building  strong  cultures.    Participants  also  discussed  the  importance  of  sharing
13
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
“lessons  learned”  and  developing  best  practices  as  an  industry.    In  my  view,  these  types  of
industry-led initiatives can offer useful insights as firms compare and contrast their efforts and
outcomes with peers. 
Official Sector
A final perspective is that of the official sector.  In my view, there is a clear role that follows the
traditional focus on prudent risk management and the goal of building resilience.  This reflects
both the direct impact to firms mentioned above and the potential for industry-wide spillover if
conduct and performance issues at one firm cause customers, counterparties, and investors to
lose trust in the industry as a whole. This type of spillover suggests a role for the official sector to
coordinate efforts and push the industry forward.
To  be  clear,  it  is  not  the  role  of  the  official  sector  to  set  the  internal  culture  of  a  firm—that
responsibility lies squarely with the board of directors and senior management.  Rather, the job of
the official sector is to promote standards and practices that will mitigate misconduct risk and
promote efficient and sustained financial intermediation and financial stability.
Global  supervisors  have  taken  a  number  of  approaches  when  it  comes  to  understanding,
influencing, and assessing culture at firms. In the whitepaper I mentioned earlier, my New York
Fed  colleagues  and  I  included  a  section  describing  a  selection  of  approaches  that  the  official
sector has employed.  The Financial Stability Board Working Group on Governance Frameworks
(FSB  WGGF)  has  published  a  range  of  tools  for  supervisors  to  use  in  assessing  firms’
management of cultural drivers of misconduct, as well as a summary of supervisory approaches
and practices in supervising for culture.
  This variation reflects differences in mandates, tools,
and authority.  Looking across jurisdictions, we see supervisory efforts such as specialized units
of  behavioral  experts,  risk  culture  assessment  frameworks,  and  supervisory  guidance  that
directs supervised institutions to develop and promote a sound corporate culture.
14
This variation in approach is a valuable feature of the official sector focus on conduct and culture
reform.   As  the  official  sector  innovates,  experiments,  and  introduces  new  approaches,  we’ll
develop a better understanding of how to best promote a healthy culture and mitigate misconduct
risk.
Measurement and Assessment
I’ll now turn to the question of measurement and assessment.  As all risk managers know, you
can’t manage what you can’t measure.  This is equally true in the area of misconduct risk.  At the
same  time,  while  hard  data  is  important,  I  don’t  believe  it  is  sufficient  to  convey  all  of  the
complexities of a firm’s culture or all of the ways it can impact business outcomes.
In  recent  years,  we  have  seen  firms  develop  dashboards  that  seek  to  bring  together  various
metrics from across their organization.  This is an important and necessary step.  Data sources
that  we’ve  seen  include  internal  quantitative  information  such  as  compliance  and  policy
violations, completed trainings, audit results, and risk metrics like limit breaches, policy violations
and  external  metrics  like  customer  complaints,  stakeholder  perceptions,  and  client  surveys. 
There also are qualitative data based on employee surveys.  Some firms have begun to do more
frequent pulse surveys with small cohorts of staff.  Other firms have found that long-term trends
are more insightful than short term changes.
These types of data, while necessary, are not sufficient to make progress. Supplementing hard
data with interviews, focus groups, dialogue, and external benchmarking can greatly enhance an
organization’s ability to manage and strengthen its culture.  Measurement and metrics are best
used as a starting point to spur further analysis and probing as boards and senior management
seek to identify trouble spots and build strong cultures.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
As we continue to see the impact of technology and big data in other parts of financial services,
one  interesting  question  is  how  innovation  and  enhanced  technology  will  support  the
measurement  and  management  of  culture.  The  potential  of  big  data  analytics  to  revolutionize
approaches in many areas of business has been talked about for years, and is now beginning to
become  a  reality.    For  example,  we  might  see  firms  routinely  leverage  broader  data  to  make
stronger predictions about potential misconduct risk, which could be useful to help focus scarce
compliance resources.   
Some may view the official sector as an impediment to the adoption of new technologies, but I
don’t think that needs to be the case.  In the context of compliance risk management in the U.S.,
the  five  federal  banking  agencies  recently  encouraged  financial  firms  to  explore  innovative
approaches  to  meet  their  compliance  obligations  related  to  money  laundering  and  further
strengthen the industry against illicit activity.
15
Similarly, in the U.K., Rob Gruppetta, head of the Financial Crime Department at the Financial
Conduct Authority, has spoken about the “balancing act” the FCA faces as a regulator trying to
encourage progress and innovation while also mitigating danger and imprudent risk-taking.  He
points  out  that  data  from  new  technologies  has  also  allowed  the  FCA  to  be  more  consistent,
effective,  and  risk-based  in  its  supervisory  approach  toward  conduct  risk.
    This  leads  to  a
question about how firms can use similar tools and techniques to mitigate misconduct risk and
promote healthy cultures. 
16
As with any innovation and application of new technology, critical questions are emerging.  For
example,  reliance  on  complex  algorithms  or  machine  learning  tools  raises  issues  around
“explainability”  and  a  clear  audit  trail.    Lawyers  will  inevitably  opine  on  a  variety  of  issues,
including data protection and privacy.  Beyond strictly legal issues, firms will have to wrestle with
questions  about  fundamental  fairness  and  the  consequences  that  techniques  perceived  as
unduly intrusive and untrusting may have on employee morale and industry retention.  As new
technologies  spread  and  their  use  grows  in  areas  related  to  compliance  and  internal
assessments, we will need to confront these issues.
Conclusions
To  conclude,  the  culture  of  a  financial  firm,  and  of  the  industry  as  a  whole,  is  a  complex
phenomenon that is not easy to measure or manage.  Collectively, however, we must not ignore
this issue.
Looking ahead, members of the financial industry with different roles and perspectives can each
take practical steps to move this dialogue forward.  Financial firms should continue to develop
and implement programs to build cultural capital, with directors, senior management, and staff
each  having  distinct  responsibilities  and  perspectives.    Supervisors  around  the  globe  should
remain committed to staying up-to-date on industry advances while continuing to develop and
implement  innovative  supervisory  approaches.    We  should  continue  to  collaborate  with  the
industry, the academic community, and other parts of the official sector. We should continue to
monitor  progress  on  industry  benchmarking  as  more  jurisdictions  take  up  these  efforts. And,
perhaps most importantly, we should continue to engage in discussions like this one, so we work
together to identify lessons learned and best practices as we pursue our common goals of a
safe, sound, and stable banking system.
I  think  we  should  be  optimistic  that  with  the  right  tools  and  technology,  the  right  level  of
commitment,  and  the  right  people  at  the  table,  we  can  build  cultural  capital  and  mitigate
misconduct risk. We all have a role to play in mobilizing our organizations to advance this critical
work.
Thank you for your attention.
1
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
I would like to thank Stephanie Chaly, Robert Fitchette, Jim Hennessy, and Jackie McCormack for help preparing
these remarks.
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York, Reforming  Culture  and  Behavior  in  the  Financial  Services  Industry:
Progress,  Challenges,  and  the  Next  Generation  of  Leaders,  June  18,  2018  and Workshop  on  Culture
Measurement and Assessment, June 21, 2017.
See SR 16–11: Supervisory Guidance for Assessing Risk Management at Supervised Institutions with Total
Consolidated Assets Less than $50 Billion, June 8, 2016 and SR 12–17 / CA 12–14: Consolidated Supervision
Framework  for  Large  Financial  Institutions,  December  17,  2012  for  details  for  small  and  large  banks,
respectively.  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Board requests comment on
proposed guidance that would clarify Board’s supervisory expectations related to risk management for large
financial institutions, January 4, 2018.
Stephanie Chaly, James Hennessy, Lev Menand, Kevin Stiroh, and Joseph Tracy,  Misconduct Risk, Culture, and
Supervision, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, December 2017.
Stiroh, Kevin J., The Complexity of Culture Reform in Finance, October 4, 2018.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Board invites public comment on two
proposals; corporate governance and rating system for large financial institutions, August 3, 2017.
See Banking Standards Board.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Board requests comment on proposed
guidance that would clarify Board’s supervisory expectations related to risk management for large financial
institutions, January 4, 2018.
Dudley, William C., Strengthening Culture for the Long-Term, June 18, 2018.
Lois V. Brown, Psychology of Motivation, 2007.   Coon D, Mitterer JO. Introduction to Psychology: Gateways to
Mind and Behavior With Concept Maps. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth; 2010.    Oudeyer, P. and Kaplan, F.  What is
Intrinsic Motivation? A Typology of Computational Approaches. Front Neurorobotics, 2007.
See Banking Standards Board, Annual Review 2017/2018.
Department  of  Finance, Minister  Donohoe  Welcomes  Banking  Initiative  That Aims  to  Rebuild  Trust  in  the
Industry, December 31, 2017.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Workshop on Culture Measurement and Assessment, June 21, 2017.
Financial Stability Board, Strengthening Governance Frameworks to Mitigate Misconduct Risk: A Toolkit for Firms
and Supervisors, April 20, 2018.
Federal Reserve Board, Federal Reserve Board issues joint statement encouraging depository institutions to
explore  innovative  approaches  to  meet  BSA/anti-money  laundering  compliance  obligations  and  to  further
strengthen the financial system against illicit financial activity, December 3, 2018.
Rob Gruppetta, AI and Financial Crime: Silver Bullet or Red Herring?, November 11, 2018.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
