  07.05.2019 
 Challenges for the Spanish economy. Productivity and the business sector 
Assembly of the Instituto de la Empresa Familiar 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Good morning. Let me begin by thanking the Instituto de la Empresa Familiar (IEF) for their 
kind invitation to take part in their Annual Assembly.  
Throughout its 25-year history, the IEF has not only played a crucial role in disseminating 
studies on the reality of and the challenges facing family businesses in our country, but has 
also fostered debate on many economic aspects of general interest. One recent example is 
its interesting publication on dual training on its website.1 
In  my  address  today  I  shall,  after  briefly  describing  the  current  economic  setting,  mainly 
analyse the principal challenges facing our economy in the medium and long term. I will 
particularly focus on productivity, the main determinant of economic growth in the long run. 
In  Spain’s  case,  productivity  dynamics  have  been  particularly  poor  in  recent  decades. 
Improving  them  with  a  view  to  the  future  is,  therefore,  a  prerequisite  for  achieving 
sustainable and balanced growth in the long term.  
The economic situation  
 After averaging growth of around 3% in the three years from 2015 to 2017, the pace of the 
Spanish economy eased somewhat last year to annual growth of 2.6%.  
 1 See the study by Instituto de Empresa Familiar  (2018) “Orientación profesional y formación dual. Hacia un modelo 
integrado para el empleo juvenil”. 
 3/18 
 On  the  latest  Banco  de  España  macroeconomic  projections  released  on  20  March,  the 
current upturn is forecast to continue over the coming years.  
These  economic  projections  are  expected  to  be  underpinned  by  the  continuation  of  the 
factors  that  have  sustained  growth  since  the  start  of  the  recovery.  These  include,  in 
particular,  the  gains  in  competitiveness  achieved  since  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  the 
strengthening of the financial situation of firms, households and financial institutions, and 
the  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance.  And  we  should  add,  in  the  short  term,  the 
prolongation of the expansionary stance of budgetary policy.  
This  combination  of  factors  would  enable  the  economy  to  continue  growing  at  a  pace 
greater  than  its  potential  rate,  which  would  support  the  absorption  of  the  high 
unemployment generated during the crisis.  
Among  these  factors I  would  like  to  stress  the  role  played  by  competitive gains  and  the 
improved financial position of households and firms. Both have helped make the Spanish 
economy more resilient.  
  Indeed, throughout the recovery, thanks to cumulative gains in competitiveness, the positive 
developments in our export markets were conducive to the internationalisation of Spanish 
companies. That in turn boosted business investment and employment and, through this 
latter variable, consumption.  
As a result, the Spanish economy has managed recurrently to post external surpluses during 
the upturn, which was somewhat unusual in previous recoveries. This would indicate that at 
4/18 
  least  some  of  the  correction  of  the  external  adjustment  is  of  a  structural  nature,  and 
associated  with  the  aforementioned  cumulative  gains  in  competitiveness  and  with  the 
increased geographical  diversification of  exports  and  of the  number of  firms  selling their 
products regularly to the rest of the world.  
Also worthy of mention is the notable deleveraging by the non-financial private sector, at a 
very advanced stage in the case both of non-financial corporations and of households. In 
the case of non-financial corporations, for example, the debt-to-GDP ratio, after falling more 
than 40 percentage points (pp) from its peak, stands below the average for euro area firms.  
Significantly, too, there has been intense recapitalisation and restructuring in the banking 
sector.  Yet  as  I  shall  explain,  the  sector  continues  to  face  a  very  complex  environment 
demanding high adaptability.  
Under the projected baseline scenario for growth of the Spanish economy, however, the 
Banco de España expects a gradual slowdown in the rate of change of GDP to figures more 
closely in line with its potential growth. On our estimates, that would be around 1.5%.  
This gradual easing in growth reflects the progressive exhaustion of some of the above-
mentioned factors, such as the expansionary demand policies and, in particular, monetary 
policy.    
 This scenario of gradual deceleration is, moreover, part of a complex and uncertain global 
context.  Here  there  are  doubts  about  the  intensity  and  the  pace  of  growth  in  the  global 
economy, in particular the euro area, which is Spain’s main export market.  Moreover, the 
 5/18 
 risks  associated  with  a  no-deal  Brexit  persist,  and  the  emergence  of  fresh  protectionist 
tensions hampering the recovery in global trade cannot be ruled out.  
Domestically, doubts prevail over the future course of economic policies, both in relation to 
budgetary policy and structural reforms. We must wait until a government emerges from the 
results of the latest general elections.  
The challenges and vulnerabilities of the economy  
Beyond its expected course in the short and medium term, the Spanish economy continues 
to face significant challenges and vulnerabilities. Headway in correcting these is needed in 
order to shore up the economy’s long-term growth capacity. Most notably, I would stress 
here high public and external debt, progressive population ageing, the high unemployment 
rate,  the  strengthening  of  the  banking  system  and,  as  I  said  in  my  introduction,  low 
productivity.  
  Let us take first high public debt. This stood at end-2018 at around 97% of GDP, over 60 
pp up on 2007, and is one of the main vulnerabilities that arose in the wake of the crisis. 
Also, the budget deficit is still high (2.5% of GDP in 2018) and, on available estimates, still 
has a significant structural component into which no inroads had practically been made in 
the  past  four  years.  Eliminating  this  vulnerability  of  the  economy  requires  resuming  the 
budgetary consolidation process. Cutting the deficit and public debt would, moreover, give 
fiscal  policy  greater  leeway  for  countercyclical  action  in  the  face  of  any  future  negative 
shocks. 
6/18 
  Meeting the guidelines of the preventative arm of the European Stability and Growth Pact 
should  show  the  temporary  fiscal  consolidation  path  to  follow  in  the  future  after  having 
managed last year to cut the budget deficit to below 3%.  
At the same time, a review of the composition of public spending and revenue might also 
contribute decisively to improving the economy’s potential growth. There is room both to 
increase the efficiency of public spending and steer its composition towards those items 
exerting greater influence on the accumulation of physical, technological and human capital, 
and to re-define the structure of the tax basket in order to make it more conducive to growth. 
The presence of high tax benefits in our tax system, arising from numerous exemptions, 
allowances and special low rates, which generate substantial revenue-related losses and 
distort the efficiency and fairness of the tax system, are a good example of the headroom 
existing here.  
Secondly, despite the notable correction to date, the negative net international investment 
position is still at 77.1% of GDP. And the nation’s gross debt amounts to 166.7% of GDP, 
only slightly below the peak seen during the crisis.  
To  bring  down  the  debt  vis-à-vis  the  rest  of  the  world,  Spain  will  have  to  run  external 
surpluses over an extended period of time. And that, in turn, requires maintaining the gains 
in competitiveness, which throughout the recovery have been based on the moderation of 
labour and financial costs, and which, hereafter, should rest to a greater extent on increases 
in productivity.  
  7/18 
 Thirdly,  population  ageing  is  one  of  the  main  medium-  and  long-term  challenges  facing 
developed economies. Illustrating this phenomenon is the substantial increase foreseen in 
the dependency ratio (percentage of the over-66s relative to the population aged 16-66). 
Even in the most optimistic demographic projections, this ratio will exceed 50% in Spain by 
the mid-21st century, far exceeding its current level of 25%.  
Population ageing will have – and is already having – a significant impact on public finances. 
The latest estimates anticipate a substantial increase in public spending on pensions, health 
and long-term care.  
In the case of the pension system, the 2011 and 2013 reforms included certain adjustment 
elements that would enable the effect of the expected increase in the dependency ratio in 
the  long  term  to  be  offset  significantly.  This  would,  above  all,  be  through  a  likewise 
significant reduction in the pension replacement rate (defined as the ratio of the average 
pension to the average wage or average productivity in the economy). However, the latest 
implemented measures have put back the application of the sustainability factor to 2023, 
and  have  reintroduced  an  annual  revaluation  system  for  pensions  indexed  to  the  CPI. 
Against this background, ensuring the financial sustainability of the public pension system 
and  safeguarding  inter-generational  equity  will  require  additional  measures,  on  both  the 
revenue and expenditure sides.  
Nor must we forget that population ageing has significant consequences not only for public 
finances, but also for aggregate supply and demand in the economy.  
Foreseeably, demographic changes will affect consumption and saving patterns and tend 
to  reduce  productivity  growth.  This  is  why  I  must  stress  that  addressing  the  population 
challenge calls for the adoption of a multidisciplinary strategy. Among other aspects, this 
strategy must encourage the participation of older workers, tailor migratory policy to labour 
market needs and boost the birth rate. In this scenario, education and vocational training 
policies are crucial. 
 8/18 
    Fourthly, the unemployment rate remains very high (14.7% in 2019 Q1), despite the fact that 
since the onset of the recovery almost 2.5 million jobs have been created. Moreover, around 
45% of the unemployed have been looking for a job for a year or more.  
Improving  the  employability  of  the  most  vulnerable  groups  –  namely  youths  and  elderly 
workers, in particular the least skilled  – is essential to reduce this scourge and thus help 
correct the strong rise in wage inequality that  stemmed from the crisis. In this respect, it 
would be desirable to improve the human capital of the least skilled unemployed and to 
align job training measures to employers’ demands.  
These measures should be structured to fit others aimed at reducing the high temporary 
employment ratio, in light of its negative influence on human capital accumulation – to which 
I shall refer later – and, once again, on inequality.  
Indeed, despite trending more favourably over the past year, the temporary employment 
ratio stood in 2019 Q1 at almost 26%, far above that in other European countries. Reducing 
it will necessarily involve raising the attractiveness of permanent hiring for firms.  
Finally, let us turn to the banking sector. Major challenges, in many cases shared with other 
European banking systems, remain outstanding, despite the progress made in recent years.  
For one thing, the Spanish banking sector should speed up the  reduction of its non-earning 
assets, since these not only bear down on its profitability but also on its capacity to allocate 
 9/18 
 resources efficiently. This aspect is particularly relevant in Spain’s case, where the recourse 
by smaller-sized firms to external funding is mainly through bank loans.  
Next,  in  addition  to  enhancing  the  quality  of  their  assets,  Spanish  institutions  should 
strengthen their capital and the liabilities susceptible to be used in the event of bail-ins in 
order to face on the best footing the regulatory challenges still pending.  
As in other countries, the new technological environment poses a challenge. But it is also 
an opportunity for the financial system, which the Spanish banking sector should harness.  
Finally, financial institutions should seek to enhance their reputation. This challenge should 
not be neglected if they are to successfully tackle an environment like the current one, which 
is becoming more competitive as new agents emerge (e.g. the so-called FinTech).  
In an economy like Spain’s, where the banking sector continues to mediate most financial 
flows,  overcoming  these  challenges  is  crucial  if  deposit  institutions  are  to  continue 
contributing to economic growth.   
The productivity challenge  
 In  recent  decades  the  increase  in  total  factor  productivity  (TFP),  which  measures  the 
efficiency  with  which  productive  factors  are  used,  has  been  notably  meagre  in  Spain. 
Indeed, TFP posted negative growth rates for much of the 2000s. In Spain, it has averaged 
growth  over  the  past  20  years  of  approximately  0.2%,  0.2  pp  less  than  the  euro  area 
average, according to European Commission estimates.  
10/18 
 Such poor productivity has a cost in terms of wealth. A simple calculation helps illustrate 
the fact that, if Spanish TFP had performed like that of the euro area, income per employee 
would today in Spain be almost 90% of the euro area average, as opposed to its current 
level of 83%.  
  The  latest  economic  literature  stresses  the  role  of  business  dynamism  in  productivity. 
Specifically,  innovative  business  start-ups  and  the  destruction  of  relatively  unproductive 
firms are at the root of productivity gains.  
On Eurostat data, the pattern of business start-ups in Spain prior to the crisis was relatively 
similar to other advanced economies, and the destruction of firms somewhat lower.  
Yet  during  the  crisis  the  rate  of  business  start-ups  underwent  a  sharper  fall  than  that 
observed in other economies, while destruction increased, being concentrated moreover in 
the least productive companies.  
Since 2013 the business sector has proven somewhat more dynamic. That said, the pick-
up in business start-ups is moving slowly, as it is in other European economies such as 
Germany  and  France.2  This  environment  of  diminished  business  dynamism  in  net  terms 
might  be  associated  with  an  increase  in  the  market  power  of  certain  big  firms  in  some 
sectors.  
                                                                                               
2 See Chapter 4, “Business dynamics in Spain: characteristics, determinants and implications”,  Annual Report 2015, 
Banco de España.  
 11/18 
  Additionally,  business  dynamics  in  Spain  show  two  anomalies  compared  with  other 
countries: 1) the productivity of business start-ups is lower; and 2) companies that increase 
their size are not necessarily the most productive. 
As  occurs  in  other  countries,  new  Spanish  firms  are  small  in  size  and  show  lower 
productivity levels than the average for their sector. This suggests the existence of a learning 
curve  that  new  firms  must  follow  if  they  are  to  converge  towards  average  efficiency.  In 
Spain’s case, however, the evidence available suggests that the productivity gap between 
new firms and existing ones is greater than that in other European countries.  
The  relatively  low  level  of  new  firms’  productivity  adversely  affects  both  their  survival  - 
Spanish  firms’  probability  of  survival  after  three  years  is  low  when  compared  with  other 
countries – and their ability to grow. 
There is also evidence that, in Spain, the correlation between growth and productivity is not 
particularly  high.  In  other  words,  the  most  productive  firms  do  not  always  increase  their 
market share.  
The outcome of these two phenomena is that the Spanish economy has a business sector 
in  which  the  predominant  pattern  is  one  of  a  large  number  of  small-sized  and  relatively 
unproductive  firms  alongside  a  relatively  small  group  of  large,  better  positioned 
corporations,  but  which  also  show  somewhat  lower  productivity  than  their  European 
counterparts.  
Specifically,  the  relative  productivity  of  small  Spanish  firms  is  40%  lower  than  that  of 
German,  French  and  Italian  companies.  This  difference  progressively  diminishes  as  the 
12/18 
  productivity of large companies is analysed; in any event, however, the negative difference 
never falls below 10%.  
Which factors account for these dynamics?  
According to the economic literature, the various factors that may influence an economy’s 
productivity  growth  include  most  notably  the  human  capital  available,  the  capacity  to 
innovate, access to and allocation of funding, market regulation and the degree of sectoral 
competition.3 4 
Human and technological capital  
  Turning  to  human  capital,  let  me  first  stress  the  gradual  improvement  in  the  Spanish 
population’s level of educational attainment in recent decades. There will have been further 
progress in recent years owing to the extension of the formative period for youths during 
the crisis. Hence, 24% of those aged 60-64 did not complete what now constitutes the first 
cycle of secondary education, while among those aged 25-29 this figure has dropped to 
6%.  
                                                                                              
3 See Syverson C. (2011): “What determines productivity”, Journal of Economic Literature, 49 (2), pp. 326-365.  
4 See Chapter 3 “Growth and reallocation of resources in the Spanish economy”, Annual Report 2014, Banco de España, 
and Chapter 2 “Financing and investment decisions of Spanish non-financial corporations”, Annual Report 2016, Banco 
de España. 
 13/18 
 Despite  these  positive  developments,  the  Spanish  education  system  has  still  to  face 
significant challenges. These include most notably the high early school dropout rate (18.3% 
among those aged 18-24) and the poor performance of our pupils in standardised exams at 
the  international  level,  indicative  of  low  educational  quality  compared  with  that  of  other 
developed countries.  
The evidence available shows that these poor results have not only to do with students’ 
relative knowledge, but also with their non-cognitive skills (such as the desire to innovate, 
self-control and the ability to concentrate).5  
In light of this evidence, adding to which is the need to address issues such as globalisation 
and digitalisation, we should reconsider the institutional design of the Spanish education 
system, learning methods and the content of the educational curriculum.  
Spanish  entrepreneurs  also  show  some  disadvantages  in  their  levels  of  human  capital 
relative  to  what  is  seen  in  other  leading  economies.  For  example,  according  to  Eurostat 
figures, the level of educational attainment of the self-employed is lower than the euro area 
average. Specifically, in Spain 40.5% of the self-employed and 35.1% of employers have a 
low educational level, compared with 24.8% and 20.1%, respectively, for their European 
counterparts. 
Moreover, managing a company requires certain skills – interaction, strategic, operational 
and control abilities – that also appear to be comparatively lower in Spain than in countries 
such as Germany, the United Kingdom, France and Italy.  
In  any  event,  the  indicators  available  on  business  management  should  be  viewed  with 
caution. It is not clear they distinguish appropriately between entrepreneurial capabilities 
per  se,  as  opposed  to  structural  problems  arising  from  an  institutional  framework  that 
constrains  the  capacity  to  organise  firms’  productive  resources.  For  instance,  excessive 
Spanish  labour  market  segmentation  does  not  facilitate  on-the-job  training  of  either 
temporary or permanent workers. Thus, on top of improving entrepreneurial and employee 
capabilities, doing away with the excessive duality of employment contracts is fundamental 
for raising productivity.  
To conclude my thoughts on the importance of human capital, allow me to refer also to the 
need to improve the relationship between general government and the firm in two spheres: 
that of vocational training and that of innovation.  
On vocational training, it is essential that firms should be involved in the guidance of youths 
seeking their first job. But it is likewise necessary that the administration should evaluate 
and adjust the vocational training system as business needs evolve.  
Recently there has been much discussion of the virtues of dual vocational training, based 
on the positive results in other countries. But it is difficult to define how best to transfer a 
system  such  as  Germany’s,  with  a  high  prevalence  of  large  industrial  corporations,  to 
Spain’s very different business sector.  
                                                                                              
5 See Zamarro, G., C. Hitt and I. Mendez (2016) “When Students Don't Care: Reexamining International Differences in 
Achievement and Non-Cognitive Skills” EDRE Working Paper No. 2016-18. 
14/18 
  The first papers to have evaluated this experience in Spain do not offer conclusive findings. 
And that underscores the challenge of adapting another country’s successful model to our 
circumstances.6  It  is  therefore  important  to  conduct  pilot  programmes  enabling  us  to 
determine which design is most suitable for us.  
Also, in addition to improving employee training, it is important that such training should be 
in an innovative environment. In this respect, investment in R+D activities in Spain is still 
very low in the public and private domains alike (0.8% and 1.4% of GDP, respectively, in 
2016), which places Spain at levels 25% and 50% below the European average. As a result, 
the technological capital gap with the EU has continued to widen.  
Here  several  measures,  among others,  would  be  advisable:  to  evaluate  the possibility  of 
increasing  the  public  funds  allocated  to  the  area  of  innovation;  to  change  research 
promotion and career arrangements to facilitate the entry and development of new high-
potential  researchers;  to  restructure  in  their  entirety  public  organisations  that  pursue 
innovation in order to harness synergies where they may be found; and to promote a sound 
evaluation system to determine the allocation of resources across centres.7 
Business financing  
                                                                                               
6 See Bentolila, S., A. Cabrales and M. Jansen (2018): “Market insertion of youth: Evidence from Madrid”, Working Paper, 
forthcoming. 
7 See the 2014 report “ERAC peer review of the Spanish research and innovation system”, authorised by the European 
Commission.  
 15/18 
 The growth of firms is influenced by the availability of external financing to undertake new 
investment  projects.  In  Spain’s  case,  as  is  known,  this  financing  is  mainly  through  bank 
loans, especially at smaller-sized companies. 
In the immediate run-up to the crisis, the standards governing this type of loan to firms were 
relatively lax. That made for abundant bank financing, which was particularly conducive to 
the creation and survival of numerous firms, many of them small in size.  
However,  the  companies  resorting  in  best  conditions  to  such  lending  did  not  always 
evidence  high  productivity.  Indeed,  the  buoyancy  of  loans  extended  to  relatively 
unproductive firms in the years prior to the crisis made for the build-up of macrofinancial 
imbalances. 
Conversely, in recent years, the allocation of lending appears to be proving more efficient. 
Specifically,  funds  tend  to  be  earmarked  for  companies  showing  a  comparatively  more 
favourable economic and financial situation and that are more productive.8  
This change in lending standards might be linked both to experience of the crisis and to 
financial  regulation  changes.  In  particular,  the  regulatory  requirements  applied  to  credit 
institutions have been significantly tightened with the aim, among others, of better aligning 
the level and quality of bank capital to the real risks assumed by banks. 
The  weight  of  construction-related  investment  has  diminished,  partly  as  a  result  of  the 
credit-allocation  changes  I  have  just  referred  to.  Since  2013,  in  fact,  investment  in 
equipment and in intangible assets has gained weight relative to total investment (more than 
4 pp) to the detriment of investment in real estate assets.  
Beyond the changes in the supply of credit, this pattern will also have been influenced by 
certain  far-reaching  changes  in  the  demand  for  real  estate  assets  in  recent  years.  In 
particular, there have been some housing-related fiscal and regulatory measures that have 
sought to reduce the traditional bias towards home ownership, such as the elimination of 
the house-purchase allowance under personal income tax.  
It  should  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  Spain  has  been  no  exception  regarding  the  overall 
tendency to increase the weight of investment in intangible assets derived largely from the 
expansion of digitalisation and technological development. This change causes difficulties 
when  it  comes  to  using  the  asset  to  be  financed  as  collateral,  which  may  lead  to  the 
disintermediation of business financing, in particular of large corporations. While this is a 
global phenomenon, its intensity has been somewhat more marked here, with Spain having 
traditionally been more highly banked than other developed economies.  
Small and medium-sized enterprises cannot avoid this change, and they must be prepared 
to  undertake  the  search  for  alternative  means  of  financing.  That  will  require  headway  in 
making  their  management  more  professional  and  in  enhancing  their  transparency  with  a 
view to resorting to the financing offered on the capital markets.  
                                                                                               
8 See Chapter 2 “Financing and investment decisions of Spanish non-financial corporations”, Annual Report 2016, Banco 
de España. 
16/18 
  Regulatory framework  
I would now like to focus on three  regulatory challenges with the potential to distort our 
country’s  current  regulatory  framework:  the  enormous  disparity  of  regulations  at  the 
municipal  and  regional  levels;  regulations  that  depend  on  firm-size;  and  regulations  that 
artificially distort the costs of different-sized firms.  
Firstly, the disparity of regulations at the municipal and regional levels. The OECD published 
a  report  in  2015  showing  the  enormous  dispersion  of  procedures  needed  in  19  Spanish 
cities in order, for example, to start a company, to apply for a building permit or to initiate a 
legal  claim.  In  such  a  setting,  the  formalities  needed  to  undertake  investment  projects 
proliferate, which hampers building up the business in alternative locations. This may be 
particularly  relevant  for  certain  sectors,  such  as  professional,  scientific  and  technical 
activities, training and wholesale and retail trade.  
To correct these distortions, the Law to Ensure Market Unity was approved. This legislation 
only allows limits on an operator’s freedom of establishment and movement when this is 
warranted by pressing reasons that are proportionate and in the general interest.  Moreover, 
the legislation places at operators’ disposal claim mechanisms under administrative law that 
are swifter, in principle, than the previous ordinary procedures.  
Benefits have clearly arisen from the defence mechanisms for agents fomented by this Law. 
And thanks to the sectoral conferences being held as a result of the legislation, coordination 
between regions and municipalities is increasing so as to identify and, as far as possible, 
adopt best practices at the sectoral level.   
Secondly, there are specific (tax or employment, for example) regulations in place intended 
to  assist  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  but  which  may  actually  discourage  their 
growth.  Indeed,  there  is  evidence  of  an  artificially  high  concentration  of  firms  at  sizes 
immediately  prior  to  certain  regulatory  thresholds.  That  would  denote  the  need  to  adapt 
existing regulations, so as to avoid these deterrents to business growth.9  
Finally, while the foregoing types of regulation discourage company growth, there are other 
types  of  rules  that  may  occasionally  prevent  such  growth.  This  is  because  such  rules 
artificially  distort  firms’  costs,  benefiting  those  already  in  place,  and  which  are  generally 
bigger, to the detriment of new firms, which are usually smaller.  
The specific nature of these distortions is very varied. For instance, the legislation on public 
procurement requires accreditation by tendering firms of a degree of solvency that is usually 
related to their turnover or their net worth and to public works executed in recent years. 
Start-ups have greater difficulty winning any tenders, irrespective of their productivity. But 
it is worth mentioning that the new public procurement legislation approved in 2018 made 
it possible for SMEs to tender by eliminating the accreditation of previous public works and 
reducing the number of years needed to demonstrate technical solvency.  
                                                                                               
9 See Almunia, M. and D. López-Rodríguez (2018): “Under the radar: The effects of monitoring firms on tax compliance”, 
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10 (1), pp. 1-38. 
 17/18 
 Conclusion 
In conclusion, allow me to recall that, in a setting of limited potential growth, the only means 
of improving the economy’s well-being turns on raising productivity. Indeed, set against the 
mere accumulation of production factors, increasing productivity is the sole mechanism that 
can generate sustained and stable economic growth in the long run. It is therefore crucial 
to  make  the  structural  reforms  needed  to  improve  productivity  dynamics.  Among  other 
aspects, there is ample room to undertake reforms that reduce labour market duality, limit 
regulations  impinging  on  competition  and  the  allocation  of  resources,  and  eliminate  the 
human and technological capital shortfall.  
Thank you for your attention.  
 18/18 
 