  10.09.2019 
 Global Imbalances and Capital Flows in the Era of New Technologies 
Opening Remarks - Banco de España and the Reinventing Bretton Woods 
Committee 
Pablo Hernández de Cos 
Governor 
 
  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  am  delighted  to  welcome  you  to  this  conference  on  global 
imbalances  and  capital  flows  in  the  era  of  new  technologies.  The  Banco  de  España  is 
particularly honoured to be co-organising it in collaboration with the Reinventing Bretton 
Woods Committee on the 75th anniversary of the Bretton Woods agreements.  
Indeed,  an  anniversary  to  celebrate,  and  a  unique  opportunity  to  praise  the  merits  and 
achievements of the rules-based system set by these agreements. But it is also high time 
to reflect on the challenges facing our current framework of global economic governance 
inspired by the agreements. 
The  core  values  of  multilateralism  and  international  cooperation  that  guided  the  Bretton 
Woods agreements in the past, are at least as necessary today as, with hindsight, they were 
75 years ago. Admittedly, the world has changed rapidly and profoundly. In such an evolving 
context, some “tailoring” to update international economic governance may be warranted, 
precisely to ensure that the core values that have promoted international cooperation will 
continue to do so in the future.  
In particular, over the last few decades we have been witnessing the emergence of new 
economic, political and geostrategic powers, as well as new challenges: population aging, 
migrations, security threats, social inclusion, and climate change, to name just a few. And 
all these dynamics have been taking place in an era of digitalisation and rapid development 
of new technologies, in which massive information flows call for an internationally agreed 
response that allows the benefits of innovation to be reaped while ensuring that the potential 
risks are mitigated.  
Together, these developments amount to a new policy frontier that requires the promotion 
of mutual understanding and broad coordinated policy efforts, in much the same way as 
when  the  world  first  confronted  the  problem  of  managing  increased  trade  and  financial 
flows.  
However, this need for further coordination comes at a time when inward-looking populist 
and protectionist policies have re-emerged in some countries in combination with a greater 
emphasis on bilateral relations, somewhat questioning the current multilateral rules-based 
framework. 
I am certain that all these topics will feature highly in our discussions over the next two days. 
But before opening the full conference, allow me to start by recalling the underpinnings of 
the  Bretton  Woods  agreements,  the  economic  benefits  they  have  facilitated  and  the 
limitations  that  have  become  apparent  over  the  years.  I  would  then  like  to  discuss  why 
reforms are key to the survival of multilateralism, with some ideas for a way forward to tackle 
current challenges in an increasingly interconnected and digitalised global economy.  
The benefits of multilateralism  
The Bretton Woods agreements of 1944 were the cooperative response to the unilateral 
actions taken in the early 1930s that led to a period of historic global economic contraction. 
To quote Anne Krueger, this episode is an excellent example of how "efforts to depart from 
 3/8 
 multilateralism have provided more vivid illustrations of the need for multilateral solutions to 
international economic policy issues”.1  
Ever  since  the  signing  of  the  Bretton  Woods  agreements,  international  cooperation  has 
focused  on  creating  a  system  governed  by  generally  accepted  rules.  These  have  been 
complemented  by  mechanisms  and  procedures  to  ensure  compliance  and  to  resolve 
potential conflicts on the basis of fairness and equity from the perspective of all member 
states. In this rules-based system, multilateral organisations play a key role, by promoting 
the transparency and predictability of the system and by seeking to limit free-riding.  
There  is  a  broad  consensus  that  this  system  has  been  key  to  the  development  of 
globalisation and the promotion of economic growth and prosperity for many countries over 
the past half century.  
Trade  barriers  were  drastically  reduced  and  trade  flows  soared.  According  to  the  WTO, 
between 1948 and 1993 the value of world merchandise exports increased from $59 billion 
to more than $3,000 billion; and they jumped to five times that figure after the creation of 
the WTO. More importantly, in 1948, 63 percent of those exports were traded by Western 
Europe and the US, by 1993, this percentage had decreased to 58 percent and in 2016 it 
reached 48 percent, with a major shift in flows towards Emerging Asian countries.  
At the same time, financial flows were gradually liberalised and a global financial system 
emerged, with the active participation of global banks and investment firms. In addition, 
foreign direct investment inflows have increased tenfold since 1993.  
The opening up of the current account and the subsequent expansion of trade and financial 
flows enabled many countries to raise their development status. In this vein, GDP per capita 
in low and middle income countries doubled in constant terms from 1995 to 2016, while 
extreme poverty was notably reduced.  
The  Spanish  experience  since  the  mid-1980s,  when  we  joined  the  European  Union, 
constitutes a canonical example of the benefits that the opening up and liberalisation of an 
economy can bring about in terms of growth and economic modernisation. 
The need to reform the global governance model 
However, we should admit that the multilateral system that emerged from Bretton Woods 
has been sluggish in adapting to a changing world. A world in which emerging economies 
play a greater role in the global economy than they did in the past. This has undermined 
some of its legitimacy, causing disaffection among some of its members and impairing the 
consensus needed for agreements to be reached at international level.  
The  emergence  of  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008  highlighted  the  need  to  rebalance 
representation on global fora in order for effective concerted action to be achieved. This led 
to the endorsement of the G20 as "the first forum for international economic cooperation".2 
                                                                                               
1 Anne Krueger (2007), “An enduring need: multilateralism in the twenty-first century”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 
Volume 23, Number 3, 2007, pp.335–346. 
2 G20 Pittsburgh Declaration, September 2009. 
4/8 
  Indeed, the new framework proved to be key in containing the effects of the global financial 
crisis, through multilateral and coordinated actions on the monetary and fiscal fronts. The 
protectionist  response  to  the  crisis  was  significantly  smaller  than  during  the  Great 
Depression. In addition, since 2009, the G20 has promoted a range of policies to enhance 
the  resilience  of  the global  financial  sector,  including  stricter  prudential  requirements  for 
internationally active banks and, particularly, for systemically important institutions.  
However, after the initial impetus provided by the G20-multilateralism, finding consensus at 
international level has become increasingly difficult over time and the initial hopes that the 
G20 could become an effective mechanism for coordinating national policies have faded 
somewhat. 
Against this backdrop, it seems clear to me that the way in which international cooperation 
is defined and multilateral institutions work need to be revised.  
The system of global trade is a paradigmatic case, given the broad consensus on the need 
to  reform  and  revitalise  its  backbone,  the  WTO.3  While  some  western  economies  raise 
concerns  about  China’s  trading  practices,  as  well  as  the  effects  of  its  industrial  and 
technology  policies  on  the  level-playing  field,  many  emerging  countries  complain  about 
western countries’ policies in areas such as agriculture. 
Not only has the WTO proved unsuccessful as a forum for solving these issues, but also 
progress in responding to the challenges posed by the emergence of new forms of trade, 
such as e-commerce, has been rather limited. The experience in other relevant areas such 
as investment, intellectual property protection and public procurement, has been similar.  
Indeed, the collapse of the Doha round in 2001 had already raised doubts about the WTO 
governance framework. In particular, the effectiveness of the Dispute Resolution System 
and the viability of conducting trade discussions and adopting decisions involving over 160 
countries, on the basis of general consensus, had been called into question.  
In  fact,  given  the  deadlock  in  WTO  negotiations,  countries  have  chosen  to  shift  their 
liberalisation efforts towards regional or bilateral agreements. However, it is important to 
stress that bilateral agreements represent only a second-best solution. They usually entail 
some form of trade diversion which, from a global perspective, reduces the positive effects 
stemming from trade creation.4 What is more, bilateral or regional agreements, give rise to 
situations  in which  large  trading  nations or  blocks  are  typically  in  a  stronger  negotiating 
position than other economies, generating an asymmetric system of international relations.  
And, in this context, a trade war has unfolded, which is already taking a heavy toll as regards 
its effects on global trade and global uncertainty and is currently one of the greatest threats 
to the world economy.  
                                                                                               
3 Hoeckman (2018), “Revitalizing Multilateral Governance at the World Trade Organization”, Report of the High-Level 
Board of Experts on the Future of Global Trade Governance. https://cadmus.eui.eu/handle/1814/60580 
4 Dai, Mian, Yoto Yotov and Thomas Zylkin (2014), “On the trade-diversion effects of free trade agreements”, Economics 
Letters, 122(2): 321-325. 
 5/8 
 On the financial front, the international architecture has also become more fragmented 
during the last decade. The difficulty of reforming the IMF´s governance structure and the 
impression  that its  resources  might  prove insufficient  should  a  severe  crisis  occur,  have 
contributed to the emergence of multiple layers in the global financial safety net.5  
Since the global financial crisis, the system has expanded to encompass multiple forms of 
insurance, comprising the IMF and a number of regional financial arrangements (RFAs) — 
the size of which has increased from almost negligible amounts in the early 2000s to more 
than 1.5 trillion dollars today —, bilateral swap lines and reserve arrangements.  
The proliferation of regional financial agreements is a response to countries’ need to ensure 
access to support for their balance of payments when circumstances require it — in some 
cases subject to less strict conditionality, in an effort to avoid the IMF stigma —, but also to 
the need to boost resources for crisis prevention and resolution. The latter need is clearly 
the rationale for the largest RFA, the European Stability Mechanism, created in the middle 
of the euro area sovereign debt crisis. 
As a result, the global financial safety net has expanded beyond the walls of the IMF with 
limited coordination across its different layers.  
In  short,  the  multilateral  system  has  given  way  to  a  new  decentralised  and  fragmented 
system,  more  prone  to  bilateral  conflicts  and  managed  by  informal,  non-binding 
commitments.  
Reform is possible  
It  should  come  as  no  surprise  that  without  reform,  the  current  system  will  be  unable  to 
provide  satisfactory  answers  to  global  problems,  to  address  externalities  caused  by 
unilateral actions, to ensure the enforcement of international (non-binding) agreements or to 
confront  free-rider  concerns.  In  other words,  in  the  current  context of  new  powers,  new 
economic and geopolitical equilibria, and new challenges, multilateralism has to be adapted 
to ensure its survival.6 
These  reforms  should  be  pragmatic.  Viable  solutions  should  first  aim  to  establish 
frameworks that ensure the best feasible agreements are reached, implemented and 
enforced. The idea would be to support collective action in specific fields through various 
existing multilateral fora that are already working effectively. There are good examples of 
this course of action in the financial stability arena as shown by the work of the Financial 
Stability Board7 or the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. 
A similar model of collaboration could perhaps be tailored to the trade arena to unblock the 
WTO.8 That should allow progress on multilateral agreements, despite blocking positions in 
the current institutions. In this case, flexibility means the possibility of third parties voluntarily 
                                                                                              
5 Garrido, I., P. Moreno and X. Serra (2012), “El FMI y los acuerdos regionales de financiación”, Boletín Económico, 
March, Banco de España, and (2016), “The new map of international financial institutions”, Economic Bulletin, January, 
Banco de España. 
6 Johannes Linn (2018): “Recent threats to multilateralism”, Global Journal of Emerging Market Economies 9, 86–113. 
7 
https://www.bundesbank.de/en/press/speeches/policy-evaluation-assessing-the-effects-of-post-crisis-financial-
sector-reforms-799146 
8 
financing-arrangements-and-the-imf 
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Policy-Papers/Issues/2017/07/31/pp073117-collaboration-between-regional-
6/8 
  adhering  to  a  plurilateral  agreement  in  due  course  (making  the  agreement  multilateral  in 
essence), while maintaining peer pressure to avoid free riding.9  
Furthermore,  the  new  global  governance  system  should  recognise  that  both 
regionalism and multilateralism are compatible, as some problems are of a local nature 
and are better tackled locally. Regionalism and multilateralism are not mutually exclusive. 
On  the  contrary,  both  approaches  can  support  and  complement  each  other,  generating 
synergies  that  strengthen  the  global  financial  safety  net.  Indeed,  bilateral  and  regional 
agreements  have  in  many  cases  brought  about  improvements  in  the  multilateral  trading 
system. E-commerce is a good example of this.10 
In this regard, the European Union, for example, should maintain its proactive approach to 
preserve  the  rules-based  global  trade  system.  And  indeed  the  European  Union  is  fully 
engaged in working, together with other members, on proposals to strengthen the WTO in 
areas such as subsidies, e-commerce, property rights and ensuring enforceability of existing 
WTO  commitments  with  a  well-functioning  dispute  settlement  system  that  cannot  be 
blocked by any single country.11 At the same time, it is important that the European Union 
should continue to negotiate trade agreements with other partners. Although, as mentioned 
earlier, this is not a first best solution, it is time to recognise that regional and multilateral 
arrangements open  to others  can  succeed  where  multilateral  negotiations have  failed  to 
bring many countries into the international trading system.  
In the financial arena, the emergence of regional initiatives has generated a more robust 
and  better  resourced  global  financial  safety  net.  However,  coordination  between  the 
different layers should be strengthened, on the understanding that a regional system can 
complement, but not substitute, the role of the IMF. In my view, the IMF is still essential, for 
at  least  four  reasons.  First,  it  has  unique  expertise  in  crisis  management.  Second,  the 
participation  of  the  IMF  in  adjustment-programme  design  adds  an  objective  view  that 
regional institutions cannot provide, one that is respected both by domestic authorities and 
by the private sector. Third, in cases of interconnected economies, the involvement of the 
IMF can dissipate the potential regional concentration of risks. Fourth, the IMF is the only 
institution that can mobilise a substantial amount of resources should a global crisis occur.12 
Finally, I believe it is also important to make the multilateral system and its benefits more 
visible to the general public in order to regain legitimacy and public support. In this sense, 
global integration should be accompanied by domestic policies that allow all citizens to reap 
the benefits of globalisation, since although the general equilibrium effects of globalisation 
are indeed positive, it can have negative effects on certain sectors and groups, which it is 
important to try to minimise.13 
Many of these ideas may well fit into what former IMF managing director Christine Lagarde 
dubbed “new multilateralism in a new economic landscape".14 She illustrated her proposal 
                                                                                              
9 http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/press/index.cfm?id=1945 
10 Alan WM. Wolff (2019), “The opportunity for reform of the trading system must not be squandered”, Speech at the 
Banque de France conference centre in Paris, 16 July 2019. 
11 http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/press/index.cfm?id=1945 
12 Gallego, S., P. L’Hotellerie and F. López (2018), “The International Monetary Fund and its Role as a Guarantor of 
Global Financial Stability”, Banco de España, Economic Bulletin 4/2018. 
13 IMF (2007), “Globalization and Inequality”, WEO, Chapter 4 and Helpman, E. (2018), “Globalization and Inequality”, 
Harvard University Press. 
14 https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2018/10/11/sp101218-new-economic-landscape-new-multilateralism 
 7/8 
 nicely with two examples. One concerns trade integration: the system should be fair and 
take care of those left behind in the process of globalisation. The other relates to global 
imbalances: deficit and surplus countries should both take action in a cooperative manner. 
Again,  a  core  element  of  any  of  these  proposals  is  complementarity  between  sound 
domestic  policies,  international  cooperation  and  a  robust  global  financial  safety  network 
that accommodates both regional and multilateral actors.  
Conclusions 
In short, the multilateral economic cooperation system, despite its limitations, has allowed 
significant  development  in  many  countries over  the  last  few  decades.  Today,  more  than 
ever, its defining principles of cooperation, rules, universality, formality and sovereign equity 
need to be preserved to enable the various global challenges ahead to be addressed.  
Notwithstanding this, the new economic, social and geopolitical realities call for a reform of 
multilateralism.  We  must  work  to  adapt  multilateral  institutions  to  the  new  realities, 
eliminating  obstacles  that  hinder  collective  action,  making  them  more  flexible,  efficient, 
representative, transparent and accountable. They also need to become more cooperative 
and to better complement regional arrangements and institutions. 
Thank you. 
 8/8 
 