Luís  Máximo  dos  Santos:  New  challenges  facing  the  multilateral
trading system
Opening address by Mr Luís Máximo dos Santos, Vice-Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the
Symposium  "New  challenges  facing  the  multilateral  trading  system"  of  the  Institute  for  Legal
Research, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, 15 November 2018.
 1.  Let  me  start  by  thanking,  on  behalf  of  Banco  de  Portugal,  Rui  de  Figueiredo  Marcos,  the
Director of the Law Faculty of University of Coimbra (FDUC), José Aroso Linhares, the Chair of
the  Institute  for  Legal  Research,  and  Luís  Pedro  Cunha,  the  Chair  of  the  Symposium’s
Organising Committee, for inviting me to participate today. I am also grateful to be joined in this
excellent and timely initiative by all these other distinguished speakers and participants. 
Participation in FDUC conferences is always a source of pleasure and a challenge for any jurist. I
took  part  several  times  when  on  the  staff  of  the  University  of  Lisbon  School  of  Law  and  so  I
wanted  to  express  my  particular  pleasure  in  associating  myself  with  the  work  of  this
Symposium. 
2. The 70-year anniversary of the introduction of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
(GATT) on 1 January 1948 is very important at several levels. 
Portugal became a contracting party of GATT on 6 May 1962 as part of the opening up of the
economy  in  the  early  1960s.  The  decision  was  consistent  with  our  membership  of  the
International  Monetary  Fund  and  World  Bank  in  1960,  and  an  indirect  result  of  joining  the
European  Free  Trade Association  (EFTA),  following  the  signing  of  the  Stockholm  Convention,
also in 1960. 
As is known, this opening up of the Portuguese economy was key to Portugal’s fast economic
growth up until the 1973 oil crisis. 
Then, on 1 January 1995, Portugal became a founder member of the World Trade Organization
(WTO). In other words therefore, Portugal has a long history of participating in the multilateral
trading system.  
However, unfortunately, the subject of the multilateral trading system and international trade in
general has never had the appropriate profile in Portuguese public and political debate given its
exceptional economic and social importance.  
Undoubtedly there is important academic research on the topic and it is right to mention in this
regard  the  long  tradition  of  the  law  schools  of  the  Universities  of  Coimbra  and  Lisbon  among
several others, now with a new generation of excellent academics. 
But that academic work has only had a minimal impact on public debate. Certain factors explain
this. On the one hand, there is the highly technical and complex nature of the topics surrounding
the  multilateral  trading  system  and  its  functioning,  which  are  difficult  to  condense  into  sound
bites. On the other hand, the common commercial policy is the exclusive competence of the
European Union, leading – wrongly, clearly – to the assumption that somehow it is a topic about
which we have little to say.  
Perhaps the difficulties facing the multilateral trading system at least have the virtue of pushing
lively  debate  of  international  trade  topics  higher  up  the  agenda.  The  initiative  to  hold  this
Symposium therefore could not be more timely and fitting.   
3. The success of GATT has been talked about for a long time in the literature, but it is worth
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
repeating, so great is its originality. 
It arose as a clever solution to address the weakness of the Havana Charter – not ratified by the
United States – and the resulting failure to create the International Trade Organization. It came
into force with a ‘provisional’ status for nearly half a century (1948–1995), through the Protocol of
Provisional Application.  Having  started  with  23  contracting  parties,  on  the  date  the Agreement
establishing the WTO entered into force there were already 128.
However, it is more important to emphasise that GATT was undoubtedly successful in its core
mission. Indeed, with a minimalist constitution and without the legal and institutional basis of a
true international organisation, but with a clear definition of the core principles and provision for
suitable waivers to bring it flexibility and pragmatism, GATT created an international framework
that  led  progressively  to  a  huge  reduction  in  customs  laws  and  to  the  combating  of  non-tariff
obstacles, thereby contributing to the expansion and promotion of international trade.  
In other words, if the ambition behind its origin might have been modest, the results achieved by
GATT were impressive. 
We should remember that GATT also represents the ability, through international cooperation, to
create  a  mutually  beneficial  international  order,  as  was  the  case  under  the  Bretton  Woods
system. That is a lesson that cannot be forgotten nor should be underestimated in any way. 
It is important to recall that the Bretton Woods system contributed to the perfect integration of the
two great losers of the Second World War, Germany and Japan, into the international economy,
thereby showing an ability to learn from post-First World War mistakes. It brought prosperity to
the countries that took part in it and showed from the outset an ongoing capacity to expand, even
though it has only become truly universal from the 1980s, following the total collapse in 1989 of
the economic system aiming to rival it, based on the centralised planning of the economy. 
The Bretton Woods system was also able to overcome the challenge posed by the project (or
rather,  the  utopia,  perhaps)  of  the  ‘new  international  economic  order',  put  forward  by  the
developing countries, following their political pronouncement at the Bandung Conference, which
would gather great international prominence in the 1960s and ‘70s as a result of the work of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and the political backing of the
United Nations General Assembly. 
GATT faced this challenge without overlooking the importance of its central underlying theme –
the specifics of the developing countries’ situation – and was even able to adapt, as shown for
example by the addition of Part IV to GATT and the acceptance of the Generalized System of
Preferences created under UNCTAD. 
However, all this was done without compromising the core validity of its founding principles.  
While  reforming  the  monetary  system  proved  impossible  –  and  the  Bretton  Woods  monetary
system  collapsed  irreversibly  in  1971  –  reform  of  international  trade  was  nevertheless
achievable, shown by the creation of the WTO at the Uruguay Round.  
The  creation  of  the  WTO,  as  I  wrote  about  many  years  ago,  was  an  ending  as  well  as  a
beginning. 
An ending, in that it marked the completion of a long journey and the ultimate materialisation of
the vision of the Bretton Woods ideologues, who did not manage to build the International Trade
Organization in their time. 
A beginning, since the defining of a single institutional framework to administrate trade relations
between members in domains as vast as those covered by the set of agreements concluded
under the Uruguay Round in fact marked the start of a new phase. For example, the path was
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
cleared  for  the  first  time  for  financial  services  to  be  included  in  a  multilateral  trading  system,
through the conclusion of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). 
In  turn,  the  strengthening  of  the  Dispute  Settlement  System  increased  expectations  of  the
prevalence  of  law  over  sheer  power,  also  helping  to  depoliticise  and  dedramatise  matters  of
international trade.
It was a new framework, therefore, that justified high expectations, but also held significant risk of
disappointment, in a context in which the great changes, at all levels, in world trade were just
appearing on the horizon. 
4. Heralded as the first international organisation with a universal vocation for globalisation, the
WTO’s creation and the overall outcome of the Uruguay Round added optimism to an already
very optimistic environment.
In  November  2001,  the  Doha  Round  began  in  Qatar,  focusing  on  the  developing  countries’
problems. As is known, it has still not been possible to complete those talks. 
Also in 2001, on 11 December, the People’s Republic of China became a member of the WTO,
which was clearly an enormously important moment for the world economy. By benefiting from
WTO  rules,  China  enjoyed  even  more  favourable  conditions  for  its  rise  in  the  international
economic context. And it has used them very successfully, creating a new geoeconomy and a
new geopolitics in a few years, which in itself is a rare historic event.  
It is clear that the inability to complete the Doha Round has weakened the multilateral trading
system,  not  only  due  to  the  objective  meaning  of  that  inability  but  also  due  to  the  great
disappointment that it signified compared to initial expectations. 
But that is not the key factor of its crisis.  
In truth, as the 21st century has advanced, it has become apparent, to paraphrase Mark Twain,
that reports of the death of the nation state have been greatly exaggerated.  
On its own that might not be a grave problem. And we can agree that the weakness of states
beyond certain limits is in itself problematic. The real problem is that there are those who seem
to believe that returning to a position focused on the exclusive defence of the national interest, a
position  imposed  unilaterally  if  necessary,  might  solve  countries’  problems.  Given  the  current
nature  of  the  world  economy,  this  does  not  seem  possible,  even  for  the  largest  powers,
whichever they may be.  
The multilateral trading system today is under pressure. But it is not moribund. 
The  international  financial  crisis  and  the  Great  Recession  it  caused  had  immediate
repercussions  on  international  trade,  which  in  2009  contracted  for  the  first  time  in  several
decades. But thereafter it clearly recovered. Many countries continue to be deeply committed to
the goals of the multilateral trading system.   
Some problems are old and relate to familiar international trade themes: how to view preferential
trade agreements, which have proliferated relentlessly; how to assess the effects of economic
regionalism, with the establishment of economic integration zones; and are these circumstances
positive or negative for the expansion of international trade?
Other problems result from more recent developments in the nature of international trade. What
are the conclusions that we should draw, in terms of trade policy, from the fragmentation of the
production chain, and the emergence of global value chains, as they are known? As a result of
these developments, to what extent are we obliged to revisit more thoroughly the principles and
concepts we took as given?
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
And lastly, are the trade policies of the multilateral system fully correct from the viewpoint of the
new industrial revolution under way, structured around the digital transformation, which changes
the way we produce and consume, changes firms’ business models, and ultimately changes the
modern way of life itself? 
In this regard, asking questions is not as easy as it may appear, as it is important that we ask the
questions that really matter. In any case, answering them is clearly harder.
5. In the context of the Portuguese and European legislation governing it, Banco de Portugal is
tasked with multiple missions. Among the most important without doubt is that of safeguarding
financial  stability.  Broadly  speaking,  financial  stability  is  effectively  essential  for  preserving
international  trade,  as  the  financial  crisis  clearly  showed.  In  2009,  world  trade  in  goods  and
services  declined  over  10%,  even  though  since  then  it  has  returned  to  notable  growth  rates.
Without  sound  global  financial  institutions  successfully  carrying  out  the  key  roles  entrusted  to
them, the world economy suffers and international trade is one of the first victims, placing the
multilateral trading system under further pressure. 
6. For understandable reasons, some talk of a certain ‘multilateralism fatigue'. All topics should
be  discussed  without  dogmatism,  as  that  approach  is  the  most  lucid  given  the  novelty  and
complexity of the modern world. 
But  there  is  one  aspect  that  seems  non-negotiable  to  me:  the  principle  that  the  multilateral
methodology – without blocking other dynamics – is a precious good, and must be defended. 
It is surely no coincidence that the League of Nations and the United Nations were created at the
end  of  the  two  World  Wars,  with  the  United  Nations  supplying  the  original  framework  for  the
Bretton Woods system. 
One  must  bear  in  mind  that  without  operational  multilateral  institutions,  a  standard  conferring
international  legitimacy  will  cease  to  exist.  If  this  happens,  it  is  not  hard  to  see  that  the
‘multilateralism  fatigue’  identified  by  many  would  be  swiftly  followed,  in  all  likelihood,  by  a
‘nightmare feeling', arising from the proclamations of bilateralism, more or less regionalised, or,
worse still, by the disorderly overlapping of States’ unilateral actions.   
7. Many of these issues will be debated in this Symposium, which will surely be a great success.
Impressed  by  advances  in  technology,  which  surprise  us  every  day  and  open  up  new
possibilities  that  were  unimaginable  before,  we  tend  to  underestimate  the  power  of  ideas,  of
knowledge in its broadest sense, of beliefs and of institutions. Nothing could be further from the
truth. There is no greater power than that which originates from these factors, as it is they that
will ultimately decide the direction taken by technological progress. 
In a recent book, Stephen D. King states that “globalisation is driven not just by technological
advance, but also by the development of the ideas and institutions that form our politics, frame
our economies and fashion our financial systems both locally and globally. When existing ideas
are undermined and institutional infrastructures implode, no amount of new technology is likely to
save the day."
That seems to me a key insight into our current problems.
I wish everyone two days of intense and fruitful discussion.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
