Yakiv  Smolii:  National  Bank  of  Ukraine  press  briefing  -  monetary
policy statement
Speech  by  Mr  Yakiv  Smolii,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Ukraine,  at  a  press  briefing  on
monetary policy, Kyiv, 25 April 2019.
 Dear colleagues,
Please be informed that the Board of the National Bank of Ukraine has decided to cut
the key policy rate to 17.5% per annum.
Inflation has been on a steady decline towards the 5% target, allowing the NBU to launch a cycle
of key policy rate cuts. At the same time, the NBU Board sees risks that may hinder the plans to
lower the rate.
What inflation developments followed the last key policy rate decision?
In March 2019, consumer price inflation continued to slow and reached 8.6%, in line with
the NBU’s latest forecast. Core inflation declined even faster than expected – to 7.6%. This is
evidence that underlying inflationary pressure continued to ease in early 2019.
The decline in inflation was supported by the NBU’s tight monetary policy, which was one of the
reasons for the strengthening of the hryvnia. That, in turn, impacted the prices of imported goods
and goods with a significant import share in their production costs
Despite  the  electoral  events,  conditions  in  Ukraine’s  financial  market  remain  benign,  while
inflation  expectations  of  households,  businesses,  banks,  and  financial  analysts  continue  to
improve.
In addition to monetary factors, an increase in the domestic supply of some food products, and
lower global food prices also dampened inflationary pressures.
What will be the future trajectory of inflation?
We expect that inflation will continue to decline gradually. More specifically, it will decrease
to 6.3% by the end of 2019 and to 5.0% by the end of 2020. As projected before, inflation will
enter the target range of 5% ± 1 pp in early 2020.
The slowdown in inflation was driven by the following factors:
first and foremost, tight monetary conditions and restrained fiscal policy
second, wage growth decelerated, as it approached the rates of wage growth of neighboring
countries and labor migration from Ukraine declined in intensity
third,  the  hryvnia  appreciated  in  Q1  2019,  holding  down  the  future  growth  in  prices  for
nonfood products
fourth, global prices for natural gas declined, which will be reflected in price changes in the
domestic market
fifth, the supply of both domestic and imported food products increased.
These factors will also contribute to the continued slowdown of core inflation to 5.0% this year
and 3.7% in the subsequent year.
The expected increase in some tariffs to the market levels and higher excise taxes on alcoholic
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
and tobacco products will restrain the decline in inflation.
The NBU has also performed scheduled revisions of other macroeconomic forecasts
Economic growth will slow in 2019 to rebound in 2020.
As well as in January, the NBU forecasts a slowdown in economic growth to 2.5%.
This will be due to a slowdown in the global economy and trade, restrained fiscal policy resulting
from the need to repay large volumes of public debt, and tight monetary conditions required to
bring inflation to its target. Moreover, the harvest of grains and oil crops is expected to be lower
compared to the bumper crop of 2018.
Private consumption will remain the main driver of economic growth. However, its growth will
decelerate due to a slower growth in real household income – wages, pensions, and remittances
from abroad. Investment demand will be limited by political uncertainty in the year of presidential
and parliamentary elections.
Growth  in  real  GDP  will  accelerate  to  2.9%  in  2020  and  3.7%  in  2021.  The  growth  will  be
propelled by a gradual easing of monetary policy, which will bolster domestic demand, and spur
investment  activity  as  the  election  cycle  is  over.  Economic  growth  will  be  restrained  by
decreased volumes of natural gas transit to Europe as a result of the construction of bypass
pipelines.
In 2019, the current account deficit is projected to stay at the previous year’s level, at
3.3% of GDP, due to various factors. Proceeds from the sales of last year’s record harvest of
corn and the effect of favorable trade conditions will be offset, as the economies of Ukraine’s
main trading partners cool.
The cooling will negatively affect exports and remittances from labor migrants.
In future, the current account deficit will widen slightly, to 4% of GDP in 2021, as a result of a
decrease in natural gas transit and weak demand from Ukraine’s main trading partners caused
by stronger investment demand on the domestic markets.
The continued fulfillment of Ukraine’s obligations under the current cooperation program
with 
the
macroeconomic forecast.
International  Monetary  Fund  remains 
the  basic  assumption  of 
the 
This will allow Ukraine to attract other official financing, improve the conditions of access to the
international  capital  markets,  and  support  the  active  interest  of  nonresidents  in  hryvnia-
denominated  domestic  government  bonds.  These  borrowings  will  make  it  possible  for  the
government  to  repay  external  public  debt,  the  repayments  of  which  will  peak  in  2019  –  2020.
Inflows of debt capital and investments to the private sector will continue as well.
As  a  result,  international  reserves  will  hover  around  USD  21  to  22  billion  during  this  and  the
subsequent years.
The usual increase in uncertainty during presidential and parliamentary elections poses
the main internal risk to the said macroeconomic forecast, including Ukraine’s ability to
meet its inflation target in 2020.
The NBU will consider this risk in its monetary decisions mainly due to its impact on the financial
market and inflation expectations.
The following external risks are also important:
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
the global recession and lower raw commodity prices
stronger geopolitical tensions, particularly due to the uncertainty around Brexit
uncertainty  over  the  volume  of  gas  transit  through  Ukraine  starting  in  2020,  as  pipelines
bypassing the country are being built to deliver gas to Europe
an escalation of the military conflict and new trade restrictions introduced by Russia.
Taking into account the updated macroeconomic forecast and the said assessment of risks, the
NBU Board decided to decrease the key policy rate to 17.5% per annum.
What will be the NBU’s monetary policy stance in future?
As it initiates an easing cycle, the NBU Board points out that its further steps will depend
on whether or not inflation risks materialize and whether or not inflation expectations
improve.
However, despite there being macroeconomic preconditions for starting a cycle of key policy rate
cuts, this process might be impeded by the materialization of risks to financial stability (that were
mentioned in the statement of the Financial Stability Council last week), and to the central bank`s
independence.
The NBU will closely monitor developments in Ukraine and, if the above risks materialize, will
respond by deploying monetary tools.
A new detailed macroeconomic forecast will be published in the central bank’s Inflation Report on
3 May 2019.
A  summary  of  the  discussion  by  Monetary  Policy  Committee  members  that  preceded  this
decision will be published on 6 May 2019.
The next meeting of the NBU Board on monetary policy issues will be held on 6 June 2019.
I thank you for your attention!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
