François Villeroy de Galhau: The role of banking in a sustainable
global economy
Speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  World
Conference of Banking Institutes, London, 17 September 2019.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 I am delighted to be with you today. The topic that you have asked me to address – “The Role of
Banking in a Sustainable Global Economy” – prompts us to think about the future. However, let
me first say a few words about the present. The current context is one of increased uncertainty,
which is already weighing on growth at the international level. Two threats are contributing to this:
above all, trade tensions coming from the US, and second – of course – Brexit. Needless to say,
this situation is not sustainable. It is the responsibility of politicians more than central bankers, to
restore confidence. The latest example of this uncertainty is the spike in oil prices after the attack
last Saturday on Saudi Arabia’s oil infrastructure. It is too early to rush to hasty conclusions; we
should closely monitor the consequences on the oil market, which is characterised by a rather
flexible supply and a subdued demand. Oil price has significantly decreased since June, by about
20%. If it lasts, this latest oil shock could increase inflation and hamper growth. In my remarks
today, I will briefly start with Brexit before addressing two of our shared challenges for the future:
digital transformation and green finance.  
I. The prospect of Brexit and our future relationship
Let me say from the outset that Brexit is and remains bad news, not only for the United Kingdom,
but also for Europe. But we respect the British choice, whatever it turns out to be. At this stage,
both the British and Europeans are faced with great uncertainty surrounding the outcome. We
are  still  hoping  for  a  deal,  but  we  have  to  be  ready  for  a  no-deal  and  all  the  risks  it  entails.
Supervisors  both  at  national  and  European  levels  have  encouraged  and  monitored  the
implementation of contingency plans by the financial industry: on our side, we are ready.
Let me add one word on the future relationship between the UK and the European Union. After
Brexit,  we  will  obviously  no  longer  belong  to  the  same  European  club,  but  we  will  hopefully
remain close partners and friends. The UK will continue to participate in international forums –
such  as  the  G7,  G20  FSB,  BIS,  etc.  –  where  cooperation  will  be  much  needed  to  face  our
common challenges such as financial stability, digitalisation and the regulation of Bigtechs, as
well as the challenge of green finance. In a context where the multilateral order is being put at
risk, let me express the wish that the UK, together with the EU, may resolutely strive to renew
multilateralism. On our side of the Channel, our collective response to Brexit may possibly be a
further  integration  of  Europe,  with  the  new  and  promising  Commission  led  by  Ursula  von  der
Leyen, rather than isolationism or paralysis. Europe should build on its most valuable assets: the
euro, which is celebrating its 20th anniversary this year, the single market and its shared social
and environmental model.
II. Making the digital leap with lucidity
Let me now turn to our shared common challenges. Digitalisation is shaking up the way we live
and consume, opening up a world of possibilities for corporates and customers alike. Worldwide,
it clearly represents both an opportunity and a challenge for banks, as well as for supervisors.
New players are becoming increasingly important. Fintechs do not have the capital resources to
disrupt incumbent banks and can even be acquired by them. By contrast, Bigtechs do have the
potential to fundamentally redefine financial intermediation: they have strong brand recognition, a
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
worldwide customer base and privileged access to cutting-edge technologies. This new situation
is a major challenge for regulators and supervisors. Of course, financial regulation should remain
technologically neutral: the basic principle “same activity, same rules” must apply. This is a good
thing  for  the  level  playing  field.  However,  beyond  traditional  financial  regulation,  international
cooperation  should  be  developed  in  four  areas,  four  cornerstones  of  the  regulation  of  digital
finance. First, cybersecurity is a sine qua non for a reliable and sustainable digital future. It was
a  clear  priority  of  the  G7  French  Presidency  this  year.  Second,  regarding data  protection,
financial supervisors and authorities in charge of privacy have to invent new ways of cooperation
to  address  data  issues  that  have  become  central  to  financial  services.  Third,  regarding
competition  and  anti-trust  policies,  situations  where  “the  winner  takes  most”  while  staying
outside the scope of financial regulation should be adequately anticipated and addressed. And
fourth, fair taxation, thanks hopefully to OECD work.
 “Stable coin” projects, including Facebook’s Libra, are a case in point. “Stable coins” are quite
different from speculative assets like Bitcoins. However, regulators will have to keep a very close
eye  at  the  global  level,  and  believe  me,  we  will  do  it. At  their  meeting  in  Chantilly  in  July,  G7
members have expressed a clear position: stable coin projects raise a sovereignty challenge,
and “serious regulatory and systemic concerns, as well as wider policy issues, which both need
to be addressed before such projects can be implemented.”  France, as Chair of the G7 this
year, has created a dedicated task force – as soon as the project was announced by Facebook.
The  task-force,  chaired  by  Benoît  Coeuré,  will  make  its  conclusions  public  and  make
recommendations in October. Our aim is to formulate a response that is common across all
jurisdictions, and holistic, covering all the issues. And to quote only two of many requirements: it
is imperative that such projects comply with anti-money laundering regulations; the anonymity
of the users creates heightened risks. In addition, if issuers of stable coins also want to offer
banking services such as deposits, financial investments and loans, then they will have to obtain
a banking license in all countries where they operate. Otherwise these activities would be illegal.
1
Stable  coin  projects  reveal  gaps  in  existing  cross-border  payment  systems.  Hence,  at  the
European  level,  we  should  aim  at  promoting a  genuine  European  strategy  for  retail
payments. Payments are no longer a mere boring back-office technicality. They are innovative,
and they provide two strategic assets: data, and daily customer relations. The raw truth however
is  that  the  European  payments  market  is  already  dominated  by  non-European  stakeholders.
Furthermore, the growing role of non-European digital firms – be they American or Chinese –
offering  payments  solutions  should  be  taken  seriously.  Despite  the  creativity  of  the  European
ecosystem of payments, our market remains too fragmented. We don’t have much time left. We
– the Eurosystem and the Banque de France – call for the creation of pan-European payment
solutions, building on a common brand and on a state-of-the-art instant payment such as the
Target  Instant  Payment  Settlement  infrastructure  (TIPS)  managed  by  the  Eurosystem,  and
contributing to much more efficient international payments including for remittances.
Some also suggest that the right answer to Libra is accelerating the creation of a Central Bank
digital currency (CDBC). This is a scintillating subject, but a separate one. We Central banks
should investigate the many questions it raises – and we have started this work at the Banque de
France  –, and then decide on its own merits.
III. Green finance, “a new frontier for the 21st Century”
Let me now turn to green finance. For me, it is “a new frontier for the 21  Century”. First and
foremost, I would like to pay tribute to the Governor of the Bank of England, my colleague and
friend Mark Carney, who was a pioneer when he pointed out “the tragedy of the horizon”  in 2015.
Much has already been undertaken since then.
We  are  currently  witnessing a  growing  awareness  from  central  banks,  supervisors  and
2
st
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial  institutions  about  climate-related  risks.  Clearly,  green  finance  and  climate  risks
management have gone from the “nice to have” to the “must have”, from emotion to reason. In
financial  institutions,  climate  change  is  no  longer  confined  to  Corporate  Social  responsibility
(CSR) policy. Concerning central banks and supervisors, the creation of the Network of Central
Banks and Supervisors for Greening the Financial System (NGFS) in Paris in December 2017
has been a decisive step forward. In 18 months, this coalition of the willing has increased from 8
founding members to almost 50 members and observers from all 5 continents, with the Banque
de France acting as its permanent Secretariat and the active involvement of the Bank of England.
This momentum has an important meaning: supervisors and central bankers have collectively
acknowledged that climate change-related risks are a source of long-term financial risk. In April
2019,  the  NGFS  published  its  first  comprehensive  report  issuing  four  recommendations  for
central banks and supervisors, and two additional recommendations for policy makers.
3
Looking down the road, I see three priorities for the near future. First, we will require enhanced
disclosures that need to be built on sound taxonomies. The taxonomy framework published by
the Technical Expert Group (TEG) on Sustainable Finance of the European Commission on 18
June is a welcome step. Second, we have to better anticipate long-term climate-related risks,
through what I call “the video of the risks”. We must push for the development of comprehensive
climate stress tests in order to build a forward-looking approach of the impacts of climate risks.
Third,  green  finance  needs  to  mature  and  upgrade  its  professional  standards.  The  financing
needs  for  the  energy  transition  are  huge;  in  Europe  alone,  it  is  estimated  that  an  additional
EUR 177 billion per year will be necessary over the period 2021-2030 to reach the EU’s energy
and  climate  objectives  for  2030.   The  European  Green  Bond  Standard  proposed  by  the  TEG
should ultimately help to further develop the green bond market and channel more investments
towards green projects.
Furthermore,  many  proposals  have  been  made  to  allow monetary policy to play a direct and
sector-focused  role  in  financing  the  transition  to  a  low-carbon  economy.  For  example,  some
suggest a “green quantitative easing” by introducing a bias towards green assets in the purchase
programme  framework.  Despite  its  apparent  simplicity,  this  proposal  is  incomplete  and  has
serious limitations: monetary policy targets a macroeconomic objective (inflation) and it does not
single out specific social or sectoral objectives; and massive purchases on a relatively shallow
pool of green bonds could seriously distort the market. I prefer a more “integrated” and holistic
approach – and hence more ambitious, consistent with our financial stability and monetary policy
mandates. This is what I pointed out in the latest issue of the Financial Stability Review of the
Banque de France in June.  Climate change is a source of financial risk, but it can also provoke
both upward price pressures and a slowdown in activity – and can thus generate a long-term
stagflationnary  shock. In the light of this, central banks have two main tools at their disposal that
should be activated. First, it is essential that they contribute to the collective research effort in
order to better understand and anticipate the economic effects of climate change, and still more
that they integrate these into their macroeconomic models. Second, in operational terms, this
involves  integrating  the  results  of  climate-related  risks  into  the  assessment  of  collateral.  This
requires the development of a robust methodology to accurately assess the impact of climate
change on the credit risk of eligible assets.
4
Let  me  conclude  with  a  strong  conviction:  these  shared  challenges  for  tomorrow  require
immediate  action  from  us  today.  Political  philosopher  Thomas  Paine  said: “If  there  must  be
trouble, let it be in my day, that my child may have peace.” Let us hope that beyond Brexit, we will
find  common  grounds  to  build  a  desirable  future  for  the  next  generations.  Thank  you  for  your
attention.
1
2
3
Chair’s summary : G7 finance ministers and central bank governors’ meeting, Chantilly, 17–18 July 2019
« Breaking the tragedy of the horizon – climate change and financial stability », Speech by Mark Carney given at
the Lloyd’s of London, 29 September 2015.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
4
Source: European Commission
F. Villeroy de Galhau (2019), “Climate change: central banks are taking action”, Banque de France, Financial
Stability Review, no. 23 – June 2019.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
