Nina  Stoyanova:  Upcoming  changes  in  the  area  of  payment
services
Publication  of  Ms  Nina  Stoyanova,  Deputy  Governor  (Banking  Department)  of  the  Bulgarian
National Bank, in the Quarterly Bulletin of the Association of Banks in Bulgaria, issue 58, July
2019.
 Over the last years we have witnessed a continuous trend of increase in cashless and online
payments, dynamic development of technologies in the financial sector and new entrants in the
market. In this regard, initiatives have been taken on both European and national level aiming to
improve the legal framework in the area of payment services with a focus on payment security,
ensuring a level playing field for market participants and improving customers’ awareness.
Common and Secure Open Standards of Communication
1
In  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Chapter  5  of  Commission  Delegated  Regulation  (EU)
2018/389 , account servicing payment service providers that offer to a payer a payment account
that is accessible online, must have in place at least one interface which enables the providers of
the  two  new  payment  services  to  identify  themselves  towards  the  account  servicing  payment
service provider, as well as to communicate with it securely and in a secure environment.
In  order  to  fulfil  this  obligation,  Delegated  Regulation  (EU)  2018/389  provides  two  options:  by
enabling the providers of the new types of services to communicate with the account servicing
payment  service  providers  through  the  interfaces,  intended  for  payment  services  users  (e.g.
internet  banking  of  the  respective  bank)  or  by  establishing  a  dedicated  interface  (so-called
application programming interface - API). Where an account servicing payment service provider
chooses  to  use  a  dedicated  interface  allowing  access  (API),  it  should  provide  a  fallback
mechanism  that  will  allow  the  providers  of  the  new  types  of  services  to  use  the  customer
interface of the relevant account servicing payment service provider in case of problems with the
dedicated interface.
the  possibility 
The  Regulation  provides 
for
implementing Directive (EU) 2015/2366 , such as the Bulgarian National Bank (BNB), to exempt
an  account  servicing  payment  service  provider  from  the  obligation  to  set  up  and  run  such  a
fallback mechanism on its dedicated interface (API) if the conditions of the Regulation, relating to
availability and service level, publication of data, performance of stress-tests, design and testing
facility of the interface, its wide usage, as well as problem resolution, are complied with.
the  competent  authorities  responsible 
for 
2
In  the  interest  of  clarity  regarding  interpretation  of  the  conditions  for  exemption,  the  European
Banking Authority (EBA) has adopted Guidelines on the conditions to benefit from an exemption
from the contingency mechanism under Article 33 (6) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU)
2018/389, which the BNB will follow.
According  to  the  requirements  of  the  Commission  Delegated  Regulation  (EU)  2018/389  in
deciding to grant a particular account servicing payment service provider an exemption from the
obligation  to  set  up  a  contingency  mechanism,  the  respective  competent  authority  (e.g.  BNB)
shall  consult  EBA  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  conditions  are  consistently  applied.  Due  to  the
expected significant number of applications for exemption from the contingency mechanism, a
simplified procedure for consulting EBA is envisaged until the end of 2019.
The Bulgarian National Bank has established a procedure for prompt handling and examination of
applications  for  exemption.  This  will  enable  the  account  servicing  payment  service  providers,
which comply with the requirements of the Regulation, to be exempted from obligation prior to the
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
entry into force of the requirement for providing a fallback mechanism on 14 September, 2019.
Strong Customer Authentication
According  to  the  provisions  of  Commission  Delegation  Regulation  (EU)  2018/389  –  by  14
September,  2019  the  payment  service  providers  in  the  country  must  fully  implement  the
requirements  for  strong  customer  authentication  in  respect  of  all  electronic  payment
transactions. The focus is on the use of at least two independent authentication elements from
different categories. The two elements should refer to one of the categories of knowledge (e.g.
static  password),  possession  (SMS  OTP  or  generated  by  token  device)  or  inherence  (e.g.
fingerprint scanning). Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2018/389 exhaustedly stipulates
the  cases  for  which  payment  service  providers  are  allowed  not  to  supply  strong  customer
authentication.
Where a payment service provider wishes to benefit from any of the exemptions, it will have to
notify BNB in advance, indicating the particular payment service to be exempted. In addition, in
cases  pursuant  to  Article  17  of  Regulation  (EU)  2018/389  regarding  corporate  payment
processes and protocols, a payment service provider will have to submit to the BNB an audit
report performed by auditors with expertise in IT security and payments. The audit report should
certify that those processes or payment protocols guarantee at least equivalent levels of security
to those provided for strong customer authentication as per Article 100 of the Law on Payments
Services  and  Payment  Systems.  The  provider  must  notify  the  BNB  of  any  change  in  the
application of exemptions from strong customer authentication. In addition to these requirements,
payment service providers applying the exemptions should perform the monitoring, as stated in
Article 21 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2018/389, and make the results available to
BNB upon request.
Charges on Cross-border Payments in Euro and Currency Conversion Charges
3
Regulation (EU) 2019/518  introduces the requirement for payment service providers in non-euro
area  Member  States  to  levy  equal  charges  for  cross-border  payments  in  euro  and  for
corresponding national payments of the same value in the national currency of the respective
Member State. Such a legal requirement has existed so far only in respect to equal charges for
national  and  cross-border  payments  in  euro.  The  requirement  for  equal  charges  will  become
mandatory for payment service providers as of 15 December, 2019.
In addition to the requirement for equal charges, the new Regulation envisages requirements with
respect to currency conversion charges related to card payments and electronic credit transfers
which  are  expected  to  increase  transparency  and  to  ensure  comparability  in  cases  where  a
payment  service  user  is  faced  with  a  choice  between  currency  conversion  alternatives  f.
According  to  the  requirements  concerning  currency  conversion  charges  related  to  card
payments, payment service providers and the parties providing currency conversion services at
an automated teller machine (ATM) or at the point of sale shall provide information prior to the
initiation of the payment transaction for the total currency conversion charges expressed as a
percentage mark-up over the latest available euro foreign exchange reference rates issued by
the European Central Bank. In addition, the payer must also be provided, prior to the initiation of
the payment transaction, with information about the amount to be paid to the payee in both the
currency  used  by  the  payee  and  in  the  currency  of  the  payer’s  account.  With  regard  to  the
requirements  for  currency  conversion  charges  related  to  electronic  credit  transfers,  payment
service  providers  will  be  obliged  to  inform  the  payer  prior  to  the  initiation  of  the  payment
transaction about the expected currency conversion charges applied to the credit transfer, the
expected amount of the credit transfer in the currency of the payer’s account, as well as about
the expected amount which will be transferred to the payee in the currency used by the payee.
Payment service providers will have to apply these requirements as of 19 April 2020.
  2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
With  regard  to  Regulation  (EU)  2019/518,  Regulation  (EU)  2018/389  and  the  Corrigendum  of
Directive (EU) 2015/2366, amendments to the Law on Payment Services and Payment Systems
have been prepared which are due to be adopted by the end of 2019.
1
2
3
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2018/389 supplementing Directive (EU) 2015/2366 of the European
Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical standards for strong customer authentication
and common and secure open standards of communication
Directive (EU) 2015/2366 of the European Parliament and of the Council on payment services in the internal
market
Regulation  (EU)  2019/518  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  19  March  2019  amending
Regulation (EC) No 924/2009 as regards certain charges on cross-border payments in the Union and currency
conversion charges
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
