    Africa Meeting of the Econometric Society 
 Introductory Speech of Mr. Abdellatif Jouahri  
Governor of Bank Al-Maghrib 
Rabat, July 11 2019 
         Honorable guests, 
Distinguished researchers and professors, 
Dear friends and colleagues, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 First of all, I would like to assure you that I will not venture giving a lecture in 
front of such an audience. I am here today more to listen. 
That  being  said,  I  would  like  to  start  by  expressing  how  pleased  I  am  to 
welcome  you  in  Bank  Al-Maghrib  and  to  wish  our  visitors  from  abroad  a 
wonderful stay in Morocco.  
I  would  also  like  to  thank  all  officials  for  joining  us,  the  distinguished 
researchers  for  kindly  accepting  to  speak  at  the  plenary  sessions  and  the 
mostly-young researchers for coming from different spheres to present their 
works. 
I also extend my warmest thanks to Econometric Society which approached 
us to organize this conference, thus paving the way for a valuable cooperation 
between both teams. 
We view this meeting as an opportunity for us as a central bank, as well as for 
all  the  national  institutions  here  represented  today,  to  inquire  about  the 
progress  made  in  economics  research,  namely  with  regard  to  quantitative 
economics.  It  is  also  an  opportunity  to  strengthen  the  bonds  with  the 
academia and initiate new cooperation relationships. 
2 
 Among  all  the  scientific  meetings  that  we  have  organized  so  far,  this  event 
holds  a  particular  importance,  in  view  of  the  strong  participation  of  African 
researchers and of its focus on the economic issues of the Continent.  
For several years now, Morocco has been committed to a policy of openness 
to  Africa  to  further  reinforce  their  ties, already  strong  by  history,  geography 
and  culture,  and  to  promote  a  win-win  co-development  in  all  fields.  As  a 
central bank, our contribution lies in accompanying the banking system in its 
expansion  and  in  maintaining  a  broad  cooperation  with  several  similar 
institutions  of  the  continent.  Today,  we  are  pleased  to  pursue  this 
contribution for the benefit of research. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Africa, as we know, performs poorly in the field of research. The Continent, 
now home to nearly 17 percent of the world's population and more than one 
quarter  by  2050,  produces  only  5  percent  of  the  wealth,  measured  by  the 
purchasing power parity, and contributes to the world’s scientific publications 
by  no  more  than  2.6  percent,  according  to  the  latest  UNESCO  Science 
Report published in 2015. 
In Morocco, we are well aware that developing human capital and research is 
not an easy task. Despite the strong will and a budgetary effort of around 6 
percent  of  GDP,  we  still  struggle  to  put  our  education  system  on  track  to 
provide the skills adequate for the labor market and to develop research and 
innovation. 
Amid  an increasingly  competitive  world,  constantly  reshaped  by  deep-seated 
changes  which  alter  the  classical  paradigms,  investing  in  research  and 
innovation  is  no  longer  a  luxury,  but  a  necessity.  It  is  the  path  towards 
3 
 achieving  the  rapid  and  sustainable  growth  Africa  needs  to  meet  the 
aspirations of its population, especially the youth. It is also the only alternative 
to prevent the divide with the advanced countries from widening further. 
In areas such as economy and finance, there is a huge need for cutting-edge 
research that takes into account the specificities of Africa.  No one can deny 
the  laudable  initiatives  and  projects  focusing  on  Africa,  such  as  the  one 
carried out between 2007 and 2014 by the U.S National Bureau of Economic 
Research  (NBER),  nor  the  establishment,  within  prestigious  universities,  of 
centers dedicated to Africa. However, the continent should enhance its own 
skills and develop its national capacities. 
Central  banks  are  particularly  aware  of  this  challenge.  Monetary  policy 
decision-making  requires  a  thorough  understanding  of  the  economy  and  its 
performance drivers. To this end, we need to build up models which draw on 
the  most  recent  advances  in  economics,  while  taking  into  account  our 
realities, oftentimes different from those of advanced countries.  As such, we 
are facing two major challenges. 
The  first  one  is  related  to  the  lack  of  knowledge  as  to  the  mechanisms 
underlying the functioning of our economies, on which we can capitalize. We 
therefore called upon to develop our own formalization of the economy from 
scratch. The second challenge is that economic modeling requires reliable and 
regular  data.  This  entails  significant  financial  and  human  resources  that  are 
sorely lacking in statistical institutes in several countries. 
In this respect, I think that central banks, owing to their autonomy, can play 
an  important  role  in  research  development  and  have  a  ripple  effect  on  its 
ecosystem. This is exactly what we are trying to do in Bank Al-Maghrib. 
4 
 In fact, we have always put research and human capacity building at the core 
of  our  strategic  plans.  Thus,  alongside  the  various  operational  entities,  we 
have  set  up  since  2007  a  division  dedicated  to  research,  whose  task  is  to 
reflect on all strategic matters and issues related to the Bank's missions.  
Several  cooperation  programs  were  developed  with  the  national  and 
international academia, as well as with many central banks around the world. 
More  particularly,  we  have  launched  the  "fellow  researcher"  program  which 
allowed the Bank’s executives to collaborate with experts from central banks 
of other countries such as the United States, Canada and Poland, and I hope 
we will soon be able to extend this cooperation to African researchers. 
In addition to our institutional publications, a series of working papers  were 
drawn by the Bank staff, and are gradually becoming a reference for research 
in various areas directly or indirectly related to our missions.  
Moreover, the Bank organizes a series of timely or regular scientific meetings, 
such  as  the  International  Days  of  Macroeconomics  and  Finance,  which  we 
hold each year. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
A mere glimpse into the conference program can show us how proud Africa 
can  be  of  its  diaspora,  which  has  succeeded  in  positioning  itself  in  the  best 
universities in the world. This great potential can be harnessed by integrating 
some Africa-specific issues in its research agendas, and strengthening the ties 
with the African academic institutions.  
National  authorities,  for  their  part,  have  an  important  responsibility  in  this 
respect.  They  are  called  upon  to  put  in  place  enabling  frameworks  that  are 
flexible enough to attract this diaspora and benefit from its skills. 
5 
 In  our  view,  it  also  falls  upon  the  international  cooperation  to  strongly 
support  Africa  through  this  path,  by  systematically  expanding  its  programs 
and including a component dedicated to enhancing research capacities. 
This  becomes  all  the  more  important  today  as  Africa  has  launched  a  major 
project  of  economic  integration, namely  the  African  Continental  Free  Trade 
Area, whose success is determined by taking into consideration other related 
fields, particularly research and teaching. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  highlight  the  great  interest  aroused  in  our 
country  by  holding such  a  scientific  conference  which  brings  together  many 
eminent researchers and professors here present today. I take this as a gesture 
of support and encouragement, but also as a sign of confidence in the future 
of research both in Morocco and Africa.  
I wish full success to this conference and I thank you all for your attention. 
6 
 