   An address by Lesetja Kganyago, Governor of the South African Reserve 
Bank, at the African Economic Research Consortium 
Cape Town 02 June 2019  
Growing with Debt in African Economies – Options, Challenges and Pitfalls 
 Good  morning  ladies  and  gentlemen.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  African  Economic 
Research Consortium for inviting me to introduce this important topic. I hope you will 
indulge me while I reflect the opportunities, challenges and pitfalls presented by debt 
to developing economies in sub-Saharan Africa. 
Economic growth in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) has been improving from the low base 
in the early 1990s and is set to continue. Real GDP is projected to pick up to 3.5% in 
2019 and 3.7% in 2020. However, this remains well below the averages of the 2000s. 
There are also growing questions about macroeconomic stability given the weakening 
of fiscal positions in a number of low income developing countries (LIDCs) in recent 
years.  According  to  the  IMF,  debt  burdens  and  vulnerabilities  of  LIDCs  have  risen 
significantly since 2013, reflecting a mix of factors, including exogenous shocks and 
loose fiscal policies. 
This calls for a reflection on the role played by public debt in economic development. 
It is broadly accepted that governments resort to borrowing because taxation alone 
cannot provide sufficient funds for economic development. The challenge is to ensure 
that debt financing is done in a sustainable way. 
At the turn of the 21st century, billions of dollars’ worth of debt was wiped clean across 
sub-Saharan Africa. South Africa was instrumental in pushing for debt relief and we 
succeeded  in  late  1990s  when  the  HIPIC  programme  was  agreed  through  the 
Development Committee of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund. At the 
time, the solution appeared simple – wipe off the debt and allow countries space to 
get their affairs in order and growth and stability will follow. 
For  a  time,  we  saw  significant  improvements  in  the  continent,  with  many  countries 
strengthening  their  macroeconomic  frameworks  and  institutions.  A  number  of 
countries  also  gained  market  access.  In  2018,  international  bond  issuances  in  the 
region  reached  a  new  high,  totalling  more  than  USD17  billion,  with  the  average 
issuance rising to nearly USD3 billion1. As the IMF has observed, SSA has been the 
                                                           
1 World Bank Africa Pulse, April 2019 
 Page 1 of 4 
region with the fastest debt growth in recent years across a group of low income and 
developing countries.  
In 2018, about 16 SSA countries were at high risk of debt distress – more than double 
the 2013 levels. Average public debt across the region rose close to 56% of GDP at 
the end of 2018, with wide disparities in debt dynamics across countries. For example, 
in 2018, public debt-to-GDP stood at 72% in Zambia and 100% in Mozambique. Debt 
servicing  costs  have  also  risen  sharply,  with  the  median  interest  payment  burden 
doubling to about 10% of revenue between 2011 and 2018.  
 While debt levels is not as high as they were in 1990s, there is growing concern that 
Africa is at risk of landing in debt traps once again. 
In their 2010 paper, titled “Growth in a Time of Debt”, Reinhart and Rogoff argue that 
high debt could create uncertainty, deter investment and innovation, and the literature 
shows that it could have a negative impact on growth. I am inclined to agree with them. 
In  addition,  unsustainable  debt  burdens  and  rising  debt  service  costs  crowd  out 
spending  in  key  development  areas  such  as  education,  health  and  infrastructure. 
These were exactly the lessons learned during the African debt crisis of the 1980s and 
1990s, and which justified debt relief. Consequently, badly managed debt could now 
reverse some of the developmental progress made over the past twenty years.  
The financial landscape has also been changing, not only because of easier global 
financial  conditions  but  also  the  increasing  share  of  borrowing  from  non-traditional 
lenders and the types of debt instruments in the market. The share of borrowing from 
non-traditional lenders has risen to about 15% of global GDP. Financing instruments 
such  as  collateralised  sovereign  loans  are  also  gaining  prominence.  The  terms  of 
these loans are often complex and typically only revealed after countries experience 
debt distress as was seen in Chad and the Republic of Congo recently2.  
This increased reliance on non-traditional creditors has raised borrowers’ exposure to 
market risk, while at the same time posing additional challenges to the sustainability 
of  external  debt  in  the  region.  For  instance,  in  the  case  where  countries  find 
themselves in debt distress, it may be harder to come to a rescheduling agreement 
with a large number of private creditors than when you had, in the past, a relatively 
small  number  of  public  creditors  (Paris  Club)  or  commercial  bank  lenders  (London 
Club).  In  Chad,  for  example,  collateralisation  also  made  debt  restructuring  more 
complex since it reduced the room for manoeuvre for sovereign borrowers3. We can 
also think of the problems recently faced in Argentina, where bondholders refused to 
accept restructuring terms. 
Data from the World Bank shows that the region’s foreign currency-denominated debt 
as a share of total debt reached approximately 60% in 2017. Most of the increase in 
foreign-currency  debt  can  be attributed  to  the  increasing  issuance of  Eurobonds. A 
                                                           
2In  2014,  Glencore  had  lent  Chad’s  oil  company around  USD1,45  billion,  in  a  move  to  secure  access  to  the  country’s 
oil. However, the decline in the oil price later that year left the sovereign struggling to meet the repayment schedule. By the 
end of 2016, Glencore held 98 per cent of Chad’s external commercial debt. Eighty-five per cent of Chad’s oil proceeds – its 
primary source of revenue – was directed towards paying Glencore back. 
3 Mustapha S. and Prizzon A., “Africa’s rising debt – How to avoid a new crisis”, October 2018 
 Page 2 of 4 
large amount of these Eurobonds are set to mature in 2019-2020 and in 2024-2025, 
which  may  pose  substantial  refinancing  risks  in  the foreseeable future,  especially  if 
countries’ fiscal positions  remain  weak4.  Nearly  90%  of  the  region’s  Eurobonds  are 
denominated in US dollars, which further raise currency and interest rate risks and the 
potential for tighter global financial conditions in global settings clouded by significant 
downside risks.  
It is also important to consider fiscal risks posed by state-owned enterprises (SOEs). 
In some instances, SOE liabilities have reached worrisome levels of 10% of GDP or 
more  in  countries  such  as  Cameroon,  Ghana  and  South  Africa,  threatening 
government’s  debt  sustainability  and  potentially  crowding  out  social  spending 
(Botswana, Cabo Verde, Madagascar)5. The dominance of SOE debt in the banking 
system  is  a  considerable  financial  stability  risk  in  countries  that  don’t  have  deep 
financial markets.  
These challenges also highlight the need for countries to strengthen debt management 
practices and  improve  transparency,  which  is fundamental  to  sustainable financing. 
Addressing these challenges would require countries to make tough fiscal choices to 
prevent debt burdens from becoming unsustainable. Fast-growing countries that face 
elevated debt vulnerabilities would also need to prioritise rebuilding buffers, including 
through structural reforms and improvement in fiscal frameworks. 
There is wide consensus that countries need to raise more domestic revenue to make 
debt financing more sustainable. There also needs to be a greater focus on improving 
the  efficiency  of  public  spending  in  such  a  way  that  it  helps  to  improve  economic 
growth. While the primary responsibility for avoiding the build-up of unsustainable debt 
lies  with  the  borrower,  creditors  also  have  a  role  to  play  in  encouraging  greater 
transparency.  Irresponsible  borrowing  ultimately  contributes  to  unsustainable  debt 
burdens.  
In closing, I wish to reiterate that public debt has an important role to play in financing 
development, particularly in augmenting government budgets. However, it should be 
clear  that  debt  is  not  a  replacement  for  domestic  revenue  mobilisation.  Meanwhile, 
debt levels have to remain sustainable so as to not undermine market confidence. To 
ensure that debt plays a meaningful role, it must be utilised for revenue generating 
activities that increase the productive capacity of the economy. 
Countries in the region could benefit from the slower-than-expected monetary policy 
normalisation  in  major  economies  to  build  additional  buffers,  preferably  aimed  at 
increasing fiscal space and setting development priorities on course. The international 
community is eager to help. Early in May, the G20 called a high-level conference on 
                                                           
4 Mustapha S. and Prizzon A., “Africa’s rising debt – How to avoid a new crisis”, October 2018 
5 In Madagascar, for instance, large subsidies and transfers to troubled state-owned enterprises (SOEs) such as the electricity 
utility JIRAMA and Air Madagascar to cover debt obligations have increased government liabilities. The IMF, in its 2018 Article 
IV assessment, highlighted that unexpected losses at SOEs or delayed reforms in public spending could crowd out pro-growth 
priority spending in Madagascar. In Ghana, the government also faces significant contingent liabilities from the energy SOEs, 
which continue to face challenges. 
  Page 3 of 4 
Sustainable  debt  for  sustainable  growth  (the  Paris  Forum).  The  key  objective  is  to 
assist countries with debt management capacity and improve debt transparency. 
The key conclusion of the Paris Forum was not to say that countries should borrow 
less but that they should be assisted to “borrow smarter”, by ensuring that borrowers 
are equipped with expertise to understand their real needs, to secure good terms and 
to  effectively  manage  their  debt,  while  holding  creditors  to  higher  standards  on 
transparency and sustainability. 
I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate the AERC for continuing to have a  
policy-oriented research programme that remains relevant for policy makers. Today’s 
programme is filled with the right mix of policy practitioners and academics to give us 
for food for thought.  
 Thank you 
   Page 4 of 4 
