John C Williams: If we fail to prepare, we prepare to fail
Remarks by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Council on Foreign Relations, New York City, 6 June 2019.
As prepared for delivery
 Note:  These  remarks  are  based  on  those  delivered  at  the  9th  High-Level  Conference  on  the
International Monetary System on May 14, 2019.
Introduction
Thank  you  for  that  kind  introduction  and  for  the  opportunity  to  speak  again  at  the  Council  on
Foreign Relations. I’m going to keep my remarks brief so that there’s plenty of time for Steve to
grill me on interest rates, followed by some thoughtful questions from the audience.
With the mention of interest rates, it’s time I remind everyone that the views I express today are
mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or others
in the Federal Reserve System.
John Maynard Keynes is credited with saying, “When the facts change, I change my mind. What
do you do, sir?” The economic era we’ve experienced for the last 11 years has been defined by
the  Great  Recession.  There’s  the  world  before,  and  the  world  after,  the  subprime  mortgage
crisis, the collapse of Lehman Brothers, and the ensuing financial crisis.
The Road to Recovery
Governments and central banks have spent the intervening years working to get their economies
growing, create jobs, and put regulation in place to prevent another such catastrophe.
Central banks instituted huge asset purchase programs and brought short-term interest rates to
near zero—in some cases below zero—to stimulate economic recovery.
The good news is that, for the most part, monetary policy did its job. Advanced economies have
seen steady growth and significant declines in unemployment. But the recovery has been slow.
And  despite  low  unemployment,  inflation  rates  have  been  running  persistently  below  central
banks’ goals. The Federal Reserve, like many central banks, has a goal of keeping inflation at 2
percent.
In the pre-2008 era, inflation was a major concern for the public and central banks alike. And,
while I will always be vigilant about inflation that’s too high, inflation that’s too low is now a more
pressing problem.
The  experience  of  a  slow  recovery  and  persistently  low  inflation  is  a  symptom  of  deeper
problems afflicting advanced economies. Two changes, unrelated to the crisis, have been taking
place, causing a shift in economic conditions and quietly shaping the trajectories of advanced
economies.
These are the “the facts” that have changed. Today I’m going to discuss them in more detail, and
explore our options for dealing with the challenges they present. 
“The Facts”
Shifts  in  demographics  and  productivity  growth  have  fundamentally  altered  the  economic
environment in which we operate.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Starting with demographics, two changes have taken place: People are generally living longer,
and  population  growth  is  slowing.  Dwindling  birth  rates  are  bringing  population  growth  to  a
standstill. In OECD countries, population growth averaged over 1 percent back in the 1950s and
1960s, but it is now running at half a percent per year, and is expected to gradually fall before
1
dipping into negative figures by 2070.
Slowing  birth  rates  mean  fewer  consumers  and  fewer  workers.  People  planning  on  longer
retirements will tend to save more. And while this is undoubtedly good news in many respects,
an abundance in the supply of savings also has a big effect on the global economic picture.
When it comes to productivity, there has also been a stark step-down in growth. Rapid changes
in the kinds of technology we use in our daily lives—robotic vacuum cleaners, self-driving cars,
and facial recognition technology in our phones—may make this seem counterintuitive or plain
2
wrong.
But the data are clear.
In OECD economies, growth in labor productivity—the amount produced per worker hour—has
averaged  a  little  over  1  percent  per  year  since  2005,  about  half  the  pace  seen  over  the  prior
decade.
Falling R-star
So what does all this mean for the future?
Two things: First, slower population and productivity growth translate directly into slower trend
economic  growth.  Second,  an  abundance  of  savings,  and  a  decline  in  demand  for  savings
resulting  from  slower  trend  growth,  together  lead  to  lower  interest  rates. All  of  these  factors
combined have contributed to dramatic declines in the longer-term neutral rate of interest, or r-
star.
While a central bank like the Fed sets short-term interest rates, r-star is a result of longer-term
economic  factors.  It’s  the  rate  expected  to  prevail  when  interest  rates  are  neither  giving  the
economy a boost, nor slowing it down. That’s why it’s called the “neutral” rate.
The  evidence  of  a  sizable  decline  in  r-star  across  economies  is  compelling.  The  weighted
average of estimates for five major economic areas—Canada, the euro area, Japan, the United
Kingdom,  and  the  United  States—has  declined  to  half  a  percent.   That’s  about  2  percentage
points below the average natural rate that prevailed in the two decades before the financial crisis.
A  striking  aspect  of  these  estimates  is  that  they  show  no  signs  of  moving  back  to  previously
normal levels, even though many advanced economies have fully recovered from the crisis.
3
This poses significant challenges for monetary policy. When interest rates are low, central banks
don’t have much room to maneuver to deal with a crisis. They will only be able to cut interest
rates by a small amount before they hit zero—or as economists call it, the “zero lower bound.”
Of course, central banks can, and have, used negative rates to stimulate growth, but they bring
with them a separate set of challenges.
The result is that future recoveries will be slow, and slow growth is usually characterized by low
inflation.  Persistently  low  inflation  creates  a  vicious  circle,  where  expectations  of  low  inflation
drag down current inflation. If inflation falls, central banks will have even less room to maneuver
4
when faced with a slowdown.
A Fresh Approach
All this begs the question: what can we do to prepare ourselves and our economies for the next
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
crisis? There’s no single silver bullet that can solve these challenges. But changes to monetary,
fiscal, and other economic policies could all help us become more resilient. 
Starting  with  monetary  policy,  central  banks  should  reassess  their  strategies,  goals,  and  the
tools they use to achieve them.  This might include things like reassessing how we achieve our
2 percent goal.
5
Outside of monetary policy, there are a number of ways fiscal policy can support an economy.
One  is  to  strengthen  the  “automatic  stabilizers,”  which,  in  a  downturn,  reduce  taxes  without
legislation to stimulate growth. Another is to use regulation to enhance financial stability. 
Finally, fiscal and other economic policies can attack the sources of slow growth and low r-star
directly.  Demographics  are  not  an  area  where  most  economists,  or  policy  makers,  want  to
meddle—and I’m certainly not going to stand here and say people should stop living so long!
But  there  are  things  we  can  do  to  improve  long-run  growth.  These  include  raising  public  and
private investment in human and physical capital, infrastructure, and science and technology, as
well as removing barriers to participation in the labor force and the economy more broadly.
It’s impossible to predict the future. But we can deal with the present. The economic environment
in which we operate today is a direct consequence of the demographic and productivity shifts
taking place. Low neutral interest rates are very real, and they’re here to stay.
Conclusion
The facts have changed, and so it is time to change our minds also. It is often said that change is
hard.  But,  experience  teaches  us  that  it  is  better  to  prepare  for  the  future  than  wait  too  long.
Ultimately, failure to prepare often means preparation for failure.
1
2
3
4
5
United Nations, World Populations Prospects: Key Findings and Advance Tables, 2015 Revision.
Antonin Bergeaud, Gilbert Cette, and Rémy Lecat, Productivity Trends in Advanced Countries between 1890 and
2012, Review of Income and Wealth, Volume 62, Issue 3, pp. 420–44, September 2016. 
Shigeaki Fujiwara, Yuto Iwasaki, Ichiro Muto, Kenji Nishizaki, and Nao Sudo Fujiwara, Developments  in  the
Natural Rate of Interest in Japan, Bank of Japan Review, October 2016; Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach, and
John  C.  Williams, Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants, Journal of
International Economics, Volume 108, Supp. 1, pp. S59-S75, May 2017.
Thomas M. Mertens and John C. Williams, Tying Down the Anchor: Monetary Policy Rules and the Lower Bound
on Interest Rates, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working Paper Series, May 2019.
Richard H. Clarida, Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, The Federal Reserve’s
Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications Practices , speech delivered at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, April 9, 2019.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
