 RESTRICTED 
 NATIONAL BANK OF SERBIA  
Vice-Governor’s opening remarks at the presentation 
 of the Inflation Report – November 2018 
Dr Željko Jović, Vice-Governor 
         Belgrade, 16 November 2018  
Ladies and gentlemen, esteemed members of the press, dear colleagues, 
Welcome  to  the  presentation  of  the  November  Inflation  Report.  We  will  give  you  an  overview  of 
monetary and macroeconomic trends since the previous Report and set out our expectations for the 
period ahead.  
At the very beginning I would like to stress that since the August Report macroeconomic indicators 
have  remained  favourable,  while  macroeconomic  outlook  marked  an  additional  improvement. 
Economic  growth  has  accelerated,  inflation  is  at  a  low  and  stable  level,  relative  exchange  rate 
stability  has  been  preserved  and  inflationary  pressures  have  remained  low  in  the  face  of  strong 
economic  growth.  This  is  primarily  a  result  of  joint  efforts  of  all  economic  policy  makers  aimed  at 
laying the groundwork for sound and sustainable economic progress.   
Of  particular  importance  is  the  fact  that  our  country  is  recording  good  results  even  though  the 
international environment continues to be plagued by a high degree of uncertainty. Volatility in the 
commodity markets persists due to volatile prices of oil and other primary commodities, as well as in 
the  financial  market  amid different  dynamics of monetary  policy  normalisation of  the  Fed  and  the 
ECB.  Geopolitical  tensions  and  rising  protectionism  in  the  relations  between  leading  economic 
powers are an additional source of instability. Such global market developments also reflect on the 
slower than expected growth of the euro area, our most significant economic partner.  
However,  since  policies  in Serbia  are  fully  coordinated,  internal  and  external  imbalances  narrowed 
down  and  macroeconomic  prospects  improved,  strengthening  the  resilience  of  our  economy  to 
external uncertainties. The importance of increased resilience is practically visible. Namely, this year 
Serbia recorded the fastest growth in the last ten years despite adverse external conditions. In the 
past  three  quarters  GDP  growth  reached  4.5%  y-o-y.  Acknowledging  this  fact  and  a  faster  than 
expected rise in investment, we revised the GDP growth projection for this year upward from 4% to 
4.2%. Serbia’s growth projections were  upgraded by all relevant  international financial institutions, 
too – the International Monetary Fund, the European Commission, some rating agencies and many 
economic analysts who monitor developments in our country. 
Based on the results of the achieved macroeconomic stability and implemented structural reforms, 
we  expect  similar  growth  dynamics  in  the  medium  term,  as  well.  The  benefits  of  this  economic 
progress are also felt more by our citizens. Wages and pensions are rising on sustainable grounds and 
unemployment is at the lowest level in the last quarter of a century.  
Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
By  maintaining  price  and  financial  stability  and  relative  stability  of  the exchange  rate, the  NBS  has 
greatly contributed to the creation of a predictable environment for doing business and for financing 
production, investment and consumption.    
  Inflation is low and stable and is expected to remain so in the period ahead. 
Y-o-y  inflation  is  within  the  target  tolerance  band.  It  measured  2.2%  in  October.  That  inflationary 
pressures  are  still  low  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  more  than  half  of  the  contribution  to  y-o-y 
inflation  stems  from  the  hike  in  the  prices  of  petroleum  products  and  fruit  and  vegetables.  This  is 
also  corroborated  by  the  low  and  stable  core  inflation  which  moved  around  1%  y-o-y  in  the  past 
months.  According to our latest medium-term projection, which is  almost  unchanged from August, 
inflation will be moving within the target tolerance band of 3.0±1.5% until the end of the projection 
1 
 horizon,  that  is,  over  the  next  two  years.  Inflation  movements  in  the  medium  term  will  be 
determined by the rise in aggregate demand. Also, disinflationary pressures on account of the past 
appreciation of the  dinar will gradually  wane  in the coming period. In the short  term, low  costs of 
food  production  will  work  in  the  opposite  direction.  Financial  and  corporate  sectors  also  expect 
inflation to be within the target band both for one and two years ahead. Their anchored expectations 
are the best evidence of market participants’ confidence in the measures taken by the NBS and an 
indicator of the rising monetary policy credibility. 
      Private sector and government financing conditions are much more favourable and lending 
activity is on the rise.  
Much more favourable financing conditions for the private sector and government are indicated by 
the  interest  rates  on  new  corporate  and  household  loans,  which  in  Q3  moved  close  to  the  lowest 
levels  recorded  in  the  past  months.  Better  financing  conditions  are  a  result  of  monetary  policy 
easing, lower country risk premium, increased competition and persistently low interest rates in the 
international  money  market.  In  nearly  all  of  these  segments  we  can  recognise  the  importance  of 
domestic  factors  –  primarily  of  macroeconomic  stability,  which  reflects  well-coordinated  monetary 
and fiscal policies. In such conditions, economic growth, accompanied with labour market recovery, 
contributes  to  the  further  increase  in  lending  activity.  In  September,  the  y-o-y  growth  in  total 
domestic loans accelerated to 7.7% excluding the effect of exchange rate changes. This credit growth 
was  recorded  against  the  background  of  continued  efforts  to  resolve  NPLs  which  led  to  their 
significant write-off and sale to non-banking sector entities, supporting the investment upswing and 
the acceleration of economic growth.  
 2 
    Implementation of the NPL Resolution Strategy continues to yield excellent results.  
In slightly  more than three  years since the adoption of the  NPL Resolution  Strategy the  amount of 
NPLs was slashed by over 67%. At the same time, their share in total loans was cut by close to 16 pp, 
to 6.4% in September which is their lowest level since 2008 when the monitoring of this indicator of 
bank asset quality began. Owing to the considerable drop in the NPL ratio, high capital adequacy of 
banks  and  better  access  to  SMEs  financing,  Serbia  made  a  significant  progress  in  the  international 
competitiveness  list  of  the  World  Economic  Forum  for  2018,  as  judged  by  the  financial  system 
indicators.   
   Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
With  low  and  stable  inflation,  relative  exchange  rate  stability,  favourable  financing  conditions  and 
maintained financial stability, we have contributed to keeping the economic environment stable and 
conducive  to  doing  business.  By  implementing  consistent  monetary  policy  and  coordinating  it 
successfully  with  fiscal  policy,  together  with  the  Government  we  have  achieved  the  results  which 
additionally  inspire  market  participants’  confidence  in  economic  policy  makers  and  make  growth 
sustainable  in  the  years  to  come.  Positive  economic  outlook  for  Serbia  was  recognised  by  a  great 
number  of  investors  that  are  increasingly  deciding  to  make  long-term  investments  in  our  country. 
Owing to this, net FDI inflow, as in the previous three years, will be more than sufficient to fully cover 
the current account deficit – in the first nine months of the year this coverage was over 122%. In the 
3 
 medium term, the activity of domestic and foreign investors will result in capacity building, primarily 
in  tradeable  sectors,  and  will  thus  underpin  growth  acceleration  in  the  longer  term.  Thanks  to 
excellent  results  of  fiscal  consolidation  in  the  past  several  years,  investment  growth  is  now 
increasingly supported by the government too.  The achieved fiscal balance and the reduction in the 
share  of  the  central  government  public  debt  to  a  sustainable  level  (55.9%  of  GDP  in  September) 
contribute  to  favourable  prospects  for  a  further  credit  rating  upgrade  and  to  lower  country  risk 
premium, making external finance more accessible and cheaper. 
The pick-up in economic growth and improvement in the standards of living are a proof that we have 
worked  to the  benefit of all,  strengthening  the  economy’s  resilience  to  external  shocks  and  taking 
great care that the solutions implemented are sustainable in the long run. The NBS will continue to 
closely  monitor  and  analyse  the  international  markets  and  to  assess  their  impact  on  economic 
developments in Serbia. Looking ahead, price and financial stability, as well as continued support to 
the  economic  policy  of  the  Government,  remain  our  priorities.  We  believe  that  by  contributing  to 
favourable business conditions and hence competitiveness of the overall economy, we have proved 
that we are a reliable partner to everyone doing business in Serbia and will continue to be so in the 
future.      
Thank you for your attention. I will now give the floor to my colleagues. After that we will be happy 
to take your questions. 
   4 
