Governor’s Address at the Ministerial Dialogue    
Brussels, 17 May 2019 
 
Esteemed colleagues, dear hosts,  
Allow  me  also  to  extend  my  gratitude  on  behalf  of  the Serbian  delegation  for  the 
assessments  and  given  recommendations.  I  believe  that  we  can  agree  with  general 
assessment  that  Serbia  has  made  huge  progress  since  our  first  meetings.  We  can  and 
must  agree  also  that  today  our  economy  is  stable,  by  all  means,  and  that  it  has  good 
growth prospects.  
Now, on behalf of the National Bank of Serbia, I would like to emphasize that we share 
your view that the Serbian monetary policy was conducted consistent with the inflation 
targeting  regime  and  the  achievement  of  the  targeted  inflation  rate.  The  fact  is  that 
inflation in Serbia has been preserved at a low level for longer than half a decade. The 
fact is, as you also pointed out, that Serbia has recorded a sharp fall in the NPL ratio. And 
another fact is that with our measures we have supported two-digit growth in corporate 
and household lending, and via this channel, we supported economic growth as well. It is 
not by accident that I have singled out these segments of our operations. I chose them 
as they are important components of the business and investment environment.  
    1 
This  is  why,  in  line  with  the  topic  of  today’s  dialogue  –  Structural  reforms  to  attract 
foreign  direct  investment  and  increase  resilience,  I  will  briefly  inform  you  about  the 
composition  of  foreign  direct  investment  in  Serbia.  I  will  also  provide  a  general 
assessment  of  their  benefits  and  what  attracts  investment  to  Serbia.  I  will  also  share 
with you our opinion on what we can do through concerted efforts.  
I  will  start  with  the  figures.  During  the  last  four  years  FDI  inflows  in  Serbia  stood  at 
around 6% of GDP on average, while last year they reached 8.2% of GDP. By this percent 
they  provided  full  coverage  of  CAD,  making  financing  risk  much  lower.  We  also  have 
strong project diversification of FDIs, which is, as quite important, recognised and by the 
ECB, in order to reduce  risks of sudden stops.  More than half of investments  in Serbia 
are  channelled  to  tradable  sectors,  with  one  third  of  the  total  going  to  the 
manufacturing  industry  through  many  small  projects  to  export-oriented  sectors.  Being 
so, the FDIs were one of important drivers  of the two-digit export growth rates of our 
manufacturing industry during the last four years. Plus, we also have constant growth in 
geographical diversification of FDIs, also recognised as important.  
     2 
High  and  diversified  FDI 
inflows  have  been  quite  supportive  for  our  growth 
fundamentals. One reflection of their benefits is a rise in production and employment, 
and improvement of the structure of our economy. We expect that FDI will be one of the 
push up factors for our economy to growth at rates of at least 4% in the medium term. 
Another benefit is that they are facilitating the access to global value chains. Let me give 
an  example.  Additional  benefit  of  FDIs,  as  recognised  and  said  already,  is  export 
diversification. According to the IMF’s Export Diversification Index, Serbia ranks 12th out 
of  186  countries,  and  this  is  quite  good  result.  With  this  I  would  like  to  end  this  part 
regarding the level, structure and importance of FDIs. 
  And  what  is  driving  investors  to  invest  in  Serbia?  Importance  of  structural  reforms  is 
clearly confirmed through reforms we imposed. From the central bank perspective, the 
most important and hardest was to provide price stability and regain trust in monetary 
policy,  due  to  hyperinflation  in  the  past.  And  during  the  last  half  a  decade  inflation  in 
Serbia  has  been  kept  under  control.  According  to  the  Global  Competitiveness  Index, 
inflation  in Serbia  is no longer  a limiting factor for doing  business; as was  the case for 
example back in 2010. On the contrary, a low inflation environment is perceived as one 
of  the  key  factors  of  a  stable  business  environment  in  our  country.  Further,  relative 
stability  of  the  exchange  rate,  the  mentioned  results  on  the  fiscal  front,  as  well  as  in 
many other areas as part of stabilisation agenda, are perceived as vital for FDI attraction. 
 3 
This is all confirmed by many studies, such as World Bank study from 2018 showing that 
countries  with  lower  exchange  rate  and  inflation  volatility  had  higher  FDIs  in  terms  of 
GDP.  Not  to  forget,  in  terms  of  FDIs  attraction,  of  outmost  importance  is  also  political 
stability.  The  same  is  assessed  by  Moody’s  rating  agency  in  their  latest  yearly  report, 
stating that Serbia clearly ranks above the countries with the same rating, when it comes 
to political stability and government effectiveness. In such environment foreign investors 
are rather reinvesting their profit in Serbia, than sending it back. On average – around 
60% of profit is being reinvested.  
What  is  ahead  of  us?  I  believe  that  the  integration  in  infrastructure  flows,  the  latest 
technological  projects  and  innovations,  in  line  with  our  potentials,  are  the  basis  for 
Serbia’s  growth.  At  the  same  time,  this  is  the  basis  for  investment.  And  our  potentials 
are geographic position and work force. Anyone offering a partnership in this context is 
welcome. It is up to us to provide macroeconomic stability and equal treatment  for all 
investors.  We  do  not  have  the  privilege  or  the  reason  to  measure  this  by  any  other 
criterion,  but  the  interest  of  our  citizens  in  better  living  standards  and  sustainable 
growth.  And  investments  diversified  by  country  and  branch,  are  the  guarantee  to  the 
achievement of our goals which are written in all the preambles of the most reputable 
and the most significant international institutions.  
Of course, we can always do more. Each one of us present here. Therefore, allow me to 
quote a message stated in the Joint Conclusions: “Across the region, further efforts are 
needed to tackle corruption, improve the rule of law and strengthen institutions in order 
to  promote  competitiveness”.  I  strongly  believe  that  this  goes  beyond  candidate 
countries and refers to all. 
Thank you. 
  4 
  5 
