   M a y   2 7 ,   2 0 1 9 
Bank  of 
Japan 
 
 Global Economy: Challenges and Policy Responses 
Keynote Speech at the T20 Summit 
Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
 Introduction 
It is a great honor for me to deliver this keynote speech at the T20 Summit. This year, Japan 
assumes the G20 presidency for the first time. The G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank 
Governors Meeting in Fukuoka is fast approaching. I will be co-chairing the meeting with 
Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Aso. We will be discussing various key issues 
regarding the global economy and finance. The T20, as an international forum for think tanks, 
has also debated a wide range of issues on the global economy, along similar lines to the G20 
discussions, and has provided policy proposals. I believe those proposals from think tanks, 
with their expertise and unique viewpoints, provide valuable input for public sector policy 
management.  Needless  to  say,  it  is  important  that  the  private  and  public  sectors  exchange 
views, learn from each other, and engage in constructive dialogue, in order to provide and 
implement  better  policies.  Today,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  the  challenges  and  policy 
responses  to  the  current  situation  in  the  global  economy,  hoping  that  my  speech  will 
contribute to the discussions at the T20 Summit. 
 Specifically,  I  would  like  to  elaborate  on  the  medium-term  challenges  such  as  global 
imbalances  and  international  financial  architecture.  Before  going  into  those  issues,  let  me 
begin with recent developments in the global economy. 
I. Recent Developments in the Global Economy 
The  global  economy  registered  high  growth  up  to  the  first  half  of  last  year,  but  it  has 
decelerated since then, particularly in China and the euro area. Several factors account for 
this deceleration.  
 First, there has been increased uncertainty regarding economic policy on a global level such 
as trade tensions and the Brexit negotiations. This has put downward pressure on corporate 
investment and international trade in capital goods. Second, at the same time, the so-called 
silicon cycle has entered a downturn, something we have observed many times in the past. 
Until the first half of last year, there was a claim that the "super-cycle" in demand for semi-
conductors  was  on  a  rising  trend. According  to  the  claim,  semi-conductor  demand  would 
increase steadily over the medium term. However, as was seen in the past, there have been 
 1 
 some cancellations of multiple orders for parts and capital goods, together with downward 
revisions to final goods such as smartphones. 
 In addition to these two global factors, region-specific factors have contributed to the recent 
deceleration in the global economy. The Chinese economy has shown some weakness due to 
the lingering impact of deleveraging policy measures, together with trade tensions. In the euro 
area,  exports  have  decelerated,  automobile  production  has  been  hampered  by  delays  in 
adjusting  to  new  emissions  regulations,  and  business  sentiment  have  deteriorated  due  to 
heightened uncertainty regarding political and economic conditions. 
 In  short,  these  several  factors  have  contributed  to  the  slower  pace  of  growth  in  the  global 
economy. 
 What  then  are  the  prospects  for  the  global  economy?  The  most  recent  World  Economic 
Outlook from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), published in April, indicates that the 
global  economy  will  regain  positive  momentum  during  the  second  half  of  this  year.  First, 
economic  policy  measures  in  China  and  other  regions  will  gradually  begin  to  take  effect. 
China has decided to implement or has already implemented a range of policy measures since 
the  second  half  of  last  year,  including  fiscal  and monetary  policies.  Some Asian  emerging 
economies  are  also  expected  to  increase  fiscal  expenditures.  In  emerging  economies  in 
general, monetary policy space has increased as the Federal Reserve has adopted a patient 
stance  regarding  its  policy  normalization.  Concerns  over  capital  outflows,  currency 
depreciation,  and  heightened  inflation  have  also  eased  relative  to  last  year.  Second, 
production adjustments are likely to show progress in IT-related goods. Manufacturers in Asia, 
including those in Japan, are now in an adjustment phase, but production of electronic parts 
is expected to turn around and increase gradually in due course. 
 However,  there  remains  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty  regarding  these  prospects,  and  the 
downside risks are large. Among them, I will touch upon four risk factors here.  
 The first is the impact of trade tensions. Although trade negotiations seem to have progressed 
somewhat,  a  number  of  issues  remain  to  be  resolved.  Due  to  the  widening  range  of  tariff 
 2 
 increases, trade costs may rise, and corporate activity could be subdued due to reconsideration 
of production sites and global value chains. 
 The second risk is the effects of economic policy measures, such as those in China. China has 
implemented a range of tax reduction measures, together with an increase in infrastructure 
investment.  The  effect  of  these  tax  reductions,  however,  depends  on  the  extent  to  which 
households and firms increase their spending. Households' and firms' spending is affected by 
their sentiments and prospects for the economy. Since we have seen heightened uncertainty 
regarding, for example, trade tensions, we should be cautious about the effectiveness of these 
policy measures. 
 The third risk comes from political factors. In addition to Brexit and political uncertainties in 
Europe, political destabilization due to increasing income inequality could affect the global 
economy through a decline in confidence and instability in financial and capital markets. 
 The fourth risk is vulnerability arising from accumulated debt in the private and public sectors. 
The accumulation of public debt is the result of an increase in public expenditure after the 
Lehman shock and rising social security payments. There is no doubt that such expenditures 
have had a positive impact on the economy. However, securing long-term fiscal sustainability 
is a precondition for maintaining economic stability. While accumulated private debt may be 
the result of positive investment, such as corporate and housing investment, it does increase 
the financial vulnerability of firms and households, making them susceptible to changes in 
interest rates and financial market conditions. We  therefore need to be vigilant about such 
risks. 
 At  each  G20  meeting,  we  share  our  understanding  on  global  economic  conditions  and 
associated  risks,  and  we  discuss  the  necessary  policy  measures.  Of  course,  the  global 
economy is changing continuously. In the run-up to the June G20 meeting in Fukuoka, we 
will remain vigilant about these changes, while gathering all the necessary information. As 
president  of  the  G20,  we  will  lead  policy  discussions  at  the  meeting  with  all  the  relevant 
information and appropriate evaluations of global economic conditions. 
 3 
 II. Global Imbalances 
Among the G20 policy agendas, let me focus on two  medium- to long-term issues: global 
imbalances and international financial architecture. 
 First, on global imbalances. Although the issue has long been a topic for discussion at G20 
meetings, we have had limited opportunity in the recent past to discuss it in great depth. We 
have therefore decided to put the issue on the table of G20 meetings again this year. We will 
analyze the trend and background of  global imbalances and discuss the appropriate policy 
actions.  
 Looking back on the global trend before the Lehman shock, we saw excess consumption and 
investment  on  the  back  of  soaring  asset  prices  in  the  United  States,  and  an  expansion  in 
current account deficit as the mirror image of these domestic excesses. On the other hand, 
emerging economies took a cautious approach to investment, partly because of the trauma of 
past balance-of-payment crises, and as a result, their current account surplus accumulated. 
When  asset  prices  plunged  and  domestic  demand  shrank  in  the  United  States,  the  saving-
investment  balance  subsequently  recovered.  The  expanding  trend  of  U.S.  current  account 
deficit  stopped.  Meanwhile,  emerging  economies  experienced  a  deterioration  in  trade 
balances due to the slowdown of the global economy triggered by the global financial crisis. 
The increasing trend of their current account surplus stopped. 
 It  is  not  necessarily  true  that  deficit  is  bad  and  surplus  is  good  with  regard  to  global 
imbalances. As  textbook macroeconomics  tells  us,  the current  account  is equivalent  to  the 
domestic  saving-investment  balance.  It  is  not  appropriate  to  judge  whether  it  is  in  a  good 
situation or not merely by seeing if there is a deficit or surplus. For example, it is better for 
emerging economies with high growth potential to borrow abroad, invest at home, and realize 
higher economic growth. On the other hand, for countries with limited growth opportunities, 
it is better to invest abroad and  earn higher returns. In these circumstances, countries with 
abundant investment opportunities are more likely to see investment exceed savings, resulting 
in  a  current  account  deficit.  Meanwhile,  countries  with  limited  growth  opportunities  see 
savings  exceed  investment,  hence  a  current  account  surplus.  Optimal  saving-investment 
balances and associated current account balances differ from country to country, depending 
 4 
 on  individual  circumstances.  What  we  need  to  determine  is  whether  the  actual  saving-
investment balances and current account balances have diverged from the optimal levels that 
reflect economic fundamentals. If the balances do not reflect economic fundamentals, we then 
need to examine whether or not this divergence is the result of disequilibrium of the economy 
and finance and inappropriate policy measures. 
 In  order  to  realize  sustainable  and  balanced  economic  growth,  we  cannot  overlook  excess 
current account imbalances that are not in line with fundamentals. Bilateral trade measures 
will not help resolve such imbalances. These are primarily issues for multilateral and macro 
saving-investment consideration. 
 Global imbalances will be discussed intensively at the G20 meeting this year. In particular, 
we will promote understanding that we need to examine whether the current levels of global 
imbalances are appropriate or excess, taking into account the importance of structural factors 
such as aging. 
III. International Financial Architecture 
Along with global imbalances, international financial architecture has also long been on the 
agenda at the G20 meetings. The global economy has suffered the enormous negative impact 
of financial and economic crises such as the Asian crisis in the late 1990s, the global financial 
crisis after the Lehman shock, and the subsequent European sovereign debt crisis. 
 To prevent such crises from occurring again, each country must implement the appropriate 
economic policies to avoid accumulating economic and financial sector imbalances. Looking 
back on history, we have seen how asset bubbles in stocks and real estate, as well as excessive 
lending by financial institutions, have contributed to overheating the economy, and vice versa, 
and how current account deficits and accumulated external debt have become the source of 
crises.  One  lesson  history  teaches  us  is  that,  by  helping  to  stem  the  source  of  crises, 
appropriate  economic  policy  management  is  definitely  the  first  line  of  defense  in  crisis 
prevention. Rigorous monitoring of the global economy and financial conditions is crucial to 
detecting the early signs of crisis. With this in mind, we intensively examine global economic 
and financial conditions at every G20 meeting. 
 5 
  Of course, experience has taught us the difficulty of prior detection of excessive activities and 
imbalances. That is why we also need to prepare crisis management policy tools to prevent 
crises  from  spreading.  The  IMF's  lending  facilities  play  a  crucial  role  in  such  crisis 
management. One of the important functions of the IMF is to provide short-term lending to a 
country with a balance-of-payments crisis. The IMF's role in times of crisis has become even 
more important as international trade and financial transactions have expanded. 
 Besides the IMF lending in times of crisis, regional financing arrangements (RFA) are also 
expected  to  be  used.  In Asia,  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative  Multilateralization (CMIM)  is  one 
such arrangement. Japan, China, Korea, and the ASEAN countries participate in the initiative. 
Once a crisis occurs, each country is expected to provide the funds necessary to prevent the 
crisis  from  spreading.  In  order  to  mobilize  funds  promptly,  there  is  the  so-called  de-link 
portion of the fund. This portion comprises 30 percent of the total funds, and is not directly 
linked  to  the  lending  from  the  IMF.  We  have  also  seen  an  expansion  in  bilateral  swap 
agreements.  When  a  crisis  occurs,  countries  can  use  a  swap  agreement  to  exchange  their 
currency for another in order to obtain the funds needed for international transactions. 
 In short, we now have multiple layers of measures to cope with global financial crises, with 
IMF lending playing the central role, supplemented by regional financing arrangements and 
bilateral swap agreements. 
 Thanks  to  this  enhancement  of  international  financial  architecture,  together  with  the 
strengthening of financial regulations following the global financial crisis, it is fair to say that 
the resilience of the global economy and financial system has been increased. Nevertheless, 
it  is  important  to  remain  vigilant  as  global  financial  and  economic  conditions  continue  to 
evolve dramatically. A key element of surveillance is ensuring that no potential sources of 
crisis have been overlooked. We have seen rapid and revolutionary innovations in information 
and communication technologies in particular, and financial activities could expand beyond 
the scope of current regulatory and surveillance frameworks. We have also seen the migration 
of  financial  activities  to  the  non-banking  sector  as  regulations  on  the  banking  sector  have 
 6 
 been tightened. To address such non-traditional flows of funds, it may be necessary to expand 
the tools used and the range of data subject to surveillance in order to detect signs of a crisis.  
 The  policy  actions  of  individual  countries  and  international  coordination  to  tackle  the 
imbalances  identified  by  such  surveillance  are  also  important  issues  for  discussion.  In 
addition to monetary and fiscal policy, macroprudential policy measures are increasingly used 
to  address 
these  financial 
imbalances.  Macroprudential  policy  measures  such  as 
countercyclical  capital  buffers,  stress  testing,  and  regulatory  measures  on  lending  are  all 
valuable areas for the exchange of ideas and mutual learning. To enhance crisis management 
in  international  finance, we  need  to  continue  discussing  the  appropriate  modalities  for  the 
facilities provided by different entities. 
Concluding Remarks 
As I have mentioned, there are a number of important issues to be considered regarding the 
current state of the global economy. We will be discussing these issues at the G20 meetings 
this year. The analyses and policy proposals from think tanks provide invaluable input for our 
discussions, especially considering the wide range of issues related to the global economy. I 
would like to conclude my speech with the hope that today's T20 Summit will prompt further 
collaboration between the private and public sectors. 
 Thank you very much for your attention. 
 7 
