The Governor’s
Concluding Remarks
The Governor’s 
Concluding Remarks
Annual Report
2018 - 125th Financial Year
Rome, 31 May 2019
Ladies and Gentlemen,
The Bank of Italy contributes to the definition of monetary policy in the 
euro area. It is the authority charged with safeguarding financial stability and 
supervising intermediaries. It manages payment settlement systems, monitors 
these  systems  and  supervises  the  financial  markets.  It  conducts  economic, 
legal, and statistical research and provides services to the public. It is perhaps 
difficult to appreciate the sheer variety and breadth of everything the Bank 
does, given the many essential tasks it carries out in the public interest. In 
compliance with transparency requirements and legal obligations, the Bank 
provides an account of its work in the Report on Operations and Activities 
which,  as  is  now  customary,  is  published  today  together  with  the  Annual 
Report. We are increasingly committed to promoting economic and financial 
knowledge and to communicating the results of our work. 
The  Bank’s  key  functions  are  highlighted  in  our  balance  sheet,  which  
I already talked about on 29 March in an Address to the Ordinary General 
Meeting of Shareholders. This also illustrated the Bank’s capital reallocation, 
a process which began in 2014 with the reform of the ownership structure, 
leading  to  an  expansion  of  the  shareholder  base.  Finally,  it  presented  the 
results of the financial year for 2018, which recorded a net profit of €6.2 
billion, €5.7 billion of which were allocated to the State, in addition to taxes 
amounting to €1.2 billion.
Three  of  the  five  members  of  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  Governing  Board 
completed their mandates this year. With the appointment of Fabio Panetta 
as Senior Deputy Governor, the confirmation of Luigi Federico Signorini as 
Deputy Governor and the designation of Alessandra Perrazzelli and Daniele 
Franco to the same role, the board has been fully replenished.
Salvatore Rossi and Valeria Sannucci have retired from the Governing 
Board. They both brought their talents and skills to several sensitive positions 
within  the  Bank.  The  conclusion  of  his  term  as  Senior  Deputy  Governor 
of the Bank of Italy means that Salvatore has also come to the end of his 
mandate as President of IVASS, which greatly benefited over the years from 
his drive for innovation.
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
3
I am sure I speak for the Board of Directors in thanking them for their 
work in the service of our country. Let me add to the gratitude of the entire 
institution my own affectionate farewell to these two people I count as friends, 
with whom I have worked very closely over the course of my career and with 
whom I have shared the by no means light responsibility of managing the 
Bank during these undoubtedly difficult years.
I would like to welcome Alessandra Perrazzelli, who has agreed to put 
at the service of the general public her considerable experience and proven 
ability in senior professional positions in Italy and abroad. I would like to 
welcome back Daniele Franco, whose outstanding technical abilities, along 
with his steady and balanced judgment, will be of great use to us over the 
coming years.
The contribution of each and every member of the Governing Board is 
crucial in guiding the Bank’s operations. Yet nothing we do is or would be 
possible without the commitment and professionalism of all our staff: hired 
and  promoted  via  rigorous,  meritocratic  procedures,  immune  to  external 
pressures, and united by that spirit of genuine dedication to public service of 
which we are justly proud. Let me extend the heartfelt thanks of the Board of 
Directors, the Governing Board, and express my own personal gratitude to all 
the women and men working for the Bank.
The international outlook and the Italian economy 
The system of supranational institutions and multilateral rules that has 
supported  integration  and  global  economic  growth  since  the  end  of  the 
Second  World  War  has  entered  a  very  difficult  phase.  The  trend  towards 
trade openness, which had grown stronger in recent decades, has come to an 
end. The sharp deceleration in international trade observed in 2018 reflected 
tensions linked above all to the new protectionist strategy pursued by the 
United States (Figure 1).
A  large  share  of  intermediate  goods  is  produced  abroad,  and  by 
increasing the cost of production factors, protectionist measures ultimately 
rebound on domestic firms and magnify the effects of tariffs on consumers. 
The repercussions on production are not confined to those caused directly 
by trade barriers, but also stem from the deterioration of firms’ confidence, 
the  downward  revision  of  investment  plans,  and  the  greater  volatility  of 
international financial markets.
The International Monetary Fund predicts that global growth will fall 
to 3.3 per cent this year, the lowest figure since the contraction of 2009. The 
weaker  conditions  are  widespread  and  affect  areas  accounting  for  over  70 
4
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
per cent of the global economy. The projections point to a recovery starting 
in the second half of this year, boosted by expansionary economic policies 
in the main countries and by the ensuing improvement in financial market 
conditions. There are still significant risks, however, including geopolitical 
ones.
The slowdown is mainly affecting the economy of the euro area, which is 
more open to international trade than the United States or Japan. Reliance on 
foreign demand is particularly high in Germany, the most vulnerable country 
from this point of view, but also in France, Italy and Spain, countries that are 
all closely integrated into global value chains, including intra-European ones. 
The marked decline in business confidence is curbing investment (Figure 2), 
and in the second half of 2018 the downturn in the automobile industry 
contributed to the worsening of the macroeconomic situation.
The  growth  projections  for  the  euro  area  have  been  steadily  revised 
downwards. According to the main international institutions, GDP growth 
will be just over 1.0 per cent this year and around 1.5 per cent in 2020: 
the risk of this trend being less favourable is not negligible. The weakness 
of  production  has  affected  both  actual  inflation  and  that  expected  by  the 
markets. At the same time, the ECB forecast a slower convergence in inflation 
towards the objective of a level below, but close to, 2 per cent.
Last  March  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  announced  that  monetary 
policy  would  remain  expansionary  for  longer  than  had  previously  been 
indicated. It expects that rates will stay at the current low levels at least until 
the end of 2019 and, in any case, for as long it takes to achieve price stability. 
The Eurosystem will continue to fully reinvest the resources obtained from the 
redemptions of maturing securities held under the asset purchase programme 
for an extended period of time. From next September there will be a new 
series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations to maintain favourable 
conditions on the credit market and the orderly transmission of monetary 
policy. The Governing Council reiterated that it stands ready to adjust all the 
available instruments to guarantee convergence towards the inflation aim. 
In the second half of 2018, GDP declined slightly in Italy. For the year 
as a whole, the rate of growth was 0.9 per cent, just under half that of 2017. 
Negative contributions came from the slowdown in output in Germany and 
greater uncertainty, which in turn was affected by the heightened tensions 
surrounding government securities. This led to a sharp downsizing of firms’ 
investment plans. Household spending also slowed, reflecting the deterioration 
of the economic outlook and sluggish employment rates since the summer.
Permanent employment contracts in the private sector turned upward 
again, boosted by the conversion of fixed-term contracts. These were affected 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
5
in the second half of the year by the limits introduced by the ‘Dignity Decree’ 
which,  together  with  the  worsening  economic  situation,  are  nevertheless 
reducing the probability of remaining employed at the end of a fixed-term 
contract. 
In 2018, inflation stood at 1.2 per cent and the core component, net of 
food and energy products, remained below 1 per cent. The pace of growth in 
prices remained lower than in the euro area; the weakening of the economy 
weighed on labour costs and firms’ profit margins.
Even though GDP recorded a slight increase in the first quarter, there is 
widespread consensus regarding the forecasts for much lower growth this year 
than the already subdued growth of 2018. To return to higher investment 
rates and more robust spending on consumption, trade tensions must subside, 
global financial market conditions must remain favourable and above all, the 
confidence of firms and households must rise again. 
According to official estimates, the introduction of a new basic income 
scheme (reddito di cittadinanza) and new pension measures, without taking 
account of the restrictive effects of covering the cost, would lead to an increase 
in GDP of about 0.6 percentage points over the three-year period 2019-21. 
This assessment appears reasonable if we assume that all the funds allocated 
are spent. By contrast, the assessment of the effects on employment, which is 
expected to be half a percentage point higher in 2021, displays ample margins 
of uncertainty.
The  tensions  in  Italy’s  government  bond  market  are  curbing  growth 
prospects. The yield on ten-year government bonds is almost one percentage 
point higher than the levels recorded in April of last year. The spread with 
respect to the equivalent German bond has increased by 160 to around 280 
basis points, while it has risen by 140 to 190 basis points with respect to 
Spanish bonds (Figure 3). The premiums on credit default swaps indicate that 
both credit risk and the risk of the debt being redenominated in a currency 
other than the euro continue to push the yields on Italian government bonds 
upwards; these risks are closely interlinked and in times of tension could rise 
sharply in market assessments. 
The pass-through of the greater cost of public sector securities to that 
of bank loans to firms and households has been modest so far, thanks to the 
ample liquidity and the improved balance-sheet conditions of intermediaries. 
Nevertheless,  signs  of  tension  are  beginning  to  emerge:  surveys  indicate 
that credit supply policies, though remaining relaxed overall, are gradually 
tightening, especially for small firms; this is due to both the deterioration in 
the macroeconomic outlook and to higher bank funding costs. It is estimated 
that, other things being equal, and discounting negative effects on firms’ and 
6
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
households’ confidence, an increase of 100 basis points in the yields on public 
sector bonds would lead to a reduction of 0.7 per cent in GDP over three 
years. 
As  acknowledged  in  the  Economic  and  Financial  Document  (DEF), 
the  cyclical  slowdown  is  increasing  the  budget  deficit  in  the  current  year. 
The increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio could exceed that indicated in the 
government’s budget (almost half a percentage point), which assumes revenue 
from privatizations amounting to about €18 billion (one percentage point of 
GDP).
The structural difficulties of the Italian economy
Our  country  has  a  number  of  strengths  it  can  draw  on  to  support 
economic activity in unfavourable conditions. In this decade, goods exports 
have kept pace with foreign demand, interrupting the protracted decline in 
Italy’s share of the global market. The current account balance turned positive 
again in 2013 and for three years now the surplus has stood at around 2.5 
per cent of GDP; the net international investment position is practically in 
balance. Italy’s ability to compete on the international markets has benefited 
from the reallocation of exports towards forms of production which are less 
exposed to the pressures of emerging economies and made by more efficient 
and larger firms.
At the end of last year, household debt was equal to 41 per cent of GDP, 
as against 61 per cent in the other euro-area countries as a whole; the value 
of savings, of which more than 60 per cent in real estate, was more than eight 
times that of income, compared with an estimated seven times for the rest of 
the area. Firms’ debt is also low: equal to 69 per cent of GDP, against 112 per 
cent in the other countries.
Overall,  however,  the  economy  has  been  struggling  to  pick  up  since 
the double-dip recession. GDP is still more than 4 percentage points below 
what it was in 2007, and 7 percentage points in per capita terms. Though it 
has regained the 2007 level of 59 per cent, the employment rate is 9 points 
below the euro-area average. The development gap has increased in the South 
of Italy, where more than 18 per cent of the labour force is unemployed, 
compared with 7 per cent in the Centre and North; the gap is 4 percentage 
points higher than it was in 2007.
The problem is not merely low aggregate demand. In the decade preceding 
the crisis, Italy also lagged behind the other euro-area countries by around 
one  percentage  point  per  year  (Figure  4).  Despite  the  measures  enacted, 
our  economy’s  capacity  to  grow  and  to  achieve  high  employment  rates  is 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
7
weighed down by the unsatisfactory quality of public services, inadequate 
infrastructure, low levels of competition and the distortions associated with 
widespread tax evasion and corruption, not to mention the obstacles posed by 
organized crime. The result is an economic climate that is little predisposed to 
business and its growth, to investment and to employment. 
To confine ourselves to seeking temporary relief by raising the public 
deficit could prove less than effective, even counterproductive, if this led to 
a deterioration in financial conditions and in the confidence of households 
and firms. The risk of a ‘restrictive expansion’ must not be underestimated; 
the expansionary effects of a budget can be more than offset by the restrictive 
ones of higher financing costs for the State and the economy. 
The high debt-to-GDP ratio continues to be a severe constraint; to lessen 
it, there must be no delay in defining a rigorous and credible strategy for its 
reduction in the medium term. Compared with the rest of the euro area, 
the cost of Italy’s public debt is higher and its economic growth lower. Aside 
from Greece, on average in the last four years Italy is the only other country 
to report a large and positive gap between these two variables; at 1 percentage 
point,  this  gap  has  in  turn  pushed  up  debt-to-GDP  ratio  by  around  1.3 
points per year. In the same period, GDP growth was 0.3 percentage points 
higher than the average cost of the debt in France, 1.0 points higher than that 
in Spain. When the gap between the cost of the debt and economic growth 
is positive, what is needed, if only to stabilize the debt, is a primary surplus 
(when revenues exceed expenditure net of interest expense). The larger the 
gap, the bigger the surplus required. 
The increase of 1 percentage point recorded in the average yields at issue 
of Italian government securities in 2018 followed a decline of around 3 points 
between 2012 and 2017. The risk of this leading to a further widening of the 
gap between the cost of the debt and the GDP growth rate must be countered 
(Figure 5). Only careful budgetary control and solid prospects for a return to 
higher economic growth rates can boost confidence in the government bond 
market and bring yields down towards the levels prevailing in the rest of the 
euro area.
Ensuring that the budget can contribute to a lasting increase in GDP 
growth calls for incisive interventions in the composition of expenditure and 
revenue. Greater prominence should be given to programmes better able to 
stimulate economic activity, as opposed to subsidies and transfers. This must 
be accompanied by measures designed to limit the distortions introduced by 
taxation, especially in the labour market, and to step up the fight against tax 
evasion. Increases in public expenditure or lower revenues must, however, 
be part of a framework that guarantees financial sustainability and specifies 
objectives, priorities and sources of funding.
8
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
Public investment expenditure amounts to about 2 per cent of GDP, one 
third lower than it was at the start of this decade. The objective of recouping 
half of the lost ground in three years, with planned increases in spending in 
the order of 10 per cent per year, assumes a big improvement in the ability 
to move from identifying what needs to be done to actually getting it done. 
But it is not enough to simply spend more; resources must be utilized more 
effectively, by improving the procedures for selecting, assigning and executing 
the works. By international standards, Italy is behind both in terms of works 
completed and money spent.
A  primary  surplus  of  under  0.5  per  cent,  such  as  would  be  obtained 
in  2020  if  the  VAT  increases  under  the  safeguard  clauses  envisaged  in 
current legislation were deactivated without any countermeasures, would be 
incompatible with a reduction in the debt-to-GDP ratio; it would have adverse 
effects on the risk premiums on public sector securities and, subsequently, on 
economic activity. Making the deactivation of the VAT clauses conditional 
on  the  identification  of  compensatory  measures,  as  the  Economic  and 
Financial  Document  (DEF)  does,  reflects  these  concerns.  All  the  possible 
options call for a careful and transparent evaluation of the potential effects on 
demand, economic activity and income distribution. 
Looking ahead, what Italy needs is a broad-based tax reform. Since the 
early 1970s, new forms of taxation have been introduced and a complex set of 
concessions and exemptions progressively put in place, with no comprehensive 
plan  and,  not  infrequently,  with  unclear  guidance.  Reforming  only  some 
concessions or restructuring just one tax means continuing this process of 
stratification. Instead, this must stop, and a stable framework erected that 
gives  certainty  to  producers  and  consumers,  investors  and  savers,  with 
measures that reward workers and are pro-business. Account must also be 
taken of how the various components of the taxation system interact: indirect 
taxation with forms of low-income support; direct taxation with detractions 
and deductions; income support with employment incentives; interactions 
between the various exceptions to the general taxation regime envisaged for 
each taxable base; and between these components and the fight against tax 
evasion, taking full advantage of all the available technologies.
Italy is a country with a rapidly ageing and shrinking population. While 
these trends are common to many EU countries, they are more evident here. 
The  medium  scenario  projection  published  by  Eurostat  shows  that  in  the 
next  25  years,  the  share  of  the  population  aged  at  least  65  will  reach  28 
per cent in the European Union as a whole and 33 per cent in Italy; the 
financial pressures on pensions and long-term care will increase as a result. 
The population aged between 20 and 64 will fall by 6 million in our country, 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
9
notwithstanding a hypothetical net influx from abroad of 4 million persons 
in this age group (Figure 6). The reduction in production capacity linked to 
demographic trends must be countered with sharp increases in the labour 
market participation rate and in productivity. 
The participation rate is still 8 percentage points below the European 
average, despite having risen in the last 20 years, from 61 to 66 per cent. As 
in the other countries, the main contribution has come from older workers, 
linked to changes made to the pension system. The female participation rate 
has also risen, from 47 to 56 per cent. The increase has nonetheless been less 
marked than that recorded in the rest of the EU and the male participation 
rate  is  still  19  points  higher  than  that  of  women,  one  of  the  largest  gaps 
in Europe. This suggests that there is much potential for increasing labour 
force participation and highlights the need to act decisively to identify and 
introduce  measures,  services  and  incentives  designed  to  raise  the  female 
participation rate.
Immigration  can  help  to  boost  Italy’s  production  capacity,  but  the 
difficulties encountered in attracting high-skilled workers and in integrating 
and training those who come from abroad. Since the early 1990s, the number 
of immigrants arriving in Italy has surpassed that of emigrants every year. 
After falling slightly during the sovereign debt crisis, net immigration has 
continued to rise, reaching almost 190,000 people in 2018 or 0.3 per cent of 
the population. The share of foreigners who hold degrees, equal to almost 13 
per cent, is less than half the EU average. Productivity and entrepreneurial 
skills are also being adversely affected by the gradual increase in the number 
of young people and university graduates leaving Italy every year, reflecting 
structural lags in the economy. In the space of ten years, youth emigration 
increased fivefold to reach 0.5 per cent in 2017, while at 0.4 per cent, graduate 
emigration more than doubled. 
Italy has been slow to respond to the technological revolution (Figure 7) 
and economic growth has been badly hit as a result. The sectors comprising 
the digital economy today contribute 5 per cent of total value added, against 
8 per cent in Germany and 6.6 per cent on average in the European Union. 
Since the outbreak of the sovereign debt crisis, the relative weight of these 
sectors has declined in Italy, going against the trend in terms of the European 
average.  But  we  must  invest  in  advanced  and  green  technologies  for  the 
very  sustainability  of  economic  and  social  development,  and  to  preserve 
environmental balance. 
The gap with respect to the rest of the EU concerns almost all sectors 
where  firms  can  adopt  innovative  technologies;  in  the  automation  of 
10
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
production processes it  is very apparent in countries that have the kind of 
sectoral specialization Italy has, such as Germany. The development of new 
generation telecommunications networks remains limited. The role of central 
government in promoting the introduction of new technologies is similarly 
modest;  the  European  Commission’s  Digital  Economy  and  Society  Index 
(DESI) ranks Italy 19th for digital public services.
One of the factors that has slowed the advent of the digital economy 
has been Italy’s fragmented production structure, mainly comprising small 
firms, whose ownership and management arrangements often overlap, and 
which are little inclined to accept external injections of capital, technology 
and expertise. In 2017, fewer than one fifth of firms with between 20 and 49 
workers had adopted at least one advanced technology (such as robotics and 
artificial intelligence); this share rises to one third among medium-sized firms 
and is more than half for those with 250 or more workers. The more complex 
the technologies considered, the wider the gap between small and large firms. 
The fragmentation of the productive sector has had a negative effect on 
firms’ capacity to innovate: expenditure on research and development in the 
private sector amounted to 0.8 per cent of GDP in 2017, less than half the 
average in OECD countries. It is low in the public sector too (0.5 against 0.7 
per cent). At just below 1 per cent of GDP, the share of resources devoted to 
the university system is roughly one third below the OECD average.
Low 
In recent years, incentives have been introduced to support investment, 
research  and  development,  and  innovative  start-ups.  These  measures  have 
proved effective overall. Some of these incentives were confirmed in the latest 
budget law or in last April’s ‘Growth Decree’, recalibrated mostly in favour 
of small and medium-sized firms. To be effective, industrial policy requires a 
stable legislative framework that facilitates change in the economy as a whole. 
innovation  has  been  accompanied  by  the 
comparatively poor acquisition of knowledge and skills by Italian students 
and adults; these delays feed into one another, in a vicious cycle that must 
be reversed. Investments in training that accompany individuals throughout 
their working lives are also necessary to prevent the risk that the adoption 
of  new  technologies,  with  the  attendant  drop  in  demand  for  the  workers 
most affected by the advent of automation and digitalization, will magnify 
inequalities of income and opportunity, and reduce employment.
investment 
in 
Italy’s difficulties are amplified in the South and Islands, harder hit by 
the  double-dip  recession  than  the  rest  of  the  country.  First  and  foremost, 
the business climate in the South needs to improve, especially in relation to 
guaranteeing legality. The technological gap to be bridged is even wider: the 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
11
share of value added ascribable to the digital economy, at close to 2.5 per cent, 
is more than 3 points below that of the Centre and North. The skills gap must 
be narrowed, public policies made more effective, and the quality of local 
government and infrastructures improved: 70 per cent of ‘unfinished works’ 
are located in these regions, of which only 30 per cent are public works. 
Roughly one third of Italy’s population lives in the South of Italy, which 
generates almost one quarter of the country’s GDP. The southern regions are 
becoming poorer still now, owing to the emigration of their youngest and 
most highly-educated people, mostly to the Centre and North of Italy. In the 
last ten years, net migration has been barely positive overall, but there has 
been a large net outflow of young university graduates. It is a trend that has 
immediate social costs and impacts negatively on the prospects for growth.
Over  the  years  there  have  been  numerous  attempts  to  deal  with  the 
economic difficulties of the South, with very different interventions whose 
results,  on  the  whole,  have  been  disappointing.  Support  measures  can 
contribute to growth in the regions that lag behind; they must not, however, 
distort  the  incentives  for  firms  and  workers  by  hindering  the  optimal  use 
of resources. To improve the economic conditions in the South and Islands 
and  to  raise  growth  potential  requires  long-term  action,  fully  exploiting 
the opportunities afforded by European and national funds. It is necessary 
to intervene in the factors underlying the delays in the South; attempts to 
compensate for them with monetary transfers cannot be the only solution. 
The effects on the southern economy of public investment in schools and 
infrastructure could be highly significant. 
Banks, finance and supervision
Even  though  banks’  balance  sheets  continued  to  strengthen  in  2018, 
the effects of the crisis have not yet been fully reabsorbed and are delaying 
their response to the profound changes in the industry’s market structure, 
customers’ habits, financial regulations and technology. As in the rest of the 
euro area, profitability, though recovering, remains low and the incidence of 
operating costs is still high; these trends are reflected in banks’ share prices. 
Some medium-sized banks are still experiencing difficulties, which are being 
dealt with by the Italian and European supervisory authorities and by the 
government. Solutions are being actively sought to relaunch banks and to 
protect those involved.
The outlook for banks is still closely linked to the performance of the 
economy and to the perception of country risk, which affect asset quality 
and  the  costs  they  incur  in  raising  funds  on  the  markets.  For  the  entire 
12
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
banking system, capital ratios, which in mid-2018 were affected by tensions 
on government bonds, are recovering; at the end of 2018 the CET1 ratio of 
banks directly supervised by the ECB stood at 12.7 per cent of risk-weighted 
assets,  against  an  average  of  14.3  per  cent  for  significant  euro-area  banks. 
Adverse cyclical developments would inevitably affect balance sheets again, so 
the need remains for continued decisive action to reduce costs and improve 
profitability. 
In Europe the use of digital channels in banking intermediation is in 
constant  growth.  Over  the  last  decade,  the  share  of  customers  using  the 
Internet to access their current accounts has almost doubled (Figure 8) and 
the number of branches has been reduced by about one quarter. The spread 
of more complex technologies (FinTech) is rapidly transforming the structure 
of the financial industry. The management and analysis of big data, the use 
of artificial intelligence and machine learning, and the potential offered by 
distributed ledger technologies are changing the services provided; they are 
also opening the sector to new competitors – including, but not only, the 
Big Techs – that are able to swiftly exploit the advantages of operating in 
the  digital  economy  and  trade.  Market  estimates  indicate  that  investment 
in financial innovation, mainly attributable to large technological firms and 
start-ups, has increased sixfold at global level in the last five years; in 2018 it 
exceeded $100 billion, one third of which in Europe, but it is still modest in 
Italy.
Italy’s  banks  are  providing  more  and  more  traditional  services  online, 
in  order  to  increase  organizational  and  operational  efficiencies.  Almost  all 
banks now permit payments to be made using mobile devices, often for small 
amounts; over half of them place savings products through digital channels; 
though on the increase, the number of banks offering loans through portals 
is  still  modest  (Figure  9).  Nevertheless,  the  delay  in  responding  to  the 
challenges posed by the use of more complex technologies risks the gradual 
erosion of market shares. According to our surveys, half of the banks have yet 
to launch or even plan to launch trials in this field, for instance in the use of 
new instruments for assessing creditworthiness. A relatively limited amount 
of resources are allocated to these projects and are concentrated among the 
larger banks.
Using  technology  to  provide  customized  services  with  greater  value 
added can generate tangible benefits in terms of reducing costs, broadening 
consumer choice and increasing profitability. The smaller banks, for whom 
investment at individual level is too costly, can enter joint initiatives for the 
outsourcing of services designed to promote their products. The spread of 
new technologies, however, also carries new risks, especially regarding cyber 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
13
security and customer data protection; IT projects require particular care and 
advance planning.
The Bank of Italy is also experimenting with the use of new technologies 
in its supervisory activity. Recourse to artificial intelligence is not confined 
to seeking improvements in forecasting economic and financial variables; it 
is also useful for analysing the level of investors’ trust in banks and it boosts 
the effectiveness of anti-money laundering activities. The Bank has long been 
in contact with market operators offering innovative solutions: since 2017 
we have had an innovation hub, ‘FinTech Channel’, on our website. This 
direct interface with operators in a digital environment makes it possible, by 
means of advance knowledge of new projects, to assess their compliance with 
legislation, identify potential problems and consider changes to the rules and 
procedures applied at national level. 
The  importance  of  preventing  and  controlling  cyber  risks  is  bound 
to grow in an increasingly digitalized and interconnected system in which 
outsourcing is on the rise. The computer emergency readiness team for the 
financial sector (CERTFin), presided over by the Bank of Italy and the Italian 
Banking Association, whose members also comprise other sectoral authorities 
and most financial and technological operators, facilitates the exchange of 
information during cyber attacks, supports operators in the event of security 
breaches and helps to improve the effectiveness of firewalls. We play an active 
part  in  international  cooperation  initiatives  –  especially  in  the  Financial 
Stability  Board,  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and  the  G7  –  to 
define common standards and lines of action to limit cyber risks at national 
and global level.
Bank credit quality continues to improve (Figure 10). Thanks in part to 
the improved economic situation in recent years, the new non-performing 
loan rate has fallen below the levels observed before the global financial 
crisis;  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year  it  was  equal  to  1.3  per  cent.  The 
stock  of  non-performing  loans  declined  considerably,  especially  as  a 
result of some major sales, totalling €26 billion in 2016, €42 billion in 
2017 and €55 billion in 2018. Driven by pressure from the supervisory 
authorities,  the  increase  in  sales  also  benefited  from  banks’  progress  in 
providing  detailed  information  on  the  characteristics  of  exposures  and 
from the greater number of NPL recovery specialists. The coverage ratio 
reached 52.7 per cent at the end of 2018, 6 percentage points higher than 
the average figure for the main euro-area banks. Net of write-downs, the 
ratio of NPLs to total loans fell to 4.3 per cent for the banking system as a 
whole, down from 9.8 per cent at the end of 2015; according to the plans 
14
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
required of all banks by supervisors, it is expected to reach around 3 per 
cent at the end of 2021. 
Due to the reduction in bad loans achieved in recent years, more than half 
of banks’ net NPLs now consists of exposures to firms in temporary difficulty 
(unlikely-to-pay). It is important to do as much as possible to enable these 
loans to be reclassified as performing; as happens in other countries, recourse 
to specialized investors, such as turnaround funds, can provide resources and 
knowledge  to  help  firms  in  difficulty,  possibly  with  the  banks  themselves. 
The contribution that the reform of corporate crises can make to effective 
business restructuring processes will have to be evaluated. 
In 2018 profitability showed signs of improvement, mainly following 
the reduction in loan loss provisions and lower operating costs. Nevertheless, 
the cost-to- income ratio is still high (66 per cent) and the return on equity 
(5.7  per  cent)  remains  lower  than  that  which  investors  would  require  to 
subscribe newly-issued shares. This gap, which is also affected by the higher 
country risk, hinders both market access and efforts to strengthen the capital 
bases of Italian banks.
The amount of bank bonds maturing by the end of next year exceeds €70 
billion. At a time when yields at issue are high by international standards, 
raising funds on the market is a major challenge for the bigger banks too: 
the  new  crisis  management  rules  require  the  establishment  of  an  ample 
reserve  of  liabilities,  capable  of  absorbing  losses  and  replenishing  capital. 
The need to roll over and increase wholesale funding will tend to reduce net 
interest income. Market access remains difficult for smaller banks; creating 
institutional demand for their bonds could bring significant benefits.
With the establishment of two cooperative banking groups this year, the 
reform launched in 2016 to strengthen the overall solidity of this category, 
while preserving its mutualistic nature, has been enacted. The new groups 
must  combine  the  benefits  of  the  individual  banks’  proximity  to  and 
knowledge of local firms with an effective exploitation of cost synergies, in 
order to increase profitability and the capacity to turn to the market when 
necessary; maximum effort is vital on these fronts. 
For  the  popolari  banks  classified  as  less  significant  for  supervisory 
purposes, last year the cost-to-income ratio was higher than the system-wide 
average, return on equity was lower, and the stock of NPLs was still high. 
These banks are in urgent need of close forms of cooperation or mergers that 
allow them to compete on the market. Such actions are necessary to preserve 
the  capacity  to  use  resources  collected  locally  to  finance,  with  foresight, 
economic development, especially in southern Italy, where the limited size 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
15
of banks and the greater riskiness of the business environment affect overall 
supply conditions. 
Adequate consumer protection is vital in promoting confidence in the 
financial system and in individual banks. The latter, in line with the provisions 
introduced by MiFID II on investment services and with the rules on banks’ 
product governance, need to orient their behaviour towards the goal of ensuring 
effective fairness, while taking account of customers’ characteristics and needs. 
The Bank of Italy is strongly committed to overseeing bank products; it also 
collaborates with Consob, which is responsible for investment services. In 
recent years, our interventions on individual banks have been supplemented 
by thematic action in areas such as the organization of complaints offices, the 
charging of some fees, unilateral contract changes made by credit institutions, 
and salary-backed loans. The forms of individual protection offered by the 
Banking  and  Financial  Ombudsman  have  been  reinforced  and  there  will 
soon be an ombudsman for insurance disputes too.
Over the last few years, the insufficient attention paid by a number of 
intermediaries to compliance with anti-money laundering rules has become 
apparent in Europe. The ensuing risks are high and often go beyond national 
borders.  At  EU  level  there  is  an  ongoing  debate  as  to  how  to  strengthen 
and harmonize the necessary regulatory and supervisory requirements. At a 
time when the threats of money laundering and the financing of terrorism 
are particularly significant at international level, efforts to prevent supervised 
intermediaries from being infiltrated by criminal activities must be a strategic 
goal for senior management. In Italy supervisory action is unceasing; a specific 
agreement with the Financial Intelligence Unit encourages cooperation, the 
identification of risk factors, and coordinated interventions for monitoring 
and applying sanctions to intermediaries. In the event of suspected criminal 
offences, the information provided to the judicial authorities is of the utmost 
importance, and the Bank responds swiftly to any requests they make.
The role of markets and non-bank intermediaries in allocating resources 
is increasing in Europe and at global level. This trend may bring benefits to 
countries such as Italy, where banking intermediation plays a predominant 
part. A diversified financial system supports economic growth and mitigates 
the effects of adverse shocks on production. Deep and liquid capital markets 
are needed to encourage investment, especially in innovative and long-term 
projects; specialized operators that facilitate the supply of equity and assist 
firms in the various stages of their development are also required. In order to 
prevent disorderly and opaque developments from creating risks to overall 
16
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
stability, the authorities must remain especially vigilant, in the FSB and in the 
other fora for international cooperation.
Between 2014 and 2018, some 116 non-financial corporations obtained 
listings on the stock exchange in Italy, against 39 in the previous five years, 
and  over  500  companies  placed  bonds  for  the  first  time.  The  share  of 
household  savings  entrusted  to  institutional  investors  has  increased  by  14 
percentage points over the last decade, to 31 per cent. These developments 
have been favoured by tax incentives. Recourse to equity has been encouraged 
as have bond issues by non-listed companies; other incentives have supported 
investment in venture capital funds and in the securities issued by innovative 
firms. The introduction in 2016 of individual savings plans (piani individuali 
di risparmio or PIRs) has favoured household investment in Italian companies’ 
securities.
However, there is still a large gap compared with countries where capital 
markets are more developed. In France and in the United Kingdom, the ratio 
of market capitalization of non-financial companies to GDP is more than 
three times that of Italy and the ratio of bonds to firms’ total financial debt 
is almost double. Promoting the development of non-banking finance must 
continue, by assessing the effectiveness of the initiatives already introduced, 
streamlining  interventions  and  favouring  regulatory  stability.  Frequent 
changes – as in the case of the repeated revisions of incentives for capitalizing 
firms and of the reform of the PIRs included in the last budget law – could 
heighten uncertainty, with negative effects on the allocation of savings and on 
firms’ financing choices.
While for the largest firms, which can stand up to the scrutiny of external 
investors  and  sustain  the  costs  of  access  to  capital  markets,  non-banking 
finance is sure to become a key point of reference, for most businesses, banks 
will remain the first port of call for external resources. Healthy firms must 
be able to count on the support of banks and markets, regardless of their 
size. Management policies for loans to micro-enterprises and small firms need 
to select and measure risks carefully; they could benefit from technological 
innovation, something which is in the interest of both the firms that find it 
hard to access credit and of banks themselves. 
Italy and Europe
Italy is deeply integrated in the European economy (Figure 11). Some 60 
per cent of our imports come from other EU countries, which in turn receive 
56 per cent of our exports. In the last 20 years, partly as a result of the Union’s 
enlargement, exports to EU countries as a share of GDP have increased by 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
17
almost 5 percentage points, to 18 per cent. Two thirds of direct foreign and 
portfolio investment in Italy are from EU countries, which are themselves the 
recipients of 60 per cent of comparable Italian investments.
Italy was one of the main beneficiaries of EU transfers for a long time. In 
the 1980s, annual average net funds amounted to 0.4 per cent of GDP. Partly 
owing to the accession of new member states, the country’s position then 
gradually changed. Since the early 2000s, Italy has been a net contributor 
to the EU budget; since 2014, net outward transfers have amounted to just 
under 0.2 per cent of GDP per year. France and Germany contribute more 
(0.3  and  0.4  per  cent  of  GDP  respectively).  In  gross  terms,  the  resources 
allocated  to  support  disadvantaged  regions  in  our  country  for  the  period 
2014-20 amount to €34 billion or to an annual average of 0.3 per cent of 
GDP.  Their  efficient  utilization  must  be  a  priority  as  is  determination  in 
overcoming past obstacles. 
Europe’s  institutions  promote  research  and  innovation  through 
programmes  that  channel  resources  towards  shared  objectives,  facilitate 
cooperation  among  member  countries’ 
increase 
opportunities for private-public sector collaboration. Universities, research 
centres  and  high-tech  firms  are  important  contributors  to  the  EU’s 
innovation programmes and derive tangible benefits from the opportunities 
for exchanging information and ideas. If Italy’s research system were larger 
and  better  organized,  greater  resources  could  be  obtained  from  such 
programmes. 
institutions,  and 
Inflation, which was close to 20 per cent in the early 1980s and still as 
high as 5 per cent in the first half of the 1990s, reached 2 per cent in the two 
years prior to the adoption of the euro and stayed around that level until a 
few years ago; the more recent risk of deflation has been averted thanks to 
the monetary policy measures in place since 2014 (Figure 12). The single 
currency has stabilized the reduction in the occult tax that curbed households’ 
purchasing power and forced the country into making repeated devaluations 
with temporary benefits for some firms but costs for the wider community. 
Thanks to the reduction in inflation and exchange rate risk, as well as to the 
possibility of accessing a bigger financial market, the yields on government 
securities  and  those  on  loans  to  firms  and  households  came  down  in  the 
lead-up to the euro.
Neither  the  European  Union  nor  the  euro  are  responsible  for  Italy’s 
sluggish growth over the last twenty years; almost all the other member states 
have performed better than we have. What today are sometimes perceived 
as the costs of belonging to the euro area are, in reality, the result of Italy’s 
tardy response to technological change and to global markets opening up. 
The specialization of production in mature sectors has exposed the economy 
18
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
to  competition  on  prices  from  emerging  countries.  Hesitating  to  reduce 
imbalances  in  the  public  accounts  has  curtailed  the  scope  for  policies  on 
macroeconomic stabilization and for achieving sustainable growth. It is up 
to us to become aware of the problems and to address them, including with 
the help of European instruments. Others have done precisely this and done 
it well. 
Although the single currency was a vital step on the path to European 
integration, economic and monetary union remains an unfinished construction. 
Europe’s architects knew this, and wanted and anticipated greater progress in 
the future. Even before the introduction of the euro, the unusual status of 
a Stateless currency had been underlined, as had the institutional solitude 
of  the  ECB  and  the  problems  posed  by  the  imperfect  mobility  of  capital 
and labour. Trust was placed in the push that integration would give to the 
economic convergence of the member states and in a strategy of progressive 
reforms, to be enacted when the political conditions were right. 
The risks inherent in this process materialized with unanticipated violence 
during the sovereign debt crisis. The inadequacy of the euro area’s economic 
governance was laid bare: the rules of the Treaties failed to guide national 
policies appropriately and to ensure the necessary coordination; the lack of 
shared instruments for managing national economic crises has made them 
longer and deeper, and has raised the risk of episodes of contagion. 
The proposals for reform drawn up after the peak of the crisis envisaged 
the gradual strengthening of integration, first in the financial arena and then 
for public finances. Yet only partial progress has been made so far. The banking 
union is incomplete and not without flaws, the bases for the capital union are 
still being laid, and fiscal union has been postponed to an unspecified future 
date.
Efforts to reduce national risks before agreeing to share them – and even 
then not all risks – end by increasing them and heightening the feelings of 
precariousness that surround the euro. Risk reduction and sharing must go 
hand in hand and mutually reinforce one another; the pooling of risks increases 
sustainability for all. The idea that what is instead needed is to proceed by 
degrees reflects political and economic concerns linked to residual differences 
between member states. It is the result of the mutual distrust that developed 
during the crisis, fuelled by doubts about the ability and desire of countries 
to tackle problems with the necessary determination and their willingness to 
draw up rules and policies in the common interest. Standing at the crossroads 
of the reform process, the euro area’s economic growth is being held back and 
the area itself continues to be exposed to financial risks. 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
19
Italy has a duty to help Europe exit this impasse and can play a constructive 
role in identifying the necessary steps for completing economic and monetary 
union. The more successfully it removes the structural obstacles to a return to 
a stable growth path, and embarks on a credible reduction plan for its public 
debt, the more authoritative its voice in Europe will be. 
What Europe needs are integrated markets in finance, labour, goods 
and  services,  with  common  rules  and  procedures.  It  needs  coordinated 
economic policies, built on sharing medium-term strategies and objectives. 
It  needs  instruments  that  enable  it  to  swiftly  tackle  difficult  situations, 
with  decision-making  processes  that  are  not  encumbered  by  drawn-out 
negotiations and uncertain outcomes. 
Banking  union  must  be  accompanied  by  rules  and  arrangements  for 
the effective and orderly management of banking crises, so that they are not 
themselves sources of instability. It is especially important to ensure that a 
disorderly liquidation is not the only option available for the crises of small 
and medium-sized intermediaries which, like most European banks, are not 
subject to resolution, as this would create serious risks for the continuity of 
financial services, for savers, and for stability as a whole. The new possibilities 
opened  up  by  the  recent  pronouncement  of  the  General  Court  of  the 
European Union on preventive interventions by mandatory deposit guarantee 
funds should be explored further. At European level, the rules on State aid to 
safeguard competition must take account of the need to guarantee financial 
stability and, in any event, must be applied with due proportionality relative 
to the size of the intermediaries concerned. 
The widespread concern over high public debts is justified, but the idea 
that a review of the prudential treatment of sovereign exposures is indispensable 
to  break  the  sovereign-bank  nexus  fails  to  consider  that  this  is  primarily 
sustained through channels other than direct exposures. The main channel 
is the real economy; a sharp rise in the perceived risk of one State’s debt can 
quickly trigger a recessive spiral, kindling social tensions with unpredictable 
results. The blow to the banking system would be severe, irrespective of its 
capitalization and direct exposure. 
Nor is there any evidence that the benefits associated with a reform of 
the prudential treatment of sovereign exposures outweigh the costs, or that 
the  associated  reduction  in  risk  could  be  achieved  by  simply  shifting  the 
public debt securities from banks to other holders. Only a combination of 
prudent budgetary policies and credible, growth-oriented structural reforms 
can simultaneously drive a sustained increase in lending and a reduction in 
public sector securities on banks’ balance sheets.
20
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
The  Euro  Summit  held  last  December  reached  an  agreement  on 
strengthening  the  European  Stability  Mechanism’s  role  in  managing  and 
preventing crises in euro-area member states. The conditions that countries 
must respect to access the ESM’s precautionary funding instruments were 
specified  and  cooperation  procedures  agreed  between  the  ESM  and  the 
Commission for monitoring the public accounts of the member states. 
To  reduce  uncertainty  as  to  how  and  when  a  sovereign  debt  can  be 
restructured, the Summit also decided to introduce ‘single limb’ collective 
action clauses (CACs) in euro-area government bonds by 2022 and that, if 
requested by the member state, the ESM could facilitate the dialogue between 
that state and private investors. This uncertainty, however, only contributes 
to a small extent to the cost of a possible insolvency crisis. Given the close 
economic and financial ties between the euro-area countries, the effects of 
a  crisis  of  this  kind  would  be  serious  and  unpredictable  not  only  for  the 
country directly involved, but also for the others.
Europe should seek ways to support the efforts that must be made by 
member states to reduce their debt. Rigorous and prudent budgetary policies 
are indispensable, but the lowering of the debt-to-GDP ratio is a necessarily 
long  process,  which  could  be  disrupted  by  events  outside  the  control  of 
individual governments; this is why some form of supranational insurance 
is needed, for example through the creation of a European debt redemption 
fund financed by dedicated resources of the participating countries.
The heated debate on NPLs and sovereign exposures tends to overlook 
other significant risks to which banks are exposed. One example is the high 
stock  of  illiquid  and  opaque  assets  on  the  balance  sheets  of  some  major 
European intermediaries, which the Single Supervisory Mechanism recently 
addressed in a series of initiatives to define the necessary interventions. The 
tendency to have an asymmetric vision of the importance of these risks was 
confirmed in the decisions of the Euro Summit in December: the possibility 
of the financial support provided by the ESM to the Single Resolution Fund 
being made operative before 2024 is conditional on progress being achieved 
in risk reduction measured solely in relation to NPL volumes and on building 
up buffers of liabilities to be used in a crisis.
The  smooth  functioning  of  a  currency  area  requires  a  single  capital 
market  that  facilitates  access  to  financing  for  businesses.  In  addition,  an 
integrated market helps to absorb local macroeconomic shocks, increases the 
robustness  of  the  economic  system,  and  strengthens  financial  stability.  Its 
complementarity with the fiscal union and monetary policy is evident in this 
regard. 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
21
A  fiscal  union,  which  can  take  different  forms  but  must  promote 
macroeconomic  stabilization  before  all  else,  would  reconcile  the  full 
exercise of this function with balancing public accounts in each country. 
While it is difficult to conceive of any immediate adoption of discretional 
instruments, it is instead possible to plan for common automatic stabilizers, 
for  example  mechanisms  that  would  fund  part  of  the  expenditure  on 
unemployment during downturns. Designed in such a way as to avoid 
systematic cross-country transfers, these instruments would help to make 
the European employment market more fluid and the benefits of economic 
and monetary union more tangible. 
Monetary policy was the sole line of defence during the sovereign debt 
crisis and against the risks of deflation that emerged in the years thereafter. 
The ECB’s Governing Council demonstrated its readiness to use all of the 
instruments available to it and, if necessary, to introduce new ones to pursue 
the objective of price stability. It was successful, but its actions could have 
been  even  more  effective  had  they  been  accompanied  by  other  economic 
policies. 
The introduction of safe assets in the euro area is the common denominator 
necessary for the completion of the three unions – banking, capital markets 
and fiscal – that must flank monetary union. By partly replacing national 
government bonds, a European debt instrument could help to diversify the 
sovereign exposures of financial institutions; it could reduce the risk of flights 
to safety by investors in times of market tension triggering massive capital 
outflows from the countries in difficulty, instead enabling the financial market 
to play an effective role as shock absorber; and it could be an instrument for 
funding shared automatic stabilizers. It is possible to design mechanisms that 
enable  a  safe  asset  to  be  introduced  with  the  necessary  safeguards  against 
the risk of opportunistic behaviour. But aside from the rules, the essential 
requirement for the viability of this solution lies in a renewed and convinced 
commitment  by  all  to  the  European  project  and  a  willingness  to  pursue 
common solutions for common problems.
 The euro was introduced twenty years ago. It was by no means a given 
that Italy would be part of the single currency at the outset, but our country 
was resolute in its pursuit of the economic and financial objectives required 
to achieve that goal. Expectations were high; taking this brave step towards 
ever greater union between European countries sealed the commitment to 
continuing along the path of development built on the rubble of the Second 
22
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
World  War;  there  was  little,  though  some,  perception  of  just  how  much 
needed to be done to complete the economic and monetary union or of how 
great a responsibility was being entrusted to the European Central Bank in 
the absence of a political governance of the economy.  
Italy has not responded to other challenges with the same determination. 
It has been slow to react to the changes imposed by technological progress 
and by the opening up of global markets, remaining more exposed than other 
countries to competition from the emerging countries. It has yet to complete 
the restructuring of the public accounts begun in the 1990s, which involved 
shouldering  the  risks  connected  with  its  heavy  reliance  on  the  financial 
markets to fund the government debt. 
Tensions that have also been felt in the other advanced economies have 
been exacerbated by this dual weakness in Italy. A country where productivity 
was already sluggish has had to bear the consequences of a global financial 
crisis that began on another continent and of a sovereign debt crisis which 
it had done nothing to trigger. The economic and social suffering has been 
aggravated  by  the  real  and  perceived  difficulties  encountered  in  managing 
growing migration flows. 
The  euro  area  had  neither  the  governance  nor  the  tools  to  deal  with 
crises of this magnitude. In its pursuit of medium-term price stability, the 
single  monetary  policy  can  mitigate  common  cyclical  difficulties,  but  it 
cannot intervene in favour of individual countries nor can it solve structural 
problems, whether they affect just one country or the euro area as a whole. 
Yet holding Europe responsible for our troubles is a mistake; there is nothing 
to be gained by it and it diverts attention from the real issues. 
Italy is still struggling to recover from the double-dip recession as it is 
paying the price of not being – in terms of public service quality and respect 
for  the  rules  –  a  business-friendly  environment.  It  suffers  from  a  serious 
technological lag, the result  of a production structure that is fragmented and 
counts a high proportion of firms that find it difficult to grow and innovate. 
It is weighed down by the distortions caused by tax evasion and by the public 
debt, which makes funding more expensive for households, firms and banks, 
as well as for the country itself. A state of constant uncertainty squeezes firms’ 
investment and household consumption. Labour suffers, and social hardship 
increases.
The  performance  of  the  economy  and  country  risk  in  turn  affect  the 
conditions of banks. The progress on credit quality, profitability, and banks’ 
assets  observed  in  the  last  few  years  in  many  cases  reflect  the  significant 
efforts made, supported by the Bank’s supervisory activities and helped by the 
improved economic situation and relaxed financial conditions that prevailed 
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
23
up until the spring of 2018. The possibility that macroeconomic risks could 
again hit a financial sector that has yet to reorganize is a source of vulnerability 
of which we must be aware. Sustaining growth and easing tensions on the 
financial markets remain crucial to guaranteeing that this vital component of 
the economic system is fully functional.
If  we  look  beyond  the  short-term  horizon  we  cannot  ignore  the 
risk,  implicit  in  demographic  trends,  of  a  sharp  deterioration  in  Italy’s 
production  capacity,  and  the  prospect  of  strong  pressures  on  public 
finances. From here until 2030, without the contribution of immigration, 
the population aged between 20 and 64 is expected to fall by 3.5 million, 
and by a further 7 million in the subsequent fifteen years. Today, for every 
100 people in this age group, 38 are at least 65 years old; in twenty-five 
years’  time,  this  share  will  have  risen  to  76.  Italy’s  inability  to  attract 
highly-skilled labour from abroad and, indeed, the concrete risk of losing 
our  best  and  most  dynamic  workers,  makes  this  outlook  even  more 
worrying.
A more careful calibration of the budget towards measures to support 
work  and  production  activities,  a  rigorous  and  credible  strategy  to  reduce 
the  burden  of  the  public  debt,  and  broader  structural  reforms,  designed 
to  eliminate  bureaucratic  and  administrative  obstacles  to  competition  and 
investment  in  physical  and  human  capital,  can  all  help  to  restore  higher 
growth rates and confidence in the government bond market. This process 
can be facilitated by effective action to combat evasion as part of a broader 
tax reform.
Everything possible must be done to raise labour market participation rates, 
by prolonging working lives in line with the increase in life expectancy, and 
by removing the obstacles facing female workers; the country’s development 
requires that the South of Italy, where one third of the population resides, be 
revitalized. It is the job of economic policy to define the legislative framework, 
by providing adequate incentives and by removing the brakes on production, 
but it is up to firms to seize the opportunities offered by the market and 
technology, to be ready to grow, including by opening up to external capital 
and expertise; it is for students and workers to help effect change by seeking 
new and more varied skills. The financial intermediaries must prove able, in 
their own interest, to support this process by demonstrating prudence but 
also wisdom. This calls for a concerted effort, with no exceptions, and politics 
must show the way. 
Italy’s membership of the European Union is vital to return to a path of 
stable growth: this is where we can respond to the global challenges posed by 
the integration of markets, technology, geopolitical changes, and migration 
flows. The institutional development of Europe has accompanied the economic 
24
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
development of all the member countries: it has opened up a bigger market 
for firms and consumers, made more funds available to support disadvantaged 
areas, facilitated cooperation on strategic questions, and guaranteed a stable 
monetary framework. Without Europe we would have been worse off, but if 
we were to antagonize Europe we would become so.
We  must  work  responsibly,  constructively,  and  without  prejudice  to 
complete the Union, to help reinforce its institutions, and for the wellbeing 
of all. There must be no ambiguity about the responsibilities to be shared, 
the objectives to be pursued or the instruments to be used, all the while in 
the knowledge that, including for those who save, invest and produce, ‘words 
are deeds’ and ‘in the dark, words weigh double’. The farsightedness shown 
by those who laid the foundations of the European project must once again 
guide  our  actions  today.  This  is  an  essential  condition  for  guaranteeing  a 
future of peace and prosperity for the generations to come.
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
25
FIGURES
World trade growth 
Figure 1
% 
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Source: OECD. 
Business confidence of industrial firms
(indices: 2000=100) 
105
100
95
90
85
Euro area 
Italy 
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Source: Based on European Commission data. 
% 
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
105
100
95
90
85
Figure 2
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
29
(yield spread vs. German government securities; basis points)
Sovereign spreads
Figure 3
Portugal 
Italy 
400
300
200
100
0
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Spain 
Source: Based on Bloomberg data.
(the dashed lines indicate the average growth for the period)
GDP growth
4
% 
% 
2
0
-2
-4
-6
Euro area
ItItItItaaaaly    
400
300
200
100
0
4
% 
% 
2
0
-2
-4
-6
Figure 4
1996
1999
2002
2005
2008
2011
2014
2017
Sources:  Based  on  Istat  and  Eurostat  data. The  euro-area  aggregate  is  based  on  a  fixed  country 
composition (EA-19).
30
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
Figure 5
Average cost of the public debt and nominal GDP growth in Italy: forecasts
(per cent; average 2019-20)
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
Nominal GDP growth 
Italy        Belgium     France    Germany  Greece   Portugal    Spain   United
Kingdom
United
States
Average cost of the debt - nominal GDP growth (r-g) 
Japan
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
Source: European Commission, Spring forecast, May 2019.
Population in the 20-64 age group: projections
(indices: 2018=100)
Figure 6
105
100
95
90
85
80
European Union 
Italy 
105
100
95
90
85
80
2018
2025
2030
2035
2040
2045
Source: Based on Eurostat data.
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
31
Degree of digitalization
(DESI; percentage deviations from the European average)
Figure 7
40
% 
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
DK SE FI NL LU IE UK BE EE ES AT MT LT DE SI PT CZ FR LV SK CY HR HU PL IT BG EL RO
40
% 
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
Source: European Commission.
Note: The  Digital  Economy  and  Society  Index  (DESI)  is  a  composite  indicator  that  measures  the 
digital performance of the European Union and of its member states.
Use of online banking
Figure 8
70
% 
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Euro area 
Italy 
% 
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
Source: Eurostat.
Note:  Share  of  the  population  aged  25-64  years  that  uses  the  Internet  to  access  their  current 
accounts.
32
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
Supply of banking services offered through digital channels in Italy
Figure 9
100
 % 
80
60
40
20
0
Payment services 
Smartphone 
applications 
Asset 
management 
Lending to 
households 
Lending to 
ﬁrms 
 80
60
40
20
0
1997
2000
2003
2006
2009
2012
2015
2018
Source: Regional bank lending survey (RBLS).
Note: Share of banks offering their services through digital channels. Unweighted frequencies. For 
lending to households and firms, the share refers to banks that provide online estimates of what loans 
would cost.
Credit quality of Italian banks
(billions of euros)
Figure 10
400
300
200
100
0
Total NPLs 
Gross 
Gross 
Net 
Net 
Bad debts 
400
300
200
100
0
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
Source: Supervisory reports (consolidated for banking groups and individual for stand-alone banks). 
Note: The stocks are calculated gross and net of loan loss provisions. Bad debts are a subset of total 
non-performing loans (NPLs).
BANCA D’ITALIA
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
33
Exports and foreign direct and portfolio investment in Italy
(destination/origin; percentage composition)
Figure 11
Exports
 
44
56
Foreign direct investment
   Foreign portfolio investment
   35
65
29
71
European Union
Rest of the world 
Sources: Based on Bank of Italy, Istat and IMF data.
Inflation
Figure 12
Italy 
Germany 
France 
1980 1984 1988 1992 1996 2000 2004 2008 2012 2016
% 
24
20
16
12
8
4
0
-4
% 
24
20
16
12
8
4
0
-4
Source: OECD.
34
The Governor’s Concluding Remarks
Annual Report 2018
Printed 
by the Printing and Publishing Division  
of the Bank of Italy
Rome, 31 May 2019
Printed on eco-friendly paper
