John C Williams: Banking culture - the path ahead
Remarks by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the conference "Building Cultural Capital in the Financial Services Industry:
Emerging Practices, Risks and Opportunities", Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York
City, 4 June 2019.
As prepared for delivery
 Good morning, everyone. I’d like to begin by welcoming you to the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York and to the fifth conference on culture in financial services that we’ve hosted.
Before I launch into my remarks, it’s time I remind everyone that the views I express today are
mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or others
in the Federal Reserve System.
When I took on the role as President of the New York Fed last year it so happened that my first
day coincided with this conference. In my remarks that day, I emphasized that culture is a long-
term project, a constantly evolving one, which is never done.
The trouble with long-term projects with no distinct finish line is that they can lack a sense of
urgency.  The  pressure  to  make  real  progress  is  often  missing,  especially  when  there  are  so
many other priorities competing for our time.
Headlines  in  the  financial  news  illustrate  the  lack  of  progress.  In  the  year  since  our  last
conference, stories of money laundering and fraud have been an all-too-frequent feature. Culture
is at the heart of many of these issues, and addressing the root causes of misconduct must
remain a high priority for the industry and regulators.
The Supervisory Approach
Given this imperative for change, the question is, what can we do to improve culture in financial
services?
Culture  is  like  many  of  the  risk  management  issues  challenging  businesses.  Cyber  threats,
digital transformation, and climate change are all facts of life that companies face today, and will
be facing 10 years from now.
But I don’t hear any CEOs saying that securing their servers is a project that can wait until 2029.
Nor  does  anyone  think  that  there  are  “once  and  done”  fixes  for  these  problems.  Indeed,  one
important lesson from cybersecurity is that this is not purely a technology problem, but one that
requires a fundamental shift in mindset and culture over the long term.
So  the  first  thing  is  the  industry,  the  regulatory  agencies,  and  the  banks  need  to  take  culture
seriously, now.
A major and essential part of this is that there must be meaningful consequences for firms and
people when things go wrong. We have learned that simply levying large fines on companies is
not enough to create lasting change. More is needed.
Regulators  must  hold  management  and  boards  of  directors  to  account.  The  legal  element  of
supervision will always remain paramount. And a scandal often spurs change. But if leaders wait
until things have gone wrong to think about culture, they’re leaving it too late.
What Do We Do to Get to a “Good” Culture?
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The second thing is we need to understand what contributes to a good culture, and what allows a
bad  one  to  flourish.  What  fosters  an  organizational  culture  where  people  feel  empowered  to
speak up? And what leads to a work environment where employees feel emboldened to commit
fraud?
That’s one of the things I’m most looking forward to in today’s conference. I can’t wait to hear the
insights from such a variety of voices. Looking beyond our own narrow frame of reference to
other fields of study, like organizational psychology, will help us understand how to achieve the
progress that’s so desperately needed.
Behavioral science really gets to the root of how human nature interacts with an organization’s
processes.  Everything  from  how  we  set  goals  to  how  we  motivate  our  staff  to  achieve  those
goals has an effect on culture, for better or for worse.
This is where the rubber hits the road for most organizations, in the financial services industry,
and beyond.
We’re also going to hear from experts on the role technology plays, including the ethics of data
handling, and what artificial intelligence means for relationships with customers.
And I’m particularly looking forward to hearing about how diversity, something that’s a strategic
priority for me and this Bank, affects cultural norms. This includes diversity not only in terms of
race and gender, but diversity of thought and experience, which also affects an organization’s
culture and decision-making.
As an academic at heart, I have a self-confessed bias toward research. But in this case, there’s
real value in understanding the full breadth and depth of these issues.
One of the most important reasons is that we can debunk some of the myths that have acted as
a security blanket to the industry. Too often, when things go wrong, business leaders blame a
single “bad apple” as the cause of the problem.
But  focusing  on  an  individual  bad  actor  can  obscure  a  culture  in  which  people  feel  that
misconduct in the pursuit of profit is tolerated, or even condoned. The “bad apple” theory acts as
an excuse for not doing the hard work of cultural reform. In this process of blaming bad apples,
leaders fail to look at what’s happening to the rest of the barrel. What kind of environment has let
the rot set in?
Understanding the full complexity of what forms a culture is important, but our unique position
within the financial system means the Federal Reserve Bank of New York must do more.
Our Role in Achieving Progress
Three principles—“connect,” “convene,” and “catalyze”—guide my thinking in this area.
Connecting people with the latest data and research—and sharing experiences—gives them the
insights and tools they need to make change. Conferences like this one are critical—as is our
online research hub, which acts as a clearing house for the latest information and initiatives from
a wide range of organizations.
But, that’s not enough. In this regard, we recently announced the Education and Industry Forum
on Financial Services Culture to support these efforts.
The  Forum,  which  kicked  off  in  April,  brings  together  business  schools  and  industry
representatives.  Participants  will  research  and  design  case  studies  for  business  school
students. This will mean that students planning to enter the industry will have the tools to handle
the ethical challenges that can arise in real-life work situations.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
“Convene” means bringing together stakeholders to share best practices. And that’s where our
Supervisors Roundtable comes in. The Roundtable brings together supervisors from around the
world to share their jurisdictions’ approach and what they’ve learned from it. Participants have
developed a shared set of tools for supervisors that can be leveraged in cultural assessments.
Finally, let me turn to this principle of “catalyze,” and how we can use our position in the heart of
the Financial District, to create change.
As well as talking the talk—we’re walking the walk. This year, for the first time, this Bank is taking
the Banking Standards Board (BSB) Assessment.
The BSB Assessment measures the extent to which nine characteristics are demonstrated by
an organization, and it includes things like honesty, accountability, and respect. The assessment
started in the UK, and the Irish Banking Culture Board now takes a similar approach.
I would love to see firms in the United States adopt an industrywide survey that can measure
culture  and  benchmark  banks  against  their  peers.  Data  gathering  is  the  first  step  of
understanding the nature of organizational culture.
These  three  concepts—“connect,”  “convene,”  and  “catalyze”—will  continue  to  be  our  guiding
principles on the issue of culture as we build on our current work and explore new initiatives.
Like  addressing  cyber  risks  and  climate  change,  the  journey  toward  reforming  culture  in  the
banking and financial services industry is a long one. And there’s no single action that a regulator
or a bank can take to make it happen. Getting it right is going to require the will and expertise of
regulators,  financial  services  firms,  academics,  and  practitioners.  And  while  changing
organizational culture is a long-term, complex, and challenging task, I’m optimistic that we can
and we will make progress. And the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is committed to being a
partner on that journey.
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
