Peter Praet: Keynote speech – “Future Europe” conference
Video address by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
at the conference "Future Europe", Frankfurt am Main, 10 May 2019.
 Thank you for inviting me to open this second “Future Europe” conference.
It is common today for observers to assess the future of Europe with a sense of pessimism. The
long years of crisis and the rise of Euroscepticism appear, in the eyes of many, to have set the
cause of integration back. Some now question whether Europe’s citizens would be best served
by less integration, not more.
Partly these questions come from idealised memories of the past, in particular when countries
had their own currencies. But we should be clear that things were not better before EMU – they
were  worse.  It  is  easy  now  to  forget  that  the  single  market  was  a  response  to  the  economic
stagnation and high unemployment of the 1980s; and the euro a response to monetary disorders.
Yet doubts about the future of Europe also reflect real concerns about our monetary union. The
notion  that  the  euro  provides  stability  and  security  has  been  weakened  by  the  gaps  in  our
governance  framework.  In  this  context  it  is  not  surprising  that  claims  that  countries  would  be
better off outside the euro find a sympathetic audience.
The long run solution most likely involves deeper fiscal integration, and it is important that the
debate is moving forward in this area. But ambitions in the short run are relatively limited, and
actions are needed today to rebuild trust in EMU.
What  we  can  accomplish  now  is  to  complete  banking  union.  We  know  from  the  US  that  an
integrated banking sector is critical for stability and risk sharing in a well-functioning monetary
union. The progress made in building the SSM has moved us closer to this aim. But it is clear
that,  for  deep  cross-border  integration  to  develop,  effective  institutions  for  public  risk-sharing
need also to be in place.
Without such institutions, incentives will remain for national authorities to ring-fence capital and
liquidity within subsidiaries, and we will not achieve the cross-border integration and private risk-
sharing that are necessary for EMU to thrive.
This  is  why  completing  the  framework  for  bank  resolution  and  deposit  insurance  cannot  be
delayed any longer. This will lead to greater private risk-sharing and lessen the need for fiscal
risk-sharing.
Such decisive steps to strengthen the monetary union would come at an opportune moment for
Europe. This is because, even as Euroscepticism rises, the external case for working together
has rarely been stronger or more visible to the public.
It is now plain to see that the rules and norms which have governed international relations since
the Second World War are being challenged – replaced by a new power politics where large
economies try to impose their will on smaller ones. In such a world, it is undeniable that the EU
amplifies the sovereignty of its members.
In parallel, Brexit has served to underline the pros of membership and the cons of being outside.
It is now established that leaving the EU presents a trade-off: countries either have to follow the
rules  they  could  once  set;  or  they  have  accept  a  diminished  level  of  market  access,  and
ultimately lower welfare for their people.
This renewed visibility presents an opportunity for the EU to reconnect with the European public
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
and re-find its raison d’etre. In this spirit, with the EP elections approaching, those who believe in
Europe have two imperatives: to promote and defend the EU where it is working; and to fix it
quickly where it is not.
I hope this conference can help carry that debate forward.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
