Philip Lowe: Today's reduction in the cash rate
Speech  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of Australia,  at  the  Reserve  Bank
Board Dinner, Sydney, 4 June 2019.
 On behalf of the Reserve Bank Board, I would like to warmly welcome you to this community
dinner. Thank you for joining us this evening. We value this opportunity to hear firsthand from you
about the challenges and opportunities you face. I would also like to take advantage of the timing
of this dinner to explain today’s decision on interest rates.
As you would have heard already, earlier today the Reserve Bank Board decided to lower the
cash rate by a quarter of a percentage point to 1¼ per cent. This decision comes after more than
2½ years in which we have held the cash rate steady. The last change was back in August 2016.
At  its  core,  today’s  decision  was  taken  to  support  employment  growth  and  to  provide  greater
confidence that inflation will be consistent with the medium-term target.
I  want  to  emphasise  that  the  decision  is  not  in  response  to  a  deterioration  in  our  economic
outlook since the previous update was published in early May. The economic outlook remains
reasonable,  with  the  main  downside  risk  being  the  international  trade  disputes,  which  have
intensified  recently.  The  Australian  economy  is  still  expected  to  strengthen  later  this  year,
supported by the low level of interest rates, a pick-up in growth in household disposable income,
ongoing investment in infrastructure and a brighter outlook for the resources sector. So today’s
decision does not reflect a weaker outlook. Rather it reflects the fact that, even with the expected
pick-up in growth, the Australian economy is likely to have spare capacity for a while yet.
Today’s easing of monetary policy will help us make further inroads into that spare capacity. It will
assist  with  faster  progress  on  reducing  unemployment  and  will  help  achieve  more  assured
progress towards the inflation target. So that is our rationale.
I know that many of you are likely to have questions about today’s decision. I would like to take
this  opportunity  to  provide  answers  to  some  of  your  probable  questions.  I  am  also  happy  to
answer your other questions after my prepared remarks.
The four questions that I thought it would be useful to answer are the following:
1.  Why did the Board act today, after having held the cash rate steady for more than 2½ years?
2.  Are there more interest rate reductions to come?
3.  Should today’s reduction be fully passed through to mortgage rates? and
4.  What about the savers – has the Board forgotten about them?
First, why move now, after holding steady for so long?
The answer is the accumulation of evidence. As you would expect, the Board is constantly sifting
through masses of data and seeking to understand what are often conflicting signals about the
economy. As  we  have  gone  about  this  task  over  recent  times,  there  has  been  a  progressive
accumulation of evidence in support of two conclusions.
The first is that inflation pressures are subdued and they are likely to remain so.
And  the  second  and  related  conclusion  is  that  there  is  still  significant  spare  capacity  in  the
Australian labour market.
The most recent batch of data has provided further evidence in support of both conclusions. The
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
March  quarter  CPI  was  low  and  it  was  below  expectations,  as  was  the  previous  reading  on
inflation. In addition, the wage data for the March quarter confirmed that wages growth remains
subdued, although it has picked up from a year ago. And the recent labour market report also
confirmed that strong employment growth is not making material inroads into spare capacity in
the labour market. The Board judged that the accumulation of this further evidence meant that it
was now appropriate to adjust monetary policy.
Given  the  importance  of  these  two  conclusions,  I  would  like  to  elaborate  a  little  on  them  and
explore their implications.
The  subdued  inflation  pressures  reflect  a  number  of  factors.  These  include  slow  growth  in
wages,  increased  competition  in  retailing,  the  adjustment  in  the  housing  market  –  with  rents
increasing at the slowest pace in decades – and various government initiatives to reduce the
cost  of  living  pressures  on  households.  These  factors  are  all  putting  downward  pressure  on
prices and they are likely to remain with us for some time yet.
Collectively, these factors have contributed to delayed progress in returning inflation to the 2–
3 per cent target range. In underlying terms, inflation has now been below 2 per cent for three
years  and  the  latest  reading  was  1½  per  cent.  Looking  forward,  inflation  is  still  expected  to
increase, but it is unlikely to be comfortably within the 2–3 per cent range for some time yet. So
the progress on returning inflation to target is more gradual than we had hoped.
It is important to remember, though, that our inflation target is intentionally flexible and that the
Australian economy has benefited from this flexibility over the past 25 years. The Board is aiming
to ensure that Australia has an average inflation rate of between 2 and 3 per cent over time. The
focus is on the average and the medium term.
We  have  never  sought  to  have  inflation  always  between  2  and  3  per  cent.  The  RBA  adopted
flexible inflation targeting before other central banks, and this flexibility has served us well. It has
allowed the Board to set monetary policy so as best to achieve its broad objectives, with the
ultimate aim of contributing to the economic prosperity and welfare of the people of Australia. It
has also allowed the Board to look through temporary factors affecting inflation.
This flexibility, however, is not boundless. The point of our inflation target is to provide a strong
medium-term anchor that helps deliver low and stable inflation, which, in turn, is an important
precondition to sustainable growth in employment and incomes. If inflation stays too low for too
long, it is possible that inflation expectations move lower – that Australians come to expect sub-
2 per cent inflation on an ongoing basis. If this were to happen, it would be harder to achieve the
medium-term inflation goal. So we need to guard against this possibility.
Moving on to our conclusion about spare capacity in the labour market.
For  some  years,  most  estimates  of  full  employment,  including  our  own,  equated  to  an
unemployment rate of around 5 per cent – it was thought that if unemployment went below that
for too long, inflation would rise and become a problem. But, given the combination of the labour
market and inflation outcomes we have seen of late, our judgement now is that we can do better
than this – that we can sustain an unemployment rate of 4 point something.
It is also worth noting that the supply side of the labour market is turning out to be more flexible
than we had earlier expected. The recent evidence is that when jobs are there, more people join
the labour force and other Australians stay in work longer. Reflecting this, the participation rate is
currently  at  a  record  high,  despite  demographic  shifts  that  we  anticipated  would  reduce
participation. It is also the case that people are prepared to work extra hours when there is strong
demand for their labour. Together, these observations support the conclusion that there is still
spare  capacity  in  the  labour  market  and  this  is  likely  to  remain  the  case  for  a  while  yet.  The
recent data have given us more confidence in this assessment and we have responded to this.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Over  the  past  few  years,  one  concern  has  been  that  lower  interest  rates  could  add  to  the
medium-term risks facing the Australian economy as a result of high household debt. We need
to keep a close eye on this issue, but this concern has receded recently. Lending practices have
been tightened considerably and many lenders have become quite risk averse. The demand for
credit has also slowed due to the changed dynamics of the housing market and slower income
growth. So the risks on this front look to be less than they were previously.
This brings me to the second question: are interest rates going to be reduced further?
The answer here is that the Board has not yet made a decision, but it is not unreasonable to
expect a lower cash rate. Our latest set of forecasts were prepared on the assumption that the
cash  rate  would  follow  the  path  implied  by  market  pricing,  which  was  for  the  cash  rate  to  be
around  1  per  cent  by  the  end  of  the  year.  There  are,  of  course,  a  range  of  other  possible
scenarios and much will depend on how the evidence evolves, especially on the labour market.
If  you  accept  the  argument  that  a  sustainably  lower  rate  of  unemployment  in  Australia  is
achievable, the question that we should all be thinking about is: how do we get there?
It is possible that the current policy settings will be enough – that we just need to be patient. But it
is also possible that the current policy settings will leave us short. Given this, the possibility of
lower interest rates remains on the table. Monetary policy does have an important role to play and
we have the capacity to play that role if needed.
In  saying  that,  I  also  want  to  recognise  that  monetary  policy  is  not  the  only  option.  There  are
certain  downsides  from  relying  just  on  monetary  policy  and  there  are  limitations  on  what,
realistically, can be achieved. So, as a country, we should also be looking at other options to
reduce unemployment.
One option is for fiscal support, including through spending on infrastructure. This spending not
only adds to demand in the economy, but it also adds to the economy’s productive capacity. So it
works on both the demand and supply side.
Another  option  is  structural  policies  that  support  firms  expanding,  investing,  innovating  and
employing people.
All three options are worth thinking about.
From  my  perspective,  the  best  option  is  the  third  one  –  structural  policies  that  support  firms
expanding, investing, innovating and employing people. A strong dynamic business sector is the
best way of creating jobs. Structural policies not only help with job creation, but they can also
help drive the productivity growth that is the main source of improvement in our living standards.
So, as a country, it is important that we keep focused on this.
I will now change tack and move to the third question: should today’s reduction in the cash rate
be fully passed through to mortgage rates?
My usual practice in answering this question has been to explain that there are a range of other
factors that influence mortgage pricing, and then say ‘it all depends’. There are often reasonable
explanations for why the standard variable mortgage rate does not move in lock-step with the
cash rate.
Today, though, I would like to break with my usual practice and provide a clearer answer. And
that is: Yes, this reduction in the cash rate should be fully passed through to variable mortgage
rates.
This  answer  is  based  on  recent  reductions  in  bank  funding  costs.  Not  only  have  these  costs
declined as a result of the change in monetary policy, but they have also declined because of
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
movements  in  market-based  spreads.  Last  year,  these  spreads  increased  and  most  lenders
responded by increasing their standard variable rates by around 15 basis points. Over recent
months, these spreads have reversed all the increase that occurred last year and returned to
their 2017 levels. The result is that there has been a substantial reduction – at both the short end
and the long end – in the cost of banks raising funds in wholesale markets. Average rates on
retail deposits have also come down. This means that the lower cash rate should be fully passed
through  into  standard  variable  mortgage  rates.  Full  pass-through  would  also  mean  that  the
economy receives the full benefit of today’s policy decision.
That brings me to the final question: what about the savers, have we forgotten about them?
I know this question is on the minds of a lot of Australians, especially older Australians. I am
reminded of this daily as people write to me telling me how the already low deposit rates are
affecting  their  income.  I  am  expecting  to  receive  more  such  letters  and  emails  after  today’s
decision.
The  Board  had  a  thorough  discussion  of  this  issue  at  our  meeting  today.  We  recognise  that
many  Australians  have  saved  hard  and  rely  on  interest  from  term  deposits  to  support  their
income  and  spending.  Today’s  decision  will  reduce  their  income  from  this  source  and  we
understand why they would be disappointed with the outcome of today’s meeting.
At the same time as paying close attention to this issue, the Board considered what was best for
the  overall  economy.  Our  judgement  is  that  lower  interest  rates  will  help  the  economy  as  a
whole. At the moment, this benefit is likely to come mainly through two channels. The first is a
lower value of the exchange rate than otherwise would have been the case. The second is a
boost to the disposable income of the household sector. In aggregate, the household sector pays
around  two  dollars  in  interest  for  every  dollar  it  receives  in  interest  income.  So,  in  aggregate,
lower  interest  rates  reduce  the  net  interest  payments  of  the  household  sector  and  so  boost
overall disposable income.
In time, we would expect the lower exchange rate and the boost to disposable income to lead to
more jobs, lower unemployment and a stronger economy. This should benefit us all, although I
recognise that in the short run the effects are felt unevenly across the community.
It  is  partly  because  of  this  unevenness  that  I  want  to  repeat  a  point  I  made  in  answering  the
second question. And that is: the best approach to delivering lower unemployment and a stronger
economy  is  through  structural  policies  that  support  firms  expanding,  investing,  innovating  and
employing people. These policies can have distributional effects too, but the benefits are more
broadly based. So, as I said, as we ease monetary policy, it is in the country’s interest that other
policy options are considered too.
That brings me to the end of my four questions and answers. I hope that this has helped you
understand the Board’s thinking and why we took the decision today. I am happy to answer other
questions that you might have.
Thank you for listening and for joining us this evening.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
