B P Kanungo: Trade War - is it a prelude to deglobalisation?
Speech  by  Mr  B  P  Kanungo,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Forex
Association of India Conference, Singapore, 10 August 2019.
 1.  I  am  delighted  to  be  here  today  and  am  grateful  to  the  FAI  and  the  organisers  of  this
conference  for  inviting  me  to  speak  to  this  gathering.  I  am  also  happy  to  be  in  Singapore,  a
country which truly epitomises all that can be called achievements of globalisation, and a country
with which India had and continues to have multifaceted engagement covering cultural, ethnic
and economic spheres. FAI, a body of forex market professionals who intermediate between the
supply and demand for foreign currency and act as ‘price givers’ to the rest of the economy has
been active in promoting transparency, professionalism and ethical conduct in the forex market
since 1979. I commend them for the role they have played and hope that they will continue to do
so in future with utmost efficiency and fairness.
2. The forex market is unique in several ways. A foreign currency is essentially a commodity
outside its jurisdiction and therefore has attributes of an asset. But the exchange rate, the price
of  the  foreign  currency  normalised  to  the  home  currency  is  an  important  macroeconomic
variable  that  ought  to  be  determined  by  economic  fundamentals  and  influences  behaviour  of
economic  agents.  Principally  because  of  this  twin  nature,  the  exchange  rate  exhibits  great
volatility  and  decouples  from  its  value  indicated  by  the  economic  fundamentals  that  calls  for
policy response. I must add that the only thing next to extreme volatility that disorients a forex
trader is a situation of very low volatility!
3. It is ironical that amidst several disruptive factors, the volatility in the global foreign exchange
markets has been quite low in recent times. In fact, the JPMorgan Global FX volatility Index has
been at its lowest since 2014. Market participants have seen this as a lull before the storm and
have recounted past episodes when such a trough was followed by a sharp rise in the US Dollar.
Despite the 25-basis-point rate cut announced by the US Federal Reserve, the US Dollar rose
sharply,  probably  anticipating  more  accommodating  measures  in  the  future.  If  anything,  this
underscores uncertainty.
4. The global economic scenario is not very encouraging, though there is no room for pessimism
yet.  The  IMF  continues  to  revise  the  global  growth  projections  for  2019  downward  though  the
outlook for 2020 is more positive. The growth in the developed countries remains sluggish and
the emerging economies including China and India, the dominant contributors to global growth in
recent years, appear to be facing a challenge. Another era of accommodative monetary policy
regime seems to be round the corner as evident from synchronised rate cut by several Central
Banks.
5. Global trade tensions between the two largest economies are a dominant theme of discourse
today. As of now, there does not appear to be any possibility of quick resolution of the tension,
nor does it seem to escalate and get out of hand rapidly in near future. Whatever may be the
rational  and  economic  logic  behind  the  competitive  protectionism  through  tariff  barriers,  it  is
certainly contributing to the  global  economic  slowdown.  The  exit  of  Britain  from  the  European
Union,  the  so-called  Brexit  also  is  shrouded  in  uncertainty  and  it  is  recognised  that  a  no-deal
Brexit will surely be a disruptive factor. There are also risks emanating from geopolitical tensions
in the Gulf and elsewhere that can adversely affect the sentiments.
6.  Delicately  poised  as  the  global  economy  is  at  this  juncture,  much  of  which,  as  IMF  Chief
Economist Gita Gopinath says, is self-inflicted, it is entirely premature to think of deglobalisation.
Globalisation is an irreversible process and has been progressing for millennia. It has progressed
rapidly  beyond  expectation 
in
times  because  of  quantum  advancements 
recent 
in 
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
communication and technology. All aspects of human existence including economies, markets,
social  interactions,  education  and  so  on  have  become  intertwined.  True,  the  process  of
globalisation has brought problems  and  discontent  in  its  wake,  but  wisdom  lies  in  addressing
them rather than disbanding the process.
7. Free Trade has been one of the main planks of globalisation. It has been generally held that
free trade amongst nations enhances welfare. The underpinning logic is the same as that in case
of free market economics: specialisation, comparative advantage and productivity gains. Just as
in case of free market economics, there are factors that affect the gains from trade. Besides,
there has always been an asymmetric approach to free exports versus free imports. While every
country  favours  exports  (except  when  the  terms  of  trades  are  deteriorating)  because  it
contributes to domestic employment and growth, there is an abhorrence for imports because the
country loses employment, growth and foreign exchange. This brings in deterrent measures like
tariff and when one hears talk about optimum tariff, it simply means optimum for the welfare of
the  country  concerned  not  for  the  global  welfare  as  a  whole. And  if  all  the  trading  countries
impose retaliatory tariffs, it becomes a negative-sum game affecting global welfare and welfare
of individual nations to a varied extent.
8.  Ordinarily,  the  exchange  rate  is  supposed  to  play  some  kind  of  an  equilibrating  role  in
addressing the current account deficit, subject of course to several preconditions. A country with
trade surplus should experience appreciation of its currency making its exports more expensive
and  imports  cheaper  and  vice  versa  for  a  country  with  trade  deficit.  The  success  of  this
mechanism depends on to what extent the exchange rates are allowed to be determined by the
market forces without intervention of national authorities. It is not surprising that allegations of
currency manipulation were fairly common in the run up to the recent trade tension.
9.  The  increasing  globalisation  of  trade,  manufacturing,  services,  supply  chain,  capital
movement, etc. has created a web of complex interdependence. Moreover, the externalities of
national  economic  policies  have  also  become  substantially  magnified.  While  the  national
governments  and  policy  makers  are  supposed  to  act  in  interest  of  their  respective
constituencies, the collateral effect of their action on the rest of the world can be significant. The
need for coordinated action amongst the leaders of the larger nations is urgent. It must be borne
in mind that such coordinated action did contribute to contain the global financial crisis.
10. Speaking recently, Governor Das drew attention to the US Treasury’s monitoring of countries
as currency manipulators since 2015 in which India figured for some time till 2018. He further
pointed out that the charter of the IMF has elaborate provisions to bind its member countries not
to manipulate their currencies so as to gain unfair comparative advantage in trade and it is best
that the issues relating to any alleged currency manipulation are best dealt with in a multilateral
framework than bilateral attempts to correct a wrong. The same logic applies to trade in goods
and  services  and  other  areas  of  discord  as  well.  That  was  the  purpose  behind  the  erstwhile
GATT,  now  WTO.  The  current  trade  tensions  are  best  sorted  out  multilaterally  through
cooperation lest as Paul Krugman tweeted some time back, “In the long run the world would be
poorer and in the short run there would be immense disruption.”
11. The Indian forex markets have been fairly stable in recent months. As you know, the Reserve
Bank is mandated to maintain orderly conditions in the foreign exchange market. Its intervention
in the forex market is solely directed at curbing sudden turbulences not backed by the economic
fundamentals. As has been said repeatedly, market operations are not intended to achieve any
target exchange rate or band of rates. It must be pointed out that the exchange rate dynamics in
India  for  more  than  a  decade  has  been  driven  by  capital  flows  rather  than  current  account
balances. As an aside, India has mostly run a current account deficit, notwithstanding a bilateral
trade surplus with the US, marginally more than USD 20 billion during 2018. Though long-term
flows  related  to  FDI  and  long-term  debt  have  been  fairly  stable  keeping  in  tandem  with  the
economic  fundamentals,  the  portfolio  flows  have  their  own  dynamics  depending  as  much  on
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
attractiveness  of  returns  of  Indian  assets  as  the  global  factors  determining  their  risk  appetite.
Gyrations  in  the  forex  market  in  these  circumstances  leave  no  option  other  than  market
intervention to restore orderliness in the market. One also need to bear in mind that India’s forex
reserves are borrowed reserves and not built out of export surplus. Inasmuch as it provides a
bulwark against sudden flow reversals, it enhances the country’s ability to cope with the fall out
and indeed, contributes to global stability as well.
12. The policy regime is also oriented to providing adequate instruments of hedging to all resident
economic agents who have exposure to a foreign currency as well as all non-residents who have
a  Rupee  exposure.  The  onshore  markets  are  fairly  deep  and  liquid  but  needs  further
strengthening.  There  is  a  wide  menu  of  hedging  instruments  available  and  further  expansion
would be in keeping with understanding of their risk implication. In recent times, global institutions
and  investors  have  shown  a  healthy  appetite  for  Rupee  denominated  assets,  which  while
ensuring  flow  of  foreign  exchange  protects  the  Indian  issuers  from  exchange  risk.  This  trend
needs to be given further policy nudges.
13. In fine, I would like to say that though there are discouraging portents for the global economy
and uncertainties arising from trade tensions and geopolitical developments, I am optimistic that
coordinated policy response and dispute resolution within a multilateral framework will see us
through the day.
14.  I  will  also  take  this  opportunity  to  highlight  two  other  important  issues.  First,  the  issue  of
transparent  and  fair  pricing  of  foreign  exchange  transactions  which  has  been  brought  to  our
notice by various category of users. The problem of getting fair prices was especially acute for
MSMEs  and  small  businesses  who  were  not  allowed  to  access  the  FX  trading  platforms  of
individual banks. In order to address this issue, RBI decided to develop, through CCIL, a web-
based platform wherein such participants could place their purchase/sale orders directly. The
platform, is accessible to users from early August 2019 through an internet-based application,
allows bid/offers from retail clients and Authorised Dealer banks to be matched anonymously and
automatically,  thereby  allowing  complete  transparency  to  the  users  about  the  levels  of  their
trades. Banks will have to declare and recover their processing charges separately leading to
competition amongst banks for customer business. I urge banks to make the platform popular
among retail and small business houses/MSMEs.
15. Second, the Global Forex Code developed by the BIS as a common set of guidance for the
proper functioning of the FX market. It comprises a common set of principles (55 in total with 6
leading principles) aimed at restoring trust and allowing greater confidence in the forex market
and its functioning after various scandals (like LIBOR fixing scandal, etc.) eroded confidence in
the markets. The Code provides the corporate/intermediary with an opportunity to review/improve
its internal FX operations and align them to global standards. It provides a positive signal to its
clients, investors, counterparties and the wider market of the corporate’s commitment to follow
good practices while dealing in the FX market.
16. In India, all banks, barring one, and several non-bank participants have signed the Statement
of Commitment (SoC) to the Code. Though the adoption of the code is voluntary, I urge all the
non-bank participants present here to study the Code, examine their processes and, thereafter,
sign the SoC to the Global Code.
17. I wish your deliberations all success.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
