Peter Praet: Interview with Bloomberg TV
Interview with Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, and
Bloomberg TV, conducted by Ms Jana Randow on 27 March 2019 and broadcast on 28 March
2019.
 The President is talking about mitigating the side effect of  negative  rates.  Does  that
mean tiering is coming?
Praet: Well, I think don’t rush. I think it’s a bit premature to take that conclusion. What is clear
now is that the perspective of low rates for longer has triggered that debate about the side effects
of negative rates. I think it’s fair to say that this issue has to be analysed carefully. But you need
in any case to find a monetary policy case; you cannot just conclude let’s do the theory because
the economy is slowing down and the rates are low for longer. I think it’s fair to say that we have
to go into this issue but we need to have a convincing monetary policy case to do that.
Now, when you look at the economy today and the lending channel, we don’t see any particular
problem in the lending channel today. As we know with the weakening economy it may happen in
the future so you have to be ready and to look at the possible instruments or decisions you may
need to take in case. So readiness, yes, but I think don’t rush too quickly to conclusions but it’s
fair to say that the conversation has started.
If the conversation has started, does it mean that interest rates will stay low for even
longer?
Praet: I think it’s difficult to say today. When you look at prices, market prices, yes the date of the
first lift-off has been pushed further by market participants, so this debate on the tiering has been
coming. As I say, the perspective of rates for longer is something you have to look at, all the
consequences of that.
Does tiering make the tool of negative interest rates less effective?
Praet: The negative rates have been extremely useful to support the economy basically because
the opportunity costs of saving have been low. So you push people either to spend or to go into
more risk and supporting the economy, going into investment and all that. We have been big
effects  of  the  negative  rates  on  the  economy,  which  is  good  also  for  the  banks  themselves
because if their customers do better it’s also good for them. The question that comes today is
that with the slowing of the economy, because of international and geopolitical factors, you get
lower  growth,  then  you  get  also  the  negative  effect  of  the  rate  situation  on  the  intermediation
margin. That’s how the debate has been triggered. Now, on the economy you have to see how
the things will evolve.
Now, German Bunds are yielding negative; is that a red flag for the ECB?
Praet:  Well,  it  reflects  concerns  because  basically,  our  policy  –  our  communication  has  not
changed recently. We have this forward guidance which basically says that the rates are going to
stay at the present level until through the end of the year. But the recent increase of Bund prices
where the rates really fell to zero or even negative rates, reflects concerns in the market and
some flight to safety. So they reflect a concern about the economy in general, yes, so it’s an
indication of uncertainties in the market, yes.
Are you particularly concerned about Germany?
Praet: I am not particularly concerned about Germany. I think balance sheets in general of NFCs
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
– non-financial corporations – of households and of the state actually are in good shape. I think
this is a country that can absorb a number of shocks. Of course on the other side the German
economy is very much depending on manufacturing, as we know that manufacturing has been
really  hit  by  the  international  uncertainties  related  to  protectionism  and  also  the  slowdown  in
China and also the UK. One has to say that in the UK there has been a visible slowdown of
investments, so the investments have come to a halt. Germany of course is a big exporter of
investment  goods,  equipment  goods  and  Germany  has  been  hit  already  today  by  the  Brexit-
related uncertainties. So yes, I think the country is resilient. On the other hand, they’re exposed to
manufacturing.  I  think  they  can  go  through  but  it’s  of  course  a  more  delicate  phase  in  the
business cycle for them.
What about Italy?
Praet: Italy is another case. It’s a different case. Italy is weak since a long time so Italy has a
number  of  recessions  before.  They  had  I  would  say  three  recessions.  They  have  a  new
recession  now.  I  think  it’s  a  difficult  case  where  you  need  really  more  structural  reforms  of
course, but that’s a different sort of situation.
Talk to me about risks: there is China, there is trade, you mentioned Brexit. What is your
biggest concern?
Praet: Yes, well, the concerns in general are of political nature. I think the persistent character of
all  these  uncertainties,  and  you  listed  a  number  of  uncertainties,  are  weighing  on  economic
sentiment  and  business  sentiment  in  general.  So  you  can  say  it’s  only  for  the  persistence  of
these  uncertainties,  at  some  point  have  real  effects.  For  a  time,  businesses  continue  their
investment plans and it is business as usual but at some point it hits confidence and has real
effects. That worries me indeed. It’s about time that we reduced a little bit this political uncertainty
What can the ECB do to do that?
Praet: Well, there is so much that a central bank can do. We have a mandate which is price
stability so we use the instruments we think are the best suited to reach our objective but it’s only
limited.  If  you  get  fundamental  uncertainties  related  for  example  to  the  trade  regime  and  the
Brexit-related  problems,  the  central  bank  cannot  do  much  about  this.  It  also  needs  to  be
supported by other policies in general.
Do you have anything specific in mind?
Praet: Well, I think it’s time that this Brexit ends and I hope in a satisfactory and orderly way. That
would probably restore confidence quickly if you do it in an orderly way. It could be the other way,
but these things really sends very, very negative signals for everybody to say how is it possible to
have  so  much  uncertainty  lasting  so  long  about  that  issue.  That’s  one  example.  The  other
examples  in  the  trade  sphere,  it  would  be  of  course  very  good  for  confidence  if  the  trade
negotiations between US, China ended in a satisfactory way. Also we have uncertainties about
the trade regime Europe is having with US, so these uncertainties really dent confidence. They
have an impact on confidence and that’s the worry.
The ECB have been working on a lending programme and I want to talk to you about
timing.  The  announcement  of  the  programme  came  a  lot  sooner  than  many  people
expected. The start of the programme will be somewhat later than people expected. Why
is that?
Praet: Well, what we call the TLTRO, the funding for lending, is a very flexible instrument and
there are many parameters in that instrument. What we have decided in the Governing Council is
to disclose some of the parameters. First is the TLTRO is available; that means it’s basically a
funding instrument. So borrowers, banks will be able to borrow for two years up to two years.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
This is a funding side. It basically responds to the concerns that we have about congestion on
the bond market, linked to two cliff effects; one cliff effect will be in June of next year, the other,
March of the following year. That we have addressed.
The  other  issue  with  the  TLTRO  is  to  what  extent  do  you  want  to  use  it  as  an  instrument  to
support lending conditions? That’s the incentive scheme that you need to put in place. That’s
premature because you want to have more clarity about the evolution of the economy and the
lending part that supports the economy. For the time being now we don’t see anything special in
terms of lending, banking intermediation to non-financial corporations or for households. Things
are okay on that side. Of course the central bank pre-emptively has to look how the situation
potentially will evolve and with the weakening of the economic growth you must be ready to act
the instruments needed if you want to support lending. I would say in terms of pricing, for the
TLTRO you want to first make an assessment; what is the pricing that corresponds the best to
the problem you want to address? If it’s lower lending at that time, the pricing has to take that into
account. It’s a bit premature now so we’re going to decide in due time, as we say.
Can you translate due time? How much time do you have?
Praet: The first allotment will be in September of this year so you have to do it before. That will be
decided maybe, I don’t know, but maybe I will be gone. That means for the Governing Council of
June,  because  we  also  will  have  the  projections  at  that  time.  That  would  be  one  opportunity
before September, but this being said, the Governing Council can always decide to change the
incentive scheme of a programme. We did it in the past, given the evolution of the economy. We
can do it in the future. As I said it’s a very flexible instrument so you can do that, but it must be
adapted to the problem you want to address, which is a monetary policy issue that you have to
have in consideration.
You’ve talked to the banks about this tool in the past. Do you have any idea about take-
up? What’s your estimate?
Praet:  Well,  you  see,  the  TLTRO-II  is  extremely  advantageous  for  banks  because  they  can
borrow money at minus 40 basis points, so there is still a maturity of about one year. There is no
incentive  to  go  in  a  new  one  for  a  bank  that  could  borrow  at  minus  40  except  if  you  put  the
condition at minus 40, of course. But you see here, there is no need to rush for the banks. They
maybe use it as a funding instrument but in terms of supporting lending for the time being, it’s not
the primary purpose; it’s something we keep, we are aware of course of the slowdown of the
economy, of the downside risk that we flag so that instruments can be designed and calibrated in
a proper way when times come. That’s a little bit what we have now, so the fact that the take-up
for  the  September  is  far  away,  but  for  the  September  allotment  it’s  not  a  major  issue  there
because that’s more a funding device. The question will be how you price it and what are the
conditions of the pricing? That will depend on the assessment of the Governing Council about the
lending conditions in general.
Now, we’ve talked about the risks to the economy. You’ve talked about what you’ve done
so far and what’s in the pipeline. If the Eurozone was heading for a recession, if the
situation deteriorates significantly, what’s actually left for the ECB to do?
Praet: We don’t like to speak too much about the toolbox. There are many questions about the
toolbox  and  they  say,  oh,  what  is  this  mysterious  toolbox  and  all  that?  Once  you  start  talking
about something, you get a lot of speculative attitudes and speculation about what we do and
how far you are going to go. You just say the path we always control that when we need to do
something with our mandate, we find a way to do that. I think more realistically the situation which
is  more  in  probabilistic  terms  is  an  economy  that  will  not  recover  in  the  coming  quarters,
because that’s our scenario, and basically what you would see is an increase of credit spreads.
You would see some impairment in the lending conditions, the standards would tighten. Then the
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
appropriate  instruments  are  for  example  the  TLTRO  and  how  the  central  bank  can  influence
lending  conditions.  That’s  how  the  tiering  discussions  came  back  to  see  if  at  some  point  the
conditions evolved in such a way that you see some impairments in the lending part or on the
corporate bond markets. Then the central bank may wish to use some of these instruments.
That’s the context. Speculating about the big crisis, I think that’s something I don’t want to do.
Is QE still a possible tool?
Praet: Well, we say that all instruments are available, even new instruments are available; QE is
of course available as we say, but I think it’s needless. All the instruments are available as we
said, even new instruments are possible, but I think it’s not a time to speculate about this.
You are looking back to eight years at the ECB and I am just wondering, what was your
worst possible day on the job?
Praet:  I  don’t  have  a  worst  day  at  the  ECB,  really.  I  thought  about  these  things,  now  that  I’m
reaching the end. I had difficult days, that yes, sometimes because of the sovereign debt crisis. I
would say a worst day, you know what helps very much in difficult circumstances, and I must not
complain; it’s basically when you work in a group, in a team and it makes a whole difference. I
had it all my life; also in the banking crisis in Belgium, it was sometimes extremely stressful.
When you are in a team it changes totally the situation at least for me. I cannot speak about the
worst day.
If you really push me, the thing about the worst day, I would immediately say when there was
less unity. You see, these are the situations where the stress goes up; because you feel that the
team is disunited. Well, I don’t see that really as a worst day because the team was in general,
the team – that means the Governing Council – was very strong even for those having different
opinions. There was a sense of unity in general in the Council, believe it or not, but that’s how I
feel.
Now, your successor is already known; Philip Lane from Ireland. Any preference as to
who will replace Mario Draghi?
Praet: No, I have nothing to say on this. It was a fantastic cooperation with Mario, but that’s for the
others, that’s for the politicians to decide.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
