  Regional seminar of the International Financial Corporation and Bank Al-Maghrib 
on  
“Utilization of Public Credit Registry data for the Central Bank’s 
institutional functions”   
 Rabat, February 22, 2018 
 Opening remarks by Mr. Abdellatif Jouahri 
Governor of Bank Al-Maghrib 
  Excellency the Ambassador of Japan, 
IFC Country Manager for the Maghreb region, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It gives me great pleasure to welcome you today to the Bank Al-Maghrib training center in Rabat 
for  this  seminar  on  the  “Utilization  of  Public  Credit  Registry  data  for  the  Central  Bank’s 
institutional functions”.  
I  would  first  like  to  express  my  sincere  thanks  to  all  the  participants  and  speakers  for  having 
accepted  our  invitation,  and  more  particularly  to  the  IFC  representatives,  Mr.  Xavier  REILLE 
and Mr. Oscar MADEDU, and their team here for their valuable contribution to preparing this 
meeting. 
I would also like to give special thanks to His Excellency Ambassador Takuji HANATANI and 
through him the Japanese Government, which has made a vital contribution to developing credit 
information-sharing infrastructure in Morocco. 
  The relevance of this meeting lies in the sharing of experiences between the participating experts. 
The  seminar  panels,  scheduled  throughout  the  day,  will  set  the  stage  for  fruitful  discussions 
between: 
  central banks which are well advanced in terms of operating credit registries or which are 
starting to set them up, on the one hand; 
  and those which are preparing to meet the new challenges such registries impose in terms 
of micro and macro-prudential supervision and monetary policy, on the other hand. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
The  significant  importance  of  “credit  reporting”  is  widely  recognized  today,  particularly  in 
assessing borrowers’  credit risk, reducing loan  defaults and  expanding access to bank financing. 
Experience has shown that countries with credit bureaus have been able to address the problem 
of  “asymmetric  information”  and  substantially  improve  the  quality  of  credit  institutions’ 
portfolio. 
However,  the  recent  crisis  has  highlighted  the  limited  knowledge  of  counterparties’  real  health 
and revealed the pressing need for more granular, interconnected and flexible statistics. 
For  central  banks  and  supervisors,  this  need  is  creating  a  new  paradigm  for  monitoring  and 
evaluating financial stability, based on an integrated infrastructure of credit information sharing. 
This infrastructure is based on two core pillars: 
 the first is a “credit bureau” system that helps credit institutions to assess risks; and 
the  second  is  a  “central  credit  registry”  managed  by  central  banks  for  their  institutional 
functions. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Let me give you a brief overview of the steps that Bank Al-Maghrib has undertaken over the last 
ten  years  to  develop  its  financial  information  system  and  enhance  its  convergence  towards 
international standards. 
In close cooperation with the IFC, the Bank put into operation in 2009, under the first pillar, the 
1st Credit Bureau. This was a decisive step towards the establishment of a modern and state-of-
the-art credit reporting infrastructure. Indeed, the credit bureau has become an essential tool for 
lending decisions for individuals, businesses and micro-credit associations. 
Opening  up  the  market  to  competition  and  authorizing  a  second  credit  bureau  in  2016  was  a 
further  step  towards  improving  the  quality  of  services  provided  to  credit  institutions  and 
consumers.  The  range  of  products  offered  has  expanded  to  include  new  decision-aiding  tools, 
such as “behavior scoring”, “portfolio monitoring” and “alerting”. 
In close coordination with the Ministry of Economy and Finance, Bank Al-Maghrib is currently 
working  to  rapidly  develop  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  of  “credit  bureaus”  in  order  to 
expand  its  scope  to  other  nonfinancial  data  providers,  including  telecom  operators  and 
water/electricity suppliers. This will help the unbanked population to have access to financing, as 
demonstrated by the experience of pioneering countries in this area. 
 2 
  As  regards  the  implementation  of  the  second  pillar,  the  Bank  has  undertaken  since  2016,  in 
collaboration  with  the  IFC,  an  appraisal  of  the  existing  system  and  has  identified  the 
characteristics of the future credit registry.  
In this connection, today’s seminar is a real opportunity for us to learn about the experiences of 
forerunners in this field, with a view to finalizing our own roadmap. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Six regulators, well known for their optimal use of credit registries, will present to us today how 
they  use  credit  reporting  data  to  achieve  their  core  missions,  particularly  micro  and  macro 
prudential  regulation,  systemic  risk  control  and  monetary  policy,  and  strengthen  off-site 
supervision. 
These  topics  are  of  particular  importance  in  the  current  context  in  which  our  economies  are 
undergoing significant changes in the credit market as well as in the behavior of consumers and 
borrowers. Therefore, it is essential to upgrade financial infrastructures, which constitute a central 
element in the credit risk management system, in order to accompany these changes and help us 
to meet the challenges we face. 
Before  concluding,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  the  invaluable  opportunities  that  the  new 
information technologies can offer us in terms of  data sharing, collection and storage. But they 
also involve major challenges, particularly in terms of cyber security and personal data protection. 
I  wish  you  a  successful  and  fruitful  meeting,  and  hope  that  you  can  combine  business  with 
pleasure and allow yourself some time to discover the millennial richness of Rabat, this imperial 
city which was listed by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site on June 29, 2012. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 3 
