Michelle W Bowman: Introductory remarks - Fed Listens event
Introductory  remarks  by  Ms  Michelle  W  Bowman,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the
Federal Reserve System, at a Fed Listens event sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, 4 September 2019.
 In keeping with the purpose of Fed Listens, I would like to spend most of our time in conversation,
but I do want to offer a few thoughts about why the Fed is reaching out to seek a broad range of
views, and what we are trying to achieve.
This kind of comprehensive outreach on monetary policy is new for the Fed. For many decades,
there  was  a  sense  at  the  Board  that  the  public  wasn’t  interested  or  willing  to  dive  into  the
complexities of monetary policy. That view has changed in a fundamental way, especially in the
aftermath of the financial crisis when it was urgently important that the public understand what
we were doing. So we began explaining as accessibly and clearly as we could what we were
doing and why. Now we are listening broadly as well.
Since I became a Board member almost a year ago, it’s become clear to me that people not only
are willing to engage on complex economic issues, they also want to know that their concerns
are being taken into account on issues that affect their financial well-being.
The movement toward greater transparency and public engagement is ongoing, and advancing
that effort is one of my top priorities.
At  the  same  time,  we  recognize  that  clear  communication  of  our  policies  actually  helps  us
achieve  our  goals.  When  we  communicate  our  views  on  the  economic  outlook  and  our
expectations  for  where  interest  rates  may  be  heading,  consumers  and  businesses  take  that
information into account when making decisions on spending, investment, and hiring. For that
reason,  our  policy  communications  are  themselves  an  important  part  of  the  Fed’s  toolkit  for
influencing the direction of the economy.
Fed Listens is a natural outcome of this commitment to public engagement. We want to hear
from people, from different parts of the country and different sectors of the economy, about how
monetary policy affects them and their communities. It is our responsibility as a public institution
to be accountable to the public. And, hearing a broad range of perspectives on these issues will
help us make good decisions as we consider new approaches to monetary policy.
This  afternoon,  individual  stakeholders  representing  different  economic  sectors  will  meet  to
discuss their perspectives. Later, President Bullard and I will do what we came here to do, which
is  listen.  I  come  from  a  background  in  farming  and  ranching,  so,  naturally,  I  am  interested  in
hearing the St. Louis Fed’s Agriculture Industry Council’s priorities for the monetary policy review.
And  as  a  former  community  banker,  I  am  of  course  interested  in  what  your  Community
Depository Institution Council has to share with us today.
But I am also eager for other perspectives, and I look forward to all of the presentations. I want to
know, for example, how monetary policy affects rural communities, like the one I come from in
Kansas, but I also want to know how it affects urban communities. Our monetary policy review
will have implications for financial markets, but we also want to know more about what the effect
will  be  on  Main  Street—which,  by  the  way,  happens  to  be  the  name  of  the  street  where  my
family’s bank is located, in Council Grove, Kansas. My colleagues and I are keenly aware of our
responsibility  to  focus  on  how  the  decisions  we  make  affect  the  real  economy  for  people  in
communities all across the country.
And we will continue these listening sessions for the rest of this year as we consider possible
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
changes  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  approach  to  monetary  policy.  The  two  goals  for  monetary
policy—maximum employment and stable prices—are determined by the Congress and are not
subject to our review. How we reach those goals is what is up for discussion. One question I
hope to explore is whether we need new strategies to more effectively achieve our goals. For
many  years,  inflation  has  run  modestly  below  our  2  percent  objective.  Given  that,  it  would  be
helpful to hear from you whether you think the Federal Open Market Committee should consider
strategies that aim to have inflation exceed our target for a time, to make up for the earlier period
of  time  when  it  fell  short.  Or  would  that  threaten  the  decades  of  success  the  Fed  has  had
keeping the public’s expectations for inflation low and stable?
A related question concerns the Fed’s existing toolkit for monetary policy. Currently, our policy
levers include setting interest rates, adjusting the size and composition of our balance sheet, and
communicating the expected future path of policy. Are there other tools we should consider to
help us reach and sustain our objectives more effectively? I also want to know how the Federal
Open  Market  Committee’s  communication  of  its  policy  framework  to  the  public  might  be
improved. How can we help you better understand our work so you can hold us accountable?
Your perspectives on questions like these are a vital part of this monetary policy review, so I want
to thank you, again, for your time and your contribution. Once the policy review is complete, we
will share our findings with the public, probably during the first half of next year. And now I look
forward to our discussion.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
