              GROUND BREAKING CEREMONY OF THE NEW                                                                                      
BARCLAYS BANK ZAMBIA PLC  HEAD OFFICE  
  SPEECH BY  
 DR. DENNY H. KALYALYA 
GOVERNOR – BANK OF ZAMBIA 
   THURSDAY, JUNE 6, 2019 
LUSAKA, ZAMBIA  
  GROUND BREAKING CEREMONY OF THE NEW BARCLAYS BANK ZAMBIA PLC HEAD OFFICE FUNDED BY THE 
ABSA GROUP LIMITED, SPEECH BY DR. DENNY H. KALYALYA, GOVERNOR – BANK OF ZAMBIA – 6 JUNE 2019 
 The Absa Group CEO, Mr Rene van Wyk; 
The Director, Bank Supervision Department, BoZ, Ms. Gladys Mposha; 
The Director, Economics Department, BoZ, Dr. Francis Chipimo; 
The Deputy Group CEO and CEO Absa Regional Operations, Mr Peter Matlare; 
Deputy CEO, Absa Regional Operations & Chief Operating Officer Absa CIB, Mr Temi Ofong; 
The Barclays Bank Zambia Board Chairperson, Ms Chishala Kateka; 
The Barclays Bank Zambia Managing Director, Mrs Mizinga Melu; 
Executives from Absa Group; 
Representatives from Sunshare; 
Staff from BoZ; 
Management and Staff of Barclays Bank Zambia Plc;  
Distinguished Invited Guests; and 
Members of the press. 
It is my great pleasure to officiate at this ground-breaking event of Barclays Bank Zambia Plc New Head office.  
 Distinguished  Guests,  the  construction  of  the  new  Head  office  for  Barclays  Bank  Zambia  Plc,  which  will  be           
rebranded as Absa Bank Zambia from next year, is a demonstration of the efforts and commitment by Absa Group 
Limited  to  become  a  Pan-African  organisation,  that  is  interested  in  the  sustainable  development  of  the  financial   
sector and the economies of the countries they operate in.   
 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  this  event,  also  marks  a  new  chapter  for  one  of  Zambia ’s  oldest  banks.  Barclays  Bank 
Zambia has been in the country for over a century having opened its first branch in June 1918. Today, the bank has a 
widespread presence across the country with 41 branches, 103 ATMs, and   other digital service delivery channels. 
It employs in excess of 800 staff.   
 Distinguished  Guests,  Barclays  Bank  Zambia  is  one  of  the  biggest  banks  in  the  Zambian  banking                        
industry and plays a significant role in the market through the various products and services as just indicated.  
  It is our expectation that Absa Group Limited, the parent company of Barclays Bank Zambia Plc, will continue to 
build on the foundation and heritage that has been established over the last century. The bank is expected to remain 
a committed partner in driving financial sector development and supporting the country’s economic development.  
 Distinguished  Guests,  with  the  risks  to  economic  growth  projected  to  remain  elevated,  allow  me,  to  take  this           
opportunity, to urge Barclays Bank Zambia and Absa Group Limited to explore ways in which the bank can  assist in 
addressing  some  of  the  challenges  facing  the  country,  such  as,  load  shedding,  as  this  has  potential  to  further            
negatively impact the country’s economic growth. It is our expectation that Barclays Bank Zambia will come up with 
products and services that will contribute to the enhancement of alternative energy sources to mitigate the threat 
on economic growth and indeed financial stability arising from load shedding.   
 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  also  our  expectation  that  the  bank  will  continue  to  support  the  SME  sector  in           
Zambia, as the SME sector is key to sustainable economic growth and development of the country. You will agree 
with me that SMEs have the potential to create many productive jobs and contribute significantly to our economy, if 
well supported. 
 It is our expectation that Absa Group Limited, through Barclays Zambia, will continue with its efforts and strategies 
that  promote  financial  system  stability,  support  monetary  policy,  enhance  financial  inclusion  and  gender                    
mainstreaming for sustainable development in line with the Bank of Zambia’s strategic objectives. 
 Today,  as  we  commission  this  site,  it  is  my  hope  that  the  facility  will  be  of  highest  standards  and  that  the  new              
premises  will  provide  an  environment  for  the  provision  of  innovative  financial  solutions  to  the  public  as  an                    
endorsement of the Absa Group brand promise “Bringing Possibilities to Life.” 
 Master  of  Ceremonies,  distinguished  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  with  these  remarks,  please  join  me  in                      
applauding the Board, management, and staff of Barclays Bank Zambia, and Absa Group Limited, for this   initiative 
that  will  introduce  convenience  and  world  class  banking  services  and  facilities  to  its  clientele.  The  timing  of  this 
project is   also a good indication that the Absa Group is opportunity focused rather than  challenges. We hope this 
will rub on to the other players in our economy as well. 
 Thank you and God bless. 
