   9TH ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING OF GHANA ASSOCIATION OF SAVINGS 
AND LOANS COMPANIES 
   ADDRESS BY 
MRS. ELSIE ADDO AWAZDI   
SECOND DEPUTY GOVERNOR 
BANK OF GHANA 
    THE COCONUT GROOVE REGENCY HOTEL, RIDGE, ACCRA 
JUNE 20, 2019  
  Mr. Chairman,  
 Executives  of  the  Ghana  Association  of  Savings  and  Loans  Companies 
(GHASALC),  
CEOs/Managing  Directors  of  Member  Institutions,  and  other  financial 
institutions, 
Executives of other industry associations, 
Invited Guests,  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 1. Good Morning and thank you for the opportunity to join you at this 9th Annual 
General  Meeting  of  the  GHASALC.  Almost  a  decade  after  its  establishment, 
this  Association  has  become  a  recognised  voice  for  its  member  institutions, 
and  we  at  the  Bank  of  Ghana  always  welcome  the  opportunity  to  dialogue 
with GHASALC and its membership.    
 2. The chosen theme “Business Sustainability: A Shared responsibility” could not 
be  more  appropriate  in  the  times  we  are  in.  Sustainability  of  businesses  is 
critical,  if  we  are  going  to  achieve  the  socio-economic  growth  we  need  to 
move this country forward. Savings and loans companies, like other  deposit-
taking institutions, exist to intermediate savings in order that businesses and 
other economic actors can obtain access to much-needed funds to meet their 
legitimate needs. Savings and loans companies are therefore a major enabler 
 1 
of  sustainable businesses  and  must  understand  how  this  role,  if  well  played, 
 can  provide  a  boost  for  overall  socio-economic  growth  and  development. 
What  is  more,  I  need  not  remind  you  that  savings  and  loans  companies  are 
themselves businesses and must therefore be sustainable in order to be able 
to support their customers and the entire economy. As a nation, the future of 
our  economy  and  the  wellbeing  of  our  people  depends  to  a  large  extent  on 
the safety and soundness of individual financial institutions, and by extension, 
the  sustainability  of  the  whole  sector.  It  is  therefore  imperative  that  we 
stakeholders work together towards building strong and sustainable  financial 
institutions for our common good as a people.         
 3. We  have  unfortunately  seen  the  recent  demise  of  a  number  of  banks  and 
microfinance institutions, owing to weak capitalisation, unsustainable business 
models,  poor  corporate  governance,  poor  compliance  with  regulatory 
requirements,  default  on  contractual  obligations,  among  others,  that 
ultimately  led  to  their  insolvency  and  eventual  collapse.  Let  me  be  clear  that 
businesses  fail  for  all  kinds  of  reasons,  but  the  weaknesses  I  have  outlined 
above  undoubtedly  leave  any  business  vulnerable  and  unable  to  withstand 
shocks,  making  collapse  inevitable.  Indeed,  several  corporate  failures  around 
the  world  have  been  associated  with  weak  compliance.  Examples  of  failed 
businesses, such as the Medici Bank that collapsed in Italy in 1494, the failure 
of  over  a  thousand  savings  and  loans  companies  in  the  United  States  in  the 
1980s and 1990s, the failure of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International 
 2 
in 1991, Barings Bank in 1995, and more recent banking failures in the U.S, the 
 EU,  and  Nigeria,  were  all  associated  with  poor  corporate  governance  and  a 
culture  of  weak  regulatory  compliance.  For  financial  institutions  especially, 
trust and confidence are critical and once lost, business sustainability becomes 
difficult. As the saying goes, trust comes on foot but bolts on horseback.  
 4. The focus of this AGM on building sustainable businesses, is therefore timely. 
Now is a good time to assess the current state of the Savings and Loans (S & 
L)  subsector,  with  the  view  to  building  sustainable  business  models  to  the 
benefit of all stakeholders and the broader economy.  
 5. Ladies and Gentlemen,  as I said earlier,  financial  intermediation is central  to 
economic growth and poverty alleviation. This intermediation role is played by 
both  the  banking  sector  and  other  savings  and  deposit  taking  institutions  in 
the  economy.  Within  our  financial  sector,  S  &  L companies  and other lower-
tier  financial  services  companies  are  expected  to  provide  financial  access  to 
the  rather  large  informal  sector  which  is  mostly  characterized  by  the 
unbanked and underserved population. Financial access to this segment of the 
society not only helps in improving livelihoods, but also contributes positively 
to the sustainable development of the country.  
 6. Within the Ghanaian context, therefore, the potential role of S&Ls in financial 
intermediation  cannot  be  overemphasized.  It  is  however  important  to  note 
that  intermediation  thrives  on  trust  and  confidence  in  the  financial  system. 
The security of funds entrusted to all financial institutions demands that they 
 3 
are  governed  and  managed  in a sound  and prudent  manner  to preserve  the 
 confidence of depositors and investors. This also implies that all deposit taking 
institutions  must  adhere  to  good  corporate  governance  practices  and  build 
strong  risk  management  systems  to  safeguard  the  stability  of  the  financial 
sector.  
 7. Mr. Chairman, Ghana’s Savings and Loans sub-sector is made up of some 39 
companies  as  at  the  end  of  March  2019,  and  dominates  the  Specialised 
Deposit-Taking  Institutions (SDI)  sector,  accounting  for  44.6  percent of total 
SDI  assets.  In  March  2019,  total  assets  of  the  sector  increased  to 
GH¢7,977.63 million, up from GH¢6,548.63 million a year earlier.  
 8. Mr.  Chairman,  despite  the  growth  in  total  assets,  some  S  &  L  companies 
continue to be faced with poor asset quality, solvency and liquidity challenges. 
Indeed, as regulators, we have observed some worrying trends which require 
the  attention  of  all  stakeholders.  In  addition  to  liquidity and  solvency  issues, 
several financial soundness indicators of the industry have adversely deviated 
from  accepted  statutory  and  prudential  benchmarks.  These  outcomes  are 
primarily  due  to  the  business  models  adopted  by  some  (not  all)  S&Ls,  by 
essentially  attracting  term-deposit  funding  at  unsustainably-high  costs  and 
deploying  such  funding  into  risky  assets  without  adequate  risk  management 
systems  to  manage  and  monitor  the  inherent  risk  exposures.  Poor  credit 
underwriting practices, poor loan recoveries, insider dealings and related party 
transactions,  weak  governance  and  concentration  in  ownership  structures 
 4 
among  others,  have  all  contributed  to  the  capital  illiquidity  and  solvency 
 challenges in the S&L sector.  
 9. What  is  more,  some  institutions  within  the  S&L  sub-sector  shifted  from 
financing  the  lower-tier  retail  end  of  the  market  towards  financing  the 
wholesale end, or simply placing funds with other S&Ls. These practices have 
increased  concentration  risks  in  the  sector,  which  impact  negatively  on 
financial stability.  
 10.  Given  these  challenges  in  the  sector,  I  must  commend  the  GHASALC  for 
spearheading  efforts  to  re-evaluate  and  realign  the  business  models  of  its 
member institutions, at this Annual General Meeting. This will help improve to 
reposition the sector and regain the trust and confidence of the public.   
 11.  I urge the Executives of this Association to continue to lead the process of 
reengineering  this  sector,  and  in  so  doing,  to  help  to  refocus  the  business 
models  of  its  members  towards  realigning  themselves  with  the  policy 
objective  of  financial  inclusion  for  which  savings  and  loans  licences  were 
issued. I would also urge you to collectively work towards finding the balance 
between  profit-making  and  protection  of  depositor  funds,  underpinned  by 
strong  corporate  governance,  prudent  business  practices,  and  high  ethical 
standards. Investments in appropriate technology and good human resources 
are  also  critical  to  helping  the  sector  reposition  itself  to  drive  financial 
inclusion,  improve  efficiency  and  lower  transaction  costs  for  S&Ls  and  their 
customers.  
 5 
  12.  Ladies and Gentlemen, it is only such steps are taken that we can expect 
to see a sustainable savings and loans sector, as well as a sustainable private 
sector  supported  poised  to  be  the  engine  of  Ghana’s  socio-economic  growth 
and development. 
 13.  Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, making the Savings and Loans sector 
sustainable is indeed a shared responsibility and we must all work to improve 
the sector’s performance within Ghana’s financial structure. As your regulator, 
the Bank of Ghana remains committed to ensuring that S & L companies are 
safe and sound, and that together the sector as a whole is resilient and does 
not pose risks for the wider financial system. We count on the support of the 
Association as we take steps in this direction and we will continue to dialogue 
with the Association to explore how this sector is repositioned going forward.     
 14.  On  this  note,  let  me  thank  you  all  once  again  for  the  invitation  and  wish 
you fruitful deliberations at the Annual General Meeting.  
 15.  Thank you for your kind attention.  
 6 
