  Principled agents: Reflections on central bank independence 
Lesetja Kganyago, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank 
19th annual Stavros Niarchos Foundation lecture 
Peterson Institute for International Economics, 15 April 2019 
  
I am honoured to be here, but I am not sure if I should be happy. The 
Stavros Niarchos lectures tackle major world problems. In 2016, David 
Lipton discussed the backlash against globalisation. In 2017, Mervyn King 
explored  global  macroeconomic 
imbalances.  Last  year,  Tharman 
Shanmugaratnam  looked  at  wage  stagnation  and  the  decline  of  social 
mobility.  This  year  I  have  been  invited  to  discuss  central  bank 
independence. 
 
There’s a pattern here. Central banks must be in trouble. 
 
Looking around the world, there are signs of this trouble in many places – 
including advanced economies, where institutional stability can no longer 
be taken for granted. You will all be able to think of examples. The Bank 
of England has been criticised for warning about the costs of Brexit, which 
just shows that giving good advice in a polarised political environment is 
no way to make friends. As for the United States, everyone likes telling 
the Fed what to do, and as we have seen this urge is not confined to those 
without authority. Elsewhere, a conflict over the central bank’s reserves 
has  led  to  a  Governors’  resigning.  And  of  course  in  South  Africa,  the 
 1 
independence of the Reserve Bank has also come under threat in recent 
years, which must be why you think I’m the person to discuss this subject. 
 
Tonight,  I  will  briefly  review  the  textbook  case  for  central  bank 
independence,  which  centres  on  the  well-known  time-inconsistency 
problem. It is an elegant analysis, but it only covers a narrow part of central 
banking.  In  particular,  it  does  not  apply  very  well  to  financial  sector 
mandates, such as financial stability or banking regulation, which are core 
duties for many central banks. I want to argue however that the case for 
central  bank  independence  goes  further.  The  issue  is  actually  another 
classic economic concept: the principal-agent problem. How can societies 
get their leaders to look after the public interest instead of their own short 
term  political  interests?  This  is  one  of  the  fundamental  difficulties  of 
government. In my experience, it has also been the main reason the South 
African Reserve Bank has needed its independence.  
 
Independence allowed us to deliver on our mandate, as set down in the 
constitution.  Independence  ensured  that  the  tremendous  powers  of  a 
central bank – such as printing money, or licensing and supervising banks 
– couldn’t be taken over by politically connected individuals bent on looting 
the  state  instead  of  serving  the  citizens.  I’m  not  sure  exactly  how  this 
should be modelled – how we could prove the point in a large empirical 
study, and get a peer-reviewed article out of it – but it has been my lived 
experience for some years now. There is a saying: there are no atheists 
in foxholes. We’ve been on the frontlines lately, the place where good and 
bad governance meet, and I promise you – in that situation, you really 
learn to believe in central bank independence.      
 
 2 
Let’s  start  with  the  textbook.  Kydland  and  Prescott  showed  that 
governments  suffer  from  a  time  inconsistency  problem.  They’d  like  to 
promise low inflation in future, but when the future shows up, they discover 
it’s easier to tolerate higher inflation instead. As a result, lenders, firms 
and  workers  start  to  anticipate  tighter  inflation,  and  everyone  ends  up 
living in a world they would not choose, with a built-in bias towards higher 
inflation  and  higher  interest  rates.  The  solution  to  the  problem  is  an 
independent central bank, with a clear mandate to control inflation. With 
this mandate in place, governments do not have to pay higher inflation 
risk premia on their debt, and society as a whole gets to enjoy a lower 
level  of  inflation.  This  is  why  central  bank  independence  has  been 
described as a free lunch.[1] 
 
But  this  time-consistency  argument  does  not  cover  the  whole  case  for 
independence.  In  particular,  it  says  nothing  about  financial  stability 
mandate nor about narrower bank supervision duties, which occupy a lot 
of central bank staff. 
 
One response to this is to concede that these things are not like price 
stability and do not require independence. By this logic, monetary policy 
should  have  its  own  safe  space,  but  not  other  mandates.   As  Ben 
Bernanke has argued, for instance, and I quote: 
 
…there should be no ‘spillover’ from monetary policy independence 
to independence in other spheres of activity. In practice, the Federal 
Reserve  engages  cooperatively  with  other  agencies  of  the  U.S. 
government  on  a  wide  range  of  financial  and  supervisory  issues 
without compromising the independence of monetary policy.[2] 
 
 3 
threats 
Unfortunately, it is not always and everywhere the case that the two can 
be  combined  so  harmoniously.  Serious 
to  central  bank 
independence are possible, even when the sanctity of monetary policy is 
intact. 
 
For a telling example of the problem, consider Cyprus.[3]  As a member of 
the euro area, Cyprus does not have an independent monetary policy. It 
has a large banking sector, however – and when this sector fell into crisis, 
in 2013, that also generated a serious threat to the independence of this 
central bank. 
 
Cyprus’s banking crisis was the result of falling asset prices, particularly 
for Greek government bonds.  The banks bought these in 2009 and 2010, 
and  incurred  haircuts as  part  of  Greece’s  2011  debt  restructuring.  The 
result  was  banks  that  were  probably  insolvent,  but  which  were  also 
simultaneously too big to fail  and too big to bail. Tackling this problem 
required  several  desperate  measures,  including  emergency  liquidity 
assistance from the European Central Bank (ECB), strict capital controls, 
a two-week shutdown of the entire banking system, and even bail-ins for 
bank bondholders and uninsured depositors.[4] 
 
The politics of this were predictably toxic, especially in a small country 
where many people depended on the banks for their wealth and status. 
The  central  bank  got  the  job  of  administering  much  of  the  crisis 
management and resolution process, not least because it had the trust of 
international  lenders.  Perhaps  inevitably,  it  then  became  a  scapegoat, 
with critics questioning its motives and patriotism.[5]   
 
 4 
Although the independence of the central bank was secured by EU treaty, 
and the position of the Governor was protected, the Bank’s independence 
was compromised anyway. It achieved this by expanding the Board of the 
Central Bank of Cyprus (CBC) and giving it more power. The Board then 
switched reporting lines away from the Governor to its own members, so 
bank  staff  ended  up  answering  to  the  Board  instead.  The  European 
Central Bank issued a legal opinion questioning these measures, but they 
were adopted anyway, and the European Commission did not take legal 
action  in  response.  Sidelined  and  under  constant,  personal  attack,  the 
Governor, Panicos Demetriades eventually resigned.[6] 
 
I  claim  no  great  expertise  about  Cyprus’s  economy,  and  there  are 
probably people in the audience who know many interesting details of that 
country’s  crisis  that  I  have  overlooked.    I  drew  this  account  from  the 
memoirs  of  the  former  Governor.  The  point  I  want  to  make  is  that  the 
independence  of  a  central  bank  can  be  gravely  compromised  without 
monetary  policy  coming  into  dispute.  Indeed,  even  without  that  central 
bank  issuing  its  own  sovereign  currency  or  having  much  control  over 
monetary policy – which of course was being set in Frankfurt. 
 
One  answer  to  this  problem  is  to  say  that  independent  agencies  like 
central banks shouldn’t be controlling bank bailouts and resolutions. The 
distributional consequences are too large, the preferences of society are 
not clear or stable, and the scope for accountability and transparency is 
too limited.[7] The natural endpoint of this logic is that financial stability and 
bank supervision problems should stay in the political realm, with the line 
ministries  and  their  political  heads,  instead  of  being  delegated  to 
independent agencies. In this way, central banks can focus narrowly on 
 5 
monetary policy, and have independence for that, without wading into the 
mire of finance and perhaps being dragged down. 
 
But there are two problems with this argument for narrow central banking. 
First, not many central banks do narrow monetary policy. If the plan for 
safeguarding  central  bank  independence  is  to  hive  off  non-monetary 
mandates to other bodies, then we have lost our way. Most jurisdictions 
are adding new duties for central banks, not taking them away. 
 
This is related to the second problem: in a crisis, central banks find it hard 
to stay on the side-lines or escape blame. To borrow an anecdote, recall 
that in the UK it was the Financial Services Authority and not the Bank of 
England which was the lead regulatory agency for the financial sector – 
but when Northern Rock failed in 2007, it was Mervyn King whose picture 
ended  up  in  The  Economist  alongside  the  heading,  ‘The  bank  that 
failed’.[8] The FSA doesn’t exist anymore, and the Bank of England now 
has responsibility for financial stability. 
 
The lesson learned, one taken to heart in many places, was that central 
banks have unique powers as the lenders of last resort. No-one else can 
flood a banking system with liquidity like a central bank.  As a result, a 
promise to stop a bank run, or to do ‘whatever it takes’, has unique power 
coming  from  a  central  bank.  These  institutions  also  tend  to  have 
institutional  capital,  in  the  form  of  expertise,  access  to  international 
networks,  especially 
fellow  central  bankers,  and  reputations  as 
responsible  technocrats,  which  can  be  very  helpful  in  coordinating 
responses amongst diverse stakeholders. For these reasons, a central 
bank sitting at ground zero of a financial crisis will struggle to stick to a 
narrow monetary mandate. And this is even before we reflect that financial 
 6 
crises are also likely to prompt big misses of inflation targets, as happened 
in many advanced economies after the global financial crisis.  
 
The implication is that financial stability is also very important for achieving 
inflation targets. 
 
So central banks probably cannot steer clear of financial stability and bank 
regulation.  Yet  that  conclusion  doesn’t  make  the  space  any  safer  for 
independent central banks. I can testify to this from my own experience in 
South Africa.  
 
We are all used to thinking about attacks on central banks as demands to 
cut rates for political reasons. But I never once got a call or any other 
communication from the Union Buildings – the seat of the South African 
executive  –  telling  me  what  to  do  with  monetary  policy.  Similarly,  my 
toughest public engagements haven’t been about interest rates; they have 
been about the financial system. Twice a year we have monetary policy 
forums outside financial centres, but we barely talk about monetary policy. 
Instead,  we  get  questions  about  two  things.  One  is  a  sideshow  issue, 
which is the fact that the Reserve Bank has private shareholders. These 
shareholders don’t have any policy control, they get tiny dividends (about 
$14,000 per year collectively), and the private ownership isn’t the basis of 
our  independence.  Still,  it  sounds  strange  that  there  are  private 
shareholders, and people have questions, which we answer. The other 
thing we get asked about is the financial sector, especially issues around 
transformation,  financial  inclusion  and  development.  And  the  financial 
sector work is also where we have had the most difficult time, politically. 
 
 7 
Let  me  just  pause  a  moment  to  note  that  monetary  policy  has  had  its 
problems.  The  South  African  economy  has  experienced  a  prolonged 
slump, with negative per capita GDP growth since 2013. At the same time, 
we have had inflation mostly at or above the top end of our target range. 
We have had to raise interest rates in the midst of the downturn, to keep 
inflation  expectations  in  check  and  stave  off  worse  scenarios,  like  the 
crises that hit Turkey and Argentina last year. We are now getting inflation 
where we want it, in the middle of our target range, which is a rate we 
intend  to  maintain.  But  that  hasn’t  provoked  more  than  the  usual 
grumbling and op-eds – no major onslaughts. The attacks came for other 
reasons. I’ll describe three big ones. 
 
The first involved banking services for politically connected people. As has 
now been widely reported, some very senior figures in the South African 
government  developed  warm  relations  with  a  family  of  businessmen.[9] 
When it became clearer that a lot of that family’s money wasn’t clean, 
commercial banks became unwilling to handle their accounts, for fear of 
violating laws against facilitating money laundering. This made it nearly 
impossible  for  the  family  to  run  its  operations  and  sparked  a  political 
fightback.  We  started  feeling  pressure  to  force  banks  to  service  these 
accounts, in violation of the law.[10] In addition, we came under pressure 
to allow this family to obtain a banking license by buying a small bank. We 
even faced the threat of bank licensing being taken away from the SARB 
altogether.[11] We were using our independence to uphold a law against 
dirty money flows, and that made us enemies. 
 
The second problem was over a small mutual bank. This institution had 
spent  most  of  its  life  quietly  taking  deposits  from  retail  savers  and 
 8 
extending mostly mortgage loans. Frankly, we didn’t realise the full extent 
of what was going on until the very end.  
 
Starting in 2013, new management took over the bank and turned it into 
a  crude  Ponzi  scheme.  Their  innovation  was  bribing  public  officials  to 
deposit municipal funds at the mutual bank in exchange for ‘Christmas 
presents’.  They  then  simply  spent  these  deposits  on  themselves, 
accumulating fancy cars and a helicopter or two along the way.[12] When 
we noted the significant growth in the business, we started engaging the 
bank about converting to a commercial banking license.  Ultimately, we 
realised  something  was  wrong  when  they  failed  to  make  a  routine 
payment through the national payment system, and it turned out they had 
no money left. But they nearly got away with it for longer, because they 
almost received a huge deposit from a public sector rail operator, which 
would have kept the Ponzi scheme going. I should also note that one of 
the reasons we missed what was going on was that one of the people 
involved  in  the  looting  was  a  partner  at  a  Big-4  accounting  firm,  who 
signed  off  the  accounts.  We  accepted  audited  accounts  as  a  true 
reflection of the business.[13] 
 
When we put the mutual bank into curatorship, we came under attack from 
people who said we were targeting this business because it was a black-
owned  bank.  We  were  accused  of  undermining  black  excellence  and 
protecting the interests of white capitalists.[14] You know the saying that 
patriotism is the last refuge of scoundrels? Well, in South Africa, if you 
really need somewhere to hide, it’s not in patriotism but in race politics.[15] 
And these guys really needed a place to hide. They had just perpetrated 
a big bank robbery. Most troubling of all, they did it by stealing money sent 
by  government  for  service  delivery  to  some  of  South  Africa’s  poorest 
 9 
people  –  and that municipal  money  was  lost.  This did not stop  people 
saying we should save the bank because it served the poor, even though 
it was an insolvent, corrupted institution. 
 
The third problem was the strangest. In 2011 the Public Protector, South 
Africa’s ombudsman, decided to investigate a bank bailout the SARB did 
in 1985, for an institution called Bankorp, later taken over by ABSA, one 
of  our  big  banks.  There  was  talk  that  the  bank  had  received  money 
improperly, and it was argued that ABSA owed the government a refund. 
When this was investigated in the 1990s nothing came of it; the allegations 
were  found  to  be  baseless.  Nonetheless,  the  Public  Protector’s  office 
decided  to  reopen  the  matter,  and  in  June  2017,  the  Public  Protector 
issued a finding that ABSA had to pay back R1 billion (roughly US$70 
million).[16]  Then,  to  our  surprise,  the  finding  included  an  order  that 
parliament change the constitution, so that the Reserve Bank’s mandate 
stopped  being  to  ‘protect  the  value  of  the  currency  in  the  interest  of 
balanced and sustainable growth’. Instead, it should have a much more 
opaque duty to look after the socio-economic well-being of South Africans. 
 
You may be wondering how an ombuds office goes from investigating a 
thirty-year-old bank bailout to changing the Constitution. We all wondered. 
Ultimately the courts threw out both the findings.[17] Yet, although we were 
all surprised by the attack coming like that, we had not anticipated such a 
flagrant disregard of the law.  
 
This brings me back to the point I raised at the start of my speech. When 
I reflect on what the Reserve Bank was doing during this period, I cannot 
say it was all about maintaining a credible commitment to sound monetary 
policy.  The problem we were really addressing was the principal-agent 
 10 
problem. The people of South Africa were relying on their government to 
look  after  their  interests,  while  some  people  were  instead  using  public 
power to pilfer. The SARB made that more difficult, which is why the Bank 
was attacked. 
 
The terrifying thing we saw was how easy it is to flip between equilibria. 
There is one equilibrium where the rule of law is upheld and corruption is 
not  tolerated,  and  most  people  then  do  their  jobs  honestly.  And  then 
there’s  another  equilibrium  where  people  use  their  power  to  enrich 
themselves,  where  there  is  impunity,  and  where  everyone  has  the 
incentive to take what they can before there’s nothing left. Over the past 
10 years we moved from the first equilibrium towards the second, slowly 
at  first,  much  faster  towards  the  end.  Many  good  institutions  were 
weakened. 
 
It’s not a surprise to me that the institutions which survived best were the 
ones with independence, particularly the Reserve Bank and the judiciary. 
Independence is a powerful defence. Many times during my term we have 
reflected  with  gratitude  on  the  foresight  of  our  founding  mothers  and 
fathers,  who  saw  what  could  happen  in  the  future  and  gave  us  the 
constitutional tools to defend ourselves. 
 
The writers of our Constitution were students of history. They reflected 
especially closely on the African experience, where people had suffered 
so many disappointments in the decades after independence, perhaps the 
greatest  being  how  leaders  looted  and  impoverished  their  countries 
instead of governing them in the public interest. When our constitution was 
adopted the president was Nelson Mandela, and it would have been easy 
to take good leadership for granted. But good laws last longer than good 
 11 
leaders, and it was very helpful, twenty years down the line, to have the 
constitutional  protections,  the  checks  and  balances,  the  guarantees  of 
independence. 
 
This emphasis on how independent institutions can protect democracies 
from  bad  leadership  implies  a close connection  between  how  we think 
about central banks and how we think about judiciaries. I appreciate that 
central banks have narrower tasks than judiciaries, and aren’t peer organs 
of government. They are not the fourth branch. But the comparison still 
has some utility, in two ways. 
 
First,  the  example  of  judiciaries  is  relevant  because  they  too  need  to 
honour  democracy  while  exercising  unelected  power.  They  are  also 
confronted  with  the  challenge  from  elected  officials,  “I’m  elected  and 
you’re  not, so shut  up  and  listen  to me.” In  practice,  judiciaries  do  not 
resolve this tension through a policy of maximum deference. Rather, they 
typically  take  direction  from  the  rights  and  values  embodied  in  their 
countries’  foundational  laws,  and  they  confront  violations  of  these 
principles  when  they  see  them.  They  appreciate  that  there  is  more  to 
government than having 50% plus 1 vote.  
 
The lesson for central banks is, we can honour democracy without feeling 
obliged  to  define  it  in  strictly  majoritarian  terms,  in  which  only  directly 
elected 
that  
government  serves  the  interests  of  the  people.  It  does  not  consist  of 
elections only. One of the gravest threats facing any society is the ruler 
who is more powerful than anyone else and therefore cannot be stopped 
by anyone, even when he is acting against the interests of the principals, 
the people. Not all leaders are bad - I have met many good leaders, and 
legitimacy.  Democracy  ensures 
leaders  have  any 
 12 
insurance  against 
some  who  would  have  behaved  better  in  easier  circumstances.  But  a 
small portion of leaders are bad, and if you understand probability, then 
you know sooner or later most countries will get a bad leader. There is 
nothing  undemocratic  about  buying  some 
this 
eventuality,  and  independent  central  banks,  like  judiciaries,  are  useful 
parts of those insurance policies. 
 
Second,  like  judiciaries,  central  banks  tend  to  be  relatively  high-
performing institutions. There’s a famous book about judiciaries called, 
‘the least dangerous branch’.[18] The idea is that all parts of government 
can do terrible things, but the judiciary tends to do the least harm. I think 
central banks have a parallel claim. For a start, central banks generally 
maintain high standards of honesty and competence. Every now and then, 
when  there’s  a  story  about  corruption  in  a  central  bank,  people  are 
shocked. By contrast, when last was anyone surprised by a corruption 
story in a government procurement agency or a legislative office?  
 
Furthermore, central banks tend to be good at what they do, especially 
when their performances are compared with other parts of government. In 
emerging  markets,  inflation  is  at  long-term  lows.  Many  countries  have 
moved  beyond  the  problem  of  ‘original  sin’,  the  inability  of  emerging 
markets  to  borrow  long  term  in  local  currency,  in  large  part  because 
independent  central  banks  mean  the  local  money  can  now  be  trusted. 
Given how many financial crises have been caused by original sin, and 
how pervasive it was, this is important progress.  
 
In advanced economies, central banks can make an even grander claim 
- to have been ‘the only game in town’ in the years after the global financial 
crisis. This was not a position they desired, and it is not optimal from a 
 13 
policy perspective. But aren’t you glad there was a game? Central bankers 
did as much as anyone to avert another Great Depression. We are now 
worried  about  the  rise  of  populism  and  reinvigorated  nationalisms,  but 
imagine how much worse this would have been with a debt-deflation spiral 
and double-digit unemployment.  
 
This  record  tells  us  the  case  for  independent  central  banks  is  not  just 
theoretical. We have tried these institutions in many countries, and the 
experiments have generally succeeded. If anyone looks at this history and 
concludes independent central banks should be abolished, well, we might 
ask, what parts of government deserve to survive?  
 
Of course, it’s not enough to say we have a record of success and now 
we  must  be  left  alone.  The  principal-agent  problem  applies  to  central 
banks too – if there are no accountability mechanisms, what is to stop 
central bankers privileging their own interests over those of society? Part 
of the solution to this so far has been cultural, in the sense that there is a 
community of central bankers with high standards and strong norms. This 
isn’t  a  hard  or  legal  guarantee,  but  as  with  many  professions,  it  is 
important  because  it  works  even  when  people  aren’t  watching.  Even 
better, however, is having nothing to hide. Modern central banks, unlike 
their forebears, actively embrace transparency and communication. We 
try to be clear about what we’re doing, why, and what evidence we rely 
upon for our decisions. This also promotes accountability, because it is 
easier  to  assess  success  or  failure.  These  values  –  transparency, 
accountability  –  have  served  us  well,  and  I  doubt  central  bank 
independence would be tenable without them.   
 
 14 
We will also need new ideas for tackling new challenges. To conclude, I’d 
like  to  address  two  broad  problems,  one  to  do  with  financial  stability 
mandates, and one affecting the price stability mandate. 
 
Regarding  financial  stability,  I  opened  this  lecture  with  a  problem. 
Financial  stability  is  probably  an  inescapable  responsibility  for  central 
banks, but it is a dangerous environment for an independent agency to 
operate  -  more  so  than  the  monetary  policy  space.  How  best  can  we 
navigate it? I have two suggestions.  
 
First, we usually frame the problem in this sphere as one of independent 
central banks taking decisions away from the duly elected authorities. But 
sometimes independence helps ensure decisions are made in full view of 
the public, by the appropriate authorities, instead of being shirked. Let me 
give you an example.  
 
In South Africa, one of the worst examples of state capture has been state 
owned  enterprises  which  pose  a  significant  fiscal  risk.  State-Owned 
Enterprises  (SOEs)  are  a  financial  stability  issue  and  should  not  the 
Reserve Bank be doing a bailout? 
 
Absolutely  not.  The  challenge  of  dealing  with  too-big-to-fail  SOEs,  of 
combining cash injections with conditionality measures, needs to be dealt 
with by the elected authorities – as it has been in the latest budget from 
National Treasury. The SARB’s power to say no was greatly enhanced by 
its independence. 
 
Second, sometimes central banks face a tough choice between - on the 
one  hand - stretching their  mandates and  raising  legitimacy  questions, 
 15 
and - on the other hand - staying in their safe spaces, but then risking bad 
economic outcomes. For instance, with Lehman Brothers, I understand 
there were legal problems, but I wish the Fed had found a way to prevent 
its bankruptcy. Similarly, I’m glad it was possible to give other investment 
banks access to Fed funds, and to prevent AIG from collapsing.   
 
Finding the right balance here is always going to be an art. Fortunately, 
we have some master-class performances to draw on for lessons in how 
it’s done.  
 
When ECB had to manage the euro crisis, it did with just a few words – 
doing whatever it takes. But the Council followed them with a major effort 
to  convince  political  leaders,  who  ultimately  backed  the  plan  in  public. 
They  also  worked  to  address  the  concerns  of  critics,  by  devising 
conditionality  measures  for  bond  purchases.  In  policy,  there  is  always 
trade-off between how decisively you act and how widely you consult. In 
a crisis, the trade-off becomes very difficult indeed, but it doesn’t have to 
be impossible. I think a useful term here is one we used a lot in South 
Africa during the transition to democracy: ‘sufficient consensus’. It meant, 
given the importance of moving forward, you can’t permit filibustering, but 
you  also  can’t  make  decisions  unilaterally,  and  ride  roughshod  over 
opponents.  The  ECB  team  did  a  masterful  job  of  achieving  sufficient 
consensus, and I think that’s what central banks should aim for in future 
financial crises.    
 
Finally,  on  monetary  stability,  for  once  I  am  concerned  about  too  little 
inflation. In emerging markets we still mostly worry about inflation being 
high, but some advanced economies keep on missing their targets from 
below. Frankly, it doesn’t seem to me so terrible to have price stability. 
 16 
That was the original goal with 2% inflation targets - the idea was to get 
an inflation rate households and firms wouldn’t notice. The problem with 
winning the war on inflation, however, is that the only price movements 
left tend to be temporary, from supply shocks. This makes it easy to forget 
the  responsibility  of  monetary  policy  for  inflation.  Indeed,  the  so-called 
Modern Monetary Theorists even think you can do away with independent 
central  banks  and  tackle  inflation  with  other  tools.  Well,  if  you  build  a 
maximum  security  jail  and  there  are  no  escapes,  does  that  prove  you 
didn’t need to build a jail? I think it proves you built it right.  
 
The  same  goes  for  inflation.  Price  stability  is  proof  of  the  success  of 
independent central banks, not an argument for their abolition. But I worry 
there’s a new generation coming of age in the advanced economies who 
have never experienced inflation, and won’t appreciate that subtlety.  
 
Ladies and gentlemen, in conclusion, central banks may be under attack, 
but  they  deserve  to  be  defended.  They  have  been  principled  agents, 
serving the interests of their citizens, mostly with more effectiveness than 
people  usually  get  from  their  governments.  There  are  any  number  of 
institutions needing reform in this world. It would be best if the energy of 
our critics, and our defenders, could be directed to those other causes 
instead. Meanwhile, for central bankers, we should always bear in mind 
that independence is not a birth-right, but something we need to get up 
every  day  and  earn.  Our  insulation  from  day-to-day  politics  creates  a 
special  responsibility  to  do  our  jobs  right,  and  to  be  transparent  and 
accountable so that our principals, the citizens, can see we are living up 
to this privilege.  
 
Thank you. 
 17 
  [1] Debelle, G. (1996) “Central bank independence: a free lunch?” IMF Working Paper 96/1; Alesina, 
A., & Summers, L. (1993). Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some 
Comparative Evidence. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 25 (2), 151-62. 
[2] https://www.bis.org/review/r100527a.pdf 
[3] This account draws on the memoir of the central bank governor for the period 2012-2014. See 
Panicos Demetriades (2017) Diary of the Euro Crisis in Cyprus 
[4] The initial bail-in arrangements included insured deposits, but these were exempted when it 
became clear breaking the insurance guarantee would be a major error, not least because of the 
spillover risks. The deposit guarantee threshold was €100,000. 
[5] For details, see Demetriades, Ibid., especially chapter 15, ‘Toxic Fallout’  
[6] “A blow against independence” The Economist, 10 March 2014. Available at: 
https://www.economist.com/free-exchange/2014/03/10/a-blow-against-independence 
[7] This discussion draws on Paul Tucker (2018) Unelected Power, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton 
University Press 
[8] “The bank that failed” The Economist, 20 September 2007. Available at: 
https://www.economist.com/leaders/2007/09/20/the-bank-that-failed 
[1] Kevin Granville (2017, June) “A president at war with his Fed chief, 5 decades before Trump” New 
York Times, Available at: https://www.nytimes.com/2017/06/13/business/economy/a-president-at-
war-with-his-fed-chief-5-decades-before-trump.html 
[2] Burton A Abrams (2006) “How Richard Nixon pressured Arthur Burns: Evidence from the Nixon 
tapes” Journal of Economic Perspectives (20:4) Available at: 
https://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/jep.20.4.177  
[9] For an overview, see Norimitsu Onishi & Selam Gebrekidan (2018, December 22) “In Gupta 
Brother’s Rise and Fall, the Tale of a Sullied A.N.C.” The New York Times. Available at: 
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/22/world/africa/gupta-zuma-south-africa-corruption.html 
[10] The banks themselves were also called in by senior government officials and accused of being 
anti-transformation, of perpetuating what was called ‘white monopoly capital’. Tehillah Niselow 
(2018, September 24) “SARB warns of ‘catastrophic’ impact if banks kept Gupta accounts open” 
Available at: https://www.fin24.com/Companies/Financial-Services/sarb-warns-of-catastrophic-
impact-if-banks-kept-gupta-accounts-open-20180923; “Editorial: Banks’ Gupta testimony reveals 
ANC’s financial illiteracy” Available at: https://www.businesslive.co.za/bd/opinion/editorials/2018-
09-21-editorial-banks-shocking-gupta-testimony/ (21 September 2018) 
 18 
[11] “Zwane wanted SARB’s wings clipped after Gupta blacklisting” Available at: 
https://www.politicsweb.co.za/news-and-analysis/zwane-wanted-sarb-role-changed-after-gupta-
blackli, 31 August 2016 
[12] See Jeff Wicks (2018, October 14) “Holidays, flashy cars & ‘mansions’: Lifestyle of the VBS ‘heist’ 
rich and infamous” Available at: https://www.timeslive.co.za/sunday-times/news/2018-10-13-
lifestyles-of-the-vbs-heist-rich-and-infamous/ 
[13] These details are drawn from Terry Motau “The Great Bank Heist: Investigator’s Report to the 
Prudential Authority” Available at: 
https://www.resbank.co.za/Lists/News%20and%20Publications/Attachments/8830/VBS%20Mutual
%20Bank%20-%20The%20Great%20Bank%20Heist.pdf 
[14] “Editorial: VBS – a tale of vast risk not vile racism” 
https://www.businesslive.co.za/fm/opinion/editorial/2018-03-15-editorial-vbs-a-tale-of-vast-risk-
not-vile-racism/ (15 March 2018) 
[15] Ivo Vegter (2018, 16 October) “VBS defenders expose the intellectual poverty of the race card” 
Available at: https://www.dailymaverick.co.za/opinionista/2018-10-16-vbs-defenders-expose-the-
intellectual-poverty-of-the-race-card/ 
[16] “ABSA, public protector in court over apartheid-era bailout” https://www.enca.com/south-
africa/absa-protector-in-court-over-apartheid-era-bailout (5 December 2017) 
[17] Lameez Omarjee (15 August 2017) “SA Reserve Bank wins court bid against Public Protector” 
Available at: https://mg.co.za/article/2017-08-15-sa-reserve-bank-wins-court-bid-against-public-
protector 
[18] Alexander Bickel (1962) The Least Dangerous Branch, New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University 
Press 
[19] Mohamed El-Erian (2016) The Only Game in Town, New York, NY: Random House 
 
 19 
