Anita Angelovska Bezhoska: Open doors to the changing payments
landscape
Speech  by  Ms Anita Angelovska  Bezhoska,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of
North Macedonia, at the 12th Conference on Payments and Market Infrastructures "Open doors
to  the  changing  payments  landscape",  hosted  by  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  North
Macedonia, Ohrid, 3 June 2019.
Distinguished guests, excellences
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  the  12th  Conference  on  Payments  and  Market
Infrastructures  hosted  by  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  North  Macedonia.  Through  the
years,  the  organization  of  this  conference  has  benefited  from  the  invaluable  contribution  and
unreserved  support  of  the  Dutch  Central  Bank,  for  which  I  express  my  deep  gratitude.  The
presence of the European Central Bank, the Bank for International Settlement and the European
Commission is an inherent feature of the conference, as well. And we are privileged and grateful
for that, given the prominent role these institutions play in the area of payments.
Financial  technologies  and  innovations  are  reshaping  the  financial  sector,  creating  new
providers,  business  models,  new  products  and  solutions,  thus  changing  the  entire  financial
ecosystem. It is not imaginary, but rather a real possibility today, with a few swipes on a smart-
device, to be able to track payments across accounts, control direct debits, find a better credit
card,  compare  household  bills,  or  cancel  unwanted  subscriptions  or  consents.  Waves  of
financial innovations from new players, but also from incumbents on the market, create massive
changes  in  the  financial  industry.  In  this  light,  the  highlight  of  the  conference  is  embracing
changes,  that  is  opening  doors  to  financial  innovations  in  the  payment  landscape,  while
preventing disruptions to the financial markets and to the overall financial stability.
New  wave  of  digitalization  can  have  wide  ranging  positive  effects  on  the  economy  –  it  spurs
innovation and productivity, transforms public and private services, contribute to higher financial
inclusion by reaching underserved households and overall, improve wellbeing of the society as
information, knowledge and data become more widely available. Benefits go hand in hand with
challenges to jobs and skills needed, to taxation, financial markets, and invite new thinking on
how  to  preserve  fundamentals  such  as  privacy  and  security,  as  well  as  how  to  preserve
monetary and financial stability.
1
Financial  innovations,  underpinned  by  digitalization,  have  a  potential  to  gradually  reshape  the
financial sector. “The Pulse of Fintech” report of KPMG  shows that Fintech investment globally
more  than  doubled  during  2018,  and  reached  $112  billion.  In  addition,  while  new  startups
sprouted  across  emerging  fintech  subsectors,  highly  mature  areas  like  payments  saw  some
consolidation through mergers and acquisitions of big developed players. Reports also show that
highest  number  of  fintech  service  providers  are  in  the  payments,  clearing  and  settlement
category, thus, giving them the potential to gradually undertake a paradigm shift in the payment
landscape. Ernst and Young adoption index for 2017 highlights the impressive and rapid growth
in adoption of fintech services among mature and developing markets with highest adoption rate
among younger generations (25–34 years). On average, about 33% of digitally active consumers
have used at least two fintech services in the last six months (compared to just 16% two years
ago),  with  payments  and  money  transfer  being  the  most  popular  segments  (used  by  50%  of
digitally active consumers). Perhaps even more importantly, there is an increasing awareness:
84% of customers are aware of fintech services compared with 62%, two years ago. Thus, rising
investments in fintech segment, as well as growing awareness and adoption of fintech services
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
indicates that fintechs are embraced and will continue to gain momentum in the future.
Financial innovations change the environment not only for customers, but for traditional banking
industry and policy makers, as well. Customers may benefit from increased and cost effective
access to financial services, although in some instances at the cost of privacy and consumer
protection.  As  for  traditional  financial  institutions,  such  as  banks,  they  may  face  strong
competition by new entrants, on the one hand, but may benefit from increased cost efficiency,
competiveness and ability to offer new state-of-the-art services, on the other hand. The impact
on  policymakers  and  regulators  is  also  large,  as  they  have  to  first  properly  understand
innovations/new  services,  foresee  possible  consequences  for  financial  intermediation  and
stability, and react in a timely and proper manner.
Rising importance of this topic is clearly demonstrated by the adoption of the Bali Fintech Agenda
of the IMF that provides guidance for national authorities on how to cope with new and evolving
financial landscape, and underlines the need for stronger international cooperation as financial
services are blurring boundaries, both institutionally and geographically. 
In what follows, I would like to briefly focus on the challenges of fintech developments for the
banking industry and policy makers.
We do have to take into account that digitalization of banking is not a new phenomenon; it has
been  present  for  more  than  3  decades  (in  the  form  of  automated  teller  machines,  electronic
payments, e-banking). The emergence of fintech is only the latest wave of innovation to affect the
banking industry. Still, in the last decade, a significant change has occurred in the way of using
technology, thus creating environment in which disruption can happen more quickly, and urging
traditional banks to adjust faster to maintain market share.
Besides the advancement in technology, a few other factors have also contributed to proliferation
of financial innovation. The fact that banking industry was dealing with the legacy issues of the
global  financial  crisis-impaired  balance  sheets,  perhaps  was  important  factor  that  provided
space for non-banks to penetrate in financial business. Also, banks’ resources to a great extent
were  tilted  towards  implementation  of  the  new  Basel  3  requirements  aimed  at  increasing  the
resilience of the banking system. The increased competitive pressure has been further amplified
with the regulatory changes in the payments segment-PSD2, such as elimination of barriers to
entry for third parties by providing access to data and accounts of the customers in the banks –
so called “open banking". According to the research by PricewaterhouseCoopers , banks have
very  firmly  moved  from  viewing  open  banking  as  a  compliance  exercise  to  an  opportunity  to
compete, innovate, and deliver value and more than 33m people are expected to have signed up
to open banking driven services by 2022. Against these background many fintech firms, that are
not  regulated  entities,  have  launched  new,  differentiated  and  tailor  made  products,  putting  a
significant pressure on traditional financial institutions.
2
Very important factor that most probably will shape the future of the traditional banking industry is
the way how traditional banks approach and embrace the financial innovations, be it directly on
their own or through cooperation with new fintech companies. Not only will fintech companies try
to  behave  like  banks,  but  banks  will  also  try  to  behave  like  fintechs.  While  some  market
observers estimate that a significant portion of banks’ revenues, especially in retail banking, is at
risk over the next 10 years, others claim that banks will be able to absorb or outcompete the new
competitors, while improving their own efficiency and capabilities.
In this context, the BIS envisages 5 different scenarios on how the fintech explosion might impact
banks that range from a scenario where the incumbent banks digitize and modernize themselves
to  retain  the  customer  relationship  and  core  banking  services,  leveraging  the  technologies  to
change their current business models (which is not far away from the currently observed trends)
to a scenario where banks have become irrelevant as customers interact directly with individual
financial services providers as the need for balance sheet intermediation or for a trusted third
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
party is removed and banks are displaced by agile platforms and technologies.
Following the example of the European Banking Association, early this year, we made a short
survey  of  domestic  banks  to  obtain  information  regarding  their  experience  with  modern-day
technological  solutions.  The  results  of  the  survey  indicate  that  almost  two  thirds  of  domestic
banks  do  not  have  any  experience  with  fintech  companies  and  even  surprisingly,  they  do  not
have plans to establish any relationship in the near future. The banks that have some experience
with fintech companies point that it is rather a commercial partnership with existing fintech firms
for launching new products or services. In addition, a few banks answered that they prefer to
develop  in-house  fintech  solutions  without  formal  cooperation  with  external  parties.  The  most
frequently  mentioned  motives  of  the  banks  that  have  formal  partnership  with  fintech  firms  or
develop their own solutions for usage of new technologies included attracting new or maintaining
the existing customers as well as cost savings. Among the technological solutions which are
already in use or are in testing phase, most of the banks cited cloud services, usage of biometric
properties  for  client  identification  purposes  and  using  of  big  data  analysis  for  credit  scoring.
Currently,  the  banks  do  not  have  experience  neither  with  algorithms  used  for  the  purpose  of
investment advice or decisions nor with any DLT based solutions.
The regulators and policymakers also face challenges. Rules and regulations should keep pace
with innovation, providing supportive environment but also adequately assessing and mitigating
potential risks. Consequently, to apprehend the full benefits of digitalization, the authorities need
to  reach  across  traditional  policy  reluctances  and  across  different  levels  of  institutions,  and
develop a unified approach to policymaking. The Financial Stability Board stocktake of regulatory
approaches to fintech finds that majority of jurisdictions surveyed have already taken or plan to
take  regulatory  measures  to  respond  to  fintech.  The  scope  and  scale  of  changes  or  planned
changes vary substantially, depending, among other things, on the relevant size and structure of
domestic  financial  and  fintech  sectors  and  the  flexibility  already  provided  by  the  existing
regulatory framework. An example of innovation in the legislative area has been set up by the
European Union with the revised Payment Service Directive (PSD2). This directive, which has
been considered one of the more substantial regulatory changes of its kind in Europe, is set to be
a regulatory response to the game-changing finance and payment landscape. In addition, several
jurisdictions have introduced regulatory sandboxes, innovation hubs or accelerators in order to
promote innovation and improve interactions with new fintech firms. In general, the policy actions
have been mostly focused on strengthening consumer and investor protection, market integrity,
increasing financial inclusion and encouraging competition. The ongoing regulatory changes, in
turn  are  conducive  to  rising  interest  in  regtech-new  technological  solutions  helping  financial
industry to better manage their compliance obligations.
As an impetus for innovation and responding to the rising challenges, the National Bank and the
Ministry  of  Finance  have  continued  joint  activities  on  the  Draft  Law  on  payment  services  and
payment  systems,  which  transposes  the  PSD2  as  well  as  other  relevant  European  Union
regulations in the payments area. The very broad and ambitious scope of the new Law makes it
one  of  the  most  significant  and  comprehensive  pieces  of  financial  services  legislation.  It
embodies  objectives  that  seek  to  make  payments  safer,  increase  consumer  protection  and
foster  innovation  while  ensuring  a  level  playing  field  for  all  players,  including  newcomers.
Following  the  examples  of  other  central  banks,  we  are  also  in  the  process  of  creating  an
innovation  hub  for  closely  monitoring  of  fintech  developments,  interacting  with  institutions  that
plan to launch new services, which will help them better understand the regulatory environment,
but it will also help us adequately comprehend the fintech developments, assessing the risks and
possibly recalibrating the regulatory framework.
To  sum  up,  innovation  in  digital  finance,  underpinning  the  nexus  between  digitalization  and
finance,  offers  wide-ranging  opportunities,  which  authorities  are  keen  to  foster.  It  holds  the
promise  of  reducing  costs  and  frictions,  increasing  efficiency  and  competition,  narrowing
information asymmetry, and broadening access to financial services – especially in low-income
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
countries  and  for  underserved  populations.  Ongoing  innovations  and  technological  advances
support  broader  economic  development  and  inclusive  growth,  facilitate  international  payments
and remittances, and simplify and strengthen regulatory compliance and supervisory processes.
At the same time, authorities are concerned about potential risks posed to the financial system
and to its customers. Moreover, the adoption process may also pose transition challenges, and
policy vigilance will be needed to make economies resilient and inclusive, so as to capture the full
benefits.  In  response,  policymaking  will  need  to  be  nimble,  innovative,  and  cooperative  and
importantly will need to strike the right balance between enabling financial innovation on the one
hand  and  addressing  challenges  to  market  and  financial  integrity,  consumer  protection,  and
financial stability on the other. This balance is critical to deliver the welfare benefits of financial
innovation and avoid stalling the development of digital finance with the risk of leaving someone
behind.
I look forward to the presentations and discussions by the participants at the conference that I
am sure will provide interesting reflections on the abovementioned challenges casting light on the
fast changing financial innovation landscape, especially in the payments area.
I wish all of you an enjoyable and rewarding conference in Ohrid, our charming city, protected by
UNESCO for its natural and cultural heritage.
Thank you!
1
2
The  Pulse  of  Fintech  2018:  Biannual  global  analysis  of 
assets.kpmg/content/dam/kpmg/xx/pdf/2019/02/the-pulse-of-fintech-2018.pdf
investment 
in 
fintech,  2019, 
  KPMG,
The future of banking is open: How to seize the Open Banking opportunity, 2018, PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP,
retailbankinginnovation.fintecnet.com/uploads/2/4/3/8/24384857/the_future_of_banking_is_open.pdf
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
