Mario Draghi: Hearing of the Committee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs of the European Parliament
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the ECON
committee of the European Parliament, Brussels, 28 January 2019.
 Mr Chairman,
Honourable members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a pleasure to be back at the European Parliament and to appear before your Committee.
I am happy that you have chosen the euro project and its achievements over the past 20 years
as the topic for our discussion today. I will start on the substance without further ado, discussing
in turn the internal and external dimensions of the euro area. I will then argue that, building on
what we have already achieved, our duty today is to continue to make progress in ensuring that
all of the euro’s benefits are realised in full.
The euro’s internal dimension
The euro was introduced to deepen the Single Market and safeguard its integrity. It continued the
European project of reducing cross-border barriers through common endeavours and common
policies.  It  followed  the  spirit  that  was  already  imbued  in  the  Schuman  declaration  in  1950:
building Europe “through concrete achievements”. As a result, our economies are now integrated
to a point that was unimaginable not so long ago.
The euro was designed to be a trusted and stable currency. And the euro has indeed provided
two decades of price stability, thereby upholding people’s confidence in the value of their savings.
Stable prices also facilitated firm investment and the creation of new jobs. Today, there are 20
million more Europeans in employment than 20 years ago in the 19 countries that currently make
up the euro area. And since the creation of the euro, the labour force participation rate has risen
from 59% to 67%, its highest level ever.
The two decades in which the euro has existed have been exceptional. The first decade was the
culmination of a 30-year period of macroeconomic stability, also known as the Great Moderation.
Inflation averaged close to 2% and the ECB ensured price stability mainly by adjusting its key
interest rates.
The  second  decade  produced  the  worst  economic  and  financial  crisis  since  the  Great
Depression. As  I  had  the  opportunity  to  discuss  at  length  in  my  remarks  at  the  Parliament’s
plenary debate two weeks ago, as a response to the crisis we had to deploy new instruments to
1
safeguard the effectiveness of our monetary policy and stabilise the euro area economy.
Thanks to the collective efforts of all European citizens, the euro area has emerged from this
crisis.  The  results  of  their  and  their  representatives’  determination  have  been  tangible:  22
consecutive  quarters  of  economic  growth,  the  unemployment  rate  at  its  lowest  level  since
October 2008, and wages and incomes on the rise.
However,  over  the  past  few  months,  incoming  information  has  continued  to  be  weaker  than
expected on account of softer external demand and some country and sector-specific factors.
The  persistence  of  uncertainties  in  particular  relating  to  geopolitical  factors  and  the  threat  of
protectionism is weighing on economic sentiment.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
At the same time, supportive financing conditions, favourable labour market dynamics and rising
wage  growth  continue  to  underpin  the  euro  area  expansion  and  gradually  rising  inflation
pressures. This supports our confidence in the continued sustained convergence of inflation to
levels  that  are  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  Significant  monetary  policy
stimulus  remains  essential  to  support  the  further  build-up  of  domestic  price  pressures  and
headline  inflation  developments  over  the  medium  term.  This  will  be  provided  by  our  forward
guidance on the key ECB interest rates, reinforced by the reinvestments of the sizeable stock of
acquired assets. In any event, the Governing Council stands ready to adjust all of its instruments,
as  appropriate,  to  ensure  that  inflation  continues  to  move  towards  the  Governing  Council’s
inflation aim in a sustained manner.
The euro’s external dimension
The  benefits  of  the  euro  have  not  been  limited  to  the  European  internal  dimension.  Standing
together within the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) allowed us to retain sovereignty that
would otherwise be lost by individual countries in a highly integrated world economy.
As already envisaged at the time of its creation, the euro symbolises the unity of a European
continent that is better able to exert global influence. Our togetherness in the EMU gives us “a
greater  say  in  international  negotiation”  and  enhances  our  “capacity  to  influence  economic
2
relations” – to quote the Delors Report.
Over  the  past  20  years,  the  euro  has  become  the  second  most  important  currency  in  the
international monetary system. Somewhere between 20% and 40% of global foreign reserves,
foreign  exchange  transactions,  international  debt  and  international  trade  transactions  are
3
denominated in euro. And over 50 countries or territories use or link their currency to the euro.
This  global  standing  brings  benefits.  For  one,  it  lowers  the  transaction  costs  of  trading
internationally, making euro area firms more competitive. It also adds breadth and liquidity to euro
area  financial  markets,  allowing  domestic  and  international  investors  to  allocate  economic
resources more efficiently. And it lowers the cost of global capital market financing for euro area
borrowers, including corporations, financial institutions and public entities, thus benefiting firms,
households and taxpayers. Of course, the international role of the euro also brings challenges,
such as greater exposure to global foreign financial developments and potential changes to the
monetary policy transmission process.
The international benefits of sharing a currency go beyond the monetary sphere. In a world with
deep  economic  and  financial  interlinkages,  international  cooperation  is  essential  and  we  can
more effectively promote European ideas and interests by speaking together. Indeed, the euro
area’s  voice  has  been  crucial  in  strengthening  the  international  financial  regulatory  framework
after the global financial crisis. Today, the Single Supervisory Mechanism is the largest banking
supervisor  globally  and  successfully  contributes  to  shaping  the  international  supervisory
framework.
Since the global financial and euro area debt crises, however, the euro’s international role seems
to have gradually eroded. While its importance as the currency of invoice for international trade
transactions  has  remained  broadly  stable,  its  role  in  global  foreign  reserves  and  global  debt
markets has declined.
This decline is a symptom of the fault lines in EMU exposed by the crises. Concerns about the
resilience of the EMU architecture and about financial fragmentation underpinned this erosion.
Indeed, stability, financial depth and liquidity are among the key determinants of an international
currency.
European policymakers are now paying closer attention and various calls have been made in
recent  months  for  the  euro  to  assume  a  stronger  international  role.  The  Euro  Summit  of
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
December 2018 encouraged work to be taken forward to this end.
The international role of the euro is supported by the pursuit of sound economic policies in the
euro area and a deeper and more complete EMU. And this requires further efforts along the path
of deeper integration.
Completing the Economic and Monetary Union
The past 20 years have revealed beyond doubt how challenging ensuring economic prosperity
and stability can be. This was true both inside and outside the euro area.
Nonetheless,  these  years  also  demonstrated  that  such  a  shared  challenge  is  best  faced
collectively. To realise in full the benefits of the euro, we need to have the same components that
made the euro a reality in 1999.
On  the  one  hand,  we  need  national  reforms  to  promote  sustainable  economic  convergence.
Under any monetary system, higher growth potential can only be achieved through continuous
reform efforts. As the convergence process is primarily driven by structural factors, this is a key
responsibility of Member States.
On  the  other  hand,  Europe  can  make  a  difference  by  supporting  and  facilitating  such  reform
efforts. Our togetherness represents a unique competitive advantage, and we should capitalise
on this.
First, we can build on the synergies between EMU and the Single Market. The Single Market is
indeed  one  of  the  most  powerful  tools  we  have  to  unlock  the  mechanisms  that  will  raise
productivity.  In  particular,  a  genuine  capital  markets  union  (CMU)  would  not  only  ease  and
diversify access to funds for households and firms, thus fostering investment and innovation. It
would also enable risk diversification and thus compensate for temporary drops in activity locally
– the so called private risk-sharing –, thereby reinforcing the overall resilience of EMU.
Second,  it  is  essential  to  complete  the  projects  that  we  initiated  during  the  crisis,  namely  the
banking union. Together with CMU, a complete banking union would deliver meaningful private
risk sharing that is currently lacking in the euro area in comparison to the US.
But private risk sharing, to be effective, needs to be supported by other policies.
We should thus rekindle trust in our economic and fiscal framework, by making it more effective
in ensuring sound policy making at national level. These actions can also be further supported at
the  European  level  by  the  recent  decisions  to  launch  an  instrument  for  convergence  and
competitiveness for the euro area.
To tackle future cyclical crises, the two layers of protection against shocks – the diversification of
risk  through  the  private  financial  system  on  the  one  hand,  and  public  countercyclical  support
through fiscal instruments at the national and European levels on the other – need to interact in a
complete and efficient manner.
Achieving these reforms is not idealistic, nor utopian if we work together. And at the Euro Summit
in  December,  leaders  renewed  their  political  commitment  to  strengthen  EMU.  If  we  want  to
realise in full the benefits of the euro, we need to capitalise on this commitment and translate it
into concrete policy actions.
Conclusion
Mr Chairman,
Honourable members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee,
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
I  have  used  the  word  “together”  several  times  today. As  this  is  the  last  time  that  we  will  be
together in this legislative term, let me add a few words to you personally.
I would like to thank you all for the role that this Committee has played over the past years.
In  my  first  hearing  here,  I  remember  saying  that  was  my  first  exercise  in  democratic
accountability  with  the  European  Parliament  and  how  grateful  I  was  for  it.  Many  more  would
follow  and  you  effectively  ensured  that  the  ECB  would  be  accountable  and  therefore  could
legitimately  be  independent  in  carrying  out  its  monetary  policy.  But  I  am  also  grateful  for  the
support  that  this  Committee  always  expressed  for  the  actions  of  the  ECB,  a  sincere  support
because it built on the voice of European citizens and an important support that helped the ECB
through the many difficult times of the past years.
As co-legislators your role was also essential in delivering reforms that further strengthened our
Union.
This Committee, and the European Parliament more generally, has been in my experience an
attentive interpreter of the demands of European citizens. It is only by doing so that the trust in
the legitimacy of the EU’s institutions and policies is built, making it possible to achieve a more
effective and inclusive Union.
As I have argued elsewhere, citizens demand, and Parliament may help in achieving, a “more
perfect  Union”.  A  Union  that  will  continue  providing  its  citizens  with  physical  and  economic
security, while also promoting the values of an open, democratic and peaceful society.
Thank you for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions.
1
2
3
See Speech by Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the plenary debate of the European
Parliament on the ECB’s Annual Report 2017, Strasbourg, 15 January 2019.
Committee  for  the  Study  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  presided  over  by  Delors,  Jacques,  “Report  on
economic and monetary union in the European Community”, 17 April, 1989.
See The international role of the euro – Interim report, European Central Bank, June 2018.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
