    Conference of the Chair BdF/PSE, Paris School of Economics 
Current Challenges of Monetary Policy 
September 24, 2019 
 Speechi by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France 
           Press contact: Mark Deen (mark.deen@banque-france.fr). 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Page 1 sur 11 
It  is  a  particular  pleasure  to  welcome  you  on  the  occasion  of  the  10th 
anniversary of the Chair Banque de France/PSE. All anniversaries are worthy 
of  celebration,  but  the  continued  partnership  of  Banque  de  France  with  the 
Paris School of Economics is a particular reason for cheer. Over the past ten 
years, it has been a testimony of how academic research and economic policy 
making can reinforce each other. 
In the past ten years, thanks to their interaction, much has been done to make 
our  financial  environment  more  capable  of  reining  in  financial  excesses. 
Thanks  to  both,  we  have  introduced  many  new  unconventional  tools  to 
implement  monetary  policy.  But  these  changes  have  also  brought  new 
questions  and  new  uncertainties,  on  which  more  academic  research  is 
needed.  Hence,  I  would  like  to  elaborate  on  two  present  challenges:  the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  our  current  economic  environment,  and  the 
interaction between monetary policy and financial stability. 
 1.  Monetary Policy in the Face of New Challenges 
 1.1.  A New Environment Calling for New Responses 
time  when 
These  new  uncertainties  arise  at  a 
the  global  economic 
environment has itself become increasingly uncertain. In the short term, many 
of  the  uncertainties  obstructing  the  economic  outlook  –  and  especially  the 
manufacturing  sector  –  are  man-made  –  and  even  one-man  made. 
Contingencies  that  not  so  long  ago  appeared  as  tail  risks,  such  as  the 
possibility  of  an  escalation  of  trade  tensions  or  a  disorderly  Brexit,  have 
become looming threats. 
But  uncertainty  also  pertains  to  long-term  structural  trends.  Over  the  past 
decade,  the  world  economy  has  steadily  recovered  from  the  global  financial 
 
crisis. But it has not returned to its pre-crisis normal. Interest rates remain at 
historical lows, due to a historically low level of the natural rate of interest R*ii.  
Page 2 sur 11 
In the short run, this analysis – uncertainty as the first trigger of the present 
slowdown – should guide our ranking of policy answers. Monetary policy plays 
its role, but it should not – less than ever – be the only game in town. It should 
not  even  be  the  first  game  in  town.  The  first  response  would  be  for 
government-driven uncertainties to be addressed directly by governments, by 
removing the self-induced threats to world growth. 
Failing that, a second answer is for fiscal policy to step in. Fiscal stimulus from 
countries with fiscal space would both stimulate aggregate demand, and, with 
targeted,  quality  investment,  increase  long-term  growth.iii Wage  increases  in 
countries  that  have  long  relied  on  wage  moderation  could  also  help  in 
bolstering  aggregate  demand  and  inflation.  And  pro-growth  reforms  would 
raise R*.  
Monetary policy provides a third response. For the past ten years, there is little 
doubt that ECB monetary policy under Mario Draghi’s Presidency has made a 
decisive contribution not only to safeguarding the euro in 2012, but also to the 
significant recovery of the euro area since 2013. Over this period, more than 
10  million  jobs  have  been  created.  Our  unconventional  measures  are 
estimated  to  add  almost  2  percentage  points  of  growth  and  of  inflation 
between 2016 and 2020. Since I am talking to an audience of researchers I 
should of course emphasise that such numbers are subject to uncertainty.  
However, the most recent monetary policy decisions of the Governing Council 
have given rise to many comments. My rule of conduct has been to not add 
mine  in  the  heat  of  the  moment.  Two  weeks  later,  let  me  only  say  that  I 
supported many elements of the package, including the strengthening of the 
state-dependent  forward  guidance  and  the  welcome  introduction  of  a  tiering 
system,  similar  to  those  in  all  other  jurisdictions  with  negative  interest  rates. 
But I was not in favour of the resumption of net asset purchases at this time, 
because  I  thought  that  further  purchases  are  unnecessary  right  now,  given 
Page 3 sur 11 
indeed, 
 
the  very  low  levels  of  both  long-term  interest  rates  and  term  premia,  which 
have continued to decrease significantly since we stopped net purchases last 
December. The main purpose of QE is to extract more duration risk from the 
bond  market; 
term  premia  have  already  been  successfully 
compressed  –  the  term  premium  on  a  10-year  OIS  is  estimated  to  be 
significantly negative at around -60 to -100 bp. I also think that the significant 
strengthening  of  our  forward  guidance,  the  consequent  prolongation  of  the 
reinvestment period for the very important stock of QE assets – 2600 billion 
euros  –,  and  the  DFR  cut,  were  already  a  powerful  and  consistent 
combination. The forward guidance now states that we expect rates to remain 
at their present levels, or lower, until the inflation outlook robustly converges to 
a  level  sufficiently  close  to,  but  below,  2%,  and  this  convergence  has  been 
consistently reflected in underlying inflation dynamics: our forward guidance is 
now strongly “state based”, reflecting our enhanced commitment to reach our 
objective.  This  is  significant  progress  that  has  been  overshadowed  by  the 
arguments over QE.  
For me, it is not a question of a shifting balance between hawks and doves – I 
have never found ornithological categorisation to be of much help in designing 
monetary policy. It is a question of pragmatic and objective economic analysis, 
which takes market expectations as useful indicators but is not dependent on 
them. 
But whatever the debate in the Governing Council has been, let us now look 
forward  and  stress  one  simple  message  that  has  unanimous  agreement: 
monetary  policy  has,  once  more,  done  its  duty.  It  is  now  up  to  other  policy 
makers to do theirs, starting with the fiscal authorities. As Mario Draghi pointed 
out  yesterday  in  front  of  the  European  parliament,  “We  need  a  coherent 
economic  strategy  in  the  euro  area  that  complements  and  enhances  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy”. 
1.2  Specific Challenges for Monetary Policy 
 
This is not however a call for self-congratulation: we have to do our homework 
on  some  renewed  research  questions,  where  we  cannot  live  with  our  old 
metrics and our present lack of knowledge. For that, we need more than ever 
your research and our dialogue. 
Page 4 sur 11 
First,  the  measurement  of  key  structural  determinants  remains  surrounded 
with uncertainty. I mentioned the uncertainty surrounding the trend in R*. But 
similar  uncertainty  pertains  to  the  measurement  of  potential  output  and  the 
natural  level  of  unemployment  U*iv.  We  should  also  intensively  work  on  the 
economic effects of climate change as a long-term but significant shock, and 
its interaction with monetary policy. 
How to best measure inflation expectations is a second key issue. We know 
that expectations are key determinants of inflation, but it remains unclear what 
the  most  relevant  measures  of  inflation  expectations  are.  Expectations  of 
professional  forecasters  (at  1,7 %)  and  market-based  measures  (at  1,3 %) 
have received most of the attention until now, but the expectations of firms as 
well  as  households  –  which  can  be  significantly  higher  –  matter  at  least  as 
much  for  aggregate  demand  and  price-setting.  As  Benoît  Coeuré  rightly 
stressed  last  July,  more  research  is  needed  on  what  their  expectations  are, 
and how they form them.v  
Third, there is still much we do not know about how firms and households form 
expectations  on  future  interest  rates,  and  on  how  these  expectations  affect 
their  spending  decisions.  We  know  that  standard  DSGE  models  tend  to 
assume  too  much  foresight  from  private  agents.  How  to  incorporate  more 
realistic behavior is a central issue, especially when forecasting the effects of 
our new instruments such as forward guidancevi. To be sure, some uncertainty 
over the response of the economy to our policies will always remain, especially 
when  firms  and  households  are  themselves  still  learning  how  our  new 
measures  affect  the  economy,  and  how  to  live  with  very  low  or  negative 
interest rates.vii 
 
A last topic deserves, I believe, particular attention: the possible side-effects of 
our  monetary 
the  effects  of 
unconventional monetary policies. 
financial  stability,  especially 
tools  on 
Page 5 sur 11 
  2.  Monetary Policy and Financial Stability 
2.1  Prudential  Policies  and  Monetary  Policy  are  Complements  not 
Substitutes 
To address concerns over financial stability, regulation and supervision, both 
microprudential  and  macroprudential,  are  of  course  available  and  essential. 
On financial regulation, ten years after the financial crisis, we must resist the 
temptation to unpick what has been done, and the complacency to believe that 
“this time is different”. 
Macroprudential  policy  is  essential  to  foster  financial  stability.  However, 
macroprudential policies have their limits. To start with, as of today, our toolkit 
is  very  much  bank-centric.  We  are  making  some  progress  to  extend 
macroprudential  policy  beyond 
the  banking  sector.  But  we  should 
acknowledge that we are not there yet and that this is becoming a pressing 
issue as the non-banking sector is developing in reaction to the macrofinancial 
environment and changes in the regulation framework. 
In  addition,  as  our  macroprudential  arsenal  is  still  rather  new  and  untested, 
uncertainty  remains  on  the  quantitative  magnitude  of  the  effects  of  our 
interventionsviii. Experience will teach us how to adapt and adjust our policies 
over time, but uncertainty will remain a feature of real-world policy-making. 
Finally,  we  should  refrain  from  hubris:  over  time,  we  will  design  a  more 
comprehensive  macroprudential  toolkit  and  learn  to  make  the  best  use  of  it. 
But  while  macroprudential  policies  can  certainly  contribute  a  lot,  some  root 
causes  of  financial  crises  will  remain  out  of  their  reach  and  macroprudential 
policies alone would fall short of achieving financial stability. 
Page 6 sur 11 
 
If prudential policies have limitations, it is legitimate to ask whether monetary 
policy  should  take  into  account  financial  stability  concerns  or  even  assist 
prudential  policies.  To  be  sure,  monetary  policy  has  drawbacks  as  an 
instrument  to  foster  financial  stability.  In  particular,  it  cannot  target  specific 
risks. But as Jeremy Stein noted, the bluntness of the tool is also its strength: it 
affects all financial players.ix 
Let me take a step back. Central banks have an operational independence but 
they do not decide their own mandate. The mandate given to the Eurosystem 
is clear: our primary objective is price stability. However, our mandate states 
that  we  “shall  contribute  to  the  smooth  conduct  of  policies  pursued  by  the 
competent authorities relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions 
and the stability of the financial system”x. 
Careful  attention  to  the  dynamics  of  the  indebtedness  of  households,  firms, 
and financial intermediaries would also be in line with the intellectual tradition 
of  the  Eurosystem.  Since  its  inception,  the  ECB  has  always  given  special 
attention  to  broad  financial  aggregates  in  setting  the  course  of  monetary 
policy. It was emphasised by its monetary pillar and is now emphasised by its 
monetary analysis. Restricting attention to measures of liquid liabilities such as 
M3 has probably little justification today in view of the little direct relevance of 
monetary  aggregates  for  price  developments.  But  the  relevance  of  broader 
and  more  varied  credit  aggregates  is  beyond  question  for  both  price  and 
financial  stability  concerns.  Together  with  asset  prices,  they  could  constitute 
the base of a revised credit and financial pillar.xi 
 2.2  The Separation Principle becomes less relevant with a multifaceted 
monetary policy 
The link between monetary policy and financial stability raises two questions. 
First,  what  are  the  quantitative  effects  of  monetary  policy  instruments  on 
financial stability? We have enough evidence by now that interest rate policies 
can have effects on indebtedness, risk-taking (through maturity transformation, 
Page 7 sur 11 
 
search  for  yield, or  other channels)  and  the profitability  of financial actors. It 
would therefore be short-sighted to ignore the side effects of monetary policy 
on  financial  stability.  Second,  are  these  effects  large  enough  to  make  it 
possible to preserve financial stability without compromising price stability? At 
this  point,  the  precise  terms  of  a  possible  trade-off  are  still  being  debated.xii 
The  issues  are  complex:  as  Nuno  Coimbra  here  at  PSE  emphasises  in  a 
paper with Hélène Rey, a decrease in interest rates can encourage risk-taking 
when interest rates are low, but discourage it when interest rates are high.xiii 
We need more work on this important issue. 
Let me just suggest two thoughts on this open issue.  
a/ Incorporating Financial Stability Concerns with an Extended Monetary 
Toolkit 
First,  the  binary  opposition  between  the  traditional  separation  principle  and 
“leaning against the wind’’ makes less sense when monetary policy has itself 
several  instruments  at  its  disposal.  A  median  way,  which  we  could  call 
“coordinated” or “integrated” is possible. Indeed, that several instruments can 
allow to pursue several objectives is just what the old Tinbergen rule asserts. 
This is particularly relevant within monetary policy in our current context. Over 
the past years we have brought innovations to our operational framework, and 
we have considerably extended our toolkit with balance-sheet policies such as 
quantitative  easing  and  (T)LTROs.  Like  our  time-honed  interest-rate  policy, 
these balance-sheet policies were introduced with price-stability objectives in 
mind.  But  now  that  our  extended  toolkit  has  brought  us  new  degrees  of 
freedom, it is valuable to think of how this new flexibility could be used in the 
long-run  to  minimise  financial  stability  risks  without  compromise  to  price 
stability. 
Let  me  illustrate  it  with  the  example  of  tiering.  The  tiering  system  we  have 
decided upon will allow our interest rate policy to deliver price stability without 
trading it off against financial stability. Far from entering into conflict with price 
stability, tiering will actually also ensure that our policies have their intended 
 
effect on price stability, by alleviating the risk of a reduced pass-through of our 
policies  to  the  financing  cost  of  the  private  sector.  And  it  may  enhance  the 
monetary policy stance by mitigating the side effects of keeping rates lower for 
longer. 
Page 8 sur 11 
There  is  no  reason  to  commit  one  particular  monetary  instrument  to  the 
financial  stability  objective.  Instead,  a  parallel  with  public  finance  can  prove 
useful.  It  is  customary  in  public  finance  to  see  the  problem  of  choosing  tax 
rates as one of minimising the distortions created by various tax instruments, 
in  order  to  raise  a  given  amount  of  revenues.  Similarly,  it  is  possible  to 
approach our monetary policy decisions as one of choosing the combination of 
instruments  that  minimise  risks  to  financial  stability,  in  order  to  deliver  the 
policy stance called for by our price-stability mandate. 
Likewise,  some  of  our  new  instruments  could  be  more  efficient  to  address 
financial  stability  concerns.  For  instance,  under  some  dimensions,  balance-
sheet policies differ markedly from interest-rate policies. By providing valuable 
safe  assets  to  banks  –  central  bank  reserves  –  a  high  level  of  central  bank 
reserves can support their smooth functioning. Even more importantly, it can 
mitigate  the  risk  that  banks  will  try  to  supply  the  demand  for  safe  assets  by 
engineering 
issued  safe  assets  are  poor 
substitutes for public safe assets.xiv 
themselves.  Privately 
them 
b/ Keeping the purchase of private assets to a minimum 
In any case – and this is my second remark – the purchase of private assets 
by the central bank should be kept to a minimum. Indeed, the asset-side of the 
balance-sheet – what assets the central bank buys with the reserves it issues 
–  matters  a  lot.  Buying  an  excessive  amount  of  private  assets  such  as 
corporate  bonds  could  run  the  risk  of  distorting  the  signal  that  asset  prices 
convey on the assets’ riskiness. The present compression of risk premia and 
credit spreads might already increase risks to financial stability. 
  
Conclusion 
Page 9 sur 11 
I  have  restricted  my  remarks  on  financial  stability  to  the  policies  that  fall,  at 
least  in  part,  within  the  realm  of  a  central  bank.  However,  as  I  have 
emphasized earlier, monetary and prudential policies are not the only policies 
available.  Due  to  the  present  economic  environment,  fiscal  policies  and 
structural reforms can and should be more and more part of the policy mix. But 
it also follows from the guiding principle that I have highlighted today: the more 
tools  available,  the  easier  it  is  to  combine  them  to  minimise  the  trade-offs 
between price and financial stabilities. 
Fiscal policy can help monetary policy in fostering financial stability in several 
ways. First, it can of course help by taking away some of the burden of policy 
accommodation.  But  fiscal  policy  can  also  directly  assist  monetary  policy  in 
fostering  financial  stability.  It  can  help  monetary  policy  to  provide  the  safe 
assets  necessary  to  a  resilient  financial  system,  if  possible  including  in  the 
form  of  a  euro  area-wide  safe  asset.  On  the  tax  side,  it  should  reduce  all 
excessive incentives towards real-estate investment, and foster a more neutral 
allocation of savings according to a sound reward of risk. Let me end with one 
question: what will monetary policy be like in ten years? We clearly can’t be 
certain of anything, but we can at least share a conviction: the more progress 
we have made together on these issues I mentioned, the better our monetary 
policy will be. Thank you for your attention and your cooperation. 
  References: 
-Adrian  Liang  (2018),  Monetary  Policy,  Financial  Conditions,  and  Financial  Stability, 
International Journal of Central Banking 
-Aiyar Voigts (2019), The Negative Mean Output Gap, IMF Working Paper 19/183 
-Ajello  Laubach  Lopez-Salido  Nakata  (2019),  Financial  Stability  and  Optimal  Interest  Rate 
Policy, International Journal of Central Banking 
 
-Bernanke  Kiley  Roberts  (2019),  Monetary  Policy  Strategies  for  a  Low-Rate  Environment, 
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009 
Page 10 sur 11 
-Blanchard  (2019),  Public  Debt  and  Low  Interest  Rates,  American  Economic  Association 
Presidential Lecture 
-Brand,  Bielecki,  Penalver  (2018),  The  natural  rate  of  interest:  estimates,  drivers,  and 
challenges to monetary policy, ECB Occasional Paper Series n°217 
-Cerra  Saxena  (2008),  Growth  Dynamics:  The  Myth  of  Economic  Recovery,  American 
Economic Review, Vol. 98 No. 1 
-Coibion,  Gorodnichenko,  Kumar  (2018),  How  Do  Firms  Form  Their  Expectations?  New 
Survey Evidence, American Economic Review 108, p. 2671-2713 
-Coibion,  Gorodnichenko,  Ropele  (2018),  Inflation  Expectations  and  Firm  Decisions:  New 
Causal Evidence, NBER Working Paper No. 25412 
-Coibion  Gorodnichenko  Ulate  (2019),  The  Cyclical  Sensitivity  in  Estimates  of  Potential 
Output, NBER Working Paper No. 23580 
-Coimbra  and  Rey  (2019),  Financial  Cycles  with  Heterogeneous  Intermediaries,  NBER 
Working Paper No. 23245 
-Del Negro Giannoni Patterson (2012), The forward guidance puzzle, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York Staff Report No. 574 
-Gabaix (2019), A Behavioral New Keynesian Model, NBER Working Paper No. 22954 
-Gourio  Kashyap  Sim  (2018),  The  Trade  offs  in  Leaning  Against  the  Wind,  IMF  Economic 
Review, 66:70–115 
-Greenwood Hanson Stein (2015), A Comparative-Advantage Approach to Government Debt 
Maturity, The Journal of Finance, VOL. LXX, NO. 4 
-Greenwood  Hanson  Stein  (2016),  The  Federal  Reserve’s  Balance  Sheet  as  a  Financial-
Stability Tool, Jackson Hole Symposium 
-Hamilton Harris Hatzius West (2019), The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and 
Future, IMF Economic Review Vol. 64, No. 4 
-Hartmann  Smets  (2018),  The  first  twenty  years  of  the  European  Central  Bank:  monetary 
policy, ECB Working Paper Series 
-Holsten  Laubach  Williams  (2017),  Measuring  the  natural  rate  of  interest:  International 
trends and determinants, Journal of International Economics 108, S59–S75 
 
-Monnet (2014), Monetary Policy without Interest Rates: Evidence from France's Golden Age 
(1948 to 1973) Using a Narrative Approach, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 
Vol. 6, No. 4 (October 2014), pp. 137-169 
Page 11 sur 11 
-Monnet and Vari (2019), Liquidity Ratios as Monetary Policy Tools: Some Historical Lessons 
for Macroprudential Policy, IMF Working Paper 19/175 
-Nakamura  Steinsson  McKay  (2016),  The  Power  of  Forward  Guidance  Revisited,  American 
Economic Review, Vol. 106, No. 10 
-Orphanides  van  Norden  (2002),  The  Unreliability  of  Output-Gap  Estimates  in  Real  Time, 
Review of Economics and Statistics 84(4), p. 569-583 
-Rostagno et al. (2019), A Tale of Two Decades: the ECB’s Monetary Policy at 20, forthcoming 
-Stein  (2012),  Monetary  Policy  as  Financial-Stability  Regulation,”  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics, 127, pp. 57-95. 
-Stein (2013), Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses, 
Speech 
-Svensson  (2017),  Cost-benefit  analysis  of  leaning  against  the  wind,"  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics, vol. 90(C), pages 193-213. 
-Woodford (2016), Quantitative easing and financial stability, Journal Economía Chilena (The 
Chilean Economy), Central Bank of Chile, vol. 19(2), pages 04-77 
-Woodford  (2018),  Monetary  Policy  Analysis  when  Planning  Horizons  are  Finite,  NBER 
Working Paper No. 24692 
                                                             
i I would particularly like to thank Matthieu Bussière, Stéphane Dupraz, Mark Deen, and Olivier Garnier for their 
help in preparing this speech. 
ii On the measurement of the natural rate of interest and the uncertainty surrounding its long-term component, 
see e.g. Holsten, Laubach and Williams (2017), Hamilton et al. (2019), and Brand, Bielecki and Penalver (2018). 
iii On the opportunity of relying on fiscal policy in a low-rate environment, see e.g. Blanchard (2019). 
iv On  the  issues  surrounding  the  measurement  of  potential  output  and  natural  unemployment,  see  e.g. 
Orphanides and van Norden (2002), Coibion, Gorodnichenko and Ulate (2019) and Aiyar and Voigts (2019). 
v For  early  research  on  firms’  expectations,  see  e.g.  Coibion,  Gorodnichenko  and Kumar  (2018)  and Coibion, 
Gorodnichenko and Ropele (2018). 
vi On  the  forward-guidance  puzzle  and  possible  solutions  to  it,  see  e.g.  Del  Negro,  Giannoni  and  Patterson 
(2012), Nakamura, Steinsson and McKay (2016), Gabaix (2019), and Woodford (2018). 
vii See e.g. Bernanke, Kiley and Roberts (2019). 
viii Monnet (2014) and Monnet and Vari (2019), among others of his work. 
ix Stein (2013). 
x Protocol on the Statute of the Eurosystem and the ECB, Article 3.3. 
xi For recent historical accounts of the ECB’s monetary policy in general, and monetary pillar in particular, see 
Hartmann and Smets (2018) and Rostagno et al. (2019). 
Page 12 sur 11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
xii See  Svensson  (2017)  and  Ajello  et  al.  (2019)  for  studies  that  find  that  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  on 
financial  stability  is  too  small  to  make  it  worth  the  cost  on  price  stability.  See  Adrian  and  Liang  (2018)  and 
Gourio et al. (2018) for more nuanced discussions of the key assumptions that matter to the desirability of 
leaning against the wind. 
xiii Coimbra and Rey (2019). 
xiv See e.g. Greenwood, Hanson and Stein (2015, 2016) for the role of publicly issued safe assets in preventing 
the creation of privately issued safe assets, and Stein (2012) for a formal model of the impact of safe assets on 
the severity of fire sales. See Woodford (2016) for a comparison of the fire-sales risks of balance-sheet policies 
and interest-rate policies. 
