M a y   2 2 ,   2 0 1 9 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
 
 Economic Activity, Prices, 
and Monetary Policy in Japan 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Nagasaki 
Yutaka Harada 
Member of the Policy Board 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
 Introduction 
Thank you for giving me this opportunity to exchange views with you and for having taken 
the time to be here despite your busy schedules. It is indeed a great honor to be here today. 
Please  allow  me  to  express  my  gratitude  for  your  great  cooperation  with  the  business 
operations of the Bank of Japan, particularly of the Nagasaki Branch. 
 As you all know, Japan's growth rate, which until the 1980s was the highest among major 
developed  countries,  has  declined  since  the  1990s.  Low  growth  started  in  the  1990s,  so  it 
has lasted for three decades. Those who know nothing but low growth are already in their 
forties. And those who have happy memories of entering the job market during the bubble 
period  and  remember  suffering  through  the  collapse  of  asset  prices  are  already  in  their 
fifties. 
 Many people say that they do not really mind if economic growth is low -- there are more 
important things than the economy. But if you tell them that low growth will lead to lower 
pensions,  everyone  will  reply:  "Well,  that's  a  problem."  The  Scandinavian  countries,  with 
their comprehensive welfare systems, are all economically wealthier than Japan. 
 Moreover,  people  lose  their  generosity  and  ability  to  make  rational  judgments  when  the 
economy is in trouble. You will probably agree if, for example, you think back to Japan's 
path from the Showa Depression of 1930-31 to the war. It is important for the economy to 
be in a good state.   
 Based on these considerations, there are a number of issues I  will talk about today. First, I 
would  like  to  consider  Japan's  low  growth  by  dividing  GDP  growth  into  the  three  factors 
determining  growth  --  growth  in  capital  input,  labor  input,  and  total  factor  productivity 
(TFP), which can be regarded as representing technological progress -- and look at Japan's 
performance in comparison with  other countries. Second, linked to this low growth, I  will 
talk about why the 2 percent price stability target is needed. Third, I will talk about the link 
between  the  "high-pressure  economy"  and  growth.  Fourth,  I  will  explain  the  relationship 
between  low  interest  rates  and  banks'  profitability.  And  fifth,  I  will  elaborate  on  recent 
economic developments and monetary policy. 
 1 
  1. Japan's Low Growth and Growth Accounting from an International Perspective 
Let us look at Japan's low growth from an international perspective. In what follows, I will 
divide  growth  into  growth  in  capital  input  (information  and  communication  technology 
[ICT] capital as well as other capital), labor input, and TFP. The reason for dividing growth 
into  these  three  factors  is  that  considering  each  factor  individually  provides  some 
understanding of how the growth rate could be raised. Let us take a moment to have a look 
at  the  estimates  for  member  countries  provided  by  the  Organisation  for  Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD). Specifically, Chart 1 presents the average growth 
rates  for  three  subperiods  for  each  of  the  seven  major  OECD economies  and  the  averages 
for these economies as a group.1 
 The  blue  line  in  the  charts  shows  that,  while  Japan  still  enjoyed  comparatively  high 
growth  during  1985-95,  growth  subsequently  stalled,  and  from  the  mid-1990s  it 
registered slower growth than the other countries except  Italy. However, following the 
introduction  of  bold  monetary  easing  --  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing 
(QQE)  --  in  2013,  Japan's  growth  rate  recovered  somewhat,  and  with  growth  in  the 
other countries slowing, Japan's low growth is no longer that conspicuous.2 
 
                                                  
1  Data provided by the OECD are also employed in Chapter 1, Section 3 of the 2018 White Paper 
on Information and Communications in Japan released by the Ministry of International Affairs and 
Communications.  Figure  1-3-2-2  of  the  White  Paper  arrives  at  similar  conclusions  to  my  speech 
today. Using the dataset employed by the Bank of Japan's Research and Statistics  Department and 
the  Cabinet  Office  to  estimate  the  output  gap  and  potential  GDP,  somewhat  different  results  from 
those  using  the  OECD  data  are  obtained  regarding  the  contribution  of  growth  in  TFP  and  capital 
input.   
2  To  simplify  the  chart,  the  period  1985-95  is  shown.  Since  the  high  growth  registered  in  Japan 
during the second half of the 1980s was due to the bubble, combining this period with the first half 
of the 1990s, when the bubble burst, provides a better representation of the underlying growth trend. 
See Harada Yutaka, "Jissho keizaigaku wa ikanaru shinjitsu o terashi dashi taka," in Ushinawareta 
10 nen no shinin wa nanika, ed. Iwata Kikuo and Miyagawa Tsutomu (Tokyo: Toyo Keizai, 2003).   
 2 
   3 
 Next,  the  bars  in  the  charts  provide  a  breakdown  of  GDP  growth  into  changes  in  the 
contribution  of  capital  input,  labor  input,  and  TFP.  As  can  be  seen,  in  Japan,  capital 
input,  labor  input,  and  TFP  growth  all  decelerated  in  1995-2012,  and  thus  all  three 
contributed to the decline in growth overall. In 2012-17, growth recovered somewhat as 
a result of a recovery in  the contribution of labor input and TFP.3  However, while the 
average  annual  growth  rate  of  the  seven  countries  since  2012  has  been  1.6  percent, 
Japan's growth rate, at 1.3 percent, remains low. 
 That said, the reason that the growth rate of many of the other countries is higher than 
Japan's  is  the  higher  growth  rate  of  labor  input.  While  labor  input  on  average  in  the 
other countries has contributed 0.6 percentage point to GDP growth, it has contributed 
only  0.2  percentage  point  in  Japan.  However,  because  labor  input  growth  in  Japan  in 
1995-2012 actually made a negative contribution of 0.4 percentage point, the recovery 
to  small  but  positive  labor  input  growth  has  made  a  substantial  contribution  to  the 
recovery  in  Japan's  overall  economic  growth  since  2012.  The  reason  for  the  relatively 
large  contribution  of  labor  input  in  most  of  the  other  countries  is  that  these  countries 
recently have seen an increase in their population, mainly due to immigration. The fact 
that  labor  input  in  Japan  has  made  only  a  small  contribution  to  growth  overall  means 
that,  on  a  per  capita  basis,  Japan's  growth  rate  has  been  on  par  with  that  of  the  other 
countries.  In  fact,  in  terms  of  real  purchasing  power  parity  GDP  per  capita,  Japan's 
growth rate of 1.4 percent is higher than the 1.1 percent average of the seven countries.   
                                                   
3  While it frequently had been argued that the decline in Japan's growth rate during the 1990s was 
due  to  a  decline  in  TFP  growth,  it  has  been  concluded  that  other  factors  also  have  substantially 
contributed to the slowdown, such as a deceleration in labor quality improvements, a decline in labor 
input, a deceleration in capital accumulation, and a decline in capacity utilization. For details, see the 
following  references.  Motohashi  Kazuyuki,  "IT  investment  and  productivity  growth  of  Japan's 
economy  and  comparison  to  the  United  States  (available  only  in  Japanese),"  RIETI  Discussion 
Papers,  no.  02-J-018,  November  2002,  https://www.rieti.go.jp/jp/publications/summary/02110001. 
html.  Kawamoto  Takuji,  "What  Do  the  Purified  Solow  Residuals  Tell  Us  about  Japan's  Lost 
Decade?,"  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  vol.23,  no.1,  February  2005.  Kwon  Hyeog  Ug  and 
Fukao Kyoji, "Ushinawareta 10-nen ni TFP jyōshō wa naze teitai shitaka -- Seizōgyō kigyō dēta ni 
yoru jisshō bunseki," chap. 3 in Keizai seido no jisshō bunseki to sekkei, vol.1 Keizai teitai no genin 
to seido, ed. Hayashi Fumio (Tokyo: Keiso Shobo, 2007). 
 4 
 Moreover,  in  the  case  of  Japan,  another  factor  that  has  contributed  to  the  recovery  in 
economic growth is the recovery in TFP growth. The contribution of TFP growth -- at 
1.0  percent  --  has  been  higher  than  the  average  of  the  seven  countries,  which  is  0.6 
percent. I think that the recovery in TFP growth is partly due to the contribution of the 
"high-pressure  economy,"  which  I  will  talk  about  later.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
contribution  of  capital  input  has  further  declined  from  1995-2012,  dropping  to  0.2 
percent.  This  is  lower  than  the  average  of  the  seven  countries,  which  is  0.4  percent. 
Moreover,  dividing  capital  input  growth  into  growth  in  ICT  capital  and  other  capital 
shows  that  input  growth  in  both  is  lower  than  the  average  of  the  seven  countries.  It 
could  be  said  that,  in  Japan,  the  contribution  of  capital  to  economic  recovery  is 
insufficient, and so is capital investment. I will return to this issue later.   
 Looking at the seven countries, most of them have been experiencing declining growth, 
as  indicated  by  the  blue  line  in  the  charts.  Countries  growing  faster  than  Japan  have 
been able to do so due to population growth including immigration. While low growth 
has been a problem in Japan since the late 1990s, it has now become a global problem. 
At the same time, inflation also has been falling. Until the 1980s, developed countries -- 
especially Italy and the United Kingdom -- were suffering from high inflation, so hardly 
anyone in the world was concerned about the possibility of falling prices, which now is 
a  major  issue.  In  Japan,  from  the  mid-1990s  onward,  it  has  been  pointed  out  that 
deflation  has  led  to  sluggish  output  growth,  exacerbating  the  nonperforming-loan 
problem and the fiscal deficit problem.4 
 While  the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  struggled  to  maintain  positive 
inflation, they somehow succeeded. However, the situation seems  different  in  the case 
of continental Europe. For example, as seen in the charts, inflation in Germany, France, 
and  Italy  has  not  reached  1  percent  in  2012-17,  so  it  can  be  said  that  they  are  under 
deflationary  pressure.  Meanwhile,  Japan  has  recovered  from  the  deflation  observed  in 
1995-2012,  but  the  rate  of  increase  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  has  not  yet 
reached 1 percent. 
                                                 
4  Iwata  Kikuo, "Naze keiki no teimei ga tsuzuku no ka?,"  chap. 2 in  Nihon gata byōdō shakai wa 
horobu no ka (Tokyo: Toyo Keizai, 1995).   
 5 
  Furthermore,  interest  rates  also  have  been  declining.  While  this  reflects  the  decline  in 
real growth rates and in inflation, it seems there are additional factors that play a role.5   
 2. Why Is the 2 Percent Inflation Target Important? 
As mentioned earlier, not only Japan but other major countries  also are suffering from 
low  growth  and  low  inflation.  In  addition,  countries  in  continental  Europe  have  been 
unable to achieve their inflation targets, which aim at 2 percent. So, why is inflation of 2 
percent important? Some argue that if other countries cannot achieve 2 percent inflation, 
Japan will not need to accomplish this target.   
 The Bank has cited three reasons  why achieving  2 percent  inflation  is  important.6  My 
interpretation of the Bank's view can be summarized as follows. First, aiming at achieving 0 
percent inflation entails the risk of actually aiming for deflation, given the upward bias of 
the CPI. Second, the equilibrium interest rates -- which are achieved in the long run -- tend 
to  be  lower  on  a  nominal  basis  when  the  aim  is  0  percent  inflation.  That  being  the  case, 
there  will  be  virtually  no  room  for  lowering  interest  rates  should  the  economy  fall  into 
recession.  In  order  to  avoid  this,  it  is  necessary  to  provide  a  so-called  buffer  for  nominal 
interest  rates  by  raising  the  inflation  rate.  Third  is  the  global  standard.  Given  that  other 
major countries aim at achieving 2 percent inflation, if Japan were the only country with a 
lower target, this would result in an appreciation of the yen, which would create turmoil in 
firms' investment plans. If Japan maintains the same inflation rate as other countries, I feel 
that this will serve to stabilize foreign exchange over the long term. 
                                                 
5  On this point, I explained interest rate declines in relation to declines in the real GDP growth rate 
and the inflation rate as well as structural changes in the supply of and demand for funds in Harada 
Yutaka,  "Naze  nihon  no  kinri  wa  hikui  no  ka,"  Keiki  to  saikuru,  no.  62,  Japan  Association  of 
Business Cycle Studies, November 2016. In addition, the relationship between monetary policy and 
interest rates is explained in Ben S. Bernanke, "Why are interest rates so low?" Brookings Institution, 
March  30,  2015,  https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben-bernanke/2015/03/30/why-are-interest-rates- 
so-low/.  The  Cabinet Office  raises  the  decline  in  capital  goods prices  and  heightening  demand  for 
safe assets as factors behind interest rate declines in Cabinet Office, Sekai keizai no chōryū 2016 nen 
II, chap. 1, section 1, January 2017. 
6  Haruhiko  Kuroda,  "Overcoming  Deflation  and  After:  Speech  at  the  Meeting  of  Councillors  of 
Nippon Keidanren (Japan Business Federation) in Tokyo," Bank of Japan, December 2013. 
 6 
 Of these theories, I consider the buffer theory of interest rates within the second point to be 
the  most  important  and  would  like  to  provide  my  view  on  it.  This  theory  is  completely 
different  from  the  one  advocated  by  the  Bank  in  the  past.  The  previous  theory  aimed  at 
raising  interest  rates  preemptively  even  when  the  economic  recovery  was  insufficient, 
because if interest rates were too low, it would be difficult to implement stimulus measures 
during recessions. Such monetary policy resulted in a complete failure. 
 The buffer theory should be interpreted as  raising interest rates after confirming that price 
increases have gained enough momentum. This theory posits that interest rates will rise due 
to inflation. I would like to emphasize that the Bank's current thinking on the buffer theory 
is totally different from the previous incorrect one. 
 Private  banks'  business  consists  of  borrowing  short-term  debt  and  financing  long-term 
lending. The higher long-term interest rates are relative to short-term rates, the larger banks' 
loan  margins  will  be.  Since  short-term  interest  rates  generally  do  not  rise  as  much  as 
long-term rates, banks naturally will gain profits if interest rates go up due to an increase in 
the  inflation  rate.  So,  why  did  banks  want  a  hike  in  interest  rates  as  early  as  possible? 
Maybe they have not been sufficiently aware of the mechanism that lowering interest rates 
to stimulate the economy will lead to a rise in inflation and hence in nominal interest rates, 
or  maybe  they  have  been  aware  of  this  mechanism  but  were  so  desperate  for  a  rise  in 
interest rates that they could not wait.   
 Moreover, there are many who say that the Bank's large-scale asset purchases and negative 
interest  rate  policy  are  unusual,  and  thus  the  policy  must  be  "normalized"  as  early  as 
possible.7  However, they never explain on what basis policy should be regarded as usual or 
unusual.  Termination  of  the  zero  interest  rate  policy  in  2000  and  of  quantitative  easing  in 
2006  can  be  regarded  as  attempts  to  "normalize"  monetary  policy,  but  these  proved  to  be 
major failures. The premature tightening of monetary policy  gave rise to concerns about a 
deterioration  in  the  economy,  and  the  spread  between  short-  and  long-term  interest  rates 
                                                 
7  See,  for  example,  Yamakawa  Tetsufumi,  "Deguchi  no  meiro,  kin'yū  seisaku  o  tou  22,  Seifu  no 
'datsu  defure 
sengen'  uke 
seijyōka 
e,"  Shūkan  Ekonomisuto,  March  13,  2018, 
https://www.weekly-economist.com/20180313bojexit/.   
 7 
 actually  declined  rather  than  increased.8  Similarly,  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  the 
spread between such rates has been declining. This is said to be because of the cooling of 
the economy brought about by the monetary tightening implemented so far. If interest rates 
were  raised  immediately  in  Japan  now,  the  spread  between  short-  and  long-term  interest 
rates likely would be reversed. 
 Moreover,  there  is  another  reason  for  the  Bank's  committing  to  the  2  percent  inflation 
target;  namely,  that  we  cannot  fully  grasp  the  actual  strength  of  the  economy  at  present. 
Specifically,  we  do  not  actually  know  the  exact  structural  unemployment  rate,  which 
represents the limit below which any further decline in the rate gives rise to inflation. If the 
Bank had terminated monetary easing based on estimates that the structural unemployment 
rate  was  around  3.5  percent  or  lower,  the  current  unemployment  rate  of  2.0-2.5  percent 
would not have been achieved.9  In fact, I think that we probably will be able to achieve an 
even lower unemployment rate. The reason why lower unemployment was achieved and a 
bubble has not occurred is because the inflation rate is set as the direct target for monetary 
policy. Moreover, given the rise in wages, nonmanufacturing firms are making progress in 
streamlining  business  processes  and  making  labor-saving  investment.  In  other  words, 
                                                 
8  For  more on this point, see Yutaka Harada, "Economic Activity, Prices, and Monetary Policy in 
Japan: Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Ishikawa," Bank of Japan, July 2018. 
9  The following publications showed that the structural unemployment rate was around 3.5 percent 
or lower using unemployment-vacancy analysis: Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, Analysis of 
the  Labour  Economy  2015,  September  2015;  Cabinet  Office,  Annual  Report  on  the  Japanese 
Economy  and  Public  Finance  2015,  August  2015;  and  Bank  of  Japan,  "The  Bank's  View"  in  the 
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the report), October 2014. 
The Bank, from the April 2015 report, deleted the description regarding the structural unemployment 
rate from the main text of "The Bank's View" and added the following in a footnote to it: "This rate 
[the structural unemployment rate] is calculated to be around 3.5 percent or lower recently under a 
specific  methodology."  Then,  from  the  April  2016  report,  this  description  was  deleted  from  that 
footnote and instead moved to a footnote to "The Background." From the July 2016 report, the actual 
level of the structural unemployment rate referred to in that footnote was replaced by the following 
expression:  "the  structural  unemployment  rate  defined  here  differs  from  the  concept  of 
Non-Accelerating  Inflation  Rate  of  Unemployment  (NAIRU),  and  does  not  show  a  direct 
relationship with prices or wages." The chart presenting the structural unemployment rate had long 
been published in the "The Background," and it indicated that the rate gradually had been declining 
from the range of 3.0-3.5 percent. The rate exhibited a sharp drop to around 2.5 percent in the April 
2018 report, before the chart was removed from "The Background" in the July 2018 report. 
 8 
 having a clear inflation target made it possible to implement bold monetary policy and bring 
about a recovery of the economy. 
 At the international conference entitled "Central Banking in a Changing World," hosted by 
the  Bank's  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies  (IMES)  in  May  2018,  Professor 
Athanasios Orphanides of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the Honorary Advisor 
to  IMES  --  who  served  as  the  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Cyprus  and  was  then  a 
member of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank (ECB) -- commented that 
lack of clarity on the precise definition of price stability made the Bank reluctant to engage 
in  decisive  quantitative  easing  and  instead  willing  to  accommodate  too-low  inflation. 
However, he also said that, following the clarification of the definition as 2 percent in terms 
of the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI in 2013, a dramatic reorientation of monetary 
policy  took  place,  and  the  decisive  QQE  introduced  in  the  same  year  has  been  gradually 
reflating 
the  economy  while  simultaneously 
improving  Japan's  government  debt 
dynamics.10 
 III. The "High-Pressure Economy" and Real Economic Growth 
Monetary  easing  measures  stimulate  the  economy,  bring  about  labor  shortages,  and  exert 
pressure on the economy to grow. While there are a variety of channels through which such 
a "high-pressure economy" results in higher real growth rate, I would like to consider this in 
terms of the results of growth accounting mentioned earlier.11  Following the introduction of 
QQE, Japan's real growth rate recovered due to increases in growth in labor input as well as 
TFP. However, capital input both in terms of ICT capital as well as other capital has been 
decelerating.   
 The  reason  why  labor  input  increased  is  because  QQE  succeeded  in  stimulating  the 
economy.  While  the  number  of  unemployed  will  increase  during  a  recession,  those  that 
have  been  unemployed  will  start  to  work  during  an  economic  upturn,  and  with  the 
                                                 
10   Athanasios  Orphanides,  "The  Boundaries  of  Central  Bank  Independence:  Lessons  from 
Unconventional Times," Monetary and Economic Studies, vol.36, no.4, November 2018. 
11  I have explained these channels in Harada Yutaka, "Nihon keizai to seisansei: Special Lecture at a 
Conference  Commemorating  Daiwa  Institute  of  Research's  200th  Release  of  Japan's  Economic 
Outlook," Bank of Japan, March 2019. 
 9 
 improvement  in  the  employment  situation,  those  who  had  given  up  looking  for  work  will 
also actively look for work again and then start working. As a result, labor input increases. 
 Moreover,  because  a  recession  means  that  there  is  less  work,  those  who  fortunately  have 
had a job will try hard not to lose it. Amid a lack of jobs, the so-called black firms will take 
advantage  of  their  employees  that  do  not  want  to  lose  the  job  they  managed  to  get, 
subjecting  them  to  harsh  working  conditions. 12  Meanwhile,  large  firms,  because  they 
cannot easily lay off employees, will be saddled with a lot of dissatisfied employees with an 
uncertain career and future. Under these circumstances, profits and productivity are unlikely 
to grow. 
 When  the  economy  expands,  low-productivity  work  tends  to  be  reduced.  In  times  of 
recession, sales fall and retailers, restaurants, and so forth will try to increase demand, even 
if only a little, by extending their business hours. The opposite occurs during an economic 
upturn.  If  there  are  labor  shortages,  restaurants  that  used  to  stay  open  until  midnight  will 
start to close early. If they open only during the busiest times of the day and in the evening, 
labor productivity will increase. 
 If there are labor shortages, this makes it possible for people to switch jobs. Those working 
at  black  firms  will  flee  while  those  with  an  uncertain  career  and  future  will  also  try  to 
relocate  in  order  to  obtain  new  jobs.  Since  they  will  move  to  firms  that  value  them  more 
highly,  the  economy's  overall  productivity  will  increase.  This  is  not  only  a  matter  of 
productivity.  Engaging  in  a  job  in  which  they  are  valued  more  highly  also  raises  their 
degree  of  happiness.  In  other  words,  levels  of  both  productivity  and  happiness  rise  at  the 
same time, and so will that of TFP.   
 Lastly, let me explain capital input. Why is capital input not increasing? This is  similar to 
asking  why  investment  is  not  increasing  in  line  with  profits.  Reasons  for  this  include  low 
growth expectations, the self-fulfilling nature of growth expectations, and sluggish growth 
in  domestic  business  fixed  investment  caused  by  the  strong  appetite  for  overseas 
                                                 
12  For  examples  of  black  firms,  see  Konno  Haruki,  Burakku  kigyō,  Nihon  o  kuitsubusu  yōkai 
(Tokyo: Bunshun Shinsho, 2012). 
 10 
 investment.13  The  latter  reflects  concerns  over  a  shrinking  of  the  domestic  market  due  to 
the  declining  population  and  the  experience  of  intermittent  surges  in  the  value  of  the  yen 
amid its appreciating trend up until the introduction of QQE. Of these reasons, what I think 
is particularly noteworthy is the self-fulfilling nature of growth expectations. Low growth in 
the past and intermittent surges in the yen will reduce growth expectations and the expected 
rate of return on investment. Therefore, in order for investment to recover, continued high 
growth and stable exchange rates are vital. From 2012 until today, average annual growth 
has  remained  just  above  1  percent,  the  exchange  rate  has  been  stable,  and  investment  has 
been recovering, but most recently we appear to have entered a more difficult phase. This is 
something I will discuss when talking about recent economic developments later. 
 IV. Low Interest Rates and the Profitability of Private Banks 
As  I  have  explained,  while  low  interest  rates  have  led  to  labor  shortages  and  are  likely  to 
have  contributed  to  increased  productivity  and  happiness,  it  frequently  is  argued  that  they 
undermine the profitability of private banks.14  However, I think that deterioration in banks' 
profitability actually is caused by the structural problem that they are accumulating deposits 
despite  there  being  no  borrowers.  Let  me  examine  what  would  have  happened  to  banks' 
profitability if the Bank did not conduct bold monetary easing, namely QQE. 
 From  the  time  of  the  introduction  of  QQE  up  until  February  2019,  loans  by  domestically 
licensed  banks  increased  by  71  trillion  yen  while  deposits  increased  by  as  much  as  144 
trillion  yen.15  I  think  that  banks  typically  would  react  positively  to  monetary  policy  that 
allows them to increase loans by as much as 71 trillion yen; on the contrary, they express 
considerable criticism and  dissatisfaction. This is because deposits are growing faster than 
loans, which makes it difficult for some banks to invest these funds. Of course, deposits will 
rise as lending increases as a result of the money multiplier mechanism, but this mechanism 
                                                 
13  See Naoya Kato and Takuji Kawamoto, "Corporate Profits and Business Fixed Investment: Why 
are  Firms  So  Cautious  about  Investment?"  Bank  of  Japan  Review,  no.  16-E-2,  April  2016, 
https://www.boj.or.jp/en/research/wps_rev/rev_2016/data/rev16e02.pdf.;  and  Aoki  Daiju  and 
Shikano  Tatsushi,  "Shotoku  ga  nobitemo  shishutsu  ga  nobinai  no  wa  naze  ka,"  chap.  4  in 
Abenomikusu no shinka, ed. Harada Yutaka and Masujima Minoru (Tokyo: Chuokeizai-sha, 2018). 
14  See, for example, "Mienu 'deguchi,' fukusayō zōdai: ginkōkai ni takamaru fuman -- mainasu kinri 
3 nen," Jiji Press, February 15, 2019, https://www.jiji.com/jc/article?k=2019021500887&g=eco. 
15  Bank of Japan, Financial Institutions Accounts. 
 11 
 alone does not lead to an increase in deposits twice as large as the increase in loans. In my 
opinion,  if  banks  are  struggling  to  invest  funds,  it  might  be  better  if  they  tried  not  to 
accumulate deposits.   
 In  this  context,  news  reports  suggest  that  regional  financial  institutions  are  struggling  to 
attract  personnel  and  that  staff  members  are  retiring  early.16  While  this  is  reported  as 
though  it  is  troublesome,  it  consequently  could  lead  to  a  reduction  in  the  number  of 
personnel assigned to collecting more deposits than needed and in that of branches.  I think 
that this would increase the productivity of the banking sector, and thus of Japan's economy 
as a whole. 
 I  am  aware,  of  course,  of  the  criticism  that  the  decline  in  the  number  of  bank  branches 
would reduce convenience for users, and thus banks should not close branches.17  However, 
banks  would  decide  to  close  such  branches  because  they  only  have  few  customers  in  the 
first place. I agree with the argument that having a deposit account should be regarded as a 
basic human right, but there are many other places to make a deposit account, such as post 
offices,  agricultural  and  fishery  cooperatives,  credit  cooperatives,  convenience  stores,  and 
supermarkets  that  provide  banking  services.  Deposit  accounts  can  be  held  in  a  range  of 
places nowadays. 
 To examine the impact of the Bank's easing policy on banks' profits, Chart 2 compares the 
actual  deposit-taking  and  lending-related  profit  as  a  result  of  the  increase  in  lending  and 
decline  in  interest  rates  since  the  introduction  of  QQE  (where  profit  is  calculated  by 
subtracting  interest  on  deposits  from  interest  on  loans)  as  well  as  hypothetical 
deposit-taking  and  lending-related  profit  had  QQE  not  been  introduced.  In  particular,  two 
counterfactual scenarios are considered. In the first, Case 1, it is assumed that without QQE 
                                                 
16  See,  for  example,  the  2-day  series,  Minami  Takero  and  Nakatani  Shogo,  "Chigin  haran  jinzai 
kokatsu no kiki," Nikkei, February 20 and 21, 2019.   
17  Yamaneko,  "Keizai  kishōdai  ginkō  no  kyogaku  sonshitsu,  dare  no  tame,"  the  Asahi  Shimbun, 
March 26, 2019.  The article describes how deterioration in banks' profits has started to undermine 
users' convenience -- for example, branches that people nearby have frequented have closed and/or 
some  other  branches  have  stopped  providing  services  for  corporate  clients,  allowing  use  only  by 
individual clients. 
 12 
 lending  would  not  have  increased  and  interest  rates  would  have  continued  declining, 
following the past trend. Next, although I think that it is correct to assume that interest rates 
would have continued to drop as a trend due to the decline in prices and in real GDP growth 
rate, as pointed out earlier, the second counterfactual scenario, Case 2, assumes that interest 
rates would not have declined.   
  Comparing the actual deposit-taking and lending-related profit with the hypothetical cases, 
the  profit  in  Case  1  in  fiscal  2017  would  have  been  0.2  trillion  yen  higher  than  the actual 
profit. In Case 2, it would have been 1 trillion yen higher. Adding up the differences from 
fiscal 2013, the cumulative total would be 0.9 trillion yen in Case 1 and 3.4 trillion yen in 
Case  2.  However,  the  economy  improved,  stocks  rose,  and  interest  rates  declined  due  to 
QQE,  so  credit  costs  have  decreased  and  realized  gains/losses  on  stockholdings  and 
bondholdings  have  increased  as  a  result  of  QQE.  If  we  cumulate  these  gains/losses  from 
 13 
 fiscal 2013, they reach 4.0 trillion yen by fiscal 2017, which is greater than the cumulative 
total in Case 1 or 2 during the same period.18  It could be said that, until fiscal 2017, banks' 
profits were actually higher as a result of QQE than they would have been otherwise. The 
argument that banks' profits have decreased as a result of QQE is based on the implausible 
assumption that profits would have increased by more if only interest rates had not declined, 
completely ignoring the fact that the decline in interest rates brought about the improvement 
in the economy. 
                                                    
18   Calculated  by  adding  realized  gains/losses  on  bondholdings,  realized  gains/losses  on 
stockholdings,  and  credit  costs  of  major  banks  (non-consolidated)  as  well  as  regional  banks 
(non-consolidated).  Data  are  taken  from  the  Bank's  Financial  System  and  Bank  Examination 
Department's  annual  Financial  Results  of  Japan's  Banks  for  each  fiscal  year  from  fiscal  2013 
through 2017 (those for fiscal 2014 are available only in Japanese). 
 14 
 V. Recent Economic Developments and Monetary Policy 
I  have  talked  about  the  importance  of  creating  a  "high-pressure  economy"  with  the 
monetary easing policy. I now would like to talk about recent economic developments. 
 Charts 3 and 4 provide an overview of key economic indicators. Almost all the indicators -- 
for production, investment (the aggregate supply of capital goods), exports, and world trade 
-- had been improving. However, there are many indicators that are falling currently. 
  Chart 4 looks at wages, employment, employee income (wages multiplied by the number of 
employees),  and  consumption. 19   Real  wages  per  worker  have  not  increased,  but  real 
                                                 
19  In  my  past  speeches,  I  defined  real  employee  income  as  the  number  of  regular  employees 
multiplied  by  real  wages  based  on  the  Monthly  Labour  Survey.  However,  taking  into  account  the 
decline  in  the  level  of  the  number  of  regular  employees  for  January  2018,  I  have  redefined  real 
employee income as the product of the number of employed based on the Labour Force Survey and 
real wages based on the Monthly Labour Survey. 
 15 
 employee  income  (real wages multiplied by the number of employees) has  grown  more  or 
less  steadily  except  for  fiscal  2014,  the  year  of  the  consumption  tax  hike.  The 
unemployment rate also has declined.   
 Among  the  different  indicators,  the  one  showing  weak  improvement  is  real  consumption. 
Consumption  as  measured  by  the  consumption  activity  index  is  still  below  the  level  in 
2013; that is, before the spike in demand due to the frontloading of purchases prior to the 
consumption tax hike. However, it is true that consumption generally has been recovering.   
   16 
 As mentioned earlier, the economy has been recovering due to QQE. However, exports and 
production  have  been  declining  since  the  second  half  of  2018,  given,  for  example,  the 
sluggish  world  trade  volume.  I  consider  that  there  is  a  risk  of  these  declines  spreading  to 
employment and consumption. Also, there are a number of risks to economic activity going 
forward, such as the conduct of economic policy in the United States, trade friction between 
the  United  States  and  China,  the  United  Kingdom's  exit  from  the  European  Union  (EU), 
developments in the European economy, and a slowdown of the Chinese economy. It also 
should be noted that, in Japan, a consumption tax hike is scheduled to take place in October 
2019.   
 Challenges for Achieving the Price Stability Target of 2 Percent 
The economy has been weak recently, and the same can be said about prices. According to 
the most recent data, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all items less fresh food 
for March was only 0.8 percent, and that for all items less fresh food and  energy was only 
0.4 percent. Even so, if the economy continues to recover under the current monetary policy, 
the  labor  market  will  tighten  and  prices  eventually  will  rise.  There  are  some  hurdles  to 
overcome in achieving stable price rises, however. 
 First is the difficult situation the economy currently faces, as you already are familiar with. 
 Second is consumption tax hikes. Tax hikes could push the economy into recession, and a 
resultant decrease in demand could push down prices. Regarding the hike scheduled to take 
place in October 2019, its effects are likely to be smaller than those of the previous hike in 
April 2014 due to the following reasons: the rate increase -- from 8 percent to 10 percent -- 
is smaller than that of the previous hike; a reduced tax rate will be applied to some items; 
permanent  measures  such  as  those  concerning  the  provision  of  free  education  will  be 
implemented; and a variety of measures are to be taken so as to smooth out the effects of 
the  front-loaded  increase in  demand  and  its  fallback.  However,  the  effects  of  the  previous 
tax  hike,  which  many  economists  had expected  to be  limited,  have  proved  significant  and 
lasting.  There  is  a  possibility  that  a  decline  in  demand,  such  as  the  one  seen  after  the 
previous hike, naturally would contain inflation. 
  17 
 The  third  hurdle  is  price  declines  associated  with  the  scheduled  consumption  tax  hike. 
Measures  concerning  the  provision  of  free  education  will  be  implemented  alongside  the 
hike.  The  Bank  estimates  that  the  price  rises  brought  about  by  the  hike  and  the  effect  of 
prices being pushed down due to the provision of free education will together push up the 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all items less fresh food for fiscal 2019 and 2020, 
by 0.2 and 0.1 percentage point, respectively.   
 In  addition,  I  would  like  to  mention  another  factor  that  is  not  directly  related  to  the 
consumption  tax  hike.  It  is  the  planned  reduction  in  charges  for  mobile  phone  services 
recently  announced  by  some  of  the  major  mobile  network  operators  in  Japan.  Although 
many of the details are uncertain and it depends on the prerequisites for such details, many 
analyses seem to suggest that it would push down the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI 
for  all  items  less  fresh  food  by  0.1  to  0.3  percentage  point. 20  Assuming  that  these 
estimations are correct, achievement of the 2 percent price stability target inevitably would 
be delayed, in accordance with the degree of reduction. 
 Regardless of these setbacks, I am not too pessimistic. The provision of free education and a 
reduction  in  mobile  phone-related  prices  are  no  different  from  tax  cuts,  and  people's  real 
income increases by an amount equivalent to the degree of price declines. Although it likely 
will  take  time  for  an  increase  in  real  income  to  induce  an  increase  in  actual  demand,  this 
will not hamper the achievement of the 2 percent price stability target itself. This also could 
be said about other price declines, including those in crude oil prices. Nevertheless, there is 
a  risk  that  the  current  sluggishness  in  observed  prices  will  spill  over  to  inflation 
expectations, further delaying inflation. 
 To  prepare  for  uncertainties  accompanying  the  scheduled  consumption  tax  hike  and 
overseas  economic  outlook,  the  Bank  clarified  its  forward  guidance  and  decided  to 
implement  measures  contributing  to  the  continuation  of  monetary  easing  at  the  Monetary 
                                                 
20  See,  for  example,  Kato  Azusa  and  Kono  Ryutaro,  "Economic  Spotlight,  keitai  ryōkin  4  wari 
hikisage  no  inpakuto:  CPI  ni  wa  0.3  pointo  teido  no  inpakuto  ka,"  BNP Paribas  Securities  (Japan) 
Limited, April 2019 and Tonouchi Shuji, "Fandamentaruzu nabigētā, keitai shinryōkin ni yoru CPI 
shitaoshi  kōka  wa  yahari  genteiteki  to  narisō,"  Mitsubishi  UFJ  Morgan  Stanley  Securities,  April 
2019. 
 18 
 Policy  Meeting  held  on  April  25,  2019.21  I  considered  it  desirable  to  clarify  the  forward 
guidance  but  continued  to  oppose  the  policy  proposal.  This  was  because  I  considered that 
the Bank should indicate data-dependent guidance -- such as "the Bank intends to maintain 
the  current  levels  of  short-  and  long-term  interest  rates  unless  prices  show  stronger 
movements  than  currently  anticipated"  --  to  further  clarify  its  relationship  with  the  price 
stability target.22 
 Concluding Remarks 
In my speech today, I examined Japan's economy since the 1980s using growth accounting 
and at the same time looked at the effects of monetary policy during this period. What this 
showed  is  that  monetary  policy  has  the  ability  to  raise  productivity  not  only  from  a 
short-term  perspective  but  also  from  a  long-term  perspective.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is 
also  a  deep-rooted  argument  that  bold  monetary  easing  undermines  the  profitability  of 
private banks. In this regard, I pointed out that this argument appears to ignore the positive 
impact  of  the  overall  economic  recovery  on  banks'  profitability.  Lastly,  I  talked  about  the 
current state of Japan's economy and monetary policy. At present, domestic demand such as 
business  fixed  investment  and  consumption  has  withstood  the  decline  in  external  demand 
and production. However, it also is true that downside risks to the economy are increasing. 
The impact of the consumption tax hike scheduled for October this year also is a concern. If 
the economy deteriorates to the extent that achieving the 2 percent price stability target in 
the  long  term  becomes  difficult,  I  view  it  as  necessary  to  strengthen  monetary  easing 
without delay. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
                                                  
21  See, Bank of Japan, "Statement on Monetary Policy" and its Attachment, April 2019. 
22  For  my  opinion  regarding  data-dependent  forward  guidance,  see  Yutaka  Harada,  "Economic 
Activity,  Prices,  and  Monetary  Policy  in  Japan:  Speech  at  a  Meeting  with  Business  Leaders  in 
Yamanashi," Bank of Japan, March 2019. 
 19 
