“Global risks and prospects for 2019” 
Keynote speech 
by Professor John (Iannis) Mourmouras 
Senior Deputy Governor 
Bank of Greece 
Former Deputy Finance Minister 
 at OMFIF-CAMRI Panel in Singapore “Trade, China and Brexit: Global Economic Challenges for 
2019” 
 Singapore, 25 January 2019 
 1. Introduction 
Dear Professors, 
Distinguished panellists, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the Centre for Asset Management Research and Investments at the 
National University of Singapore and OMFIF for the kind invitation and say that I am very 
happy to be back in Singapore. I was here in March 2016 upon an invitation from the Lee 
Kuan Yew School of Public Policy to discuss the role of negative interest rates in terms of 
the transmission of monetary policy and its impact. Today, my focus is on the main risks for 
the financial markets this year, which could result in heightened uncertainty across the global 
economy, prompting certain Cassandras to foretell a global economic downturn and even a 
recession. 
The synchronized global expansion of 2017 gave way to a disparate growth picture in 2018. 
Growth in the United States has remained solid (2.9%), bolstered by fiscal stimulus. In 
contrast, activity in the euro area has been somewhat weaker than previously expected near 
1.7%, owing to slowing net exports. In the emerging economies, growth edged down to an 
estimated 4.6% in 2018, as a number of countries with elevated current account deficits 
experienced substantial financial market pressures and appreciable slowdowns in activity. All 
in all, global growth is projected to moderate from 3.7% in 2018 to 3.5% in 2019, before 
picking up slightly to 3.6% in 2020, as economic slack dissipates, monetary policy 
accommodation in advanced economies is removed, and global trade gradually slows. 
According to IMF estimates, advanced-economy growth will gradually decelerate toward 
potential, falling to 2% in 2019 as monetary policy is normalized and capacity constraints 
become increasingly binding. Softening global trade and tighter financing conditions will 
result in a more challenging external environment for emerging economies with EMEs’ 
growth expected to tick down at 4.5% in 2019. In China, GDP growth slowed to 6.6% in 
2018, its lowest annual rate since 1990. A further moderate slowdown in Chinese growth is 
expected this year (at 6.2%), as increased trade tensions could offset the positive effects of 
the stimulus package. 
Before coming to the analysis of global risks for this year, which is the main topic of my 
lecture today, a short digression may be in order on the allegedly reduced role of 
globalisation.   
1 
 Global inflation has generally remained contained in recent months in advanced economies 
(IMF estimate: 2.0% in 2018), while in emerging market economies, inflationary pressures 
are easing as a result of lower oil prices (IMF estimate: 4.5% in 2018).  
According to World Bank and OECD national accounts data, global flows of trade in goods 
and services measured as a share of gross domestic product (GDP) had been on a steady rise 
until  2008,  when  they  peaked  at  about  61%  of  GDP  and  have  remained  sluggish,  having 
fallen to 56.2% in 2016. 
Similarly,  cross-border  capital  flows  show  that  today  globalisation  is  in  retreat.  Having 
reached  their  peak  at  21.4%  of  GDP  in  2007,  global  capital  flows  have  been  following  a 
steady downward trend to 6.9% in 2017. 
However, and this is my belief, there is a visible rise of powerful regions in economic terms, 
as the centre of gravity of the  economy has been moving to the East, creating new regional 
blocs  around  the  world’s  major  superpowers,  e.g.  China.  China  has  already  become  an 
economic  superpower  and  the  economies  comprising  the  Association  of  Southeast  Asian 
Nations  (ASEAN),  now  the  world’s  fourth  largest  trading  bloc  in  terms  of  GDP,  have 
significantly  benefited  from  its  rise,  given  that  China  is  ASEAN’s  most  important  trade 
partner.  Total  ASEAN  trade  has  increased  by  about  US$1  trillion  between  2007  and  2017, 
with intra-ASEAN trade comprising the largest share of ASEAN’s total trade by partner (see 
Figure 1 for China’s rising trade share with ASEAN countries, which hit a peak in 2017). 
Figure 1 China’s trade share with ASEAN and total trade for the top five countries  
 
      
 
 
Source: Estimates from CEIC database.  
 
So we are not talking about a reduced role of globalisation, but a new kind or form of 
globalisation, on the back of the digital revolution (or the 4th industrial revolution), the emergence 
of blockchain in banking and financial markets and the predominance of information and 
communication technology, or ICT, with a significant impact of big data on trade and capital 
flows around the world. It is obvious from Figure 2 below, an enormous surge in big data flows, 
which increased seven-fold, outpaced the flows of trade and finance, which dropped since the last 
global financial crisis. 
 2 
Figure 2 Global flows of data have outpaced traditional trade and financial flows 
 Source: McKinsey Quarterly - April 2017, p. 4. 
2. Two major risks for 2019 
2.1 Trade war: Where do we stand now? 
Let me start with the trade war between the United States and China, which for many is the 
key  risk  for  the  year  ahead  (see  Table  1).  Even  though  this  has  not  led  to  a  significant 
slowdown  in  world  trade,  thanks  in  particular  to  the  robustness  of  US  demand,  the 
negotiations  are  expected  to  remain  a  key  topic  in  2019.  The  latest  round  of  actions  (10% 
tariffs on US$200 billion of US imports from China and 5-10% tariffs on US$60 billion of 
China’s imports from the US) are set to make a more material economic impact than previous 
ones [insert Table 1].  
More  recently,  on  1  December  2018, the  presidents  of  the  US  and  China  reached  a  90-day 
truce on the raising of tariffs, conditional on efforts made by Beijing with regard to demands 
from  the  US.  If  no  significant  progress  is  made,  the  increase  of  10%  to  25%  on  US  $200 
billion  of  imports  from  China  would  take  effect  on  1  March  2019.  Estimates  from  the 
Peterson Institute in Washington DC suggest that the US now has tariffs on 12% of its total 
imports, while the combined trading  partner retaliation covers 8% of total US exports, with 
the latest round having a bigger impact on households as more consumer goods have become 
subject  to  tariffs.  A  further  increase  in  the  tariffs  that  the  US  applies  to  Chinese  imports  − 
from  10%  to  25%  in  early  2019  –  could  negatively  affect  business  and  financial  market 
 3 
sentiment. As a recent ECB publication1 shows, an escalation to a more generalised trade war 
could lead to a significant drop in asset prices (see Figure 3).  
Table 1 Timeline of trade tensions since January 2018 
ource: Bloomberg.  
S
                                                           
1  European  Central  Bank,  The  resurgence  of  protectionism:  potential  implications  for  global  financial  stability, 
27/11/2018.  
4 
  Figure 3 Full trade war impact on asset prices across the globe 
 In  this scenario, US equity  prices  would  fall by  about  10%  and  US corporate bond  spreads 
would increase by up to 100bps in the first year. In the euro area, equity prices would fall by 
15% and corporate bond spreads would increase by 150bps in the first year.  
However, since  the  start  of  the  year  an  apparent progress  in the  US-China  negotiations  has 
been made as the rhetoric around them has appeared to soften, but the outcome is still hard to 
predict.  
2.2 Uncertainty over global monetary policies 
Last year global monetary policy stances diverged. At one end of the spectrum was the US 
Federal Reserve which raised its key interest rates 4 times from 1.50% to 2.50% confirming 
its gradual  approach to  monetary  tightening.  At  the other  end,  the  People’s  Bank of  China, 
and the Bank of Japan continued their ultra-loose monetary policies, while European Central 
Bank concluded its quantitative easing via PSPP. 2019 seems to be a different story from a 
central bank perspective as a “risk management” approach seems to prevail. Let me give you 
briefly my own insights on the global policy outlook:  
Starting with the Fed: After the dovish speech by the Fed Chair Jerome Powell earlier this 
month at the Economic Club of Washington D.C., which set the record for a data-dependent 
monetary policy, following the Fed’s projection for a GDP growth rate of 2.3% in 2019, the 
market participants no longer price in any hike in the Fed Funds rate this year. Most likely 
though, we might have one rate hike until the end of the 1st half of 2019.  
Turning  to  the  ECB,  the  ECB  will  continue  reinvesting  the  principal  payments  from 
maturing securities purchased for an extended period of time, contributing to accommodative 
monetary  policy  and favourable liquidity  conditions.  Moreover,  markets  expect  the ECB  to 
extend  its  long-term  loan  programme  to  the  banking  sector  (TLTRO).  At  yesterday’s  GC 
meeting,  the  ECB  left  its  key  interest  rates  unchanged,  while  it  said  it  intends  to  continue 
reinvesting maturing securities under its asset purchase programme for an extended period of 
time past the date when it starts raising the key interest rates. The ECB also left its forward 
guidance  unchanged,  but  moved  to  describing  growth  risks  “on  the  downside”  and  did  not 
take any decision on TLTROs. 
 
Regarding  the  BoE,  monetary  policy  remains  subject  to  the  outcome  of  Brexit.  The  high 
level of uncertainty forces the status quo to prevail in the short run. Hence, the basis for the 
Bank’s ‘hawkish’ policy signalling seems more doubtful.   
 5 
In Japan, the BoJ maintained its deposit rate at -0.10% and its 10-year target yield close to 
0.00%.  It  also  announced  that  it  would  extend  this  policy  on  a  long-term  basis  due  to  low 
inflation,  so  there  is  no  monetary  tightening  in  sight.  However,  in  order  to  pursue  this 
exceptional  policy,  the  BoJ  has  decided  to  grant  increased  flexibility  for  the  10-year  yield 
compared to target.  
Last  but  not  least,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBoC),  continues  its  accommodative 
monetary  policy  expanding  the  liquidity  offered  to  the  banking  system  in  2019  by 
strengthening  the  measures  put  in  place  in  2018.  Furthermore,  earlier  this  month,  PBoC 
decreased  by  100  basis  points  in  its  reserve  requirement  rate,  bringing  it  to  13.5%  for  big 
banks.  
 
One  last  comment  for  global  monetary  policy  outlook.  The  lack  of  significant  monetary 
tightening  in  large  advanced  economies  in  2019  does  not  mean  that  liquidity  will  return, 
since global liquidity will tighten, as central banks continue in their normalisation process.   
 
3. Other risks 
3.1 The US $247 trillion global debt mountain 
Another alarming feature for the global growth outlook is the global debt levels which have 
reached new records both in dollar terms and in relation to GDP. Total global debt owed by 
households, governments, non-financial  corporates  and  the  financial  sector  -  reached  318% 
of gross domestic product, while excluding the debt of financial companies like banks, total 
gross world public and private debt  reached a record 246% of GDP exceeding the previous 
record of 213% in 2009 (see Figure 4).  
 
Figure 4 Debt rises across the globe 
 A  higher  proportion  of  the  debt  has  accumulated  in  China  and  other  emerging  markets. 
Indeed, China’s total non-financial debt has risen over the past 10 years from 141% of GDP 
in 2008 to 261% in the first quarter of 2018. It has risen above the ranks of other emerging 
markets  to  exceed  that  of  the  US  and  match  the  eurozone’s.  Moreover,  China’s  household 
debt hit a record high at almost 50% of GDP in the March quarter of 2018, according to the 
BIS (see Figure 5).  
 
 6 
Figure 5 China’s household debt run-up  
  
Elsewhere, Japan and the US account for more than half of that global debt, while in the euro 
area, government  debt  remains  at  very  high  levels,  around  85%.  Finally,  public  debt  in  the 
emerging  markets  has  increased  by  11% of  GDP over  the  past  five  years, reaching  51%  in 
2018,  approaching  levels  last  seen  during  the  1980s  debt  crisis  driven  mainly  by  sizeable 
fiscal deficits and the domestic currency depreciations vis-à-vis the US.  
 
3.2 Brexit 
As far as Brexit is concerned, with the deadline approaching, financial services firms have no 
choice, but to continue preparing for the worst outcome ("no deal"), hoping for the best. The 
closer we get to 29 March without a deal, the more business from the City of London will be 
transferred  and  staff  either  hired  locally  or  relocated.  Many  companies  have  already 
confirmed they are moving or adding staff and/or operations elsewhere. It has been projected 
that  up  to  7,000  jobs  may  relocate  from  the  City  to  Dublin  and  Paris,  and  more  firms  will 
relocate to New York, so why not also to Singapore?  
Following  the  heavy  defeat  of  PM  May’s  EU  Withdrawal  Agreement  at  the  House  of 
Commons on Tuesday 15/1, there are now four possible Brexit scenarios: 1. A delayed Brexit 
2. No-deal Brexit 3. A second referendum and 4. A general election. 
I am probably not the ideal person to project  on the final outcome, although I have lived in 
the UK for more than a decade. The British are probably the most sophisticated electorate in 
Europe, but for me as a pro-European, all I can say is that even great nations sometimes make 
mistakes. Having said that, I have confidence in British diplomacy and UK institutions, so no 
matter what, the UK will face economic hardship in the short-term, but in the medium-term 
the  country,  including  the  City  of  London  as  a  major  financial  center,  will  not  only  sail 
through, but also thrive. 
3.3 European elections 
2019 is a year of multiple elections in the EU, the most significant of which is the vote for 
the new European Parliament, without the UK. There are three risks arising, first of all, from 
the  electoral  uncertainty  and  what  kind  of  a  parliamentary  formation  will  come  out  of  the 
European elections, from migration, a risk which is also linked with the general situation in 
terms of geopolitics in our continent and beyond and, last but not least, populism.  
Next  May’s  elections  for  the  new  European  Parliament  are  going  to  be  the  litmus  test  of 
populist  strength.  If  the  ruling  class  and  mainstream  political  parties  do  not  show  evidence 
7 
 that they have truly heard the message from ordinary people on the street (who are worried 
about migrants and jobs), the electorate will want to “punish” the political and technocratic 
elites with their vote. In the event of much broader support for populist/nationalist parties at 
next  year’s  elections,  the  populists  might  be  setting  the  agenda  in  European  politics  as  an 
unofficial  alliance  against  pro-European  forces.  Lacking  the  pragmatism  of  mainstream 
parties, populists risk shifting away from the pro-business, pro-market policies towards some 
form of “big government”. 
Some other notable parliamentary elections in Member States are in Belgium in May 2019, 
Denmark  in June  2019,  Estonia in  March  2019, Finland in  April  2019,  Portugal  in October 
2019 and also in my own country, Greece by October 2019 (see Table 1). 
Table 2 Some European countries heading to the polls in 2019 
 Belgium  
Denmark  
Estonia  
EU 
Finland 
Greece 
Lithuania  
Portugal 
 
4. FX and fixed income markets outlook 
federal and regional election 
general election 
parliamentary election 
European Parliament election 
parliamentary election 
parliamentary and regional election 
presidential election 
parliamentary election 
Both the start and end of 2018 were characterized by market turbulence due to uncertainty on 
the  sustainability  of  synchronized  global  economic  growth  and  accommodative  monetary 
policies, while many of last year’s problems remaining to be addressed. Taking into account 
the abovementioned risks, sharp bouts of risk-off will be a recurrent theme in 2019 and could 
catch  markets  by  surprise.  Hence,  2019  will  require  investors  to  embrace  a  more  prudent 
approach, and  the sustainability  of  future  returns  will be the  name  of  the  game  in 2019. In 
particular: 
In the foreign exchange market, US dollar strength was a predominant theme in 2018, thanks 
to US outperformance amid a strong procyclical fiscal stimulus, especially through tax cuts. 
Looking forward, trade war uncertainties, risks of a no-deal Brexit and Italian debt woes may 
keep  the  dollar  underpinned.  But  as  the  Fed  is  shifting  to  a  much  more  data-dependent 
approach there is high probability of a  monetary pause. Elsewhere, the pound sterling is in 
the  hands  of  politics  and  the  terms  of  the  impending  Brexit.  Uncertainties  will  weigh  near 
term, but an orderly ‘deal’ exit from the EU leaves scope for a visible rebound of sterling in 
the  first  half  of  the  year.  Finally,  further  escalation  in  the  trade  war  will  weigh  on  the 
Chinese currency. 
Turning  now  to  the  fixed  income  markets,  in  2018  the  US  government  bond  yields  moved 
higher  for  much  of  the  year,  while  the  other  global  bond  yields  remained  low.  The  2-year 
Treasuries offered around 90% of the 10-year yield with only one-fifth of the duration risk. 
Looking  into 2019, a  further  flattening  of the  yield curve is  expected, with the  long  end  of 
the  curve  moving  up  less  than  the  short  end  and  the  US  10-year  government  bond  yield  is 
expected to remain within its recent trading range, moving gradually higher, near the area of 
3%. Turning to the euro area, and given that the correlation between US Treasuries (USTs) 
and  German  Bunds  has  remained  high  (70%), the latter  should follow  USTs, but only  drift 
 8 
slightly  higher  from  their  low  levels  given  modest  inflation  expectations,  the  euro  area’s 
weak economic momentum and enhanced political risks. 
 
Thank you very much for your attention! 
 9 
