 Claudia M. Buch  
Vice-President of Deutsche Bundesbank 
 Policy Evaluation: 
Assessing the Effects of Post-Crisis Financial Sector 
Reforms 
  Keynote prepared for the workshop  
Women in Macro, Finance, and Economic History 
DIW Berlin 
 June 17-18, 2019 
 Seite 1 von 13 
  Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
The global financial crisis has been a watershed for the global economy. Its impli-
cations for growth, distribution, and public finances have been severe. Structural 
changes have affected both the real economy and the financial sector. Reforms of 
the financial regulatory system have not only been a consequence, but also a driv-
er  of  these  trends.  The  G20  countries  undertook  an  internationally  coordinated 
overhaul of the financial regulatory landscape. It has been the broad objective of 
these reforms to reduce the probability and impact of future financial crises. 
The crisis has particularly challenged the perception that the stability of individual 
institutions  automatically  guarantees  the  stability  of  the  entire  financial  system. 
Macroprudential  now  complements  microprudential  supervision.  The  purpose  of 
macroprudential policy is to ensure that the financial system can perform its role for 
the real economy, even in times of crises or distress.  
In  the  following,  I  will  briefly  review  the  origins  of  financial  crises  and  the  im-
portance of taking a systemic view. I will then review the reform agenda of the past 
10 years. As the implementation of key reform elements is well underway, the Fi-
nancial Stability Board (FSB) has started a structured approach towards ex post 
evaluation as an integral part of a policy cycle. Ex post policy evaluation assesses 
whether reforms have achieved their objectives and whether there have been ma-
jor unintended side effects. I will conclude by discussing elements of an evaluation 
process which ensure independence and transparency.  
 1)  What causes financial crises? 
A stable financial system is consistently in a position to absorb both financial and 
real  economic  shocks,  especially  when  confronted  with  unforeseen  events,  in 
stress situations and in periods of structural adjustment. A resilient financial system 
is able to absorb losses from unexpected developments, it prevents contagion and 
adverse feedback effects.  
 Seite 2 von 13 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Financial stability is at risk if systemic risks emerge. At the heart of systemic risks 
are externalities: Systemic risk may occur, for instance, when the distress of one or 
more  market  participants  jeopardises  the  functioning  of  the  entire  system.  This 
may be the case when the distressed market participant is very large or closely in-
terlinked with other market players.  
Interconnectedness  can  be  a  channel  through  which  unexpected  adverse  devel-
opments are transmitted to the financial system as a whole, thus impairing its sta-
bility.  Market  participants  can  be  connected  directly  through  contractual  relation-
ship such as on the interbank market. Besides this, indirect channels of contagion 
may exist. Many market participants may conduct similar transactions or hold simi-
lar types of assets. In such a situation, investors may interpret negative news as 
signals that other market participants are adversely affected as well. Hence, sys-
temic risks also exist if a large number of small market participants is exposed to 
similar risks or risks that are closely correlated with each other. 
In the presence of systemic risk externalities, the optimal level of risk taken by fi-
nancial institutions from a private perspective is thus higher than the socially effi-
cient level of risk. Owners of financial institutions may reap the potential benefits of 
their decisions in full, but bear the potential risks only partially if they can expect to 
be bailed out by the government bailout in the event of distress.  
This  excessive  risk  taking  implies  costs  for  society:  if  risks  materialize,  govern-
ments  may  be  pressured  to  bail  out  banks,  thus  imposing  costs  on  taxpayers. 
Regulatory reforms aimed at internalizing these externalities comprise higher loss-
absorbing  capacity  and  provisions  to  facilitate  the  orderly  resolution  of  banks. 
These  reforms  have  the  potential  to  increase social welfare.  However,  they  may 
come at a net private cost for the affected institutions: they will forgo the net private 
benefit (profits) associated with their excessive risk taking, they may incur costs re-
lated to compliance with new regulations, and their funding may be more costly as 
it must provide greater capacity to absorb losses. Through these channels, chang-
es in regulations affect the incentives for banks to take on risks. 
Seite 3 von 13 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
2)  What happened since the financial crisis? 
Capital flow/default cycles have been around since at least 1800 – if not before. 
Technology has changed, the height of humans has changed, and fashions have 
changed. Yet the ability of governments and investors to delude themselves, giving 
rise  to  periodic  bouts  of  euphoria  that  usually  end  in  tears,  seems  to  have  re-
mained a constant. (Kaminsky and Rogoff 2008, p. 53)1. 
Is this time different? Have policymakers learned from the recent financial crisis? 
One key insight of the financial crisis has been that supervision needs to go be-
yond the individual institution and take a system-wide perspective. Macroprudential 
policy aims to mitigate systemic risks, i.e. risks to the financial system as a whole. 
It builds on microprudential regulations which are concerned with the stability of in-
dividual financial institutions. The need for a macroprudential perspective is a les-
son learned from the global financial crisis: even though individual financial institu-
tions  may  seem  stable  from  a  microprudential  perspective,  the  financial  system 
may be highly vulnerable to shocks, and it may amplify these shocks. 
Since 2009, the G20 has implemented a wide range of policies which aim at reduc-
ing the probability and the effects of future financial crises (Figure 1). These fall in-
to four areas:2  A first set of policies aims at enhancing the resilience of the finan-
cial sector with regard to adverse shocks. These policies include higher capital and 
liquidity  requirements  for  all  banks  and  in  particular  for  systemically  important 
banks.  More  resilient  financial  institutions  can  better  withstand  negative  shocks 
and are less likely to amplify them. This mitigates negative repercussions on the 
real economy. 
One key insight of the financial crisis has been that large, complex, and connected 
financial  institutions  can  be  particularly  systemic  and  “too  big  to  fail”.  Large  and 
systemically  important  financial  institutions  are  thus  required  to  fulfil  additional 
_____________ 
1 Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth Rogoff (2018), “This time is different: a panoramic view of eight centu-
ries of financial crisis”, NBER Working Paper 13882, March 2018. 
2 For more information: https://www.fsb.org/2018/11/implementation-and-effects-of-the-g20-financial-
regulatory-reforms-fourth-annual-report/ 
Seite 4 von 13 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
capital requirements, and these banks are also in the focus of new resolution poli-
cies. Requirements for their total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC)3 are intended to 
ensure that systemically important banks have issued a sufficient amount of bail-
inable debt and can be resolved without recourse to taxpayer money, while main-
taining their vital economic functions. Recovery and resolution planning identifies 
critical  functions  that  can  be  ring-fenced  and  shielded  from  the  negative  conse-
quences  of  adverse  scenarios.  Finally,  enhanced  supervision  of  systemically  im-
portant banks includes higher supervisory expectations for risk management func-
tions, risk governance, and internal controls. 
Additional policies aim at making derivatives markets safer and more transparent. 
They  include  requirements  on  trade  reporting,  central  clearing,  platform  trading, 
margins and higher capital requirements for non-centrally cleared derivatives. Their 
broader aim is to mitigate systemic risk, contagion, and to avoid market abuse. A 
final  set  of  policies  aims  at  transforming  shadow  banking  into  resilient  market-
based finance. These policies include new regulations for money market funds and 
securitizations. Their broad  purpose is to mitigate systemic risks associated with 
non-bank financial intermediation. 
3)  What are the effects of the reforms?4  
Many post-crisis financial regulatory reforms have entered uncharted territory: reli-
able  assessments  of  reform  effects  and  knowledge  about  transmission  channels 
were lacking. Reforms had to be implemented in an environment characterized by 
a high degree of uncertainty. Hence, a structured policy cycle is needed to reduce 
the  risks  of  ineffective  policies,  miscalibrated  policy  instruments,  and  unintended 
side effects. Such a cycle involves four steps (Figure 2):  
(1) defining policy objectives,  
_____________ 
3 A related policy measure in the European context are Minimum Requirements for own funds and Eligible 
Liabilities (MREL). 
4 This section draws on Buch, Claudia M., Edgar Vogel, Benjamin Weigert (2018), “Evaluating macropru-
dential policies”, European Systemic Risk Board Working Paper No 76, Frankfurt a. M. 
Seite 5 von 13 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
(2) choosing intermediate objectives and appropriate indicators,  
(3) linking instruments to indicators through ex ante impact assessments, and  
(4) analysing policy effects through ex post evaluations.  
In a first step, the policy objective(s) of macroprudential policy need to be speci-
fied. Macroprudential authorities use different definitions of the policy objective, but 
they all aim at reducing systemic risk arising from externalities. Ideally, the policy 
objective is derived from an analytical framework which links performance of the fi-
nancial system to the functioning of the real economy.  
In a second step, intermediate objectives need to be specified and appropriate in-
dicators chosen. Intermediate objectives are linked to the drivers of systemic risk, 
such as leverage, risk-taking incentives, interconnectedness, or exposure to com-
mon shocks. In many cases, it will not be possible to specify a direct, simple, and 
linear relationship between intermediate objectives and financial stability. For ex-
ample,  the  link  between  the  interconnectedness  of  financial  institutions  and  the 
probability of financial contagion is non-linear.5  Intermediate objectives can thus 
be state-dependent as their relationship to financial stability depends on the struc-
ture and state of the financial system and real economy.  
In  a  third  step,  the  activation  or  recalibration  of  policy  instruments  that  address 
evolving vulnerabilities and financial stability risks needs to be considered. The de-
cision  on  whether  and  how  to  activate  policy  measures  should  be  based  on  a 
structured process of ex ante policy evaluation. This provides information about the 
relative  contribution  of  policy  instruments  reducing  systemic  risk.  Trade-offs  be-
tween  stability  and  other  policy  objectives  can  be  taken  into  account  when  per-
forming such an analysis and when calibrating instruments.  
_____________ 
5 Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale (2000), “Financial Contagion”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 108(1). 
Seite 6 von 13 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
In  a  fourth  step,  and  once  sufficient  time  has  elapsed,  the  effects  of  the  instru-
ments  need  to  be  assessed  in  an  ex  post  evaluation.  This  step  provides  infor-
mation  about  the  effectiveness  of  the  measure(s)  taken,  about  intended  or  unin-
tended side effects, and it also serves as an input into a possible recalibration of 
the policy instruments.  
Ultimately, policy evaluation provides insights beyond the assessment of specific 
policy instruments by answering the question of “how to get there”. Indeed, it can 
also help address the question of “where to go” by providing information about the 
appropriateness of the specific policy objectives and targets, which may be revised 
if needed. This is particularly important given that macroprudential policy is a rela-
tively new area and given that experience with the above policy cycle is limited. 
Evaluation of financial sector policies: The approach of the Financial Stabil-
ity Board  
The Financial Stability Board (FSB) has recently developed a framework to guide 
its own evaluation work related to the G20 post-crisis reforms of financial sector 
regulation.6  According to the FSB Framework, evaluation methods need to answer 
three questions:  
 Did the reform “cause” an outcome (attribution)?  
Did  the  reform  have  similar  effects  across  relevant  markets,  states  of  the 
• 
world, or jurisdictions and regions (heterogeneity)?  
Did  the  reform  achieve  its  overall  objective  (aggregation/general  equilibri-
• 
um)?  
_____________ 
6 Financial Stability Board (2017), “Framework for Post-Implementation Evaluation of the Effects of the G20 
Financial Regulatory Reforms”, Basel, https://www.fsb.org/2017/07/framework-for-post-implementation-
evaluation-of-the-effects-of-the-g20-financial-regulatory-reforms/ 
Seite 7 von 13 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Analytical  tools  vary  in  their  ability  to  answer  these  questions.  Which  evaluation 
approach to choose depends on their relevance to the objectives of the evaluation, 
their feasibility and replicability for implementation across countries, and their costs 
in terms of resource inputs and data requirements. As shown by the first FSB eval-
uations, a robust evaluation strategy combines different (both qualitative and quan-
titative) analytical approaches. 
In addition to fleshing out analytical concepts, the FSB framework contains a num-
ber of arrangements concerning the governance of evaluation work. For instance, 
the framework recommends that the evaluation process should include means for 
engagement with external stakeholders. These may include the publication of in-
formation  on  forthcoming  evaluation  projects,  public  consultations  on  evaluation 
reports  before  publication,  and  the  publication  of  evaluation  reports.  Workshops 
and roundtables of FSB members with academia and participants from the industry 
and the civil society are means of interaction.  
The  first  two  evaluations  under  the  framework  have  been  delivered  to  the  G20-
Summit in November 2018:7   
The first project investigates the extent to which post-crisis reforms incentiv-
• 
ized the central clearing of OTC derivatives. It has been the aim of these reforms 
to make derivatives markets both, safer and more transparent. Evaluation results 
suggest that reforms are providing the intended incentives for central clearing, es-
pecially for the most systemic market participants.  
• 
The second project evaluates the effect of reforms on the financing of infra-
structure. It concluded that effects of the reforms on infrastructure finance were of 
second order importance relative to other factors such as the macro-financial envi-
ronment, fiscal and monetary policies. The analyses do not point to a significant ef-
fect on the volume and cost of infrastructure finance, while there are some indica-
_____________ 
7 Consultative and  final reports are available at: https://www.fsb.org/work-of-the-fsb/implementation-
monitoring/effects-of-reforms/ 
 Seite 8 von 13 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
tions  that  reforms  may  have  shortened  the  average  maturities  of  infrastructure 
loans granted by global systemically important banks. 
More projects are underway. An evaluation of reform effects on SME financing will 
be delivered to the G20 Summit this year. The respective consultation report was 
published recently.8  According to this report, the evaluation does not identify per-
sistent negative effects of the G20 regulatory reforms on SME financing overall. At 
the  same  time,  the  adjustment  patterns  in  the  data  are  not  inconsistent  with 
stronger effects of the reforms on those banks for which the new rules on capital 
regulation have been binding the most. 
A new project which has been started in 2019 focuses on a core objective of the 
reforms. This project will assess the extent to which the too-big-to fail (TBTF) re-
forms have addressed the systemic and moral hazard risks associated with sys-
temically important financial institutions:9   
• 
The project will analyse whether the reforms were effective in reducing the 
perceived probability of the impact of failure of systemically important institutions – 
for instance, by assessing changes in estimates of implicit funding subsidies and 
analysing progress in the resolvability of systemically important banks.  
It  will  provide  answers  to  the  question  of  whether  reforms  are  leading  to 
• 
changes in bank behaviour, for instance by attributing changes in business models 
and risk taking that reflect the internalization of the negative systemic risk externali-
ties to relevant reforms.  
It will examine the broader effects of the reforms, including the functioning of 
• 
the financial system, market fragmentation, cost and availability of financing to the 
_____________ 
8 https://www.fsb.org/2019/06/fsb-publishes-consultation-on-sme-financing-evaluation/ 
9 Financial Stability Board (2011), “Policy Measures to Address Systemically Important Financial Institu-
tions”, November 2011. For details see the terms of reference (https://www.fsb.org/2019/05/evaluation-
of-too-big-to-fail-reforms-summary-terms-of-reference/). The final report is scheduled for the G20 Presi-
dency in 2020. 
Seite 9 von 13 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
real  economy.  A  key  issue  will  be  to  focus  on  the  achievement  of  intended  out-
comes but also analyse potential (positive or negative) unintended consequences. 
The FSB, in line with its aim to engage with a broad range of stakeholders, has in-
vited feedback on this project, including supporting evidence of reform effects, by 
June 21, 2019. To put the evaluation on a solid analytical basis, academic advisors 
are  working  in  close  collaboration  with  the  group  on  methodological  issues.10  
Stakeholders will have further opportunities to interact with the FSB and contribute 
to this project: as the project progresses, workshops and roundtables will provide 
an opportunity for externals to engage with the FSB evaluation team. Lastly, the 
FSB plans to publish a consultation report in June 2020.  
4) 
Independence of policy evaluations11  
Credible policy evaluation obviously requires independence. Independent and ob-
jective assessments are needed to gain an unbiased picture of the effects of re-
forms. There are several avenues leading to this goal. External experts can be in-
volved who have a mandate for independent evaluations and who have no stake in 
the formulation of policies. These can be existing institutions such as research in-
stitutes or policy advisory bodies. Independence of internal evaluations can be en-
hanced through institutional arrangements such as peer reviews or independence 
from policy groups. 
Transparency  is  another  precondition  for  a  credible  regulatory  process.  Policy 
evaluation  means  being  transparent  about  the  goals  of  regulatory  policies  and 
what these policies have actually achieved. Repositories of evaluation studies can 
improve transparency by making it easier and less costly for (internal) evaluators 
and external stakeholders to keep track of evaluation work. Other fields, such as 
development  economics  or  medicine,  often  rely  on  repositories  to  structure  the 
_____________ 
10 See the call for nominations for more details (https://www.fsb.org/2019/02/call-for-nominations-
appointment-of-academic-advisors-for-the-fsb-evaluation-of-too-big-to-fail-reforms/). 
11 See also “Evaluating Financial Sector Reforms: A Joint Task for Academia and Policymakers”, Claudia M. 
Buch, remarks prepared for the panel discussion “Improving Financial Resilience” at the T20 Summit 
“Global Solutions”, Berlin, May 30, 2017. 
Seite 10 von 13 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
available  evidence.12    The  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  recently 
launched  an  online  repository  of  studies  on  the  effects  of  financial  regulations.13  
The repository is an interactive tool, allowing the user to select and visualize find-
ings  from  multiple  studies.  Beyond  this,  it  also  allows  users  to  submit  their  own 
studies. 
Replicability  is  an  important  element  of  transparency.  Replicability  ensures  that 
policy decisions are based on robust evidence. This requires transparency about 
the models being used, access to data, and documentation of how studies are set 
up. Replication studies repeat an original analysis using different data and are thus 
especially useful for policy work. Academic study often focuses on specific novel 
results, which may limit the external validity of findings in a different setting. Evi-
dence-based policy decisions require information on whether a particular finding is 
robust with regard to changing the underlying setting. Hence, there is a potential 
tension between the novelty and uniqueness of findings that are appreciated in ac-
ademia and the need to rely on sufficiently robust results as a basis for policy deci-
sions.  Enhanced  appreciation  of  replication  studies  in  academic  work  and  en-
hanced capacity of policy institutions to conduct their own replication studies can 
help relaxing this tension.  
Finally, an active outreach strategy should also be part of an independent, trans-
parent  evaluation  process.  Stakeholders  should  be  given  the  opportunity  to  give 
input and voice their concerns. This interaction can take place via public consulta-
tions of reports, through workshops or conferences, or by appointing external aca-
demic advisors. All this will ultimately improve the quality of evaluations. 
 
 _____________ 
12 Examples for repositories from other policy areas are the McMaster Health Forum 
(https://www.mcmasterforum.org/) or the 3ie initiative (https://www.3ieimpact.org/) in development eco-
nomics. 
 
13 See https://stats.bis.org/frame/ and Boissay, F., C. Cantú, S. Claessens, and A. Villegas (2019), “Impact 
of financial regulations: insights from an online repository of studies”, BIS Quarterly Review, March 2019. 
Seite 11 von 13 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Figure 1: Post-Crisis Financial Sector Reforms 
 
Source:   Cavallo, Anne-Sophie (2018), “Evaluating the impact of international fi-
nancial reforms”, Banque de France Bulletin, Spring 2018. 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Seite 12 von 13 
  Figure 2: Stylized representation of a macroprudential policy process 
 
Source: Buch, Vogel, Weigert (2018) 
 
 
   Seite 13 von 13 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
