Philip R Lane: Competition policy and central banking
Remarks  by  Mr  Philip  R  Lane,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the  European
Movement Ireland and Central Bank of Ireland Joint Dinner in honour of Commissioner Margrethe
Vestager, Dublin, 24 January 2019.
Dear Commissioner Vestager, distinguished guests,
 I  am  delighted  to  host  this  dinner  together  with  European  Movement  Ireland  in  honour  of
Commissioner Vestager.  Welcome to Dublin and welcome to the Central Bank of Ireland.
The  central  banking  community  takes  a  strong  interest  in  the  competition  portfolio  held  by
Commissioner Vestager.  In particular, there is increasing evidence that the level of competition
and  the  vigour  of  competition  policies  are  key  factors  in  determining  macroeconomic
performance and long-run living standards.
For instance, the recent empirical research of Guttiérrez and Philippon (2017) and Dottling et al
(2017)  finds  that  investment  rates  are  negatively  correlated  with  indicators  of  market
concentration. Moreover, the incentives for the leading firms in an industry to innovate are weaker
in the absence of competitive pressures.  Taken together, less investment and less innovation
imply lower productivity growth and lower living standards.
One  factor  behind  the  different  patterns  by  which  market  concentration  is  rising  in  the  United
States but not in Europe is the vigorous approach to competition policy in the EU (Gutierrez and
Philippon 2018).  Importantly, this also maps into better outcomes for consumers, with prices
higher in less competitive sectors. More competition also improves the prospects for workers by
limiting the monopsony power of dominant employers to constrain wages.
In addition to macroeconomic performance, competition policy (and related State aid decisions)
is also influential in shaping the European financial system.  The process of restructuring the
European financial sector in the aftermath of the crisis has been disciplined by the imperative to
maintain a level playing field. In terms of adjudicating the design of State aid interventions, the
implementation  of  this  principle  is  not  always  straightforward  and  this  remains  an  ongoing
challenge under the revised European bank recovery and resolution regime.
A fundamental development in recent years in the euro area has been the initiation of Banking
Union.  As  Commissioner  Vestager  herself  remarked  earlier  this  month:  “the  fundamental
strength  of  our  internal  market  is  its  size”  (Vestager  2019).  In  the  aggregate,  the  European
banking  system  is  quite  fragmented:  the  development  of  Banking  Union  has  the  potential  to
deliver a more efficient, more competitive and more stable pan-European banking system. In the
transition  to  Banking  Union,  we  may  expect  to  see  an  increase  in  cross-border  mergers  and
acquisitions, with a duty on competition authorities to facilitate welfare-enhancing consolidation
while protecting and enhancing competition in each local market.
Finally, as a member of the Eurosystem and the European System of Financial Supervision, the
Central Bank of Ireland shares with the European Commission and European Movement Ireland
a  common  commitment  to  working  together  on  a  pan-European  basis  in  order  to  safeguard
stability and protect consumers.  Only through a strong European Union can we successfully
manage  the  twin  challenges  posed  by  globalisation  and  technological  change,  with  shared
sovereignty the foundation for effective and sustainable international policymaking (Lane 2018).
In closing, Commissioner Vestager: as a memento of your visit to the Central Bank, I would like
to present to you our recent commemorative coin that marks the centenary of the women’s right
to vote in 1918.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
I look forward to listening to your speech at the close of this dinner.
I thank Valerie Herzberg and Mícheál O’Keeffe for their assistance in preparing these remarks.
References
Dottling, Robin, German Gutierrez and Thomas Philippon (2017), “Is There An Investment Gap in
Advanced  Economies?  If  so,  Why?,”  in Investment  and  Growth  in  Advanced  Economies,
Proceedings of ECB Forum on Central Banking, 129–193.
Gutierrez, German and Thomas Philippon (2017), “Declining Competition and Investment in the
US,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 12536.
Gutierrez, German and Thomas Philippon (2018), “How EU Markets Became More Competitive
than US Markets: A Study of Institutional Drift,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 12983.
Lane,  Philip  R.  (2018),  “Globalisation  and  the  Irish  Economy: A  Macro-Financial  Perspective,”
Geary Lecture, Economic and Social Research Institute.
Vestager, Margrethe (2019), “The Champions Europe Needs,” -WELT Economic Summit, Berlin,
9 January.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
