  CIRSF Annual International Conference 2019 
Financial Supervision and Financial Stability Ten Years After the Crisis: Achievements and Next 
Steps 
Lisbon, 4 July 2019 
 
Banking Union: Crossing an Unstable Bridge 
Panel contribution by Elisa Ferreira, Vice-Governor of Banco de Portugali 
 
 
Good morning ladies and gentlemen. It is a great pleasure to participate in this panel. 
 
Setting the scene 
I recognise we have made big strides forward in setting up the first two pillars of Banking 
Union. However, the political will to complete it has weakened – as highlighted by the last 
Eurogroup meeting – with a fully-fledged EDIS still far off.ii  
As economic conditions have improved, a false sense of security has emerged while we are still 
half-way across the bridge. This is exactly the topic I propose for today’s discussion. 
As it stands, banks continue to be ‘European in life but national in death’, as supervisory and 
resolution decisions are mostly European, whereas the ultimate guarantor of financial stability 
remains national. 
Still in the aftermath of the crisisiii, as banks’ business models are struggling to generate 
adequate profitability levels in the current macroeconomic environment, also characterized by 
low interest rates, and to adapt fast enough to the technological progress and to the demands 
of the digital consumers, Banking Union’s ongoing incompleteness compounds the existing 
challenges. 
While waiting for the completion of Banking Union, some of the most disruptive elements of 
the present framework deserve to be addressed to minimise risks to financial stability. 
 
The fragilities of the resolution framework  
One of them is “the approach taken by the EU to the resolution of small and medium-sized 
banks [which] puts a greater emphasis on the protection of taxpayers from bailouts and a 
lesser emphasis on systemic stability and avoiding contagious market disruptions than is the 
case in the US,” as highlighted by Bolton (2019) and co-authorsiv. 
In fact, some of the main building blocks of the resolution leg (second pillar) may have 
extremely severe unintended consequences on financial stability: 
 www.bportugal.pt 
1 
  •  Whereas MREL and bail-in requirements may work for larger banks, it is not clear 
whether such requirements are suited for mid-sized institutions: 
o 
o 
that operate on a more traditional business model less familiar with capital 
markets; and 
that may be of no public interest at EU level but still have systemic importance 
at local level.v  
•  The internal loss absorption requirements (8% of total liabilities and own funds) and 
limitations on the amount of the resolution funds that can be used (5% of total 
liabilities and own funds) subject senior debt and even unsecured deposits in mid-sized 
banks with traditional business models to risks incompatible with financial stability.  
 In view of such risks, recourse to alternatives often perceived as attempts to 
circumvent the existing rules has been observed in some Member States. 
•  Some also argue that bank liquidations have become an easy way out for European 
authorities as the ensuing financial and political costs lie with national authorities.vi 
 
The risks of regulatory-driven consolidation 
The fragilities of the second pillar – just described – have been linked to calls to speed up 
consolidation as a means to increase profitability and efficiency in the banking sector, fostering 
the creation of pan-European banks able to compete with larger institutions outside Europe. 
In this regard, the perception that consolidation is regulatory-driven can be disruptive to the 
much-needed trust in the single rule book. This perception is justified by the increasing 
complexity of regulation and potentially disproportionate requirements such as MREL which 
only large banks seem able to comply with, and the speed to de-risk. 
Although the supposed increased efficiency associated with size is yet to be demonstrated, it 
cannot be disregarded that addressing too-big-to-fail (and too complex to supervise or resolve) 
was one of the main purposes of Banking Union. We should not resolve a problem by creating 
an even bigger one. 
The lauding of consolidation also ignores the fact that the current incomplete architecture of 
Banking Union creates significant imbalances across home and host countries in cross-border 
operations, which come to the fore in crisis situations. This is one of the reasons why it has 
been so difficult to implement capital and additional waivers on liquidity and remove options 
and national discretions. 
In this context, regulators and supervisors should neither help nor hinder M&A. Instead 
supervisors and regulators should provide the market a stable view of the supervisory and 
regulatory frameworks that allow market participants to take their informed decisions. 
 
Way forward 
 www.bportugal.pt 
2 
  While political circumstances prevent decisive progress in Banking Union, a number of 
intermediary solutions can nevertheless be implemented to address the major sources of 
instability, paving the way to build trust among Member States. 
It seems now sufficiently clear that the first best solution would be to amend the BRRD in 
relation to the 5% and 8% thresholds. If this is politically unfeasible, the IMF’s proposal of a 
‘financial stability exemption’ must be further explored, guaranteeing the applicability of this 
exception to mid-sized institutions and not only to G-SIBs. 
In the absence of a thorough and much-needed fine-tuning of the existing legal and 
institutional framework, consideration should be given on how to mitigate host countries’ 
concerns. 
The European supervisory authorities must monitor closely cross border operations, not only 
from the point of view of the parent undertaking, but also of all subsidiaries and systemic 
branches established in the Banking Union, allowing, simultaneously, host country competent 
authorities to have an adequate oversight on their operations (including from the operational, 
funding and governance perspectives) and to react to strategic decisions of these 
subsidiaries/branches’ parents, namely those that can affect the financial stability of host 
countries.vii 
For significant operations, there should be an adequate level of separability (financial, 
operational, IT systems, governance), not only in MPE strategies but also when an SPE strategy 
is envisaged in the resolution plan, in order to allow a subsidiary to be detached from a parent 
undertaking and thereby foster resolvability even in adverse scenarios, as the enforcement of 
pre-resolution intra-group parent support mechanisms (e.g. guarantees) may prove to be 
insufficient in a real crisis situation. 
Moreover, the current framework makes it clear that banks that are failing or likely to fail but 
which are not resolved due to the absence of a public interest are to be wound up in an 
orderly manner in accordance with the applicable national law. 
In this context, a significant number of small and medium-sized banks in the Banking Union are 
contributing to the Single Resolution Fund (SRF) without having a reasonable expectation of 
being able to pass the public interest test to eventually benefit from it. This situation must not 
be ignored. 
Obviously, solutions need to be found for the orderly exit of traditional medium-sized deposit-
taking banks without disrupting financial stability.  
The topic of harmonising EU banks’ liquidation regimes has thus been put on the agenda and 
recognised as a priority by Member Statesviii, as recent experiences have been perceived as 
exploiting existing loopholes. But what does bank liquidation mean? And do we have the tools 
to ensure its orderliness in the current context? 
Liquidation might imply the immediate interruption of lending support, as well as the 
suspension of payments; it may have disruptive effects for creditors, depositors and other 
 www.bportugal.pt 
3 
  stakeholders, with the ensuing impact on the real economy, ultimately reinforcing the 
sovereign-bank doom loop. 
The European Commission’s forthcoming study on the divergences in the insolvency 
frameworks for banks under different national laws is thus welcome.ix However, in the present 
circumstances we are not in a position to move immediately towards the full harmonisation of 
EU banks’ liquidation regimes.  
Instead, efforts must be made to establish an enabling framework for the orderly management 
of failing banks of locally systemic importance, combining elements of the resolution and 
liquidation frameworks – akin to the FDIC approach in the USA – while minimising losses and 
protecting depositors and non-financial borrowers.  
In that regard, the existing liquidation regime of small banks in Italy – compatible with the 
internal market and to which the European Commission did not raise objections – could be a 
useful first step for our discussions.x 
Such an enabling framework should include the definition of high-level principles to be agreed 
by all Member States for application at national level. Possible paths might include: 
•  The establishment of special insolvency proceedings, with recourse to administrative 
options, assigning to a liquidating authority some of the instruments currently 
envisaged in the BRRD, as an alternative to the court-led liquidation regime. The 
liquidating authority and the funding sources available would need to be identified. 
•  The use of DGSs for deposit transfers abiding by the least cost principle. For that, the 
recent judgment of the European Court of Justice on the case of Banca Tercasxi could 
inform the discussion on the role of DGSs in liquidation beyond the pure payout 
approachxii, as well as the associated State Aid issues. 
•  The liquidating authority having the option to offer guarantees or enter into profit- 
and loss-sharing regimes. 
This framework could be applied in situations where resolution: (i) is not considered to be in 
the public interest, and when it (ii) might not be the best approach given the constraints to its 
application, namely through the lack of loss-absorption capacity. 
The introduction of such a new regime would also raise the following questions, among others: 
•  How to ensure that business models, size and systemic importance are part of the 
equation? 
•  Can the bail-in of senior unsecured debt and uncovered deposits with the 
accompanying destabilising effects on financial stability be avoided? 
•  Should institutions subject to liquidation be required to hold an additional bail-in 
buffer (MREL) on top of own fund requirements to support transfers in FDIC-like 
insolvency proceedings? 
•  Can the SRF and DGSs work as complementary instruments according to the envisaged 
crisis management solution? 
 www.bportugal.pt 
4 
  •  Should recourse to resolution funds and DGSs continue to be considered State Aid on 
the basis of a pure administrative decision (by DG COMP) with the ensuing 
consequences? 
Until there is the political will to decide and implement the required structural solutions and 
establish a clear roadmap to revise BRRD and complete Banking Union (including a fully-
fledged EDIS), small technical steps must be made in order to mitigate the big stability risks 
that are hidden by the false sense of security that prevails.  
A credible path must be progressively built towards strengthening trust among Member 
States, namely through reasonable and balanced regulation that reduces to a minimum its 
potential disruptive spillovers.xiii 
 
Let me conclude. 
As Jean Monnet once wrote, “I have always believed that Europe would be built through 
crises, and that it would be the sum of their solutions.”xiv  
However, we have only half-implemented the lessons learned from the biggest crisis affecting 
the common currency. As President Juncker recently reminded us, “[w]e should not wait for 
the next crisis to do what we know we have to do.”xv 
As described before, we do know what remains to be done. Only by delivering it can we truly 
be accountable to European citizens. 
 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
                                                                        
i As prepared for delivery. 
ii Evidenced by the Eurogroup President’s letter to the President of the Euro Summit of 15 June 2019, on 
the deepening of the economic and monetary union: “We recognise that further technical work will be 
needed on defining a transitional path to the steady state Banking Union for relevant elements and their 
sequencing, adhering to all the elements of the 2016 roadmap. This work should include a roadmap for 
beginning political negotiations on a European deposit insurance system. We have therefore mandated 
the HLWG to continue this work and report back by December 2019.”, available at 
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/39769/eurogroup-president-letter-to-euro-summit-
president.pdf, and the High-Level Working Group Chair report on the strengthening of the banking 
union, including EDIS available at https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/39768/190606-hlwg-chair-
report.pdf. 
iii As recently noted by Mario Draghi, “After the crisis, it was inevitable that banking sectors in advanced 
economies would have to deleverage, both to cover losses and to re-focus their business models. The 
United States ensured that this process happened quickly and early. Around 500 failing banks were 
resolved by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, while struggling banks were stress-tested and 
recapitalised through the Troubled Assets Relief Program. Between 2008 and 2011, US banks improved 
their leverage ratio by 1.6 percentage points from 7.2 to 8.8%. The response in the euro area was more 
sluggish. Despite being more levered than their US peers before the crisis, euro area banks improved 
 www.bportugal.pt 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
their leverage ratio by just 0.9 percentage points, from 3.7 to 4.6%, and this was achieved more through 
shedding assets and less through raising capital. This in part reflected the fact that, due to the fiscal 
rules, public support for banks was concentrated in countries with fiscal space. Moreover, without a 
common resolution framework only around 50 banks were resolved in the euro area in this period. So a 
weak banking sector continued to drag on the euro area economy, which was especially pernicious 
given the importance of the banking lending channel for financing.”, Draghi, M. (2019), “Twenty Years of 
the ECB’s monetary policy”, speech at the ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, 18 June. 
iv Bolton, P., Cecchetti, S., Danthine, J.-P., Vives, X. (2019), “Sound At Last? Assessing a Decade of 
Financial Regulation”, VoxEU.org, 2 June. 
v Restoy, F. (2018), “Bail-in in the new bank resolution framework: is there an issue with the middle 
class?”, speech at the IADI-ERC International Conference “Resolution and deposit guarantee schemes in 
Europe: incomplete processes and uncertain outcomes”, Naples, 23 March. 
vi Valle e Azevedo, J., Bonfim, D. (2019), “Deposit Insurance and Cross-Border Banks”, ifo DICE Report 
I/2019, Spring, Volume 17. 
vii Some have also argued that “[t]his requires that the national supervisors and Parliaments should 
receive the necessary information to understand the risks national depositors are exposed to from these 
branches and the possible impacts on the financing of their economies. This may require developing 
specific reporting instruments and processes for the local authorities to continue to be able to 
appropriately supervise local activities and thus contribute to supervisory decisions taken at the SSM 
level that may impact their jurisdiction.”, Eurofi (2019), Programme of the Eurofi High Level Seminar in 
Bucharest, 3-5 April. 
viii As evidenced by the High-Level Working Group Chair report on the strengthening of the banking 
union, including EDIS (op. cit.): “Broad agreement exists on the need for a harmonisation of necessary 
parts of bank insolvency law, including with regard to cross-border groups and the ranking of creditors, 
while the toolbox for resolution might need to be expanded.” 
ix This report is expected to feed into the review of the Single Resolution Mechanism, European 
Commission (2019), “Report from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on the 
application and review of Directive 2014/59/EU (Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive) and 
Regulation 806/2014 (Single Resolution Mechanism Regulation)”, available at 
http://ec.europa.eu/transparency/regdoc/rep/1/2019/EN/COM-2019-213-F1-EN-MAIN-PART-1.PDF, 
and European Parliament (2019), Briefing for the purposes of the Public hearing with Elke König, Chair of 
the Single Resolution Board on 2 April 2019. The European Parliament ECON Committee has also 
commissioned an external study on “Lessons from the United States for banking resolution in the 
Banking Union” to be published in spring 2019. 
x State aid SA.50640 (2018/N) – Italy – liquidation scheme for small banks, available at 
http://ec.europa.eu/competition/state_aid/cases/274069/274069_1989761_107_2.pdf. 
xi Judgment in Joined Cases T-98/16, Italy v Commission, T-196/16, Banca Popolare di Bari SCpA v 
Commission, and T-198/16 Fondo interbancario di tutela dei depositi v Commission. 
xii The DGS Directive also recognises that DGS funds may be used for purposes other than payout in 
resolution or insolvency, as a national option under Article 11(6): “Member States may decide that the 
available financial means may also be used to finance measures to preserve the access of depositors to 
covered deposits, including transfer of assets and liabilities and deposit book transfer, in the context of 
national insolvency proceedings, provided that the costs borne by the DGS do not exceed the net 
amount of compensating covered depositors at the credit institution concerned”. Where Member States 
avail of this option, national DGS may be used to fund P&A transactions along the lines of the US FDIC. 
For further details see European Parliament – Economic Governance Support Unit (2019), “Liquidation 
of Banks: Towards an ‘FDIC’ for the Banking Union?”, February. 
xiii In this regard, the ESM has recently put forward a first interesting attempt that deserves reflection, 
Mascher, N. (2019), “Structure of the European Deposit Insurance Scheme”, speech at the Goethe 
University, Institute for Law and Finance, Frankfurt am Main, 14 June. 
xiv Monnet, J. (1976), Mémoires, Paris, Librairie Arthème Fayard. 
xv Juncker, J.-C. (2019), “Building the euro: moments in time, lessons in history”, speech at the ECB 
Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, 19 June. 
 www.bportugal.pt 
6 
