Juyeol Lee: 69th anniversary of the Bank of Korea
Speech by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the commemorating ceremony of
the Bank of Korea's 69th anniversary, Seoul, 12 June 2019.
 (This is an unofficial translation prepared by the Bank’s staffs based on original speech released
on June 12, 2019.)
Dear fellow members of the Bank of Korea family!
Today is the 69th anniversary of the Bank of Korea’s establishment. I wish to express my sincere
gratitude to our predecessors who devoted themselves to the development of the Bank of Korea
and  our  economy,  and  to  the  many  people  who  have  supported  and  encouraged  the  Bank.  I
would like to say in addition how much I appreciate the efforts of all members of our staff, who
are faithfully fulfilling the duties entrusted to them in their positions.
Economic  growth  has  faltered  this  year,  as  the  pace  of  increase  in  consumption  has  slowed
amid declines in exports and investment.
Going forward, government expenditures are expected to expand and slumps in investment and
exports to ease. However, it is judged that uncertainties surrounding the growth path have further
increased.
This stems from changes in the external environment. There is a higher possibility that global
trade could shrink with the deepening trade dispute between the US and China. The recovery of
the  semiconductor  industry  could  come  later  than  expected.  As  Korea  depends  heavily  on
exports  led  by  specific  industries,  growth  is  bound  to  be  influenced  by  how  these  uncertainty
factors evolve.
Domestically,  there  are  structural  factors  that  limit  the  growth  of  the  Korean  economy:  a  low
birthrate and aging population, weakening competitiveness in core industries, and a dual labor
market structure. The pace of increase in household debt has recently slowed somewhat, but
considering its very high aggregate volume and remaining risk factors, we cannot let our guard
down.
Under these circumstances, the policy authorities need to manage the macroeconomy so that
growth momentum is sustained, while working on structural reforms from a medium- to long-
term  perspective  to  enhance  growth  potential.  Macroeconomic  policy  needs  to  be  effectively
pursued, while carefully judging policy capacity and impact. At the same time, we need to step up
our efforts to improve economic fundamentals. We should consistently pursue the discovery of
new growth engines, the revitalization of high value-added service industries, the improvement of
labor  market  flexicurity,  and  the  rationalization  of  regulations.  This  is  a  moment  that  calls  for
urgent resolve: if we don’t change because of immediate difficulties, we will pay a higher price in
the future.
Fellow members of the Bank of Korea!
I would like to talk now about some of the things that our Bank will have to focus on carrying out
from the second half of this year.
In our monetary policy operations, we will work to ensure that stable growth is sustained and
inflation  converges  to  its  target  over  a  medium-term  horizon,  while  paying  close  attention  to
financial  stability.  Considering  that  uncertainties  about  external  factors  have  heightened
significantly,  especially  with  respect  to  the  US-China  trade  dispute  and  the  semiconductor
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
industry, we will act appropriately depending on changes in economic conditions while closely
examining  the  related  trends  and  impacts.  To  this  end,  we  should  formulate  policy
implementation strategies for various scenarios so that we can cope with changes in domestic
and external conditions in a timely manner. We will also take into consideration financial stability
risk factors as well, such as household debt and capital flows.
We will also need to work even harder to enhance the effectiveness of our policy communication.
With  uncertainties  growing  more  and  more,  markets  are  reacting  sensitively  to  changes  in
economic conditions. We will accordingly need to provide more detailed explanations about the
background to our monetary policy decision-making and also about changes in major risks. As
inflation has remained far below its target level, we will need to examine on a regular basis how
the inflation target is managed and explain in detail to enhance economic agents’ understanding
of inflation conditions.
We  will  have  to  make  ourselves  fully  prepared  to  cope  with  changes  in  the  monetary  policy
environment  over  a  longer-term  horizon.  Major  country  central  banks  and  academia  have
recently focused on changes in the traditional causal relationships among economic variables
and  monetary  policy  transmission  channels,  which  have  been  caused  by  changes  in  the
economic structure.
Wide-ranging  discussions  are  also  taking  place  about  how  to  improve  monetary  policy
frameworks to enhance the policy effectiveness the in the current low inflation and low interest
rate  environment.  While  looking  at  ongoing  research  and  discussions  in  major  countries,  we
should think carefully about which measures are applicable to Korea.
We  will  also  have  to  devote  special  attention  to  financial  and  FX  market  stability.  Mounting
concerns  about  global  economic  growth  are  keeping  long-term  interest  rates  at  low  levels  at
home  and  abroad.  Stock  prices  and  exchange  rates  are  also  highly  volatile.  We  will  have  to
closely  monitor  changes  in  domestic  and  external  risks  as  well  as  developments  in  financial
markets, and if necessary, we should actively carry out market stabilization measures.
We will also need to respond to the rapid changes in the payment and settlement environment.
With  the  advancement  of  IT  technologies,  new  payment  instruments  are  emerging  and  the
participation  of  non-financial  institutions  in  the  payment  services  market  is  increasing.  The
innovation in the payment and settlement industry will help enhance market effectiveness and
productivity. But on the other hand, we will have to pay more attention to ensure safety as such
innovation will also heighten systemic linkages and complexity and introduce new types of risks.
We will also need to complete, without delay, the establishment of the Next Generation BOK-
Wire+, which is scheduled to commence operations in 2020.
Fellow Bank of Korea staff!
Considering  the  recent  economic  environment,  high  uncertainty  seems  to  have  become  a
constant.  Some  even  say  that  we  have  entered  the  era  of  the  so-called  “new  abnormal,”  a
persistent situation where it is hard to predict what will happen even in the near future. Against
this backdrop, if the central bank wants to gain greater trust from the general public, we need to
enhance our policy capacity by heightening staff expertise, while communicating
actively with the outside.
First,  in  order  to  propose  new  alternatives  in  this  rapidly  changing  policy  environment,  it  is
imperative to pay close attention to a variety of outside opinions. Homogeneous thinking could be
an  advantage  in  running  an  organization,  but  it  could  also  make  it  difficult  to  deal  with  the
changing  environment  by  narrowing  perspectives  and  constraining  flexibility  of  thought.  In  this
sense, we need to engage in active exchanges with outside parties and make a level-headed
review as to whether there are problems with the logic and points of views that we have until now
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
taken for granted.
This  could  provide  a  chance  to  generate  “creative  abrasion”  within  our  organization.  While
recently carrying out an overall review of its monetary policy framework, the Fed has conducted
the “Fed Listens” program in which it gathers opinions from academia and local communities. I
think such efforts by the Fed speak volumes of the importance of communication with the public.
We  should  also  strive  more  to  strengthen  our  expertise.  In  a  situation  where  knowledge  and
information  changes  rapidly,  it  is  important  to  arm  ourselves  with  response  capabilities  by
detecting such changes and learning new things. It is not those who are strong but rather those
who are well adapted to the environment who are likely to survive. We should consistently work
to improve ourselves in order not to be left behind by change. And in terms of
organization and human resources management as well, we will have to provide full support in
this regard.
Meanwhile, the Bank of Korea will enforce a 52-hour workweek policy starting next month. To
carry  out  the  central  bank’s  duties  under  the  changed  working  conditions,  we  will  need  to
continuously improve our work methods so that we can utilize our resources efficiently within the
limited time frame. Our staff members will also have to concentrate more on their work.
Dear fellow members of the BOK family!
As  uncertainties  concerning  economic  conditions  have  further  heightened,  amid  a  number  of
accumulated problems facing our economy that require resolution, the general public is likely to
pin  high  hopes  on  the  central  bank.  We  should  do  our  best  in  executing  our  duties  with  firm
resolution.
Today, as we greet the 69th year since our Bank’s establishment, I would like to thank everyone
once again for your hard work, and I wish each one of you, together with your families, health and
happiness always.
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
