Yandraduth  Googoolye: 
Standards (IFRS 9) - implementation issues
Keynote address by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the Seminar
on  "International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (IFRS  9)  -  Implementation  Issues",  Ebène,  19
August 2019.
International  Financial  Reporting
 Ladies and gentlemen
Good morning.
I thank Mr Abdoul Aziz Wane, the Director of AFRITAC South and the Africa Training Institute,
and Mr Ravi Mohan, Resident Advisor, for inviting me to address you this morning.
The AFRITAC South (AFS) has been instrumental in promoting capacity building in this side of
the  continent.  It  has  hosted  a  few  seminars  on  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards
(IFRS) for countries in Sub-Saharan Africa to enable them to prepare for the implementation of
IFRS9. In case you are not aware, the origin of these seminars was from a suggestion made by
the Bank of Mauritius at one of the Steering Committee meetings of the AFS. Let me thank the
AFS for its efforts to build capacity in this region.
With  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis  more  than  a  decade  ago,  bank  supervisors  were
heavily criticised for having failed to spot the risks building up in the financial system and the
inadequacy of provisions made by banks. The incurred loss model of provisioning came under
heavy criticism, as it resulted in too little provisions too late. In the midst of public backlash, the
International Accounting  Standards  Board  was  faced  with  the  need  to  review  the  provisioning
methodology to make it more forward-looking. This triggered the development of the expected
loss model under IFRS9.
IFRS9 is a complex accounting standard. It relates to financial instruments and requires great
deal  of  understanding  and  application  on  the  part  of  prudential  supervisors  and  auditors  of
financial statements. Intricately connected to IFRS9 are two other accounting standards, namely
IFRS7  (Financial  Instruments:  Disclosures)  and  IFRS13  (Fair  value  measurement  of  financial
instruments). This seminar, I understand, covers important aspects of these three standards.
Rest assured, I will not go into the details but leave it to the experts to delve into the technicalities
of IFRS9.
It is essential that supervisors and regulators are well aware of the underlying concepts of IFRS9.
They need to be equipped with the right tools and techniques to conduct supervision of banks
and financial institutions in the most effective way. It is only then that they will be able to gain
adequate  insights  into  the  implications  of  IFRS9  on  credit  risk  models  and  blend  the  IFRS9
requirements with existing methods and models used for risk and regulatory purpose.
Given the complexities of IFRS9, many jurisdictions still consider that it can be very beneficial to
share  country  experiences  on  implementation  issues  and  challenges.  Allow  me,  ladies  and
gentlemen, to share the experience of Mauritius in the implementation of IFRS9. I will also brush
over  some  of  the  recent  developments  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  of  the
jurisdiction.  
Experience on implementing IFRS9
As an International Financial Centre, Mauritius is committed to adopting international standards
and  best  practices.  IFRS9  became  effective  since  January  2018  in  Mauritius.  To  meet  the
deadline of January 2018, the preparatory work for the execution of IFRS9 started as early as
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
2016.
The Bank of Mauritius introduced a programme to closely monitor progress by each bank and
non-bank  deposit-taking  institution  in  implementing  IFRS9. As  from  March  2016,  the  Bank  of
Mauritius  held  a  series  of  consultations  with  external  auditors  and  banks  to  ensure  smooth
execution of IFRS9. Regular meetings were held with each licensee to discuss their execution
plans  and  the  potential  impact  of  the  new  standards.  The  central  bank  started  requesting  for
quarterly progress reports from concerned institutions to monitor progress.
In  the  light  of  the  complexities  involved,  these  institutions  were  requested  to  complete  a
comprehensive  survey,  where  they  were  asked  details  about  the  impact  of  IFRS9  on  their
profitability and capital adequacy as well as the expected completion date. The survey revealed
that the increase in provisions would generally range between 2 to 87 per cent, with an average
increase of 18 per cent. Eight banks out of a total of 21 reported that there would not be any
increase in provisions. The predicted impact on the Capital Adequacy Ratio ranged from 0.1 per
cent to negative 2.20 per cent, with an average impact of negative 0.48 per cent.
The survey also revealed that banks used varying models to estimate credit losses given that
IFRS9  is  a  principles-based  standard  and  thus  was  not  prescriptive  on  the  calculation  of  the
expected losses. However, judgement was required in choosing forward-looking parameters for
the model used and in identifying significant increase in credit risk. The Bank of Mauritius was
aware that banks might lack the required historical data on defaults in order to estimate losses
accurately. This might partly explain the varying potential impact of the standard on the provision
required by banks.
Conscious  of  the  challenges  ahead,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  revised  its  Guideline  on  Credit
Impairment Measurement and Income Recognition, which will come into effect as from 1 January
2020. To ensure consistency and address the concerns on modelling risk, the Guideline sets
regulatory  floors  for  provisioning.  That  is,  when  a  financial  institution  makes  accounting
provisions  lower  than  the  regulatory  floors,  the  shortfall  will  be  accounted  for  either  through
additional provisions or a charge to the equity of the financial institution. The Bank of Mauritius is
equally considering the possibility of a phase-in period of one year for provision levels to be met
so that financial institutions have ample time to make the necessary adjustments.
In March 2019, the Bank of Mauritius conducted a workshop on IFRS9 in collaboration with the
Mauritius Bankers Association and a consultancy firm.  The Bank of Mauritius has also hired a
Consultant  to  train  supervisors  on  IFRS9  and  to  assist  in  the  development  of  a  set  of  IFRS9
returns  to  be  submitted  by  the  financial  institutions.  The  returns  will  capture  data  on  the
calculation of expected credit losses under IFRS9 and on governance as well as the model’s
methodology and set of assumptions. The draft returns are expected to be finalized shortly.
Recent developments
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  we  now  reach  the  second  part  of  my  remarks,  I  will  provide  an
overview  of  some  of  the  recent  developments  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  landscape  in
Mauritius.
The  Bank  of  Mauritius  is  actively  working  on  the  modernization  and  consolidation  of  its
supervisory framework. We have embarked on the implementation of a full-fledged risk-based
supervisory  framework.  Our  supervisory  approach  is  evolving  from  a  compliance-based
framework to a risk-based framework, which is expected to be completed by end-2020.
A separate module on Money Laundering/Fighting against Terrorism risks is being incorporated
in our risk-based supervisory framework. The Supervision Department now has a dedicated unit
to monitor Money Laundering/Fighting against Terrorism risks in the banking sector through off-
site surveillance as well as on-site examinations.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Many  of  you  might  be  aware  of  the  Mutual  Evaluation  Report  published  by  the  ESAAMLG  in
September  2018  on  the  assessment  of  the AML/CFT  measures  of  Mauritius.  We  have  since
made significant strides in addressing the deficiencies highlighted in the Report. In a follow-up
Mutual  Evaluation  Report  published  in April  2019,  the  ESAAMLG  concluded  that  Mauritius  has
made significant progress in resolving the technical compliance shortcomings. Further, Mauritius
submitted an application for Technical Compliance Re-rating of 12 recommendations, of which
11 were successfully upgraded. The Financial Services Commission, the Bank of Mauritius and
the  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  closely  collaborate  to  fight  financial  crime.  A  memorandum  of
understanding between the three regulatory institutions was signed last year. 
The central bank is currently working on the establishment of a Deposit Insurance Scheme.  The
legislation was approved by Parliament and received Presidential Assent in April 2019. However,
it  is  yet  to  be  proclaimed.  The  central  bank  has  already  started  working  on  the  operational
aspects  of  the  Scheme,  which  will  guarantee  coverage  to  eligible  depositors  up  to  a  specific
amount. At the same time, we are also working on a crisis resolution framework.
Collaboration with Supervisory Authorities
Many jurisdictions represented here are host to Pan-African banking groups and Mauritius is no
exception.  Some of our local banks have also extended their footprint on mainland Africa. Home
and host authorities are increasingly required to work closely for effective supervision of banks.
The  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  signed  Memoranda  of  Understanding  with  17  foreign  regulatory
authorities, which include banking sector regulators of Kenya, South Africa, Nigeria, to name a
few. Consolidated supervision is now part of our supervisory toolkit and is conducted on a regular
basis.  Home  and  host  regulators  are  able  to  share  their  insights  on  the  risk  management
framework of banking groups in supervisory college meetings. New areas such as cyber risks
are closely monitored.
In  March  2019,  the  Ombudsperson  for  Financial  Services  was  appointed.  Complaints  from
consumers of financial services against financial institutions licensed by the Bank of Mauritius
and the Financial Services Commission are now handled by the Ombudsperson’s Office. This is
expected  to  fast-track  complaints  resolution.    It  is  also  incumbent  on  the  Office  of
Ombudsperson for Financial Services to inform and educate the general public on investments
in financial services offered by financial institutions.
My address will be incomplete if I do not mention the significance of corporate governance in
banks. Although a risk-based supervisory framework will ensure the strength and credibility of our
financial system, it cannot eliminate the possibility of failure of an institution. I constantly remind
my officers to keep a close watch on the governance practices of banks. It is an advice that I
extend to all of you.
Concluding note 
I  am  sure  that  the  seminar  will  provide  you  with  a  good  insight  into  the  challenges  of
implementing IFRS9 as well as key takeaways from the experiences of other countries. Learning
from  others’  experience  will  undoubtedly  assist  you  all  to  improve  your  own  supervisory
practices.
I  am  delighted  to  open  this  Seminar  on  “International  Financial  Reporting  Standards:
Implementation Issues” and wish you all fruitful deliberations.
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
