Sabine Lautenschläger: Interview with Deutschlandfunk
Interview by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank  and  Vice-Chair  of  the  Supervisory  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  with
Deutschlandfunk, conducted by Mr Klemens Kindermann and broadcast on 30 December 2018.
 Ms Lautenschläger, the euro is now 20 years old. On 1 January 1999 it became legal
tender for 11 out of 15 EU Member States, initially in electronic form and then as cash as
of 2002. Germany has participated from the outset, alongside countries such as France
and Italy. Has the euro been a success?
Yes, the euro has definitely been a success, and indeed a success on an economic level. Many
people merely associate the euro with being able to travel more easily to other countries without
having  to  exchange  German  marks  for  French  francs  or  Spanish  pesetas,  but  it  has  most
especially had economic benefits for our business enterprises and our firms. We are now truly
an  export-driven  country.  Trade  within  the  euro  area  has  increased  and,  thanks  to  the  single
currency, firms find it much easier to estimate the value of the payments owed to them. They do
not run any exchange rate risk. But the euro has also been a success in political terms. We
should  not  forget  that  the  EU,  and  therefore  the  euro,  has  also  been  immensely  important  in
preserving the peace that we have enjoyed in the euro area, in the EU, for the past 70 years. And
since we are stronger together, and as part of the EU and the euro area are able to play a greater
role  in  the  global  arena,  also  on  the  political  front,  we  can  do  more  to  ensure  peace  for  the
political environment. So, in my view, the euro is a huge success.
According to a survey, even now around a third of German people still mentally convert
German euro prices to German mark, at least for larger purchases. Can you understand
that some Germans are still pining for the D-mark?
I’m not so sure that this mental conversion really is a sign that people are missing the D-mark.
Especially for the older ones among us, it is simply a better way of estimating the value. Some
people also do it out of habit. So I don’t think that Germans really want to have the D-mark back.
I’ve heard that more than 80% of the German population have a very positive view of the euro…
On  that  note,  the  latest  survey  conducted  by  the  EU  Commission  indicates  that  the
German people’s acceptance of the euro is on the decline. Has a slide set in? In 2018,
some  70%  thought  that  the  euro  was  good  for  Germany,  compared  with  76%  in  2017.
Those levels of acceptance are still high, but they have begun to slip back.
Yes, there are fluctuations here and there and of course there are years when some Germans
feel more at ease, and more nationalistic, in their own country and some may then prefer to have
their own currency. But, as you say, the levels are still at 70%, 76%, so I see no grounds for
concern. l think that firms and younger people greatly appreciate having a currency that not only
facilitates travel but also cross-border trade and payments.
Your  reference  to  national  sentiment  actually  brings  us  to  the  topic  of  the  euro  and
populism. It is easy to forget, but the Alternative for Germany (AfD) party actually started
out as an anti-single currency party. The refugee issue followed. Are you afraid that, in
Germany too, an anti-euro stance might be rediscovered by the AfD?
I’d  rather  not  make  any  statement  on  the  political  aspects.  That  is  not  a  task  for  the  ECB,
although we do of course observe and take on board the fact that people in many countries have
concerns and harbour a certain fear of globalisation.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
I don’t think it’s about the euro, but rather that some people fear that they will be left behind in a
global context and that they will no longer be able to control the situation. And then they believe,
wrongly so in my view, that they will find more security by retreating to their national domain, their
own sector and their own region.
But  anti-euro  sentiment  has  been  explicitly  stirred  up  in  France  and  Italy  during  the
respective electoral campaigns of Marine Le Pen, the Five Star Movement and the right-
wing Northern League. Do populist movements pose a threat to the euro?
I would not say that it’s under threat but I think we must take the matter seriously and we must
give a much better explanation – as this interview today enables me to do – of the benefits of the
euro, the degree of prosperity and security that it brings and the number of jobs that depend on it.
We  need  to  explain  that  the  euro  simplifies  trade  between  euro  area  countries  and  brings
economic prosperity and jobs. All this is extremely important to me and it shows that we need to
state  this  more  often  and  much  more  clearly.  In  essence,  however,  I  really  believe  that
nationalistic tendencies – and I don’t just mean in Germany, but in the whole world, as we don’t
need to confine ourselves to speaking about the EU – result from the fear of globalisation, that
people can no longer control their own independent inner domains in the way they could before.
Let’s stay with Italy which had promised to limit its budget deficit next year to 0.8%. The
target is currently set at 2.04% of GDP and the European Commission has now accepted
that figure. Can the stability of the euro be preserved in this way?
I believe it is extremely important for all of us to adhere to the commonly agreed European fiscal
rules.
Italy too?
Every  country,  including  Germany,  for  example.  It’s  important  because  for  a  functioning
economy, for sustainability in the euro area, all countries need to keep to certain budget limits
and  have  sound  public  finances.  That’s  very  important  for  the  euro,  but  it  goes  beyond  that
because it also concerns the sustainability of government debt, etc. That’s important for every
country, for Italy, for France, but also for Germany. And you may wish to remember that we were
one of the first countries to infringe these rules.
Speaking of France, the French President Emmanuel Macron has made commitments in
the order of billions of euro to the “yellow vest” protesters. France will next year have
violated the new debt rule for the eleventh year in a row, apart from in 2017. Shouldn’t an
excessive deficit procedure be launched against France?
To the best of my knowledge, the budget plans have not yet been fully decided on in France. It
would be important to know whether if they spend more on one side, they may save more on the
other  side.  I’m  not  aware  that  France  has  already  discussed  compensatory  measures  and
presented them in a European context. So I don’t think the French government has got to that
stage yet and we will have to wait and see,
The EU Commission wants to strengthen the euro’s role as a global currency. Is that
possible and if so, how?
Yes, it is possible but is not the ECB’s role to do so. Our mandate is to maintain price stability.
But  we  have  just  spoken  about  the  euro’s  importance  for  the  economy,  also  for  the  German
economy. And the European economy, i.e. firms in the euro area, who would benefit from as
many payments as possible being made in euro rather than in US dollar or in other currencies.
That would remove the exchange rate risk. They would not have to calculate exchange rates and
so it would be to their advantage if the euro gained in importance. Your second question was how
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
that could be done. Well, we could create circumstances that would make it easier to use the
euro as a currency. Infrastructure, more payments in euro, would then mean fewer risks. That
could be achieved by promoting the capital markets union, by advancing the banking union, by
harmonising insolvency regimes. All of these things help enormously.
You  are  listening  to  Deutschlandfunk’s  interview  of  the  week,  today  with  Sabine
Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  ECB’s  Executive  Board.  Ms  Lautenschläger,  the  US
Federal Reserve raised interest rates shortly before Christmas, for the fourth time this
year.  They  are  now  between  2.25%  and  2.5%.  The  ECB  is  taking  no  action  at  all  on
interest rates, why not?
The US economy is different, as are US price developments. It is not our task to copy the Federal
Reserve; our mandate is to maintain price stability in the euro area…
But many people are waiting on an interest rate hike here, too.
Yes,  some  people  are  waiting  while  others  are  very  happy  that  the  interest  rates  for  housing
construction in Germany or for investment in companies, in new jobs, remain low. It completely
depends on whom you ask, Mr Kindermann.
Yes,  there  are  many  savers  who  are  concerned  about  their  pension  plans  because
interest rates are simply not going up. What would you say to them?
Well, I’m a saver myself. I understand their position very well and I will be the first to vote in favour
of further normalisation of monetary policy once the necessary conditions are in place. Our asset
purchase  programme  ends  in  January.  That  means  we  have  taken  a  first  step  towards  the
normalisation of monetary policy and I hope that the data that we receive in 2019 will be such that
we can take further steps in 2019.
When you say the end of the asset purchase programme, it’s actually not the end at all,
because  the  ECB  is  still  blithely  purchasing  assets.  It  just  means  that  no  additional
assets are being purchased, but those maturing will be replaced. So we can’t actually say
that this programme is stopping.
We’re stopping net purchases. This means that our balance sheet will not increase any further.
We will keep it stable in the first instance because an expansionary, accommodative monetary
policy is still needed to stimulate investments, including in Germany, and to continue to support
economic growth in order to achieve inflation rates within our very narrow corridor of below, but
close to, 2%.
Will you also continue to purchase corporate bonds?
We will continue to purchase maturing corporate bonds and then reinvest again.
Even corporate bonds?
Yes.
But with these steps it will take a relatively long time to return to normality. Is it perhaps
possible that you’ve already missed the turning point? The Federal Reserve is already
much further ahead. Interest rates can only be reduced to combat a possible recession if
they have previously been raised.
Yes, but the United States is in a completely different stage of its economic cycle. Its economy is
much more mature, and its economic upturn started much earlier than ours and has been going
on  for  much  longer.  The  inflation  rates  you  see  in  the  United  States  are  much  more  stable,
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
exactly where the Federal Reserve wants them.
But here in the euro area, inflation has also been where you’d actually like it to be at for
several months now.
Yes, but you need to look further ahead. You can’t just look at the current month or one or two or
three  months  ahead.  You  need  to  look  at  how  prices  develop  over  a  longer  period  looking
forward. Otherwise you would have to change the interest rates every month, and I don’t think
that would do the economy any good. You’ll also see that the inflation rates are projected to fall
again next year. This is because some effects, particularly those resulting from higher energy
costs, drop out of the calculation after a year ‒ this is called the base effect.
But then we will have to wait even longer for interest rates to increase here in the euro
area.
We have to see how the situation develops.
Do you think that interest rates will increase above 0.0% in 2019?
It  depends  on  the  price  inflation  data  we  receive  in  the  first  and  second  quarters  of  2019.
Personally, I hope and assume that we will see a change in 2019, but I won’t try to suggest I
know exactly where we’ll be, say, in the middle of next year.
When will savings interest rates increase for savers, provided that interest rates are
raised in 2019?
It all depends on which interest rate adjustments are made and how quickly the institutions pass
them on. But for deposits interest rates are actually negative, and so it will obviously take longer
to increase these gradually (as this cannot be done in one go) to a level that resembles where
rates for savers were 10 or 20 years ago. It will take some time to be honest.
So savers still have to wait another one or two years?
Again, it depends on how the inflation rate develops.
In  the  United  States  we’re  seeing  signs  of  a  recession.  Yields  on  longer-term
government bonds in the United States are sometimes lower than the yields on those
with shorter maturities, which is a completely abnormal situation. Normally you get more
money the longer you lend. This is what is referred to as an inverted yield curve. This
has happened eight times since the Second World War. In the United States this has
always resulted in a recession. The Federal Reserve is already actively preparing itself
for  a  recession.  What  is  the  ECB  doing  to  protect  us  here  in  the  euro  area  from  a
downturn?
Once again, the US economy has achieved a different level of maturity. The country’s upswing
started much earlier – years earlier – and was much stronger.
But a recession in the United States would also affect us here in Europe.
Yes, but if you take a look, we have become much more independent. So I wouldn’t want to draw
or confirm the same parallels that you saw in the economic cycles 20 or 30 years ago for today.
The  euro  area  economy  is  much  more  diversified  in  terms  of  partners,  in  terms  of  trading
partners, and we are no longer quite as dependent. We are in a different economic cycle. So you
can mention US interest rates another 150 times, but it’s not going to help us, because we need
to base our assumptions on data in the euro area.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
You  are  listening  to  Deutschlandfunk’s  interview  of  the  week,  today  with  Sabine
Lautenschläger, Member of the ECB’s Executive Board. Ms Lautenschläger, you’re not
only a member of the ECB’s Executive Board, but also Vice-Chair of the Supervisory
Board of the ECB. I would therefore like to put the question to you: are our banks safer
than they used to be?
Yes, they are. They have much more, and higher-quality, capital. They hold much larger liquidity
reserves. Risk management practices have improved. So yes, a lot has been done in the euro
area, and even internationally, as a lot of rules have been changed and tightened globally. They
are therefore safer.
Banks really like to buy government bonds, as these are given a zero risk weighting. As
such, banks currently do not need to hold a loss buffer for these bonds. Is this the next
problem waiting to happen, especially for Italian and Spanish banks?
I can tell you that the institutions have all actually reduced their shares of government bonds in
the last ten years.
Would they not still have to back these with capital?
I agree with you here – I am very much in favour of institutions backing risks with capital and also
taking into account concentration risk, i.e. considering the amount of specific government bonds
an institution has per country.
Ms Lautenschläger, on the subject of Brexit the Governor of the Bank of England, Mark
Carney,  warns  that  an  unregulated  Brexit  on  29  March  2019  would  have  massive
consequences for the economy. According to Mr Carney, it could cause more damage
than the financial crisis did ten years ago. What provisions has the ECB made for the
event of an unregulated Brexit?
Of course, we have looked at all of the possible consequences for the financial sector in depth,
particularly for banks. This is because, as a central bank, we naturally maintain an overview of
the financial sector and, as a banking supervisor, we supervise banks. And I can tell you that
there are obviously still risks in this respect. You should therefore never just sit back and relax
and  stop  watching  what’s  going  on.  But  I  think  we’re  also  quite  well  prepared.  We’ve  been
working  to  prepare  institutions  for  two  years,  ensuring  they  submit  contingency  plans  and
alternative  options,  for  example  for  certain  trading  activities.  The  European  Commission  is
working on a regulation on clearing and payment processing, for example. So I think we’re well
prepared, at least as well prepared as you can be in such situations.
The British pound will probably end up crashing.
No one knows that.
No one knows that, but the Bank of England is expecting it in any case. That means you’ll
also be asked about it.
We’re not responsible for the pound; we look after the euro here.
But there’s an exchange rate between the pound and the euro.
Yes, but again, I think it’s better that Mark Carney speaks for the pound and we speak for the
euro.
How many foreign banks have already applied for a banking licence in Germany to retain
access to the European markets after Brexit? Can you give a figure?
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
I think it’s around 20, if I’m not mistaken, and we’re in regular contact with 40 institutions. Some
only need their licence extended, some need a completely new licence and some don’t need a
licence  at  all,  but  want  to  substantially  expand  the  business  that’s  covered  by  their  existing
licence, and this all obviously also entails work, as we then impose other conditions on their set-
up here in the European market.
Will Frankfurt, Germany’s financial centre, become more important after Brexit?
Yes.
Why?
Because  quite  a  few  banks  will  move  parts  of  their  business  from  London  to  Frankfurt,  or  to
Paris, Amsterdam or Dublin, so not only to Germany’s financial centre. London will always be a
very important financial centre, but continental European business above all will be relocated in
part – and perhaps to a larger extent over the years – to Germany, France, Ireland and Spain,
and therefore also jobs.
And finally, the eight-year term of the current President of the ECB, Mario Draghi, will be
coming to an end at the end of October 2019. Has the time not come for a woman to head
the ECB?
The time is ripe to appoint women to all kinds of positions, not only at the ECB. There are lots I
could list.
But also at the ECB?
Yes.
The  previous  ECB  presidents  have  come  from  the  Netherlands,  France  and  Italy.
Shouldn’t it be Germany’s turn next?
I don’t see it so much from a national perspective. First and foremost I’d like to have someone –
a  man  or  a  woman  (a  woman  would  of  course  be  nice)  –  who  is  an  established  expert  in
monetary policy and ensures  stability.  I  think  that’s  really  important,  and  then  nationality  takes
more  of  a  backseat,  as  we’re  not  working  as  representatives  of  our  own  countries,  but  as
representatives of the euro area as Europeans.
Mr Draghi has had to navigate through a number of crises during his time at the ECB.
What do you think are the most important qualities a new ECB president needs to have?
As I said, definitely expertise in monetary policy and national economy, steadfastness, stamina,
strategic thinking, and I think a talent for communications is extremely important.
In  that  case,  wouldn’t  Deutsche  Bundesbank  President  Jens  Weidmann  be  the  right
candidate?
I’m sure there are several people who possess these specific skills, but Mr Weidmann, President
of the Deutsche Bundesbank, also has these skills, yes.
Ms Lautenschläger, thank you for the interview.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
