Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Luis
de  Guindos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  12  September
2019.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  have  conducted  a  thorough
assessment  of  the  economic  and  inflation  outlook,  also  taking  into  account  the  latest  staff
macroeconomic  projections  for  the  euro  area.  As  a  result,  the  Governing  Council  took  the
following decisions in pursuit of its price stability objective.
First,  as  regards  the key ECB interest rates,  we  decided  to  lower  the  interest  rate  on  the
deposit facility by 10 basis points to –0.50%. The interest rate on the main refinancing operations
and the rate on the marginal lending facility will remain unchanged at their current levels of 0.00%
and 0.25% respectively. We now expect the key ECB interest rates to remain at their present or
lower levels until we have seen the inflation outlook robustly converge to a level sufficiently close
to, but below, 2%  within  our  projection  horizon,  and  such  convergence  has  been  consistently
reflected in underlying inflation dynamics.
Second,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  restart  net  purchases  under  its  asset  purchase
programme (APP) at a monthly pace of €20 billion as from 1 November. We expect them to run
for as long as necessary to reinforce the accommodative impact of our policy rates, and to end
shortly before we start raising the key ECB interest rates.
Third, we intend to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal payments from maturing securities
purchased under the APP for an extended period of time past the date when we start raising the
key ECB interest rates, and in any case for as long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity
conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation.
Fourth, we decided to change the modalities of the new series of quarterly targeted longer-term
refinancing  operations  (TLTRO  III)  to  preserve  favourable  bank  lending  conditions,  ensure  the
smooth  transmission  of  monetary  policy  and  further  support  the  accommodative  stance  of
monetary policy. The interest rate in each operation will now be set at the level of the average
rate  applied  in  the  Eurosystem’s  main  refinancing  operations  over  the  life  of  the  respective
TLTRO. For banks whose eligible net lending exceeds a benchmark, the rate applied in TLTRO
III operations will be lower, and can be as low as the average interest rate on the deposit facility
prevailing over the life of the operation. The maturity of the operations will be extended from two
to three years.
Fifth, in order to support the bank-based transmission of monetary policy the Governing Council
decided to introduce a two-tier system for reserve remuneration in which part of banks’ holdings
of excess liquidity will be exempt from the negative deposit facility rate.
Separate press releases with further details of the measures taken by the Governing Council will
be published this afternoon at 15:30 CET.
The Governing Council reiterated the need for a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy
for a prolonged period of time and continues to stand ready to adjust all of its instruments, as
appropriate, to ensure that inflation moves towards its aim in a sustained manner, in line with its
commitment to symmetry.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Today’s decisions were taken in response to the continued shortfall of inflation with respect to
our aim. In fact, incoming information since the last Governing Council meeting indicates a more
protracted weakness of the euro area economy, the persistence of prominent downside risks
and muted inflationary pressures. This is reflected in the new staff projections, which show a
further downgrade of the inflation outlook.
At  the  same  time,  robust  employment  growth  and  increasing  wages  continue  to  underpin  the
resilience of the euro area economy. With today’s comprehensive package of monetary policy
decisions,  we  are  providing  substantial  monetary  stimulus  to  ensure  that  financial  conditions
remain very favourable and support the euro area expansion, the ongoing build-up of domestic
price pressures and, thus, the sustained convergence of inflation to our medium-term inflation
aim.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Euro
area real GDP increased by 0.2%, quarter on quarter, in the second quarter of 2019, following a
rise of 0.4% in the previous quarter. Incoming economic data and survey information continue to
point to moderate but positive growth in the third quarter of this year. This slowdown in growth
mainly  reflects  the  prevailing  weakness  of  international  trade  in  an  environment  of  prolonged
global uncertainties, which are particularly affecting the euro area manufacturing sector.
At the same time, the services and construction sectors show ongoing resilience and the euro
area expansion is also supported by favourable financing conditions, further employment gains
and  rising  wages,  the  mildly  expansionary  euro  area  fiscal  stance  and  the  ongoing  –  albeit
somewhat slower – growth in global activity.
This  assessment  is  broadly  reflected  in  the  September  2019  ECB  staff  macroeconomic
projections for the euro area. These projections foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.1% in
2019,  1.2%  in  2020  and  1.4%  in  2021.  Compared  with  the  June  2019  staff  macroeconomic
projections, the outlook for real GDP growth has been revised down for 2019 and 2020.
The risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook remain tilted to the downside. These risks
mainly pertain to the prolonged presence of uncertainties, related to geopolitical factors, the rising
threat of protectionism and vulnerabilities in emerging markets.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 1.0% in August 2019,
unchanged from July. Lower energy inflation was offset by higher food inflation, while the rate of
HICP inflation excluding food and energy was unchanged. On the basis of current futures prices
for  oil,  headline  inflation  is  likely  to  decline  before  rising  again  towards  the  end  of  the  year.
Measures of underlying inflation remained generally muted and indicators of inflation expectations
stand at low levels. While labour cost pressures strengthened and broadened amid high levels of
capacity utilisation and tightening labour markets, their pass-through to inflation is taking longer
than previously anticipated. Over the medium term underlying inflation is expected to increase,
supported by our monetary policy measures, the ongoing economic expansion and robust wage
growth.
This  assessment  is  also  broadly  reflected  in  the  September  2019  ECB  staff  macroeconomic
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation at 1.2% in 2019, 1.0% in 2020
and 1.5% in 2021. Compared with the June 2019 staff macroeconomic projections, the outlook
for  HICP  inflation  has  been  revised  down  over  the  whole  projection  horizon,  reflecting  lower
energy prices and the weaker growth environment.
Turning  to  the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) growth increased to 5.2% in July 2019,
after 4.5% in June. Sustained rates of broad money growth reflect ongoing bank credit creation
for the private sector and low opportunity costs of holding M3. The narrow monetary aggregate
M1 continues to be the main contributor to broad money growth on the components side.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations remained unchanged at 3.9% in
July 2019. The annual growth rate of overall loans to non-financial corporations continues to be
solid,  although  short-term  loans  –  which  are  more  sensitive  to  the  cycle  –  show  signs  of
weakness. The annual growth rate of loans to households stood at 3.4% in July, after 3.3% in
June, continuing its gradual improvement. Overall, loan growth is still benefiting from historically
low bank lending rates.
The monetary policy measures we have taken today, including the more accommodative terms
of the new series of TLTROs, will help to safeguard favourable bank lending conditions and will
continue to support access to financing, in particular for small and medium-sized enterprises.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from the monetary analysis confirmed that an ample degree of monetary accommodation is still
necessary for the continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close
to, 2% over the medium term.
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute  more  decisively  to  raising  the  longer-term  growth  potential,  supporting  aggregate
demand  at  the  current  juncture  and  reducing  vulnerabilities.  The  implementation  of structural
policies  in  euro  area  countries  needs  to  be  substantially  stepped  up  to  boost  euro  area
productivity and growth potential, reduce structural unemployment and increase resilience. The
2019 country-specific recommendations should serve as the relevant signpost.
Regarding fiscal policies, the mildly expansionary euro area fiscal stance is currently providing
some support to economic activity. In view of the weakening economic outlook and the continued
prominence  of  downside  risks,  governments  with  fiscal  space  should  act  in  an  effective  and
timely  manner.  In  countries  where  public  debt  is  high,  governments  need  to  pursue  prudent
policies  that  will  create  the  conditions  for  automatic  stabilisers  to  operate  freely. All  countries
should reinforce their efforts to achieve a more growth-friendly composition of public finances.
Likewise,  the  transparent  and  consistent  implementation  of  the  European  Union’s  fiscal  and
economic governance framework over time and across countries remains essential to bolster
the resilience of the euro area economy. Improving the functioning of Economic and Monetary
Union remains a priority. The Governing Council welcomes the ongoing work and urges further
specific and decisive steps to complete the banking union and the capital markets union.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
