Howard Lee: Benchmark regulation and migration
Closing keynote by Mr Howard Lee, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority,
at  the  Bloomberg-ISDA  Benchmark  Conference  "Benchmark  Regulation  and  Migration",  Hong
Kong, 30 May 2019.
Taran [Khera], ladies and gentlemen,
 1.  First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  thank  Bloomberg  and  ISDA  for  organising  this  Benchmark
Conference and for gathering so many speakers and participants to exchange views on the
important subject of benchmark reform.  The subject of benchmark reform is always very
close to my heart, as I have been involved in the review of interest rate benchmarks both in
Hong  Kong  and  in  the  context  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board’s  Official  Sector  Steering
Group (FSB OSSG) deliberations for many years.
LIBOR discontinuation: A turning point
2.  If we look back to 2013 when the OSSG started to operate, there was a general agreement
that given the changes in the interbank market, the interbank offer rates, or IBORs in short
must  be  reformed.    But  given  the  long  history  of  IBORs  and  the  huge  value  of  financial
contracts referencing them, moving to new IBORs with fundamentally different determination
methodologies,  or  switching  to  alternative  reference  rates  is  a  very  complex  task,  as  we
heard from many speakers just now.  Understandably market participants generally took a
‘wait-and-see’ approach when dealing with benchmark transition issues.  But now – with a
growing recognition that LIBOR may discontinue after end-2021 – the situation is changing. 
This  is  an  important  wake-up  call  for  the  financial  market,  and  market  participants  are
spending  a  lot  more  efforts  on  the  transition  issues,  with  the  support  of  ISDA  and  other
industry bodies.
3.  But, with this growing momentum, are we all geared up?  I would reply with a simple ‘no’. 
Clearly, much more remains to be done.
Transition: A challenging process even for the deep USD market
4.  Among all the IBORs, USD LIBOR is the most widely used benchmark in the global market. 
And the US authorities have been proactively engaging with the industry in promoting the use
of Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) as an alternative.
5.  Since the launch of SOFR in April 2018, the trading volume of interest rate derivatives (IRD)
referencing SOFR has been growing, but it remains relatively small.  According to ISDA’s
Interest  Rate  Benchmarks  Review,  the  total  traded  notional  volumes  of  IRD  referencing
SOFR was US$22.6 billion in Q1 2019.  This was less than 0.1% of those referencing USD
LIBOR, which totalled US$34.8 trillion.
6.  So, even for the USD market, which is the deepest and most liquid market in the world, the
build-up of transactions based on an alternative risk-free rate could take some time.  For
other IBORs, this could be an even longer and more challenging process.
Transition: A multi-dimension challenge
Wide-ranging impact arising from the transition
7.  As many speakers have pointed out, transitioning to alternative reference rates is a complex
multi-dimension task.  It will have potential profit and loss, tax and accounting implications on
market  participants.    Migration  of  legacy  contracts  and  adoption  of  new  documentation
involving hundreds of thousands of clients would be another complex exercise.  All these
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
issues will cut across different segments of the financial market, from derivatives, to bonds,
to  loans  and  many  others.    The  implications  may  also  vary  greatly  across  different
jurisdictions given the different market structure and legal environment.  Therefore, industry
associations such as ISDA have an important role to play, in helping to address these wide-
ranging issues with a global and industry-wide perspective.
Global banks should take the lead
8.  Likewise, international banks, which have operations across many jurisdictions, will be better
placed to help shape the path for transition for the banking sector.  As we all know, IBORs
are used in nearly every aspect of their business – from trading, to risk management, to
pricing  and  valuation.      Preparing  for  the  transition  means  they  need  to  develop  the
necessary operational and system capability for their global operations, probably dealing with
multiple alternative reference rates at the same time.  I can see this is a very onerous and
resource-intensive process.  But then, given the quantity and diversity of financial contracts
on their book, and their presence and market knowledge in various jurisdictions, these global
banks should be best equipped to take the lead in devising a comprehensive transition plan. 
After all, it is in their best interest to act early and get themselves ready for the transition
given the scale of their business.
Smaller banks should not wait and see
9.  The  flip  side  of  this  argument  is  that  smaller  banks  or  non-banks  would  likely  look  to  the
global banks to act first.  But I would caution against waiting until the last minute.  Although
there  may  still  be  uncertainties  for  the  transition,  all  banks  and  corporations  should  keep
updated of the latest development and understand what aspects of their business would be
affected  –  this  is  a  fundamental  first  step.    Undertaking  detailed  risk  assessment  and
formulating an action plan would be next.  For now, some banks may hesitate to trade in
products  using  the  new  alternative  reference  rates,  as  they  want  to  see  better  market
liquidity  before  they  start.    But  this  is  a  ‘chicken  and  egg’  scenario  –  if  everyone  plays  a
waiting game, the market will never be developed.  More importantly, going into the market in
a manageable scale would enable your people to learn the rope early before these trades
become more main stream.
Client education is also important
10.  While  banks  are  gearing  up  their  own  preparation,  the  wide-spectrum  of  IBOR  users  is
adding further complexity to the transition process.  Switching to alternative reference rates
is  not  something  that  can  be  done  unilaterally.    Banks  need  to  work  closely  with  their
counterparties to develop the necessary fall-back arrangements.
11.  It  may  be  relatively  easy  to  discuss  the  transition  plans  with  counterparties  that  are  also
financial institutions, as everyone is more or less on the same page.  But IBORs are also
used by banks’ different clients, both corporations and individuals.  There is a big gap among
these IBOR users on the awareness of the benchmark reform, so the situation becomes
less straightforward.
12.  Therefore,  client  education  is  another  vital  task.    Banks  should  begin  outreach  to  their
clients, and educate them about the benchmark transition early.  This could help to minimise
misunderstanding and costly litigation in the future.
Raising market awareness in Hong Kong
13.  Closer to home in Hong Kong, the Treasury Markets Association (TMA) has been working
with  bank  representatives  on  benchmark  reform  for  many  years.    More  recently  it  has
intensified its reach-out to other sectors.  It has set up a Working Group to engage a wider
spectrum  of  stakeholders  including  accountants,  lawyers,  bank  customers  and  industry
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
associations like ISDA.  It is important that different market participants understand what the
transition  will  mean  for  their  business  operations  and  how  they  should  prepare  for  these
changes.  The Working Group is now looking at issues like the implications on accounting
and the transition of cash products.  It will further engage stakeholders to explore means of
encouraging the adoption of alternative reference rates in their day-to-day transactions and
business activities.
14.  At the same time, the HKMA supervisors has also been actively engaging banks.  In March,
we  issued  two  circulars  to  all  banks  in  Hong  Kong.    The  first  one  reminded  them  to
undertake risk assessment and make preparation for the necessary transition.  The second
one served to clarify that genuine amendments to existing derivatives contracts which are
made to give effect to interest rate benchmark reform will not be considered new contracts
from  the  perspective  of  the  HKMA’s  margin  requirements.    This  removes  one  of  the
uncertainties about the transition.  For the time being, we have not specified a timeline for
the  banks  to  get  ready  their  transition  plan  but  we  will  approach  them  at  a  later  stage  to
understand their progress and readiness for the transition.
HIBOR and HONIA
15.  As financial institutions in Hong Kong are gathering pace in their preparation for the LIBOR
transition,  we  are  also  making  progress  in  identifying  an  alternative  reference  rate  for
HIBOR.  We understand market participants are keen to have forward-looking term rates to
mirror  the  structure  of  HIBOR.    Therefore,  the  HKMA  conducted  a  feasibility  study  of
compiling HKD term rates based on actual wholesale funding transactions by major banks. 
But the results showed that while transaction-based wholesale term funding rates generally
followed  term  HIBORs,  they  exhibited  a  high  level  of  daily  volatility,  which  made  them  an
impractical substitute for term HIBORs.
16.  More  recently,  TMA  proposed  adopting  the  Hong  Kong  Dollar  Overnight  Index  Average
(HONIA) as the alternative reference rate for HIBOR.  Similar to many alternate reference
rates chosen in other currency areas, HONIA is an overnight interbank funding rate.  While
lacking  a  term  structure  on  its  own,  this  reference  rate  is  robust  and  based  purely  on
transaction data.
17.  In  early  May,  TMA  completed  a  consultation  with  the  industry  on  several  technical
refinements to HONIA.  This is part of its ongoing initiative to further enhance the robustness
of its benchmarks.  It is now reviewing the feedbacks received, and will consider how best to
put in place the relevant enhancements.
18.  When  these  enhancements  are  done,  TMA  will  work  with  the  industry  to  promote
development  and  trading  of  HONIA-based  financial  products.    Later  on,  it  will  also  try  to
promote trading in the OIS market, and hopefully develop an OIS curve from HONIA.  But
this would have to depend on market conditions.
19.  While HONIA serves as an alternative to HIBOR, there is currently no plan to discontinue
HIBOR.  HIBOR has been in place for many years and is still widely recognised by market
participants as a credible and reliable benchmark.  Similar to a few other jurisdictions in the
region, Hong Kong will adopt a multiple-rate approach.  In other words, HONIA and HIBOR
will  co-exist  in  the  market  and  market  participants  are  free  to  choose  between  them. 
Meanwhile, TMA will continue to strengthen HIBOR to ensure that it remains in compliance
with international standards.
20.  Of  course,  we  are  facing  the  irony  that  if  HIBOR  remains,  market  players  may  see  little
incentive  to  develop  and  trade  HONIA-based  products.    However,  I  encourage  all  market
participants to start exploring how to incorporate HONIA into their business.  It may be true
that HIBOR will last for some more time.  But the transition to SOFR in the USD space could
gradually  lead  to  changes  in  market  practices  and  conventions  that  may  eventually  shift
market preference for interest rate benchmarks.  Therefore, if more HONIA-based products
can be introduced in the market going forward, it would help reduce any market impact in
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
case HIBOR has to discontinue one day owing to changes in market circumstances.
Closing
21.  Ladies and gentlemen, as we have learned from speakers earlier this morning, interest rate
benchmark reform is complex, but it is something too important for any market participant to
ignore.  When LIBOR ceases to exist, there will certainly be an impact on global financial
markets.  Some people may say end-2021 seems a long way off.  But it’s not, given the
tremendous amount of preparatory work required to ensure a smooth transition.  No one in
the market can afford to play a waiting game.  Let’s all devote resources now, and work
closely together on this important task.
22.  Thank you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
