Italian Banking Association
Annual Meeting
Speech by the Governor of the Bank of Italy
Ignazio Visco
Milan, 12 July 2019
The economic situation and outlook
The  world  economy  is  struggling  to  regain  momentum.  According  to  the 
main international institutions, GDP growth this year will be at its lowest since the 
contraction of 2009. In the Economic Bulletin that will be published this afternoon, 
the pace of international trade growth is estimated to be 1.5 per cent, more than 
two and a half points lower than in 2018. Downside risks linked to protracted trade 
tensions, the slowdown in the Chinese economy, and the unknowns surrounding 
the timeframe and arrangements for the United Kingdom’s exit from the European 
Union, are weighing on the economic outlook.
Growth remains weak in the euro area. The uncertainty regarding the world 
economy is having a negative effect on exports, manufacturing production, and 
firms and households’ expectations. According to the projections made in June by 
the Eurosystem, GDP is expected to increase by 1.2 per cent in 2019, while the 
forecast for 2020 has been lowered to 1.4 per cent. The growth in prices remains 
modest and financial markets’ inflation expectations are particularly low.
At  the  beginning  of  June,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  confirmed  its 
strongly expansionary monetary policy stance. If there is no improvement in the 
macroeconomic outlook, further measures will be needed. Over the next few weeks, 
the Council will continue to consider how to recalibrate the tools at its disposal. 
Despite  the  slight  improvement  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year,  economic 
activity is stagnating in Italy, owing above all to the slackness of the industrial 
cycle.  According  to  our  surveys,  firms  expect  a  slowdown  in  demand  over  the 
coming months and very modest growth in investment over the year as a whole. 
The central projection included in the Bulletin puts GDP at 0.1 per cent in 2019 
and  at  just  under  1.0  per  cent  on  average  for  the  following  two  years.  These 
estimates are subject to risks connected with both international developments and 
domestic demand. The confidence of households and firms could be affected by 
the uncertainties surrounding the budget, which have been dispelled for this year 
but not for the next.
At a time of a generalized reduction in risk premiums, reflecting expectations 
of  greater  monetary  accommodation  in  the  euro  area,  tensions  on  the  Italian 
government securities market have abated. Thanks to the European Commission’s 
decision not to recommend the launch of an excessive deficit procedure, following 
the  reduction  in  expected  net  borrowing  for  the  current  year,  the  yield  spread 
between  Italian  and  German  ten-year  government  bonds  narrowed  further  and 
yesterday was below 200 basis points. 
To build on these results and reduce the cost of public debt further, the prudent 
budget  policy  stance  must  be  confirmed  over  a  longer  time  horizon.  The  yield 
spread compared with the corresponding German Bund is still around 70 points 
above the not low levels prevailing in April 2018. The yield spread with respect to 
Spain, which, like Italy, was severely hit by the sovereign debt crisis, is over 120 
points; it had been around half a percentage point in April of last year. If the spread 
continued  to  narrow  and  were  the  cost  of  debt  to  fall  below  the  nominal  GDP 
growth rate, as has already happened in the other euro area countries, it would be 
easier to lower the debt-to-GDP ratio.
Narrowing  the  spread  would  also  attenuate  the  risks  for  credit  access 
conditions.  The  tensions  over  public  debt  securities  have  pushed  down  private 
bond prices and the corresponding issue prices, especially for banks. There has 
been  little  effect  so  far  on  interest  rates  on  loans,  in  part  thanks  to  high  levels 
of  liquidity  and  the  improvement  in  banks’  balance  sheets.  Nevertheless,  signs 
of a tightening of credit access conditions have been emerging since mid-2018, 
especially for smaller firms and for those in the Centre and South; at a time of weak 
credit  demand,  this  has  led  to  a  moderate  contraction  in  loans  to  non-financial 
corporations since the beginning of this year.
The conditions of Italian banks
Italy’s banking system has progressively strengthened over the last few years, 
and credit quality has improved. Cautious lending policies, together with the albeit 
modest  economic  recovery,  has  kept  the  new  non-performing  loan  rate  down; 
prudent provisioning, more effective recovery processes and increasing recourse 
to  NPL  sales  have  driven  the  reduction  in  the  stock  of  non-performing  loans. 
Compared with the peak of 2015 and net of loan loss provisions, NPLs have more 
than halved, falling from €196 billion to €88 billion last March; their ratio to total 
loans has gone down from 9.8 to 4.2 per cent. 
Profitability has shown signs of recovery, linked to the reduction in loan loss 
provisions and the gradual decline in operating costs. Return on equity has been 
positive since 2017. Liquidity conditions have also progressively improved; some 
4
banks  have  resumed  bond  issuance  on  the  wholesale  markets  since  the  end  of 
last year, though at costs that are still higher than those recorded in the spring of 
2018. Capital ratios, which up until last September had been affected by tensions 
on the government securities market, increased again; last March, the CET1 ratio 
averaged 13.2 per cent.
In the first quarter of this year, the ratio of new non-performing loans declined 
for  firms  as  a  whole,  but  increased  slightly  in  some  sectors  (construction  and 
manufacturing);  net  interest  income,  which  was  already  low,  fell  further.  The 
prudent lending policies implemented by banks could mitigate the impact of the 
cyclical  slowdown  on  the  flows  of  non-performing  loans  compared  with  those 
observed  in  the  past.  Operating  costs  need  to  come  down  further  so  as  not  to 
penalize banks’ profitability again.
Tensions in the government bond market affect the value of the assets that 
are eligible as collateral in the Eurosystem, push up funding costs, and have 
a  negative  effect  on  banks’  capital,  given  the  losses  on  portfolio  securities 
calculated  at  fair  value.  In  the  second  quarter  of  2018,  for  example,  the 
increase in yields on government bonds reduced the capital ratio by about half 
a percentage point on average. Compared with April of last year, the market 
rates for bank bonds are now higher by about 15 basis points in Italy, while 
they are 45 basis points lower in the rest of the euro area. The rating agencies 
are  maintaining  their  negative  –  or  at  best  stable  –  outlook  as  regards  any 
shifts in Italy’s credit rating. This is also why there is an urgent need to define 
a strategy to support investment and innovative enterprises within a credible 
framework for public debt reduction. 
The situation of the less significant banks other than mutual banks (BCCs) is 
still characterized by specific weak points. For most of these banks, profitability 
continues to be lower than that of the significant groups and their NPL ratio is 
higher.  Some  are  affected  by  inadequate  corporate  governance  and  risk  control 
structures. The problems tend to be worse for banks in Italy’s Mezzogiorno, mainly 
because this region faces greater economic difficulties. Their balance sheet assets 
are, on average, half those of banks in the Centre and North; their legal form is 
most commonly that of a banca popolare (9 banks out of 16, against 12 out of 78 
in the rest of the country); the assets attributable to the popolari account for more 
than 90 per cent of the total, compared with 10 per cent in the Centre and North. 
As we have often pointed out, it is more difficult for popolari banks to turn to the 
market for the funds they need to strengthen their capital and to finance business 
growth and innovation. 
5
In the past few years, the Bank of Italy has introduced a series of measures 
covering all smaller banks, in part to prevent the emergence of critical situations. 
Action was taken to encourage new investors in banks’ capital and, where necessary, 
mergers with other intermediaries. Banks have been urged to reduce their credit 
risk  and  strengthen  NPL  management  and  recovery.  They  have  been  asked  to 
adopt appropriate measures to reduce operating costs and diversify income flows, 
for example by using consortium-based initiatives, reorganizing branch networks 
and containing staff costs. 
The  most  problematic  situations  have  been  managed  through  market 
solutions  that  safeguarded  financial  stability  and  protected  depositors.  Until  the 
first few months of last year, also thanks to greater confidence in the economic 
outlook for Italy and the euro area, the involvement of qualified investors made it 
possible to relaunch a number of banks, whose business models were completely 
overhauled and adapted to the new competitive scenario. However, in the current 
market environment, investing in the capital of smaller banks is considerably less 
attractive. Restructuring operations have become more difficult, partly due to the 
perception that their possible outcomes are much less certain. 
In this context, and given the limitations imposed by the European rules for 
managing crises at smaller banks, the less significant banks must work together to 
identify solutions to secure their business and relaunch their activities. On the one 
hand, links with their local area cannot be the only factor in their development; 
knowledge of markets and operators must be accompanied by more intensive use 
of  new  technologies  to  increase  operational  efficiency  and  to  make  the  supply 
of customer services more competitive. On the other hand, banks must reap the 
benefits that being larger can bring in terms of economies of scale and a strong 
capital  position.  We  are  mindful  that  consolidation  is  a  complex  process,  but 
preparatory work must begin at once to move in that direction, defining projects 
of  common  interest  in  areas  such  as  technological  innovation,  the  pooling  of 
auxiliary  activities  and  their  related  costs,  and  the  development  of  synergies  in 
service provision. It is fundamental to establish balanced governance structures 
that avoid conflicts of interest and meet the objective of financing the real economy 
in conditions of full efficiency and adequate profitability.
In  the  last  few  months,  the  two  new  mutual  banking  groups  that  are  now 
classified  as  significant  for  supervisory  purposes  have  started  operations.  Most 
of  the  BCCs  (224  out  of  263)  have  joined  these  two  groups.  Fully  reaping  the 
benefits  of  the  reforms  of  this  sector  will  largely  depend  on  the  effectiveness 
of  the  interaction  between  the  parent  banks  and  the  individual  BCCs  in  raising 
6
efficiency  and  profitability,  harnessing  economies  of  scope  and  improving 
credit  management  processes,  including  on  the  basis  of  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism’s  Comprehensive  Assessment.  The  necessary  streamlining  measures 
will  have  to  be  carried  out  promptly,  particularly  in  relation  to  the  profitability 
of  the  branch  networks  and  their  size.  The  capacity  of  the  BCCs  to  continue  to 
serve their territories of reference requires risk management and control systems 
that converge rapidly towards high standards, mostly to prevent the emergence of 
improper business relationships or conflicts of interest. The parent companies must 
act decisively when exercising their powers of intervention under the new regulatory 
framework and when tackling the problems of BCCs with structural weaknesses.
Full compliance with the rules on transparency and adequate customer protection 
are  necessary  conditions  to  foster  trust  in  banks  and  preserve  their  reputation; 
such conditions contribute to financial stability. The Bank of Italy is committed to 
strengthening  regulatory  defences;  supervisory  action  is  aimed  at  both  individual 
banks  and  at  particular  problem  areas.  The  work  of  the  Banking  and  Financial 
Ombudsman strengthens individual protection, but a decisively proactive approach 
on the part of the banks is needed, turning organizational measures aimed at ensuring 
compliance with rules and provisions into an effective strategic choice. 
The significance of the risk posed by the financial sector’s possible involvement 
in criminal activity in connection with money laundering is confirmed by recent 
events at some major European banks. Targeted initiatives have been launched to 
strengthen oversight in the individual EU member states, to set up mechanisms for 
cooperation  among  national  authorities,  and  to  integrate  money  laundering  risk 
assessments into prudential profiles. It will be possible to assess the effectiveness 
of  these  measures  in  the  near  future.  In  Italy,  our  supervisory  activity  makes  a 
significant  contribution  to  ensuring  that  banks  are  not  vulnerable  to  criminal 
infiltration; one of our strengths is our proximity to and close cooperation with the 
Financial Intelligence Unit. In this area too, it is essential that banks remain highly 
vigilant with respect to the monitoring of risks.
Over  the  years,  cooperation  with  the  judicial  authorities  has  been  intense: 
in  the  three  years  2016-18,  the  Bank  of  Italy  awarded  more  than  350  technical 
consultancy contracts, answered almost 700 requests for information, and issued 
more  than  280  communications.  Support  for  the  public  prosecutor  offices  most 
heavily engaged in combatting financial crime has been stepped up. One tangible 
symbol of this is the memorandum of understanding that will soon be signed with 
the public prosecutor’s office in Milan, where a team of our experts has already 
been working since 2009.
7
The challenges posed by regulatory developments
The  European  Banking  Authority  recently  published  the  methodology  to 
be used for the next round of stress testing, which will begin in early 2020 and 
involve 50 intermediaries, of which four are Italian. As in the past, the test is 
not a pass-fail exercise; its goal is instead to support the Supervisory Review 
and Evaluation Process (SREP). The consultation phase that has just begun is 
intended to allow banks to prepare for the stress test.
The perception that the costs of the stress tests have become high with respect 
to the benefits has led to a discussion on how to improve this tool. The Bank of 
Italy  is  actively  involved  in  this  debate.  A  study  we  published  in  recent  weeks 
advocates  for  two  separate  tests:  the  first,  to  be  conducted  by  the  supervisory 
authorities,  for  microprudential  purposes;  and  the  second,  to  be  carried  out  by 
the European Banking Authority in cooperation with the European Systemic Risk 
Board, for macroprudential purposes. This distinction would be consistent with the 
regulatory tasks assigned to the different European authorities. 
Adopting a bottom-up approach, the microprudential exercise would focus 
on specific risk areas identified as a priority by the supervisors; it would combine 
static and dynamic assessments based on stress tests carried out by the banks and 
subject to rigorous quality assurance by supervisors. The top-down macroprudential 
exercise would instead assess the resilience of the entire European financial sector 
to systemic shocks, using tests devised directly by the authorities and minimizing 
the costs for the banks concerned. We hope that there will be a wide-ranging and 
open discussion on these issues over the next couple of months.
In  Europe  work  has  begun  to  adopt  the  standards  approved  at  the  end  of 
2017 by the Group of Central Bank Governors and Heads of Supervision (Final 
Basel  III).  The  measures  seek  to  reduce  excessive  variability  in  the  calculation 
of risk-weighted assets. The introduction of an output floor for the requirements 
calculated using internal models and the new rules on market risks approved at the 
beginning of this year to rebalance the relative weight of credit and market risks in 
the capital requirements (Fundamental Review of the Trading Book – FRTB) will 
be of critical importance. 
There  will  be  a  long  transition  period  before  the  standards  enter  fully  into 
force. Based on the information available, the effects of the new rules on Italian 
banks, while not negligible, appear less significant than for the banks of the other 
major European countries. However, Italian banking groups would do well to seize 
8
the opportunity offered by the transition phase to prepare effectively, honing their 
operational strategies and balancing profitability and capitalization needs. 
In recent years, episodes of market manipulation and a significant reduction 
in  interbank  transactions  have  jeopardized  the  integrity  and  representativeness  of 
the money market reference rates. To counter these risks, a process to review the 
financial  benchmarks  has  also  been  launched  at  European  level,  in  line  with  the 
recommendations of the Financial Stability Board. Starting on 2 October 2019, the 
ECB will publish an index of the unsecured overnight borrowing costs of euro area 
banks (euro short-term rate, €STR), which going forward will replace Eonia in the 
indexation of financial instruments. Moreover, it is expected that before the end of 
the year, Euribor, an important benchmark for indexed mortgage loans and other 
financial contracts, will complete its migration to a new calculation methodology 
which, where possible, will use data on the actual transactions of a sample of banks. 
The use of benchmarks in the financial system is widespread; in Italy a large 
amount  of  the  banking  system’s  assets  and  liabilities  is  indexed  to  Euribor.  It  is 
essential that intermediaries identify and promptly implement the necessary measures 
to  ensure  an  orderly  transition  to  the  new  reference  rates,  both  for  dealings  with 
customers and in terms of organizational and operational setups. 
The objective of the rules on managing banking crises introduced in Europe 
since 2014 is to enable failing banks to exit the market while minimizing the impact 
on financial stability and the public accounts. This is a valid objective, whose actual 
achievement has nonetheless been hindered by factors that require further reflection.
Some resolution tools, such as the bail-in, cannot be applied in the absence of 
dedicated bank liabilities (TLAC and MREL) subscribed by qualified investors and 
capable of absorbing the losses and recapitalizing the intermediary. It would take until 
at least 2024 to build up the full stock of these liabilities, also due to the significant 
costs that banks must incur in issuing them. In the meantime, in order to manage 
bank crises solutions must be found that make it possible to draw on external sources 
of  funding  even  in  derogation  of  the  bail-in  principle.  Consistent  with  the  IMF’s 
recommendations, when there are risks to financial stability these solutions should 
remain available even after the stock of dedicated liabilities has been fully established. 
Precautionary recapitalization should be more readily available to address any 
market failures that restrict the ability of solvent banks to self-finance and to head 
off  the  risk  of  contagion.  Regulatory  constraints  that  discourage  investors  from 
participating in bank recoveries should be removed; these include, for example, 
9
envisaging  forms  of  protection  for  the  financial  contributions  they  provide  and 
strengthening  the  early  intervention  tools  available  to  supervisory  authorities, 
including special administration. 
The resolution procedure established at European level is only applicable to 
a very limited number of large banks; in the event of a crisis, all the others would 
be subject to liquidation in accordance with national laws, with no guarantee of 
this taking place in an orderly manner in a way that avoids any impact on systemic 
stability. There is an urgent need for European measures establishing a liquidation 
framework  that  will  not  lead  to  business  discontinuity,  fire  sales  of  assets,  and 
negative  consequences  for  unprotected  depositors,  customers  and  the  economy 
as  a  whole.  One  reference  model  is  that  of  the  US  Federal  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation (FDIC), under which deposit guarantee systems intervene to facilitate 
the en bloc disposal of the assets and liabilities of the bank being liquidated (in an 
institutional framework in which the deposit protection limit is higher than that in 
Europe and the FDIC is not a super senior creditor). 
More  generally,  the  relationship  between  the  regulatory  framework  on 
banking crises and that on State aid must be reviewed. In addition to eliminating 
the overlapping of jurisdictions and to clarifying uncertainties as to application, 
there  is  a  need  for  discussion  and  reconsideration  of  the  principle  whereby  the 
protection of competition, which underpins the rules on State aid, always takes 
precedence over arguments for protecting financial stability.
Appropriate  revision  of  the  European  bank  crisis  management  framework 
could help solve the problem of having failed to provide for an adequate transition 
phase which the new system would have required. Such a revision would make 
it possible to take better account of the fact that banks are, by their very nature, 
exposed to the risks of contagion, unlike, as a rule, companies that operate in other 
economic sectors. Legislative action on the part of the new European Commission 
to revise the BRRD could provide an opportunity to rethink the current rules in 
order to make the European regulatory framework more flexible and more at one 
with the nature of banking. 
In the European Union all banks are subject to many regulatory standards which, 
in reality, were conceived with international banks in mind. While this ensures fair 
competition within the Single Market and creates a robust framework that safeguards 
stability, it imposes high compliance costs on smaller banks (despite the simplified 
rules  they  benefit  from,  even  on  very  important  parts  of  the  regulations,  such  as 
market risk, employee compensation and reporting obligations).
10
Complex  risks  cannot  but  require  detailed  rules.  However,  an  excessively 
complex  regulatory  system  can  itself  become  a  source  of  risk:  it  can  generate 
uncertainty as to the application of the rules, can serve as an incentive to conduct 
business  outside  the  scope  of  application  of  the  rules,  and  may  result  in  a 
disproportionate burden on smaller or more specialized banks. 
The opportunities and risks presented by technological innovation in the 
financial arena
The challenges posed by technology are inescapable, for banks, for businesses, 
for  each  and  every  one  of  us.  Closing  the  gap  that  has  accumulated  over  the  last 
thirty  years  in  economic  and  financial  innovation  and  in  the  skills  of  adults  and 
students  requires  a  collective  effort.  Banks  are  expanding  the  range  of  traditional 
services available online but have not yet begun to invest significantly in the latest 
technologies. In industry, the recovery of competitiveness in the international markets 
witnessed  in  recent  years  must  be  supported  by  policies  that  encourage  firms  to 
innovate and expand. However, further progress can only be made if we all recognize 
the importance of investing in culture and knowledge to provide an education that 
encompasses not just the student years but people’s entire working lives.
Digital technologies make it possible to increase financial inclusion, leading 
to  more  efficient  resource  allocation  and  supporting  investment  and  economic 
growth.  New  ways  of  collecting  large  volumes  of  heterogeneous  data  and  new 
methods for analysing them (including artificial intelligence and machine learning 
applications) make it possible to assess customer credit ratings more accurately 
and  the  terms  and  conditions  at  which  loans  will  be  granted.  The  benefits  of 
using new technologies are greater in the payment segment and in that of loans to 
firms that operate in sectors and areas in which lending is riskier. The advantages 
of  exploiting  digital  technologies  tend  to  be  greater  for  smaller  banks,  whose 
customers are mainly small firms.
Nowadays, a number of crowdfunding platforms put firms in direct contact 
with  both  retail  and  institutional  investors,  increasing  access  to  funds.  The  use 
of  distributed  ledgers  for  trading  shares  of  unlisted  SMEs,  which  are  currently 
being tested, reduces the costs of accessing capital markets. These technologies, 
which are experiencing rapid growth abroad, can also make inroads in Italy, where 
corporate financing mainly depends on the banking system.  
Coping with the competition of new digital operators requires that banks 
lose  no  time  in  investing,  with  adequate  safeguards  against  cyber  risks,  in 
11
both the latest technologies and in the formation of the human capital needed 
to apply them successfully. In a market in which customer characteristics and 
habits change rapidly, it is not enough to rely on maintaining trust in traditional 
intermediaries.   
The possible introduction of a virtual currency that could make the settlement 
of some retail and financial transactions cheaper and faster was recently announced; 
according to its architects, its value would be kept stable with respect to a basket 
of  the  main  world  currencies.  The  fact  that  a  private  currency  can  originate  in 
a digital context may change the way in which traditional liquidity, market and 
solvency risks manifest themselves, but it cannot eliminate them altogether. These 
risks come with others, certainly no less important, linked to the security of savers’ 
resources, the protection of personal data, its possible use for the purposes of tax 
evasion, recycling and terrorist financing and, given the potentially vast application 
of this new means of exchange, to the potentially adverse effects on monetary and 
financial stability.    
The  attention  of  regulators,  central  banks,  supervisory  authorities  and  the 
other institutions involved is at a maximum. The information available still does 
not permit a complete analysis of the risks associated with this type of proposal and 
the measures required to counter them. It is important that all the parties involved 
keep engaging in dialogue and stand ready to intervene to ensure the application 
of  the  principle  whereby  the  same  activities  are  subject  to  the  same  regulatory 
safeguards, regardless of who performs them, the necessary security standards are 
upheld for the proper functioning of financial transactions, and everything possible 
is done to maintain the trust of savers and to prevent abuses of authority. Account 
must also be taken of the findings of assessments, still to be completed, of how 
best to safeguard monetary and financial stability. In any event, the introduction 
of private virtual currencies may entail risks of a different nature to those directly 
connected with technological innovation, which in itself is desirable owing to the 
significant advantages it offers. In this regard, even for the legal tender issued by the 
central banks, assessments are under way of how best to exploit the opportunities 
provided by advances in digital technologies.  
 The  Italian  Banking  Association  was  established  on  13  April  1919.  In  the 
one hundred years since then, Italy has lived through the difficult interwar years, 
the  economic  miracle  of  the  1950s  and  1960s,  the  decline  of  growth  between 
the  collapse  of  Bretton  Woods  and  the  early  1990s  and,  finally,  a  long  period 
12
also marked by two very severe crises, in which the economy’s growth rate has 
disappointed and production has stagnated. 
In this latter period, Italy has paid the price for its delayed reaction to the 
opening up of global markets and to technological change. It is a delay that has 
also concerned banks, which are now called upon to make profound changes to 
deal with competition, including from non-bank intermediaries, and to resume in 
full their principle role as financers of the economy. Strengthening the solidity and 
competitiveness of banking systems, in Italy as in Europe, calls for mergers to raise 
efficiency levels and to improve banks’ ability to make the necessary investments 
in  technology.  At  this  critical  juncture,  ABI  can  encourage  banks  to  anticipate 
these  changes  as  much  as  possible,  by  promoting,  including  at  international 
level, initiatives that favour innovation, the revision of business models, and the 
strengthening of trust in the banking system.  
Developments  in  finance  and  in  the  real  economy  are  interdependent;  the 
more efficient financial intermediation is, the more possibilities firms will have to 
develop their business; economic conditions affect the quality of banks’ credit and 
their profitability and capitalization. Economic policy must recreate the conditions 
to ensure this interaction is beneficial and avert negative spirals.   
Preserving  the  trust  of  households,  firms  and  investors  requires  concrete, 
resolute action to tackle Italy’s structural weaknesses, accompanied by persuasive, 
goal-oriented,  and  unequivocal  communication.  An  organic  plan  with  clear, 
comprehensive measures, designed to boost firms’ investment and growth, above 
all of innovative firms, must go hand in hand with a credible strategy to reduce 
the public debt. The markets have reacted positively to the recent decisions of the 
Italian government and European Commission, proof that it is possible to trigger 
a virtuous cycle between budgetary policies and financial conditions capable of 
conveying a strong and lasting stimulus to economic activity.
13
Designed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
