Benjamin E Diokno: Fueling growth of FDIs in the Philippines - The
BSP as an enabler
Speech by Mr Benjamin E Diokno, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the 5th Joint Economic Briefing of the British Chamber of Commerce
in the Philippines, Makati City, 19 June 2019.
Friends, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  address  this  5th  Joint  Economic  Briefing  of  the  British  Chamber  of
Commerce and the Dutch, French, German, Italian, and Spanish Chambers. The BSP always
welcomes the opportunity to engage current and potential investors and to communicate BSP
policy initiatives that impact the operating environment for businesses.
While fueling growth of FDIs is not the primary mandate of the BSP as a central bank, we are
well-aware that achieving our core objectives of promoting price and financial stability contributes
in promoting an investment-friendly Philippines.
It is from this perspective that I build on your conference topic, “Fueling the Growth of FDIs in the
Philippines.”
My presentation will focus on three areas:
First, I will present  developments  on  Foreign  Direct  Investments  (FDIs)  in  the  Philippines  and
prospects moving forward.
Second, I will discuss the factors that influenced FDI inflows during the past decade.
And third, I will present BSP initiatives that support the government’s overarching goal to further
increase FDIs.
FDIs in the Philippines have been rising steadily since 2010. It reached record levels in 2017 and
2018, during which FDIs averaged US$10 billion a year on the back of robust macroeconomic
fundamentals as evidenced by sustained and accelerating economic growth.
Also serving as pull factors for FDIs are the Philippines’ stable inflation, improved fiscal balance,
and resilient external position.
From January to March this year, the country attracted US$1.9 billion in FDIs. This is lower than
the  US$2.3  billion  recorded  during  the  same  period  in  2018.  This  could  be  partly  attributed  to
increased  uncertainty  over  the  US-China  trade  war,  pre-mid-term  election  jitters,  and  the
legislative proposal to rationalize tax incentives, among others.
In  the  early  2000s,  the  biggest  recipients  of  equity  capital  investment  have  been  the
manufacturing, real estate and financial intermediation sectors.
During  the  past  decade  (2009–2018),  however  –  finance  and  insurance  as  well  as  utilities–
gained larger shares in foreign equity flows, together with manufacturing.
Moving to the first three months of 2019, the table shows that equity capital infusions were mainly
invested in finance and insurance, real estate, and manufacturing, among others.
In terms of FDI sources, the top five foreign investors over the past decade have been Japan, the
United States, Hong Kong, ASEAN, and the European Union.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
What  is  notable  in  this  table  is  the  rising  share  of  FDIs  from  our ASEAN  partners—from  just
US$19 million in 2009 to US$990 in 2018.
While Philippine FDIs flows have substantially increased in recent years, they remain modest
compared to our ASEAN peers.
This is seen in the size of FDIs relative to the size of the economy as shown in the chart at the
left. The same observation applies when comparing FDIs against gross fixed capital formation,
the chart on the right.
Please note, however, that in the chart at the right, the Philippines caught up with Vietnam and
Malaysia in 2016.
This chart, meanwhile, shows that the average growth rate of FDIs in the Philippines from 2013–
2018 averaged 22.4 percent. This is higher than the growth in other Asian countries, specifically,
Malaysia, India and Vietnam—but lower compared to Thailand and Indonesia.
In any case, prospects for FDIs in the Philippines continue to be positive as shown by recent
data on investment approvals.
In  the  first  quarter  of  2019,  foreign  investments  approved  by  seven  investment  promotion
agencies (IPAs)   amounted  to  PhP46.0  billion.  This  is  more  than  three  times  higher  than  the
PhP14.2 billion approved in the same period in 2018.
1
The biggest commitment was from the Netherlands, whose PhP10.1 billion investment pledge
2
accounted for 22.0 percent of total commitments.
Manufacturing, on the other hand, received the largest share among industries with 76.1 percent
3
of the total pledges, amounting to PhP35.0 billion.
Please allow me to highlight that the recent credit rating upgrade of the Philippines by S&P to
BBB+   is expected to further enhance investor perception of the Philippines.
Moving forward, determining the factors that fuelled FDI growth needs an examination of trends
that shaped Philippine FDIs. 
While  progress  has  been  made  in  removing  trade  barriers  and  improving  logistics,  foreign
ownership restrictions have been cited as an obstacle in attracting stronger investment inflows.
A  World  Bank  report  cited  the  following  factors  as  constraining  investment  entry  into  the
4
Philippines. These include:
Infrastructure challenges;
Inadequate investor protection;
Laborious procedures required to open and close a business;
Poor access to credit among small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
The government is well aware of these and have pursued structural reforms over the years to
address these bottlenecks. Among these are the passage of the Ease of Doing Business and
Efficient  Government  Service  Delivery Act  of  2018  (R.A.  No.  11032)  which  aims  to  facilitate
prompt action or resolution of government transactions with efficiency.
Aside from recent reform initiatives — the country’s robust economic fundamentals, “Build Build
Build” program, and credit rating upgrades are expected to continue supporting positive investor
sentiment for the Philippines. This is in addition to the presence of a young, highly-educated, and
English-speaking workforce in the country.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In view of these factors, what then is the BSP’s contribution in promoting FDI growth?
The BSP’s primary contribution to fueling FDI growth lies in the effective discharge of its
mandates  and  policy  thrusts.  Fostering  price  stability,  sound  external  payments  position,
financial  stability,  and  an  efficient  payments  system  will  minimize  systemic  risks  as  well  as
provide resilience to shocks to the economy.
This will help support an enabling environment that is conducive to accelerating economic growth
and, in turn, investment opportunities.
Let me expound…
First, the BSP promotes a favorable investment environment by ensuring that inflation
continues to be stable and that inflation expectations remain well-anchored.
Headline  inflation  increased  to  3.2  percent  year-on-year  in  May  2019  from  3.0  percent  in  the
previous  month.  The  resulting  year-to-date  average  of  3.6  percent  remains  within  the
Government’s inflation target range of 3.0 percent ± 1.0 percentage point for the year.
Looking ahead, we expect inflation to remain on a target-consistent path for 2019 and 2020. The
latest baseline forecasts (as of 9 May 2019 MB policy meeting) indicate that inflation is projected
to average at 2.9 percent for 2019 while inflation forecast for 2020 is slightly higher at 3.1 percent
due largely to the rebound in crude oil prices.
Meanwhile,  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  remain  broadly  balanced  for  2019  amid  risks  of  a
prolonged El Niño episode and higher-than-expected increases in global oil prices. For 2020, the
risks  continue  to  lean  toward  the  downside  as  weaker  global  economic  activity  could  temper
commodity price pressures.
Maintaining a stable inflation environment, as you know, is very important to avoid increases in
operating  costs  (e.g.,  wages,    utilities,  locally-sourced  production  inputs)  and  maintaining  the
competitiveness of  your operations in the Philippines.
Given these favorable inflation assessments, the Monetary Board (MB), during its last monetary
policy  meeting,  decided  to  reduce  its  policy  rate  by  25  basis  points  (bps)  to  4.50  percent,
effective May 10, 2019. The MB’s decision is based on its assessment that the inflation outlook
continues  to  be  manageable,  with  easing  price  pressures  owing  to  the  decline  in  food  prices
amid improved supply conditions.
In addition, the BSP also recently pre-announced the schedule of reserve requirement reduction
for universal commercial banks: 100 bps by May 31 and 50-bps each on June 28 and July 26,
2019. In reducing the reserve requirement ratios, the MB recognized the continued downtrend in
domestic inflation with headline inflation averaging at 3.6 percent in the first four months of 2019,
which is within the target band of 3.0 percent ± 1.0 percentage point. The BSP was also guided
by  the  benign  inflation  forecasts  of  2.9  percent  for  2019  and  3.1  percent  for  2020.  Inflation
expectations have likewise shown increasing convergence with the BSP’s inflation target. This is
part of the BSP’s ongoing initiative to enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy and deepen
domestic money market.
Second, further enhancing BSP’s monetary policy transmission is one way of promoting
more efficient financial intermediation conducive for investments.
The interest rate corridor system (IRC) of the BSP has put in place incentives for active interbank
trading and financial market development by reducing short-term interest rate volatility and aiding
systemic liquidity management.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The IRC also helps in developing benchmark short-term market interest rates (for bank loan and
deposit pricing).  Encouraging market development through market-based monetary operations
unlocks investment capital as it ensures market efficiency.
Third, the BSP’s continuing pursuit of foreign exchange reforms is aimed at supporting
investments.
The BSP is committed to continue implementing various FX liberalization reforms to make the
country friendlier to investors and attract bigger and better FDIs both in value and quality.
To date, there have been ten waves of FX reforms implemented since 2007. The most recent set
of reforms took into consideration the country’s strong macroeconomic fundamentals as well as
the increasing needs of a growing economy.
The country’s external payments position remains resilient and sustainable as it enjoys
support  from  different  fronts.  These  include  remittances  from  overseas  Filipinos  (OFs),
revenues  from  the  IT-BPO  industry,  receipts  from  the  robust  tourism  sector,  and  sustained
inflows of foreign direct investments.
For 2019, the BSP sees a BOP surplus of $3.7 billion equivalent to 1 percent of GDP.
The    current  account  deficit,  on  the  other  hand,  has  been  revised  upward  to  USD  10  billion,
equivalent to 2.8 percent of GDP.  We continue to see this as financeable given support from
structural inflows. 
The country’s Gross International Reserves (GIR) now stands at around US$85 billion as of end-
May 2019. This is roughly equivalent to 7.5 months’ worth of imports of goods and payments of
services and primary income.
In addition, the passage of R.A. No. 11256 or the Gold Law would allow the BSP to increase its
purchases of domestic gold to further build up the level of the Philippines’ GIR, which serves as
the country’s primary buffer against external economic shocks. The law exempts from excise
and income tax the sale to the BSP of gold sourced from small-scale mining activities.
Fourth,  the  BSP’s  implementation  of  capital  market  reforms  facilitates  easier  funding
access.
The BSP is a long-standing advocate of reforms to further deepen the country’s capital market.
Capital market development helps finance infrastructure projects and limits concentration risks in
the  banking  system,  thereby  facilitating  investment  in  long-term  government  bonds,  lowering
borrowing costs, and improving monetary policy transmission. At the same time, this allows the
private  sector  to  tap  into  a  broader  market  or  avail  themselves  of  alternative  financing
opportunities for infrastructure projects.
The BSP continues to enhance the regulatory environment (e.g., refinement of benchmarks and
trading rules) by allowing banks to offer instruments that help hedge risks and provide ways of
portfolio diversification.
On  the  other  hand,  the  liberalization  of  the  banking  system,  which  allowed  the  entry  of  new
foreign  banks  into  the  country,  enhances  the  quality  of  competition  in  the  banking  system,
expands  the  array  of  financial  products  and  services  at  competitive  rates,  encourages  more
foreign  direct  investments  (FDI),  and  opens  alternative  financing  opportunities  to  fund
infrastructure projects.
Before I end my presentation today, I would like to highlight key structural reforms that
will help the BSP to more effectively perform its mandates.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Under my watch, the BSP shall have strict and prompt implementation of recently enacted laws
namely:
1. Amendments to the BSP Charter
2. National Payment Systems Act,
3. National ID System, and
4. The Gold Law 
The BSP also advocates these bills that have been passed in Congress, which needless to say,
we shall strictly implement upon their passage.
5. Islamic Banking Bill and the
6. Anti-Bank Hacking System Bill which places harsher penalties for hacking of bank systems
and skimming of ATMs or the Anti-Bank Hacking legislation.
Taken together, these laws will help enhance the macroeconomic environment, promote growth,
and improve investment prospects in the country.
As we all know, investments are fundamental to economic growth and development, especially
amid an increasingly integrated global economy.
It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  are  glad  to  engage  the  British  Chamber  to  share  our  views  on
“Fueling the Growth of FDIs in the Philippines.” This is in line with the goal of strengthening the
position of the country as one of the favored destinations for FDIs.
On the part of BSP, please rest assured that we stand ready to support efforts to fuel  further FDI
growth in the Philippines within the bounds of our mandate.
It  is  my  view  that  pursuing  business  opportunities  in  the  Philippines  will  indeed  be  mutually
beneficial for both foreign investors and the domestic economy.
Thank you very much and a pleasant day to all.
 1
2
3
4
i.e., Board of Investments (BOI), Clark Development Corporation (CDC), Philippine Economic Zone Authority
(PEZA),  Subic  Bay  Metropolitan  Authority  (SBMA),  Authority  of      the  Freeport  Area  of  Bataan  (AFAB),  BOI-
Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao (BOI-ARMM), and Cagayan Economic Zone Authority (CEZA)
Japan came in second pledging PhP9.4 billion or 20.5 percent of the total and Thailand taking the third spot with
pledges amounting to PhP8.5 billion or 18.4 percent of the total approved FIs.
Administrative and Support Service Activities came in second with investment commitments valued at   PhP3.5
billion or 7.7 percent of the total FI. Accommodation and Food Service Activities followed with PhP2.9 billion or
6.4 percent of total FI commitments.
World Bank “Philippines – Discussion Notes: Challenges and Options for 2010 and Beyond.” June 2011.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
