John C Williams: Fulfilling our economic potential
Remarks by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Association for Neighborhood & Housing Development 2019 Annual
Conference, New York City, 11 April 2019.
 As prepared for delivery
Introduction
Thank you for that warm welcome. As you may be aware, last year I moved from San Francisco
to take on the role of President of the New York Fed. In many ways California and New York are
like different countries—the weather is a big adjustment, for starters!
But through my meetings with community leaders and visits to the Bronx and Brooklyn, I’ve come
to appreciate that we’re facing a lot of the same issues in my new home that I saw in the San
Francisco Bay Area. The main topics of discussion—displacement as a result of gentrification,
inequitable growth, and a critical shortage of affordable housing—are all ones we were grappling
with on the West Coast as well.
These issues are complex and challenging, and there are no easy answers, so I want to start by
saying thank you for all the important work you do.
There are a couple of topics I want to talk about today. The first is why the work you do is so
important, and the second is the role I see the Federal Reserve Bank of New York can play in
supporting you today, and going forward.
Before I go any further I’ll give the usual Fed disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone
and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in the
Federal Reserve System.
Dual mandate
Apart from a stint running a pizza shop, I’ve worked in the Federal Reserve System for my whole
career, nearly 25 years. And I’m not alone. When you ask people at a Federal Reserve Bank how
long they’ve worked there, their response is often measured in decades, not years. What makes
them stay? Working for a mission-driven institution. 
And speaking of our mission, the Federal Reserve has two goals: maximum employment and
price stability. We want our economy to reach its potential in terms of jobs and growth and we
want low, stable inflation. While these two goals are critically important, they are broad and high-
level. The monetary policy decisions we make have important effects on the overall number of
jobs and wages, but they don’t determine what economic growth looks like across communities,
or who benefits from it. 
That’s why our outreach and community-based work is a key priority. It’s an opportunity for us to
take all of the data, all of the things we know about the economy, and help one another as we
tackle the very real issues that shape the everyday lives of Americans.
Equitable Growth
We’re closing in on the longest economic expansion on record, unemployment is at historically
low levels, and inflation is close to our 2 percent target. From a pure monetary policy perspective,
this is a healthy economy. But I’m acutely aware that not everyone is feeling the benefits of the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
economy’s good performance. 
Recent work by my colleagues at the New York Fed crystalized the economic challenges faced
by some of those living in New York City. Since the early 1980s wage inequality has increased in
the United States, but that increase in inequality has been particularly sharp in large urban areas
like this one. 
In  New  York  City  and  Northern  New  Jersey,  someone  near  the  top  of  the  income  distribution
earns seven times that of someone closer to the bottom. This contrasts with other parts of New
1
York State, where the number is somewhere between four or five times.
That’s not to say things are necessarily easier in areas with less inequality. In fact, many of the
areas  with  less  inequality  are  also  challenged  by  limited  job  opportunities  and  declining
populations. It does mean that not everyone is benefiting from growth equally.
One of the reasons for this is that the type of growth in the city has disproportionately benefited
one type of worker. Growth in New York has generated demand for highly skilled workers, who
are often more highly paid and highly mobile. This drives up housing prices and contributes to
gentrification, which often goes hand in hand with displacement.
Words  like  “gentrification”  and  “displacement”  sometimes  can  feel  impersonal  or  cliché.  For
some, gentrification conjures images of fancy coffee shops and high-priced fashion boutiques.
But the reality can be heartbreaking. Families who’ve lived in a home for generations are driven
out, communities break up, and the social fabric of a neighborhood is irreparably damaged.
We seek growth that enables everyone to fulfill their economic potential. We want enterprise that
supports communities, and communities that have the tools to flourish through investment.
This is good for families, good for communities, and good for the economy.
Of course, you don’t need me to tell you this. You face the challenges of inequitable growth every
day through your work. And that’s why I’d like to talk about the role we can play to support you
create a New York City that benefits every part of the community.
When I think about our work at the New York Fed, both today and going forward, it boils down to
three  things:  We  connect  organizations  with  data  and  research  to  amplify  the  power  of  their
work, we convene stakeholders to share experiences and best practices, and we are a catalyst
for initiatives and approaches that help tackle some of the most complex challenges confronting
our communities.
Connect
Some  of  our  greatest  assets  are  our  data,  analysis,  and  research. And  I  don’t  say  that  only
because I am an economist by training! Data is at its best when it leads to meaningful action.
I just came back from a trip to Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, which are part of the New
York Fed’s district. The overwhelming feedback I received from community leaders there was
how  useful  they  found  our  research  reports  for  thinking  about  how  to  strengthen  their  local
economy.   
An example closer to home is the work we do looking at the credit behavior of households at the
zip code level.
Analysis from the New York Fed is used by Financial Empowerment Centers across New York
City to support people on low and middle incomes get out of financial trouble and build a credit
profile. It also acts as a barometer for the success of programs, which helps practitioners learn
which interventions are most effective.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Convene
As well as connecting people with research and data, we play an important role creating spaces
where  different  stakeholders  convene,  discuss  the  challenges  and  opportunities  facing  their
communities, and share best practices.
This  is  where  our  workforce  development  program  comes  in,  and  it’s  an  area  where  Federal
Reserve Banks from across the country have been collaborating to share knowledge among key
stakeholders.
The work we’re doing bringing together schools and local employers is also in this vein. We owe
it to young people to ensure that their investments in education pay off and that there’s a job at
the end of all their hard work and study.
Fostering connections between community colleges and employers is one way we can help to
make sure the next generation is ready for the opportunities our economy has to offer. We’ve
published loads of research on this subject, and we’re putting some of our findings into practice
with a series of roundtables, collaborating with colleges, workforce development organizations,
and employers across the state.
Displacement and equitable growth are areas where we can do more. I’m pleased to share that
later this year we’ll be hosting a series of listening sessions on these topics. We plan to bring
together community development experts and nonprofits to better understand what’s happening
across the district. We want to know what’s worked in the communities that have seen equitable
growth, the challenges for those that haven’t, and what we can do about it.
We  hope  the  findings  from  these  sessions  serve  as  a  tool  for  those  areas  on  the  cusp  of
gentrification to ensure every part of the community benefits from local investment.
Catalyze
Finally, I’m going to turn to this idea of how we can be a catalyst for action.
Our desire to create change is the reason we created resource guidebooks—publications that
collate data, information, and contacts about specific communities. We’ve published guidebooks
for parts of New York State and New Jersey, and we have another one in the works for Puerto
Rico. They act as a starting point for local stakeholders and investors looking to support equitable
growth in underserved areas. 
Another  example  where  we’ve  acted  as  a  catalyst  is  our  Small  Business  Credit  Survey.  The
findings revealed the challenge small businesses face accessing loans for expansion. The cost
of originating smaller loans is often so great that banks won’t take them on. But as a result of the
gap being identified, one bank is now partnering with the Community Reinvestment Fund to refer
2
small businesses to the Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFI) Fund.
Small businesses are vital to job creation and play an important role in our communities, so it’s
essential we support them to get access to the credit they need to grow.
I  don’t  want  to  talk  about  access  to  credit  without  saying  a  few  words  about  the  Community
Reinvestment Act, or CRA. Our work supervising CRA compliance supports efforts to make sure
credit gets to where it’s needed most.
A large amount of work has been going on at the Board of Governors to review the modernization
of  the  CRA,  and  we  held  two  roundtables  here  in  New  York  City  to  better  understand  what’s
working and where we need change.
What’s  important  is  that  efforts  to  modernize  CRA  maintain  and  strengthen  the  emphasis  on
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
ensuring all communities in our nation have access to affordable credit.
These  principles—connect,  convene,  and  catalyze—will  continue  to  guide  us  forward  as  we
grow  our  outreach  programs  and  drive  progress.  They  are  the  ways  we  contribute  to  an
economy that works for everyone, above and beyond the high-level levers of interest rates and
asset purchases.
Conclusion
I’ll  conclude  where  I  began. As  a  policymaker  I’m  constantly  weighing  up  the  dual  mandate,
thinking about how we keep the economy on track, and balance maximum employment with low,
stable inflation. But these decisions don’t affect the kinds of jobs that are created or who benefits
from growth.
The type of growth we have, where it manifests, and who benefits from it play a huge role in
shaping both the fabric of society and the lives of New Yorkers. That’s why our community and
outreach programs are so important to me.
I’d  like  to  close  by  reemphasizing  my  gratitude  for  your  commitment  to  this  city.  Community
development work is complex, challenging, and never done. But it’s essential for building healthy
communities that support everyone to reach their full economic potential.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
1
2
See Economic Press Briefing on Wage Inequality in the Region, August 10, 2017.
See Community  Reinvestment  Fund,  USA  and  U.S.  Bank  Partner  to  Expand  Access  to  Credit  for  Small
Businesses, Business Wire, January 8, 2018.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
