Yannis Stournaras: Recent economic and financial developments in
Greece
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the 86th Annual Meeting of
Shareholders, Athens, 1 April 2019.
 GREECE  IN  THE  POST-PROGRAMME  PERIOD:  CHALLENGES  AND  PROSPECTS
TOWARDS A SUSTAINABLE GROWTH MODEL
2019  marks  the  beginning  of  new  course  for  the  Greek  economy.  Following  the  successful
completion  of  the  last  economic  adjustment  programme  in August  2018,  the  activation  of  the
enhanced  surveillance  framework  and  with  Greece  now  subject  to  the  improved  institutional
framework  for  economic  governance  in  the  European  Union  and  the  euro  area,  the  Greek
economy is called upon to operate in a new economic policy context. It is our duty, as individuals,
businesses, political and institutional stakeholders, to prove that we have taken ownership of the
lessons of the crisis.
2018 saw the recovery of the Greek economy gain traction, with a GDP growth rate of 1.9%. The
key  drivers  of  growth  were  a  rise  in  exports  of  goods  and  services,  reflecting  a  greater
extroversion of the economy, and a pick-up in private consumption supported by employment
growth and an increase in households’ disposable income.
The smooth execution and completion of the economic adjustment programme, improvements
in confidence and the ensuing strengthening of growth led to a return of deposits to banks. This,
in  turn,  enabled  an  increase  in  bank  liquidity,  a  significant  reduction  and  almost  elimination  of
emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) from the Bank of Greece, a small recovery of bank credit,
as well as a further relaxation of capital controls.
All of the above led to upgrades of the credit rating of the Greek sovereign and enabled Greece to
return to international financial markets a year later, in February 2019, when, taking advantage
and  of  the  favourable  global  investment  climate,  the  Greek  government  successfully  issued  a
five-year bond. The successful issue of a five-year government bond was the first positive step
on the way back to normality.
Moreover, the successful 10-year bond issue in March 2019, for the first time since the start of
the public debt crisis in 2010, marked a more decisive step in the same direction, i.e. towards
reconnecting  Greece  with  the  markets.  The  legal  provision  recently  passed  by  Parliament  on
primary  residence  protection  also  contributes  in  this  direction,  as  it  reforms  the  relevant
legislative framework, incorporating specific eligibility criteria and safeguards.
The debt relief measures agreed in June 2018, together with the increased disbursements from
the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  for  the  creation  of  a  cash  buffer,  have  significantly
improved  the  sustainability  of  public  debt  in  the  medium  term.  However,  given  that  Greek
government bonds are still rated at below investment grade and in the absence of access to a
precautionary  credit  line,  Greek  bonds  remained  ineligible  for  the  ECB’s  quantitative  easing
programme (QE) that would have helped strengthen economic activity and further improve the
credit standing of Greek bonds. Greek government bond yields are still high and volatile. They are
sensitive  to  potential  disturbances  in  international  financial  markets  and  are  influenced  by
increased uncertainty regarding the maintenance of reform momentum. In fact, the yield spread
of Greek 10-year government bonds remains elevated, at just under 400 basis points, despite the
recent decline in yields. This persistent phenomenon is a matter that needs our serious attention.
the external
2019  will  be  another  challenging  year  for  the  Greek  economy. 
In 
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
environment,  the  slowdown  of  world  trade  amid  rising  protectionism  could  dampen  export
growth.
On  the domestic front,  increased  uncertainty  about  the  continuation  of  reforms  coupled  with
credit constraints are weighing on investment. High taxation in recent years has taken a toll on
the growth dynamics of the economy, the competitiveness of Greek enterprises and confidence,
and has caused tax fatigue leading to a contraction of the tax base and an exhaustion of the
taxpaying capacity.
In 2019, the growth momentum of the Greek economy is expected to continue at the same pace
as in 2018, despite a further slowdown of growth rates worldwide and, especially, in the euro
area. However, this forecast is conditional upon the resolute pursuit of structural reforms, the
implementation  of  the  privatisation  programme  without  delays  and  the  strengthening  of
productive investment. These conditions are essential to completing a successful transition to a
sustainable and extroverted growth model.
More specifically, according to Bank of Greece forecasts, GDP at constant prices is expected to
grow by 1.9% in 2019, driven mainly by exports and private consumption. However, in order to
make up for the huge losses suffered by the Greek economy in terms of output and employment
during the long period of recession, higher growth rates are needed.
The low level of investment, insufficient domestic savings, the high – albeit declining – stock of
non-performing loans, the large loss of physical and human capital during the recession, as well
as the apparently low expectations regarding medium-to-long term potential output growth as a
result  of  adverse  demographic  trends  and  the  sluggish  adoption  of  new  technologies  in
production processes, all weaken the growth dynamics. Meanwhile, the outlook for the economy
still depends largely on foreign investor confidence and on foreign capital inflows.
Turning  to  the  domestic  environment,  and  the  fiscal  front  in  particular,  the  possible
implementation of Council of State Plenum rulings that earlier pensions cuts and the abolition of
pensioners’ bonuses were unconstitutional, poses the greatest fiscal risk in the immediate future.
Furthermore, the fact that Greece is entering an electoral cycle increases the risk of a slowdown
of  the  reform  effort  and  of  fiscal  relaxation,  compounding  economic  uncertainty.  Thus,
backtracking on agreed policies would undermine the significant progress achieved so far.
DEVELOPMENTS AND PROSPECTS OF THE GREEK ECONOMY IN 2019
Actual GDP developments in 2018 and the outlook for 2019 indicate that the Greek economy is
back on a track of positive growth. The challenge now is to preserve and reinforce the growth
momentum so as to enable strong growth rates over a long period.
The reason for this is that growth has yet to gain sufficient traction, as reflected in a negative rate
of change in investment, a negative household saving rate and a still high – albeit decreasing –
rate  of  unemployment.  The  continued  underexecution  of  the  Public  Investment  Programme  is
also dampening growth.
The growth prospects for 2019 will, to a large extent, remain conditional on the course of the
global economy and of the euro area economy in particular, as well as on the continuation of the
reform effort.
Economic expansion in the euro area is projected to continue in 2019, but at a significantly more
moderate pace (1.1%), as recent data point to a considerable weakening relative to the strong
growth rates of previous years. In order to avert the risk of a further economic slowdown in the
euro area and to ensure the continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below,
but close to, 2% over the medium term, the Governing Council of the European Central Bank
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
(ECB) decided in March 2019 to maintain accommodative monetary policy by keeping the key
ECB interest rates unchanged until the end of the year and by launching a new series of quarterly
targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTRO-III)  with  a  maturity  of  two  years.  This
decision should improve financial conditions in Greece and support the growth effort. The ECB
Governing  Council  additionally  stressed,  as  it  has  been  doing  for  some  time  now,  that  fiscal
policy in euro area member states with adequate fiscal space should be supportive of economic
growth.
The Greek economy in the current year is forecast to be driven mainly by export growth, albeit at
a slower pace, and a rise in private consumption. Private consumption will be supported by the
continued robust performance of the tourism sector, the ongoing recovery of the labour market
and the improved disposable income of households, while investment will benefit mainly from a
stabilisation of the real estate market.
HICP  inflation  fell  to  0.8%  in  2018,  from  1.1%  in  2017.  The  absence  of  significant  further
increases in indirect taxation during 2018, the sharp drop in international crude oil prices as from
October  2018  and  strong  base  effects  were  among  the  main  factors  behind  weaker  inflation
developments. Looking forward, HICP inflation in 2019 is expected to fall to lower levels, as a
result of low international crude oil prices, a slowdown in global activity and trade, as well as
strong competition in the domestic retail food market.
FISCAL POLICY
In 2017, for the third consecutive year, the general government primary balance exceeded the
programme  target.  An  overperformance  is  also  expected  for  2018,  according  both  to  the
Introductory Report on the 2019 Budget and to Bank of Greece forecasts.
However, the Public Investment Programme was once again underexecuted in 2018. Moreover,
considerable delays were observed in the clearance of general government arrears to suppliers,
despite  targeted  disbursements  under  the  loan  agreement.  These  developments,  which  have
been observed repeatedly in recent years, tighten credit supply constraints, thereby depriving the
real economy of much-needed financing resources and weighing on long-term growth, as also
pointed out by the European Commission in its Enhanced Surveillance Report.
For 2019, an expansionary fiscal package amounting to roughly 0.6% of GDP is envisaged, partly
offset by a curtailment of 0.3% of GDP in Public Investment Programme expenditure.
More importantly, possible further fiscal expansion in the run-up to the elections could put public
finances at risk.
THE BANKING SYSTEM
Developments in the Greek banking system during 2018 were marked by an accelerating return
of bank deposits, banks’ improved liquidity situation and diversification of funding sources through
access to the interbank market and away from emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) of the Bank
of Greece, a small recovery of bank credit and the maintenance of capital adequacy ratios at
satisfactory levels. However, bank profitability remained weak.
In early 2018, an EU-wide stress test exercise was conducted, including Greece’s four systemic
banks, in order to assess bank resilience to hypothetical shocks over the period 2018–2020. The
stress test exercise identified no capital shortfall in any of the participating Greek banks.
Non-performing loans
The  high  stock  of  non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  on  banks’  balance  sheets  remains  the  major
challenge for Greek banks and a serious constraint on their lending capacity. Banks are using the
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
options provided by the improved legal and regulatory framework, which has removed significant
institutional  and  administrative  impediments  to  NPL  reduction.  These  important  reforms  have
begun to bear fruit, as indicated by the reduction of the stock of NPLs to €81.8 billion at end-
December  2018  (or  45.4%  of  total  loans),  down  from  a  peak  of  €107.2  billion  in  March  2016.
However, the NPL stock is still excessively high.
At  the  end  of  March  2019,  Greek  banks  submitted  to  the  ECB  and  the  Bank  of  Greece  their
revised  operational  targets  for  NPL  reduction,  incorporating  any  recent  changes  in  their
strategies since September 2018 and any revised macroeconomic assumptions. According to
the previous submission in September 2018, the banks aimed to reduce the aggregate stock of
NPLs to €34.1 billion by end-2021, bringing the NPL ratio down to 21.2% of total loans. With the
new  submission,  the  Banks  aim  to  reduce  the  NPL  ratio  even  further,  to  slightly  below  20%.
Despite the significant reduction, this ratio is still roughly six times the EU28 average, meaning
that the NPL reduction needs to be further accelerated.
The successful resolution of the NPL problem is one of the major challenges facing the Greek
economy in its effort to achieve sustainable growth, given that bank lending is the main source of
financing  for  non-financial  corporations  (NFCs),  owing  to  their  structure  and  size,  and  for
households.  Freeing  the  banks  of  the  NPL  burden  would  help  reduce  the  financial  risks  and
funding costs faced by banks, thereby improving their internal capital generation capacity on a
sustainable basis and enabling them to resume their intermediation role. In addition, alleviating
the  NPL  burden  would  strengthen  banks’  resilience  and  shock-absorbing  capacity  against
potential future shocks; support operating profitability and put the conditions in place for a gradual
increase in loan supply and a decrease in lending rates to enterprises and households, thereby
enabling the smooth financing of the real economy.
The  Greek  authorities  will  soon  need  to  decide  on  new,  more  systemic  tools  that  would
complement the banks’ own efforts. The Bank of Greece has for quite some time now proposed
a  systemic  solution,  which  provides  for  the  transfer  to  Special  Purpose  Vehicles  (SPVs)  of  a
significant  part  of  NPLs  along  with  part  of  the  deferred  tax  credits  (DTCs)  on  banks’  balance
sheets. This solution has the advantage of addressing two very serious problems at the same
time: NPLs and DTCs. The government and the Bank of Greece are working together towards
the submission for approval of such systemic solutions by the competent European authorities
and their ultimate adoption with a view to successfully tackling the NPL problem.
Furthermore, as mentioned previously, the new legislation on primary residence protection is a
first  step  towards  an  overhaul  of  the  personal  insolvency  framework  in  pursuit  of  a  holistic
solution to the problem. The implementation of the new framework, which incorporates specific
eligibility  criteria  and  safeguards,  aims  to  protect  the  more  vulnerable  social  groups,  to  avoid
creating moral hazard at the expense of non-delinquent borrowers and to ensure that the impact
on bank capital is manageable.
PRIVATE INSURANCE UNDERTAKINGS
As a consequence of Solvency II, the Greek private insurance market matured further in 2018,
with  improvements  in  governance  structures  and  human  resources.  Risk  and  solvency
assessment capabilities were also improved, with a view to better capital and risk management
and more effective protection of policy-holders. In 2018, insurers continued their efforts to reduce
the  long-term  guarantees  embedded  in  their  products.  In  this  context,  the  time  horizon  of
coverages has been reduced, and the financial guarantees offered reflect more accurately the
prevailing economic conditions. These practices have had a positive impact on the undertakings
themselves,  by  enhancing  their  solvency  position,  and  on  policy-holders,  by  ensuring  lower
insurance costs and better quality of insurance products. Nevertheless, insurance undertakings
must take care not to lose their long-term perspective.
In  the  life  insurance  sector,  insurance  undertakings  are  increasingly  designing  and  providing
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
insurance-based investment products. This business strategy supports the financial strength of
insurance  undertakings,  while  also  enabling  them  to  offer  higher  returns  to  policy-holders,
although  exposing  them  to  higher  investment  risks.  Against  this  background,  it  is  of  crucial
importance  that  insurers  provide  accurate  and  relevant  information  to  prospective  customers,
enabling them to understand the risks involved and avoid losses. In addition, with Law 4583/2018,
Directive (EU) 2016/97 on Insurance Distribution was transposed into national legislation, and the
Bank of Greece was entrusted with the supervision of insurance intermediaries and distributors.
The outlook for the domestic insurance market is promising. In particular, based on the recent
proposal  for  an  EU  regulation  on  a  Pan-European  Personal  Pension  Product  (PEPP),  Greek
insurance  undertakings  could  assume  a  new  role  and  offer  personal  pension  products  to
customers seeking to supplement their pension entitlements. Likewise, insurance undertakings
could  be  part  of  a  broader  scheme  providing  protection  against  natural  disasters,  climate
change-related and environmental risks in general.
Moreover,  insurance  undertakings  can  take  advantage  of  new  technologies,  such  as  big  data
analytics, artificial intelligence and machine learning, to improve risk assessment and pricing.
RISKS AND SOURCES OF UNCERTAINTY
Despite the progress made so far, as shown by key economic aggregates, risks remain, both
domestic and external.
On  the external front, risks could arise from a possible further slowdown of global economic
activity  in  2019  amid  increasing  trade  protectionism,  geopolitical  risks  and  vulnerabilities  in
emerging  market  economies.  The  slowdown  of  the  European  economy  is  also  a  significant
source of concern, which together with heightened uncertainty over the outcome of the Brexit
process, could negatively affect the growth of Greek exports and tourism.
Turning to the domestic front, the possible implementation of Council of State Plenum rulings
that earlier pensions cuts and the abolition of pensioners’ bonuses were unconstitutional, poses
the greatest fiscal risk in the medium term. The associated additional expenditure would weigh
negatively on the public debt sustainability analysis and would feed uncertainty about the fiscal
policy and the financial sustainability of the pension system.
Other  domestic  risks  include  the  potential  implications  of  high  taxation  and  the  overall  fiscal
policy mix, as well as the backtracking on reforms or delays in their implementation. In addition,
in the labour market, the increase in the minimum wage, legislated last January, though expected
to  bring  about  short-term  gains  by  supporting  disposable  income  and  thereby  private
consumption,  is  expected  in  the  medium  term  to  hurt  employment,  mainly  of  youth,  and
competitiveness. In any event, any raise of the average wage must be consistent with labour
productivity growth, so as to preserve the gains in competitiveness and employment achieved
through a painstaking reform effort since 2010.
CHALLENGES FOR GROWTH
Greece is confronted with a dual challenge: on the one hand, to achieve strong and sustainable
growth  rates  and,  on  the  other,  to  ensure  high  primary  surpluses  in  order  to  meet  its  fiscal
commitments, as defined in the Eurogroup decision of June 2018 and by the broader framework
of European fiscal rules.
During  the  long  period  of  adjustment,  the  Greek  economy  succeeded  in  correcting  several
macroeconomic imbalances. However, Greece continues to face vulnerabilities which can, to a
large extent, be considered a legacy of the crisis, although the multiple and interrelated nature of
these vulnerabilities reveals chronic weaknesses.
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
In greater detail:
–  The  permanent  return  of  the  Greek  State  to  international  financial  markets  on
sustainable  terms is  the  greatest  challenge  ahead.  The  existence  of  a  cash  buffer,  though
useful, is only a temporary means for refinancing State borrowing requirements, and would prove
rather ineffective in the event of future shocks in international markets. By no means, therefore,
can the cash buffer substitute for a return to the markets at regular intervals and on sustainable
terms.
– The high public debt-to-GDP ratio increases public and private sector borrowing costs and
puts  a  drag  on  growth.  Although  Greece’s  debt  sustainability  improved  markedly  with  the
measures  adopted  by  the  Eurogroup  since  2012  and  up,  most  recently,  to  June  2018,  debt
reduction ultimately hinges upon both achieving the fiscal targets and remaining committed to the
reform effort so as to ensure robust GDP growth.
– The maintenance of large primary surpluses over an extended period of time (3.5% of
GDP annually until 2022 and 2.2% of GDP on average over the period 2023–2060), especially
when accompanied by high taxation, weighs on growth and consequently on debt sustainability.
– The high stock of non-performing loans (NPLs) on banks’ balance sheets hampers the
financing of growth, as it ties up bank capital and financing resources in non-productive activities.
The successful resolution of this problem is absolutely necessary in order to improve the quality
of  bank  assets.  This,  in  turn,  would  enhance  the  access  of  healthy  entrepreneurship  to  bank
credit.
– The rate of unemployment remains not only high,  but  the  highest  across  the  European
Union.  High  unemployment,  in  particular  youth  and  long-term  unemployment,  gives  rise  to
inequalities that threaten social cohesion, devalues human capital, saps away any motivation for
better education and work, and feeds the brain drain.
– Low structural competitiveness, with in fact a trend towards deteriorating.
– The still negative rate of change in investment, considering the need to replenish Greece’s
capital stock, especially in the wake of a protracted period of disinvestment. Moreover, continued
underexecution of the Public Investment Programme holds back growth, as it reduces aggregate
demand,  leads  to  a  deterioration  of  public  infrastructure  and  increases  businesses’  operating
costs.
– Insufficient domestic savings. The rise in nominal disposable income per capita, in particular
in  the  lower  income  brackets,  supported  by  employment  growth  especially  among  youth  and
workers  with  part-time  and  intermittent  employment  contracts,  was  chiefly  channelled  into
consumption. Thus, the household saving rate has remained in negative territory.
– Delays in the delivery of justice. According to the Enforcing Contracts Indicator used in the
World Bank’s Doing Business report for 2019, compared to the OECD average, the time for trial
and  to  enforce  the  judgment  is  three  times  longer  in  Greece,  while  the  time  for  resolving
insolvency  is  twice  as  long.  Therefore,  the  rapid  and  fair  settlement  of  legal  disputes  in  a
transparent and stable legal framework is crucial to strengthening the rule of law, thereby also
improving investor confidence.
– The quality of institutions and respect for independent authorities. Countries with weak
institutions lack in flexibility and adaptability, making potential economic disturbances more likely
to occur and more difficult to address.
– Adverse demographic developments. Over the past decade, Greece’s demographics have
deteriorated dramatically, as evidenced by the decline and rapid ageing of the population and a
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
very low fertility rate. This trend in demographic data was further exacerbated by the recent wave
of migration of part of the population of reproductive age. The demographic crisis is one of the
most  serious  challenges  that  Greece’s  society  and  economy  will  need  to  address  in  the
immediate  future,  as  the  rapid  contraction  and  ageing  of  the  population  adversely  impacts
potential output and the pace of economic growth in the medium-to-long term.
– The slow digital transformation of the economy. According  to  the  Digital  Economy  and
Society Index (DESI), Greece ranked second to last among the EU28 in 2018, meaning that the
digital transformation of the Greek economy remains slow. As a result, Greece is still considered
‘digitally immature’. Consequently, policy action must be taken to eliminate this technological lag
and reduce digital illiteracy.
– Climate Change and the challenge of sustainable development. Redefining the concept
of growth in a sustainability context and embracing the principles of a circular economy will be
crucial to our future. According to the World Economic Forum’s Global Risks Report for 2019,
three of the top five risks for the world economy are environmental and all three relate to climate
change.
PREREQUISITES FOR SUSTAINABLE GROWTH
Addressing the above challenges effectively will require, as a minimum, the following set of policy
actions:
First,  a  continuation  and  completion  of  structural  reforms,  so  as  to  safeguard  the
achievements  made  so  far,  reinforce  the  credibility  of  economic  policy  and  further  improve
Greece’s  credit  standing,  paving  the  way  to  a permanent  return  to  international  financial
markets  on  sustainable  terms.  In  this  context,  top  priority  must  be  given  to  reforms  that
enhance  public  administration  efficiency,  legal  certainty,  especially  in  land  use,  and  the  faster
delivery of justice.
Second, reducing the high stock of non-performing loans, so as to free up funds for viable
businesses,  facilitate  the  restructuring  of  the  business  sector  and  strengthen  healthy
competition.  Meanwhile,  the  legal  framework  reforms  currently  under  way  should  improve
payment morale.
Third, a change to the fiscal policy mix geared towards lowering the excessively high tax rates,
further rationalising public expenditure and enhancing the Public Investment Programme. Ideally,
this change should be combined with more realistic primary surplus targets, considering that,
with  public  debt  close  to  170%  of  GDP,  one  additional  percentage  point  increase  in  GDP
contributes  1.7  times  more  towards  reducing  the  public  debt  ratio  than  does  one  percentage
point of primary surplus.
Fourth, greater focus on attracting foreign direct investment of high value added, which
would accelerate technology integration, strengthen Greece’s export performance, utilise inactive
human resources, thereby increasing total factor productivity. This presupposes a continuation of
privatisations,  along  with  an  encouragement  of  public-private  partnerships  and  a  removal  of
disincentives to investors.
Fifth, strengthening the “knowledge triangle” (education, research, innovation). As shown by
the latest global trends, in modern efforts to reconcile the functioning of a market economy, i.e.
capitalism, with democracy, investing in knowledge and the access opportunities to knowledge
for all are a crucial catalyst both for economic growth and for social justice. The Greek education
system, despite producing a pool of highly-qualified individuals, fails to equip them with the skills
required in today’s digital world. The new technologies can generate employment opportunities,
provided  that  labour  can  rapidly  adjust  to  a  human-centred  working  environment,  in  which
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
knowledge,  skills,  personal  initiative,  mobility,  flexibility  and  cooperation  will  play  a  key  role.
Investing in human capital and fostering entrepreneurship are strategies crucial to the successful
adjustment of the labour market. All levels of the education system must therefore be redesigned
in  order  to  cultivate  the  skills  required  by  the  modern  labour  market.  Closer  links  between
education and the production process will contribute towards this goal.
 2019 will be a challenging year, as domestic and external risks remain. Therefore, there is no
room  for  complacency.  Greece’s  successful  course  in  new,  post-crisis,  European  normality
calls for strict commitment to uphold the very important achievements made so far, conduct a
prudent  economic  policy  aimed  at  eliminating  the  remaining  imbalances  and  pursue  reforms.
The  ultimate  objective  is  to  complete  the  Greek  economy’s  safe  transition  to  a  sustainable
growth  model  based  on  extroversion,  entrepreneurship,  investment,  knowledge  and  social
cohesion,  with  social  sensitivity  and  respect  for  the  natural  environment.  The  benefits  to  be
reaped are substantial: a rapid decrease in the unemployment rate, a reversal of the brain drain,
higher total productivity, higher wages and incomes.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
