      MONETARY POLICY REPORT 
PRESENTATION BEFORE THE FINANCE COMMISSION OF THE 
HONORABLE SENATE OF THE REPUBLIC
 
      Mario Marcel 
Governor 
Central Bank of Chile 
1 April 2019 
                                                  
 The Monetary Policy Report of March 2019 can be found at http://www.bcentral.cl.  
I. 
Introduction 
Mister President of the Senate’s Finance Commission, Senator Ricardo Lagos-Weber, Senators members of 
this Commission, ladies, gentlemen,  
I am grateful for your invitation to present  the  vision of the Board of the Central Bank  of Chile on recent 
macroeconomic  developments,  their  prospects  and  the  implications  for  monetary  policy.  This  vision  is 
contained  in  detail  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  (IPoM)  of  March  2019,  released  this  morning.  These 
antecedents provide the background for the decision adopted by the Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting 
last Friday. 
At that Meeting, we decided unanimously to keep the Monetary Policy Rate (MPR) at 3%. At the same time, 
we noted that, in line with the lower level of inflation and its outlook, it would be necessary to maintain the 
monetary stimulus for a longer period, taking a break in the process of MPR normalization that began last 
October. To the extent that the economy continues on the foreseen path, this process should be resumed in 
the medium term to ensure the convergence of inflation within the policy horizon.  
This decision is coherent with the analysis and baseline projection scenario that I will share with you now. In 
particular, it considers that the economy posted healthy growth in 2018, driven by investment, an impulse 
that is expected to continue in 2019. Externally, growth in the main economies has shown a sharper-than-
expected deceleration, which has led its authorities to implement further economic stimulus packages.  
The main difference with respect to December’s baseline scenario was seen in local inflation. Measured by 
the benchmark Consumer Price Index (CPI) calculated by the National Statistics Institute (INE) based on the 
updated basket and new methodology, annual CPI variation is significantly below the forecast. This differential 
between  forecast  and  actual  inflation  occurs  in  a  context  where  activity  and  demand  have  behaved  as 
expected,  which  in  this  Report  is  explained  by  a  lower-than-expected  peso  depreciation  pass-through, 
favorable supply factors in some markets and greater capacity gaps than had been estimated until now. Said 
gaps do not originate in weaker demand, but in the labor force effects of massive immigration to the country, 
an issue that the Bank has brought up in its presentations to this Commissions for some quarters now.  
In this context, our projections yield that the convergence of inflation to the 3% target will take almost a year 
longer than we estimated in December. This provides room for the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus to 
proceed at a slower pace than was announced before by the Board. 
This  scenario  plays  out  in  a  context  of  greater  uncertainty  in  the  world  economy,  where  global  financial 
markets remain very susceptible and more negative scenarios may occur. For the same reason, although we 
believe  that  the  evolution  of  macroeconomic  conditions  will  make  it  necessary  to  reduce  the  monetary 
stimulus and that the external impulse facing the Chilean economy has not seen significant changes, we will 
continue to implement this process with particular caution. 
Let me now share with you some more detail of our assessment of the macroeconomic scenario, its prospects 
and monetary policy implications. 
1 
    II. 
 Recent evolution of inflation 
As is well known, in January, the INE updated the CPI basket and measurement methodology, giving rise to a 
new CPI series with base 2018=100, that supersedes the former base of 2013. The new CPI uses a basket of 
products that responds to the current consumption patterns of the population, taken from the Family Budget 
Survey of 2017, and incorporates a series of methodological improvements in the collection of some price 
data. This certainly makes the new CPI a more accurate indicator of current inflation. In introducing the new 
series, the INE has applied the same procedures of the last two updates, in 2009 and 2014. Thus, for analytical 
purposes,  it  has  generated  a  benchmark  series,  corresponding  to  the  CPI  level  calculated  with  the  new 
methodology  for  the  months  of  January  to  December  2018.  This  allows  estimating  the  average  prices 
established by the base of the indicator and twelve-month variations, beginning in January 2019. The series 
spliced with the 2013 base CPI remains the official index, that is good for all legal and contractual purposes, 
including the calculation of the UF. 
In its analysis of the behavior of inflation, the Central Bank uses, as in the previous changes, the benchmark 
series,  because,  for  the  reasons  just  explained,  the  new  CPI  is  a  better  thermometer  of  the  evolution  of 
inflationary pressures and because, since it will be governing in the coming years, the information of its past 
behavior is more useful for estimating its outlook. 
In doing so, an important difference is revealed with respect to the December estimates. Thus, while with the 
2013=100 base the CPI accumulated a variation of 2.1% between February and December (eleven months), 
with the new basket and methodology (2018 = 100) it accumulated 1.7%. In the case of the CPIEFE index—
which  excludes  food  and  energy—the  figures  were  2%  and  1.5%,  respectively.  With  this,  at  February  the 
annual change in the CPI and the CPIEFE stood at 1.7% and 2% per year, respectively (figure 1). Compared 
with the change in the CPIEFE projected for this date in the December Monetary Policy Report, its current 
value is around 80 basis points lower. 
Beyond the methodological reasons behind the changes in the figures produced by the new CPI, it is important 
to understand the macroeconomic fundamentals of the lower actual inflation. Our analysis identifies three 
key factors: first, there are differences in the goods component of the CPIEFE, which point to a lower transfer 
to local prices from the peso depreciation throughout 2018. This may be explained by the fact that during this 
period the variation of the peso/dollar parity responded to movements of the global value of the dollar, as 
opposed to past parity variations (e.g. in 2017) that responded to idiosyncratic shocks to Chile (figure 2). The 
difference in the pass-through coefficient of forex variations to inflation according to the origin of the former 
was widely documented in a box in the March 2016 Report and today we see it reflected in the recent behavior 
of inflation. 
Second, there are also differences that could be more linked to supply factors in some markets of products 
and services. One example is the increased competition in the car industry, as well as the emergence of low-
cost alternatives in passenger air transport, as seen in the behavior of the CPIEFE for services. The same applies 
2 
  to  the  increased  competition  in  special  offers of  telecom  packages  mobile  phone  services.  Some  of  these 
phenomena have been captured by the new CPI thanks to some of its methodological improvements (figure 
3). 
Third, the labor market presents greater slack, resulting from the massive immigration of recent years. Last 
December, the  INE  published the  new  population  projections that use  information from the 2017 Census, 
which  ratified  the  significant  increase  in  the  immigrant  population  beginning  in  2015.  According  to  these 
figures, between 2015 and 2019 around 865 thousand people came to the country, which also has a significant 
effect on  the  demographics  (figure  4).  As we  reported  to  this  Commission  last  December,  an  immigration 
phenomenon of this magnitude has a strong effect on the labor force. Moreover, the immigrant population 
has a participation rate in the labor force of the order of 80% according to the 2017 Census, compared with 
the native population’s which is somewhat above 60% according to the same source. 
As  we  noted  in  a  box  in  last  December’s  Report,  the  effects  of  immigration  manifest  through  supply  and 
demand channels that together generate an expansionary effect on output and have a limited inflationary 
impact. On one hand, the increase in population brings with it an increase in aggregate demand for consumer 
goods  and  services,  pushing  inflation  upward.  But,  on  the other  hand,  immigration expands  the  supply of 
labor,  which  moderates  wage  increases  and  reduces  the  marginal  costs  of  companies,  putting  downward 
pressure on inflation. While over time the economy adjusts to accommodate the population increase, it is 
unclear which channel will dominate, that of higher aggregate demand or that of the increased labor force. 
This  will  depend  on  the  propensity  to  save  of  the  immigrant  population  (considering  remittances),  the 
willingness to work at different wage levels and how fast the capital stock will adjust in response to the larger 
scale of the economy. The information of the last few months, with activity in line with forecasts, lower-than 
expected inflation and nominal wages decelerating during 2018, suggests that so far, the dominant channel 
has been the expansionary effect on the supply of labor. 
Thus, it is possible to identify some recent economic phenomena that allow to analytically understand the 
fundamentals  behind  the  lower  inflation.  Some  of  these  phenomena  (e.g.  immigration  and  differences  in 
exchange  rate  pass  through)  had  been  mentioned  by  the  Central  Bank  in  previous  Reports,  its  effective 
translation into lower inflation only manifested with the calculation of the new CPI.  
III. 
Recent evolution of activity 
 Recent months’ data confirmed that the economy recovered its dynamism after the break of the third quarter 
of last year. As we reported in December, in said quarter activity slowed down more than expected because 
of, among other factors, a significantly higher calendar effect because of September’s many holidays.  
Fourth-quarter data that this effect was temporary, so total GDP closed the year with a growth of 4%, where 
3.9% was non-mining. On the demand side, the greater dynamism of investment continues to stand out—
especially in machinery and equipment—, which intensified over the year. Habitual consumption (i.e. non-
3 
   durable  goods  and  services)  continued  to  expand  in  tandem  with  GDP,  while  durable  consumption 
decelerated significantly mainly due to the normalization of volume car sales (figure 5).  
About this year 2019, partial activity data for the first quarter show annual variations smaller than those at 
the end of last year. This combines a higher basis of comparison and, especially, a poor performance of the 
mining sector (figure 6). This worsened in February because of downtime in geographic areas affected by the 
intense highland winter, according to the INE’s Manufacturing Production Index, which fell 9.4% in said month. 
Several indicators suggest that the lower growth of early this year will be a rather limited phenomenon. 
About demand fundamentals Regarding the determinants of demand, it is worth noting that borrowing costs 
continue  to  be  favorable  by  historic  standards  and  that  both  supply-  and  demand-side  conditions  have 
improved in recent quarters. In terms of expectations, signals are mixed. While consumer expectations (IPEC) 
show a decline with respect to the end of the year, the business component (IMCE) shows an improvement 
in the same period, where worth noting is the progress in the construction sector. In the labor market, the 
national unemployment rate has been stable around 7%. 
On  the  investment  side,  the  latest  survey  of  the  Capital  Goods  Corporation  (CBC)  ratified  the  significant 
increase in projects under execution that we saw at the end of 2018. It even revised upward investment plans 
for this and the next two years, with special emphasis on 2020, with investment in mining projects continuing 
to contribute the most according to the survey. Inventories posted a significant increase throughout the year, 
where accumulated buildup went from 0.5% to 1.3% of GDP between 2017 and 2018, largely concentrated in 
the exporting sector and imports of machinery and equipment. 
Chilean exports performed well during 2018, partly reflecting an increase in volume exports from all economic 
sectors  in  general.  Worth  noting  were  shipments  manufacturing  products,  which  reached  their  highest 
nominal growth since 2011, supported also by the favorable evolution of the international prices of many of 
these products (figure 7). 
IV. 
International scenario 
 Internationally, there has been a more marked slowdown in growth in the main economies. The data was 
particularly weak in the Eurozone, with a significant adjustment of trade inside and outside the region in the 
fourth quarter of 2018. In China, growth went from 6.8% in the first quarter, to 6.4% in the fourth. Moreover, 
concerns about how intense this global deceleration may become have been exacerbated. Different short-
term  activity  indicators  underperformed  the  market  forecast:  the  outlook  for  firms  in  the  manufacturing 
sector (PMI) has deteriorated, manufacturing output has slowed or even contracted in several economies and 
international trade has weakened (figure 8). 
Preoccupation over  the  weakening of  the  economies,  together  with  lower  inflationary  pressures  and  high 
financial volatility, resulted in an increase in monetary and/or fiscal stimuli in several countries. In the US, the 
Federal Reserve took a considerable turn in its monetary policy stance, showing itself open to maintaining its 
4 
   expansionary  orientation  for  some  time  longer,  in  contrast  to  the  tighter  signals  emitted  up  to  the  third 
quarter. This led to a significant decline in US long-term interest rates. which has even translated into reversal 
of  the  US yield  curve  (figure  9).  For  its  part,  the  European  Central  Bank  postponed  the  start  of  monetary 
normalization and announced new initiatives for liquidity provision. Chinese authorities have announced new 
fiscal and monetary packages in addition to those adopted during 2018. 
Nonetheless,  global  financial  markets  remain  susceptible  to  potentially  negative  news,  as  reflected  in  the 
tensions at the end of 2018 and at the statistical close of this Report. Thus, there have been ups and downs in 
appetite for risk, capital flows and emerging currencies. The exchange rate  in Chile  has also been volatile. 
Considering  the  average  of  the  ten  days  prior  to  the  statistical  closing,  the  real  exchange  rate  (RER)  is 
somewhat  below  its  average  of  the  last  fifteen  and  twenty  years.  As  a  working  assumption,  the  baseline 
scenario foresees that the RER will return to these levels during the projection horizon. 
The baseline scenario of the Monetary Policy Report states that during 2019 and 2020 the world economy will 
grow 3.3% and 3.2%, respectively, less than the 3.7% average of the two previous years and the December 
Report’s forecast (3.5% and 3.3%, respectively). Chile’s business partners will show the same expansion rates 
in that period (3.6%  in 2017-2018). These projections assume  that the  US will grow  at rates closer to 2%, 
gradually approaching trend growth. In the case of China, it is projected to grow 6.1% this year and 6% in 
2020, less than in previous years and consistent with the process of achieving lower expansion rates as the 
economy  grows  in  size.  These  projections  are  somewhat  inferior  to  those  observed  in  the  usual 
counterparties. In particular, in March the OECD said it expects global growth to grow 3.3% and 3.4% in 2019 
and 2020, identical to the latest figures published by Consensus Forecasts and a little below the IMF’s January 
projections (figure 10). 
Turning to the terms of trade, most commodities increased their prices after the December Report. In the 
baseline scenario, prices for copper and oil are expected to be somewhat higher than predicted in December. 
A copper price of $2.9 per pound is forecast for this year and the next two, which compares with the prices of 
$2.85 and $2.80 per pound that we assumed in December for 2019 and 2020, respectively. In the case of oil, 
average Brent-WTI average prices are expected of $62 per barrel in 2019 and 2020 (59 dollars for both years, 
in December) and $60 in 2021. With this, and the revisions to the historical numbers, the terms of trade should 
increase this year by a higher rate than we thought in December, but in terms of levels, they will be similar 
(figure 11). 
V. 2019 – 2021 Outlook 
 Our baseline projection assumes that the boost that the Chilean economy will receive from abroad in the next 
two  years  will  be  milder  than  it  was  in  the  last  two.  It  will  be  still  be  positive,  however,  combining  the 
downward  adjustment  of  world  growth  and  somewhat  more  favorable  financial  conditions  than  were 
foreseen  in  December.  At  home,  the  recent  evolution  of  demand  and  prospects  for  consumption  and 
5 
   investment  continue  to  indicate  that  the  economy  will  narrow  its  capacity  gaps  further  over  the  coming 
quarters.  
About  the  magnitude  of  these  gaps,  however,  the  mix  between  lower  headline  inflation  and  strong  non-
mining GDP imply that they will exceed previous projections, which, as has been noted, is consistent with the 
expansion of the labor force coming from massive immigration, among other factors. In order to tone down 
uncertainties about the values of this and other structural parameters used in the calibration of monetary 
policy, the Board has decided to update these estimates in the Monetary Policy Report next June. 
V.1. Activity  
 In our baseline scenario, we expect the Chilean economy to grow between 3% and 4% in 2019. This range runs 
somewhat below our December forecast (3.25% to 4.25%), due to a poor-than-expected mining performance 
which, as I just mentioned, is clearly noticeable in the figures early this year. For 2020, we foresee that the 
economy  will  grow  between  3%  and  4%,  a  little  above  our  December  forecast.  Finally,  in  this  Report  we 
present the first growth projection for the year 2021, that is, within a 2.75% to 3.75% range.  
About expenditure, we still estimate that investment will be its most dynamic component, with annual growth 
over 6% in 2019. By 2020 and 2021, it should decline to around 4%. Consumption will continue to grow at 
rates consistent with GDP. In the fiscal area, our working assumption is that in 2019 the economy will receive 
a boost consistent with the approved Budget; from then onwards, the structural deficit will follow the path of 
gradual decrease defined by the authority (table 1). 
V.2. Inflation 
 In  terms  of  inflation,  given  its  lower  level  today  and  the  estimate  of  somewhat  larger  capacity  gaps,  its 
convergence to 3% will take longer than we predicted last December. Thus, it is estimated that the CPI will 
end this year with an annual increase of 2.6% and return to 3% in the first half of next year. From then on, it 
will fluctuate in the vicinity until the end of the policy horizon, that is, the first quarter of 2021. The CPIEFE is 
projected to end 2019 at 2.4% and approach 3% in the second half of next year (figure 12). 
V.3. Monetary policy 
 As for monetary policy, the Board continues to believe that the evolution of macroeconomic conditions makes 
it  necessary  to  reduce  the  monetary  stimulus  over  the  policy  horizon.  However,  the  change  in  the  initial 
conditions of the baseline scenario caused by the lower inflation observed—in addition to other adjustments 
6 
     mentioned above—implies that its convergence to the target requires the pace of MPR normalization to be 
slower than anticipated. in December.  
For  short-term  forecasting  purposes,  we  use  as  a working  assumption  the  MPR  trajectory  taken  from our 
March Economic Expectations Survey, which foresees no changes in the MPR at least during the next two 
quarters. For the medium term, our projections are consistent with the MPR reaching its neutral level towards 
the end of the policy horizon. The Board has estimated for some time that the neutral MPR is between 4% 
and 4.5%. This parameter that will also be revised in the June Report. 
V.4. Risk scenarios 
 The base scenario that I have just presented reflects the events most likely to occur with the information at 
hand  at  the  close  of  this  Report.  There  are  risks,  however,  that,  if  materialized,  may  reshape  the 
macroeconomic outlook and the course of monetary policy.  
On the external front, despite having steadily input lower growth prospects, the risk balance continues to be 
biased downward. The main risk remains that of an abrupt reversal of financial conditions facing emerging 
economies, which could be triggered by various reasons, including a more abrupt and widespread slowdown 
in world growth or the negative evolution of the various geopolitical tensions that have persisted in the recent 
past. Although in such a scenario the main central banks would probably expand their monetary policies, a 
lower appetite for risk and declines in commodity prices are also possible, more than offsetting these lower 
interest rates.  
At home, it is estimated that the risk balance for both activity and inflation is unbiased. First, the massive 
immigration of recent years may have a greater impact on growth and inflation. As I said, although in the 
medium-term immigration should have an expansionary effect on GDP and a limited one on inflation, it is 
unclear  how  the  supply  and  demand  channels will  interact,  and  which  one  will  dominate  as the economy 
absorbs the population inflow.  Second, on the activity side, it is possible for investment to be even more 
dynamic if larger-scale projects keep coming, but it can also happen that the greater external risks induce a 
more conservative behavior by entrepreneurs and consumers. Third, the expected evolution of inflation could 
also be affected if the pass-through of the peso depreciation returns to near average magnitudes earlier than 
expected and pushes up inflation of CPIEFE goods. Finally, we cannot rule out a faster depletion of the one-
off effects of sectoral supply shocks, particularly the heavier competition in some areas. 
Final remarks 
V. 
 The global economic scenario poses important challenges to our country. For two years now, events have 
been unfolding that have added uncertainty to the global growth Outlook, such as the trade conflict between 
7 
    the US and China or the Brexit resolution. Thus, we have seen several episodes in which global markets have 
been stressed, generating less favorable conditions for the emerging world. The most recent of these events 
is  still  underway,  putting  pressure  on  economies  that  are  perceived  to  have  weaker  macroeconomic 
fundamentals. 
Chile, being a small economy, commercially and financially integrated in the world, has not been spared these 
tensions. As I just mentioned, the impulse we will be getting from abroad in the next two years will be milder 
than the one of the last two. And as we have said in a number of Reports, we believe that the external risk 
balance is biased downward. 
However, we must also be clear that this external scenario finds the Chilean economy on the right foot. Our 
growth  rates  have  substantially  outperformed  those  of  previous  years,  investment  is  the  most  dynamic 
component of expenditure and our country has been absorbing a significant increase in the workforce without 
a corresponding increase in unemployment, while wages continue to grow. Today’s lower level of inflation 
and  its  implications  for  the  two-year  convergence,  not  only  allows  adjusting  the  pace  of  monetary  policy 
normalization, but also provides room to monitor and analyze the evolution of external conditions without 
the pressure of an imminent adjustment to the policy rate. Plus, there the traditional cushioning effect of the 
exchange rate float and a deep local capital market. 
Summing up, monetary policy is now in an expansionary position, with the policy rate that has remained low 
for quite a while. Although in our baseline scenario we believe that it will still be necessary to raise it in the 
next two years, we have also been clear about the convenience of taking a break in the coming months.  
Since we began the monetary policy normalization process, we have said that we will conduct this process 
gradually and cautiously, ensuring that the economy can adapt to a milder monetary stimulus and be on the 
lookout for changes in macroeconomic conditions that advise adjusting the pace of the process. The recent 
changes  in  the  international  economy  and  the  new  inflation  measurement  associated  to  the  CPI  updated 
belong  to  this  class  of  changes.  True  to  its  commitment,  the  Bank  has  thoroughly  examined  these 
developments,  factoring  them  into  its  projections,  and  has  concluded  that  it  is  necessary  to  adjust  the 
expected trajectory of monetary policy. Accordingly, we have put the normalization process on hold for some 
quarters, in order to allow inflation to go back to a path of convergence. 
In the same way, faced with the uncertainty regarding the value of the structural parameters on which the 
monetary policy is based after important economic changes, we have decided to include an update in the June 
Monetary Policy Report, which will allow us to gauge its future trajectory. 
These actions attest to the Bank’s commitment to its institutional mission, as well as its vocation to act on the 
basis of solid evidence and rigorous analysis of background information. In this way, we reflect our purpose 
of being an institution to which citizens can entrust the protection of price stability and financial stability, as 
essential determinants of their well-being. 
Thank you. 
  8 
      9 
   10 
   11 
        12 
      13 
         14 
   15 
 