Sabine Lautenschläger: Central bankers, supervisors and climate-
related risks
Panel remarks by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European
Central Bank, at the NGFS (Network for Greening the Financial System) conference, Paris, 17
April 2019.
 The financial community’s most important action with regard to climate change has happened in
the last few years: many stakeholders in the financial industry, and central bankers, too, have
realised that climate change is not an issue for next century. It’s an issue for now, and it’s a topic
not  only  for  other  sectors  but  also  for  the  financial  sector  and  for  central  bankers  and
supervisors.
The ECB is paying a lot more attention to climate risks, not least through its participation in the
Network  for  Greening  the  Financial  System  (NGFS).  We  think  about  and  work  on  climate
change-related risk from four broad perspectives:
There is the question of how we use our microprudential supervisory arm to assess and
address climate change-related risk in banks.
There is the question of climate change-related risk and its impact on financial stability.
There  is  the  question  of  whether  and  how  we  take  climate  change  into  account  in  our
investments in own funds and pension funds.
And there is the question of how we assess the potential impact of climate change on the
factors that are important to monetary policy.
We  continue  to  conduct  further  research  from  all  these  perspectives.  For  example,  we  are
collecting more information on the topic of climate change risk and green finance in order to have
a better view of how exposed euro area financial institutions are to climate-related risks.
Collecting  data  and  evidence  is  not  an  easy  task,  as  we  all  know.  There  are  no  common
definitions or taxonomies and we lack the overall data we need to assess the risk in the financial
sector correctly. As the challenges posed by climate change are largely unprecedented, we need
to dedicate considerable resources to understanding them.
In the area of banking supervision, this year the ECB has formally identified climate-related risk
as one of the key risks facing the banking sector.
Here, we will assess how the banking industry looks at climate change-related risks from a risk
management perspective.
And on this front, too, further knowledge is key. ECB Banking Supervision is collecting evidence
on whether and how banks are dealing with climate-related risks. We would like to learn more
about the constraints banks face when they assess environmental risks, and when they try to
make their portfolios “greener”.
So, we recently ran a pilot stocktake on a sample of banks to gather evidence on how they are
approaching these challenges. We designed a qualitative questionnaire to evaluate how banks
integrate climate risks into their strategy and their risk management framework.
Preliminary results show that, while many banks are already aware of the risks posed by climate
change, much more needs to be done in this field. Banks seem to have approached this topic
from  a  corporate  social  responsibility  perspective  rather  than  from  a  risk  management
perspective.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Some banks have asked for clear guidance from regulators, or for more information about best
practices.  Others  see  business  opportunities.  For  example,  some  are  interested  in  financing
clean energy or issuing green bonds.
However, as I said before, the lack of common definitions and data makes it difficult to estimate
the  microprudential  impact  of  these  risks.  It’s  clear,  then,  that  the  NGFS  and  other  fora  for
cooperation and knowledge-sharing will continue to play a key role.
Last  but  not  least,  the  ECB  has  worked  to  foster  sustainable  investment  in  our  own  non-
monetary  policy  portfolios.  For  example,  for  the  ECB  pension  fund,  we  have  delegated  proxy
voting for equity investment to investment managers that have signed up to the United Nations
Principles  for  Responsible  Investment.  With  the  help  of  our  external  asset  managers,  we  are
also looking to broaden the options for ECB staff to invest in sustainable financial products.
In the near future, we should first of all clearly define the policy parameters of green finance and
climate change risks for us as central bankers and supervisors. The challenges we face with
regard to climate change can only be successfully solved if all stakeholders accept responsibility.
Central  bankers  and  supervisors  cannot  replace  the  full  range  of  political  actions  required  to
respond to climate change.
For example, I would caution that any potential changes to regulatory or prudential frameworks
must  be  justified  from  a  prudential  perspective.  We  should  do  our  utmost  to  acknowledge,
assess  and  act  upon  climate  change-related  risks  within  our  mandate,  but  we  should  not  be
obliged, for example, to promote green finance by granting banks preferential capital treatment if
this is not justified by the specific risks linked to green finance.
Second, we need to organise and coordinate the work of the different global groups in order not
to  overburden  the  financial  industry  with  a  myriad  of  different  information-collecting  exercises.
The NGFS could play a key role in this kind of coordination.
Third,  we  need  to  tackle  –  preferably  on  a  global  level  –  the  lack  of  common  definitions  and
taxonomies, as well as data and metrics. Without doing this, it is difficult to gauge the micro- and
macroprudential impact of climate risks. We need to know more about the different risks of green
and brown assets.
Therefore,  I  wholeheartedly  support  the  request  of  the  NGFS  to  establish  a  taxonomy  of
economic activities, including for green, non-green, brown and non-brown assets. We must fill
the data and information gap we face as quickly as possible.
Fourth, from my perspective we cannot afford to wait until we have a perfect understanding of all
these risks to take action. Climate change will not adapt to our research schedules.
So I am in favour of establishing, at least at the European level – and preferably even at the global
level  –  a  common  set  of  supervisory  expectations  about  how  banks  should  deal  with  climate
change and environmental risks. We could start with a modular approach, first addressing the
governance issues before going into the technical topics.
Fifth, banks need to  make  progress  in  methods  and  practices  for  assessing  climate  change-
related  risks.  Yes,  it  is  about  governance  in  banks  –  whether  these  types  of  risk  are  fully
embedded in the risk management framework. But it is about risk assessment techniques, too.
So  we  should  foster  a  stronger  risk  management  perspective  and  techniques  with  regard  to
climate-related risks; it is about having an adequate mapping and classification of “at-risk” assets
and including them in banks’ forward-looking risk strategies with a longer time horizon than banks
commonly  use  for  assessing  “traditional”  risks.  We  all  know  how  difficult  it  is  to  set  key
assumptions and different plausible scenarios for assessing the potential impact of these risks.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
From a system-wide financial stability perspective, we will continue to monitor the transmission
channels of climate-related risks. And thorough research, as well as intense discussions about
scenario designs, will give us an idea of the range of possible impacts of climate change on the
financial industry.
The ECB has begun work to compute the impact of climate-related changes on banks’ capital
positions,  on  other  financial  intermediaries  and,  ultimately,  on  the  supply  of  funds  to  the
economy.
One  study,  in  particular,  considers  the  channels  through  which  climate-related  risks  are
propagated to the economy as a whole. It finds that these risks will affect the earnings of the
corporate sector, and this will have an impact on their probabilities of default, value of debt and
equity. These changes will then be mapped onto banks’ capital positions, or corporate bond and
equity portfolios held by other intermediaries, to determine the overall impact on the supply of
funds to the economy. This is very ambitious but important work.
Directly  linked  to  this  topic  is  the  question  of  how  climate  change-related  risk  will  affect  the
underlying factors that guide our monetary policy. Here, research is needed to get an idea of how
the transmission channels can be influenced by climate change.
So there’s more than enough work to be done, and this work is urgently needed and complex.
We shouldn’t delay.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
