Daniel Boamah: The importance of being financially fit 
Remarks by Dr Daniel Boamah, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, on the 
occasion  of  the  Prize-Giving  Ceremony  of  “Financially  Fit  Schools’  Essay  Competition”, 
Bridgetown, 7 June 2010. 
 Madam Chairperson, representative from Caribbean Technical Assistance Centre, members 
of the media, awardees, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. On behalf of 
the  Board  of  Directors,  the  Governor,  Management  and  staff  of  the  Central  Bank,  it  is  my 
distinct pleasure to welcome you to the Bank and to this prize-giving ceremony. Let me, on 
behalf  of  the  Bank  congratulate  the  recipients  of  prizes  in  this  essay  competition  and 
encourage those who were not successful this time to continue trying.  
I must commend the Management of the Caribbean Technical Assistance Centre (CARTAC) 
for the initiative to sponsor this essay competition. First of all, it encourages students to put 
their thoughts on paper in a more structured format and to help them think logically. Secondly 
it provides them with an introduction to financial education which should equip them with the 
information  and  skills  necessary  to  enable  them  to  take  control  of  their  personal  finances. 
Any  project  that  would  teach  young  people  important  life  skills  of  how  to  make,  save  and 
spend  money  wisely,  especially  in  these  times  of  challenging  economic  realities,  is  worth 
supporting. 
A  few  years  ago,  at  a  meeting  of  the  Central  Bank  Governors  of  the  Commonwealth  of 
Nations,  it  was  recommended  that  central  banks  should  take  steps  to  enhance  financial 
literacy  in  their  jurisdictions.  This  is  because  it  was  recognised  throughout  the  world  that 
many  people  are  failing  to  plan  ahead  and  are  making  bad  financial  decisions  without 
realising it.  
Some central banks in the region have already gotten involved. The Central Bank of Trinidad 
and Tobago and the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB) have active financial literacy 
programmes. The Central Bank of Barbados also launched a financial education programme 
in  August  last  year,  beginning  with  a  series  on  budgeting.  The  staff  of  the  Bank  made 
presentations  to  several  workplaces  on  the  topic  and  the  feedback  reinforces  the  point  of 
view that greater attention ought to be paid to financial literacy in Barbados. 
Even  before  launching  its  financial  education  programme,  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados, 
through  its  Schools’  Outreach  Programme,  was  engaged  in  educating  students  about 
financial issues as the Bank recognises that teenagers who learn to handle their finances will 
become  adults  who  know  how  to  manage  their  money  in  order  to  build  better  lives  for 
themselves and their families and to strengthen the economy. 
I have been asked to speak to you about the importance of being financially fit. But what is 
finance?  
The  text  books  have  a  more  elaborate  way  of  defining  finance  but  in  common  usage,  the 
term  finance  simply  means  the  management  of  large  sums  of  money  over  time.  For  our 
purposes,  we  would  define  “finance”  as  simply  the  management  of  funds,  not  necessarily 
large.  Funds  need  to  be  managed  because  of  two  main  factors:  financial  resources  are 
scarce in relation to our aspirations and secondly because our receipt of funds and our need 
to incur expenditure do not normally coincide. 
By  convention,  most  employees  are  paid  monthly  but  their  expenditure  needs  are  spread 
across  different  times  of  the  month.  A  parent  may  receive  employment  income  today,  but 
tuition fees for his or her ward may not have to be paid until next year.  
Because considerable time can elapse between expenditure being incurred and the receipt 
of  income,  various  institutions,  including  commercial  banks,  have  emerged  to  assist  in  the 
BIS Review 81/2010 
 1
financing of business during this interval. Therefore time plays an important role in financial 
calculations. 
Being  financially  fit  simply  means  positioning  oneself  to  deal  with  financial  uncertainty.  It 
means  developing  a  series  of  financial  habits  that  will  make  us  better  able  to  deal  with 
unexpected expenses, rising cost of living and a decline or loss of income. We may draw an 
analogy with the human body, in the sense that one desires to be physically fit so that the 
body is better able to fight unexpected diseases. 
In  short,  sound  financial  management  is  simply  a  sensible  way  of  spending  and  investing 
your money over a given period. To be financially fit, your money payments should be less 
than or at least equal to your income over that period. To achieve this you need to devise a 
personal plan that involves regular monitoring and evaluation. The planning process has a 
number  of  steps,  usually  five.  You  first  need  to  assess  your  financial  situation,  then  set 
financial  goals,  create  an  action  plan  to  guide  you  towards  those  goals,  take  an  identified 
course of action and monitor your progress over time. 
Assessing your financial situation usually involves a listing of all your assets and liabilities. 
Examples of your assets would include things like a car, a house, a bank account, and so on. 
Your liabilities would include items like credit card debt, a bank loan, and so on. Subtracting 
your total liabilities from your total assets will indicate your personal financial situation or your 
personal net worth at that point in time. Finding out that your financial net worth is negative is 
like  getting  on  a  scale  and  finding  out  that  you  are  terribly  out  of  shape.  You  are  simply 
overweight. The question that may begin to exercise your mind is, how did I become so out 
of shape? You may get an answer by looking at your eating habits; how often you visit the 
fast food outlet, how often you over eat. This would induce you to do something about it. You 
may, for instance, decide to cut your weight down by 20 lbs over a six month period.  
Similarly, you may get an idea of how your finances got terribly out of shape by compiling a 
personal  cash  flow  statement,  keeping  track  of  how  you  spend  your  money  over  a  given 
period and on what you spend it. This will involve listing your income (over say one month), 
and  all  your  expenses  over  the  same  period.  By  subtracting  your  expenses  from  your 
income, you obtain your personal net cash flow position. If your net cash flow turns out to be 
negative, that should give you an idea of why your finances are in shambles.  
Then just as you set a goal of cutting your weight by 20 lbs over six months, you may wish to 
start your journey to financial fitness by setting up goals to give directions to your financial 
life. Your first goal might be a decision to bring your cash flow statement into balance over a 
three-month period. Another goal could be to save $500 out of your income over a period of 
one year. It is not uncommon to have several goals, some short-term, and some long-term.  
Having determined your financial goals, the next step is to craft a plan which will detail how 
you  will  accomplish  the  goal.  It  means  basically  spending  less  than  you  make,  which 
suggests reducing unnecessary expenses or finding an evening job to increase your income. 
In all this, it is always helpful to be able to identify what you need from what you want. As 
anybody who sets out to lose excess body weight would tell you, it is a painful exercise that 
requires a great deal of discipline but you need to stick to your plan. It may be necessary to 
revisit and re-examine your plan and monitor your progress from time to time. If it looks like 
you will not achieve your goal, you can either alter your plan or adjust your goal.  
As  your  savings  grow,  your  sense  of  well-being  and  peace  of  mind  grows.  You  may  then 
start looking at alternative ways of investing your savings. You are on your way to achieving 
financial fitness.  
Finally, I wish to commend CARTAC for initiating this programme on financial fitness for you 
young students. Like CARTAC, I am of the view that instilling the basics of managing your 
money  wisely  from  an  early  age  will  serve  you  well  in  your  adult  life.  And  as  I  intimated 
throughout my presentation, looking after your financial health is equally as critical as taking 
care of your physical health. 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2010
The power to do both resides with you, even as young people.  
I thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 81/2010 
 3
