Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Financial sector talent enrichment programme – 
syllabus enhancement 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia, at the launch of the “Financial Sector Talent Enrichment Programme (FSTEP) – 
Syllabus Enhancement”, Kuala Lumpur, 20 July 2010. 
 I am delighted to be here this morning to officiate the launching of the Financial Sector Talent 
Enrichment  Programme  –  Syllabus  Enhancement  which  will  be  implemented  for  the  next 
5 batches  until  batch  10.  Today  marks  a  milestone  for  FSTEP  as  the  programme  has 
delivered  more  than  680  graduates  to  the  industry  and  is  now  poised  to  deliver  another 
500 graduates under an enhanced syllabus. 
The development of human capital in the financial services industry is core in promoting a 
well-functioning and stable financial sector. Human capital development is critical in nation 
building  as  a  whole.  At  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  for  many  years,  we  have  embarked  on 
strategies to strengthen human capital development in the financial services sector. Various 
institutional  platforms  were  established  such  as  INCEIF,  the  International  Centre  for 
Education in Islamic Finance; ICLIF, the International Centre for Leadership in Finance; AIF, 
the  Asian  Institute  of  Finance;  and  of  course,  FSTEP,  which  is  entrusted  with  equipping 
talents  with  the  right  skills  and  knowledge  for  their  smooth  transition  into  the  financial 
services industry in Malaysia. 
It is such initiatives that would put the necessary foundation to promote Malaysia as a centre 
of learning for financial services this region. Attracting, retaining and nurturing talent of our 
brightest mind would form the basis for our country’s transition to being a high income growth 
economy. It is also the groundwork that we need to built and strengthen so that our financial 
services remain competitive and innovative. 
With the support from the industry players, FSTEP can serve as a bridge that connects the 
needs  of  the  financial  services  industry  with  the  talents  produced  by  institutions  of  higher 
learning. But the industry must be forward looking in its approach. FSTEPS was designed 
and  intended  to  develop  the  best  graduates  that  we  can  recruit.  Properly  trained  and 
exposed, they could form the pool of future leaders and senior management for the financial 
services industry. FSTEP was not envisaged to produce technicians and mechanics. Neither 
was  FSTEP  created  to  duplicate  the  training  programs  of  financial  institution.  FSTEPS 
comprehensive  one-year  programme  while  emphasizing  the  important  facets  of  technical 
knowledge also exposed trainees to personal development and on the job internship. FSTEP 
was intended to produce graduates that can be entrusted with positions of responsibility in 
the industry over the long term. This was the idea behind the formation of FSTEP and we 
need to bear this in mind when devising the syllabus and enhancement in the future. 
The  Quality  Assurance  Committee  was  created  based  on  the  thinking  that  a  dynamic  and 
relevant programmes requires continuous and timely revision. The QAC that had developed 
the  new  syllabus  incorporated  valuable  inputs  from  the  industry.  The  new  syllabus  was 
approved, by the FSTEP Steering Committee on June 28, 2010. Under the revised syllabus, 
the programme design and delivery will be more balanced between classroom-lectures and 
experiential  learning  in  the  form  of  case  studies,  role  plays  and  simulations.  This 
methodology  is  better  suited  for  adult  learning  and  shift  somewhat  the  responsibility  of 
learning to the trainees. 
With  this  in  mind,  the  content  and  details  of  the  programme  will  be  regularly  updated  and 
align  with  the  progressive  development  of  the  financial  industry.  It  will  keep  participants 
abreast with market needs in this age of advance technology and knowledge. As the financial 
services  industry  matures  and  the  lines  between  businesses  become  even  more  blur,  the 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 1
skills  and  talents  needed  to  navigate  the  industry  becomes  even  more  diverse  and 
demanding. The change in syllabus and other enhancements will differentiate FSTEP from 
other  training  programmes  offered  by  the  financial  institutions  and  training  institutes.  So  I 
don’t expect FSTEP syllabus to converge with the training programmes offered by individual 
financial institution. 
In order to ensure FSTEP secures a constant flow of quality graduates from both local and 
foreign institutes of higher learning to its training programme, initiatives have been mooted by 
FSTEP to sign a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with all public universities and a few 
reputable  private  universities  in  Malaysia  to  instill  the  way  for  greater  cooperation  and 
collaboration  in  matters  of  mutual  interest  and  benefit.  In  particular,  FSTEP  will  offer 
scholarships to eligible top graduates from various universities to participate in its one-year 
fast-track training programme. 
I  wish  to  congratulate  FSTEP  for  the  successful  effort  in  designing  a  new  syllabus  and  it 
continuous  effort  to  improve  the  FSTEP  programmes  remain  contemporary  and  relevant 
agreed to by all parties within the financial services industry. More importantly, it is my hope 
that FSTEP will continue to produce the quality of graduates that will meet the needs of the 
industry.  I  hope  that  all  of  you  will  have  a  fruitful  discussion  and  dialogue.  On  this  note,  I 
declare open the event “FSTEP: Syllabus Enhancement”. 
2 
 BIS Review 100/2010
