José Manuel González-Páramo: Monetary and fiscal policy interactions 
during the financial crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at a conference, Madrid, 26 February 2010. 
 Introduction 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here today in Madrid to deliver the closing remarks at this 
important conference on the interactions between monetary and fiscal policies. 
Before starting my intervention, let me recall that we are presently in the purdah period, i.e. 
within the one-week period before the next decision meeting of the Governing Council. Thus, 
nothing that I will say today is intended to have implications on our future monetary policy 
decisions, nor should it be interpreted as such. 
Undoubtedly,  this  conference  has  addressed  a  very  timely  topic.  Because  of  the  financial 
crisis, substantial policy challenges have emerged for which we need to find answers. And I 
am not sure whether it gives me much comfort that these challenges are not only faced by 
policymakers, but, in a deeper sense, by the economics profession as a whole. I think that for 
all of us much remains to be done until we will be able to say that we have “understood” the 
lessons from the financial crisis. 
The range of topics that have been covered over the past two days is impressive. I will not try 
to comment on all the papers. This would be too much for a single speech. In any case, at 
the end of an intensive conference this would probably not be in line with your preferences. 
Instead, I will focus my remarks today on the monetary and fiscal reaction of the euro area to 
the  financial  crisis.  But  before  doing  so  let  me  start  by  making  a  few  short,  inevitably 
selective remarks on some of the papers. One paper which I found particularly relevant is the 
one by Eric Leeper, because I very much agree that the current crisis is a period in which 
uncertainty  over  future  policy  regimes  poses  particular  challenges.  As  government  debt 
reaches unprecedented levels in peacetime and ageing populations will significantly add to 
the fiscal burden in many industrialised countries in the coming years, the notion of a “fiscal 
limit” that might be reached at some point in the future is immensely important. And this limit 
matters  already  today  because  of  forward-looking  expectations.  Another  interesting  point 
which came out of the presentations by Wieland, Corsetti, Lane, Faia and others, is that the 
current  environment  has  been  conducive  to  a  renewed  and  very  rich  debate  about  the 
determinants  and  the  likely  size  of  fiscal  multipliers,  about  which  there  is  still  much 
uncertainty. Next, it seems clear to me that the paper presented by Loisel addresses a topic 
which will stay with the profession for a long time to come, namely the adequate integration 
of financial market frictions into state-of-the-art DSGE models. And finally, it may not surprise 
you  that  the  paper  presented  by  Cooper  addresses  a  topic  which  does  not  escape  my 
attention these days. By this I mean that monetary unions – which are characterised by the 
very  special  combination  of  a  single,  centralised  monetary  policy  and  many  national  fiscal 
policies – require a particular monetary and fiscal architecture. 
This brings me to the theme on which I would like to devote my attention today, namely the 
reaction  of  euro  area  monetary  and  fiscal  authorities  to  the  financial  crisis.  I  would  like  to 
focus  my  remarks  on  the  fact  that,  while  similar  in  many  ways,  in  certain  respects  the 
reaction  of  the  euro  area  authorities  to  the  crisis  has  differed  to  that  of  other,  major 
industrialised  economies,  such  as  the  United  States  or  Japan.  And  in  this  regard,  an 
interesting question is the extent to which this can be linked to the specific architecture of 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  Before  addressing  this  question,  let  me  briefly  recall  the 
main elements of this architecture. 
BIS Review 23/2010 
 1
EMU principles regarding the framework for monetary and fiscal policies 
Indeed, when we discuss monetary and fiscal policy in the euro area, we should remember 
that we are talking about an economic area sui generis; an economic area within which the 
member  countries  have  given  up  their  own  national  currencies in  favour  of  a single,  area-
wide monetary policy. Governments do not sign up to such ventures lightly. Monetary union 
only  became  possible  in  Europe  because  a  sufficient  consensus  emerged  regarding  the 
basic  principles  of  sound  macroeconomic  policy.  And  before  going  further,  it  is  worth 
recalling these basic principles, which were written into the Maastricht Treaty. 
 
 
Central bank independence.  
A  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  with  the  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price 
stability.  
And  an  obligation  for  Member  States  to  treat  their  economic  policies, in  particular 
their fiscal policies, as a matter of common concern. 
 In  order  to  protect  monetary  policy  from  profligate  fiscal  policies,  the  EU  Treaty  prohibits 
monetary  financing  and  direct  bail  outs  of  governments  in  financial  difficulty;  it  calls  on 
governments to avoid excessive deficits, and it provides for an excessive deficit procedure 
ultimately leading to sanctions in case of flagrant breaches of European fiscal rules. Before 
the  introduction  of  the  euro,  these  rules  were  further  elaborated  and  strengthened  by  the 
adoption of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
In short, the premise of Economic and Monetary Union is a clear allocation of responsibilities 
among  policy  makers;  a  commitment  of  both  monetary  and  fiscal  authorities  to  keep  their 
own houses in order; and a set of safeguards to ensure that all parties abide by the rules. 
Any analysis of monetary and fiscal policy in the euro area – not just in normal times but also 
in  crisis  times  –  should  take  into  account  the  fact  that  euro  area  macroeconomic  policy 
should  be  guided  by  these  basic  principles;  because  they  are  the  principles  on  which  the 
EMU contract was signed. 
Monetary and fiscal reactions in the euro area to the crisis 
To what extent has the euro area response to the financial crisis been guided by these basic 
principles?  Let  me  first  very  briefly  recall  the  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  actions  that  have 
been undertaken in the euro area since the financial crisis intensified in autumn 2008. I will 
then discuss in more detail the rationale behind these actions. 
Starting  with  monetary  policy,  about  which  I  can  obviously  say  most,  during  the  crisis  the 
Governing Council of the ECB has taken unprecedented action via both standard and non-
standard  measures.  Given  rapid  changes  in  the  assessment  of  risks  to  price  stability,  the 
ECB’s main refinancing rate was cut by a cumulative 325 basis points between October 2008 
and  May  2009  bringing  it  to  its  current  level  of  just  1%.  This  is  a  level  not  seen  in  the 
countries  of  the  euro  area  since  at  least  the  Second  World  War.  In  addition,  to  support 
financing  conditions  and  credit  flows  above  and  beyond  what  could  be  achieved  through 
interest  rate  cuts  alone,  non-standard  measures  were  adopted,  the  so-called  “enhanced 
credit support”. These measures – which for very good reasons are of a temporary nature, 
with some of them already being discontinued, as I will discuss at the end of my talk – can be 
grouped into five categories: 
 
 
First, fixed rate tenders with full allotment in all liquidity-providing operations.  
Second,  additional  refinancing  operations  with  one-month  and 
three-month 
maturities, as well as the provision of funding at longer maturities of six months and 
one year.  
2 
 BIS Review 23/2010
 Third, a broadened collateral framework, notably the lowering of the rating threshold 
to  BBB-  and  the  acceptance  of  selected  foreign  currency assets  and of  securities 
issued in some non-regulated markets, all these with commensurate additional risk 
control measures.  
Fourth, the covered bond purchase programme.  
And fifth, the introduction of foreign currency-providing operations. 
 
 
These  extraordinary  policy  measures  represented  the  ECB’s  response  to  extraordinary 
shocks. They have ensured adequate provision of liquidity to the euro area banking system 
at favourable conditions, so as to support the provision of credit to households and firms and 
thereby  contribute  to  the  revival  of  the  euro  area  economy.  As  a  consequence  of  these 
ample liquidity conditions, the EONIA rate is set close to the deposit facility rate, i.e. 0.25%. 
Euro area governments also responded to the crisis with exceptional measures. 
First,  euro  area  governments  committed  substantial  public  funds  to  support  individual 
financial institutions and help stabilise the financial sector. Support came in various forms, in 
particular recapitalisations, the setting up of “bad banks” to remove toxic assets from balance 
sheets, and the guaranteeing of interbank lending, deposits and bond issuance. 
Secondly,  euro  area  governments  have  used  (or  at  least  allowed)  fiscal  policy  to  support 
economic activity through the crisis. In 2007, the euro area government deficit ratio was just 
0.6% of GDP. In all likelihood, the euro area deficit reached around 6% of GDP last year and 
is likely to remain around this level or even rise closer to 7% this year. This is a significant 
fiscal impulse. 
The rationale behind euro area monetary and fiscal policies during the crisis 
Let me now move from facts to their interpretation. In doing so I will have to be selective, 
focusing on aspects related to the conference theme of monetary and fiscal interactions as 
well as on aspects reflecting the specific architecture of EMU. 
Monetary policy 
Focusing  first  on  monetary  policy,  let  me  take  as  a  starting  point  for  my  reflections  an 
observation made in a recent overview BIS paper by Claudio Borio and Piti Disyatat (2009). 
Borio  and  Disyatat  argue  that  the  unprecedented  responses  of  the  world’s  major  central 
banks to the crisis have two distinct types of action in common, namely, interest rate policy 
and balance sheet policy. To stress this broad commonality is important: from the onset of 
the crisis all major central banks shared a broad consensus that an extraordinary monetary 
policy response was necessary. And this response went beyond interest rate policy. 
Let me cite a few numbers for the euro area, which serve to illustrate what is meant by the 
term  balance  sheet  policy.  In  summer  2007,  before  the  crisis,  the  total  assets  of  the 
consolidated  balance  sheet  of  the  Eurosystem  stood  at  EUR  0.9  trillion.  This  was  around 
10%  of  euro  area  GDP.  At  the  height  of  the  crisis,  in  January  2009,  these  total  assets 
exceeded EUR 1.8 trillion. Currently, they stand at around EUR 1.5 trillion. Similar balance 
sheet movements can be observed also for other central banks. 
However,  Borio  and  Disyatat  point  out  that  there  are  interesting  differences  between  the 
particular balance sheet policies chosen. According to their categorisation, these range from 
“credit  policies”  to  “quasi-debt  management  policy”,  “bank  reserves  policy”  and  “exchange 
rate  policy”.  The  enhanced  credit  support  provided  by  the  Eurosystem  is  seen  as  a  prime 
example  of  what  the  study  refers  to  as  credit  policies.  At  the  same  time,  the  Eurosystem 
does  not  belong  to  the  large  group  of  central  banks  which  have  resorted  to  “quasi-debt 
management policy”. This reflects the fact that the Eurosystem has not considered buying 
euro  area  government  bonds  for  monetary  policy  purposes.  Similarly,  the  Eurosystem  has 
BIS Review 23/2010 
 3
not considered requesting public guarantees to support the expansion of its balance sheet. In 
sum, what sets the Eurosystem somewhat apart from other major central banks is a stylised 
feature  which  one  may  call  the  “minimisation  of  the  fiscal  implications  of  our  monetary 
policies”. 
Let me comment on this feature from a number of perspectives. 
Principles 
Clearly the  avoidance of outright purchases of euro area governments’ debt (which in any 
case  would  have  been  clearly  restricted  to  purchases  in  secondary  markets)  respects  the 
above discussed clear separation of monetary and fiscal responsibilities enshrined in the EU 
Treaty.  As  a  corollary  of  this  separation,  let  me  add:  in  monetary  unions,  with  many 
sovereign issuers of government debt, there does not exist a single sovereign yield curve. 
Hence, outright purchases of government debt would inevitably be fraught with distributional 
concerns between countries to be avoided at the outset. 
But the decision of the Eurosystem not to go the route of purchasing government bonds also 
reflected  a  number  of  additional  considerations,  of  which  I  would  like  to  stress  four  in 
particular. 
History 
Differences between  the  measures  adopted  by  the  Eurosystem  and,  for  example,  the  Fed 
reflect different histories and different operational frameworks. In the United States, in normal 
times, repo operations are only used to correct temporary fluctuations in the liquidity needs of 
the  banking  system,  while  outright  purchases  and  sales  of  treasury  bonds  with  short 
maturities are used on a daily basis to implement monetary policy. This tradition is succinctly 
summarised, for example, by Marvin Goodfriend’s statement that “monetary policy refers to 
open  market  operations  that  expand  or  contract  high-powered  money  (bank  reserves  and 
currency)  by  buying  or  selling  Treasury  securities”.  Given  that  tradition,  it  may  be 
advantageous  under  non-standard  circumstances  to  refine  this  procedure  by  significantly 
expanding the volume of purchases and focusing on bonds with longer maturities. 
The  Eurosystem  faced  at  the  outset  the  challenge  to  combine  various  traditions  from  its 
member countries. This has led to a broad-based framework in which “reverse transactions” 
–  on  the  basis  of  repurchase  agreements  or  collateralised  loans  –  are  the  single  most 
important  instrument  in  open  market  operations.  Given  this  starting  point  it  has  been  a 
natural  step  to  adapt  the  tender  procedures  of  our  refinancing  operations  and  to  adjust 
collateral  requirements.  Moreover,  these  adjustments  were  successful  because  access  to 
these refinancing operations has traditionally been granted to a large pool of counterparties 
and the range of assets accepted as collateral, including private paper, has always been very 
broad since the start of Monetary Union in 1999. 
Of  course,  under  the  Eurosystem’s  refinancing  operations  balance  sheet  connections  with 
fiscal authorities are not entirely avoided. But their nature is different from those in the United 
States. In particular, it is the counterparties of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy operations 
who decide which type of eligible asset they pledge as collateral. Interestingly, in the last two 
years (i.e. 2008 and 2009) the share of government securities in the total eligible collateral 
that  has  been  posted  has  been  smaller  than  in  preceding  years  (while  the  share  of  asset 
backed securities, uncovered bank bonds and non marketable assets has increased). 
Bank-based nature of the euro area financial system 
The enhanced credit support has been tailored to the financial structure of the euro area in 
which banks play a particularly important role. Indeed, the bulk of the external financing of 
non-financial corporations comes from the banking sector. This feature put a premium on a 
broad-based reduction of funding constraints for banks rather than on direct interventions in 
multiple market segments via outright purchases of assets. Let me add: this feature also puts 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2010
a premium on the recapitalisation and, where needed, restructuring of European banks, as 
repeatedly  stressed  by  the  Governing  Council.  Where  appropriate,  however,  direct 
interventions were undertaken, as exemplified by the covered bonds purchase programme. 
Effectiveness of outright purchase vs. repos  
I expect that in a couple of years’ time – in light of the then available research on current 
events – we will understand much better the effectiveness of the various policy options that 
are available under “non-standard” circumstances at which the short-term interest rate has 
reached  its  effective  lower  bound.  I  cannot  prejudge  the  outcome  of  this  research. 
Nevertheless,  let  me  share  with  you  some  questions  concerning  the  effectiveness  of  the 
options  that  have  been  on  the  table.  For  the  sake  of  the  argument,  assume  there  is  a 
uniquely defined sovereign yield curve. Then, under non-standard circumstances, short-term 
government  debt  and  monetary  balances  are  close  substitutes  in  private  sector  portfolios. 
We  know  from  studies  in  the  spirit  of  Eggertsson  and  Woodford  (2003)  that,  under  well 
functioning  capital  markets,  the  effectiveness  of  outright  purchases  of  government  bonds 
tends  to  be  limited,  unless  such  purchases  can  be  effectively  used  to  steer  expectations 
concerning future actions. Yet, given the observed market failures, the practical relevance of 
this  reasoning  is  controversial,  and  most  central  banks  were  primarily  interested  in  acting 
directly on liquidity premia. While this can be done via outright purchases, it seems to me 
that this can be done with similar effect via the maturity structure of tenders in a repo-based 
operational framework. Indeed, the Eurosystem’s experience has shown that a shift towards 
long-term refinancing operations can ensure secure funding of activities at low rates over a 
predictable horizon. But let me say again: I have touched  here on questions for which we 
need more guidance from good academic work, both conceptually and empirically. 
Exit considerations 
The non-standard measures adopted by the Eurosystem were designed with an exit strategy 
in mind. The Eurosystem’s refinancing operations provide liquidity over a fixed time horizon 
and unwind in a fully predictable way. By contrast, the unwinding of outright purchases, in 
particular  of  long-term  bonds,  typically  requires  an  additional  decision,  namely  whether  to 
hold the securities to maturity – and if not, when to sell. The route taken by the Eurosystem 
limits  such  decisions  to  the  covered  bonds  purchase  programme,  which  is  limited  in  size 
such that the effect on total liquidity can be easily neutralized. 
Fiscal policy 
Before addressing exit considerations in further detail, let me first touch upon fiscal policies 
during the crisis. 
The extent to which the euro area fiscal response to the crisis has been shaped by the EMU 
architecture,  and  in  particular  the  European  fiscal  rules,  is  not  easy  to  gauge.  One  could 
argue that the answer is “not much”. Most government support granted to the financial sector 
was  either  below  the  line  or  off  balance  sheet,  so  it  didn’t  affect  government  deficits 
according to the “Maastricht definition”. Obviously, there has been no concerted decision to 
keep Maastricht deficit and debt levels within the respective ceilings of 3% and 60% of gross 
domestic  product,  regardless  of  the  economic  circumstances.  If  we  turn  the  clock  back  to 
autumn 2008, it was already obvious that most countries were heading towards “excessive” 
government deficits in the sense of the Treaty, if not in 2008, then certainly in 2009. Yet most 
euro  area  governments  went  ahead  with  fiscal  stimulus  anyway.  More  generally,  the  high 
fiscal  deficits  that  have  emerged  in  almost  all  industrialised  countries  over  the  past  year 
seem  incongruous  with  the  3%  deficit  limit  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact. 
In  light  of  this,  to  some  extent  it  would  be  tempting  to  say  that,  as  far  as  fiscal  policy  is 
concerned,  the  Treaty  and  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  were  simply  ignored;  an 
BIS Review 23/2010 
 5
inconvenient obstacle that was brushed aside. But for at least four reasons, I think such a 
critical view would be too simplistic and inappropriate. 
First,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  has  its  “flexibility  clauses”.  According  to  the  Pact,  an 
economic downturn is deemed to be exceptional – potentially warranting a deficit in excess 
of the 3% of GDP reference value – in case of negative output growth, or a protracted period 
of low growth relative to potential. By this, or any measure, the circumstances faced at the 
height of the economic and financial crisis were exceptional and warranted an exceptional 
fiscal policy response. 
Second, at least some euro area countries – including Spain – entered the crisis with relative 
strong starting positions in terms of low levels of government debt and/or budget surpluses. 
So  in  this  sense,  at  least  in  some  countries,  there  was  fiscal  room  for  manoeuvre  at  the 
beginning of the crisis. 
Third,  the  extent  to  which  euro  area  governments  engaged  in  discretionary  fiscal  stimulus 
generally  reflected  the  strength  of  their  fiscal  starting  positions.  Fiscal  stimulus  packages 
were comparatively large in low debt or surplus countries such as Spain and Germany, but 
virtually non-existent in high debt countries such as Italy. 
And  fourth,  the  discretionary  fiscal  stimulus  in  the  euro  area  has  not,  actually,  been  that 
large. According to the European Commission, measures adopted by euro area governments 
under the umbrella of the European Economic Recovery Plan amounted to about 1% of euro 
area GDP in 2009. And even this is probably a slight exaggeration, as it ignores the fact that 
there were also offsetting tax increases and spending cuts in some countries. 
The bulk of the increase in government deficits in the euro area during the crisis has been 
caused not by discretionary stimulus but by the automatic response of fiscal policy to lower 
output  and  inflation.  Tax  revenues  fell  as  a  consequence  of  lower  wages,  profits  and 
consumption, while social spending increased due to rising unemployment. Moreover – and 
this  is  something  that  tends  to  get  overlooked  –  the  implementation  of  spending  budgets 
expressed in cash terms in a context of lower than previously expected inflation has meant 
more spending in real terms; and, of course, higher deficits. By contrast, a larger proportion 
of  the  crisis  related  deficit  increase  in  the  United  States  can  be  attributed  to  discretionary 
stimulus measures. But this may have been justified given the smaller size of the American 
public sector. 
The bottom line is that government deficits in the euro area would have reached levels well 
above the Treaty reference value of 3% of GDP even in the absence of any discretionary 
stimulus. Seeking to prevent this in the midst of the severest recession in many decades and 
at a time of intense uncertainty was not really an option for most countries. But even in these 
extreme  circumstances,  the  European  fiscal  rules  were  not  brushed  aside.  As  actual  or 
planned deficits have exceeded the 3% reference value, excessive deficit procedures have 
been launched, as foreseen in the Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact. The impact of 
these  excessive  deficit  procedures  is  not  negligible.  They  have  obliged  the  countries 
concerned,  already  at  a  relatively  early  stage,  to  put  on  paper  their  post  crisis  fiscal 
adjustment strategies. 
Monetary and fiscal exit considerations 
Indeed, as the major economies around the world appear to be stabilising, the attention of 
policy-markers  at  the  current  juncture  is  increasingly  on  developing  appropriate  exit 
strategies.  And  in  this  regard  I  would  argue  that,  on  balance,  the  euro  area  is  quite  well 
placed, if anything having something of a head start. 
6 
 BIS Review 23/2010
Monetary policy 
As I already mentioned earlier, the non-standard monetary policy measures adopted by the 
Eurosystem  have  been  designed  with  their  phasing-out  in  mind.  Several  of  them  unwind 
naturally in the absence of an explicit decision to prolong them. This applies, for example, to 
the temporary expansion of the list of eligible assets. Others have already been discontinued, 
such  as  the  provision  of  non-euro  liquidity  via  swap  lines  with  a  number  of  other  central 
banks, including the Federal Reserve. These operations have been discontinued against the 
background  of  improved  functioning  of  financial  markets  over  the  past  year  and  limited 
demand.  Moreover,  going  back  to  a  Governing  Council  decision  already  taken  last 
December,  the  number  and  frequency  of  longer-term  refinancing  operations  is  gradually 
being  scaled  back.  In  particular,  the  last  one-year  operation  was  conducted  in  December 
2009,  and  one  final  six-month  operation  with  full  allotment  will  be  conducted  next  month. 
Further decisions on the gradual phasing-out of those non-standard measures that are not 
needed to the same extent as in the past will be announced in the coming months. 
The  decision  to  initiate  the  gradual  phasing-out  of  these  measures  reflects  improvements 
observed  in  financial  conditions.  Money  markets  are  performing  better,  and  the  past 
reductions  in  the  ECB’s  key  policy  rates  are  increasingly  reflected  in  the  interest  rates  on 
bank  loans  to  households  and  corporations.  This  indicates  that  the  monetary  policy 
transmission process is broadly functioning. 
Looking forward, it goes without saying that the overriding concern for the ECB’s monetary 
exit  considerations  is  the  primary  objective  of  price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the 
medium  term.  From  this  perspective,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  operational  framework 
with its interest rate corridor is flexible, allowing control over interest rates even without the 
phasing-out of all non standard measures. In other words, the Governing Council is free to 
choose the way in which interest rate action is combined with the unwinding of the remaining 
non-standard measures. 
Fiscal policy 
What about fiscal policy? I think it is fair to say that the “fiscal exit” – or I think it is better to 
say “fiscal adjustment” that will be necessary in the coming years is likely to prove even more 
challenging  for  governments  than  the  phasing  out  of  non-standard  measures  for  the 
Eurosystem.  During  the  crisis,  governments  were  right  to  allow  deficits  to  expand  so  that 
fiscal policy provided support to the economy in the short run. But now, government deficits 
are  high  –  and  indeed  very  high  in  many  countries;  government  debt-to-GDP  ratios  are 
mostly high and rising; and the attention of financial markets is increasingly turning to issues 
of  government  solvency.  In  this  context,  it  is  of  some  comfort  that  –  in  part  thanks  to  the 
European  fiscal  framework  –  the  aggregate  euro  area  government  deficit  is  currently 
significantly lower than that of most other major economies. But this is only limited comfort. 
Prompt  action  to  bring  the  fiscal  house  in  order  is  necessary  so  that  high  and  increasing 
levels of government debt do not jeopardise longer-term growth prospects. The next crisis 
must not be a sovereign debt crisis! 
The  key  issue  for  fiscal  policy  at  this  juncture  is  not  “whether”  but  “how  much”  and  “how 
soon” to start fiscal consolidation. 
Earlier,  I  argued  that  the  increase  in  euro  area  government  deficits  during  the  crisis  was 
largely  automatic  rather  than  being  due  to  discretionary  fiscal  stimulus  measures. 
Unfortunately, what automatically goes up does not always automatically come down. The 
crisis has put our economies on a lower path of potential output, although we still don’t know 
exactly  what  this  path  is.  Yesterday’s  cyclical  deficits  are,  from  today’s  perspective,  more 
structural in nature. The government sector needs to adjust to the new reality of a smaller 
economy. In many countries, this means that challenging decisions will have to be made in 
the coming years. 
BIS Review 23/2010 
 7
In  the  long  run,  fiscal  consolidation  –  in  other  words  moving  from  unsustainable  to  more 
sustainable public finances – is clearly beneficial for economic growth. I think we would all 
agree on this. However, fiscal consolidation is usually not without costs in the short-run. 
Does this mean that under current circumstances fiscal consolidation should be postponed 
until  the  recovery  is  entrenched?  Obviously  a  premature  fiscal  tightening  that  plunges  the 
economy back into recession needs to be avoided. But barring this, the sooner fiscal policy 
adjusts the better. As long as fiscal policy is on an unsustainable course with government 
debt ratios still rising, the social costs of further delaying adjustment will exceed the costs to 
society of acting sooner. 
We also have to acknowledge that there is a lot of uncertainty regarding the short run effects 
of  fiscal  adjustment.  There  is  an  extensive  literature  examining  this  issue  and  different 
studies  have  yielded  quite  different  results.  But  broadly  speaking,  what  we  can  ascertain 
from this literature is that the short run costs of fiscal adjustment are likely to depend on a 
variety of conditions. Notably, these costs are likely to be more limited: 
 
 
 
If the fiscal starting position is precarious and the adjustment is credible;  
If financial markets react by lowering long-term interest rates;  
If  households  have  correctly  understood  the  need  for  fiscal  adjustment  and  have 
factored  this  into  their  spending  decisions;  in  other  words,  if  households  are  –  at 
least partly – “Ricardian”;  
and if monetary conditions are accommodative. 
 
This  last  condition  touches  on  the very  subject  of  today’s conference:  monetary  and  fiscal 
policy interactions. And in certain respects, it has to be acknowledged that such interactions 
are particularly challenging for the euro area. 
Common exit considerations 
When  we  consider  the  monetary  and  fiscal  exit  from  a  common  perspective,  it  is  often 
argued that it is preferable that fiscal policy adjusts earlier and more forcefully than monetary 
policy.  Ceteris  paribus,  a  tighter  fiscal  stance  means  less  inflationary  pressure  and  more 
subdued inflation expectations. For a stability-oriented monetary policy, this should imply a 
less front-loaded phasing out of monetary stimulus. Yet, this line of reasoning largely ignores 
that  by  their  nature  fiscal  policies  lack  strong  built-in  mechanisms  when  it  comes  to  the 
unwinding of stimulus, and it rests on an assumption that all “players” live up to their ex ante 
given promises. We know that in practice this assumption does not always hold. 
In the euro area there are, indeed, many players. Hence, this reasoning should be further 
qualified in at least two respects. 
First, in the euro area there are multiple fiscal authorities, so predicting the future stance of 
fiscal policy and correctly factoring this into monetary policy decisions is not a straightforward 
task.  In  such  environment  it  would  be  particularly  costly  if  delayed  monetary  action 
compromises on price stability, and, not less important, on the remarkably solid anchoring of 
medium-term  inflation  expectations.  To  put  this  differently:  the  stability-oriented  monetary 
policy  of  the  Eurosystem  provides  the  nominal  anchor  which  acts  as  the  single  most 
important  implicit  coordination  device  for  all  other  actors  with  their  various  responsibilities, 
including fiscal policymakers. This anchor must not be put at risk. 
Second,  the  task  of  monetary  policy  is  facilitated  if  the  future  stance  of  fiscal  policy  is 
reasonably clear. In the euro area, the Stability and Growth Pact aims to guarantee sound 
public finances and, thereby, a reasonable degree of fiscal certainty. It is not without reason 
that the ECB has made repeated calls on governments to abide by their commitments under 
the Stability and Growth Pact. These commitments are known to everyone. From the current 
perspective,  in  December  the  ECOFIN  Council  established  deadlines  for  most  euro  area 
8 
 BIS Review 23/2010
Member States to correct their excessive deficits. The Council also recommended average 
annual  adjustment  paths  geared  to  achieving  these  goals.  These  consolidation  paths  are 
reflected  in  the  stability  programmes  that  Member  States  have  recently  submitted  to  the 
Commission and Council in the context of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
But a plan or a target is one thing; delivering it is another. In the past, the track record of 
some euro area governments in actually delivering promised fiscal consolidation has been 
mixed. This has created a credibility gap as far as euro area fiscal policies are concerned. 
Conclusions 
To  conclude,  it  is  therefore  essential  that  consolidation  targets  are  reflected  as  soon  as 
possible in specific, detailed tax and spending plans. Credible and detailed fiscal adjustment 
plans  should  reassure 
financing 
environment.  Credible  and  detailed  fiscal  adjustment  plans  should  provide  certainty  for 
households  making  their  saving  and  investment  decisions.  Credible  and  detailed  fiscal 
adjustment  plans  would  also  facilitate  the  task  of  monetary  policy  in  maintaining  price 
stability, while gradually returning to a more normal, post-crisis monetary environment. 
investors,  creating  a  more 
favourable, 
long-term 
BIS Review 23/2010 
 9
