Jean-Claude Trichet: What can central banks do in a financial crisis? 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  on  the 
occasion of the Susan Bies Lecture, Kellogg Distinguished Lecture Series, Evanston, Illinois, 
27 April 2010. 
 Introduction 
The  global  economy  is  now  recovering  –  albeit  in  a  gradual  manner  –  from  the  deepest 
recession experienced since the end of the Second World War. The recession was triggered 
by  a  financial  crisis,  to  which  the  policy  response  has  been  both  innovative  in  nature  and 
unprecedented in magnitude. While these measures have proved remarkably successful in 
stabilising the financial system, the broader repercussions of the crisis continue to shape the 
outlook for prices, public finances and the economy as a whole.  
The events of the past three years have provided a salutary reminder of the macroeconomic 
importance  of  linkages  between  the  financial  sector  and  the  real  economy.  It  has  become 
commonplace to observe that models of the economy that neglected financial and monetary 
factors have been found wanting.1 Policy-makers, practitioners, and the research community 
have  embarked  on  a  quest  to  improve  their  understanding  of  these  linkages  and  develop 
more robust frameworks for managing systemic risk and macroeconomic dynamics. 
At  the  outset  of  this  quest,  it  is  worth  remembering  the  words  of  the  eighteenth-century 
Anglo-Irish  philosopher,  Edmund  Burke:  “Those  who  don’t  know  history  are  destined  to 
repeat it”. For this financial crisis is hardly a unique event. On the contrary, the evolution of 
the global economy over many centuries has been punctuated by financial crises. In recent 
decades,  such  crises  came  to  be  seen  as  the  preserve  of  emerging  markets.  But  mature 
economies too have been subject to periodic asset price booms and asset price busts.  
Should we thus view financial crises as unavoidable? Are our efforts to prevent them futile? 
Or  can  we  hope  to  reduce  their  frequency,  severity  and  impact  on  the  broader  economy? 
These  are  the  questions  that  I  will  discuss  here  today.  More  precisely,  I  will  offer  some 
thoughts on how we can refine the macroeconomic policy framework so as to prevent crises 
and make crisis management more robust. 
These are challenging questions. I do not pretend that I can offer complete answers today. In 
central  banks,  finance  ministries  and  international  institutions,  we  are  collectively  seeking 
new and better policy responses. Taking inspiration from Burke, I will draw on my experience 
as a policy-maker over the past three decades to tease out some lessons from history about 
the required policy framework. After all, history offers our only empirical guide. 
A  large  part  of  my  professional  career  has  involved  dealing  with  episodes  of  financial 
disruption. 
As President of the Paris Club in the mid-1980s, I was closely involved in the resolution of 
the sovereign debt crisis that had struck a large number of countries in Latin America, Africa 
and the Middle East. More than 50 countries defaulted. Even if advanced economies were 
not touched directly, their financial systems were deeply implicated. And the impact on entire 
continents in the emerging world – economically, and by way of consequence in social and 
human terms – was profound.  
                                                 
1  Prominent examples of critiques of the existing macroeconomic literature include: P. Krugman (2009), “How 
did economists get it so wrong?” New York Times (2 September); and W.H. Buiter (2009), “The unfortunate 
uselessness of most “state-of-the-art” academic monetary economics” Financial Times (3 March). 
BIS Review 57/2010 
 1
At the French Treasury and then as Governor of the Banque de France, I also witnessed first 
hand the exchange rate crises of the European Monetary System in 1992–93. A succession 
of emerging market crises followed later in the decade: the “tequila crisis” in Mexico in 1994; 
the  Asian  crisis  from  1997;  and  the  Russian  crisis  of  1998.  Each  of  these  rocked  global 
financial markets and created new challenges for monetary and financial policy. 
Here in the United States, the collapse of LTCM in 1998 and the bursting of the “dot-com 
bubble”  at  the  turn  of  the  century  were  episodes  of  significant  financial  disruption,  with  an 
impact that reverberated across the Atlantic. And, as President of the European Central Bank 
since 2003, I have been very closely involved in the global response to the current crisis, in 
concert with colleagues at the Fed and other leading central banks.  
In short, my professional life has been one of dealing frequently with financial crisis. What 
have I learned from this experience? And what are the implications from these lessons for 
the refinement of policy design? 
In  anticipation  of  my  answer  to  these  questions,  allow  me  to  give  an  initial  flavour  of  my 
response, which will be organised around two themes.  
First,  I  will  argue  that  financial  crises  share  some  commonalities.  In  particular,  crises  are 
associated with the emergence of euphoria and complacency in financial markets, typically 
supported  by  rapid  credit  growth  and  a  growing  belief  that  new  concepts  like  financial 
innovation  or  technological  advances  have  rendered  old  limits  on  economic  performance 
obsolete. The existence of such commonalities in the anatomy of financial crisis gives rise to 
a number of hopes. They suggest that it is possible to develop warnings of nascent crises at 
an  early  stage.  They  imply  that  policy-makers  could  design  and  implement  policies  that 
contain or avoid such crises.  
Yet these hopes should not give rise to complacency, still less to the belief that by tweaking 
our policy framework we can condemn financial crises to the past.  
While  sharing  commonalities,  each  financial  crisis  is  also  unique:  what  triggers  the  crisis, 
how it is propagated through the financial system, and which sectors are most affected are 
specific to each episode. Such considerations bring me to the second theme of my remarks: 
the need for a flexible and innovative approach to crisis management. Policy-makers need to 
be constantly alert, aware that financial turmoil is likely to emerge in a way that they did not 
anticipate. As a result, they must be prepared to act decisively to contain financial disruption 
of  a  form  for  which  they  were  not  ideally  prepared.  At  the  same  time,  these  inevitably 
somewhat  discretionary  actions  need  to  be  embedded  within  a  credible,  rules-based  and 
medium  term-oriented  framework,  which  ensures  that  the  immediate  needs  of  crisis 
management  do  not  place  at  risk  future  price  stability,  future  macroeconomic  stability  and 
future financial stability. 
Marrying  an  exploitation  of  commonalities  with  a  respect  for  specificities  is  the  key  to 
managing financial crises. Allow me now to develop further these two themes. 
Exploiting commonalities: a more robust policy framework  
All financial crises are unique, but they also share a number of commonalities.2 
For  example,  many  crises  exhibit  a  common  evolution.  The  starting-point  is  typically 
structural  change  to  the  real  economy  –  the  unexpectedly  rapid  take  off  of  emerging 
economies  in  the  1980s;  the  emergence  of  a  new  technology;  the  opening-up  of  new 
markets; or the implementation of comprehensive fiscal and regulatory reform. While the sign 
                                                 
2  The seminal  discussion in the academic  literature  was  provided by  C. Kindleberger (1978, reprinted 2009), 
Manias, panics and crashes: A history of financial crises, 5th edition, Wiley Investment Classics. 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2010
of the impact of such changes on economic performance is well understood, the magnitude 
and timing of the impact is highly uncertain. Such uncertainty is perhaps best characterised 
as Knightian: given the novelty and magnitude of the change, uncertainty cannot easily be 
boiled down to a calculus of probabilities.3 
Entrepreneurs and investors seek to exploit the new opportunities created by the improved 
environment. Households seek to raise consumption in anticipation of higher future incomes 
and wealth. Such efforts rely on the financial sector: finance provides the necessary bridge 
between opportunities and expectations today, and higher productivity, output and incomes 
tomorrow.4 
How  do  financial  intermediaries  manage  these  inter-temporal  flows  in  such  an  uncertain 
environment? The challenge of doing so is compounded by changes to the financial sector 
itself. Technological advances or regulatory changes in the real economy are also likely to 
have  direct  implications  for  banks  and  financial  markets.  Financial  innovation  abounds  in 
such  a  situation.  Financial  regulators  are  faced  with  new  instruments  and  processes  to 
police. 
In  this  context,  financial  market  participants  face  both  a  favourable  macroeconomic 
environment  –  stronger  economic  growth  and  relatively  benign  price  developments  –  and 
many new, and apparently profitable, opportunities at the firm level. The question arises of 
whether  such  circumstances  prompt  them  to  lapse  into  euphoria:  to  take  on  more  risk;  to 
expand balance sheets more rapidly; to increase leverage; and to bid up asset prices.5  
Of course, the underlying shock to fundamentals is in many cases favourable and offers the 
prospect of greater prosperity. But the danger exists that financial imbalances may emerge in 
such a situation. Such imbalances both increase the vulnerability of the financial sector and 
the broader economy to future economic shocks and may create unsustainable positions in 
financial institutions that will eventually unravel of their own accord. 
In  principle,  economic  fundamentals  impose  a  limit  on  such  euphoria  and  imbalances, 
thereby 
the  economy.  But  assessing  such 
fundamentals is notoriously difficult – for policy-makers and the private sector alike – all the 
more  so  because  the  evolution  of  fundamentals  themselves  can  be  influenced  by  the 
pervasive euphoric state of financial markets.  
In this context, levels of leverage, liquidity or asset prices completely outside historical norms 
can be justified on the basis of a four-word refrain, recently used by Carmen Reinhart and 
Ken Rogoff for the title of their book: “this time is different”.6 
But, as Reinhart and Rogoff demonstrate, experience over several centuries reveals that the 
self-sustaining booms induced by this sequence of events are ultimately unsustainable. They 
culminate in financial crash, with severe consequences for both the financial sector and the 
stability of the real economy. This time is not so different after all. 
introducing  self-equilibrating 
forces 
for 
                                                 
3  See: F.H. Knight (1921), Risk, uncertainty and profit, Houghton Mifflin Company. 
4  For an application of this framework in the context of emerging markets, see: R.I. McKinnon and H. Pill (1997), 
“Credible economic liberalizations and overborrowing” American Economic Review 87(2), pp. 189–193. 
5  Literature on the so-called “risk-taking channel” of monetary policy transmission provides a deeper insight into 
such behaviour; see (inter alia): C.E.V. Borio and H. Zhu (2008), “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary 
policy:  A  missing  link  in  the  transmission  mechanism?”  BIS  working  paper  No  268;  Y.  Altumbas, 
L. Gambacorta and D. Marques (2010), “Bank risk taking and monetary policy” ECB Working Paper No 1166; 
G. Jiménez, S. Ongena, J-L. Peydro and J. Saurina Salas (2010), “Credit supply: Identifying balance sheet 
channels with loan applications and granted loans” CEPR discussion paper No 7655; and A. Maddaloni and 
J-L. Peydró (2009), “Bank risk-taking, securitisation, supervision and low interest rates: Evidence from lending 
standards” ECB Working Paper, forthcoming. 
6  See: C.M. Reinhart and K.S. Rogoff (2009), This time is different: Eight centuries of financial folly, Princeton 
University Press. 
BIS Review 57/2010 
 3
How  well  does  this  pattern  of  behaviour  map  into  recent  events?  The  onset  of  financial 
turmoil in 2007 and its intensification in 2008 were marked by specific events in the money 
markets, to which I will return. As is typical, the trigger and propagation of the current crisis 
were specific. Nonetheless, a number of commonalities identified by the academic literature 
on financial crises are clearly discernible. 
Globalisation  –  in  particular,  the  integration  of  the  large  emerging  markets  into  the  global 
economy – represents a significant, positive real shock, both to those economies and to the 
rest of the world. The impact on economic performance is beneficial, but of much-debated 
magnitude. As a result, from the turn of the century, we witnessed the incidence of a positive 
shock to economic fundamentals with uncertain implications, typical of those that initiate a 
boom-bust financial cycle. 
Financial  innovation  was  also  key.  The  rapid  growth  of  securitisation  techniques,  as  the 
banking sector increasingly adopted an “originate-to-distribute” business model, had important 
implications for the economic outlook. Advocates of securitisation saw it resulting in both a 
better distribution of credit and liquidity risk and easier and cheaper bank access to funding. 
Such benefits justified the higher levels of leverage and liquidity observed from the middle of 
the decade. Both financial market participants and the regulatory authorities were swayed by 
these arguments, at least to some extent, and were therefore willing to tolerate much greater 
leverage than had been seen in the past. 
Yet, with the benefit of hindsight, it is now clear that the value of these financial innovations 
was  more  apparent  than  real.  What  were  portrayed  as  increases  in  equilibrium  leverage 
ratios were, in fact, an accumulation of financial imbalances. Credit and liquidity risk transfer 
was  a  chimera:  in  many  cases,  these  risks  ultimately  resided  on  bank  balance  sheets, 
arguably in a more toxic form than previously. 
But  at  the  peak  of  the  credit  boom,  such  concerns  were  forgotten.  Enjoying  abundant 
liquidity, the volume of capital chasing limited investment opportunities led to an aggressive 
“search  for  yield”.  The  demand  for  risky  financial  assets  surged,  feeding  the  securitisation 
frenzy.  Credit  growth  accelerated  well  into  double  digits.  And  spreads  and  yields  were 
depressed to very low levels, consistent with an under-pricing of credit and liquidity risks. 
Ultimately, this accumulation of imbalances proved unsustainable. The growing losses on US 
sub-prime mortgage instruments triggered an evaporation of confidence in banks’ solvency, 
causing the interbank money markets to freeze. The specifics of this triggering event and the 
course  of  its  subsequent  propagation  proved  hard  to  predict  in  real  time.  But,  with  the 
considerable benefit of hindsight, one can easily identify warning signals of the subsequent 
financial  distress  in  the  data  for  2006–07.  And  at  that  time,  central  bank  communication 
pointed to excessive monetary and credit growth, an under-pricing of risk and an excessive 
narrowing of spreads as causes for concern. 
Similar traits can be recognised in previous crises.  
The  high-tech  bubble  of  the  second  half  of  the  1990s  was  rooted  in  the  belief  that  a 
technological revolution based on the “new economy” had opened new vistas of economic 
opportunity. It spawned novel financing techniques via the explosion of venture capital and 
private  equity.  Expectations  again  ran  ahead  of  reality,  as  the  speculative  excesses  in 
“dot-com” investments ultimately led to the collapse of equity prices at the turn of the century. 
Emerging  market  crises  display  similar  characteristics.  The  commodity  boom  in  the  1970s 
and  the  miracle  of  the  “Asian  tigers”  in  the  1990s  spawned  the  belief  that  emerging 
economies  could  make  an  extraordinary  development  leap.  Newly  liberalised  markets  for 
international capital, supported by financial innovations (such as syndicated loan markets or 
emerging market mutual funds) fuelled the ensuing economic boom. But the euphoria of the 
embryonic economic miracle eventually proved ill-founded, leading to financial crisis and a 
sharp reversal of capital flows. 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2010
A comprehensive review of every episode of financial crisis lies well beyond the scope of this 
lecture. Nevertheless, this brief overview already illustrates the commonalities shared across 
crises in different locations and at different times.  
Such commonalities offer hope that policy-makers can detect, at an early stage, a nascent 
financial crisis. On the basis of inductive logic, we can exploit historical regularities to help 
predict  the  future.  Being  able  to  identify  financial  tensions  would  allow  appropriate  policy 
actions to be taken in a timely manner. 
Of course, the existence of commonalities in the historical experience does not amount to 
rigorous statistical proof that such relationships can be identified in the data and exploited for 
policy purposes. It has proved difficult to construct a robust economic indicator that provides 
a reliable signal of growing financial excesses.  
In part, this reflects some of the processes that I have mentioned, which are integral to the 
boom-bust cycles themselves. Continuous and often rapid financial innovation can alter the 
character and relevance of existing monetary and financial statistics. And in an increasingly 
interconnected world, financial and economic imbalances more and more assume a global 
dimension. 
These caveats notwithstanding, research conducted at the ECB and elsewhere points to a 
link between boom-bust financial cycles and the evolution of broad measures of money and 
credit.7 
For example, the ratio of global credit to global GDP offers an indication of nascent financial 
stress. The departure of this ratio from its historical trend offers a signal of emerging financial 
imbalances and asset price misalignment. Of course, the indicator is imperfect: one needs to 
define the appropriate credit measure, agree how to aggregate to a global indicator, decide 
how to estimate the trend and identify an appropriate threshold of distress.  
Nevertheless,  even  the  simple  portrayal  in  Figure  1  corroborates  the  intuition  behind  my 
assertion that early warning indicators of financial distress can be meaningful.8 As shown in 
the chart, credit developments lead financial distress: the positive “credit gap” that emerged 
during the 1980s precedes the US savings and loans crisis; that observed in the second half 
of the 1990s precedes the collapse of the dot-com bubble; and growing credit excesses are 
apparent from 2005, before the onset of the current crisis. 
Considerations of this type support the ECB’s emphasis on monetary analysis, including a 
regular  assessment  of  credit  developments,  as  a  central  aspect  of  the  framework  for 
preparing monetary policy decisions. More specifically, we have always foreseen that a close 
monitoring  of  monetary  and  credit  developments  constitutes  an  important  element  in 
identifying asset price misalignments that may threaten price and macroeconomic stability. 
The  ECB  continues  actively  to  conduct  research  along  these  lines,  in  the  context  of  its 
continuing enhancement of monetary analysis.9 
                                                 
7  See (inter alia): D. Gerdesmeier, B. Roffia and H-E. Reimers (2009), “Asset price misalignments and the role 
of money and credit” ECB Working Paper No 1068; and R. Adalid and C. Detken (2007), “Liquidity shocks and 
asset price boom/bust cycles” ECB Working Paper No 732. 
8  See:  L.  Alessi  and  C.  Detken  (2009),  “Real  time  early  warning  indicators  for  costly  asset  price  boom/bust 
cycles: A role for global liquidity” ECB Working Paper No 1039. 
9  See: J. Stark (2007): “Enhancing the monetary analysis” speech at the conference “The ECB and its Watchers 
IX”, September 2009. 
BIS Review 57/2010 
 5
Figure 1 
Global excess credit 
 At times, the ECB’s decision to pay close attention to monetary and financial developments 
in  formulating  monetary  policy  has  been  controversial.  The  canonical  model  of  monetary 
policy neglected the role of monetary aggregates and of their counterparts, emphasising the 
output gap as the main indicator of inflationary pressures.10 
Recent  events  have  forced  a  re-evaluation  of  such  models  in  the  research  community.  It 
seems  to  me  that  the  ECB’s  approach  has  been  vindicated  by  the  financial  crisis.  The 
importance of monitoring money and credit developments is becoming more recognised in 
both the academic literature and the policy debate. Indeed, leading academics have argued 
in  favour  of  defining  and  monitoring  new  monetary  indicators  to  detect  the  build-up  of 
leverage within the financial sector.11 
Of course, recognising the importance of monetary analysis is not a panacea. It is only the 
starting-point of a difficult process that requires an ongoing monitoring and understanding of 
financial  innovation  and  continuous  attempts  to  sharpen  and  deepen  our  understanding  of 
financial  developments.  Nor  should  monetary  analysis,  or  the  detection  of  the  build-up  of 
financial imbalances, be seen as an end in itself. Monetary analysis is only useful insofar as 
it improves policy decisions and furthers the achievement of the ECB’s ultimate objective. 
The primary objective of the ECB is the maintenance of price stability in the euro area. From 
the outset, we have emphasised the need to adopt a medium-term orientation in pursuit of 
this  objective,  acknowledging  the  long  and  variable  lags  in  the  transmission  of  monetary 
                                                 
10  See:  A.  Beyer  and  L.  Reichlin  (eds.)  (2008),  The  role  of  money:  Money  and  monetary  policy  in  the 
21st century, European Central Bank. 
11  See: T. Adrian and H.S. Shin (2008), “Liquidity, monetary policy, and financial cycles” FRB New York Current 
Issues in Economics and Finance 14(1), pp. 1–7. 
6 
 BIS Review 57/2010
policy, which make “fine-tuning” of price developments in the face of the inevitable economic 
shocks both impossible and potentially counterproductive.12 
Adopting  such  a  medium-term  orientation  allows  a  degree  of  flexibility  to  monetary  policy-
makers. There are many paths of policy interest rates that are consistent with maintaining 
price stability over the medium term. In choosing among these various paths, policy-makers 
may seek policy settings that contain the emergence of financial imbalances, so as to impart 
greater stability to the economy as a whole.  
Analysis of monetary and credit developments may offer insight into the slow accumulation of 
financial imbalances and thus identify a growing threat to macroeconomic stability in general, 
and price stability in particular, over the longer term. Given such signals, central banks can 
respond in a commensurate and timely manner.  
Responding to money and credit developments in this way implies “leaning against” financial 
imbalances and asset price misalignments. Even if such an approach creates some inflation 
volatility  in  the  shorter  run,  it  better  serves  price  and  macroeconomic  stability  at  longer 
horizons.  
While conducting monetary policy in this way helps to provide an environment of price and 
macroeconomic  stability  that  is  conducive  to  financial  stability,  alone  it  will  not  suffice. 
Responsibility for the maintenance of financial stability should largely fall on the shoulders of 
regulators  and  supervisors.  Along  this  dimension,  the  crisis  has  highlighted  the  distinction 
between risks facing individual financial institutions and risks to systemic financial stability. 
Let me elaborate on this point, which I see as crucial. 
Managing risk is, of course, an indispensable aspect of financial intermediation. Banks have 
to remunerate depositors and must constantly search for investment opportunities, offering 
rates  of  return  that  are  higher  than  the  cost  of  funding.  Financial  economics  tells  us  that, 
ultimately,  increasing  risk  is  the  only  way  to  earn  higher  returns.  So,  almost  by  definition, 
financial intermediation would not be possible without risk-taking. 
Problems  arise  in  two  cases.  The  first  case  involves  financial  intermediaries  choosing  a 
combination of risk and returns that is not efficient from their individual perspective. This can 
happen  when  financial  players’  incentives  are  aligned  against  prudent  practices.  These 
problems  should  be  tackled  by  an  appropriate  micro-supervisory  framework.  Indeed,  until 
recently, the main focus of financial supervision was on ensuring the soundness of individual 
financial institutions.  
Supervision  at  the  micro  level  is  a  very  challenging  task.  It  is  vastly  complicated  by  the 
uncertainties and innovations that characterise the historical experience. In the interests of 
brevity, I will not dwell on these challenges here, but in coming to an overall assessment they 
should not be neglected. 
Problems can also arise in a second case, in which the choice of risk and returns may be 
appropriate at the individual bank level. Individual banks, however, may not take into account 
the impact of their decisions on the rest of the financial system.  
For  example,  individual  banks  may  be  rationally  willing  to  hold  the  risky  tranche  of  a 
mortgage-backed security for a fee that appears to be in line with prevailing market rates. 
The  banking  system  as  a  whole  may,  however,  fail  to  appreciate  in  full  the  various 
dimensions  of  risk  for  that  security.  More  specifically,  it  may  fail  to  appreciate  that 
widespread  holdings  of  assets  exposed  to  a  common  risk  can  generate  catastrophic 
consequences for the system as a whole. When the value of those assets starts falling, a fire 
                                                 
12  See:  ECB  (1999),  “The  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  Eurosystem”,  Monthly  Bulletin 
(January). 
BIS Review 57/2010 
 7
sale can be ignited as each bank attempts to guard against further reductions in value, but 
no bank is on the other side of the market. 
Such  considerations  are  magnified  in  the  context  of  the  uncertainties  and  innovations  that 
characterise  the  build-up  to  financial  crisis.  In  such  a  situation,  individual  institutions  and 
regulators  may  not  be  fully  aware  of  all  interconnections  and  correlations  associated  with 
new financial instruments and business models.  
The  risk  of  systemic  instability,  and  its  potential  costs  for  the  economy,  has  long  been 
recognised in both the academic literature and in policy circles. This is reflected, for example, 
in  the  fact  that  many  central  banks  have  been  producing  regular  financial  stability  reports, 
which try to identify and analyse these risks. The crisis, however, has heightened the need to 
deepen this analysis and, moreover, to take appropriate policy actions to address these risks 
and  prevent  them  from  imposing  severe  losses  on  the  real  economy.  Against  this 
background, the need for additional tools and policies, which fall under the broad heading of 
macro-prudential policy, has been widely recognised. 
In the case of Europe, this has led to a decision by the European Council to create a new 
independent body responsible for the conduct of macro-prudential oversight: the European 
Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). The main task of the ESRB will be to identify and assess risks 
to the stability of the European Union’s financial system and issue risk warnings when the 
risks  appear  to  be  significant.  When  appropriate,  the  ESRB  could  complement  its  risk 
warnings with policy recommendations for remedial action. 
In pursuing this task, the ESRB will also have to rely heavily on the commonalities that we 
have identified in our experience of financial crises. It is these commonalities that provide the 
basis for identifying risks at an early enough stage that remedial policies can be introduced. 
By exploiting the common features of the lead-up to previous financial crises, policy-makers 
can  identify  nascent  financial  distress.  By  refining  the  existing  policy  regime  on  both 
monetary and prudential dimensions, policy-makers can exploit such information to reduce 
the frequency and severity of financial crises, and thereby their impact on macroeconomic 
and price stability. 
Respecting specificities: effective crisis management 
Yet  even  if  a  refined  policy  framework  promises  to  be  more  effective  in  diffusing  nascent 
financial distress, it would be naive to rule out altogether the possibility of future crises. What 
can policy-makers do once a crisis erupts? What have we learnt from experience about how 
financial crises should be managed? 
Financial  crises  typically  induce  a  large  and  sudden  fall  in  aggregate  demand,  owing  to 
negative  wealth  effects,  a  collapse  of  confidence  or,  more  generally,  both.  While  these 
shocks  are  difficult  to  quantify  in  real  time,  conceptually  they  are  similar  to  the  shocks 
addressed  by  monetary  policy  on  a  continuing  basis.  To  simplify,  downward  pressure  on 
price  developments  associated  with  a  fall  of  economic  activity  can  be  countered  using 
standard  interest  rate  policy,  reducing  official  rates  so  as  to  spur  spending  and  bolster 
confidence. Such measures serve the maintenance of price stability.  
The  timing  of  the  interest  rate  response  is  crucially  important.  Financial  crises  can  strike 
suddenly.  By  implication,  the  response  to  the  crisis  should  be  commensurably  swift  and 
decisive. This requires a stance of permanent alertness, to identify promptly new threats to 
price stability, including those arising from the crisis itself.  
The current crisis, however, has demonstrated that deeper market failures may occur in the 
financial  sector,  such  that  standard  interest  rate  changes  alone  may  prove  insufficient  to 
restore economic and price stability. Introducing measures to address these market failures 
naturally requires that the failures themselves are correctly identified and well understood. It is 
on this dimension that the specificities associated with each financial crisis can play a key role. 
8 
 BIS Review 57/2010
To illustrate, it is helpful to recall how the current crisis was triggered and propagated. The 
money  markets  played  a  crucial  role  in  this  respect.  Until  mid-2007,  money  markets  were 
viewed  as  quiescent  and  well-behaved  –  not  as  candidates  for  the  outbreak  of  financial 
turmoil.13  But,  through  the  re-pricing  and  re-rating  of  sub-prime-related  credit  risk  transfer 
instruments, the money markets came to play a central role.  
To be more concrete, the difficulties experienced by a small number of investment funds in 
June 2007, owing to the non-performance of US sub-prime mortgage securities, led rating 
agencies  to  downgrade  a  large  number  of  asset-backed  instruments.  The  immediate 
consequence of these downgrades was a deterioration in the quality of the balance sheets of 
banks holding those securities, as their price fell and capital losses were incurred.  
As the number of large and complex financial institutions severely affected by the re-pricing 
of  asset-backed  securities  was  recognised,  this  financial  shock  was  propagated  to  the 
broader financial market and real economy. The ensuing rounds of write-downs and a lack of 
transparency  regarding  exposures  to  these  toxic  instruments  created  an  atmosphere  of 
anxiety  and  suspicion.  The  root  cause  of  this  information  problem  was  this  generalised 
uncertainty regarding counterparty risk, which, at some point, made it impossible for lenders 
to distinguish between healthy and distressed institutions.  
These informational problems became manifest in a freezing of the money market. Figure 2 
illustrates the unprecedented extent of the turbulence using a common measure of liquidity 
and counterparty risk.  
Figure 2 
Interbank market spreads 
 
More  precisely,  the  spread  between  the  cost  of  unsecured  short-term  funding  from  other 
financial intermediaries – in the euro area, the so-called EURIBOR rate – and the interest 
                                                 
13  See: C. Holthausen and H. Pill (2010): “The forgotten markets: How understanding money markets helps to 
understand the financial crisis”, ECB Research Bulletin 9, pp. 2–5. 
BIS Review 57/2010 
 9
rate on the equivalent index swap rates, which had been negligible around the middle of the 
decade, suddenly rose to record levels. 
These events were especially worrying because they threatened to disrupt the transmission 
of monetary policy to the real economy. To the extent that firms and households borrow at 
interest rates indexed to unsecured interbank rates, the emergence of a large and variable 
spread  between  policy  rates  and  these  market  rates  implied  a  potential  loss  of  control  of 
central banks over financing conditions.  
Given heightened concerns about counterparty risk – which intensified dramatically after the 
failure of Lehman – cash-rich banks proved unwilling to lend to banks needing liquidity.14 As 
a result, the money market came close to a total freeze. The ensuing decline in banks’ ability 
to  raise  funds  led  to  a  tightening  of  credit  conditions  facing  enterprises  and  households. 
There  was  a  clear  and  present  danger  that  the  resulting  tightening  of  financial  conditions 
would lead to augment the risk of a deflationary spiral, to trigger additional credit losses and 
a vicious downward cycle of financial and real distress. 
To avert this danger, central banks introduced a variety of non-standard measures to permit 
their  reduction  of  policy  interest  rates  to  be  fully  transmitted.  In  the  case  of  the  ECB,  the 
Governing Council acted swiftly to address these risks through our policy of enhanced credit 
support.15 
Since  banks  play  a  central  role  in  the  intermediation  of  credit  in  the  euro  area,  we  have 
largely directed our efforts at banks rather than intervening to influence activity and spreads 
in  specific  financial  markets.  To  satisfy  the  higher  liquidity  needs  of  banks,  we  decided  to 
allocate liquidity on a full allotment basis at fixed rates. We also lengthened the maturity of 
our  operations  up  to  one  year,  to  give  banks  a  more  medium-term  perspective  in  their 
liquidity  planning.  This  measure  greatly  attenuated  the  maturity  mismatch  between  assets 
and liabilities in banks’ books, which would otherwise have further deterred bank lending. At 
the same time, we expanded the list of assets that we accept as collateral in our operations. 
By expanding the list of eligible collateral, we ensured that banks could refinance that large 
proportion of their assets that had become less liquid in the crisis. In addition, we provided 
liquidity  in  foreign  currencies  to  banks  by  means  of  swap  arrangements  with  the  Federal 
Reserve and other central banks. Finally, we decided to purchase of €60 billion of covered 
bank bonds in order to revive this market segment, which is important in Europe. 
The  fact  that  our  operational  framework  was  very  flexible  from  the  start  has  been  a 
considerable  asset.  Unconventional  measures  did  not  require  modifications  to  the  same 
extent as elsewhere and this flexibility enabled us to react very quickly.  
As  a  result  of  these  measures,  the  adjustment  of  retail  bank  interest  rates  in  response  to 
reductions  in  policy  rates  appears  to  have  remained  effective  during  the  financial  turmoil. 
Banks’  short-term  lending  rates,  which  are  generally  affected  by  movements  in  the  three-
month  EURIBOR,  declined  by  341  basis  points  between  September  2008  and  February 
2010, while the three-month EURIBOR declined by around 436 basis points during the same 
period.  Long-term  bank  lending  rates  declined  over  this  period  by  151  basis  points,  while 
seven-year government bond yields declined by 121 basis points. 
Lending rates to non-financial corporations also declined almost in parallel with the key ECB 
interest  rates,  as  did  most  bank  interest  rates on  loans  to households for  house purchase 
and  consumer  credit.  While  lending  rates  to  households  remain  relatively  high,  their  level 
does not seem to indicate a malfunctioning of the transmission mechanism, but rather high 
levels of credit risk compared with normal economic conditions. 
                                                 
14  See: F. Heider, M. Hoerova and C. Holthausen (2009), “Liquidity hoarding and inter-bank market spreads: The 
role of counterparty risk” ECB Working Paper No 1126. 
15  See: J.-C. Trichet (2009), “The ECB’s enhanced credit support” Keynote address, University of Munich, July. 
10 
 BIS Review 57/2010
All in all, the evidence suggests that the enhanced credit support policies introduced by the 
ECB  were  successful  in  ensuring  the  effectiveness  of  the  reduction  in the  key  ECB  policy 
rates.16  Currently,  these  improvements  are  guiding  a  gradual  phasing-out  process.17  The 
speed and path of the phasing-out of non-standard measures will depend on developments 
in financial markets and the economy. The current situation of ample liquidity in euro area 
money markets guarantees a continued positive impact on financing conditions. As regards 
the monetary policy stance itself, it will be designed as always to deliver price stability, in the 
medium and long term, in line with our definition. 
As is natural, I have focused on the ECB experience. But let me emphasise that, faced with 
unprecedented challenges, central banks around the globe demonstrated a remarkable unity 
of  purpose  in  meeting  the  financial  crisis.  Different  economies,  with  different  channels  of 
transmission and different financial structures, required different policy responses. But, in the 
end, the action taken by the leading central banks proved successful in containing financial 
distress. 
The  cross-sectional  variation  in  crisis  management  measures  is  mirrored  in  the  historical 
dimension.  Crisis  management  needs  to  be  attuned  to  the  specifics  of  the  situation.  The 
recent episode had one of its epicentres in the money market, and Central Banks measures 
focused very much on that segment. But on previous occasions the focus was elsewhere. 
For  example,  during  the  crisis  of  the  mid  1980s,  emerging  market  sovereign  debt  was 
central. The crisis management implemented in recent years would have been ill-suited to 
address the challenges of the 1980s. 
All  in  all,  experience  demonstrates  that  crisis  management  requires  a  great  degree  of 
alertness  and  agility.  Since  policy-makers  are  unlikely  to  know  precisely  how  the  financial 
crisis will become manifest, they need to monitor developments closely and be prepared to 
act  rapidly  and  decisively,  as  required.  The  specifics  of  the  situation  need  to  be  identified 
quickly and an appropriate response developed to contain contagion and restore stability.  
Given the idiosyncrasies of each episode, history may provide little guidance in dealing with 
these  specificities.  Rather  policy-makers  must  rely  on  deductive  logic,  based  on  robust 
underlying  principles,  in  formulating  their  policy  response.  Such  an  approach  requires  a 
willingness to be flexible and innovative, while recognising the potential risks associated with 
entering uncharted territory in terms of policy design. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me sum up the lessons I draw from my experience – both recent and more longstanding – 
of dealing with financial crisis. 
First prevention is better than cure.  
By implication, we need to refine the macroeconomic policy framework so as to make it more 
robust  and  resistant  to  financial  crisis.  Crucial  to  such  refinements  are  a  number  of  
elements:  constructing  early  warning  indicators  of  nascent  financial  distress;  developing 
macroprudential  policy  instruments  to  contain  systemic  risk;  and  ensuring  that  monetary 
policy is credible in the pursuit of price stability over the medium term.  
Second, I would guard against complacency. 
                                                 
16  See: M. Lenza, H. Pill and L. Reichlin (2010), “Monetary policy in exceptional times” CEPR discussion paper 
No 7669; and P. Donati (2010), “Monetary policy effectiveness in times of crisis: Evidence from the euro area 
money market” ECB Working Paper, forthcoming. 
17  See: J.-C. Trichet (2009), “The ECB’s exit strategy” speech at the conference “The ECB and its Watchers XI”, 
September 2009. 
BIS Review 57/2010 
 11
However well-designed the macroeconomic policy framework, I am sceptical of the view that 
financial crises can be prevented with certainty. We need to prepare for such crises, even 
while we aim to avoid them. Policy-makers must maintain a continuous state of alertness and 
a readiness to act decisively, so as to contain such crises should they emerge. 
This brings me to my third and final point: crisis management requires agility and innovation 
to  meet  the  idiosyncrasies  of  a  specific  crisis,  but  at  the  same  time  respect  for 
well-established principles to guide decisions in uncharted waters. 
In short – and as I have argued on previous occasions18 – central bankers must continually 
maintain  a  posture  of  “credible  alertness”,  which  would  permit  to  counter  at  any  time  any 
unexpected  threat  to  price  stability  and  so  contribute  to  a  solid  anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations. At the same time, being permanently alert, the central bank can take without 
delay  the  measures,  including  non-conventional,  that  might  be  required  under  unexpected 
and  exceptional  circumstances.  It  is  what  we  have  done  ourselves  in  the  exceptional 
circumstances that we have had to cope with since August 2007.  
But  it  is  very  important  to  stress  that  the  non-conventional  measures,  taken  to  counter 
unexpected market disruptions should, in our view, never run against our primary goal, which 
is to deliver price stability over the medium term. It is the core of the so-called “separation 
principle”. This has been well understood by the observers and the market: our medium to 
long-term  inflation  expectations  have  remained  well  anchored  since  the  beginning  of  the 
period of turbulences. 
To  conclude,  allow  me  to  reflect  again  more  broadly  on  how  historical  experience  should 
inform policy-makers’ decisions.  
Almost a century ago, in the aftermath of the First World War and the deep psychological 
and  physical  scars  it  left  on  Europe,  the  writer  H.G.  Wells  noted  that:  “human  history 
becomes more and more a race between education and catastrophe”.19 
No  doubt  this  statement  resonates  with  policy-makers  grappling  with  the  current  financial 
crisis. Thanks to a prompt global policy response, I am confident that catastrophe has been 
avoided.  
But  education  absolutely  must  remain  ahead  in  the  race,  even  if  the  outlook  remains 
uncertain.  We  must  ensure  that  the  appropriate  lessons  are  learnt  and  better  policies 
implemented as a result. This is the current agenda for central bankers throughout the world.  
Wells – realistically, but also reassuringly – concluded that “clumsily or smoothly, the world, it 
seems, progresses and will progress”. 
In their pursuit of an improved policy framework, I am confident that central bankers will do 
likewise. 
                                                 
18  See: J-C. Trichet (2009), “Credible alertness revisited” speech at the Jackson Hole symposium on “Financial 
stability and macroeconomic policy”, August 2009. 
19  See: H.G. Wells (1920), The outline of history. Garden City Publishing, ch. 41. 
12 
 BIS Review 57/2010
