Mark Carney: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 22 April 2010. 
 Good Morning. I am pleased to be here with you today to discuss the April Monetary Policy 
Report, which the Bank published this morning. 
 
Global  economic  growth  has  been  somewhat  stronger  than  projected,  with 
momentum  in  emerging-market  economies  increasing  noticeably  and  moderate 
recovery underway in most advanced economies. Global growth is now projected to 
average slightly above 4 per cent a year through 2012.  
In  Canada,  the  economic  recovery  is  proceeding  somewhat  more  rapidly  than 
expected  in  January.  It  is  supported  by  continued  fiscal  and  monetary  stimulus, 
improved  financial  conditions,  the  rebound  in  global  economic  growth,  more 
favourable terms of trade, and increased business and household confidence.  
This year should mark the turning point when the private sector takes over from the 
public  sector  as  the  primary  source  of  growth.  GDP  is  now  projected  to  grow  by 
3.7 per cent in 2010 before slowing gradually to 3.1 per cent in 2011 and 1.9 per 
cent in 2012.  
This profile reflects stronger near-term global growth, very strong housing activity in 
Canada,  and  the  Bank’s  assessment  that  policy  stimulus  resulted  in  more 
expenditures being brought forward in late 2009 and early 2010 than expected.  
At  the  same  time,  the  persistent  strength  of  the  Canadian  dollar,  Canada’s  poor 
relative  productivity  performance,  and  the  low  absolute  level  of  U.S.  demand  will 
continue to act as significant drags on economic activity in Canada.  
The Bank estimates that GDP in the first quarter of 2010 was about 1 per cent below 
its peak in the third quarter of 2008 and some 2 per cent below its potential. The 
economy is expected to return to full capacity in the second quarter of 2011, one 
quarter earlier than projected in January.  
The  outlook  for  inflation  reflects  the  combined  influences  of  stronger  domestic 
demand, slowing wage growth, and overall excess supply. Core inflation, which has 
been somewhat firmer than projected in January, is expected to ease slightly in the 
second quarter of 2010 as the effect of temporary factors dissipates, and to remain 
near 2 per cent throughout the rest of the projection period.  
Total CPI inflation is expected to be slightly higher than 2 per cent over the coming 
year, before returning to the target in the second half of 2011.  
Despite the firming of the global and Canadian recoveries, there are considerable 
risks around the Bank’s outlook.  
There  are  two  main  upside  risks  to  inflation.  It  is  possible  that  the  momentum  in 
household expenditures and residential investment could be greater than currently 
expected.  Internationally,  a  faster-than-expected  global  recovery  could  stimulate 
external demand for Canadian exports and improve the terms of trade.  
On  the  downside,  the  global  economic  recovery  could  be  more  protracted  than 
currently projected. A second downside risk is that the combination of the persistent 
strength of the Canadian dollar and Canada’s poor relative productivity performance 
          BIS Review 54/2010 
 1
    could  exert  a  larger-than-expected  drag  on  growth  and  put  additional  downward 
pressure on inflation.  
In response to the sharp, synchronous global recession, the Bank lowered its target 
rate rapidly over the course of 2008 and early 2009 to its lowest possible level. In 
addition, in April 2009, the Bank committed to hold it at that level, conditional on the 
outlook for inflation.  
This unconventional policy provided considerable additional stimulus during a period 
of  very  weak  economic  conditions  and  major  downside  risks  to  the  global  and 
Canadian economies.  
With recent improvements in the economic outlook, the need for such extraordinary 
policy  is  now  passing,  and  it  is  appropriate  to  begin  to  lessen  the  degree  of 
monetary stimulus. That is why on  Tuesday, 20 April 2010, the Bank removed its 
conditional commitment.  
The extent and timing of any additional withdrawal of monetary stimulus will depend 
on  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  inflation,  and  will  be  consistent  with 
achieving the 2 per cent inflation target. 
With that, I would be pleased to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2010
