Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Organizational performance review 
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas 
(the  central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  2010  Mid-Year  Organizational  Performance 
Review Session, Manila, 8 July 2010. 
 We may have missed the splendid view of the beaches of Cebu, or the pine-scented Baguio 
breeze,  or  the  gentle  winds  of  Tagaytay  but  I  was  captivated  by  your  display  of the  same 
diligence and hard work during this past day and a half as we paused and pondered on what 
is essential to effectively deliver our mission. In 2007, we committed to regularly review our 
scorecard to ensure that we sustain BSP’s credibility and relevance in the context of the new 
global, regional and domestic landscape. 
Celebrating our successes  
Meeting our targets 
At this point, I wish to commend the hard work and dedication of the BSPers in meeting our 
performance targets. Evidently, we are on track. We have met and even surpassed some of 
our targets for the year. I extend my congratulations and thanks to the collective efforts of 
management  and  staff  of  the  Monetary  Stability  Sector;  the  Supervision  and  Examination 
Sector; the Resource Management Sector; the Security Plant Complex; and the Executive 
Management Services. 
On our institutional mandates, we are on course as actual inflation for the first semester is 
well within our target for 2010; and while actual values of our performance have yet to fully 
reflect our achievements, we continue to make progress in addressing operational gaps in 
our supervisory actions and examination related deliverables.  
Our pursuit for operational excellence is driven by our continuing efforts to align our business 
processes  with  international  standards  and  best  practices.  We  have  pushed  for  innovative 
approaches to managing and developing our people. 
Receiving stakeholder affirmation 
We believe that our good performance eventually reached the minds of the public we serve. 
Our stakeholders have spoken and we are happy to be affirmed that we have their trust and 
confidence as evidenced by a high net approval index of 76.6% and a qualitative rating of 
“good”  based  on  the  2009  BSP  Public  Perception  Survey  Report.  Similarly,  in  a  survey 
among our business partners we garnered a high net approval rating of 83%, which shows 
that BSP is a good business partner and our integrity is highly regarded by them. 
Laying the groundwork in good governance and in organizational enhancement 
We have also focused on efforts to improve our enabling processes in strengthening good 
governance and enhancing our corporate culture. With our frameworks for governance, risk 
management and organizational enhancement in place, assessments on where we stand in 
these areas are nearly completed. We are finalizing our roadmaps toward a Bangko Sentral 
that  exhibits  governance  principles  which  are  highly  integrated  in  our  policies,  systems, 
processes and practices; a Bangko Sentral that exemplifies a values-based culture, with men 
and women of inspiring leadership, dynamic, achievement-oriented, and acting as one team. 
BIS Review 107/2010 
 1
Revisiting the fundamentals – BSP’s mandate 
As the end of our strategic plan draws near, fundamental questions emerge as we respond 
to new challenges relating to our mandate. During this past day and a half, we also engaged 
in a strategic dialogue on how we would like to position BSP, the country’s lone monetary 
authority, in the next medium term. 
Our engaging dialogue on the assessment of seventeen years of monetary policy at the BSP 
highlighted key issues such as the financial stability dimension of price stability, the operating 
environment  and  practice  of  inflation  targeting  in  emerging  market  economies  like  the 
Philippines, and the approach in responding to asset price bubbles.  
We also had a spirited discussion on the complexity, impact and requirements of pursuing 
financial  stability  in  bank  supervision,  BSP’s  relationships  with  other  regulators,  monetary 
policy and payments and settlements. In this connection, we also looked into the challenges 
in the payments and settlements system in the context of meeting our goals of monetary and 
financial stability, as well as in achieving economic efficiency. 
Focusing on the homestretch 
We  are  on  the  final  leg  of  the  journey.  Apart  from  the  sense  of  urgency  this  evokes,  this 
reality  prompts  us  to  heighten  our  teamwork  and  to  collaborate  more  to  guarantee  our 
strategic success. Looking at our scorecard, the “reds” and “yellows” pointed out the areas of 
concern  that  need  the  attention  of  the  entire  organization  –  the  Monetary  Board, 
management  and  staff.  We  said  that  we  are  a  strategy-focused  and  results-oriented 
organization, and we are determined to prove this true. 
Let us focus our energy to the implementation of the strategic initiatives that will contribute to 
the attainment of our targets in the medium-term plan. Let us continue our efforts in closing 
the  gaps  and  in  addressing  the  overlaps  to  achieve  the  synergy  we  desire  within  the 
organization and in our relationships with external partners. We will deliver on our promise. 
In staying true to our commitment for continuous improvement, let us keep in mind what our 
stakeholders have expressed in terms of areas that still fall short of their expectations. Let us 
draw up measures to effectively address these gaps in our roadmap. 
Fortifying the BSP team for the next medium term 
As we set our minds on the immediate tasks at hand, let us not lose sight of the future, which 
we need to plan for strategically. We end our planning exercise today with a question: “Is the 
BSP  poised  to  face  the  advent  of  a  new  period  in  central  banking,  both  in  the  global  and 
regional  fronts?”  With  our  ideals  as  an  institution  encapsulated  in  our  new  BSP  logo,  we 
usher the next medium-term with our continuing pursuit of becoming a world-class monetary 
authority,  with  high  degree  of  professionalism  and  open  mindedness  to  the  changes  that 
comes with the evolving demands for best practices in governance and service delivery. 
On behalf of the Monetary Board, I affirm our support to management. Pursuing our mandate 
is not an easy task as it requires not only the high-level of competence the BSP is known for, 
but also strength of character and a courageous heart to protect and contribute to a better 
quality of life for Filipinos. We may have our share of disappointments and discouragements 
in the conduct of our work, but at the end of the day, we find fulfillment in the fact that we 
have served our stakeholders well. I urge everyone to continue to help one another in doing 
our task and with God’s blessing see it though its completion. I congratulate all of you and 
the organizers of this year’s performance review and planning event for a job well done.  
Thank you and enjoy the rest of the weekend. 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2010
