Bandid Nijathaworn: Post-crisis challenges to emerging markets – what 
are at stake for central banks? 
Keynote address by Mr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor for Monetary Stability of the 
Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  South  East  Asian  Central  Banks  (SEACEN)/Bank  of  England 
Seminar  on  Macroeconomic  and  Monetary  Policy  Management,  Brunei  Darussalam, 
22 March 2010. 
 First,  I  want  to  thank  SEACEN,  the  Centre  for  Central  Banking  Studies  of  the  Bank  of 
England, and Ministry of Finance, Brunei Darussalam for inviting me to deliver this morning’s 
keynote  address.  The  SEACEN’s  advanced  course  and  seminar  have  always  been  an 
important learning forum for central bankers in Asia to discuss common challenges as well 
as to share practical experience. So, I very much appreciate the opportunity to be speaking 
to all of you today.  
On  a  personal  note,  it  has  also  been  a  few  years  since  I  last  spoke  at  this  forum,  as  my 
responsibility at the Bank of Thailand as a deputy governor up to October last year changed 
from monetary policy to financial regulation and supervision. This brief tenure of overseeing 
financial  stability,  especially  managing  the  financial  system  at  the  height  of  the  global 
financial  crisis,  has  been  a  valuable  experience  and  makes  me  appreciate  even  more  the 
responsibility, the complexity, and the challenge to central banking. And it is a reflection of 
this  experience  that  I  want  to  share  with  you  this  morning,  on  the  post-crisis  challenge  to 
emerging economies and what are at stake for central banks. My address today will focus on 
three issues. The first is the lessons learned from past crises. The second is the post-crisis 
environment and their implications for emerging markets. And, the third is the challenge for 
central banks going forward.  
First, the lessons learned. 
Those  of  you  who  have  been  at  central  banks  fifteen  years  or  more  will  by  now  have 
witnessed at least two major financial crises that put the task of central banks in managing 
the economy under the spotlight. The first is the Asian financial crisis of 1997–98, and the 
second is the current global financial crisis. Although the two crises share many similarities 
as well as exhibit important differences, they both have a common origin in globalization and 
in  the  inability  of  the  global  financial  system  to  deal  effectively  with  the  consequences  of 
globalization.  In  the  Asian  crisis,  the  origin  was  in  external  imbalance  of  individual 
economies,  private  sector  indebtedness,  currency  mismatch,  and  a  sudden  reversal  of 
capital flows. In the current crisis, the origin lay in a large global imbalance, excessive-risk 
taking by financial institutions, and the accumulation of large systemic risk. In the context of 
policy,  the  two  crises  have  produced  many  useful  lessons  on  what  needs  to  be  done  to 
prevent the recurrence of crises. While there is no shortage of lessons learned, having been 
at the Bank of Thailand through the two crises, my own list of lessons learned comes down 
to four important lessons.  
The  first  is  that  nobody  is  above  crises.  This  is  to  say  that  crises  can  happen  in  any 
economy, whether it is large or small, developed or emerging, with or without a sophisticated 
financial system, and regardless of whether the country has a fixed or flexible exchange rate 
system. And once a crisis happens, the impact will be large because of the globalized nature 
of markets that drives the spillover and contagion. For emerging markets, this means that the 
risk of future crises is wide-ranging and can be both internally and externally induced. The 
externally-induced  crisis  can  either  be  because  of  imprudent  policy  choices  elsewhere  or 
because of failures of systemically important markets or institutions. And we have seen in the 
current crisis, the impact from an externally-induced crisis through contagion can be as, or 
even more severe, as an internally-induced or a home-grown crisis. 
BIS Review 36/2010 
 1
Therefore, to lessen the risk of future crises, prudent and good policy choices must be made 
in all countries. If not, the chance of crises repeating will remain high in this globalized world 
because  of  the  interdependence  between  economies  in  policies,  and  because  of  the 
interconnectedness of countries in trade and financial flows.  
The second lesson is that, while monetary policy must remain focused on maintaining low 
and stable inflation environment, which is crucial for sustainable growth, it is clear from the 
current crisis that low and stable inflation alone is not sufficient for ensuring financial stability. 
This  is  because  the  risk  to  financial  stability  can  come  from  many  sources  other  than 
domestic inflation. In the current crisis, it was the housing bubble and excessive risk-taking 
by  financial  institutions  that  precipitated  the  crisis  in  the  environment  of  stable  prices. 
Therefore, to maintain financial stability, attention must be paid to all the key sources of risk 
and  imbalance,  other  than  price  stability,  that  can  have  systemic  implications  for  the 
economy’s growth and stability. This is the second lesson.  
The third lesson relates to the importance of having a robust and resilient financial sector at 
all times. For emerging markets, this means a strong banking sector. In the current crisis, it is 
the  strength  of  the  banking  sector  that  has  enabled  the  Asian  economies  to  cope  more 
successfully  with  the  impact  of  the  global  crisis.  These  strengths  are  underpinned  by  the 
sector’s strong capital base, its limited exposure to subprime-related and other toxic assets, 
and its low reliance on external funding. Such strength and qualities are no accident. They 
are the results of deliberate policies to reform the financial system, strengthen supervision of 
financial  institutions,  and  revamp  financial  regulation,  risk  management,  and  governance 
after the Asian financial crisis. The point I want to stress here is that these are the qualities 
that helped us through the current global financial crisis and they are the qualities that we 
need to keep.  
The fourth lesson is the benefits to long-term growth and stability that come from disciplined 
policy  management  and  the  pursuance  of  policy  that  enhances  flexibility  in  the  economic 
system.  The  1997–1998  crisis  has  been  an  important  lesson  for  Asia  on  this  point. 
Disciplined  policy  reduces  the  risk  of  an  internally-induced  crisis  due  to  policy  error  and 
provides the authorities with greater room and flexibility to deal with unexpected events or 
shocks. In the current crisis, the ability of many Asian economies to respond aggressively to 
the impact of the crisis without undermining policy credibility is a case in point.  
From my own experience, policy discipline relates closely to decisions that are made with a 
long-term  perspective.  The  lack  of  discipline  more  than  often  reflects  policy  that  focuses 
overwhelmingly  on  short-term  outcome.  In  economics,  emphasis  on  short-term  outcome 
tends to reduce volatility initially but a cost of a much larger volatility and welfare loss at a 
later  date  as  the  needed  adjustment  is  postponed.  A  long-term  perspective,  on  the  other 
hand, allows the adjustment to be spread out with lesser volatility and effects on economic 
welfare.  
Next,  enhancing  flexibility  in  the  economy  through  policy  that  raises  the  role  of  the  price 
mechanism  in  the  allocation  of  resources  is  another  crucial  policy  choice  that  can  make 
important differences to the economies of emerging markets. Again, we in Asia learned this 
lesson  well  in  the  1990’s.  Since  then,  reform  of  the  policy  regime  to  increase  flexibility, 
especially the exchange rate, has contributed importantly to greater resiliency and abilities of 
the economies in Asia to adjust to changes in the external environment. So, the fact that the 
Asian  economies  have  done  better  this  time  is  not  only  because  of  the  policy  response 
during  the  crisis,  but  also  because  of  the  policy  choice  that  was  made  long  time  ago  to 
increase flexibility.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  second  part  of  my  talk  on  the  post-crisis  environment  and  the 
challenges for emerging markets. 
The challenges for emerging markets in the post-crisis world will be shaped importantly by 
the forces of change that will emanate in the new global economic and financial environment. 
Some of these forces will relate to cyclical shifts in trade and financial flows in response to 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2010
new  configuration  of  risk  and  opportunities  that  arises.  Others  will  represent  a  more 
fundamental  change  as  the  new  structure  of  economic  and  financial  relations  between 
countries emerges to replace the old structure that had been dismantled by the crisis. Recent 
discussion on this issue has pointed to the new normal global growth, the rise of Asia, and 
the increased role of government in the economic system as the new economic realities in 
the  post-crisis  world.  But  amongst  these  three  possible  new  changes,  I  think  the  most 
important  that  will  have  far-reaching  implications  for  emerging  economies  will  be  the 
durability and the composition of global growth.  
The new normality of global growth will see a lower average rate of growth, weighed down by 
slower  growth  in  the  advanced  economies  because  of  the  balance  sheet  problems  of 
households, banks, and the government. Emerging markets, on the other hand, will see a 
more rapid recovery and expansion, leading to what has now been described as a two-speed 
global economy. Implications of this two-speed economy for emerging markets will be two-
fold. First, differential growth outlook will provide incentives for a reallocation of investment 
into emerging market assets as investors look for higher return. This will result in large and 
persistent  capital  flows  to  emerging  markets  with  important  implications  for  the  exchange 
rate,  domestic  liquidity,  inflation,  and  asset  prices.  Second,  the  two-speed  economy  will 
represent a shift in the centre of economic gravity from the advanced countries to the Asian 
region.  But  whether  such  shift  is  sustainable  will  depend  crucially  on  how  the  transition  is 
managed  by  policies  in  emerging  markets.  Chief  amongst  these  are  the  exchange  rate 
arrangement and the policy to reorient the growth driver from exports to domestic demand. 
Successful  handling  of  these  two  issues  will  significantly  reduce  the  risk  and  the  threat  to 
financial stability in emerging economies associated with strong and persistent capital flows. 
Therefore, managing this risk and growing safely in this era of new globalization will be the 
stake for emerging economies going forward. 
Let me now turn to the third and final part of my talk which is on the challenge for central 
banks.  
The  task  set  ahead  for  central  banks  in  emerging  markets,  therefore,  are  many.  First  and 
foremost is to manage the challenge posed by the new globalization in the pursuit of price 
stability.  Important  in  this  context  is  the  monetary  policy  framework  that  addresses  the 
challenge to price stability while at the same time allows central banks to pay closer attention 
to financial stability. Next is the question on the role that central bank policies can play to 
support the economy’s transition from export-led growth to a  more balanced growth. Such 
transition  will  require  a  redirection  of  economic  incentives  from  exports  to  domestic 
consumption and investment. At a minimum, the transition will require a further strengthening 
of the economy’s financial system so as to ensure an efficient intermediation of resources 
into productive investments.  
Against  this  backdrop,  I  want  to  leave  you  with  a  few  thoughts  on  the  challenges  to 
macroeconomic  policy  that  will  be  important  for  emerging  market  central  banks  going 
forward.  
The  first  is  monetary  policy  and  the  challenge  is  to  have  in  place  a  monetary  policy 
framework that can deal effectively with the threat to price stability and the need to oversee 
the risk of financial imbalance in this era of globalization. In the current crisis, it is clear that 
no  particular  monetary  policy  framework  is  superior  in  dealing  with  such  a  challenge. 
Nonetheless, experience of many inflation-targeting emerging economies in this crisis does 
demonstrate  that  price  stability  and  financial  stability  can  be  preserved  even  in  extreme 
financial  circumstances  under  a  flexible  inflation-targeting  regime.  This  is  because,  under 
inflation-targeting, monetary policy can be flexibly combined with macroprudential measures 
to  address  concerns  on  financial  stability  without  undermining  the  credibility  of  monetary 
policy.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  has  pursued  this  line  of  flexibility  since  2004.  Moreover, 
inflation-targeting  also  offers  flexibility  in  the  setting  of  the  inflation  targets  in  terms  of  the 
choice between core and headline inflation, as well as the level of the inflation targets itself. 
BIS Review 36/2010 
 3
This flexibility means that monetary policy will have greater room to maneuver in responding 
to  shocks.  With  this  flexibility,  my  view  is  that  inflation-targeting  remains  useful  as  a 
framework for monetary policy in emerging economies.  
The  second  challenge  is  how  to  manage  the  macro-implications  of  large  and  persistent 
capital  inflows,  especially  the  risk  to  financial  stability,  in  the  context  of  a  small  open 
emerging economy.  
At this time, this challenge is real for most countries in the region and the challenge is more 
demanding compared to the similar episodes in the 1990’s. This is because this time capital 
flows are not linked to the financing of payments imbalance in the majority of economies in 
the region, but are a reflection of a global phenomenon of ample liquidity worldwide. Hence, 
there is a potential for capital flows to be larger and more volatile, and effective management 
of its impact will require a constellation of policies, both economic and financial. 
Under inflation-targeting, a flexible exchange rate system will be a first line adjustment that 
can  help  lessen  the  risk  to  financial  stability.  Next,  to  manage  the  impact  on  domestic 
liquidity,  it  will  be  useful  for  central  banks  to  have  a  variety  of  monetary  tools  to  absorb 
liquidity and influence market conditions. But, to deal effectively with both price and financial 
stability, two instruments will be needed. The first is monetary policy that focuses on price 
stability.  The  second  is  bank  regulation  and  effective  supervision  that  ensure  financial 
stability through maintaining a robust and resilient financial system. Important in this context 
for  emerging  economies  is  the  strengthening  of  risk  management  and  governance  of 
financial institutions. Furthermore, if needed, monetary and financial policies can be further 
supplemented by macroprudential measures aimed at reducing procyclical behaviour in the 
financial system. And finally, running fiscal surpluses is an effective counter-cyclical measure 
to restrain the impact of demand expansion on domestic inflation and asset prices.  
The  third  challenge  is  to  develop  and  maintain  a  robust,  efficient,  and  resilient  financial 
system. As I noted earlier, a resilient banking sector is most crucial for helping the economy 
to adjust to the impact of external shock. An efficient financial sector will also raise the ability 
of the private sector to manage risk. In the last fifteen years since the Asian crisis, much has 
been done to strengthen the region’s financial systems. Nonetheless, much more can still be 
achieved in the context of financial market development, enhancing competition, and putting 
in place the needed financial infrastructure to help facilitate better risk management by banks 
and the private sector. In the Thai case, we are moving in this direction with the launch of our 
Second Financial Sector Master Plan last year that focuses on improving efficiency, access, 
and the comprehensiveness of the Thai financial sector. In general, apart from lowering the 
risk  to  financial  stability  through  better  risk  management,  a  robust  and  efficient  financial 
sector will also raise the capacity of emerging economies to generate investment from their 
local savings. This, in my view, is where the real issue lies in solving the problem of global 
imbalance.  
So, this very much concludes what I plan to say to you this morning in my address. I hope it 
has  been  useful.  Again  I  want  to  thank  SEACEN,  the  CCBS  of  the  Bank  of  England,  and 
Ministry  of  Finance,  Brunei  Darussalam,  for  the  invitation,  and  wish  you  all  a  successful 
seminar as well as a full and rewarding career at your respective central bank.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2010
