Christian Noyer: Central banks in the financial crisis – a European 
perspective 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board 
of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Bank  of  Korea  International 
Conference, Seoul, 1 June 2010. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It’s a great pleasure for me to address such a distinguished audience. First, let me thank the 
organizers of  the  conference  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  open  this  second  day  of  the 
conference. Yesterday’s contributions have been outstanding and, in view of our program I 
have very high expectations for our discussions of today.  
From the outset, Central Banks have been major actors in fighting the financial crisis. Overall 
their  actions  have  been  broadly  successful.  In  the  period  to  come,  however,  steering  the 
economy may prove more challenging and new risks can weigh negatively on the recovery 
underway.  A  case  in  point  is  the  brutal  reassessment  of  sovereign  risks  by  market 
participants.  The  euro-area  has  been  at  the  epicentre  of  this  phenomenon.  Some  market 
segments  have  become  dysfunctional  to  a  point  that  jeopardized  the  transmission  of 
monetary  policy.  The  Eurosystem  has  therefore  resorted  to  new  steps  to  contain  those 
tensions and prevent their spill over to the real economy. The sovereign debt turmoil is the 
most recent episode of a crisis that started already more than two years ago. It reminds us if 
need  be  that  crisis  management  is  a  difficult  and  potentially  long  lasting  task  and  that  we 
should  always  keep  in  mind  that  our  policies  have  effects  not  only  the  current  course  of 
events but also through the expectation of the private sector that they may be repeated in the 
future.  
It  is  therefore  timely  to  reflect  upon  the  past,  present  and  future  course  of  Central  Banks’ 
actions.  
I – The seeds of financial instability 
It  is  paradoxical  that  the  crisis  took  place  after  a  protracted  period  of  nominal  and  real 
stability.  In  particular,  inflation  had  remained  low  and  remarkably  stable  for  nearly  two 
decades.  This  unprecedented  degree  of  price  stability  mostly  reflects  a  combination  of 
central banks’ credibility and the effects of a benign economic environment.  
This macroeconomic stability has however not prevented deep imbalances – macroeconomic 
and financial – to grow in parallel, reinforcing one another. The abundance of savings in the 
world, specifically in emerging economies, prevented real long term interest rates from rising 
and stimulated the pace of credit expansion, especially in the US. Indeed, when policy rates 
were raised in 2004 in  the US and late 2005 in the euro  area, long term rates responded 
much less than in previous interest rate cycles and the yield curve flattened unexpectedly.  
Over  the  same  period,  financial  markets  have  gone  through  deep  structural  changes. 
Financial innovation and extensive financial engineering fuelled a “search for yield” through 
increased  risk  taking.  The  development  of  securitisation  has  spurred  the  demand  for  new 
types of instruments. This demand led the financial system to generate new assets even at 
the  cost  of  extending  credit  to  ever  riskier  sub-prime  borrowers.  This,  for  a  time,  helped 
sustain  a  rapid  increase  of  real  estate  prices  which  in  turn  stimulated  the  growth  of 
mortgages.  
BIS Review 76/2010 
 1
The  main  causes  of  the  crisis  therefore  lie  in  the  growing  “real”  imbalances  and  the 
uncontrolled development of financial innovations. Overall, these combined evolutions led to 
a generalized increase in leverage and financial fragility. 
Against this background, it is quite unlikely that too accommodative monetary policies played 
a  central  role  in  the  crisis.  Some  analysts  have  pointed  out  to  what  they  see  as  an 
“asymmetric  response”  by  monetary  authorities  to  asset  price  increases:  Central  Banks 
would not lean against asset price bubbles, but were prepared to clean the consequences 
after  they  burst.  However,  we  need  to  ask  ourselves  whether  the  unusually  rapid  credit 
growth  in  the  years  preceding  the  crisis  should  not  rather  have  called  for  complementary 
policy  actions  on  the  supervision  side.  Some  attempts  were  made  in  the  Eurosystem.  In 
particular,  the  Bank  of  Spain  enforced  dynamic  provisioning  to  curb  domestic  credit 
expansion.  But  the  crisis  hit  globally  nevertheless  and  it  raises  several  challenges  for 
authorities in charge of macroeconomic policies.  
II –Managing the crisis  
Starting  in  august  2007,  Central  Banks  were  confronted  with  major  and  unprecedented 
tensions.  Increasing  uncertainty  led  to  liquidity  hoarding  by  financial  institutions.  Banks 
severely limited the maturity, the scale and the number of counterparties to whom they would 
lend. This liquidity freeze further deteriorated after the bankruptcy of Lehman in September 
2008. Central banks intervened massively in order to tame the liquidity crisis and prevent its 
spill  over  to  the  real  economy.  This  intervention  took  various  forms  across  countries, 
reflecting the specificity local financial markets. 
In the Euro area financial intermediation occurs mainly through the banking system. Most of 
our  actions,  therefore,  aimed  at  providing  banks  with  sufficient  liquidity  through  repo 
operations to ensure that the flow of credit to the economy would not be severely disrupted. 
We  have  been  fortunate  to  enter  the  crisis  with  a  very  appropriate  set  of  tools.  From  the 
outset, our operational framework was based on a very broad list of eligible counterparties 
and  collateral.  So,  we  could  adjust  to  the  shocks  in  money  and  credit  markets  without 
creating new facilities, with the small exceptions of the covered bonds and, more recently, 
government bonds purchases. 
Doing so, we have been able to maintain a clear separation between monetary policy and 
liquidity  provision.  A  major  step  was  taken  in  October  2008  when  we  moved  to  a  regime 
called in our jargon “full allotment fixed rate”, which basically means that banks were given 
unlimited  access  to  liquidity  at  the  prevailing  policy  rate.  Over  the  course  of  the  crisis,  we 
made  several  downward  adjustments  to  that  policy  rate.  But  we  never  committed  to  any 
specific  path  or  trend.  We  always  kept  the  possibility,  while  providing  the  banking  system 
with  unlimited  amounts  of  liquidity,  to  change  the  interest  rates  of  all  our  facilities.  And, 
obviously, this remains true today.  
Because  asset  purchases  played  a  very  limited  role  in  our  operational  framework,  the 
unprecedented expansion in our balance sheet was never a source of concern. By essence, 
repo facilities are self expiring and self exiting. A vivid illustration will come in July when our 
one year long term operation expires and our balance sheet will contract by a third. A very 
useful  complement  comes  from  the  systematic  sterilization  of  our  more  recent  asset 
purchases. 
Our interventions have had significant effects on monetary and market conditions in the Euro 
zone. Liquidity conditions improved markedly. The decrease in policy rates, from 4.25 % in 
September 2008 to 1 % in May 2009 was largely passed-though to bank lending. This return 
to more favourable conditions has supported economic recovery. 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2010
During this period, four main factors have contributed to the success and efficiency of our 
operations:  
 
First,  our  credibility.  At  no  time  during  the  crisis  have  inflation  expectations 
significantly deviated from our definition of price stability. This was most apparent, 
and crucial, during those months when headline inflation stayed in negative territory, 
the  output  gap  was  itself  strongly  negative  and  the  risks  of  deflation  could  have 
materialized.  
With inflationary expectations strongly anchored around 2%, the “zero lower bound” 
never really was a problem. Short term real interest rates were brought at negative 
levels,  with  sufficient  speed  to  stabilize  the  economy  despite  the  unprecedented 
shock which followed the Lehman failure. 
second, the flexibility of our operational framework  
third,  the  strong  and  efficient  cooperation  between  all  Central  Banks,  which 
materialized  through  the  speedy  implementation  of  swap  agreements  and,  most 
visibly, in the coordinated reduction in interest rates which occurred in October 2009 
Finally, for France, we drew important benefits from having the Central Bank taking 
important responsibilities in banking supervision and financial stability. At any single 
point in time, we could efficiently draw on our knowledge of the banking sector, our 
broader vision of financial markets and our macroeconomic expertise.  
   III – Challenges for the future of central banking 
In the past, financial crisis have always triggered important changes in the organization and 
practice  of  Central  Banking.  Will  this  one  be  an  exception?  Two  interrelated  but  different 
questions are currently debated: should Central banks take more responsibility in fostering 
financial stability? And should monetary policy itself be conducted in a different way? These 
are deep and difficult issues which may take many years to elucidate. Here, I will try and give 
some preliminary – and personal – insights. 
1/ – Few people would discuss that Central Banks should have a bigger financial stability role 
in  the  future.  They  have  a  strategic stake in  the  functioning  of  financial  markets.  Financial 
conditions,  such  as  developments  in  asset  prices  or  in  the  quantity  of  credit  affect  the 
transmission of monetary policy. Central Banks also have the expertise needed to address 
these issues. 
In  many  countries,  the  Central  Bank  is  already  formally  recognized  as  the  systemic 
supervisor. In Europe, the ECB will play an essential role in the future European Risk and 
Stability  Board.  There  are  big  advantages  in  keeping  financial  supervision  close  to  the 
Central Banks. Central Banks need to have an intimate knowledge of the banking system. 
And, on the other hand, bank supervisors benefit when they can complement their unique 
vision  of  individual  situations  by  a  broader  perspective  on  financial  and  macroeconomic 
dynamics. 
2/ – Even when pursued by Central Banks or under their aegis, financial stability should be 
first maintained by specific tools. The general objective is to strengthen the financial system’s 
resilience to downturns and limit activities that increase systemic risk. Three approaches are 
currently pursued: 
 
increasing  robustness  and  strength  of  individual  banks  through  hardening  capital 
and  liquidity  requirements.  This  is  the  purpose  of  adjustments  considered  to  the 
Basel II framework. A BIS and Central Banks’ working group is currently assessing 
the macroeconomic implications of the reforms.  
BIS Review 76/2010 
 3
  mitigating the pro-cyclicality of financial systems. Accounting rules have an essential 
role  to  play,  in  this  regard,  both  to  allow  for  early  recognition  of  risk  through 
expected loss provisioning and avoid excessive volatility through adequate valuation 
principles.  
systemic  risk  should  be  contained  via  the  creation  of  resolution  mechanisms  for 
financial institutions as well as promoting more resilient market infrastructures, such 
as CCPs for clearing and settlement of derivatives products. 
The financial crisis also gives us the opportunity to think about Central Banks fundamental 
task:  the  making  of  monetary  policy.  Amongst  the  many  questions  currently  asked  in 
academic and policy making circles I will select four: 
1/ – the mandate: recent proposals have been made to assign monetary policy additional 
financial  stability  objectives,  possibly  by  amending  Central  Banks  mandates.  I  see  those 
proposals as misguided. First, adding a financial stability objective at the same level as price 
stability  could  weaken  the  latter.  Second,  if  price  stability  is  not  a  sufficient  condition  to 
ensure financial stability, it is certainly a necessary one. And, finally, current mandates seem 
absolutely appropriate to allow Central Banks to fulfil all their responsibilities. Looking, more 
specifically  at  the  Eurosystem  we  have  a  “hierarchical”  mandate,  giving  clear  and 
unambiguous  priority  to  achieving  price  stability;  and,  once  this  objective  has  been  met,  it 
allows us to pursue other goals. Financial stability easily fits into the set of those “secondary” 
objectives. This clear priority was understood by the markets. It was most apparent in our 
decision to raise policy rates in July 2008. It was essential to give us the necessary leeway to 
act  decisively  later  –  when  the  financial  system  was  in  danger  of  paralysis  –  without 
compromising our credibility.  
2/  –  the  operational  framework:  most  Central  Banks  conduct  monetary  policy  through 
changes  in  interest  rates.  Many  do  not  pay  close  attention  to  monetary  aggregates.  The 
Eurosystem  stands  alone  in  developing  a  formal  monetary  analysis  through  its  “second 
pillar”. At the very least, however, the crisis has shown that liquidity matters. The assumption 
of permanent liquidity allowed the shadow banking system to develop and proper. Excessive 
maturity  transformation  has  fueled  the  growth  in  leverage.  Liquidity  premia  were  all  but 
eliminated for a long period of time.  
It  is  legitimate  question  whether  those  evolutions  have  implications  for  monetary  policy. 
Recent research tends to show that even small changes in policy rates could have had non-
negligible  implications  forcing  some  intermediaries  to  close  leveraged  positions  and, 
potentially, to partially correct some financial imbalances. Those issues may still be relevant 
today when in face of uncertainty, liquidity provision remains important. This is why, even for 
monetary policy purposes, Central Banks should keep actively monitoring asset prices, credit 
flows and liquidity conditions.  
3/ – a closely related question pertains to the transmission mechanism. Evidence tends to 
show  that  risk  appetite  tends  to  increase  when  interest  rates  stay  low  and  liquidity  is 
perceived as abundant. This is called the “risk taking channel” of monetary policy. Risk taking 
behaviors are amplified when monetary policy is permissive. Ultimately, this channel creates 
a link between the levels of interest rates and risk premia. And this, of course, means that 
movements in interest rates have, everything equal, a bigger (and may be less predictable) 
impact on the financial system, credit aggregates and asset prices. A lot of work remains to 
be done to precisely quantify that channel and disentangle its effects from those of the more 
“traditional” credit channel. Nevertheless, it is clear that, in the future Central Banks will need 
to pay greater attention to that specific impact of their decisions on the financial system and 
the  economy.  The  risk  taking  channel  provides  the  best  rationale  for  “leaning  against  the 
wind” when financial imbalances tend to grow. 
4/ – the last question is especially topical here, in Korea. How much should we care about 
the  “global  monetary  stance”?  This  is  not  an  easy  concept  to  define,  or  to  use  from  an 
4 
 BIS Review 76/2010
operational  point  of  view.  On  the  other  hand,  we  know  that  some  determinants  of  price 
stability are global: they depend on the combined effects of our national policy stances. Put it 
differently,  there  are  externalities  associated  with  our  different  monetary  policies.  For 
instance, divergences in monetary policies, however justified by national circumstances, can 
fuel  capital  flows  and  create  financial  imbalances.  In  theory,  those  problems  can  be  dealt 
either with total exchange rate flexibility or , on the contrary, fully sterilized interventions and 
the dynamic use of foreign exchange reserves. Neither of those polar solutions appear fully 
attractive or feasible. This is why the search for new “financial safety nets” i.e. ways to delink 
reserves creation from monetary policies and exchange rate management appear promising 
and, although very complicated, should be encouraged. These are extremely difficult issues. 
But I want to pay tribute to the leadership taken by  Korea  on this question during its G20 
Presidency.  
Conclusion 
To conclude, I would like to outline what I see as the main lessons central banks should draw 
from the crisis. 
First, financial crises are a pervasive feature of modern capitalism. While the exact timing of 
a crisis is hard to predict, situations of financial fragility, when some sectors have increased 
their debt and leverage in parallel to asset prices, reduce the resilience of financial systems 
to asset price reversals. 
Second,  timely  and  determined  interventions  of  central  banks  can  quench  the  thirst  of 
financial markets for liquidity and limit the spill over of liquidity squeezes to the real economy. 
Central  banks  have  demonstrated  that  their  international  cooperation  could  be  relied  upon 
even  under  extreme  stress  in  financial  markets  that  have  become  integrated  at  the  global 
level. 
Third, central banks should both prepare to manage future financial crises and design their 
policies in order to minimise the risks of future financial crises. For the least, central banks 
should  avoid  that  their  policies  stimulate  potential  excessive  risk  taking,  which  although 
benign in good times, increase the scale of insolvency in the event of an asset price reversal. 
This is the best way to limit the risks to price stability over the longer run. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 76/2010 
 5
