Patrick Honohan: The intertwined recent experience of the Irish and UK 
economies 
Address  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  &  Financial  Services 
Authority  of  Ireland,  to  the  British-Irish  Parliamentary  Assembly  40th  Plenary  Conference, 
Cavan, 22 February 2010. 
 Introduction  
I can think of no better topic for an address to the British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly than 
the similarities and contrasts between the performance of our intertwined economies before 
and during the global economic crisis. Economic activity and employment have contracted 
sharply and property prices have plunged. Our economies have been hit hard by the global 
financial crisis but in addition, for all of us, the crisis has served to expose strikingly similar 
pre-existing vulnerabilities in our economies – not shared by most others in Europe – which 
would  sooner  or  later  have  led  to  trouble  even  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  global  meltdown, 
notably:  
• 
• 
the wide-ranging imbalances created by a credit-fuelled property boom;  
the  growing  dependence  of  the  financial  sector  on  wholesale  market-funding, 
increasingly in the form of foreign borrowing, and  
the  extent  to  which  the  credit  and  property  booms  significantly  boosted  transitory 
windfall tax revenues, which came to be relied on to finance strong growth in public 
spending.  
 While  the  economy  of  the  Republic  of  Ireland  was  the  more  vulnerable,  and  has  been  hit 
much  harder,  I  think  that  these  parallels  are  no  coincidence.  Indeed,  the  involvement  of 
banks from each side in funding the property boom of the other is an interesting dimension of 
the  pre-crisis  bubble.  This  of  course  reflects  the  fact  that  our  economies  have  long  been 
intertwined on a broader front.  
As we begin to recover, though, there is one important emerging contrast. Inflation has been 
persistently negative in the Republic for over a year, reflecting the unwinding of the bubble 
against  the  background  of  a  strong  currency.  But  UK  prices  have  been  rising  and  the 
international value of sterling has been at historic lows. The contrasting exchange rate, price 
and wage environment presents its own difficulties, not least for Irish businesses struggling 
to remain cost-competitive, especially when wages had edged up to uncompetitive levels in 
the last years of the boom.  
Fiscal policy  
Even before the global crisis metastasized in September 2008, Ireland’s fiscal position was 
coming  under  pressure,  not  just  because  of  an  accelerated  expansion  of  spending  in  the 
previous  few  years,  but  especially  because  of  the  sharp  fall  in  tax  revenues  which  began 
soon after the property prices started to turn down.  
To elaborate, the marked deterioration in the Irish fiscal position in recent years reflects in 
part  the  effects  of  strong  growth  in  public  spending  first  during  the  boom  years,  and  then 
resulting  from  the  demands  imposed  by  the  jump  in  unemployment.  But  a  much  more 
significant driver has been sharp collapse in tax revenues. The scale of the latter has been 
remarkable. The tax take, having averaged over 24 per cent of GDP in the first seven years 
of the new millennium, collapsed to barely 20 per cent of a greatly reduced GDP by 2009. 
BIS Review 19/2010 
 1
This reflected a fundamental weakness in the tax structure and, in particular, an excessive 
reliance on revenues related to the value of property transactions.  
Looked at more broadly, this was the continuation of a trend that has been evident over the 
past  two  decades,  which  has  seen  a  systematic  shift  away  from  more  stable  and  reliable 
revenue sources such income tax, VAT and excise taxes, towards more cyclically sensitive 
taxes.  The  result  was  more  and  more  dependence  on  corporation  tax,  stamp  duties  and 
capital  gains  tax  as  sources  of  revenue;  the  contribution  of  this  group  of  taxes  grew  from 
about  7  per  cent  of  total  tax  revenue  in  1987  to  over  35  per  cent  two  decades  later.  The 
buoyancy of these taxes during the boom period facilitated both a reduction in the income tax 
burden and the numbers in the tax net. It also financed a strong and persistent rise in public 
spending.  While  reliance  on  “boom  time”  taxes  made  these  developments  possible  for  a 
time,  it  left  the  fiscal  position  particularly  exposed  to  a  downturn.  It  also  meant  that  fiscal 
policy  was  effectively  operating  in  a  pro-cyclical  manner  during  this  period  and  was  itself 
stoking  the  boom.  (Indeed,  it  has  recently  been  estimated  that  the  contribution  of  the 
residential property market to total tax revenue through VAT, stamp duty and capital gains 
alone more than doubled to over 12 per cent in the seven years to 2006, Addison-Smyth and 
McQuinn, 2009).  
There is also the issue of the extent to which the nature and design of the tax system itself 
partly  fuelled  the  construction  boom.  Tax  incentives  for  developers  and  homeowners  have 
long been a feature of the Irish taxation system and must have contributed significantly to the 
oversupply of houses which now exists, especially in parts of the country where underlying 
demand is likely to remain weak for many years to come.  
The impact of the subsequent collapse in what were in reality largely windfall revenues can 
be gauged from the fact that, since 2007, total tax revenues have fallen by 30 per cent, while 
the  combined  receipts  from  stamp  duties,  CGT  and  corporation  tax  have  fallen  by  58  per 
cent  over  the  same  period.  In  total,  just  over  half  of  the  revenue  loss  since  2007  reflects 
declines in these three categories.  
Along  with  the  collapse  of  tax  revenues,  an  expansion  of  Government  spending  –  partly 
driven by policy, partly by the automatic response to a deteriorating output and employment 
situation – resulted in the sudden emergence in Ireland of a sharp fiscal deficit, after years of 
surpluses.  
I  don’t  need  to  dwell  today  on  the  robust,  measured  and  appropriate  policy  response  in 
Ireland that has stemmed and begun to reverse this fiscal set-back. Instead, I want to note 
the  striking  extent  to  which  UK  fiscal  trends  up  to  2009  have  paralleled,  albeit  in  a  more 
muted way, those of Ireland.  
As I understand it, the recession in the UK has also been characterized by a fall-off in tax 
revenues  and  a  rise  in  spending  which,  though  not  quite  as  sharp  as  in  Ireland,  have 
together resulted in the emergence of a deficit of comparable proportions as a percentage of 
GDP (in this case following a number of years where the deficit ran at around 3 per cent).  
UK tax revenue too has been sensitive not only to the economic cycle, but also to the level of 
housing  market  and  financial  sector  activity.  In  terms  of  corporation  tax,  for  example, 
revenues  from  the  financial  sector  have  typically  accounted  for  around  25  per  cent  of  the 
overall  corporation  tax  take,  while  the  housing  sector  has  provided  revenue  in  much  the 
same way as I have described for Ireland. UK Treasury estimates suggest that receipts from 
taxes linked to these two sectors rose from around 3 per cent of GDP in 2002–03 to 4¼ per 
cent  of  GDP  by  2007–08  and  accounted  for  around  half  of  the  increase  in  total  current 
receipts over this period. Receipts from the two sectors are projected to decline to around 
2¾ per cent of GDP in the current fiscal year, down by over one-third as a share of GDP. 
Public spending has also been growing, not least designed to offset some of the downturn in 
other spending.  
2 
 BIS Review 19/2010
In summary, in both countries, the collapse of the housing and credit booms has had a major 
impact  on  the  public  finances.  For  Ireland  at  least,  the  lesson  has  been  that  our  taxation 
system needs to be on a firmer footing than in the past.  
to 
British and Irish banks and the property bubble – home and abroad  
While tax incentives undoubtedly played a part in the Irish story, however, it was banks that 
primarily fuelled the property bubble. In short, there was too much bank lending, financed by 
heavy foreign borrowing; this funded an unsustainable construction and property price boom. 
To expand credit on the scale which happened, banks leveraged their deposits with sizeable 
borrowings  from  abroad.  Funds  were  readily  available  in  a  global  economy  awash  with 
surplus savings, with increasing possibilities for securitisation and helped by the absence of 
exchange rate risk on euro borrowings. Without large-scale foreign borrowing by the banks, 
the property boom could not have grown as it did.  
Irish banks also engaged in extensive lending to finance projects outside of Ireland, though, 
in practice, this offered them little real diversification. Such lending was once again largely 
focussed on property-related activities, quite often involved Irish residents and tended to be 
concentrated  on  markets  which  were  strongly  correlated 
Ireland.  Consequently, 
overinvestment in property by Irish people was not confined to this country; the boom period 
also  saw  strong  expansion  in  overseas  property  investment,  particularly  commercial 
property. Much of this investment was concentrated on the UK. While comprehensive data 
on the scale of such flows (lending for investment in UK property market) is not published, 
industry estimates suggest that up to half of such commercial investment went to the UK and 
that, during this period, Irish investors accounted for a not insignificant share of activity in the 
UK commercial property market.  
While the expansion of Irish banks stands out for the scale on which these things occurred, it 
is clear that this experience was not unique. Global financial conditions were characterised 
by an abundance of liquidity and very low risk aversion across most markets. Ireland was not 
the only banking market which expanded by lending for property. A similar pattern was seen 
in the UK, where a similar combination of macroeconomic imbalances and financial sector 
developments, accompanied by a similar lowering of credit standards, drove rapid expansion 
of credit. To be sure, the British financial sector is much larger and more complex than that in 
Ireland.  Nevertheless,  a  significant  part  of  its  expansion  in  the  mid-2000s  was  related  to 
funding of the property market. It has also been argued that accounting standards designed 
to reflect observable facts and limit the role of judgement as to future possibilities and risks, 
further contributed to pro-cyclicality in credit provision and pricing. The increase in property 
prices in Britain was not far behind that in Ireland, though the construction boom was much 
less  pronounced,  limiting  the  scale  of  the  subsequent  overhang.  Nevertheless,  as  we  all 
know,  several  sizable  British  banks  got  into  difficulties  too  and  had  to  be  intervened  or 
rescued.  
Both the Irish and British banking systems are unusually international in character. For the 
Irish banks, a key part of their international activities relates to their long-standing and sizable 
presence in the UK – going well beyond their clearly central role in Northern Ireland. And the 
wide global reach of the largest British banks is an important aspect of London’s continued 
role  as  a  leading  global  financial  centre  hosting  a  deep  and  complex  matrix  of  financial 
activities.  Unsurprisingly,  during  the  boom  period,  growth  in  the  UK-owned  financial  sector 
was not just confined to the UK itself.  
Indeed,  bank  competition  in  Ireland  was  strikingly  influenced  by  the  decision  of  one 
UK-based  bank  (HBOS)  to  expand  more  vigorously  into  the  Irish  mortgage  market  with 
especially keen pricing (though I would stress that it was not the most aggressive competitor 
in the Irish market). This bank’s actions had the initially favourable effect of reducing lending 
margins  and  introducing  new  products,  such  as  the  tracker  mortgage,  which  assured 
borrowers that interest rate changes on floating rate mortgages would not be arbitrary. These 
BIS Review 19/2010 
 3
innovations  were  subsequently  adopted  more  widely,  by  both  Irish  controlled  and  foreign 
controlled banks in Ireland, as was an extensive reliance on wholesale funding.  
Indeed, without questioning the largely-home-grown nature of the Irish credit bubble, it may 
well be that the rapid – and ultimately unwise – expansion of some of the UK banks both at 
home and in Ireland may have helped to lull Irish observers into a sense of false security. 
(The same might be said of the property price surge that was going on in parts of Britain).  
At  any  rate,  these  new  lending  features  became  unsustainable  in  Ireland  once  the  global 
financial  crisis  broke,  with  the  scarcity  and  increased  cost  of  wholesale  funding  to  many 
banks  undermining  the  profitability  of  tracker  mortgages.  Not  surprisingly,  both  of  the  big 
British banks that have suffered most in the crisis (HBOS and RBS) have – like the locally 
controlled  banks  –  reported  a  severe  loan-loss  experience  on  the  lending  of  their  Irish 
subsidiaries.  
Both  countries  have  acted  decisively  to  protect  crucial  but  weakened  segments  of  their 
banking  systems.  Extensive  asset  insurance  (UK)  and  asset  purchase  (Ireland)  schemes 
have been put in place and government has injected capital into major banks on both sides 
of  the  Irish  Sea,  nationalizing  some  of  them.  The  Irish  measures  will  soon  be  completed 
when  the  major  asset  purchases  of  NAMA  are  finalized,  and  the  main  banks  are 
recapitalized, at least in part with further investments by Government. While the scale of the 
Irish  measures  is  larger  than  those  in  Britain,  and  the  design  of  the  measures  different  in 
detail, as is warranted by the contrasting nature and scale of the distressed assets held in 
the two banking systems, their broad outlines have striking similarities.  
I am confident that these measures will succeed both in confirming the solidity of the banks, 
and in further restoring confidence in the finances of the State, free as it will then be of any 
shadow of prospective commitments to the banks.  
Since  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis,  banks  have  tended  to  withdraw  from  international 
commitments,  reflecting  not  only  a  broad  upswing  in  what  is  often  termed  “home  bias”  in 
finance,  but  also  the  intensified  pressure  to  deleverage  –  a  pressure  which  has  been 
considerably reinforced by the decisions of the European Commission, concerned to prevent 
State  aid  to  banks  from  distorting  banking  markets.  In  line  with  these  trends,  the  new 
management of HBOS has recently moved to retrench its Irish operations, closing its retail 
branch network here, a decision which is understandable though disappointing. I am glad to 
have been reassured of the determination of Ulster Bank – the RBS subsidiary – to remain in 
Ireland for the long haul. I feel sure that this commitment will be rewarded over time, and I 
would  like  to  take  the  opportunity  to  emphasize  how  much  we  welcome  the  presence  of 
British and other foreign banks providing financial services in Ireland.  
Wage competitiveness  
If, on the other hand, we are to seek contrasts, we need look no further than to wage, price 
and  exchange  rate  developments.  Clearly,  wage  competitiveness  is  a  key  to  restoring 
economic  activity  and  reversing  the  rise  in  unemployment.  This  aspect  of  competitiveness 
deteriorated  significantly  in  Ireland  during  the  boom,  and,  given  the  fact  that  euro-area 
inflation will continue to be low in the years ahead, recovering wage competitiveness in the 
short run must depend largely on containing and indeed reducing nominal wage rates – as 
indeed  has  already  formed  part  of  budgetary  strategy.  Though  tough,  this  should  be 
somewhat less painful than might appear at first sight, given the fact that inflation in Ireland 
has been negative now for well over a year – quite a contrast with the UK, where inflation 
currently  exceeds  the  official  target.  Even  indebted  households  may,  for  the  present,  be 
better able to absorb nominal wage cuts to the extent that most floating mortgage rates are 
currently still lower than they were before the crisis. It’s a different matter, of course, for the 
many affected by unemployment.  
4 
 BIS Review 19/2010
In contrast, international wage competitiveness of the UK has been strongly assisted by the 
weakness of sterling since the crisis began (albeit at the cost of rising inflation). The sharp 
decline in the value of sterling, especially from late 2007 to early 2009, has of course been 
inconvenient, to say the least, for businesses in the Republic exposed to UK competition – 
and  let’s  not  forget  that  we  have  long  been  and  are  still  among  the  UK’s  largest  trading 
partners. The contrasting exchange rate regimes and policies have certainly complicated life. 
Achieving  cost  savings  sufficient  to  offset  the  exchange  rate  movement  –  albeit  partially 
mitigated by higher UK inflation – has proved difficult, as is well understood by businesses in 
border counties such as Cavan.  
Achieving  lower  nominal  wage  rates  is  not  easy.  But  it  is  undoubtedly  an  essential 
component of a pro-employment recovery strategy for Ireland – and not simply a means of 
achieving budgetary savings. I want to end with this message, as I think that it is both the 
most important policy message that I can deliver in the current environment, and one which 
highlights  in  a  dramatic  way  the  similarities,  contrasts  and  interdependencies  of  the 
economies of the Republic of Ireland and the United Kingdom, as we both face the volatilities 
and surprises of the globalized world.  
BIS Review 19/2010 
 5
