Millison Narh: Macroeconomic management and regional integration 
Keynote address by Mr Millison Narh, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Ghana, at the West 
African  Institute  for  Financial  and  Economic  Management  (WAIFEM)  Regional  Course  on 
Macroeconomic Management and Regional Integration, Accra, 8–19 March 2010. 
 to 
it  covers 
topics  ranging 
from  research  methods 
Director General of WAIFEM, Prof. Akpan H. Ekpo, 
Course Facilitators and Participants, 
Distinguished Invited Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
On behalf of the Governor, Mr. Kwesi Amissah-Arthur, let me welcome you all to this opening 
ceremony of the Regional Course on Macroeconomic Management and Regional Integration. 
I am pleased to welcome you all to Accra, especially those visiting us for the first time; please 
feel at home and do take some time off your otherwise busy work schedule to visit some of 
our historical landmarks as well as tourist attractions, and to get a taste of the well-known 
Ghanaian hospitality. I also wish to thank WAIFEM for organizing this course, and indeed for 
generally  sustaining  such  efforts  in  line  with  its  principal  objective  of  building  capacity  for 
debt, macroeconomic and financial sector management in its constituent countries. I thank 
you for inviting me to deliver the keynote address and to chair the opening ceremony. 
From  a  cursory  glance  at  your  work  program,  it  is  clear  to  me  that  the  course  is  rather 
integrated,  as 
the  basics  of 
macroeconomics, advanced macroeconomics, econometrics and regional integration issues. 
I am certain that an excellent faculty has been put at your disposal to facilitate the respective 
topics, and I am sure that your participation in the course shall indeed be beneficial. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  theme  for  this  course,  “Macroeconomic  Management  and 
Economic Integration”, could not have been better chosen. The recent global financial crisis 
has  re-emphasised  the  need  for  more  efficient  macroeconomic  management  and  the 
promotion of economic integration among our economies. As you will recall, the impacts of 
the recent global financial crisis on fragile economies such as ours, have ranged from falling 
exports, a drop in remittances, reduced access to trade finance, lower levels of foreign direct 
investment, and potential reductions in further foreign aid flows. Among the coping strategies 
that  have  been  suggested  at  different  fora  is  to  boost  domestic  resources  as  foreign 
financing  from  export  revenues  to  development  assistance  continues  to  dry  up.  Another 
recommendation is to accelerate economic integration among our economies so as to limit 
the impact of asymmetric shocks, and also to discover new regional markets for our exports. 
As you are aware, we are currently implementing the two track approach to the ECOWAS 
single  monetary  zone  concept.  The  Gambia,  Ghana,  Guinea,  Nigeria,  Sierra  Leone,  and 
recently  Liberia  have  been  working  for  the  formation  of  a  second  monetary  zone  that  will 
ultimately merge with WAEMU for the formation of the ECOWAS-wide single monetary zone. 
The  second  monetary  zone  project,  like  the  single  monetary  zone  programme  was 
postponed a number of times due to the inability of its members to meet the macro economic 
convergence criteria and the structural benchmarks. At the 24th Meeting of the Convergence 
Council  of  Ministers  and  Governors  of  Central  Banks  of  the  West  African  Monetary  Zone 
(WAMZ), it was yet again agreed that the dateline for the single currency and monetary union 
in the WAMZ should be postponed to January 1st 2015. 
Indeed,  our  economic  and  regional  integration  efforts  continue  to  face  challenges  as 
countries struggle to meet and sustain the convergence criteria. But in spite of the adverse 
impacts of the global financial crisis on our economies, it is gratifying to note that member 
countries of the zone are making progress in containing the adverse impacts of the global 
crisis and stabilizing their economies to restore it to a path of stronger growth and poverty 
BIS Review 51/2010 
 1
reduction. Clearly, we must continue to implement sound macroeconomic policies so as to 
sustain progress toward convergence. We must all commit to work on the roadmap towards 
the  introduction  of  the  single  currency,  be  it  in the  areas of  harmonization  of  convergence 
criteria, or harmonization of the regulatory and supervisory framework for banking and other 
financial  institutions,  or  harmonization  of  monetary  policy  frameworks,  payments  system 
infrastructure, trade liberalisation, exchange rate stabilisation, capital account liberalisation, 
or integration of financial markets in the zone, etc. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I know that we can continue to count on Management of WAIFEM for 
building the capacity of technical staff of Central Banks and Ministries of Finance, as well as 
other public servants in member countries in the various areas connected to the successful 
implementation  of  the  single  currency  framework  both  within  the  Zone  and  indeed  in 
ECOWAS. 
In  conclusion,  let  me  again  thank  the  Management  of  WAIFEM  for  bringing  this  important 
course  to  our  doorstep,  and  I  urge  you  all  to  take  time  off  to  explore  some  of  the  tourist 
facilities  and  other  landmarks  that  we  have  available.  I  know  that  you  have  an  intensive 
training programme ahead of you and your desire to commence the technical sessions right 
away. 
On that note, Ladies and Gentlemen, it is my privilege to declare open the Regional Course 
on Macroeconomic Management and Regional Integration. 
I wish you all a rewarding time here in Accra and I thank you for your attention. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2010
