Usha Thorat: Risk management – priorities for the Indian banking sector 
Opening remarks by Smt Usha Thorat, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
panel  discussion  on  “Risk  Management:  Priorities  for  the  Indian  Banking  Sector”,  at 
“BANCON – Indian Banking Conclave 2009–10”, Mumbai, 12 January 2010. 
 1. 
The new decade is predicted to be more transformational than the first decade of 
this millennium for the Indian economy and the Indian financial system. If the last ten years 
have  seen  transformation  in  terms  of  consistently  higher  growth  rates,  adoption  of  core 
banking solutions, transformation in the payments systems and greater integration with the 
global  economy,  the  coming  decade  will  see  unprecedented  volume  of  business  for  the 
Indian  financial  system  as  it  tries  to  meet  the  challenges  and  requirements  of  rapid  and 
inclusive  growth.  Information  Technology  (IT)  has  made  it  possible  for  banks  to  deal  with 
large numbers and such growth in volume and value of business will obviously imply huge 
challenges for risk management, which in turn will have to depend on human resources and 
IT in dealing with the new normal – a theme so apt for this conference.  
2.  
The major challenge is, clearly, having the human resources of the right kind and 
numbers and the ability to retain skilled personnel. From having personnel to deliver banking 
services to the poorest, to having the expertise to deliver sophisticated financial products and 
adopt  consistent  risk  management  practices  across  the  organisation,  will  be  the  key  to 
managing huge organisations optimally.  
3.  
If one of the reasons for the global financial crisis was that the financial sector grew 
out of sync with the real sector in the advanced economies, in India the position is different in 
that  the  financial  system  has  to  ensure  that  it  meets  the  requirements  of  the  growing  real 
sector. Risk is inherent in banking as banks essentially trade in risk in the process of maturity 
transformation.  Therefore,  banks  cannot  afford  to  be  risk  avoiders.  At  the  same  time 
“banker’s prudence”, something that is critical to safety of the depositors’ funds, has to be the 
underlying philosophy at all times. The risk return relationship has to be optimally balanced 
for welfare enhancing outcomes.  
4.  
• 
The crisis has thrown up some critical issues relevant to risk management policies: 
The business model matters. Banks that were extremely aggressive in the trading 
books were clearly more affected. Those that had a fair degree of traditional banking 
were less affected.  
There has to be an intuitive approach to risk. Despite huge growth in leverage and 
huge expansion of “on” and “off-balance” sheet items, complex risk models threw up 
measures  of  risk  that  seemed  to  be  quite  capable  of  being  absorbed.  There  was 
obviously  a  clear  limitation  to  these  models  especially  in  times  of  stress.  The 
inadequacies stemmed from two perspectives: 
a. 
Use of past data without adequately factoring in the data from acute periods of 
stress and 
The presumption that the highly sophisticated mathematical models could be 
as successful as they are in physical sciences. 
b. 
 The latter presumption is clearly wrong inasmuch as financial events are heavily influenced 
by  largely  unpredictable  or  irrational  human  behaviour  which  models  cannot  capture. 
Nevertheless,  these  are  useful  when  considered  as  one  of  the  inputs  supplemented  by 
stress/scenario  analysis  and  informed  judgement.  The  other  aspect  which  causes  serious 
concern  is  that  the  comprehension  of  these  models  remains  confined  to  a  small  group  of 
Quants and it becomes very difficult for the top management and boards to comprehend the 
BIS Review 2/2010 
 1
   actual risk undertaken by the organisation. These lessons will have to be kept in view now 
that some of the banks will move towards advanced approaches.  
• 
Pricing of risk is important. There is a temptation to under-price risk whenever there 
is excess liquidity and pressure to generate profits. Pricing below cost can be risky 
and the risk cost is very often not captured adequately. Moreover, this gives rise to 
asset price bubbles with attendant implications.  
While  credit,  market  and  operational  risk  are  captured  in  the  capital  framework 
under Pillar I of Basel II, liquidity risk, concentration risks, strategic risk, reputation 
risk  and  risks  arising  out  of  securitisation,  off  balance  sheet  vehicles,  valuation 
practices need to be recognised. Banks’ Boards need to focus on all these risks and 
set  firm  wide  limits  on  the  principal  risks  relevant  to  the  banks’  activities.  Banks 
should  focus  on  robust  stress  testing.  Compensation  packages  should  also  form 
part of risk management policies.  
This crisis has also highlighted the importance of internal controls, good corporate 
governance  and  risk  management.  As  shown  in  the  Senior  Supervisors  Group 
Report  on  Risk  Management,  some  banks  with  strong  risk  management  systems 
weathered  the  current  crisis  much  better  than  many  banks  that  had  poor  or 
inadequate risk management systems.  
For banks that are part of financial conglomerates, the process of risk management 
must focus on intra group exposures and transactions as also group wide exposures 
to sectors and borrowers.  
The new element recognised in this crisis is that even while sound risk management 
policies  are  observed  at  the  firm  level  there  could  be  systemic  risks  over  which 
individual banks have no control and this calls for risk management at the systemic 
level – viz. ensuring financial stability by financial regulators and policy makers.  
5.  
I  will  now  turn  to  the  key  areas  where  banks  need  to  focus  while  planning  their 
businesses for higher growth, keeping in view the on-going international regulatory initiatives. 
The Basel Committee has brought out on December 17, 2009, two consultative documents 
containing key proposals that will be taken up for an impact study before adoption. These 
proposals cover raising quality and coverage of capital to ensure loss absorbency on a going 
and  gone  concern  basis,  greater  stress  on  Tier-I  and  common  equity  component, 
introduction  of  leverage  ratio,  measures  to  deal  with  pro  cyclicality  such  as  capital  buffers 
and  forward  looking  provisioning,  introduction  of  minimum  liquidity  ratios  and  enhanced 
capital for trading book securitisations and counterparty credit exposures. 
6.  
While  our  assessment  is  that  Indian  banks  will  be  generally  able  to  meet  these 
enhanced  requirements,  it  is  useful  to  see  on  a  rough  and  ready  basis  what  the  present 
position is in this regard. Our assessment shows that:  
• 
 The  common  equity  component  as  percent  of  total  assets  stood  at  7  per  cent  in 
March 2009 for Indian banking sector as against a range of 3 per cent to 4 per cent 
for large international banks. Total CRAR is 13.75 percent with Tier I at 9.4 per cent. 
Thus Indian banks are in a position to meet the growth requirements currently and 
have reasonable period to plan and raise required capital for future growth.  
The  leverage  ratio  for  Indian  banks  (including  credit  equivalents  of  off-balance 
sheet) was about 17 per cent in March 2009 and can be considered reasonable.  
While  the  SLR  has  stood  us  in  good  stead,  banks  would  do  well  to  assess  their 
liquidity  risk  against  the  more  calibrated  liquidity  ratios  put  out  in  the  consultative 
document such as the proposed short term liquidity coverage ratio and long term net 
stable funding ratio. This should be a regular exercise for banks that have significant 
share of bulk deposits and CDs. 
  2 
 BIS Review 2/2010
  7.  
• 
    The  Basel  proposals  for  forward  looking  provisioning  are  based  on  advanced 
approaches  using  through  the  cycle  PDs  etc.  In  India,  banks  are  yet  to  adopt 
advanced approaches. The gross NPAs for the banking sector have increased from 
2.4 per cent as on March 31, 2008 to 2.6 per cent as on September 30, 2009. In the 
context of the rising NPAs and the likely slippages in the restructured accounts, we 
had introduced the 70 per cent provisioning coverage ratio for NPAs as a forward 
looking  requirement.  Most  banks  currently  meet  this  ratio.  For  standard  assets,  in 
alignment  with  the  Basel  proposals  for  forward  looking  provisioning,  more  work 
needs  to  be  done  based  on  sectoral  trends  and  measurements  of  estimated  loss 
based on something like the Spanish dynamic provisioning model.  
In  the  case  of  capital  for  trading  book  and  counterparty  exposures,  while  some 
enhancements have been made for forex derivatives, more work will be required for 
counterparty exposures and other derivatives. Nevertheless, looking at the interest 
rate risk for the entire balance sheet rather than the trading book alone, duration gap 
analysis could be a useful tool for managing interest rate risk. 
Let me next turn to the areas where banks need to be sensitive to risk:  
While  overall,  credit  growth  in  the  banking  sector  has  been  slower  in  the  current 
year,  certain  sectors  like  real  estate,  infrastructure  and  NBFCs  have  seen  higher 
rates of growth. Credit to commercial real estate (CRE) has fallen in the half year 
ended September 2009 evidencing higher risk perception. However credit to NBFCs 
and  infrastructure  continues  to  be  high.  While  the  country  needs  infrastructure 
financing  of  significant  magnitude,  banks  that  essentially  mobilise  short  term 
resources  do  face  risk  on  account  of  ALM,  large  size  exposures  and  some  risks 
beyond their control such as implementation hurdles. The emergence of long term 
investors  such  as  pension  and  insurance  funds,  development  of  corporate  bond 
market,  and  single  name  CDS  may  help  in  de-risking  to  a  certain  extent  banks 
exposures to infrastructure.  
A  phenomenon  that  RBI  has  brought  to  attention  of  banks  recently  is  the  large 
investments  by  banks  into  debt  oriented  mutual  funds.  MFs  have  invested  large 
amounts in bank CDs. Banks that have a significant part of their liabilities in form of 
CDs  have  to  be  sensitive  to  the  rollover  risk.  Equally,  banks  that  have  large 
investments in MFs have to be sensitive to the liquidity risk in the event of the need 
for  sudden  redemption  by  large  investors  at  the  same  time.  This  distortion  – 
whereby MFs are apparently acting as intermediaries in what should otherwise have 
been  intermediated  in  the  interbank  market  –  is  something  that  needs  to  be 
addressed.  Besides  there  are  concerns  about  the  direction  of  flow  of  resources 
through MF intermediation. 
In the case of lending to NBFCs engaged in micro finance treated as priority sector 
lending by banks, there is a risk that multiple lending and high interest rates could 
lead  to  deterioration  in  asset  quality.  As  originator  of  these  loans  no  longer  have 
stake in  them,  banks  would  do  well  to  assess  the  credit  quality  of  these  loans  by 
better oversight at the grass root level on a sample basis. 
While banks have been diversifying their operations and are into new businesses, it 
is necessary to recognise the reputation risk, especially when promoting VCFs and 
other such funds. As is now well known, internationally many banks had previously 
offloaded certain items from their balance sheet to specialised investment vehicles. 
During the market crunch the banks had to take back those assets on their balance 
sheets. 
Securitisation  of  assets  by  banks  in  India  during  the  year  ended  March  31,  2009 
showed  a  decline  of  about  30%  over  the  previous  year.  This  might  affect  the 
profitability of banks which have been undertaking securitisation activity as one of 
BIS Review 2/2010 
 3
    the main business lines. However, the securitisation activity may pick up once the 
retail  loan  segment  starts  growing  again.  RBI  would  shortly  issue  guidelines  on 
minimum retention requirement and minimum holding period for securitisable loans.  
While  hedging  or  remaining  unhedged  is  the  prerogative  of  the  borrowers,  banks 
must remember that the unhedged position of their borrowers can quickly translate 
into severe stress on their asset quality and hence it is absolutely necessary that the 
unhedged position of the corporates are closely monitored and this is built into the 
credit  and  other  rating  assessment  of  the  borrowers  while  extending  facilities  to 
them. 
Excess liquidity in the system has once again led to the familiar phenomenon of sub 
PLR  short-term  lending;  banks  would  do  well  to  recognise  re-pricing  and  rollover 
risk.  
To  remove  the  credit  information  asymmetry,  RBI  has  taken  long  term  steps 
inasmuch  as  it  has  issued  in-principle  authorisation  for  setting  up  four  credit 
information  companies.  This  may  take  some  time  to  become  operational.  It  must 
however  be  recognised  that  the  system  will  function  only  to  the  extent  timely  and 
accurate information is made available and made use of. I understand that these are 
not happening both in providing information to CIBIL as well as making full use of 
the range of information available particularly for corporate credit.  
While introduction of technology in banking has increased the speed and accuracy 
of service delivery, it has also increased banks’ vulnerability to cyber frauds. Banks 
need to put in place appropriate control mechanisms to prevent such frauds. 
It is necessary for the banks now to take technology from the core banking solution 
to  a  higher  level  to  build  up  adequate  MIS  capability.  Unless  this  is  done,  risk 
management cannot be of the highest order and banks will not be able to meet the 
challenge of an increasingly sophisticated financial system. 
In the area of housing loans, teaser rates are increasingly being offered which is a 
cause for concern. I hope banks are ensuring that borrowers are well aware of the 
implications of such rates and the appraisal takes into account repaying capacity of 
the borrowers when the rates become normal.  
Current  experience  worldwide  has  called  for  robust  stress  testing  practices  in  the 
banks.  Stress  testing  alerts  bank  management  to  adverse  unexpected  outcomes 
related to a variety of risks and provides an indication of how much capital might be 
needed to absorb losses should large shocks occur. In India, banks should not take 
stress testing exercise a mere compliance requirement but accord due importance 
to  it  to  facilitate  the  development  of  risk  mitigation  or  contingency  plans  across  a 
range of stressed conditions.  
8.  
To conclude, Indian banking system which has shown resilience in withstanding the 
global crisis is well placed to meet the requirements of the rapid inclusive growth. Even in the 
new paradigm under Basel, the system is well placed in terms of capital and liquidity. Strong 
HR  and  sound  risk  management  practices  will  stand  the  banks  in  good  stead  while  they 
strive to meet the challenges of the next decade.  
Thank you. 
   4 
 BIS Review 2/2010
