Hu Xiaolian: Three characteristics of the managed floating exchange rate 
regime 
Article  by  Ms  Hu  Xiaolian,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  Beijing,  
22 July 2010.  
 The content of the managed floating exchange rate regime includes three aspects. First, the 
floating of exchange rate is based on market supply and demand so that the exchange rate 
plays a role as a price signal. Second, the range of floating adjustment is based on trade and 
current account balances to reflect the “managed floating” nature. Third, the exchange rate is 
determined with reference to a basket of currencies, rather than the bilateral exchange rate 
between RMB and any single currency.  
I. 
A managed floating exchange rate regime based on market supply and 
demand is to achieve the general balance of the balance of payments account. 
In theory and practice, resource allocation is efficient when the supply and demand is broadly 
in  balance.  When  the  supply  and  demand  is  not  in  balance,  optimization  of  resource 
allocation  is  not  possible.  When  total  exports  are  persistently  smaller  than  total  imports, 
resources are not adequately channelled to the export sector, and it would result in shortage 
of  foreign  exchange  and  consequently  import  demand  for  consumer  and  capital  goods 
cannot be met; when total imports are persistently smaller than total exports, resources are 
overly  concentrated  in  the  export  sector  and  subsequently  the  foreign  exchange  earned 
through  export  cannot  be  absorbed  by  import  and  can  only  be  invested  overseas.  If 
investment  is  concentrated  in  low-yield  sectors  overseas,  the  resource  is  not  allocated 
efficiently.  Since  the  establishment  of  a  socialist  market  economy  was  identified  as  an 
objective in the 14th CPC National Congress, efficient resource allocation based on market 
supply and demand has become the focus of reform.  
To evaluate the efficiency of resource allocation from a BOP perspective, we mainly look at 
whether the current account is in balance. The capital and financial account, the component 
of  the  BOP  account  other  than  the  current  account,  records,  among  others,  inter-temporal 
investment and would inevitably include speculative activities. International experiences have 
shown  that  the  capital  and  financial  account  does  not  offer  a  perspective  as  good  as  the 
current  account  in  measuring  the  impact  of  the  exchange  rate  on  efficiency  of  resource 
allocation. Foreign exchange reserve is an important item in the BOP account. A country’s 
need for foreign exchange reserve may vary in different development stages. The build-up of 
foreign  exchange  reserves  may  also  be  inter-temporal.  Inadequacy  of  foreign  exchange 
reserve can be made up by appropriate-surplus, but in the medium and long run a balanced 
current account is best for resource allocation and social welfare. 
The  BOP  balance,  and  current  account  balance  in  particular,  is  the  basis  for  equilibrium 
exchange rate analysis. An internationally accepted indicator is the current account balance 
to  GDP  ratio.  For  example,  the  current  account  norm  is  the  core  concept  in  the 
macroeconomic  balance  (MB)  approach,  which  is  used  by  the  IMF  to  assess  member 
country’s  exchange  rate.  If  a  country’s  current  account  balance  exceeds  the  norm  in  the 
medium term, its exchange rate is believed to be undervalued, and otherwise the exchange 
rate  is  overvalued.  The  size  of  the  gap  between  current  account  balance  and  the  current 
account norm indicates the degree of undervaluation or overvaluation.  
In  the  medium  and  long  term,  the  correlation  between  exchange  rate  and  current  account 
balance may not be this simple because resource endowment, industrial division of labor and 
consumption  behaviors  are  more  significant  factors  in  international  trade  and  economic 
BIS Review 101/2010 
 1
activities.  Nevertheless,  good  policy-making  on  exchange  rate  needs  to  be  supported  by 
forward-looking  judgment  on  the  supply  and  demand  on  the  foreign  exchange  market  and 
such judgment is based on analysis of current account balance. The supply and demand on 
the foreign exchange market is of course related to the overall BOP situation, not only the 
current account. Generally speaking, however, the current account reflects activities of the 
real economy, and the current account balance accounts for the major part of BOP. Since 
2007, the share of current account surplus in China’s BOP surplus has been over 75 percent. 
Moreover,  with  a  full  convertibility,  China’s  current  account  is  responsive  to  market  supply 
and demand. Therefore, the analysis of the foreign exchange market based on the current 
account will not lead to systematic errors.  
Since return on investment as a current account item is related to the capital account, as a 
practical  consideration,  it  is  not  included  in  current  account  balance  analysis.  Instead,  the 
analysis looks at trade balance, which is represented by trade statistics from the Customs 
because it is regularly updated and readily available. 
II. 
The Exchange rate floating is based on the current account, mainly the trade 
account balances 
Managed  floating  exchange  rate  serves  three  purposes.  It  is  needed  to  deal  with  any 
unexpected  movements  in  domestic  and  international  markets  to  avoid  dramatic  currency 
fluctuations and curb financial speculation; to bring the exchange rate to an appropriate level 
that helps improve resources allocation and promote a balanced BOP account; and to make 
sure  that  any  improvement  in  resources  allocation  could  be  absorbed  by  most  companies 
and would not lead to massive closures and job cuts.  
The  equilibrium  exchange  rate  determination  theory  treats  exchange  rate  as  a  function  of 
current account balance or trade balance. If the function has a linear relationship with current 
account balance, it could be adjusted accordingly. However, the relationship is much likely to 
be non-linear, which means exchange rate floating needs to be progressed in a gradual and 
proper  manner  and  should  be  managed  in  line  with  the  state  of  the  economy  and  BOP 
position. 
Exchange rate adjustment poses pressures on the corporate sector’s structural adjustment. 
A  large  or  rapidly  growing  trade  surplus  means  companies  are  generally  adaptive  to  such 
pressures,  while  a  shrinking  surplus  suggests  companies  need  to  enhance  their  ability  to 
deal with exchange rate adjustment. The adjustment process needs to be properly paced to 
take full advantage of favorable factors and contain the impact of disadvantages. It should 
also  take  into  account  global  economic  development  and  international  cooperation  to  help 
secure the current period of strategic opportunities. 
Exchange  rate  adjustment  helps  improve  the  relative  position  of  domestic  and  external 
prices,  and  optimize  resources  allocation  between  domestic-oriented  sectors  and  the 
external  sector.  It  supports  domestic  consumption  growth,  industrial  restructuring  and 
innovations. This progress will in turn facilitate market-based adjustment of current account 
position and ultimately contribute to balanced and sustainable growth.  
Exchange rate adjustment also affects capital account. Therefore, it is necessary to closely 
monitor capital flows, stand ready to conduct sterilization operations, and impose limits on 
external debts. It is important to put restrictions on converting the external debts of foreign 
currencies into RMB, and step up efforts to address irregularities in foreign exchange flows, 
as  experiences  from  Thailand  and  other  countries  show,  borrowing  external  debt  and 
converting it into domestic currencies by the private sector, corporate sector or other sectors 
is a major channel for capital inflows. Temporary control on capital inflow and outflow may 
also be introduced if circumstances warrant, as what has been done recently by a number of 
emerging market economies. 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2010
Measure the exchange rate with reference to a basket of currencies 
III. 
A floating exchange rate has impact on total imports and exports of an economy. Therefore, 
the floating cannot be aimed to adjust bilateral trade balance and it is not advisable to just 
look  at  the  RMB/USD  exchange  rate.  Theoretically,  the  best  indicator  to  measure  the 
international relative price of tradables is real effective exchange rate, i.e. the exchange rate 
measured by a basket of currencies of major trading partners. Real effective exchange rate 
reflects  the  movement  of  dollar  exchange  rate  to  other  major  currencies  and  has  been 
adjusted against the cross country inflation differentials. There are various opinions on the 
currencies in the basket. Though it is necessary to take into account trade, capital flow and 
other  factors,  weighted  trade  is  usually  the  major  factor  to  consider  because  capital  flow 
fluctuates.  Specifically,  the  effective  exchange  rate  basket  should  have  a  variety  of 
currencies to reflect diversification of trade and investment. The weight is to be determined 
based  on  the  current  account  situation  and  the  currency  structure  of  capital  and  financial 
account and of cross-border receipt and payment. 
The  reference  of  a  basket  of  currencies  is  reasonable  in  theory.  In  practice,  however,  the 
nominal effective exchange rate, which is not inflation-adjusted, is more frequently used, for 
the  following  reasons:  First,  it  is  hard  to  settle  on  a  universally  accepted  and  comparable 
price  index.  Though  commonly  used,  the  CPI  may  not  be  appropriate  according  to 
academicians as it includes prices of many non-tradables. Other options, such as PPI, GDP 
deflator and the index of per unit labor cost, are not widely accepted. Second, the calculation 
of real effective exchange rate has to deal with the time lag and availability of data, and price 
indices  such  as  the  CPI  are  subject  to  time  lags  and  comparability.  There  are  easily 
accessible and real time data for nominal exchange rate while it takes one month to get CPI 
and PPI readings, at least one quarter to get GDP deflator and even longer for the index of 
per  unit  labor  cost.  Moreover,  statistical  coverage  of  countries  varies  greatly  and  some 
countries hardly have comparable data. 
Compared with pegging to a single currency, the exchange rate regime with reference to a 
basket  of  currencies  will  help  adjust  exports  and  imports,  current  account,  and  balance  of 
payment in a more effective manner. It has two-way movements of exchange rate. The RMB 
exchange  rate  has  been  basically  stable  at  an  adaptive  and  balanced  level  though  it  may 
fluctuate in both ways against any particular single currency.  
Since  the  RMB  exchange  rate  regime  reform  that  started  in  2005,  the  focus  of  public 
communications  has  been  the  RMB  exchange  rate  regime  with  reference  to  a  basket  of 
currencies.  But  the  mindset  of  focusing  too  much  attention  on  RMB/USD  exchange  rate 
cannot be changed overnight due to behavioral habits and the dominant use of US dollar in 
accounting  and  statistics.  This  underpins  the  necessity  for  China  to  make  more  efforts  to 
improve the exchange rate regime based on market supply and demand (mainly through the 
current  account  and  especially  the  trade  account  balances)  with  reference  to  a  basket  of 
currencies.  In  the  future,  consideration  can  be  given  to  disclosure  of  the  nominal  effective 
exchange rate information on a regular basis and to gradually shift the public’s attention on 
RMB/USD exchange rate to the effective exchange rate of RMB, which is the true reference 
for its movement. 
BIS Review 101/2010 
 3
