Jean-Claude Trichet: Strengthening the European Union’s framework for 
crisis management 
Opening statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at 
the  European  Commission  Conference  “Building  a  Crisis  Management  Framework  for  the 
Internal Market”, Brussels, 19 March 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the Commission for inviting me to today’s conference. I trust that the 
discussion will help to identify avenues that will strengthen the European Union’s framework 
for crisis management and resolution for the years to come. 
The evolving crisis 
Reflecting  on  the  crisis  from  today’s  perspective,  I  would  say  that  what  is  now  called  “the 
crisis” is a deeply evolving phenomenon. It evolved from a crisis of liquidity into a full-scale 
crisis of banking and finance, and then into a global financial and economic crisis. And as we 
are all well aware, a great deal of attention is currently focused on fiscal policy and public 
finances. 
At the same time, policy-makers around the world have so far fended off a number of threats: 
a global meltdown of finance, a downward spiralling of the economy and a massive increase 
in global levels of unemployment. 
Fundamentally,  this  is  a  crisis  of  valuation.  But  it  is  also  a  crisis  that  has  led  us,  and 
continues to lead us, to fundamental re-evaluation. 
We  have  had  to  re-evaluate  our  understanding  of  the  nature  of  risk  of  major  market 
disruptions.  We  have  had  to  re-evaluate  the  potential  responses  in  terms  of  the 
implementation of monetary policy and the effectiveness of fiscal policy. And as citizens and 
policy-makers,  we  have  to  re-evaluate  our  understanding  of  the  role  of  finance  in  our 
economies and our societies. 
In  particular,  we  must  consider  fundamental  questions  about  the  relative  importance  and 
limits  of  the  pure  financial  “game”  in  markets,  about  the  potential  abuse  of  market  power, 
and, most importantly, about the function of the financial sector in the broader economy. In 
my view there is a clear litmus test for this function: whether or not finance serves the real 
economy. 
Financial  reform  therefore  must  ensure  that  finance  is  properly  reconnected  with  the  real 
economy. Reform needs to go beyond the banking sector on which so much attention has 
been focused. We also have to look very closely at non-bank financial institutions and at the 
set-up and functioning of financial markets. 
Financial  markets  are  not  always  efficient.  They  are  also  not  always  broad,  liquid  and 
representing a fair competition of views and positions. Quite often, specific market segments 
can  be  oligopolistic,  dominated  by  a  few  large  actors.  In  such  oligopolistic  markets, 
information handling is particularly problematic, as views by dominant actors can evolve into 
fashions  and  set  off  trends  that,  through  herding,  move  valuations  out  of  line  with  what  is 
warranted by medium-term fundamentals. 
As we now all recognise, if left on its own, finance has the potential to spiral out of control, for 
example  through  leverage  cycles,  triggering  financial  disruption,  wealth  destruction  and 
economic hardship for our people. 
BIS Review 33/2010 
 1
Therefore, one of the greatest challenges for economics and public policy at this time is to 
restore  financial  and  economic  stability,  to  rebuild  confidence  in  the  prospects  for  our 
economies and to improve the future functioning of financial systems. 
 The main agenda for today is what progress we can make in building a crisis management 
framework for our financial system at the European level. I will make some remarks on that 
key issue in a moment. But first I would like to reflect on what we have learned from the crisis 
in terms of the fundamental issue of systemic risk. 
Systemic risk 
A pre-condition for meeting the challenges of crisis prevention and crisis management is a 
deep understanding of the nature of systemic risk. 
The  financial  crisis  has  been  revealing  in  many  respects.  It  has  revealed  the  scale  of  the 
potential fallout from the failure of large financial institutions. It has revealed the fragility of 
the  financial  system  to  features  and  trends  that  cut  across  institutions,  markets  and 
infrastructures.  And  it  has  illustrated  the  amplitude  of  the  consequences  of  the  adverse 
feedback loop between the financial system and the real economy. 
All  three  elements  I  have  just  described  are key  features  of  systemic  risk:  first, contagion; 
second, the build-up of financial imbalances and unsustainable trends within and across the 
financial system; and third, the close links with the real economy and the potential for strong 
feedback effects. 
To  identify  sources  of  systemic  risk  and  recommend  remedial  action  will  be  the  task  of 
macroprudential supervision in the EU, and the cross-border crisis management framework 
will help to handle large and complex financial intermediaries whose disorderly failure could 
pose systemic risks. 
A crisis management framework 
The national legal and institutional arrangements in a number of Member States have sought 
to  improve  the  framework  for  prudential  supervision  and  financial  stability.  We  at  the 
European Central Bank have supported such improvements. 
One key remaining issue is to accompany the greater interdependencies between national 
financial  systems  and  thereby  bolster  the  process  of  EU  financial  integration  that  is  so 
desirable from a welfare point of view. This requires appropriate action at EU level to address 
the possible systemic impact of failing cross-border financial institutions. The ECB therefore 
fully supports the Commission in its initiatives to develop an EU-wide resolution framework 
and remove obstacles to effective crisis management pertaining to EU cross-border financial 
institutions. 
The  Commission  has  suggested  a  very  useful  classification  of  the  main  issues  under 
discussion  into  three  areas:  early  intervention  by  supervisors;  bank  resolution;  and 
insolvency proceedings. 
Let me devote a few words to each of them. 
First,  in  the  area  of  early  intervention  the  enhancement  of  cooperation  among  supervisory 
authorities is important, when they address an ailing cross-border financial institution. It can 
be improved by achieving convergence as regards a minimum set of tools available to the 
supervisory authorities involved. This may require also a common terminology as regards for 
instance the types of reorganisation measures to be used for financial institutions. 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2010
Second, as regards bank resolution, a priority is to pursue an enhanced and more coherent 
framework  for  the  action  of  supervisory  and  resolution  authorities.  To  avoid  moral  hazard, 
authorities  should  be  ready  to  intervene  with  appropriate  actions  to  contain  the  possible 
impact  on  financial  stability  and,  where  appropriate,  ensure  an  orderly  winding-up  of  the 
affected financial institution. 
In  the  Single  Market,  efforts  should  be  made  to  facilitate  coordination  of  the  actions  of 
national  authorities  involved  in  the  resolution  of  a  cross-border  banking  or  financial  group. 
Over the medium term, it would be helpful to achieve closer institutional convergence, with 
an enhanced role for the authorities within the resolution process, by recognising in particular 
their leading role in the administration of ailing financial institutions, in full respect of the due 
role of the judicial system. 
Third,  as  regards  insolvency  proceedings,  new  initiatives  are  required  to  promote  further 
harmonization at the EU level. Today, national legal regimes are still diverse in terms of the 
rules  and  procedures  that  apply.  It  is  recognised  that  harmonization  at  EU  level  may  be 
difficult to achieve, but it should be underlined that it is key in any crisis resolution. Therefore, 
utmost efforts should be devoted to assessing outstanding problems and identifying possible 
ways forward. The ECB strongly supports the recent establishment by the Commission of a 
group of experts to pursue this aim. 
There is one central challenge to all crisis management frameworks and this is speed. The 
rapidity of unfolding developments is one of the greatest challenges for policy makers. And 
even  though  financial  crises  are  by  no  means  new  phenomena,  the  speed  of  their 
transmission has accelerated tremendously over the past few decades. The unfolding of the 
sovereign debt crises in the 1980’s occurred over the course of years, the Asian Financial 
crisis  developed,  at  its  peak,  over  months.  And  last  intensification  of  the  present  crisis, 
starting in September 2008, has spread around the globe in the course of half-days. Many 
factors  have  contributed  to  this  acceleration,  including  the  process  of  global  financial 
integration, the increasing leverage in institutions, the technological advancements that allow 
for  an  instantaneous  transmission  of  information  world-wide  and  the  accumulation  over  a 
long period of time of unsustainable global imbalances. 
Hence, a key message for all crisis management frameworks is that they need to be able to 
cope with the speed of which financial developments can unfold. 
including 
functioning, 
The role of infrastructures  
Policy  action  should  not  concern  only  banks  but  also  the  system  as  a  whole,  in  particular 
addressing  market 
those  of  CDS.  The  current  reflections  at 
international  level  include  also  initiatives  aimed  at  strengthening  the  core  financial 
infrastructures and markets. Indeed, it is essential that conditions are in place to ensure that 
the financial system is able to withstand any possible shock and that financial infrastructures 
are strengthened to reduce the risk of contagion. 
Moreover,  regulators  have  to  ensure  that  financial  market  participants  are  behaving  in  full 
compliance with the rules and that no additional source of risks would derive from improper 
behaviour. 
In  this  context,  attention  has  been  attracted  at  the  current  juncture  by  the  Credit  Default 
Swaps (CDS) market. 
I  would  like  to  highlight  the  importance  that  certain  financial  instruments,  which  were 
introduced  in  consideration  of  their  positive  effects  for  the  hedging  of  risks,  should  not  be 
misused in a speculative manner. I share the consensus at global level that regulators should 
be  equipped  with  appropriate  tools  to  be  able  to  investigate  and  act  in  an  effective  and 
coordinated  manner.  We  need  more  transparency  in  CDS  markets,  and  so  do  investors. 
BIS Review 33/2010 
 3
Transparency of markets is a public good. Authorities must be able to gather information, to 
assess possible risks for financial stability and detect possible improper conduct. 
In this respect, a key priority in terms of enhancing the resilience of the CDS markets is the 
establishment of central counterparty facilities. Such CCPs will help, in particular, to diversify 
and  share  risk  exposures  and  their margining  procedures will  reduce  the  incentive  to  take 
excessive risks. Moreover, CCPs will deliver more of the much needed transparency for all 
parties involved. 
Conclusions 
The  defining  characteristic  of  any  financial  crisis  is  a  collapse  of  confidence.  The  defining 
characteristic  of  the  current  crisis  was  a  loss  of  confidence  that  seemed  to  permeate  the 
whole world and almost instantaneously. 
At the height of the crisis – when irrational exuberance had turned into excessive pessimism – I 
repeatedly stated that regaining confidence was of the essence. Since then, confidence in the 
short term has been restored, not least because of bold and courageous policy actions around 
the globe. 
Going  forward,  we  need  to  strengthen  longer-term  confidence,  and  that  requires  policy 
frameworks that will be robust against future challenges. 
That is the agenda on which I know we all plan to make some progress today. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2010
