K C Chakrabarty: Bank credit to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
(MSMEs) – present status and way forward 
Address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the formal 
release  of  the  India  Micro,  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  Report  2010  of  the  Institute  of 
Small Enterprises and Development (ISED), Kochi, 21 May 2010. 
Assistance provided by Smt L Vadera in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
 1. 
Dr P M Mathew, Director, ISED, Dr K N Kabra, Chairman, ISED, Shri T O Sooraj, 
Director,  Industries  and Commerce,  Government  of  Kerala,  Dr  Yerram  Raju,  senior  fellow, 
ISED,  senior  bankers,  MSME  entrepreneurs,  other  distinguished  guests,  ladies  and 
gentlemen. I am indeed very happy to be in your midst today for the release of the 13th issue 
of  the  India,  Micro,  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  Report  Series  of  your  Institute.  The 
MSMEs,  given  their  limitations  and  constraints  need  professional  support,  to  analyze  their 
own  environment,  articulate  their  needs  and  understand  the  impact  of  policies  that  get 
shaped there from. I am glad that the Institute is endeavouring to provide this support. 
In a nation’s economy, it’s the small and micro enterprises which play a vital role. 
2. 
For, they not only give employment to a large number of unskilled and semi-skilled people 
but also support bigger industries by supplying raw material, basic goods, finished parts and 
components, etc. The critical role and place of the MSME sector in the Indian economy in 
employment  generation,  exports  and  economic  empowerment  of  a  vast  section  of  the 
population  is  well  known.  There  are  about  2.6  crore  enterprises  in  this  sector.  The  sector 
accounts for 45 per cent of the manufactured output and 8 per cent of the Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP). MSMEs contributed close to 40 per cent of all exports from the country and 
employ nearly 6 crore people which is next only to the agricultural sector. MSME is the best 
vehicle for inclusive growth, to create local demand and consumption. MSMEs cater to niche 
markets. The MSMEs of yesterday are the large corporates of today and could be MNCs of 
tomorrow. Thus the banks and other agencies should take pride while servicing the MSMEs 
as they are playing an instrumental role in the formation of MNCs of tomorrow. 
3. 
It was, therefore, only appropriate that the Government of India enacted the Micro, 
Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  Development  Act,  2006. Public  Policy  has  rightly  accorded 
high  priority  to  this  sector  in  order  to  achieve  balanced,  sustainable,  more  equitable  and 
inclusive growth in the country. Advances extended to the MSE sector are treated as priority 
sector  advances  and  as  per  the  extant  Reserve  Bank  guidelines,  banks  are  required  to 
extend at least 60% of their advances to the MSE sector to Micro Enterprises. 
An increasingly globalised world, marked by competition and innovation, is posing 
4. 
newer and varied challenges to the MSEs. Because of their small size, individual MSEs are 
handicapped in achieving economies of scale in procuring equipment, raw materials, finance 
and  consulting  services.  Often,  they  are  unable  to  identify  potential  markets  to  take 
advantage  of  market  opportunities,  which  require  large  volumes,  consistent  quality, 
homogenous standards and assured supply. In today’s globalised economy, improvements 
in products, processes, technology and organizational functions such as design, logistics and 
marketing have become key drivers in delivering competitiveness, for the MSEs. 
5. 
MSEs primarily rely on bank finance for a variety of purposes including purchase of 
land, building, plant and machinery as also for working capital, etc. Availability of timely credit 
at  reasonable  rates  is  the  need  of  the  sector.  As  at  the  end  of  March  2009,  the  total 
outstanding credit provided by all Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) to the MSE sector 
was Rs. 2,56128 crore, constituting 11.4 percent of the Adjusted Net Bank Credit. Credit flow 
to MSMEs had therefore, doubled from Rs. 1,27,000 crore in 2006–07 to Rs. 2,57,000 crore 
in 2008–09. In 2007–08, credit flow to the sector was Rs. 2,13,000 crore. In September 2009 
BIS Review 71/2010 
 1
the total outstanding credit stood at 323565 crore and in February 2010 it further increased to 
Rs. 369866 crore. Despite the global financial crisis, there was enough liquidity in the Indian 
banking system and banks were willing to extend credit to viable projects. Despite the fact 
that there is no dearth of credit in the system there exists a gap in perception of the lenders 
and SME borrowers. While the lenders felt that credit to the sector is expanding, the SME 
borrowers felt that the lenders are not doing enough for the SMEs and are catering more to 
the needs of the large corporate. As only 4–5% MSMEs are covered by institutional funding 
given that approx 95% of villages are not covered by banks. There is, therefore, a need to 
bridge this gap through enabling policies. Reserve Bank has recently advised all the SLBC 
Convenor  banks  to  constitute a  Sub-Committee  of  the  District  Consultative  Committees 
(DCCs) to draw up a roadmap by March 2010 to provide banking services through a banking 
outlet  in  every  village  having  a  population  of  over  2,000,  by  March  2011.  Such  banking 
services  may  not  necessarily  be  extended  through  a  brick  and  mortar  branch  but  can  be 
provided  through  any  of  the  various  forms  of  ICT-based  models,  including  through  BCs. 
Reserve Bank will closely monitor extension of banking services. My message to the MSME 
sector  is  that  as  interest  costs  are  a  very  small  fraction  of  your  operating  costs,  only 
approximately 4%, do not ask for low interest rates from the banking sector, and instead ask 
for credit at competitive rates. Credit has to be self-liquidating on a viable project and has a 
cost.  
As regards the cost of credit, as per extant guidelines, all loans up to Rs. 2 lakh are 
6. 
charged interest not exceeding PLR of the bank. The rates of interest on loans above Rs. 2 
lakh have been deregulated and banks are given the freedom to fix the interest rates based 
on cost of funds, risk cost, transaction cost, etc. Further, banks have been advised that with 
effect  from  July  1,  2010  the  Base  Rate  system  would  replace  the  BPLR  system  whereby 
banks would determine their actual lending rates on loans and advances with reference to 
the Base Rate. Since the Base Rate would be the minimum rate for all commercial loans, 
banks  could  not  resort  to  any  lending  below  the  Base  Rate.  Accordingly,  the  current 
stipulation of BPLR as the ceiling rate for loans up to Rs. 2 lakh would be withdrawn. It is 
expected that deregulation of lending rates will increase the credit flow to small borrowers at 
reasonable rate. 
Measures by RBI  
7. 
RBI  has  recently  taken  several  measures  to  enhance  credit  delivery  to  the 
employment intensive Micro and Small Enterprises (MSE) sector. One of the major concerns 
of  the  MSE  sector  is  the  inability  to  arrange  for  collateral  security  and  or  third  party 
guarantee. As a result, new entrepreneurs find it difficult to access credit from the banking 
system. Accordingly, RBI have issued guidelines from time to time thereby advising banks to 
grant  collateral  free  loans  up  to  Rs.  5  lakh  sanctioned  to  the  units  of  MSE  sector  (both 
manufacturing  and  service  enterprises).  Further,  banks  have  also  been  advised  to  lend 
collateral free loans up to Rs. 25 lakh, based on good track record and financial position of 
the  units.  We  have  received  enquiries  as  to  whether  these  guidelines  are  advisory  or 
mandatory  in  nature.  We  have  since  clarified  that  these  guidelines  regarding  extending 
collateral  free  loans  up  to  Rs.  5  lakh  sanctioned  to  the  units  of  MSE  sector  (both 
manufacturing and service enterprises) as defined under MSMED Act, 2006 are mandatory 
in nature and banks must not obtain collateral security in the case of loans up to Rs. 5 lakh 
extended to all units of the MSE sector. 
8. 
A  Working  Group  was  set  up  by  Reserve  Bank  of  India  to  review  the  Credit 
Guarantee Scheme of the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro and Small Enterprises and 
suggest measures to enhance its usage. The Group has submitted its final report which was 
released  on  March  6,  2010.  Some  of  the  main  recommendations  of  the  Working  Group 
include mandatory doubling of the limit for collateral free loans to micro and small enterprises 
(MSEs) sector to Rs. 10 lakh from the present Rs. 5 lakh, increase in the extent of guarantee 
cover,  absorption  of  guarantee  fees  for  the  collateral  free  loans  by  CGTMSE  subject  to 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2010
certain conditions, simplification of procedure for filing claims with CGTMSE and increasing 
awareness about the scheme, etc. Guidelines have been issued on May 6, 2010 by Reserve 
Bank on the recommendations of the Working Group to enhance the limit of collateral free 
loans to Rs. 10 lakh from the present level of Rs. 5 lakh and these guidelines are mandatory 
for all scheduled commercial banks. On the other recommendations the CGTMSE has been 
advised  to  initiate  appropriate  action.  The  implementation  of  the  recommendations  of  the 
Working  Group  is  expected  to  result  in  enhanced  usage  of  the  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme 
and facilitate increase in quality and quantity of credit to the presently included as well as 
excluded, MSEs, leading eventually to sustainable inclusive growth. 
9. 
The Reserve Bank had constituted a Working Group on Rehabilitation of Sick SMEs 
(Chairman: Dr K C Chakrabarty) and based on the recommendations of the Working Group, 
banks have been advised to undertake a review and put in place a Loan Policy governing 
extension of credit facilities, Restructuring/Rehabilitation policy for revival of potentially viable 
sick units/enterprises and a non-discretionary One Time Settlement scheme for recovery of 
non-performing loans. 
10. 
As on date, 41 scheduled commercial banks have reported to have complied with 
the  requirement  of  setting  up  a  dedicated  loan  policy  on  MSE,  40  scheduled  commercial 
banks  with  the  requirement  of  setting  up  a  rehabilitation/restructuring  policy  and  39 
scheduled  commercial  banks  on  setting  a  non-discretionary  One  Time  Settlement  scheme 
for recovery of non-performing loans. Among the 39 scheduled commercial banks who have 
reported to have complied with the requirement of setting up of a non-discretionary One Time 
Settlement scheme for recovery of non-performing loans, 30 banks have indicated to have 
placed the policy on their respective banks’ websites.  
The Working Group has also recommended to the GOI for creation of several Funds by the 
Government  such  as  a)  National  Equity  Fund,  b)  Fund  for  Technology  Upgradation,  c) 
Marketing development Fund, d) Rehabilitation Fund, e) Venture capital/mezzanine finance 
to encourage the entrepreneurs to innovate new ideas, etc. 
11. 
As the progress in rehabilitation of sick units was found to be tardy, the Regional 
Directors who head the Empowered Committees set up by RBI at its Regional Offices have 
been advised to ensure that banks strive for timely action for rehabilitation of sick units in the 
MSE sector, and put in place a credible, pro-active and a functional monitoring mechanism to 
review the progress in actual concrete outcomes. The same is being monitored at the Central 
Office level. 
The  non  credit  related  factors  which  affect  the  growth  rate  of  small  enterprises 
12. 
sector  are  non-availability  of  power  and  other  infrastructural  facilities,  delay  in  getting 
clearance from different agencies, lack of entrepreneurship development, infrastructure and 
historical/social bottlenecks etc. The solution thus lies in the engagement of the Central and 
State Government in easing the licensing and documentation requirements, exit policy and 
labour  laws,  putting  in  place  an  efficient  tax  structure  in  conformity  with  public  finance 
principles, appropriate infrastructure development etc. 
GOI and MSEs 
13. 
Recognizing the importance of the sector and the various constraints being faced by 
the sector a High Level Task Force has been constituted by the Government of India under 
the chairmanship of the Principal Secretary to the Hon’ble Prime Minister to consider various 
issues raised by various MSME associations and draw up an agenda for action. The Task 
Force  which  submitted 
final  report  on  January  30,  2010,  has  made  several 
recommendations  on  issues  relating  to  credit,  taxation,  marketing,  labour,  exit  policy, 
infrastructure/ technology/skill development and special packages for North East and Jammu 
and  Kashmir,  etc.  A  Steering  Group  on  MSME  has  been  set  up  by  the  GOI  to  review  the 
implementation  of  the  recommendations  of  the  Task  Force.  In  particular,  three  important 
its 
BIS Review 71/2010 
 3
recommendations made by the Task Force relating to credit have been considered by the 
Steering Group and it has been decided that: 
(i) 
all scheduled commercial banks should achieve a 20 per cent year-on-year growth 
in credit to micro and small enterprises to ensure enhanced credit flow;  
to increase the flow of credit to micro enterprises all scheduled commercial banks 
should lend 60% of their MSE lending to micro enterprises in stages viz. 50% in the 
year 2010–11, 55% in the year 2011–12 and 60% in 2012–13;  
all scheduled commercial banks should achieve a 10 per cent annual growth in the 
number of micro enterprise accounts. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
The recommendations of the Task Force are expected to go a long way to facilitate credit 
flow to the sector and the implementation of the recommendation is being monitored at the 
highest level by the Government of India. 
Way forward 
14. 
If India has to have a growth rate of 8–10 percent for the next couple of decades, it 
needs a strong MSME sector, without which it cannot be achieved. There are approximately 
3 crore MSMEs in the country. The SMEs have shown an average growth of 18 percent over 
the last five years. Around 98 percent of the production units are in the SME sector. 
15. 
There  has  been  a  burst  of  entrepreneurship  across  the  country,  spanning  rural, 
semi-urban and urban areas. This has to be nurtured and financed. It is only through growth 
of enterprises across all sizes that competition will be fostered. A small entrepreneur today 
will  be  a  big  entrepreneur  tomorrow,  and  might  well  become  a  multinational  enterprise 
eventually if given the comfort of financial support. But we also have to understand that there 
will  be  failures  as  well  as  successes.  Bank  will  therefore  have  to  tone  up  their  risk 
assessment and risk management capacities, and provide for these failures as part of their 
risk management. Despite the risk, financing of first time entrepreneurs is a must for financial 
inclusion and growth. 
16. 
In MSME sector, the failure rate is relatively higher – the reasons for which range 
from  delayed/inadequate  availability  of  credit  to  non-availability  of  backward  and  forward 
support system. Despite the risk, financing of first time entrepreneurs is a must for financial 
inclusion  and  growth.  Asymmetry  of  information  and  lack  of  transparency  and  reliability  of 
data has been a major concern for organizations dealing with MSMEs the world over. The 
main reasons for the financial constraints faced by SMEs are quite generic, and high on the 
list is the perception that SMEs are historically a high risk group lacking in financial discipline 
and unable to provide trustworthy financial track records. To overcome this perception, there 
should  be  adequate  and  reliable  credit  information  mechanism,  such  as  an  SME  credit 
bureau, that serves the needs of both the SMEs’ and the potential lenders’. Bodies such as 
the  ISED  could  disseminate  information  on  various  relevant  issues  such  as  rating,  SME 
policies  and  schemes,  provide  consultancies  etc.  Transparency  shall  facilitate  them  in 
obtaining  finances,  getting  favourable  contracts  and  improving  their  business  prospects.  A 
World  Bank  report  stated  that  a  good  credit  information  infrastructure  can  contribute 
significantly  towards  assisting  SMEs’  access  to  capital.  The  report  further  highlighted  that 
small firms with access to credit bureaus have a 40% chance of obtaining a loan, whereas 
firms  without  access  to  credit  bureaus  have  only  a  28%  chance  of  receiving  a  loan. 
Therefore,  significant  opportunities  exist  to  increase  lending  activities  to  MSMEs  with  the 
establishment of MSME credit bureaus.  
17. 
Micro and small enterprises are the worst sufferers when disaster strikes. It suffers 
from discontinuity of business, which it is normally not in a position to bear. It renders the 
recovery  of  already  supplied  goods  difficult,  besides  affecting  future  supplies.  These  units 
need support in such situations. It has, therefore, felt that a separate umbrella organisation 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2010
be set up to provide all comprehensive services to the SME sector under one roof and also 
look  at  providing  disaster  assistance  to  small  enterprises  on  the  lines  of  Small  Business 
Administration, USA. An expert Group has been set up by the GOI of India to examine the 
modalities to set up such a body in India. 
18. 
The GOI, may consider setting up a National Equity Fund to help green field projects 
and  new  generation  entrepreneurs  to  tide  over  difficulties  faced  in  start-up  finance.  The 
ability  of  MSMEs  (especially  those  involving  innovations  and  new  technologies)  to  access 
alternative sources of capital like angel funds/risk capital needs to be enhanced considerably 
has been acknowledged by the Prime Minister’s High Level Task Force on MSMEs and has 
recommended the need for removing fiscal/regulatory impediments to use such funds by the 
MSMEs on priority.  
There  is  a  need  to  promote  factoring  services  without  recourse  in  the  country  for 
19. 
MSMEs and a suitable legal framework for promotion of factoring services without recourse 
in the country for MSMEs needs to be evolved. The Industry Associations have often been 
often representing on the delayed payments from large corporate. While banks have been 
advised to allocate a sub-limit in respect of large borrower accounts, for making payments to 
the MSE units against purchases from them but it is not possible for banks to force the large 
buyers to utilize the limit for making payments. This problem could be institutionally tackled 
by  factoring.  The  Prime  Minister’s  Task  Force  on  MSMEs  also  has  recommended  that  a 
suitable  framework  for  promotion  of  factoring  services  without  recourse  in  the  country  for 
MSMEs.  Reserve  Bank  has  also  constituted  a  Working  Group  on  Securitization  of  Trade 
Credit Receivables to examine various options for liquidating the receivables before maturity. 
There is 96% exclusion of the small entrepreneurs, it is, therefore, imperative that they are 
financially  included  and  brought  in  the  formal  banking  system,  the  GOI,  based  on  the 
recommendations of the PM’s Task Force on MSMEs has decided that there should be an 
annual growth in the number of micro enterprise accounts be for the present fixed at 10% for 
banks  to  achieve  and  also  strict  adherence  by  banks  to  the  allocation  of  60%  to  micro 
enterprises of  the  total MSE  lending  which  should  be  done  in  stages  viz.  50% in  the  year 
2010–11, 55% in 2011–12 and 60% in the year 2012–13. Necessary instructions are being 
issued shortly to the banks in this regard and Reserve Bank will monitor the performance of 
banks.  
20. 
The various fora set up by Reserve Bank, such as the Empowered Committees, and 
the  Standing  Advisory  Committee,  State  level  Banker’s  Committee  meetings  etc.  meet  at 
periodic intervals to monitor the credit flow to this sector. It is necessary that the efficacy of 
such fora/meeting are monitored to assess the impact at the ground level. 
21. 
With  increasing  competition,  introduction  of  new  products  and  stringent  regulatory 
environment, the role of banks needs to change from mere lenders to partners in business. 
There  is  a  need  for  greater  participation  of  banks  in  the  affairs  of  their  constituents  by 
convergence of credit services and non credit services. The banks should not only provide 
differentiated  products  for  MSMEs,  but  also  provide  counselling  &  guidance  to  new  and 
established  businesses,  extending  marketing  support  etc.  Similarly,  the  Government  and 
other institutions entrusted with development of the MSME sector need to focus providing an 
enabling  environment,  infrastructure  and  forward  &  backward  linkages  so  that  the  credit 
function  being  discharged  by  the  banks  is  adequately  supplemented  by  their  non  credit 
functions.  
Entrepreneurship and lack of adequate capacity is the key feature, as regards micro, 
22. 
small  and  medium  enterprises.  Entrepreneurship  development  is  important  in  view  of  its 
visible  impact  on  wealth  creation  and  employment  generation.  To  facilitate  and  encourage 
this, skill building has been impressed upon by the Prime Minister’s Task Force for MSMEs. 
Enterprise Development Centres (EDC) should be set up by the Central/State Governments 
with  incubators  to  provide  training  not  just  for  setting  up  of  new  units  but  also  provide 
BIS Review 71/2010 
 5
continuing  education  on  different  aspects  like  product  design,  packaging,  technology 
upgradation, financial management and marketing etc.  
I  would  also  urge  upon  the  Institute,  which  has  emerged  as  an  institutional  response  to 
several of the issues relating to enterprise development to continue its endeavour to facilitate 
skill building for the micro and small enterprises. 
At  present,  SME  units  which  have  been  incorporated  as  a  company  have  to  follow  the 
Balance  Sheet,  Profit  and  Loss  Account  and  other  disclosures  in  the  format  prescribed  in 
Schedule VI of Companies Act. They are also required to follow the accounting standards as 
prescribed by ICAI for large corporates. As Government has already set up a committee for 
amendment  of  Companies’  Act,  it  is  probably  necessary  that  the  revised  Companies’  Act 
should  prescribe  simplified  disclosures  norms  and  ICAI  should  come  out  with  simplified 
account standards for SMEs.  
23. 
initiatives which facilitate ease of credit flow to small entrepreneurs. 
Lastly, banks need to effectively implement the RBI guidelines and significant policy 
Conclusion  
24. 
their support to the sector and it was indeed my privilege to release their Report.  
Thank you. 
I  would  like  to  compliment  the  Institute  of  Small  Enterprises  and  Development  for 
6 
 BIS Review 71/2010
