Glenn Stevens: The role of finance 
Shann Memorial Lecture by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, 
at the University of Western Australia, Perth, 17 August 2010. 
 I would like to thank Paul Bloxham for his extensive research assistance in preparing this address. 
Thank you for the invitation to deliver the 2010 Shann Lecture. It is an honour.  
People are shaped by formative events, and Edward Owen Giblin Shann was no exception. 
Born in Hobart in 1884, his family moved to Melbourne a few years later. Growing up in the 
Depression of the 1890s – an episode that hit Melbourne particularly hard – Shann saw first-
hand  the  effect  that  financial  crises  could  have  on  peoples’  lives.  Those  memories  stayed 
with him and motivated much of his career’s work.1  
In his early adult life Shann exhibited some Fabian tendencies – and a flirtation with the Left 
would be a not uncommon response by a later generation of intellectuals as a result of the 
sense that capitalism had failed in the 1930s. But by the time he had become prominent as 
an  economist,  his  views  had  shifted  in  a  direction  that  we  would  probably  today  call 
Libertarian.  One  of  his  most  noted  works  was  a  short  pamphlet,  published  in  1927,  that 
described the lead-up to and crash of the early 1890s. It was prescient in drawing parallels 
with the financial developments in the 1920s that preceded the 1930s depression.2 
The 1880s were characterised by rapid population growth and increased urbanisation which 
fostered  an  investment  boom  dominated  by  construction.  There  was  a  spirit  of  optimism, 
which saw international capital flow in and asset prices – particularly land prices – increase. 
Leverage rose and lending standards fell. As Shann’s monograph noted, financial regulation 
at  the  time  abetted  the  excesses,  including  an  “untimely  amendment”  of  the  Victorian 
Banking Act in 1888, which allowed borrowing against a wider range of collateral.  
In the 1920s, when Shann was applying this experience to contemporary issues, the problem 
was not so much excessive private debt or poor regulation.3 This time the problem Shann 
saw  was  too  much  public  borrowing.  He  viewed  the  extensive  public  works  popular  with 
State governments in the 1920s as not only increasing debt but also lowering productivity. So 
it would come as no surprise that, after Australia’s terms of trade collapsed in the late 1920s 
and  international  capital  markets  made  new  borrowing  much  more  difficult,  Shann  was 
among the group that argued that the standard of living that could feasibly be associated with 
full employment was noticeably below that to which people had become accustomed in the 
boom.  The  Premiers’  Plan  of  1931,  which  Shann  had  a  hand  in  producing,  sought  to 
recognise this, and to spread the associated decline in incomes across the different sectors 
of society.4 
These  two  episodes  had  some  important  differences,  but  in  a  deeper  sense  both  stories 
were  rather  similar,  and  all  too  familiar.  The  sequence  goes  as  follows.  Some  genuine 
improvement in economic conditions leads to more optimism. It may be a resource discovery 
(including the opening up of new productive land), or a technological change, or a rise in the 
terms  of  trade,  or  even  just  greater  confidence  in  economic  policy’s  capacity  to  solve 
                                                 
1   Snooks (1993). 
2   Shann (1927). 
3  
In  the  1890s  more  than  half  the  note-issuing  banks  had  suspended  payment  –  one  third  never  re-opened 
(Cornish 2010, Kent forthcoming). By comparison, only three minor banks failed in the 1930s’ Depression. 
4   Shann and Copland (1931). 
BIS Review 107/2010 
 1
problems. Human nature being what it is, people (or governments) are inclined to project into 
the future with undue confidence and insufficient assessment of risk. They often decide to 
invest more in ventures that are marginal, or even speculative, borrowing to do so. Because 
their assessment of permanent income is that it has increased, they also decide to consume 
more  now  (either  privately  or  in  the  form  of  public  services).  Financial  markets  and 
institutions – which are populated by human beings after all – help them do both these by 
making capital available. Then, at some point, an event causes people suddenly to realise 
they have been too optimistic. Maybe the “new paradigm” disappoints in some way or the 
terms of trade decline again. The cycle then goes into reverse, usually painfully.  
This pattern is fresh in our minds after the events of the past several years. But Shann was 
writing  about  it  75 years  ago,  and  of  course  he  wasn’t  the  first.  Narratives  like  these  are 
peppered throughout history. The thought that “It’s Different This Time” springs eternal in the 
human psyche, and is a fitting title to the recent work by Rogoff and Reinhart covering eight 
centuries of financial delusions. Moreover, financial instruments, markets and institutions are 
always central to the way these cycles play out.  
So  it  is  fitting,  given  Shann’s  own  work,  to  ask  the  question:  what  is  the  proper  role  of 
finance? In particular, I will take up four questions:  
1. 
2. 
What are the desirable functions of the financial system, and how did they evolve?  
What  problems  are  inherent  in  finance,  and  what  issues  do  they  raise  for 
policymakers?  
What questions arise from the growth and change of the financial system over the 
past couple of decades?  
3. 
And finally,  
4. 
What are the challenges as we look ahead?  
The functions of the financial system and its origins 
What is it that we need the financial system to do?  
I think we can outline five key functions. We want it to provide:  
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
a reliable way of making payments (that is, exchanging value);  
a means for pricing and pooling certain types of risks;  
a way of transferring resources from savers to borrowers;  
a way of transferring the returns back again, which requires that the savers’ money 
is not lost and which, in turn, requires monitoring of borrowers and managers; and  
liquidity.  
v. 
These  are  very  valuable  things  for  a  community  to  have.  The  modern  economy  could  not 
have developed without these capabilities arising in the financial system.  
We tend to think of financial activity and innovation as very recent, but in fact the history is a 
long one. There is not time to do justice to that history here, and there are some fascinating 
books on the subject which repay the reader generously for the investment of their time.5 But 
it is clear that borrowing and lending is almost as old as civilisation itself. Evidence of such 
transactions, some of them remarkably codified, go back at least to eighteenth century BC 
                                                 
5   One of the most accessible recent treatments is Ferguson (2008). 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2010
Babylonian records.6 Some scholars suggest that the records of the Greek and then Roman 
ages  show  considerable  evidence  of  several  activities  we  would  associate  with  banking, 
including taking deposits, making loans and facilitating transactions.7 
Developments  seemed  to  accelerate  during  the  Renaissance,  particularly  in  Italy.  Bills  of 
exchange were by then in common use as a means to facilitate trade and also to circumvent 
usury  laws.  Traders  were  able  to  take  a  deposit  in  one  city,  make  a  loan  to  someone 
transporting goods to another city and then take repayment at the destination (possibly in a 
different currency) – with a suitable addition to the price in lieu of interest. This activity would 
appear to be a forerunner – by seven centuries – of an instrument that in our terminology 
would  combine  elements  of  a  zero  coupon  or  discount  security,  trade  credit  and  a  sort  of 
foreign currency swap.  
The most noted bankers of that era were of course the Medici family of Florence, who went 
further than their predecessors and contemporaries in the pooling of credit risk, by having a 
branch network with partners who were remunerated with a profit share.8 The development 
of  double-entry  bookkeeping,  in  Genoa  in  the  1340s,  also  helped  banking  assume  more 
modern features: the receipt of deposits, maintenance of current accounts, provision of loans 
and management of payments.9 
This  form  of  banking  in  Italy  later  became  a  model  for  Holland,  Sweden  and  England,  to 
which  further  innovations  were  added.  In  Amsterdam,  the  Wisselbank,  which  was  the  first 
exchange  bank  in  Northern  Europe,  pioneered  a  system  of  cheques  and  direct  debits 
circumventing problems with different currencies.10 The Swedish Riksbank, formed in 1656 
and the oldest institution recognised today as a central bank, is credited by some as having 
pioneered fractional reserve banking.11 
Other  key  innovations  were  joint-stock  ownership  and  limited  liability.  These  allowed  more 
capital to find its way into banking and further reduced the costs of intermediation. The Bank 
of  England,  established  in  1694,  was  for  many  years  the  only  bank  in  England  allowed  to 
operate  on  a  joint-stock  ownership  basis.  Walter  Bagehot  devotes  a  chapter  in  Lombard 
Street to the virtues of joint-stock ownership, noting that while these sorts of companies “had 
a  chequered  history”,  in  general  the  joint-stock  banks  of  Britain  were  “a  most  remarkable 
success”.12 The same innovations helped to develop equity markets more generally.  
Meanwhile bond markets had also developed. Again the earliest forms were in Renaissance 
Italy, where wealthy citizens were able to buy bonds and thereby invest their savings in one 
of the few activities that was seen as providing a significant return: war. Such instruments 
allowed  governments  (and  later  large  corporations)  to  raise  funds  from  a  broader  set  of 
sources. In time, the formation of secondary markets for these securities meant that risk had 
                                                 
6   Banking  activities  were  sufficiently  important  in  Babylonia  that  there  were  written  standards  of  practice  that 
were part of the Code of Hammurabi, the earliest known formal laws (Davies 1994). These were carved on 
tablets of stone, including details of how loans, interest and guarantees would operate according to a set of 
standardised procedures. 
7   Temin (2004). 
8   See  de  Roover  (1946).  The  Medici  family  may  have  learned  from  earlier  failures  of  the  Peruzzi  and  Bardi 
families’  banks  in  Florence  in  1348  owing  to  defaults  on  payments  when  King  Edward  III  failed  to  repay 
borrowings taken in the beginning of the Hundred Years’ War (Kindleberger 1993). 
9   As an aside, it is from this era that we receive the term “bank”, which derives from the merchant’s bench, or 
banco, in the market places of medieval Italy (particularly Lombardy; Lombard Street in the City of London is 
named after this region of Italy, as King Edward I granted this piece of land to the goldsmiths of Lombardy). 
10   Quinn and Roberds (2005). 
11   Ferguson (2008). 
12   Bagehot (1873). 
BIS Review 107/2010 
 3
a price set by a market. These innovations also spread to Northern Europe and, by the mid-
eighteenth century, London had a well-developed bond market.13 It was trading in the bond 
market  that made  the  Rothschild  family  wealthy  and  for  most  of  the  nineteenth  century  its 
bank was the largest in the world.14  
So by the middle of the nineteenth century a quite sophisticated financial system had arisen 
in major western economies. It included banks and other financial intermediaries, stock and 
bond  markets  and  insurance.  It  allowed  transactions  to  be  made,  and  mobilised  pools  of 
savings for investment in enterprise while offering a degree of liquidity to savers. It pooled 
certain risks, and served in a fashion to monitor borrowers. It allowed payments to be made 
and  funds  invested  across  national  borders.  In  the  process,  it  facilitated  the  industrial 
revolution, which resulted in the biggest transformation in living standards seen in the history 
of  western  civilisation.  This  system  did  just  about  all  the  things  we  would  want  a  financial 
system to do today, albeit with less technological efficiency. Arguably the biggest change a 
financier from much earlier times would notice today would not be the new instruments – nor 
the  crises!  –  but  the  effects  of  the  silicon  chip  and  fibre  optics  on  the  way  finance  is 
conducted.  
Incidentally,  the  difficulties  that  accompanied  having  only  a  rudimentary  financial  system 
were nowhere better illustrated than in the early Australian colonies, as one of Shann’s other 
works, An Economic History of Australia, makes clear. The most commonly used means of 
exchange  for  many  years  was  rum.15  Indeed,  he  reports  that  in  Sydney  “George  Street 
between Brickfield Hill and Bridge Street cost four hundred gallons” of rum to build (p 49). In 
today’s prices for rum, this amounts to about $80,000. It is doubtful that a road of that length 
could be constructed for that sum today, such has been the increase in the price of labour in 
terms  of  rum  (and  indeed  other  commodities).  The  colonists  began  to  issue  “notes”  or 
“cards”, which were forms of IOUs and which circulated as currency, although this system 
soon became unworkable partly because the quality of such IOUs varied greatly and tended 
to decline over time. Governor Macquarie famously sought to end the shortage of metallic 
currency by punching holes in a consignment of Spanish dollar coins, giving the “ring” and 
“dump”  different  values,  and  also  rendering  them  less  useful  elsewhere,  thereby  retaining 
this currency in the new colony.  
However,  the  need  for  credit  facilities,  for  pastoral  expansion  and  short-term  financing  for 
local  and  overseas  trade,  still  required  the  development  of  a  banking  system.  In  1817, 
Macquarie granted a charter to a group of leading traders and officials to form the Bank of 
New  South  Wales,  with  responsibility  to  issue  a  paper  currency.  As  Shann  points  out,  the 
stock holders were given limited liability in the operations of the Bank of New South Wales, 
which at the time in England was still an exclusive privilege of the Bank of England, and was 
not  granted  to  other  British  banks  until  1858.16  So  despite  a  somewhat  shaky  start, 
Australia’s  own  financial  system  was  able  to  catch  up  rapidly  on  the  other  developed 
economies by adopting their technologies.  
                                                 
13   The more market-oriented approach of British finance stood in contrast to mainland Europe, which was more 
bank-oriented  (and  remains  so  today).  Both  approaches  provide  different  ways  of  achieving  the  functions 
listed above.  
The contrast between systems has spurred much debate about their effectiveness. Some suggest a key role 
in the development of German industry in the nineteenth century, for example, was the large size and scope of 
the  universal  banks  of  Germany,  which  allowed  them  to  develop  a  close  relationship  with  industry 
(Gerschenkron 1962). Others suggest that markets provide the discipline required and also led to a superior 
allocation of capital. 
 14   Ferguson (2008). 
15   Shann (1930). 
16   Shann (1930) and Newton (2010). 
4 
 BIS Review 107/2010
The problems of finance and development of regulation 
As banking had developed, it had become more leveraged. No longer was it a case of a few 
wealthy  individuals  risking  their  own  money  in  enterprises  akin  to  venture  capital  funds  – 
accepting the risk and illiquidity that went with it. In their more developed form, banks raised 
deposits from the public – redeemable at their face value, at notice or at call.  
Leverage changes the dynamics of any business. Expected returns are higher but management 
needs  to  be  on  its  game  –  which  is  an  oft-quoted  argument  for  having  some  debt  in  a 
corporation. In the case of banks, it meant that the business of banking became even more 
focused on monitoring, information gathering and risk management.  
Of course the depositors had some protection in that the capital of the proprietors was at risk 
before deposits. But banks also undertook maturity transformation. They offered depositors 
liquidity, but held only a fraction of their own assets in liquid form – enough for normal day-to-
day operations. The whole thing depended on confidence – if depositors wanted their funds 
back en masse, a bank could not provide them because its assets were not all in cash. If 
there was a loss of confidence for some reason, the bank would be under pressure: there 
could be a run. So banks themselves needed access to liquidity in situations of stress; that 
is, they needed to be able to liquify assets when a shock to confidence occurred.  
When  such  a  shock  was  idiosyncratic,  a  bank  might  seek  funding  in  the  market.  Other 
institutions,  mindful  of  the  possibility  of  contagion  if  a  run  got  going,  might  support  one  of 
their  competitors  provided  there  was  a  reasonably  held  expectation  of  solvency.  But  if  the 
confidence  shock  was  more  systemic  in  nature  the  question  was  how  the  whole  system 
could  be  supported.  This  came  to  be  seen  as  the  proper  role  of  a  central  bank  and  was 
ultimately  encapsulated  in  Bagehot’s  famous  (if  widely  misquoted)  maxim  that  the  central 
bank should be prepared to “lend freely, against good collateral at a high rate of interest”.17 
Of course central banking was at that time embryonic at best: the central banks in existence 
in  Bagehot’s  day  mainly  had  been  established  to  help  sovereigns  raise  war  finance;  their 
stability functions evolved later, over time.18  
But while the provision of liquidity in crises left the system less vulnerable to runs, it was no 
real solution to simple bad lending. Even if all the good assets can be liquified to meet a run, 
if not all the assets are good, failure may still occur. Failures of individual institutions could be 
allowed provided they did not damage confidence in others, but it is always difficult to know 
just how small or large a failure might cross the threshold. Inevitably, since there could be 
spillovers  from  failures,  and  since  banks  and  others  would  accept  funds  from  the  general 
public, there would end up being a degree of regulation.  
And so the history of banking and finance is not just a history of financial innovation, it is also 
a history of regulatory response. That regulatory response has had its own quite pronounced 
cycles. Moreover, regulation prompts further innovation, and so on.  
From the 1930s, regulation became much more intrusive. In the United States, fear of the 
“money power” saw some large institutions (J.P. Morgan for example) broken up, much as 
occurred  in  some  other  industries  at  the  time.  Yet  simultaneously,  competition  between 
banks was intentionally curtailed in some respects, for fear of irrational behaviour. Regulatory 
intervention  extended  to  interest  rates,  requirements  for  reserves,  prohibitions  on  certain 
types of business, and even lending guidelines and quotas. In the 1940s this all became part 
of  the  war-time  apparatus  that  essentially  sought  to  run  economies  via  direct  intervention 
                                                 
17   I spoke at length about the role of a central bank as lender of last resort in the Melville Lecture at ANU in 
2008, so will not cover it here in further detail (Stevens 2008). 
18   Most central banks in existence today were established in the twentieth century. The price stability mandate 
typically  came  later  –  since  until  the  1930s  countries  were  typically  on  some  sort  of  link  to  gold  and  the 
problem of continual inflation was not expected to arise in such a world. 
BIS Review 107/2010 
 5
rather  than  by  relying  on  the  price  mechanism.  However,  it  persisted  in  finance  for  many 
years after the war had ended, perhaps in part to keep low the costs of servicing large war 
debts.  It  was  only  really  in  the  1980s  and  1990s  that  this  regulatory  approach  had  finally 
passed, allowing banks to compete vigorously for all lines of business and allowing pricing to 
be driven by market forces.  
We  can  trace  many  of  these  trends  in  Australia.  The  1937  Royal  Commission  argued  for 
greater control and regulation of the Australian monetary and banking systems, motivated by 
the perceived failings of the financial system through the depressions. Legislation on many of 
the  recommendations  from  the  Commission  was  enacted  in  1945  and  continued  the  tight 
controls placed on banks during the Second World War. The focus immediately after the war 
was  on  stability  with  little  regard  given  to  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  system.  This  was 
consistent with extensive government intervention and regulations in other markets.  
As  a  result,  in  the  early  post-war  period,  the  Australian  banking  system  was  highly 
constrained. There were tight controls on interest rates for bank lending and borrowing, on 
terms  to  maturity  of  different  types  of  deposits  and  loans,  and  quantitative  and  qualitative 
controls  on  banks  loans  in  aggregate  and  to  particular  types  of  borrowers.  These  were 
introduced to guard against excessive risk-taking by banks with depositors’ savings and also 
were regarded as serving the needs of macroeconomic policy.  
Given the pervasive and restrictive nature of these controls, it is perhaps not surprising that 
the banking system was very stable. In the almost five decades from the early 1930s until the 
problems of the Bank of Adelaide in 1979 no Australian bank failed or even faced serious 
financial problems.19 This was in a very real sense a result of the terrible 1890s depression 
which  had  been  so  influential  on  the  young  Shann.  As  Selwyn  Cornish  points  out,  that 
episode had a significant effect on the nature and form of much of Australian economic policy 
throughout most of the twentieth century, including financial regulation and central banking.20  
But the constrained banking system left a gap into which others stepped.21 As early as the 
1960s, new, less regulated, financial institutions began to arise. The banks’ share of financial 
intermediation in the Australian economy steadily declined from the mid 1960s, reaching a 
little over half at its lowest point in the early 1980s (Graph 1).  
                                                 
19   Macfarlane (2006). 
20   Cornish (2010). 
21   This “regulatory arbitrage” has antecedents, in the Medici example I used earlier, and descendents in the form 
of the recent North Atlantic financial crisis. In the recent case, as we all know, a great deal of financial activity 
moved outside the regulatory net, via the so-called shadow banking system which enabled the creation of a 
whole array of off-balance sheet vehicles, for example SPVs and conduits, to circumvent capital requirements. 
6 
 BIS Review 107/2010
Graph 1 
  The  increasing  size  and  complexity  of  the  system  and  the  rise  of  non-bank  financial 
institutions  made  the  regulatory  architecture  increasingly  less  effective.  By  the  late  1970s, 
the  philosophical  tide  was  turning  against  intervention  as  efficiency  costs  became  more 
apparent – a trend not confined to finance.  
Eventually these inefficiencies led to calls for financial liberalisation and so, around 40 years 
after the Royal Commission, the Campbell Inquiry laid the foundations for the intellectual and 
practical shift towards liberalisation and the current system. In addition to freeing up banks, 
the floating of the currency and the opening up of capital markets, a range of technological 
advancements  –  as  well  as  economic  development  and  policy  changes  affecting  other 
sectors in the economy – also were important drivers of change in the financial system.  
Questions arising from the growth of finance 
The  past  20  years  has  seen  a  major  increase  in  the  size  and  breadth  of  activity  of  the 
financial sector in most economies, as well as an acceleration in the globalisation of finance.  
Statistics  abound  to  demonstrate  this:  the  turnover  in  various  markets,  the  real  value  of 
assets,  the  amount  of  gross  derivative  positions  outstanding;  all  have  grown  considerably 
faster than the size of overall economic activity. Again some of these same trends are seen 
in  Australia.  Total  assets  of  financial  institutions  relative  to  the  size  of  the  economy  have 
increased from the equivalent of around 100 per cent of annual GDP in the early 1980s to 
almost 350 per cent in recent years (Graph 2).  
BIS Review 107/2010 
 7
Graph 2 
  Noteworthy in some countries has also been a significant increase in the share of financial 
activity in the economy’s value added and the proportion of people employed in the financial 
sector.  
It is widely assumed that financial deregulation played a major role in this increase, and the 
timing seems to fit. Now, in the aftermath of the crisis, there is a more questioning tone about 
whether all this growth was actually a good idea: maybe finance had become too big (and 
too  risky).  This  question  is  certainly  a  live  one  in  the  United  Kingdom,  where  the  City  of 
London was very prominent in the economic success of the country since the mid 1980s.22 
There are at least two potential problems in a world where the finance sector becomes “too 
big”. If it is accepted that finance has its own cycle – of risk appetite, leverage, crisis and then 
de-leveraging  –  then  a  bigger  financial  system  compared  with  the  economy,  unless 
accompanied by much more capital (and it wasn’t in the case of the big international banks – 
the reverse was true), risks de-stabilisation of the whole economy. Because crises can be 
costly, moreover, calls are inevitably placed on the public purse for support. These are very 
difficult  to  resist.  In  the  current  episode,  the  direct  costs  to  the  public  purse  of  restoring 
financial stability in some of the North Atlantic countries are non-trivial. But the cost of lost 
revenue in the lengthy periods of economic weakness that seem invariably to follow financial 
crises is an order of magnitude larger. It is this factor really that has unleashed the recent 
round of concerns about public finances in the affected countries.  
Secondly, as well as making incomes and activity less stable, an overly large financial sector, 
if  characterised  by  perverse  incentives  that  can  drive  extraordinary  remuneration  for 
individuals, may draw in too many resources that could otherwise be employed at a higher 
social return. To put it in practical language, too many PhD physicists, mathematicians and 
engineers working on options pricing and designing structured products could lower, rather 
than increase, the productive capacity of the economy.  
                                                 
22   See for example the recent conference on The Future of Finance at <http://www.futureoffinance.org.uk>, and 
particularly the papers by Turner (2010) and Haldane (2010). 
8 
 BIS Review 107/2010
For finance is not, for the community, an end in itself. It is a means to an end. Ultimately it is 
about mobilising and allocating resources and managing risk and so on – providing the five 
outputs I listed earlier. Yet people have become suspicious of the way much of the activity in 
the financial system amounts to the production of “intermediate” financial services, delivered 
to others within the same sector: the “slicing and dicing” of risk, re-allocating it around the 
system to those who are most willing and best able to bear it (or, sometimes perhaps, and 
much more troublingly, to those who least understand it).  
Some commentators – among them the chair of the UK Financial Services Authority – have 
openly  questioned  the  social  usefulness  of  much  of  this  activity.  In  essence  people  are 
asking whether the rising size and pace of transactions of the finance sector is actually a sign 
of higher economic prosperity, or of something  wrong. They are also questioning implicitly 
whether the thrust of financial liberalisation in the 1980s and 1990s was correct, or at least 
may have gone too far, if it helped to produce these outcomes.  
These questions are likely to be debated intensely over the next several years. This will be a 
growth  sector  of  the  conference  and  consulting  industry.  It  is  therefore  premature  to  draw 
strong conclusions, but a few observations may be useful.  
First,  a  small  point  of  measurement.  In  most  modern  economies,  the  share  of  GDP 
accounted for by services generally has long been growing as agriculture and manufacturing 
get (relatively) smaller. It would not be surprising for the finance sector to be part of that. So it 
might make more sense to measure the financial sector as a share of the services sector, 
rather than as a share of total GDP. On this basis it will still have shown a distinct rise, but 
not  quite  as  much.  In  Australia’s  case,  by  the  way,  the  finance  sector’s  share  of  services 
sector  employment  peaked  around  1990,  thereafter  declined  somewhat  and  has  changed 
little for a decade.  
Second, a fair bit of the growth in financial sector activity was surely bound to happen in view 
of changes in technology. These dramatically lowered costs, so that the provision of news 
and information became instantaneous and ubiquitous, as did the ability to respond to news. 
The  capacity  to  monitor  and  manage  a  portfolio  more  actively  is  likely  a  “superior  good”: 
people  will  want  more  of  it  as  their  affluence  increases.  The  increasing  development  of 
financial management techniques and new instruments – another kind of technology, if you 
will – also led to a lot more gross activity. For example the conceptually simple process of 
keeping  to  a  benchmark  drives  a  good  deal  of  transaction  volume.  So  surely  some  of  the 
growth in the finance sector has been genuinely useful, and the technological changes mean 
that  much  of  it  has  been  accommodated  without  much  in  the  way  of  real  resources  being 
used. That is not to deny that there is a very important set of questions about the price the 
general public is paying for some of the services and about whether the capacity to respond 
to every piece of “news” is resulting in an excessively short-term focus in management. The 
latter is, of course, a question that extends much more widely than just the finance sector.  
Third,  the  increasing  integration  of  the  global  economy  –  itself  assisted  by  financial 
development – brought the savings of literally hundreds of millions of Asians into the global 
capital  market.  This  meant  that  differences  between  countries’  policies  and  saving  and 
investment appetites became more likely to affect financial trends and market prices. These 
factors were certainly one reason that interest rates, including long-term rates set in markets, 
not just the ones set by central banks, were so low in the middle of last decade. Surely this 
had a major bearing on the pace of growth of intermediation and, ultimately, the appetite for 
risk in the global system.  
Fourth,  we  need  to  be  careful  how  much  blame  we  ascribe  to  changes  in  regulation  for 
everything  that  went  wrong.  Of  course  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  regulations  had 
shortcomings.  But  while  all  significant  countries  were  operating  on  more  or  less  the  same 
minimum  standards  for  bank  supervision,  some  countries  had  serious  financial  crises,  but 
many  –  in  fact  most  –  did  not.  Moreover,  a  significant  part  of  the  problems  arose  in  the 
“shadow banks” – more lightly regulated institutions which were not banks (though some of 
BIS Review 107/2010 
 9
them  became  banks  subsequently  when  there  was  a  regulatory  advantage  to  doing  so). 
Many  observers  have  concluded  that  in  the  major  countries,  allowing  large  regular 
commercial  banks  to  engage  in  more  “shadow  banking”  type  activity  without  more  capital 
was  a  mistake.  But  all  this  says  that  supervisory  practice  is  as  important  as  the  formal 
regulations.  Moreover,  if  those  freedoms  were  granted  in  response  to  the  demand  by  the 
commercial  banks  to  get  in  on  the  action  happening  elsewhere,  that  points  to  the  general 
environment  as  a  big  part  of  the  story.  As  we  know  from  our  own  history,  if  there  is  an 
incentive for risk-taking activity to occur (like low interest rates, for example), it will eventually 
occur  even  if  it  has  to  migrate  to  markets  and  institutions  where  fewer  regulatory 
impediments are in place. To put this point at its most extreme, it could be argued that that 
the  overall  environment  dictates  the  appetite  for  risk-taking  financial  activity,  and  that  the 
nature of regulation simply determines the location of the activity. That is, as I say, extreme, 
but there is some truth to it.  
Looking ahead 
Where then does this leave us?  
The regulatory cycle has come fully around. After two or three decades of liberalisation and 
allowing  markets  and  private  agents  in  the  financial  sector  more  sway,  the  international 
debate has of late been consumed with issues of financial regulation: how to re-design it, and 
generally increase it.  
This  is  understandable,  and  it  is  entirely  appropriate  that  these  questions  be  posed  in  the 
light of the events of the past decade. My point is simply that we have been here before. If 
we think far enough back in history, there are things to learn about regulation and its cycle, 
just as there would have been – had people been more inclined to look – about the nature of 
private finance and its cycle.  
The objective shouldn’t be to suppress finance again to the extent it was for so long in the 
past.  There  would  be  a  cost  to  the  economy  in  attempting  this,  and  in  any  event  the 
financiers will be quicker to figure out the avoidance techniques than they used to be. The 
objective should, rather, be to foster arrangements that preserve the genuine benefits of an 
efficient and dynamic financial system, but restrain, or punish, the really reckless behaviour 
that sows the seeds of serious instability. Such arrangements surely have to include allowing 
badly run institutions to fail, which must in turn have implications for how large and complex 
they are allowed to become.  
There is a large reform effort under way at the international level. I have spoken about this 
before on several occasions and so I will not revisit the regulation issue here. I would only 
say that while no doubt regulations can always be improved – and who would say otherwise? 
– it is unlikely that regulation per se, becoming more and more complex and widespread as it 
is, will be the full answer. A big part of the answer must come from practice, not just black-
letter law.  
The finance industry, certainly at the level of the very large internationally active institutions, 
needs to seek to be less exciting, less ambitious for growth, less complex, more conscious of 
risk and more responsible about where those risks end up, than we saw for the past decade 
or two. And, of course, it does have to be better capitalised.  
Equally,  surely  regulators  and  supervisors  in  some  jurisdictions  need  to  be  more  intrusive 
and  assertive,  to  be  prepared  to  go  beyond  minimum  standards  and  to  be  a  little  less 
concerned  about  the  competitive  position  of  their  own  banks,  than  they  have  been  in  the 
past.  It  has  been  not  uncommon,  for  example,  for  Australian  bankers  to  complain  about 
APRA’s  relatively  strict  rules  on  definition  of  capital  for  regulatory  purposes,  where  other 
jurisdictions  were  more  lenient.  But  the  international  supervisory  community  is  at  this 
moment in heated debate about what can and cannot be counted as capital, and it is moving, 
belatedly, in APRA’s direction.  
10 
 BIS Review 107/2010
But  to  be  effective,  supervisors  need  support  from  their  legislatures  and  executive 
government  –  in  having  strong  legislation,  adequate  funding,  and  a  high  degree  of 
operational independence from the political process in the conduct of their duties. In several 
countries  legislatures  are  working  now,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  to  strengthen 
supervisory arrangements. That is good, but the most important time to have this support is 
in the boom period – when a cashed up private sector, which would much prefer the party to 
keep heating up, can bid quality staff from regulatory agencies and is not averse to looking 
for other ways of tilting the playing field in the direction of short-term profits. It is precisely 
then that capable, well-resourced and well-supported regulators need to be able to say “no”.  
Conclusion 
Edward Shann died tragically in 1935. He did not live to see the full recovery from the Great 
Depression,  nor  the  long  post-war  prosperity.  He  could  not  take  part  in  the  subsequent 
debate  about  financial  regulation  in  its  ebbs  and  flows.  But  were  he  to  have  been  able  to 
observe the past fifteen years in the global economy and financial system, I think he would 
have recognised many of the features.  
Finance matters. Its conduct can make a massive difference to economic development and 
to  ordinary  lives  –  for  good  or  ill.  Moreover,  finance  has  its  own  cycle  –  of  risk  appetite, 
innovation and occasional crisis. That won’t change. Shann understood that and so must we.  
The sort of financial system we should want is what was once described as “the hand-maid 
of industry”:23 reliably facilitating transactions, fostering trade, bringing savers and investors 
together,  pooling  risk  and  so  on.  We  don’t  actually  want  too  many  of  the  financiers  to  be 
“masters of the universe”. There will always be a risky fringe, but it should stay at the fringe, 
not be at the core.  
But the man we remember tonight would not want the financial system to be simply an arm of 
the state either, subject entirely to bureaucratic or political direction. We shouldn’t be looking 
to go back to the 1940s and 1950s.  
So we have to find the right balance involving regulation, supervision and financial industry 
practice. That is the task that lies before us.  
Bibliography 
Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market, Henry S. King and Co., London.  
Cornish S (2010), The Evolution of Central Banking in Australia, Reserve Bank of Australia, 
Sydney.  
Davies G (1994), A History of Money: From Ancient Times to the Present Day, University of 
Wales Press, Cardiff.  
de Roover R (1946), “The Medici Bank Organization and Management”, Journal of Economic 
History, 6 (1), May, pp 24–52.  
Ferguson  N  (2008),  The  Ascent  of  Money:  A  Financial  History  of  the  World,  Allen  Lane, 
London.  
Gerschenkron  A  (1962),  Economic  Backwardness  in  Historical  Perspective,  Harvard 
University Press, Cambridge.  
                                                 
23   I first heard this phrase in remarks by Ed Frydl at a conference many years ago – about a previous financial 
crisis. I have several times tried to find its origins. To my knowledge Withers (1916) was the first to use the 
phrase. 
BIS Review 107/2010 
 11
Haldane A (2010), “What is the Contribution of the Financial Sector: Miracle or Mirage?”, in 
The Future of Finance: The LSE Report. Available at <http://www.futureoffinance.org.uk>.  
Kent  C  (forthcoming),  “Two  Depressions,  One  Banking  Collapse:  Lessons  from  Australia”, 
Journal of Financial Stability.  
Kindleberger  C  (1993),  A  Financial  History  of  Western  Europe,  Second  Edition,  Oxford 
University Press.  
Macfarlane IJ (2006), The Search for Stability, Boyer Lectures 2006, ABC Books, Sydney.  
Newton L (2010), “The Birth of Joint-Stock Banking: England and New England Compared”, 
Business History Review, 84 (1), pp 27–52.  
Quinn S and W Roberds (2005), “The Big Problem of Large Bills: The Bank of Amsterdam 
and  the  Origins  of  Central  Banking”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Atlanta,  Working  Paper  
2005-16.  
Reinhart CM and KS Rogoff (2009), This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, 
Princeton University Press, Princeton.  
Shann EOG (1927), The Boom of 1890 – And Now, 2nd edn, Cornstalk Publishing Company, 
Sydney.  
Shann  EOG  (1930),  An  Economic  History  of  Australia,  Cambridge  University  Press, 
Cambridge.  
Shann  EOG  and  DB  Copland  (1931),  The  Battle  of  the  Plans:  Documents  Relating  to  the 
Premiers’ Conference, May 25th to June 11th, 1931, Angus and Robertson, Sydney.  
Snooks G (1993), “Bond or Free? The Life, Work, and Times of Edward Shann, 1884–1935”, 
in MAB Siddique (ed), A Decade of Shann Memorial Lectures 1981–1990, Academic Press 
International.  
Stevens  G  (2008),  “Liquidity  and  the  Lender  of  Last  Resort”,  Seventh  Annual  Sir Leslie 
Melville Lecture, RBA Bulletin, May, pp 83–91.  
Temin P (2004), “Financial Intermediation in the Early Roman Empire”, Journal of Economic 
History, 64(3), September, pp 705–733.  
Turner A (2010), “What do Banks do? Why do Credit Booms and Busts Occur and What can 
Public  Policy  do  About  it?”  in  The  Future  of  Finance:  The  LSE  Report.  Available  at 
<http://www.futureoffinance.org.uk>.  
Withers H (1916), International Finance, Smith, Elder and Co., London. 
12 
 BIS Review 107/2010
