Brian P Sack: Reflections on the TALF and the Federal Reserve’s role as 
liquidity provider 
Remarks  by  Mr  Brian  P  Sack,  Executive  Vice  President  of  Markets  Group  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the New York Association for Business Economics, New York, 
9 June 2010. 
 In my remarks today, I had intended to focus on the Federal Reserve’s experience with the 
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, or the TALF. This facility, which is scheduled to 
end later this month, was the last of the Federal Reserve’s special liquidity programs, and 
those programs were then expected to enter a period of inactivity. It had therefore seemed to 
be a good time to reflect on our experiences with the TALF, and more broadly on the role of 
the central bank as a liquidity provider.  
However,  the  context  for  this  talk  has  shifted  importantly  with  recent  developments  in 
financial markets. In particular, investors’ concerns about sovereign risk in some European 
countries, with the attendant pressures on financial firms with exposures in those areas, have 
put  renewed  emphasis  on  liquidity  provision  and  led  the  Federal  Reserve  and  five  foreign 
central banks to reestablish dollar liquidity swap lines. 
Accordingly, I will begin today with some remarks on recent financial market developments 
and  the  role  of  the  liquidity  swap  lines.  I  will  then  turn  to  the  TALF  program,  providing  a 
review of its performance and assessing the benefits that it provided. Both of these programs 
provide important insights into the role of the central bank as a provider of liquidity, leading to 
a  few  observations  and  to  a  few  questions  that  I  believe  warrant  further  exploration  in 
considering future policy actions.1 
Liquidity swaps with foreign central banks 
The  second  half  of  2009  and  the  early  part  of  2010  were  marked  by  substantial 
improvements  in  financial  markets,  ranging  from  short-term  funding  to  longer  term  risk 
assets.  There  was  good  reason  for  those  improvements:  Efforts  by  the  government  to 
stabilize  markets  and  support  financial  institutions  were  successful,  and  a  virtuous  circle 
appeared  to  be  under  way  in  which  increasing  optimism  about  the  economic  outlook  and 
improving  conditions  in  financial  markets  fed  upon  one  another.  The  gains  in  asset  prices 
were dramatic, with broad equity indexes reversing most of the declines experienced in late-
2008  and  early  2009  and  with  some  measures  of  short-term  funding  spreads  returning  to 
pre-crisis levels. 
However, more recent developments have demonstrated that conditions in financial markets 
can change abruptly. These developments have been widely discussed at this point, and I 
will not go through them in detail, except to highlight the two broad themes in play. 
First,  investors  have  become  concerned  about  the  fiscal  positions  of  some  European 
countries, leading them to re-price sovereign risk for those countries and to question whether 
austerity  measures  and  other  supporting  efforts  will  prove  sufficient  to  restore  market 
confidence. Second, investors have increasingly worried about the exposures of European 
financial  institutions  to  these  countries  and  to  European  growth  prospects  more  broadly. 
These  uncertainties  have  led  to  sharp  declines  in  the  share  prices  of  those  financial 
                                                 
1   The views and opinions expressed are mine alone and do not necessarily represent the views of the Federal 
Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 
institutions and have affected the ability of many of them to fund themselves in short-term 
credit markets. 
The  successful  resolution  of  these  problems  ultimately  rests  on  European  policy  actions. 
Those actions will determine the degree of fiscal adjustment that is required over time, the 
amount of fiscal support and risk sharing among European countries that is appropriate, and 
the extent to which European financial institutions are supported. The Federal Reserve had 
only a limited and supportive role in the policy response, taking steps to allow the European 
Central  Bank  and  other  foreign  central  banks  to  respond  more  fully  to  emerging  liquidity 
pressures. 
The  liquidity  pressures  that  have  emerged  stem  from  the  balance  sheets  of  European 
financial institutions. Those institutions still hold large amounts of dollar-denominated assets 
and  finance  a  sizable  portion  of  those  holdings  in  short-term  dollar-denominated  funding 
markets. In the presence of concerns about the status of these institutions, investors have 
become more reluctant to extend term funding to many of them, putting upward pressure on 
term funding rates and forcing the firms to change their funding patterns. 
To help prevent strains in dollar funding markets from intensifying and spreading, and hence 
creating  more  widespread  pressure  on  financial  markets,  the  Federal  Reserve  established 
liquidity swap arrangements with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European 
Central Bank, the Swiss National Bank and the Bank of Japan. These arrangements provide 
foreign  central  banks  with  the  capacity  to  deliver  US  dollar  funding  to  institutions  in  their 
jurisdictions.  The  credit  is  extended  by  the  foreign  central  bank  against  the  collateral  that 
each accepts, and the interest generated from those transactions is returned to the Federal 
Reserve. 
From the perspective of the Federal Reserve, the liquidity swap arrangements are safe. After 
all, the Federal Reserve is extending credit to the foreign central bank and not to the financial 
institutions  that  obtain  dollar  funding.  The  credit  we  extend  to  the  foreign  central  bank  is 
collateralized  by  foreign  currency  deposited  with  the  Federal  Reserve.  Moreover,  the 
operations do not involve any exchange rate risk for the Federal Reserve, because the swap 
transactions are unwound at the same exchange rate at which they are established. 
There  is  currently  only  a  very  small  amount  of  outstanding  credit  extended  through  the 
liquidity swap arrangements, in contrast to the dramatic usage that was observed during the 
financial crisis. The reason is that the circumstances surrounding the recent establishment of 
the  swap  lines  differed  from  those  in  the  middle  of  the  financial  crisis.  During  that  earlier 
period,  the  need  for  dollar  funding  was  more  severe,  and  funding  markets  had  become 
completely  dysfunctional.  The  swaps  were  priced  at  rates  that  were  well  below  those 
available in the market at that time, causing usage of the swap lines to rise dramatically to a 
peak of nearly $600 billion in December 2008. 
In the current circumstances, although the swaps have been priced in the same manner as 
during the crisis, this pricing is less advantageous relative to the funding rates available in 
the market, limiting the usage of the swap lines at this time. The swaps were essentially put 
in  place  in  a  preemptive  manner,  under  the  view  that  their  presence  would  provide  a 
backstop for dollar funding markets and help to bolster market confidence. 
Reflections on the TALF 
I am now going to switch gears and discuss the TALF, which is a liquidity program of a very 
different  nature.  Later  this  month,  we  will  be  holding  our  final  subscription  for  the  TALF. 
However,  because  no  deals  have  been  presented  for  review  for  the  final  subscription,  we 
know that the extension of new credit under the TALF has effectively come to an end. 
Although  the  structure  of  the  TALF  differed  considerably  from  the  other  liquidity  programs 
initiated  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  its  basic  role  was  similar  in  many  ways  to  the  traditional 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2010
central bank function of providing liquidity to the financial system and encouraging the flow of 
credit. In this case, however, the program was geared toward providing support for market-
based credit intermediation, as opposed to the traditional banking sector. More specifically, 
the TALF was designed to support the market for securitized credit. 
Overall, the TALF performed impressively in meeting that objective. The program contributed 
to  a  substantial  improvement  in  conditions  in  the  securitized  credit  market,  facilitating  an 
increase in the availability of credit to households and businesses. Moreover, it achieved this 
outcome with limited risk to the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. 
Let  me  begin  with  some  general  background  information  on  securitized  credit  markets. 
Securitization is an important funding source for bank and nonbank lenders. When a lender 
extends credit, it makes the decision of whether to keep loans on its books or to securitize 
and  sell  them  to  other  investors.  If  kept  on  the  lender’s  books,  the  holdings  have  to  be 
financed, either by borrowing or by using funds that could be deployed for other purposes, 
including making other loans. Thus, in many circumstances the lender finds it advantageous 
to sell assets through the securitization channel, allowing other investors to ultimately hold 
the  assets  and  hence  bear  the  risk.  The  amount  of  credit  financed  through  securitization 
rivals  that  provided  directly  by  banks.  Indeed,  even  excluding  the  sizable  securitization 
markets for mortgage credit, approximately $2 trillion in loans to consumers, students, and 
businesses were securitized over the past decade.2 
The  securitization  market  became  significantly  disrupted  during  the  financial  crisis  in  2008 
and 2009 in all areas outside of conforming agency mortgage-backed securities. Liquidity for 
securitized  products  deteriorated,  leading  to  an  unprecedented  widening  of  spreads. 
Issuance virtually ground to a halt, resulting in significant funding concerns for a variety of 
lenders  who  relied  on  securitization.  These  funding  strains  prompted  some  lenders  to 
dramatically  tighten  underwriting  standards,  thus  reducing  overall  credit  to  consumers  and 
businesses. A prolonged shutdown of the securitization market could have compounded the 
credit crunch and increased the risk of an even more severe contraction of the economy than 
we experienced. 
In response, the TALF was created to provide liquidity in the form of term loans to investors 
in  the  least  risky  part—the  AAA  tranches—of  particular  types  of  asset-backed  securities, 
including  those  backed  by  consumer  loans,  student  loans,  small  business  loans,  and 
commercial  real  estate  loans.  The  hope  was  that,  by  providing  loans  directly  to  investors 
against  asset-backed  collateral,  the  TALF  would  help  stabilize  and  improve  the  prices  at 
which  those  securities  could  be  sold,  thus  reducing  lenders’  costs  of  funds.  With  lenders’ 
funding  strains  alleviated,  the  extension  of  credit  to  consumers  and  other  borrowers  could 
occur on more favorable terms. 
While  the  TALF  is  essentially  similar  to  other  programs  in  its  basic  objective  of  providing 
liquidity and encouraging the extension of credit, it is worth highlighting that the TALF has 
several features that are not common in other liquidity facilities. 
First, TALF loans are non-recourse, meaning that the borrower can put the collateral to the 
Federal Reserve rather than repay the loan if the collateral value falls sufficiently below the 
amount  owed.  The  provision  of  non-recourse 
to  encourage  investor 
participation. In late 2008, when secondary market spreads had spiked and risk aversion was 
high, investors were uncertain as to when and how the market would stabilize. Non-recourse 
lending helped place a floor on investor losses, thus increasing market confidence broadly 
and facilitating the return of structured product investors. 
loans  helped 
                                                 
2   Source:  Morgan  Markets.  Note:  This  includes  securitizations  of  auto  loans  and  leases,  credit  card  account 
balances, student loans, dealer floorplan loans, and business equipment loans and leases. 
Second, TALF loans have considerably longer maturities than the lending from the Federal 
Reserve’s discount window and its other temporary liquidity facilities. The term of the loans, 
which were either three or five years, was intended to more closely match the maturity of the 
underlying securities, as needed to encourage investors to return to the market. In addition, 
loans  with  longer  terms  were  viewed  as  more  effective,  as  financing  would  extend  well 
beyond the expected end of the recession. 
The  combination  of  these  two  elements  –  non-recourse  loans  and  long  maturities  –  was 
critical  to  the  success  of  program.  Without  one  or  the  other,  investors  would  have  had 
exposure to short-term swings in risk premiums in a time of extreme volatility, which would 
have likely limited participation and thus reduced the program’s effectiveness. 
A  third  notable  feature  of  the  TALF  was  that  it  was  available  to  a  wide  set  of  market 
participants  beyond  the  Federal  Reserve’s  traditional  bank  counterparties.  This  feature 
reflected  the  program’s  broad  focus  on  a  financial  market  rather  than  a  particular  set  of 
financial firms. Given the wide array of market participants, the program’s broad reach was 
necessary to effectively support the entire market. 
Let  me  turn  to  the  program’s  achievements.  By  providing  liquidity  and  a  backstop  to  limit 
losses  to  investors,  the  TALF  contributed  importantly  to  the  revival  of  securitized  credit 
markets. Secondary spreads narrowed significantly, and volatility moderated. Moreover, the 
improvements  in  the  secondary  market  helped  re-start  the  new-issue  market.  Issuance  of 
non-mortgage asset-backed securities jumped to $35 billion in the first three months of TALF 
lending in 2009, after having slowed to less than $1 billion per month in late 2008. During 
those initial months that the TALF was in operation, about half of the issuance in the market 
was financed by the facility, with this degree of support then gradually declining as market 
function improved.3 
While each of the Federal Reserve’s liquidity facilities was ultimately aimed at encouraging 
the  flow  of  credit  to  the  economy,  the  TALF  may  be  distinctive  in  offering  a  more  direct 
impact  to  the  consumer.  In  fact,  nearly  all  of  the  auto  lenders  supported  by  the  TALF 
reported  that  the  facility  enabled  them  to  offer  more  credit  to  consumers  at  lower  rates. 
Lenders  attributed  this  impact  to  the  program’s  success  in  re-opening  the  securitization 
channel through which roughly half of consumer loans are financed. 
The TALF also facilitated the first issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities since 
mid-2008,  which  provided  an  important  benchmark  for  pricing  and  helped  establish  the 
higher  credit  standards  now  seen  in  the  market.  These  developments  paved  the  way  for 
subsequent  commercial  mortgage-backed  deals  to  come  to  the  market  without  TALF 
support. 
The  TALF  accomplished  these  benefits  while  exposing  the  Federal  Reserve  to  a  limited 
amount of risk, as its design provides considerable protection. As I mentioned earlier, loans 
were  made  only  against  the  highest  rated  asset-backed  collateral.4  Moreover,  TALF 
borrowers contributed significant capital in the form of a risk-based haircut, which means that 
the market value of collateral pledged exceeded the principal amount of the TALF loan. The 
prices  of  securities  pledged  to  the  facility  have  risen,  giving  the  Federal  Reserve  an  even 
larger cushion against loss, and no securities have been put to the facility to date. In addition, 
Treasury  backstopped  the  facility  by  committing  up  to  $20  billion  to  absorb  any  losses 
associated  with  the  loans  before  the  Federal  Reserve  would  be  at  risk.  And  lastly,  the 
interest earned on our loans is accruing, with about $400 million earned to date, and serves 
as a buffer against loss. 
                                                 
3   Sources: Morgan Markets; Bloomberg L.P.; Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
4  
Importantly, the Federal Reserve performed due diligence on each of the bonds pledged to the facility as a 
part of a detailed risk assessment process. 
4 
 BIS Review 80/2010
The risk to the Federal Reserve is also limited by the amount of balance sheet employed, 
which  has  been  considerably  less  than  envisioned  at  the  height  of  the  crisis.  While 
$200 billion was authorized for the program, only approximately $70 billion in total was lent. 
Moreover, because loans were paid back as private credit markets improved, the maximum 
amount of credit extended under the program was about $50 billion. Today, there is about 
$44 billion of TALF credit outstanding. 
It  is  worth  considering  why  the  program  was  able  to  achieve  such  significant  market 
improvements with a limited amount of balance sheet. The success of the TALF may reflect 
that  it  targeted  a  market  under  severe  stress,  one  characterized  by  extreme  liquidity 
premiums  that  had  caused  asset  prices  to  become  detached  from  the  underlying  credit 
quality  of  the  securities.  Under  those  conditions,  our  involvement  was  able  to  have  a 
substantial effect, in part by pushing those markets back toward more normal functioning and 
pricing. 
To  be  sure,  improvements  in  funding  markets  broadly  and  in  the  macroeconomic  outlook 
during  the  course  of  the  program  clearly  influenced  the  recovery  of  securitized  credit 
markets. That said, the TALF lending mechanism has been widely credited with helping to 
jumpstart those markets. 
As markets have improved and the liquidity premium on securitized credit has shrunk, the 
TALF  has  become  a  less  appealing  source  of  funding.  Indeed,  borrowers  have  been 
prepaying their loans as spreads have narrowed below the TALF lending rate. At this point, 
those asset-backed securities markets that were supported by TALF appear to be standing 
on  their  own.  Going  forward,  the  securitized  credit  markets  will  be  shaped  importantly  by 
regulatory  efforts,  with  some  potential  changes  such  as  risk  retention  and  transparency 
requirements still undecided. 
Defining the Central Bank’s role as liquidity provider 
Let me now turn to the broader issue of the appropriate role of the central bank as a provider 
of  liquidity  during  periods  of  market  strain.  In  effect,  both  of  the  programs  I  have  just 
discussed  expand  the  reach  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  liquidity  policies  to  a  broader  set  of 
firms  than  those  with  access  to  our  traditional  discount  window  program.  Moreover,  the 
Federal Reserve launched a number of other facilities during the financial crisis that reached 
other types of firms and markets. 
The scope and process for launching similar liquidity facilities in the future will be guided by 
the  legislative  efforts  currently  under  way.  Still,  it  is  important  for  the  Federal  Reserve  to 
reflect on what we have learned through our experiences so that we may better judge the 
actions that should be taken in the future within that legislative structure. 
The  liquidity  programs  that  were  launched  by  the  Federal  Reserve  shared  some  common 
characteristics. In all cases, the programs provided credit in stressed markets, and for those 
facilities  that  offered  credit  at  a  predetermined  interest  rate,  the  rate  was  set  at  a  penalty 
relative to normal market functioning. This approach yields several benefits. 
First, by acting in markets that are under stress, such programs have the scope to produce 
substantial improvements in market conditions. If they are seen as credible backstops, these 
programs can increase confidence and move financial conditions back toward normal levels. 
This feature was discussed earlier in the context of the TALF, in terms of the sizable market 
impact relative to the amount of risk taken. 
Second,  liquidity  programs  designed  in  this  manner  have  a  good  chance  of  generating 
positive income for the central bank. The reason is that financing is offered at a time when 
market  risk  premiums  are  very  high.  The  central  bank  therefore  captures  a  high  expected 
return  relative  to  the  actual  risk  it  is  assuming,  especially  when  the  lending  is  adequately 
collateralized  to  limit  such  risk.  Indeed,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  likely  to  make  substantial 
returns  from  the  liquidity  facilities  launched  during  the  financial  crisis.5  Achieving  these 
returns, of course, was not an objective of the programs, but it does suggest that the Federal 
Reserve was prudent in the way in which it established these programs. 
Third,  this  approach  gives  the  facilities  a  self-liquidating  property.  Loan  rates  are  set  at 
penalty  levels  that  are  not  attractive  in  normally  functioning  markets.  Given  the  scarcity  of 
liquidity and the extreme movements of risk premiums during a crisis, the penalty rates are 
readily  accepted  by  market  participants  in  those  circumstances.  However,  as  the  market 
gains confidence and returns to normal functioning, users of the facility have an incentive to 
stop borrowing from the central bank and to pursue better rates in private funding markets. In 
essence,  pricing  at  penalty  rates  incorporates  an  exit  strategy  into  the  design  of  the 
programs. 
But  while  the  various  liquidity  programs  shared  these  features,  they  differed  in  other 
dimensions,  and  it  is  these  differences  that  prompt  questions  about  the  future  scope  and 
design of liquidity facilities. 
A primary question is whether liquidity support during times of stress should be offered only 
to banks or to a wider set of financial institutions. We have a financial system in the United 
States  that is  heavily  dependent  on nonbank  institutions  in  the  extension  of  credit  to  firms 
and households. Indeed, as noted earlier, the amount of credit provided by the securitization 
market has rivaled that provided by banks. Moreover, nonbank firms in many cases are just 
as vulnerable to liquidity pressures and run-like dynamics as are banks. Accordingly, there 
may be benefits to having the central bank extend credit to both banks and nonbank financial 
intermediaries during periods of financial stress. The experience with the TALF suggests that 
nonbank  lending  efforts  can  be  successful  at  restoring  market  functioning  and  the  flow  of 
credit to firms and households. 
A second issue is the extent to which the Federal Reserve should be flexible in setting the 
structure of its liquidity programs to meet the needs of the market. As noted earlier, the TALF 
did this in several ways, including its extension of the duration of the loans beyond the short-
term nature of most other liquidity facilities. That decision clearly improved the appeal of the 
program,  suggesting  that  having  some  flexibility  in  structure  can  be  beneficial.  However, 
policymakers will have to decide the appropriate degree of flexibility to exercise in the future. 
Of  course,  both  of  those  dimensions—having  a  wide  range  of  counterparties  and  using  a 
more flexible lending structure—have the potential to increase risk to the central bank. The 
TALF was able to offer credit on these terms without compromising the safety of the Federal 
Reserve’s balance sheet by requiring sufficient collateralization of the loans and by relying on 
the loss buffer provided by the Treasury. Without the Treasury’s contribution to the program, 
it  would  have  been  more  challenging  to  design  a  program  that  was  both  appealing  to  the 
markets  and  safe  for  the  Federal  Reserve.  Thus,  a  third  open  issue  for  future  policies  is 
determining  the  circumstances  under  which  such  cooperation  between  the  monetary  and 
fiscal authorities is appropriate. 
A final issue is that, if the central bank provides a back-up source of liquidity to the markets, 
whether  through  its  traditional  discount  window  function  or  these  other  facilities,  it  should 
consider  the  effects  on  the  risk  taking  behavior  of  market  participants.  Efforts  should  be 
taken to ensure that expectations of the availability of Federal Reserve lending facilities do 
not lead to excessive risk taking on the part of financial institutions. In the case of banking 
institutions, this moral hazard is offset by appropriate supervision and regulation. Measures 
may be warranted for nonbank financial institutions if they expect Federal Reserve credit to 
be made available to them during times of stress. 
                                                 
5   The interest income and fees that accrue to the Federal Reserve from these facilities are ultimately remitted to 
the US Treasury. 
6 
 BIS Review 80/2010
Conclusion 
Overall,  recent  financial  market  developments  serve  as  a  reminder  that  the  central  bank’s 
role as a liquidity provider can be critical during periods of financial stress. 
In this speech, I discussed the reintroduction of the liquidity swap lines with foreign central 
banks  and  reviewed  our  experience  involving  the  TALF—two  programs  that  provide  dollar 
liquidity to a broad set of counterparties. Our experiences with these two programs, and with 
the other facilities launched during the financial crisis, suggest that liquidity programs can be 
quite effective at restoring market functioning and facilitating the flow of credit to households 
and  businesses.  However,  because  these  facilities  differ  from  traditional  discount  window 
activity,  they  raise  questions  about  the  appropriate  scope  and  structure  of  the  Federal 
Reserve’s role as liquidity provider. 
We should continue to evaluate our experience with these facilities and with other liquidity 
programs  to  more  clearly  define  an  appropriate  framework  for  providing  liquidity  to  the 
markets in the future. 
