Daniel Mminele: A perspective on South African monetary policy 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Rand Merchant Bank Fixed Income Seminar, Cape Town, 28 January 2010. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen. 
Thank  you  to  Rand  Merchant  Bank  for  the  invitation  to  participate  in  this  fixed  income 
seminar. 
The  global  crisis  has  certainly  changed  the  way  many  people  think  about  things  and  has 
changed the manner in which the world operates. It has also taught us that a lot of people 
actually know far less about how the economy works than they would like others to believe, 
the  implication  being  that  it  is  particularly  when  things  are  going  well  that  we  should  be 
asking ourselves “why”, and not assuring ourselves that it has been good judgement only1. 
Since the emergence of the global financial and economic crisis, the interest in the role of 
central  banks  and  their  work  has  risen  to  an  unprecedented  level.  As  you  are  aware  that 
interest has also been accompanied by a much higher level of scrutiny. South Africa has not 
been an exception and indeed the debate is continuing. 
My speech today will initially briefly touch on recent monetary policy responses to the global 
crisis. I will then provide a perspective on the mandate of the South African Reserve Bank, 
our  monetary  policy  framework  and  its  implementation  in  recent  times,  and  conclude  by 
making some remarks on the exchange rate within that context, as this is a topic which has 
also received much attention recently.  
Monetary policy responses to the global crisis  
2. 
The  global  financial  crisis  that  started  in  2007  and  the  ensuing  deterioration  in  world 
economic growth necessitated drastic adjustments to fiscal and monetary policy in developed 
and emerging market economies in order to support economies and to ease credit market 
conditions.  The  origins  of  the  crisis,  its  widespread  nature  and  the  extent  of  the  financial 
market turbulence and the spill-over effects to other sectors of the economy prompted central 
banks to review their monetary policy implementation frameworks and to implement policies 
that,  only  a  few  years  back,  were  not  on  their  radar  screens,  and  certainly  outside  the 
“comfort zone” of many. Central banks responded with both conventional and unconventional 
monetary policies to the global financial crisis. During the early stages of the crisis, central 
banks adjusted their normal refinancing facilities, for example, they lengthened the maturity 
of their money market operations and extended the universe of securities they were prepared 
to  accept  as  collateral  for  borrowing  from  the  central  bank.  During  this  period  several 
initiatives  were  announced  by  central  banks  acting  both  individually  and  in  concert 
(e.g. US dollar  swap  lines  between  the  Fed  and  various  other  central  banks).  This  was 
followed by the introduction of unconventional monetary policy strategies, including various 
forms of quantitative easing.  
These unconventional monetary policies, sometimes called balance sheet policies, involved 
central  banks  using  their  balance  sheets  to  influence  broader  economic  and/or  financial 
conditions during the crisis, particularly when the zero bound for policy rates was reached. 
                                                 
1   William White, BIS. 
BIS Review 61/2010 
 1
These  policies  were  also  used  to  provide  liquidity  to  dysfunctional  interbank  and  credit 
markets and to prevent the fire sale dumping of assets in order to contain the realisation of 
excessive  losses  by  banks  and  investment  funds.  During  the  crisis  balance  sheet  policies 
were employed to target term money-market rates, long-term government bond yields and 
various risk spreads. In contrast to interest rate policy, balance sheet polices generally result 
in substantial changes in the central bank balance sheet – in terms of size, structure and risk 
profile. This stems from the fact that central banks targeted market segments that fell outside 
the  traditional  ambit  of  monetary  policy,  and  that  went  well  beyond  the  market  for  bank 
reserves, which is more familiar territory for central banks, and over which they tend to have 
more control. 
Generally, these interventions did not inject large amounts of liquidity on a net basis, and the 
increase  in  bank  reserves  has  not  as  yet  translated  into  a  generalised  increase  in  broad 
money  supply.  The  balance  sheets  of  commercial  banks  have  contracted,  but  as  financial 
market  conditions  normalise  and  economies  recover,  private  sector  credit  extension  and 
money supply is likely to accelerate, and with that inflationary pressures may start to build as 
output  gaps  narrow.  Central  banks  will  have  to  ensure  that  exit  strategies  to  reverse 
quantitative  easing  do  not  constrain  interest  rate  policy,  and  are  well  timed  and  carefully 
sequenced.  This  unwinding  of  central  bank  risks  could  undoubtedly  have  far-reaching 
consequences for debt markets and needs to be well co-ordinated with national governments 
in order to prevent their operational independence and anti-inflation credentials from coming 
under threat in the longer term.  
While there are clear signs of a modest recovery in the global economy, the challenges for 
policy makers have not abated. In addition to the reversal of balance sheet policies, policy 
makers still have to ensure that: the economic recovery becomes sustainable; that national 
budget  deficits  revert  to  levels  that  could  be  justified  in  terms  of  financial  stability  and 
sustainable  economic  growth;  that  global  imbalances  are  addressed;  that  appropriate 
financial sector reform is implemented and that inflationary pressures are well contained.  
We can only hope that the recovery process will not encourage complacency with regard to 
the  significant  amount  of  repair  work  that  still  needs  to  be  done,  because  the  idea  is  not 
simply to return to where we came from, but to effect changes that will ensure that next time 
we  will  be  at  least  better  prepared  and  be  in  a  position  to  limit  the  damage  and  its  costs. 
Difficult as the process is, the work under way in different fora pertaining to the reform of the 
international  financial  architecture  and  enhancing  regulatory  and  supervisory  standards 
needs to continue, and we cannot afford to lose the sense of urgency.  
Inflation targeting in South Africa  
3.  
During the global crisis, South Africa was in the fortunate position, where it did not have to 
consider  responding  to  the  economic  slowdown  with  unconventional  monetary  policy. 
However,  before  I  look  at  more  recent  monetary  policy  developments  in  South  Africa,  I 
thought that it may be useful to touch briefly on the Bank’s mandate. As is the case in many 
parts  of  the  world,  the  role  and  responsibilities  of  the  South  African  central  bank  and  the 
appropriate focus of its work has come into much sharper focus. 
Section  224  (1)  of  the  South  African  constitution,  from  which  the  Bank  gets  its  mandate, 
describes the primary objective of the South African Reserve Bank as being “to protect the 
value  of  the  currency  in  the  interest  of  balanced  and  sustainable  economic  growth  in  the 
Republic”. Therefore price stability is core to the mandate of the Bank. However, it is clear 
that  price  stability  is  not  an  end  in  itself,  but  in  the  interest  of  balanced  and  sustainable 
growth. It follows then that, as far as the constitutional mandate is concerned, both economic 
growth  and  by  implication  employment,  need  to  be  taken  into  account  when  making 
decisions on monetary policy. To give effect to these constitutional imperatives, the Bank has 
been  mandated  by  government  to  maintain  low  inflation  within  an  inflation  targeting 
framework. This framework is a means to achieve the objective. It is not an end in itself.  
2 
 BIS Review 61/2010
We  note  the  current  debates  around  the  appropriateness  of  our  mandate  and  questions 
about  how  that  mandate  is  executed.  The  SARB  has  indicated  its  willingness  to  openly 
engage various stakeholders to both explain its approach and to explore with them any ideas 
they  may  bring  forward.  Governor  Marcus  has  identified  improved  communication  and 
stakeholder engagement as a priority, and has underlined this by creating dedicated capacity 
in her office for stakeholder engagement and outreach. 
Inflation-targeting was introduced by several countries in the 1990s under relatively benign 
conditions  with  generally  favourable  outcomes.  The  financial  crisis  has  sorely  tested  this 
framework. However, the goal of maintaining low-inflation is inescapable as the alternative of 
high inflation is unsustainable. The distinction between countries that officially target inflation 
and  the  non-targeters  is  blurred.  Irrespective,  monetary  policy  must  achieve  low  inflation, 
which will provide a stable environment conducive to long-term growth. 
Inflation targeting was introduced in South Africa in 2000, with a clear and concise mandate. 
The  democratically  elected  government  sets  the  monetary  policy  goal  in  the  form  of  a 
pre-announced numerical target, while this goal establishes a benchmark for accountability. 
The  attainment  of  this  goal  is  the  responsibility  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  In  this  regard  the 
constitution is again very clear and indicates that the South African Reserve Bank “…must 
perform  its  functions  independently  and  without  fear,  favour  or  prejudice…”  and  makes 
provision for regular consultation between the Bank and the Cabinet Minister responsible for 
national  financial  matters.  This  framework  helps  to  anchor  inflation  expectations  and  is 
transparent.  It  requires  forward-looking  policy-decision  making  based  on  expected  inflation 
and allows for flexibility to respond to shocks not offered by strict monetary rules and fixed 
exchange rates. Inflation targeting in effect tries to strike a balance between the application 
of  inflexible  policy  rules  and  potentially  undisciplined  monetary  policy  discretion,  and  has 
been aptly referred to by Bernanke (2003) as a framework of constrained discretion. 
In  abiding  by  these  principles,  the  Bank  has  the  latitude  that  inflation  can  be  outside  the 
target range as a result of first-round effects of a supply shock. The Bank, furthermore, has 
discretion as to the time horizon for bringing inflation back into the target range. In this regard 
a  distinction  is  made  between  so  called  strict  inflation  targeters  and  flexible  inflation 
targeters.  The  SARB  undoubtedly  is  a  flexible  inflation  targeter.  This  flexible  medium-term 
focus policy approach adopted in South Africa provides for interest rate smoothing over the 
cycle,  with  the  focus  on  second-round  inflationary  effects  of  exogenous  shocks.  This  is 
evidenced  by  lagged  increases  in  interest  rates  in  response  to  exogenous  shocks,  for 
example the currency crisis during the second half of 2001 and the tightening of monetary 
policy only in early 2002. Similarly, in the current interest rate cycle, the repurchase rate was 
reduced, while expected inflation was still somewhat above the inflation target range. This 
approach was also informed by the forward-looking nature of policy implementation, which 
took  into  account  the  opening  output  gap  and  the  downward  pressure  it  would  exert  on 
inflation  going  forward,  a  clear  example  of  how  economic  growth  dynamics  have  played  a 
role in monetary policy decision-making.  
The challenge of the inflation-targeting approach is to maintain monetary policy credibility as 
measured,  among  others,  by  how  well  inflation  expectations  have  been  anchored  and,  by 
applying the correct mix of policy discretion together with a broad enough focus that extends 
beyond  inflation  to  affect  output  variability  or  cyclical  growth  and  employment.  Monetary 
policy cannot directly impact on the long-run trend growth. The latter is determined by real 
variables  such  as  land,  labour  productivity,  capital  and  infrastructure  together  with  other 
factors such as regulations, the judicial system and the efficiency of government as well as 
external factors such as the terms of trade.  
With respect to inflation and output variability, a recent study by Kahn (2008) compared 
the relevant inflation-targeting period (first quarter of 2000 until the second quarter of 2008) 
with the period from the first quarter of 1991 until the fourth quarter of 1999 and concluded 
that  in  the  pre-targeting  period,  CPIX  inflation  averaged  9,7  per  cent  and  this  declined  to 
BIS Review 61/2010 
 3
6,5 per  cent  in  the  inflation  targeting  period.  The  average  growth  rates  in  the  two  periods 
were 1,6 per cent and 4,3 per cent respectively (measured as a percentage change on the 
same quarter in the previous year)2. In South Africa, despite the challenges posed by supply-
side  and  exchange  rate  shocks,  the  variability  of  both  output  and  real  interest  rates  has, 
therefore,  declined  during  the  inflation-targeting  period.  Fears  that  the  implementation  of 
inflation targeting has been inimical to growth in South Africa are therefore unfounded. This 
shows that inflation targeting has been consistent with (although not necessarily the cause 
of) higher average growth. At the very least it would appear that inflation targeting is not the 
enemy of growth!  
Kahn’s paper also concluded that there has been greater stability in real interest rates. The 
real policy rate averaged 5,7 per cent in the 1990s and 3,3 per cent in the relevant inflation-
targeting period. Of greater significance perhaps is the relative stability of the real rate in the 
inflation-targeting period. It is clear that monetary policy has not resulted in a tighter policy 
stance on average when measured in terms of real interest rate developments.  
The South African experience has illustrated the difficulties that are faced when dealing with 
exchange  rate  or  supply-side  shocks.  Kahn  has  also  quoted  research  arguing  that  the 
monetary policy decisions taken in response to the sizeable domestic and external shocks 
have  improved  significantly  during  the  inflation-targeting  period.  In  response  to  these 
exchange rate and commodity price shocks, the MPC adopted a relatively flexible approach 
and did not attempt to get back to within the target over the shortest possible time horizon. In 
general,  the  MPC  attempted  to  look  through  the  short-term  impacts  of  the  shocks  and  to 
focus on the second-round effects. Some interest rate smoothing was applied as evidenced 
in the gradual changes that were applied during the interest rate cycles.  
Although  the  recent  debate  in  South  Africa  has  focused  on  the  impact  of  the  inflation-
targeting  regime  on  output,  there  are  other  positive  aspects  of  the  system  that  should  be 
highlighted. Monetary policy has also become more transparent after the implementation of 
inflation targeting, reducing uncertainty, and raising the level of investment and the quality of 
decision-making. Monetary policy has become more predictable, especially if one considers 
the forward market which has anticipated repo rate changes well and has done so from the 
very beginning of explicit inflation targeting in 2000. In the absence of an explicit target for 
inflation, as provided for in the inflation-targeting framework, monetary policy would still have 
remained  focused  on  achieving  price  stability,  responding  to  the  self-same  supply  shocks 
that the economy has recently faced. In my own view, whilst one can argue about the exact 
timing  of  certain  decisions,  I  doubt that  the  trajectory  of  monetary  policy  would  have  been 
any different.  
Monetary policy in South Africa during the crisis  
4.  
The  global  financial  crisis  resulted  in  the  widespread  adoption  of  more  accommodative 
monetary  policy  globally.  South  Africa’s  monetary  policy  easing  began  in  December  2008, 
and since then the repurchase rate was reduced by 500 basis points to 7 per cent, which is 
the same as the low point of the interest rate cycle reached in 2005, and the lowest nominal 
policy rate since the late 1970s. However, the inflation rate in 2009 was significantly higher 
than that which prevailed in 2005. The decisive downward adjustment in the central bank’s 
key policy rate reflected the severity of the impact of the global downturn on the domestic 
economy  and  the  consequent  dissipation  of  inflationary  pressures.  The  inflation  rate 
remained outside the inflation target range, but the inflation forecasts of the staff of the Bank 
consistently  showed  that  the  inflation  rate  was  expected  to  follow  a  persistent  downward 
trend to within the target range. We continue to be of the view that the consistency of our 
                                                 
2   Extending the analysis to the third quarter of 2009 does not detract too significantly from these results. 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2010
policy  approach  will  result  in  inflation  readings  being  back  within  the  target  range  on  a 
sustainable basis from the second quarter of this year. This should be a clear manifestation 
of the flexible approach followed by the Bank, which reflects its awareness of the impact of 
monetary policy on economic growth and the forward looking approach of inflation targeting.  
The role of exchange rates in monetary policy  
5.  
Before  I  conclude  I  would  like  to  touch  on  our  exchange  rate  policy  as  an  integral  part  of 
monetary  policy.  The  level  of  the  exchange  rate  has  elicited  comments  from  diverse 
stakeholders,  and  there  have  been  calls  for  a  more  activist  approach  towards  its 
management  by  the  Bank.  Allow  me  to  reiterate  and  clarify  our  views  in  this  regard.  The 
South African Reserve Bank remains committed to a flexible exchange rate regime and is of 
the view that the exchange rate of the rand should be determined by the market. The floating 
exchange rate regime helped to cushion South Africa from more severe effects of the recent 
global financial crisis. However, the commitment to a flexible exchange rate should not be 
misconstrued to suggest that we are indifferent as far as the level of the exchange rate is 
concerned. The level of the exchange rate is a very important factor in the inflation process 
and  gets  taken  into  account  when  considering  policy  within  the  framework  I  have  just 
described. Its possible impact on the potential future path of inflation very much forms part of 
our considerations.  
Our current involvement in the foreign exchange market is mainly for the purpose of reserve 
accumulation and domestic liquidity management. As stated previously, our participation in 
the foreign exchange market is also informed by volatility conditions, the liquidity situation in 
the  market  and  cost  considerations.  As  regards  the  level  of  the  exchange  rate  and 
competitiveness,  while  it  is  acknowledged  that  certain  sectors  of  our  economy  have  been 
affected  by  what  may  be  perceived  to  be  a  relatively  strong  exchange  rate,  it  is  crucial  to 
highlight the importance of inflation management in this regard. If the nominal exchange rate 
were  to  depreciate  without  inflation  being  controlled  at  the  same  time,  there  would  be  no 
improvement in the level of competitiveness. So the real exchange rate is more important. 
Any consideration for more active participation in the foreign exchange markets would also 
have  to  be  carefully  assessed  against,  among  others,  the  prospects  of  success  given  the 
factors that may be driving the exchange rate in any particular direction at any given point in 
time. 
Conclusion  
6. 
Having  initially  under-estimated  the  interconnectedness  of  financial  markets,  and  how 
powerful a role this interconnectedness would play to transmit loss of confidence across the 
globe, central banks acted decisively to avert a total meltdown of the world financial system 
and  to  prevent  an  even  more  severe  economic  crisis.  The  challenge  facing  central  banks 
around the world is planning and timing their exit strategies from unconventional policies so 
as not to jeopardise the recovery, whilst at the same time keeping close watch on possible 
inflation pressures that may start to emerge. 
The fact that we have stepped away from the brink should not allow complacency to creep in 
with regard to the repair work still required in terms of the reform of the international financial 
architecture and enhancing regulatory and supervisory standards in a coordinated manner. 
Economic and financial conditions in South Africa did not reach the stage where the Bank 
had  to  broaden  the  scope  of  monetary  policy  to  unconventional  policies.  In  my  view  the 
interest rate policy within an inflation targeting framework and the flexible approach followed 
by the South African Reserve Bank in its implementation has served the country well and is a 
good basis to move forward from.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 61/2010 
 5
References 
1. 
Opening  remarks  by  William  R  White  at  the  Seventh  BIS  Annual  Conference  on  
26–27 June 2008 on “Whither monetary policy?, Monetary policy challenges in the 
decade ahead” 
South African Reserve Bank Monetary Policy Review, November 2009 
Unconventional  monetary  policies:  an  appraisal,  Claudio  Borio  and  Piti  Disyatat, 
Bank for International Settlements Working Papers No 292, November 2009  
Challenges of inflation targeting for emerging-market economies: The South African 
case, Brian Kahn, South African Reserve Bank, 2008  
South  Africa  amidst  the  crisis,  Spire  Awards  Ceremony,  Mr  A  D  Mminele,  Deputy 
Governor, South African Reserve Bank, 3 November 2009 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6 
 BIS Review 61/2010
