Jean-Claude Trichet: Laudatio for Hans Tietmeyer 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  at 
Münster City Hall, Westphalia, 26 March 2010. 
 into 
the  Westfälische  Ehrengalerie 
Lord Mayor, 
Mr Hillebrandt, 
Dear Hans, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  giving  this  speech  in  honour  of  my  dear  friend  Hans 
Tietmeyer.  The  Westfalen-Initiative  has  made  an  excellent  decision  in  inducting  Hans 
Tietmeyer  and  Freiherr  vom  Stein  (1757–1831)  into  the  Westfälische  Ehrengalerie 
[Westphalian Gallery of Honour]. 
Induction 
is  a  means  of  honouring  prominent 
Westphalians  for  their  services  to  the  region.  Of  course,  the  achievements  of  Hans 
Tietmeyer, like those of Freiherr vom Stein, can be seen far beyond Westphalia.  
The historical significance of this city hall also extends way beyond Westphalia. It has played 
host  to  pivotal  events  in  the  history  of  Europe,  having  witnessed  the  negotiation  and 
conclusion of the Peace of Westphalia more than 360 years ago. The Treaty of Münster and 
the Treaty of Osnabrück formed the basis for the establishment of peace in Europe following 
the Thirty Years War. 
Hans Tietmeyer has also participated in pivotal events in Europe’s history. Indeed, he played 
a decisive role in laying the legal foundations for Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union. 
The introduction of the single currency represents the greatest achievement to date in the 
history  of  European  integration  –  a  process  which  has  ensured  six  decades  of  peace  and 
prosperity in Europe.  
Today,  Europe  faces  further  pivotal  decisions.  The  global  financial  crisis  has  resulted  in 
major  challenges  for  Europe’s  economic  and  fiscal  policies.  I  will  talk  more  about  these 
issues at the end of my speech. 
I had the pleasure of spending many years working with Hans – particularly between 1987 
and 1999. Initially, Hans was Secretary of State in the Ministry of Finance and I was Director 
of  the  Treasury.  Later,  our  periods  as  the  governors  of  our  respective  central  banks 
coincided.  When  the  ECB  was  established,  we  both  became  members  of  the  Governing 
Council  of  the  ECB.  It  was  Hans  who  proposed  not  using  members’  countries  of  origin  to 
determine  the  seating  plan  for  the  Governing  Council’s  meetings  and  instead  using 
alphabetical order to decide who sits next to whom. After all, the members of the Governing 
Council are there to represent the euro area as a whole. 
But maybe Hans just wanted to sit next to me. Because there is not much that fits between 
Tietmeyer and Trichet, also in the alphabet. I always greatly appreciated working with him, 
and I learnt a lot from him about Germany.  
Hans  Tietmeyer’s  period  as  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  coincided  with 
turbulence  in  the  international  financial  markets.  By  comparison  with  the  recent  global 
financial crisis, the Mexican crisis and the Asian crisis were less dramatic from a European 
perspective.  Nevertheless,  Hans  Tietmeyer  recognised  at  an  early  stage  the  threat  that 
unstable  financial  markets  could  pose  to  a  globalised  world  economy,  and  it  was  on  his 
initiative that the Financial Stability Forum was established in 1999. Ten years later, one of 
the  responses  to  the  global  financial  crisis  was  the  enhancement  of  the  Financial  Stability 
Forum,  which  became  the  Financial  Stability  Board.  The  number  of  participants  was 
BIS Review 38/2010 
 1
increased and its remit was extended. The Financial Stability Board has thereby become a 
key institution in the reform of the international financial system. 
Above all, though, Hans Tietmeyer’s time at the Bundesbank was marked by preparations for 
Monetary Union. His tireless support for rules ensuring the stability of the single currency has 
proved to be entirely justified. The euro area’s 330 million or so citizens are now benefiting 
from the fact that the currency in their wallets is as solid as the Deutsche Mark used to be 
(“so hart wie die D-Mark”). 
The euro – a stable currency 
The euro is just as strong as the most stable of its predecessors. The ECB has ensured price 
stability in the euro area. At the end of this year, the average inflation rate since 1999 will, in 
all probability, be around 1.95% – i.e. just under 2%. 
Thus, the euro need not shy away from comparisons with the Deutsche Mark. The average 
inflation rate in Germany in the 1990s prior to the introduction of the euro was 2.2%. In the 
1980s it was 2.9%. Many people still don’t want to believe it, but the euro has not increased 
inflation. 
However, price stability is by no means the only advantage that Germany enjoys as a result 
of  Monetary  Union.  Without  the  euro,  the  financial  crisis  would  certainly  have  triggered 
additional turbulence on the currency markets, also causing further damage to the German 
economy. 
People like Hans and me who were directly involved in the EMS crisis know what they are 
talking about. In his book “The euro challenge”, his memories of the events of 1992 and 1993 
are  headed  –  appropriately,  I  think  –  “monetary  earthquake”  and  “strong  aftershock”.  The 
successful resolution of that crisis is another one of Hans Tietmeyer’s lasting achievements. 
Europe’s monetary integration could have ended in failure as a result of that episode. 
Price  stability  is,  without  a  doubt,  the  best  contribution  that  central  banks  can  make  to 
people’s  well-being.  Nevertheless,  many  people  virtually  don’t  take  much  notice  of  their 
central banks’ operations in normal times. Furthermore, the mechanism for the transmission 
of  monetary  policy  decisions  is  very  complicated.  This  makes  it  all  the  more  important  for 
people to be able to rely on the delivery of price stability. 
In the case of the ECB and the Eurosystem, they can rely on it. Price stability is our primary 
objective. The Governing Council has defined price stability as increases in the Harmonised 
Index  of  Consumer  Prices  for  the  euro  area  of  below  2%  over  the  medium  term.  The 
Governing Council has, in addition, specified that it strives for increases of “below, but close 
to, 2%”. 
With  the  aid  of  this  quantitative  definition,  we  have  succeeded  in  firmly  anchoring  inflation 
expectations at a low level. This has been of great assistance to us during periods of both 
increasing and decreasing inflationary pressures. 
The central banks have worked hard for those low inflation expectations, which have been 
achieved  primarily  as  a  result  of  decades  of  credibly  following  stability-oriented  policies. 
Those  inflation  expectations  are  of  fundamental  importance  for  the  success  of  monetary 
policy. It would therefore be a very serious mistake to aim for a higher level of inflation in the 
future. Consequently, as I have stressed on a number of occasions, I strongly oppose this 
idea. Pandora’s box must remain shut. The weakening of our price stability objective is out of 
the question. 
Price stability benefits us all. It safeguards purchasing power and the value of savings, and it 
prevents the arbitrary redistribution of wealth. Only in the presence of price stability does the 
price mechanism function in an efficient and transparent manner. It is the main instrument for 
the steering of our market economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2010
Independence guarantees a stability-oriented monetary policy 
An important requirement for the delivery of price stability is the independence of the central 
bank.  We  know  this  as  a  result  of  the  painful  learning  processes  that  central  banks  have 
undergone  in  the  past.  Germany  was  one  of  the  first  countries  to  have  an  independent 
central  bank.  I  myself  was  Governor  of  the  Banque  de  France  when  it  became  fully 
independent. Central bank independence was “Europeanised” and became the model for the 
ECB. On 1 January 1994, more than 16 years ago, I saw for myself the enormous difference 
that it makes to preside over a fully independent institution. 
It has now long been demonstrated – both theoretically and empirically – that central banks 
are  better  able  to  ensure  low  and  stable  levels of  inflation when  they  are  independent.  Of 
course, independence does not mean arbitrariness. Instead, that independence is tied to a 
concrete  objective.  And  independence  requires  accountability.  In  the  case  of  the  ECB,  its 
mandate specifies that the delivery of price stability is its primary objective. 
The  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  does  not  just  contribute  to  the  anchoring  of 
inflation expectations. It also provides people with an objective yardstick with which to judge 
our work. 
The mandate and the independence of the Eurosystem are enshrined in Europe’s treaties. 
These are quasi-constitutional in nature. Monetary policy has been removed from the remit of 
national politics. At the same time, the ECB – like other central banks – cannot complain that 
it  has  lacked  advice  from  politicians.  This  is  something  of  a  tradition  when  it  comes  to 
independent central banks. Don’t forget Adenauer’s famous “guillotine speech” in 1956. 
Half a century later, Heads of State or Government attempted – again, unsuccessfully – to 
influence  the  monetary  policy  of  the  ECB.  When  growth  weakened  in  2003  and  2004  the 
then leaders of the three large euro area countries demanded an instant reduction in interest 
rates.  The  Governing  Council  refused  to  reduce  rates,  and  I  was  proud  to  refer  to  the 
Adenauer  precedent.  Later,  at  the  end  of  2005,  many  governments  warned  against 
increasing interest rates. We did indeed increase rates, the ECB stuck to its mandate, and 
today  nobody  disputes  the  fact  that  our  decisions  were  correct.  At  the  time,  however,  we 
were under considerable pressure. We withstood that pressure. 
In  most  cases,  criticism  of  independent  central  banks  is  sparked  by  restrictive  decisions. 
Expansionary policies are rarely criticised. This shows that many pressure groups, as well as 
politicians, who often are under short-term pressure, don’t think in terms of the time horizons 
considered by central bankers. 
The ECB is independent. It does not allow any government, institution or lobby to influence 
its monetary policy decisions. The citizens of Germany and the rest of Europe can rely on us 
to continue to deliver price stability in the years to come. Our defence of our mandate will be 
just as resolute as it has been in the first 11 years of Monetary Union. 
A  monetary  policy  that  pursues  short-term  objectives  is  doomed  to  failure.  However,  this 
focus on the longer term means that those independent central banks also stand in contrast 
to the short-termism of the financial markets. The global financial crisis is also fundamentally 
a result of short-term thinking. 
Challenges arising from the financial crisis 
The  handling  of  the  financial  crisis  and  its  economic  consequences  has  been  a  great 
challenge  for  us  all.  Governments  and  central  banks  have  had  to  intervene  on  a  massive 
scale in order to stabilise the financial system and the real economy. 
The  monetary  policy  measures  adopted  by  the  Eurosystem  have  allowed  inflation 
expectations  to  be  kept  stable  even  during  the  crisis.  From  the  very  beginning,  our 
BIS Review 38/2010 
 3
interventions  were  designed  in  a  way  that  allowed  us  to  unwind  them  easily  as  soon  as 
conditions improved. At no time did we lose sight of our price stability objective. 
Countries’ budget deficits have risen substantially on account of the crisis. Rising debt levels 
do  not  just  bring  with  them  the  potential  for  greater  conflict  between  fiscal  and  monetary 
policy.  Above  all,  they  also  place  a  burden  on  the  sustainability  of  public  finances  in  the 
countries in question. It is therefore in the interests of each and every country to return to 
sound public finances as quickly as possible. 
In the current circumstances, where Europe faces pivotal decisions, it is more important than 
ever  to  recognise  that  a  prosperous  union  requires  determined  action  by  all.  The  most 
important issue is that Europe’s policy-makers live up to their responsibilities. As I mentioned 
yesterday,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  has  always  stressed  the 
need to preserve and reinforce peer surveillance inside the euro area, to strictly apply the 
Treaty  provisions  and  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  and  to  have  the  best  functioning 
possible of the Commission and of the Eurogroup. Particularly as regards the government 
members of the Eurogroup, the ECB’s Governing Council has always considered that it was 
important  that  they  would,  as  a  college,  live  up  to  their  very  important  responsibilities  as 
regards fiscal policies, the monitoring of relative competitiveness and structural reforms. I am 
therefore pleased that the Heads of state and government of the euro area could work out a 
solution, implementing their earlier declaration to “take determined and coordinated action, if 
needed…”, which maintains the lead responsibility of European policy makers.  
Monetary  Union  in  Europe  is  far  more  than  a  monetary  arrangement.  As  Hans  Tietmeyer 
said  many  years  ago,  the  Monetary  Union  is  a  community  that  shares  a  common  destiny. 
And we should not forget that we are also a community of values. 
Price  stability  is  the  best  contribution  that  central  banks  can  make  to  the  stability  of  the 
financial system. Price stability is even a necessary condition for financial stability. However, 
price  stability  is  not  a  sufficient  condition.  Many  people  share  responsibility  for  financial 
stability, and all must live up to that responsibility. 
The crisis has revealed weaknesses in the institutional framework. Thus far, it has not been 
sufficiently possible to encourage the Member States to implement policies that are in line 
with our benchmark. Fiscal policies, wage policies and structural policies must conform to our 
stability target of inflation of just under 2%. I am convinced that we will find ways of achieving 
this. 
Conclusion 
Before I finish, I should like to recount a short anecdote. 
Once,  while  Raymond  Barre  was  Prime  Minister  [1976–1981],  he  asked  me,  given  that  I 
worked at the Treasury, whether I often travelled to Brussels. In that case, he said, I must 
meet Hans Tietmeyer. He said: “He is very influential, and he is a tough negotiator. If you 
have issues to discuss with him, good luck!” That was a considerable compliment. Germany 
and Europe have much to thank Hans Tietmeyer for. He was resolute in ensuring that the 
euro  would  be  a  stable  currency.  Today,  after  having  had  to  cope  with  the  worst  financial 
crisis  since  World  War  II,  we  can  say  with  confidence  that  the  euro  has  been  a  stable 
currency since its inception and that the euro area is a stable community. As I said earlier, 
Hans Tietmeyer is the author of a book entitled “The euro challenge”. I am certain that the 
euro will be equal to that challenge. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2010
