Sada S Reddy: Fijian business – on the edge 
Presentation  by  Mr  Sada  S  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  to  the  Fiji 
Indigenous Business Council, Suva, Fiji, 23 June 2010. 
 The Chairman of the Fiji Indigenous Business Council, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good Morning 
I  am  very  honoured  to  be  invited  to  speak  to  you  this  morning.  I  have  been  requested  to 
speak on the theme: “Fijian Business: On the Edge.” 
Well, when I looked at the topic, a number of things came to my mind. First of all, what does 
a Fijian Business mean for instance; and secondly why “on the edge”. 
Let  me  first  deal  with  what  a  “Fijian  Business”  means  to  me.  I  presume  it  means  any 
business venture that the indigenous people of Fiji own and operate as distinct from business 
ventures owned and operated by the rest of the people of Fiji, including foreign investors. 
If my understanding is correct then I need to ask why is that you wish to distinguish Fijian 
Businesses from the rest of Fiji Businesses. I guess this is where the challenge comes.  
For your council to form an association to represent the indigenous businesses itself shows 
that  you  have  seen  the  need  for  such  a  body  to  address  some  of  the  opportunities  and 
challenges you collectively feel need to be addressed. 
So what are these challenges and needs? I have to confess I have not had the opportunity 
until  today  to  discuss  with  anyone  of  you  to  really  find  out  what  exactly  are  the  aims  and 
objectives  of  the  Fiji  Indigenous  Business  Council.  But  I  have  closely  followed,  through 
various media, the activities of various business associations including your association, over 
the years and therefore have some idea about what these associations’ aims and objectives 
are. 
I guess one of the key issues your members have to deal with is how to grow and compete 
with existing businesses. This in itself is a very difficult and complex issue. When you look at 
some of the successful Fiji businesses, you will find that they have all had very humble and 
small  beginnings.  Some  started  off  with  corner  grocery  shop  and  over  say  two  to  three 
generations of hard work, personal and family sacrifices, enormous discipline in managing 
money, building up saving and making prudent business decisions, managing business risks, 
developing strategic business alliances, but more importantly having a passionate vision and 
working day and night to achieve that vision.  
There  is  no  short  cut.  Most  of  the  successful  businesses  you  see  today  did  not  get  any 
government help in the initial years. It had to be sheer hard work, discipline, both at personal 
and  family  level.  Business  acumen  was  inculcated  from  parents  to  children  from  a  very 
young age. 
In this modern business world, as well, there is no short cut. But in these days, you have to 
be  well  educated,  and  also  smarter  than  the  rest.  Knowledge  of  the  business  world  is 
critically important.  
At this juncture, let me make one very important point in relation to indigenous business. I 
have  had  the  opportunity  to  diagnose  the  failures  of  a  number  of  indigenous  businesses 
during my long career in the Reserve Bank of Fiji. One of the most challenging things I have 
noticed  is  the  lack  of  financial  discipline,  lack  of  budgeting  and  anticipating  and  managing 
business and personal risks. 
BIS Review 88/2010 
 1
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  message  I  wish  to  leave  with  you  today  is  that  nobody  owes 
anyone a living in this modern world. You have to be a survivor and learn to survive in this 
world of business. If you are successful, then there is no limit to your growth and well-being 
for you, your family, your employees and your community.  
The second element of this Conference theme is “On the Edge”. Are indigenous businesses 
“on the edge”? I do not know how to respond to this question. However, what I can do is to 
analyse for your benefit the business environment that you will be faced with as we move 
forward. The business sector will then have to work out how they manage and remain and 
grow their business given the business environment you will be faced with.  
Let me now turn to the business environment that we are all faced with. 
Ladies and gentlemen, in fact, with what happened in the global economy as a result of the 
latest global financial crisis, many businesses have failed the world over. Direct and indirect 
effects of the crisis have also passed through to the Fijian economy. As a result, a number of 
local businesses were affected. While there may be several indigenous businesses in the list 
of  affected  companies,  I  am  sure  that  they  were  not  the  only  ones.  Indeed,  a  number  of 
companies  both  large  and  small  were  seriously  affected  because  of  the  Global  Financial 
Crisis. 
Since I have touched on the global financial crisis, let me begin by giving you an overview of 
the global economic conditions. In line with today’s theme, I’m sure all of us will remember 
that  not  long  ago  the  global  economy  was  “on  the  edge”.  However,  after  much  concerted 
efforts  and  policy  support,  the  global  economy  has  managed  to  turn  this  situation  around. 
The world economy is improving and according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the 
global economy is expected to grow by 4.2 percent this year, following a contraction of 0.6% 
in  2009.  Last  year’s  performance  of  the  global  economy  is  actually  regarded  as  the  worst 
since  the  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s.  On  a  positive  note  though,  a  further  growth  of 
4.3 percent is expected in 2011. 
Ladies and gentlemen, except for Australia, all our trading partner economies contracted last 
year  as  a  result  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  This  significantly  affected  our  exports  and 
tourism last year. However, the worst is over now and all of these countries are expected to 
post a modest growth this year and continue this into 2011. This is good news for Fiji, as this 
means  increased  demand  for  our  exports  and  tourism.  In  fact,  we  are  already  seeing  the 
effects of these, especially in the tourism industry, where we see a strong recovery in visitor 
arrivals. 
Amongst advanced countries, the US economy is doing better than Europe and Japan, while 
for emerging and developing economies, Asia is driving the recovery. In particular, China and 
India recorded high growth rates in 2009 and are expected to record similar growth in 2010.  
As  is  the  case  in  most  developed  and  developing  economies  worldwide,  it  is  the 
business/private sector that will drive these growth prospects. Having said that, indigenous 
businesses  play  an  important  and  crucial  role  in  the  development  of  their  economies.  All 
businesses, whether big or small, have a role to play in the development of the economy.  
Before I return to this subject in more detail, let me share with you our expectations on the 
domestic economic outlook.  
Economic conditions 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me now touch on Fiji’s current economic conditions and prospects. 
Our economy has been contracting over the last 3 years. Last year our economy contracted 
by  2.2  percent.  However,  the  economy  is  expected  to  regain  some  strength  in  2010  and 
continue  this  performance  into  the  next  two  years.  For  this  year,  we  are  expecting  most 
sectors  to  show  positive  growth  except  for  agriculture  &  forestry  and  health  &  social  work 
sectors,  which  are  projected  to  decline.  The  agriculture  sector  was  badly  hit  by  Cyclone 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2010
Tomas, resulting in a downward revision of the overall growth rate for this year, which now 
stands at 1.8 percent. Looking ahead into the next two years, growth is also expected to be 
broad-based.  Apart  from  an  expected  decline  in  the  building  and  construction  sector,  the 
tourism  industry  is  expected  to  lead  the  growth  assisted  by  some  growth  in  agriculture.  A 
growth rate of around 1.7 and 1.9 percent is expected for 2011 and 2012, respectively. 
While  we  are  encouraged  by  the  turnaround  in  the  economy,  we  still  have  a  number  of 
fundamental  issues  in  the  economy  which  if  not  fixed  will  not  allow  us  to  fully  realise  our 
growth potential. We have said on so many occasions in the past that our external position, 
or  Fiji’s  balance  of  payments  (BOP),  remains  vulnerable.  The  poor  performance  of  our 
exports  sector,  coupled  with  our  ever  growing  need  for  imports,  continues  to  produce  a 
widening trade and current account deficit. As long as we have a current account deficit, it 
will  continue  to  put  pressure  on  Fiji’s  foreign  reserves.  The  challenge  remains  in  raising 
exports  and  minimising  imports  to  help  reduce  these  imbalances  and  ease  pressure  on 
foreign reserves.  
Unless we bring the current account deficit to below 5 percent of GDP, our macroeconomic 
policies  will  need  to  remain  relatively  tight.  In  light  of  this,  Government  will  have  to 
consolidate its fiscal position by aiming for a reduced fiscal budget. This is expected to be 
supported by relatively tight monetary conditions. 
Now what does this mean for Fijian businesses? In the short-term, business conditions in 
Fiji  may  not  be  easy.  A  tight  fiscal  policy  can  mean  fewer  tax  breaks  and  handouts  to 
businesses. Tight monetary policies can mean that loans will be more expensive. Therefore, 
businesses should brace themselves to survive against challenges during these times.  
So, how do you manage in such an environment? 
I do not think I can give you any serious advice in this regard. But, I suppose I can make 
some general comments here.  
Businesses should consider adjustments in their operations. You need to work smarter so 
that the limited resources you have gives you the maximum returns. 
You  can  consider  product  diversification  –  look  for  new  and  perhaps,  niche,  business 
opportunities. Consider moving up the value chain by adding value to your current products. 
If you are currently providing tours for tourists, explore going into budget accommodation. If 
you are producing timber, consider converting them into furniture or other finished products. 
If the local market is saturated, consider exporting your goods and services. 
In addition to these, businesses should also consider staff capacity building at the various 
training  institutions  we  have,  TPAF  for  instance,  to  improve  productivity  and  dynamism  of 
your workforce.  
Most  importantly,  as  I  mentioned  before,  an  important  rule  is  that  businesses  operate 
according  to  certain  principles  –  and  those  principles  must  be  followed  by  all  business 
people. There are no shortcuts to success or separate rules for different ethnic groups.  
Given that Government will have to tighten its own belt would mean that there will be little of 
any support that the Government can give to businesses in the short to medium term.  
Ladies and gentlemen, our economy is expected to recover slowly in the medium term. The 
structural  reforms  planned  by  the  Government  are  expected  to  provide  a  more  positive 
business environment in the future. Reduced government expenditure is expected to provide 
space for private investment to take place and business conditions are expected to improve. 
Now the challenge for you is to find out how you, as a Fijian entrepreneur, can contribute to 
this economic development and nation building process.  
By strengthening and consolidating your business base now, Fijian business will be better 
positioned to contribute to the growth process. I mentioned in some recent conferences and 
would like to reiterate here, that we live in a world of competition where many countries have 
BIS Review 88/2010 
 3
low cost structures and high productivity. Therefore, unless we raise our productivity and do 
business in a smarter way, we will not be able to compete successfully against the rest of the 
world. Reliance on preferential access is now a thing of the past, and we must learn to stand 
on our own feet. 
And remember, small businesses only remain small if they do not have a vision for getting 
bigger.  I  encourage  you  to  form  that  vision  –  where  do  you  want  your  business  to  be  in 
5 years and 10 years from now. And then follow the path that will take you there. 
Like you, I am concerned about the pressing need to open the way for the advancement of 
indigenous businesses. I understand that this is something that previous Governments had 
attempted to do, but we may then ask the question – why have these policies not delivered 
as expected.  
What is the RBF doing to assist Fijian businesses? 
The  rising  balance  of  payments  deficit  calls  for  concerted  and  decisive  efforts  by  all 
stakeholders. At the Reserve Bank, we have embarked on various initiatives that can help 
cushion  such  economic  deficiencies  and  we  remain  focused  on  proactively  intervening 
through appropriate monetary policy action in the face of any external shocks to the macro 
economy. 
The  RBF  has  also  played  a  wider  and  more  proactive  role  in  working  closely  with  the 
Government on its various reform initiatives, particularly reforms in the export sector, import 
substitution and fiscal consolidation. Reforms in these sectors have been slow moving and 
greater action is still needed. 
Now let me briefly highlight some of the work that the Reserve Bank is doing in the areas of 
small  and  micro  enterprise  development.  Most  of  the  work  in  this  regard  ties  in  with  your 
Council’s role in developing Fijian businesses.  
In April 2009, we made some institutional reforms within the Reserve Bank which resulted in 
the  establishment  of  a  Group  called  the  Financial  Systems  Development  and  Compliance 
(FSDC)  Group.  One  of  the  major  roles  of  this  Group  (amongst  others)  was  to  ensure  the 
development and provision of microfinance services to the greater Fijian community. After a 
little more than a year of its establishment, we have witnessed a lot of exciting developments.  
From  1st  January  2010,  we  have  issued  a  new  Microfinance  Policy  which  requires  all 
commercial  banks  to  establish  internal  microfinance  divisions  and  units  that  will  serve  to 
cater for SMEs and the underserved. Most commercial banks have complied with this Policy 
and have begun to offer affordable products and services to their targeted customers.  
On  the  same  token,  the  Reserve  Bank  has,  through  the  collaboration  of  various  donor 
agencies and other players, set up a National Financial Inclusion Taskforce (NFIT) that will 
be  responsible  for  driving  and  promoting  microfinance  and  greater  financial  inclusion 
initiatives in Fiji. The establishment of the Taskforce will provide a platform for stakeholders 
to encourage and foster sustained and coordinated development of financial services to the 
poor  and  rural  communities  and  more  importantly  expanding  access  to  finance  for  small 
enterprises.  Membership  of  this  Taskforce  includes  representatives  of  the  microfinance 
institutions, commercial banks, donor agencies and the RBF.  
The RBF has recently introduced an Import Substitution Facility to try to assist large scale 
commercial agricultural businesses to obtain credit at concessional rates of interest. A total 
amount of $20 million is available through the scheme. New and existing local businesses 
engaged  in  commercial  agriculture  may  access  funds  from  the  facility  at  a  fixed  rate  of 
6.00 percent per annum. The facility is available for a maximum loan term of 5 years and is 
available through the commercial banks, licensed credit institutions and the Fiji Development 
Bank (FDB).  
4 
 BIS Review 88/2010
The  RBF  has  also  offered  a  scholarship  for  Chef  Training  in  Malaysia  which  should 
encourage the use of local foods in preparation of hotel menus. This is targeted at reducing 
our import bill and improving our balance of payments position, as well as encouraging local 
value adding. 
Local businesses should try to seize the opportunities that are arising out of these initiatives I 
have just mentioned. 
The  Reserve  Bank  is  also  embarking  on  developing  an  effective  and  all-encompassing 
framework to guide community or village development. No doubt, there are abundant natural 
resources  and  manpower  capacity  in  our  rural  areas.  However,  we  continue  to  notice  the 
lack of progress by successive authorities in developing our rural dwellers to become more 
economically active.  
The  rural  area  is  home  to  about  52  percent  of  Fiji’s  population.  More  importantly,  most  of 
Fiji’s key exports are rural based, providing the greatest potential for future development and 
prosperity, particularly in the tourism, agriculture, forestry and fisheries sectors. It is therefore 
important  that  a  suitable  development  scheme  or  framework  is  put  in  place  in  our  rural 
villages and communities.  
Our policies do not discriminate between the nationalities of businesses. All of you have the 
same  benefit  from  these  policies  as  any  other  business  in  Fiji.  You  must  seek  these 
opportunities out. 
Concluding remarks 
In  summary,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  have  seen  that  the  global  economy  is  recovering. 
This is good news for us – we can expect our exports and services, such as tourism, to pick 
up.  
As I had just mentioned, the need for us to maintain a healthy BOP position means that we 
should expect relatively tight fiscal and monetary policies in the near-term.  
I have also taken some time to highlight the areas that the Reserve Bank is working on to 
promote  small  and  micro  enterprise  development,  which  is  in  line  with  the  FIBC’s  role  in 
developing  Fijian  businesses.  It  is  in  your  Council’s  interest  to  ensure  that  indigenous 
businesses are aware of these initiatives and that they benefit from them. 
I wish to once again underscore the importance of financial discipline and a culture of hard 
work and personal discipline which will ensure your success in business.  
In conclusion ladies and gentlemen, I thank you again for the invitation to speak to you this 
morning. And I wish this symposium and your businesses all the best in the future. 
Vinaka vakalevu. 
BIS Review 88/2010 
 5
