Muhammad  Kamran  Shehzad:  Commercial  mediation 
in  emerging 
markets  –  role  of  State  Bank  in  promoting  mediation  for  resolution  of 
banking disputes 
Speech  by  Mr  Muhammad  Kamran  Shehzad,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of 
Pakistan,  at  the  National  Conference  on  Alternative  Dispute  Resolution  (ADR),  Lahore,  
29–30 April 2010. 
 I  feel  privileged  to  be  here  today  and  share  some  thoughts  on  ADR  mechanism  for  the 
resolution of banking disputes in Pakistan. Let me admit at the outset that Pakistani banking 
sector  is  not  yet  fully  geared  to  avail  maximum  benefit  from  mechanism  like  mediation  for 
settlement of disputes. The main reason seems to be the lack of awareness and perceptions 
of losing legitimate legal rights especially in the matters of recovery of loans. However, due 
to world-wide popularity of ADR, these perceptions are changing and both banks and their 
customers  are  becoming  aware  of  alternatives  available  for  settling  disputes  without 
compromising  their  interests.  Keeping  in  view  the  potential  of  ADR  as  a  viable  dispute 
resolution  mechanism,  there  is  always  a  natural  preference  for  it  over  litigation.  However, 
there  is  need  to  disseminate  the  pros  and  cons  of  ADR  in  a  correct  perspective  so  that 
parties realize the significance of ADR. I believe that collective efforts of all stakeholders and 
an integrated approach can familiarize ADR in banking circles and SBP as a regulator on its 
part is willing to support this initiative. 
In the general sense, ADR means out of court settlement of disputes by way of mediation, 
conciliation,  arbitration  or  expert  determination.  Arbitration  is  more  relevant  in  the 
international context since overseas investors and parties generally require Arbitration clause 
in agreements. The mediation on the other hand is more relevant, cost effective and speedy 
way of resolving commercial disputes under which parties agree to ask a third person to help 
them find a solution to their dispute. 
Due to phenomenal growth and expansion of international transactions worth trillion of US 
dollars across borders and territories, disputes also increased manifold between citizens and 
governments and citizens of one country with citizens of another country. The cases filed by 
the  parties  in  courts  for  resolution of  disputes and  enforcement  of  contracts  overburdened 
the  legal  machinery.  The  developed  countries  therefore,  introduced  the  concept  of  settling 
disputes outside the court under the name of Alternate Dispute Resolution in 1970s. 
The  emerging  economies  and  more  specifically  countries  like  Singapore,  Malaysia,  Hong 
Kong and Indonesia already have developed a certain kind of ADR system as per their local 
environment and legal systems. Indonesia has particularly established a solid system of ADR 
for banking system. The central bank – Bank Indonesia has issued detailed circular for banks 
to avail ADR for settling disputes and hence banking mediation has been institutionalized. 
Malaysia has also established Financial Mediation Bureau as an independent body to help 
resolve  disputes  between  financial  institutions  and  their  customers.  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore  has  been  promoting  the  ADR  mechanism  through  educational  supportive 
programs. The central bank of Morocco created a system of resolving bank and borrowers 
disputes. 
It may be noted that the concept of settling disputes outside court is historically well known to 
Pakistani  society  in  the  form  of  Punchayat  and  Jirga  etc.  The  experience  of  long 
consumption of time through formal judicial system is very common phenomenon.  
The courts are over-burdened due to huge backlog of cases. It is in this perspective that Law 
and  Justice  Commission  of  Pakistan  recommended  ADR  to  provide  relief  to  the  parties 
engaged in litigation. Accordingly, the Government in 2002 had made amendments in Civil 
BIS Review 68/2010 
 1
Procedure Code under which Section 89 B was inserted to empower civil court to adopt ADR 
subject to consent of the parties. A consequential amendment was also made in Order X of 
C.P.C to empower the court to pass necessary orders for expediting the trial proceedings. 
Unfortunately, these provisions have somehow not been fully utilized due to which objective 
and benefit of these amendments is currently not visible. 
It would be important to keep in view the fundamentals of banking sector in Pakistan while 
examining the relevance and significance of ADR in the prevailing circumstances. Besides 
walk-in  customers,  over  25  million  people  currently  have  regular  accounts  with  banks  in 
Pakistan.  The  deposits  of  the  banking  system  stand  at  about  rupees  4.8  trillion  whereas 
loans and advances extended by banks as of December, 2009 were rupees 3.2 trillion. The 
amount of nonperforming loans at present is rupees 432 billion. The banks have filed 56320 
recovery and execution cases in courts involving rupees 215 billion.  
The cases filed by borrowers and customers other than recovery suits are in addition to the 
aforesaid cases. 
The foregoing facts amply clarifies that there is overreliance on courts for all disputes which 
the parties cannot resolve themselves. Due to high stakes, parties are sensitive to protect 
their  rights.  Therefore,  there  is  a  dire  need  of  putting  in  place  a  mechanism  of  dispute 
resolution which is speedy, cost effective and just to maintain confidence and continuity of 
banking transactions. 
Let  us  look  at  some  elements  of  existing  mechanisms  of  dispute  resolution  where  SBP  is 
wholly or partially involved. The events like privatization of financial institutions, liberalization 
in  the  economy,  stiff  competition  among  the  market  players,  advancements  in  information 
technology and telecommunication have brought about newer aspects of complexities along 
with growth of the banking sector. The increasing complexity in the products being offered by 
banks  and  substantial  growth  in  consumer  credit  has  caused  a  significant  increase  in  the 
number  of  complaints  with  diverse  nature  of  disputes.  Although  SBP  continued  to  redress 
public grievances against banks, the increasing number of complaints require a reliable and 
independent  source  of  complaint  redressal.  Therefore,  institution  of  Banking  Mohtasib 
Pakistan was established in 2005 under Part VI A of Banking Companies Ordinance, 1962. It 
may  be  clarified  that  jurisdiction  of  Banking  Mohtasib  is  well  defined  and  not  restricted  to 
maladministration  of  public  sector  banks  only.  The  Banking  Mohtasib  is  competent  to 
entertain complaints from customers, borrowers, banks or from any concerned person. In the 
first instance, the Banking Mohtasib has been mandated, under the law, to try and facilitate 
an amicable resolution or settlement by resorting to mediation, failing which he can pass an 
order that if not appealed against within a defined timeframe becomes final and operative. 
As per Report of Banking Mohtasib, it has disposed off 2879 complaints in 2009. 
While it is a very modest beginning, State Bank is assisting Banking Mohtasib to increase its 
capacity and outreach to facilitate the aggrieved customers of the bank. 
SBP’ Consumer Protection Department: Besides direct complaints received from general 
public,  State  Bank  is  appellate  authority  against  decisions  of  Banking  Mohtasib  under  the 
same  Part  VI  A  of  Banking  Companies  Ordinance.  Till  2008,  SBP  was  handling  public 
complaints  through  Banking  Policy  and  Regulations  Department.  However,  in  the  wake  of 
increasing  number  of  complaints  as  also  due  to  its  enhanced  responsibility  as  appellate 
authority  against  decisions  of  Banking  Mohtasib,  SBP  created  a  specialized  department 
namely,  Consumer  Protection  Department  to  resolve  banking  disputes  in  a  more  focused 
and professional manner. The department was able to dispose of 8000 complaints during the 
year 2008 whereas during 2009 a total number of 13000 complaints were handled. The very 
objective is to provide a faster, cheaper and efficient way of redressing public grievances and 
resolving disputes. SBP feels that it has contributed toward reduction of court cases which in 
the absence of the mechanism were sure to go in courts. 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2010
In addition, various courts have been sending cases to SBP where matters involved technical 
scrutiny and analysis of facts. As per court orders, SBP successfully resolved a number of 
disputes  involving  banks  and  customers.  It  is  pertinent  to  mention  that  SBP  had  issued 
directive under Circular No. 17 of 2004 in terms of which banks are required to put in place a 
complaint handling system. The objective is to promptly resolve the issues received directly 
by banks or referred by other quarters including SBP. However, the mechanism cannot be 
relied since bank being a party to the dispute would have natural inclination to prejudice the 
other party. 
In  a  related  development,  High  Court  while  disposing  of  several  Writ  Petitions  relating  to 
recovery  of  finance  had  emphasized  the  importance  of  ADR.  The  Hon’ble  Court  observed 
that  litigation  is  not  only  time  consuming  but  also  has  adverse  implications  for  business 
environment.  The  Court  further  desired  SBP  to  issue  instructions  to  banks  that  before 
approaching  courts,  attempt  should  be  made  to  resolve  disputes  through  mediation/ 
reconciliation. 
Subsequent to Court Orders, Karachi Centre for Dispute Resolution (KCDR) met SBP and 
desired issuance of instructions to banks for availing remedies available through the Centre 
and support holding of seminar for banks. Accordingly, SBP circulated aforementioned Court 
Order to banks on March 09, 2009 with the view to let the banks know about availability of 
ADR  mechanism  and  give  an  indication  that  both  the  Courts  and  SBP  support  the  use  of 
ADR. A seminar was also held for banks through Pakistan Banks Association in SBP in May, 
2009.  
The foregoing facts fully explain that SBP supports the idea of resolving disputes outside the 
court.  The  expeditious  settlement  of  issues  would  be  in  the  interest  of  banking  system  in 
particular and economy in general. The bank management would be able to devote their time 
to  business  and  other  prioritized  areas  instead  of  being  bogged  down  in  lengthy  time 
consuming disputes with their customers. Likewise customers would also be able to settle 
their cases and move forward with their businesses. It is, therefore, a win-win proposition for 
all stakeholders. 
Unfortunately as per feedback received from KCDR (Karachi Centre for Dispute Resolution), 
the  number  of  cases  referred  by  banks  to  it  is  extremely  low  on  one  hand  and  even  the 
referred  cases  were  haplessly  non-productive  due  to  non-traceability  of  parties  or  issues 
involving  willful  defaults.  The  customers  of  banks  also  prefer  to  lodge  complaint  against 
banks either with Banking Mohtasib or directly with SBP. The exact reasons of low number of 
fit cases not being referred to KCDR cannot be explained; prima facie it could be partially 
due to the following factors. 
 
First as I mentioned earlier is the lack of awareness about the available mechanism 
or institutions like KCDR for alternate dispute resolution. This can be taken care of 
with some workshops and seminars or conferences on ADR.  
Second, high profile cases involving big amounts are directly filed in courts to secure 
banks’ interest in a more formalized way especially to avoid charges of negligence 
or collusion. 
Thirdly,  the  failure  of  mediation  results  again  in  continuation  of  legal  proceedings. 
Since there has been a tendency in defaulters to stretch legal proceedings as much 
as they can, the banks may have an apprehension that ADR would also be used by 
such unscrupulous elements to further delay the course of justice. 
Where amounts are small, parties prefer to send a single page application to SBP 
without incurring any cost. SBP enjoys high degree of public trust and complainant 
believes that SBP takes action on merit. The customers of banks not only get final 
decision of the case but interim interaction is also maintained for further information 
or sometimes meeting in SBP. In this way, customers get relief without incurring any 
cost or going through any hassle. 
   BIS Review 68/2010 
 3
 SBP has presence all over Pakistan. Although complaints are handled in Karachi, 
the field offices of SBP properly guide general public to process their applications. 
Neither Banking Mohtasib nor SBP charge anything for complaint redressals. 
 
The fee charged by KCDR may in some cases be the reason especially in small disputes. 
Going forward, there are certain expectations from SBP to promote ADR. 
Setting  up  an  independent  mediation  centre:  SBP  feels  that  currently  institution  of 
Banking  Mohtasib  and  Consumer  Protection  Department  are  functioning  satisfactorily. 
Further, SBP considers KCDR as a reliable center. The parallel system of mediation would 
not  be  appropriate  due  to  defined  role  and  responsibilities  of  SBP  under  the  banking 
legislation.  However,  SBP  would  welcome  cases  referred  by  Courts  or  any  other  quarter 
involving banking disputes. 
Awareness events from SBP Platform: SBP supports this and intends to hold meeting of 
Senior Executives of banks in SBP. KCDR would be invited to explain in detail the facilities 
and benefits of mediation. Besides, it would be clarified to banks that SBP not only has any 
reservations over utilization of mediation but supports it due to its advantages over litigation. 
Inclusion of mediation in curriculum of banking courses/training 
Programs: This is also agreeable. New entrants and existing staff are provided necessary 
training through NIBAF and inclusion of suitable material on the subject would be helpful in 
creating  awareness  and  understanding  of  the  mechanism.  We  would  obviously  welcome 
suggestions of KCDR in finalizing curriculum and imparting training. 
Issuance of policy directives to banks: It would not be appropriate to prescribe a particular 
way  of  seeking  remedies  especially  keeping  in  view  the  regulatory  role  of  SBP.  The 
directives issued by SBP are binding on banks and as a matter of policy we can facilitate, 
encourage but not force banks to avail facilities of KCDR. This is the decision which parties 
have to make themselves. Otherwise, directives issued by SBP run counter to the spirit of 
ADR/ mediation which is necessarily a mechanism based on mutual consent of the parties. 
Mediation under “terms and conditions” of various products: We are of the view that 
Pakistan Banks Association is in a better position to evaluate whether banks should include it 
as a condition of the agreement or not. SBP is neutral in that it is for banks to decide which 
option they want to avail in case of disputes. 
Taking advantage of this forum, my message today is same as observed by Hon’ble Court 
that prior to filing cases in courts, the option of mediation/reconciliation should be explored to 
avoid unnecessary costs, time and inconvenience. This would not only benefit the parties but 
facilitate  release  of  valuable  resources  for  the  businesses  which  are  critically  dependent 
upon timely availability of funds. Further, the court system would be receiving lesser number 
of  cases  and  hence  its  efficiency  will  increase.  In  my  view,  mediation  has  at  least  the 
following positive points as compared to formal court litigation: 
i) 
ADR  enables  settlement  between  the  parties  with  their  consent  and  cooperation. 
Therefore, unlike court case, none is loser but a win-win situation for the parties. 
The costs of ADR relative to court expenses are substantially low. Further, the cost 
of ADR is shared by the parties whereas under court decision loser has to pay costs 
if allowed by the Court. 
ADR  provides  solutions  quickly,  cost  effectively  and  privately  as  against  lengthy 
procedures of court proceedings, high expenses and no privacy.  
ADR  not  only  economizes  on  case  expenses  but  saves  valuable  time  of  human 
resource and management as well as stress related to Court cases. 
The parties set venue and timing for ADR proceedings whereas Court rules are to 
be strictly followed for court proceedings. 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2010
vi) 
The parties use delaying tactics due to which court cases linger on for years. The 
next date of hearing comes after months. The parties under ADR cooperate and the 
matter can be resolved even before a week. 
Finally,  I  thank  IFC  and  KCDR  for  organizing  the  event  which  I  believe  will  achieve  its 
objective  of  disseminating  ADR  knowledge  and  creating  awareness.  SBP  will  continue  to 
play its due role for early resolution of banking disputes. 
BIS Review 68/2010 
 5
