Charles Bean: The UK economy after the crisis – monetary policy when it 
is not so NICE 
Speech by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy at the Bank of England, 
to Alumni of Cambridge University, London, 16 March 2010. 
 Good evening! Tonight I want to talk about what the future might hold for the British economy 
and draw a few lessons from the recent crisis for the conduct of monetary policy. As you will 
no doubt recall, the Bank was given the operational responsibility for setting interest rates in 
1997  by  the  incoming  Labour  government.  In  retrospect,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s 
first decade can be seen to have been part of a golden era of steady growth and low and 
stable inflation, which began in 1992 after the exit from the Exchange Rate Mechanism and 
the subsequent adoption of the inflation target (Chart 1). Economists refer to this period of 
benign macroeconomic outturns – which was not confined to the United Kingdom – as the 
“Great Moderation”, though the Governor has somewhat more colourfully referred to it as the 
NICE (for Non-Inflationary Consistently Expansionary) decade.  
Well,  it  is  pretty  clear  that  the  NICE  decade  has  come  to  an  end,  with  a  financial  crisis 
unparalleled  in  almost  a  century  in  its  severity  and  reach,  together  with  the  sharpest  and 
deepest  downturn  in  global  activity  experienced  in  the  post-war  period.  Peak  to  trough, 
output fell just over 6% in the United Kingdom, almost 4% in the United States, nearly 7% in 
Germany  and  more  than  8%  in  Japan.  And  in  the  eight  months  following  the  collapse  of 
Lehman Brothers, world trade collapsed by almost a fifth, a figure completely unmatched in 
peace time. 
Governments  and  central  banks  around  the  world  responded  by  providing  substantial 
support to their banking systems, relaxing fiscal policy, slashing official interest rates and, in 
some  cases,  introducing  unorthodox  monetary  measures.  This  succeeded  in  avoiding  the 
worst  of  the  immediate  downside  risks  to  activity  and  employment.  China  and  some  other 
emerging economies have subsequently rebounded strongly, and during the second half of 
last  year,  we  saw  growth  resume,  albeit  at  a  moderate  pace,  in  most  of  the  advanced 
economies. It appears to have taken a little longer for expansion to return here but, according 
to the current vintage of official data, output rose 0.3% in the final quarter of 2009. Production 
and trade are likely to have been adversely affected by the inclement weather in January, but 
business surveys suggest that a similar rate of expansion will occur in the first quarter of this 
year. 
While a return to growth is certainly good news, it is clear that we still have a very long way 
to go before recovery from the Great Recession of 2008–9 is complete. A large margin of 
underutilised  resources  in  the  economy  remains  and  it  will  take  time  before  these  are 
returned to active use. How quickly that happens depends on the strength and durability of 
the recovery. Some of the turnaround in growth here and elsewhere is mechanical in nature, 
driven by a reduction in the rate at which businesses are running down their inventories. But 
as far as the strength of the recovery over the medium term goes, one needs to look at the 
underlying forces driving the demand for UK goods and services. On this score, there are 
both reasons to be fearful and reasons to be cheerful. 
The reasons to be fearful are several. First, the banking system here and elsewhere is still 
dealing with the legacy of decisions taken before the crisis. The process of balance sheet 
repair  has  some  way  to  run  and  that  is  likely  to  continue  to  restrain  the  supply  of  credit. 
Moreover,  a  key  feature  of  the  run-in  to  the  crisis  was  an  underestimation  of  risk  and  an 
excessive compression of risk premia. We should not expect premia to return to where they 
were  before  the  crisis  broke.  The  spreads  on  lending  to  businesses  and  households, 
particularly riskier prospects, will be higher in the future than before the crisis. 
BIS Review 31/2010 
 1
Second,  the  housing  boom  has  resulted  in  some  households,  especially  younger  ones, 
carrying forward high levels of debt. Although the burden of servicing these debts is currently 
manageable  because  of  the  low  level  of  mortgage  interest  rates,  concerns  about  future 
servicing  costs  as  interest  rates  normalise  may  lead  the  high  stock  of  outstanding  debt  to 
weigh on these households’ spending. The possibility of unemployment may also encourage 
saving,  though  happily  unemployment  has  so  far  risen  by  less  than  many  observers, 
including  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  feared.  The  relative  robustness  of  employment, 
given the depth of the decline in output, owes something to the willingness of employees to 
accept low pay awards in the face of the downturn. Last year over a third of private sector 
pay settlements were pay freezes, and a recent survey of their business contacts carried out 
by the Bank’s regional Agents points to a similar outcome this year (Chart 2). 
Third, the Government allowed the fiscal deficit to rise in response to the downturn. That was 
helpful in cushioning the fall in demand. But the deficit now looks set to be around 12% of 
GDP this year, which is unsustainable in the medium term. That creates a difficult balancing 
act.  Cutting  spending  and/or  raising  taxes  is  likely  to  result  in  lower  domestic  demand, 
though a failure to do so may lead long-term interest rates to rise, also hitting demand. The 
recent depreciation of sterling appears to owe something to heightened fears about the UK’s 
fiscal prospects. Fortunately, all political parties recognise the need to put in place a credible 
plan for the consolidation of the public finances over the medium term, even if their preferred 
routes to doing so differ. 
Finally, question marks remain about the durability of the recovery in the rest of the world 
and  particularly  in  the  UK’s  main  export  markets.  Some  of  the  advanced  economies  face 
headwinds  similar  to  those  facing  the  United  Kingdom.  The  fate  of  the  euro  area,  the 
destination of more than half our exports, is particularly important. The recovery there all but 
stalled in the fourth quarter and business surveys point to only moderate growth in the first 
part of this year. Moreover, Greece and some other euro-area countries face significant fiscal 
challenges.  The  necessary  fiscal  consolidations  are  likely  to  depress  overall  euro-area 
demand unless offset by demand expansion elsewhere.  
But as I noted, there are also reasons to be cheerful. Two factors in particular should provide 
a boost to the demand for UK goods and services. First, there is a substantial policy stimulus 
still working through the economy. Bank Rate remains at a historical low of 0.5%, while the 
Bank  has  bought  some  £200  billion  of  assets,  mainly  gilts,  financed  by  the  issuance  of 
central  bank  reserves  (think  of  these  as  Bank  of  England  IOUs  that  are  held  by  the 
commercial banks) – so-called “quantitative easing”. Even though we have called a pause in 
our asset purchase programme, the effects of past purchases will continue to work through 
the economy for some time to come. The aim of quantitative easing is to boost the supply of 
money,  push  up  a  wide  range  of  asset  prices  and  facilitate  finance  through  the  capital 
markets, thus raising nominal demand in the economy.  
How  well  is  quantitative  easing  working?  Chart  3  shows,  for  the  two  days  following  each 
successive  announcement  about  the  scale  of  the  asset  purchase  programme,  the 
movements in: average gilt yields; the expected average level of Bank Rate over the same 
maturity  (from  Overnight  Indexed  Swap  rates);  and  the  spread  between  them1.  That 
suggests  gilt  yields  are  lower  as  a  result  of  the  programme  by  a  total  of  around  one 
percentage point. Moreover, since the programme began, investment-grade corporate bond 
yields have fallen by almost four percentage points, equity prices have recouped half their 
                                                 
1   The impact is measured by the change over two days in the average 5 to 25 year (zero coupon) gilt spot rate. 
The  event  dates  are the  publication  of  the  February  2009  Inflation  Report  and  the  associated  press 
conference,  which  was  taken  to  suggest  a  policy  of  quantitative  easing  was  imminent;  the  decision  at  the 
March MPC meeting to use the Asset Purchase Facility as a monetary policy tool for initial asset purchases of 
£75bn; and the subsequent extensions of planned purchases to £125bn in May, to £175bn in August and to 
£200bn in November. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2010
2
o in the expected direction . 
losses  and  capital  market  issuance  has  been  unusually  strong.  Finally,  nominal  demand 
growth  recovered  to  an  annualised  rate  of  around  4%  in  the  second  half  of  last  year. 
Although we cannot be sure what would have happened without our asset purchases, these 
movements do at least g
Some  commentators  have  pointed  to  the  weakness  in  bank  lending  and  argued  that  this 
shows  that  quantitative  easing  has  not  worked.  While  the  substantial  increase  in  bank 
deposits  and  bank  reserves  as  a  result  of  the  asset  purchase  programme  could  indeed 
encourage banks to extend more credit, such an effect was always likely to be quite weak, as 
at the current juncture banks are seeking to repair their balance sheets and to de-leverage. 
Rather, the objective of quantitative easing is to work around an impaired banking system by 
stimulating activity in the capital markets. 
Of course, some businesses, especially small and medium-sized enterprises, will not find it 
possible to access funds through the capital markets. But the right response is then to get 
the banks back into a position to lend normally as soon as possible. The array of measures 
introduced  by  the  Government  to  support  the  banking  system  –  injections  of  new  capital, 
insurance against losses on toxic assets, guarantees on bank debt – plus the Bank’s Special 
Liquidity Scheme, which allows banks to swap illiquid mortgage-backed securities for liquid 
treasury bills, have all been aimed at that objective. 
The second reason to be hopeful lies in the substantial depreciation of the sterling effective 
exchange rate, which has fallen by around a quarter since the middle of 2007. Prior to that, 
the  MPC  had  already  drawn  attention  to  the  need  to  re-balance  the  economy  away  from 
domestic  spending  towards  net  exports  and  so  reduce  the  UK’s  current  account  deficit.  A 
real  depreciation,  boosting  the  competitive  position  of  UK  producers  in  both  domestic  and 
overseas  markets,  is  part  of  the  mechanism  to  bring  such  a  rebalancing  about.  And  an 
increase  in  net  exports  will,  of  course,  help  to  fill  the  hole  made  by  the  crisis-induced 
reduction in private and, potentially, public spending. 
Unfortunately,  there  is  little  sign  so  far  of  a  significant  impact  of  the  depreciation  on  the 
volumes of exports and imports, which have moved broadly in line with the movements in 
overall  demand  abroad  and  at  home  respectively  (see  Charts  4  and  5).  Moreover, 
commentators have noted that exporters have responded to the depreciation by expanding 
their profit margins rather than cutting their foreign currency prices in order to boost market 
share. Does this mean that the depreciation will prove ineffective at boosting demand? I do 
not think that would be the right conclusion. Experience after previous large depreciations, 
such as following sterling’s exit from the Exchange Rate Mechanism in 1992, suggests that it 
is normal for the initial impact to be seen mainly in expanded profit margins and only after 
some  while  does  one  see  an  impact  on  market  shares.  One  reason  for  that  may  be  that 
expansion  in  overseas  markets  requires  some  investment  and  businesses  are  likely  to  be 
cautious about making that expenditure until they are sure the improvement in profitability will 
be maintained. For that reason, I expect to see the contribution from net exports gradually 
building as the global recovery proceeds.  
The path of the recovery will be determined by the balance between these two sets of forces. 
Our central expectation, as laid out in our February Inflation Report, is for four-quarter GDP 
growth to gradually strengthen as the year proceeds (Chart 6). But the quarterly path is sure 
to be uneven and there remains a risk of setbacks. And even if things turn out well, it is likely 
to  be  a  considerable  time  before  the  substantial  margin  of  underutilised  resources  in  the 
economy developed in the downturn is whittled away (Chart 7).  
 
                                                
2   For  more  analysis  of  the  impact  of  quantitative  easing,  see:  David  Miles,  “Interpreting  Monetary  Policy”, 
speech at Imperial College Business School, London, 25 February 2010; and Spencer Dale, “QE One Year 
On”, speech at CIMF/MMF Conference, Cambridge, 12 March 2010. 
BIS Review 31/2010 
 3
That brings me naturally to inflation, the MPC’s mandated target. One might expect that, after 
such a sharp downturn, inflation would have dropped back. Indeed, inflation had fallen as low 
as 1.1% last September. Since then, it has moved up sharply, reaching 3.5% in January and 
triggering an open letter of explanation from the Governor to the Chancellor. That volatility in 
inflation  can  be  explained  in  terms  of  a  variety  of  factors  impacting  on  the  price  level:  the 
restoration of the standard rate of VAT to 17.5%; recent movements in the oil price and a 
year  earlier;  and  the  pass-through  into  consumer  prices  of  the  higher  import  prices 
associated  with  the  depreciation  in  sterling.  When  setting  monetary  policy,  the  MPC  looks 
through  effects  that  can  be  expected  to  affect  inflation  only  transitorily,  to  the  underlying 
determinants of inflation in the medium term: inflation expectations; and the margin of slack 
in the economy. 
Despite  recent  volatility  in  actual  inflation,  inflation  expectations,  according  to  a  variety  of 
measures, have remained stable and reasonably well anchored at levels consistent with the 
target.  There  is,  however,  considerable  uncertainty  about  the  extent  of  the  downward 
pressure on inflation from economic slack. With output some 10% lower than it would have 
been if pre-crisis growth rates had been maintained, it would appear that the margin of spare 
capacity ought to be large. But the evidence from past sharp downturns after banking crises 
is  that  they  can  have  a  significant  impact  on  the  economy’s  supply  potential  (Chart  8). 
Downturns typically lead to less investment, more capital scrapping, fewer business start-ups 
and more business closures and a restriction in the availability of credit is likely to aggravate 
these effects. Moreover, lower employment can lead to skills atrophying and the long-term 
unemployed becoming disconnected from the labour market. 
Business investment has fallen sharply in this recession – down more than a quarter from its 
peak  –  though  only  part  of  that  is  likely  to  reflect  a  restriction  in  the  availability  of  credit. 
Heightened uncertainty is also likely to have played a part. But against that, both business 
closures  and,  as  noted  earlier,  unemployment  have  risen  less  than  feared.  So  the  overall 
impact of the downturn on the present and future supply potential of the economy is rather 
uncertain. 
In addition, in present circumstances the extent of the downward pressure on inflation from 
spare capacity is also uncertain. Once one allows for the effect of transient factors such as 
the  restoration  of  the  VAT  rate,  oil  price  movements  and  the  likely  impact  of  sterling’s 
depreciation, underlying inflation has been surprisingly resilient. That could be because the 
impairment of effective supply as a result of the credit crunch is large. Or it could be that the 
spare capacity is exerting little downward pressure, because businesses with limited access 
to credit are unwilling to run the risk of reducing their cash flow by cutting prices in order to 
boost  market  share.  Moreover,  even  though  pay  growth  has  been  muted,  unit  wage  costs 
have  nevertheless  risen  quite  sharply  because  businesses  have  held  onto  skilled  labour 
through the recession, rather than lay it off. So the firmness in underlying prices may just be 
the flipside of the better-than-expected labour market outturns. 
Despite these uncertainties, it seems likely that the margin of spare capacity will be sufficient 
to pull inflation back towards the 2% target from its present elevated level, as the near-term 
effects  of  the  restoration  in  VAT  and  sterling’s  past  depreciation  work  through.  Our  latest 
projections,  contained  in  the  February  Inflation  Report,  are  shown  in  Chart  9.  The  risks  of 
inflation  being  above  or  below  the  target  are  roughly  balanced  by  the  end  of  the  forecast 
horizon.  
It  should,  I  hope,  be  clear  from  my  remarks  that,  although  a  recovery  of  sorts  may  have 
commenced, there are still considerable doubts about its strength and durability and about 
the accompanying path of inflation. The road ahead is likely to be bumpy and there is still the 
risk  of  further  adverse  shocks.  All  we  can  do  on  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  is  stand 
ready to react to those risks if and when they crystallise, either resuming asset purchases if 
further  stimulation  is  required,  or  tightening  policy  through  Bank  Rate  increases  and 
ultimately asset sales. 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2010
Let  me  now  step  back  from  the  UK’s  immediate  economic  prospects,  to  ask  what  recent 
experience  has  taught  us  about  the  broader  monetary  policy  framework.  After  such  a 
cataclysmic  economic  event,  people  have  unsurprisingly  questioned  whether  inflation 
targeting is the right regime or whether it needs to be modified or even abandoned. A variety 
of changes have been mooted. 
First,  some  commentators  have  suggested  that  the  focus  on  inflation  is  misplaced  at  the 
current juncture, when surely the aim ought to be to get output up and unemployment down; 
at  the  very  least  the  Committee’s  objective  ought  to  include  a  measure  of  activity,  as,  for 
instance, in the US Federal Reserve’s “dual” mandate. In my view, this criticism is misplaced 
as the Chancellor’s remit to the MPC already incorporates a subsidiary objective to support 
the  Government’s  aims  with  respect  to  growth  and  employment,  providing  that  it  does  not 
jeopardise meeting the inflation target. 
When the economy experiences a contraction in demand, as in the wake of the collapse of 
Lehman Brothers, other things equal, inflation tends to fall. The objectives of maintaining full 
employment and stabilising inflation are therefore aligned, and there is no inconsistency in 
these circumstances between boosting growth and meeting the inflation target. 
Things are more complicated when an adverse supply shock occurs, such as the sharp rise 
in oil prices that we saw during the first half of 2008. That tends to lower output at the same 
time as it raises inflation, so there is a tension between maintaining high growth and meeting 
the inflation target. But under the present regime, the MPC has “constrained discretion” to 
look  through  the  inflationary  impact  of  such  a  shock,  provided  it  is  temporary.  What  the 
regime does not permit is for such a shock to be accommodated in a persistently higher rate 
of inflation. That is what happened in the Seventies and I do not think we want to go back 
there. 
The essential point that critics of the current set-up need to bear in mind is that an adverse 
supply shock will always leave the policy maker with a difficult judgement, as the appropriate 
monetary policy response depends on the extent to which it is likely to lead to compensating 
increases  in  wages  and  other  prices.  Changing  the  objective  does  not  alter  that  basic 
dilemma, but compensating increases in wages and other prices will be less likely if people 
already expect inflation to remain low and stable.  
Finally,  as  was  illustrated  in  Chart  1,  the  inflation  targeting  period  was,  until  the  past  two 
years, also a period of unusually steady growth. So, from a practical perspective, there was 
no obvious conflict between stabilising inflation and stabilising output. 
A second suggested change to the framework has come recently from the IMF. While not 
questioning the basic framework, they suggest3 that inflation targeting central banks should 
aim to hit a rather higher inflation rate of around 4%, so as to give more room to cut official 
interest rates in the face of a collapse in demand before they hit their natural floor of zero. 
Thus, during the years leading up to the crisis, Bank Rate averaged around 4½%–5% and 
inflation  averaged  around  2%,  so  the  real  interest  rate  averaged  2½%–3%.  If  instead, 
inflation had been averaging 4% and Bank Rate 6½%–7%, i.e. the same real interest rate as 
before, then we would have been able to lower Bank Rate by another two percentage points 
before it approached its lower limit. 
The  thinking  behind  this  seems  entirely  reasonable.  But,  aside  from  ignoring  the  fact  that 
monetary policy, in the shape of asset purchases4, can still be effective even when the policy 
rate  reaches  zero,  it  underplays  the  costs  of  higher  inflation.  Inflation  at  2%  or  less  is 
                                                 
3   Olivier Blanchard, Giovanni  Dell’Ariccia and Paolo Mauro, “Rethinking  Macroeconomic Policy”, International 
Monetary Fund, January 2010. 
4   As well as more exotic options; see Willem Buiter, “Don’t Raise the Inflation Target, Remove the Zero Bound 
on Nominal Interest Rates Instead”, Citibank , 5 March 2010. 
BIS Review 31/2010 
 5
generally felt to be low enough that businesses and households do not have to consciously 
plan for rising prices – it is “close enough” to price stability, in other words. While 4% may not 
sound  much  higher  than  2%,  the  difference  is  large  enough  that  people  would  have  to 
consciously  take  account  of  inflation  in  their  decision  making.  Moreover,  it  is  unexpected 
movements in inflation that are particularly costly and capricious in their impact, and there is 
a well documented empirical relationship between the level and the volatility of inflation (see, 
for instance, Chart 10). There is a risk that even a modest increase in the target, such as the 
IMF  advocates,  would  lead  to  a  corresponding  increase  in  inflation  volatility.  Such  an 
increase in the target should not be regarded as costless. 
Moreover, it would be particularly dangerous to raise inflation targets at this juncture, as one 
should expect nominal interest rates to rise roughly in line. Even if expected long-term real 
interest rates were thus unchanged, the fall in bond prices would lower wealth and worsen 
the  already-impaired  balance  sheets  of  financial  institutions.  So  raising  the  inflation  target 
represents  a  risky  way  of  providing  more  room  for  manoeuvre  in  the  face  of  a  once-in-a-
century financial crisis, whose potential repetition is any case best prevented through other 
means, as I will explain below.  
A  more  potent  challenge  to  the  regime  comes  from  the  charge  that,  while  the  inflation-
targeting  regime  may  have  delivered  the  goods  during  the  Great  Moderation,  it  singularly 
failed  to  prevent  the  build-up  of  the  financial  imbalances  which  are  now  unwinding  so 
painfully. Indeed, an even stronger version of this argument is that the very success of the 
regime contributed to the decline in market participants’ perception of risk and encouraged 
them in the leveraged acquisition of risky assets. According to this view, the MPC ought to 
put independent weight on credit and asset price developments and should have kept policy 
tighter during the years leading up to the crisis. That would have generated an undershoot of 
the inflation target in the near term but reduced the likelihood of a disruptive unwinding of the 
financial imbalances further out.  
The first point to make is that interest rates affect the whole economy through a variety of 
channels. Raising Bank Rate in order to curb a credit boom would be fine if that credit boom 
was  also  associated  with  excessive  demand  growth  and  overheating  in  the  real  economy. 
But that, by and large, was not the case during the years leading up to the financial crisis. 
Raising interest rates enough to have had a material impact on the credit boom would most 
likely have resulted in an even higher value of sterling, markedly weaker activity and higher 
unemployment.  Would  businessmen,  households  and  Parliament  have  accepted  this  as  a 
price  worth  paying  to  bring  down  credit  growth  with  the  hope  of  forestalling  a  hypothetical 
future financial crisis? I suspect the answer to this would be No, even though equipped with 
20/20  hindsight  we  might  take  a  different  view.  The  fact  is  that  policy  has  to  be  made  in 
ignorance  of  how  the  future  will  turn  out,  and  one  has  to  weigh  certain  near-term  costs 
against uncertain longer-term gains.  
Moreover,  it  seems  unlikely  that  higher  interest  rates  in  this  country  alone  would  have 
prevented  us  experiencing  a  severe  recession.  Events  in  the  United  States  would  have 
proceeded  in  much  the  same  way,  regardless  of  what  the  MPC  chose  to  do.  And,  as  we 
have seen, the downturn has been global in nature, not confined to those economies with 
overblown financial or housing markets. 
Would  it  have  helped  if  our  target  variable  had,  say,  included  a  measure  of  asset  prices, 
particularly house prices? There is certainly a good case for including a measure of owner-
occupied  housing  costs  in  any  consumer  price  measure,  as  for  many  households  it 
represents their largest single expenditure. And, depending on the measure used, that could 
have resulted in higher inflation figures during the years leading up to the crisis. That does 
not,  however,  translate  directly  into  a  higher  level  of  Bank  Rate.  Monetary  policy  affects 
inflation with a long and somewhat variable lag and there is little the MPC can do to offset 
unanticipated  movements  in  near-term  inflation.  Instead,  we  have  to  look  at  inflation 
prospects two or three years ahead. But it is in the nature of asset prices, including house 
6 
 BIS Review 31/2010
is 
inflation 
targeting 
insufficient 
that  successful 
prices, that one can say rather little about their likely direction of movement that far ahead. 
Most of the time, the best projection of asset prices at that horizon is for them to be broadly 
flat. Consequently, I suspect that our policy choices would not have been radically different 
had we been tasked with targeting an inflation measure that included a measure of owner-
occupied housing costs.  
Finally,  there  is  something  of  a  logical  error  in  moving  from  the  indubitably  correct 
observation 
to  guarantee  either 
macroeconomic stability or financial stability to the conclusion that monetary policy should in 
addition,  or  instead,  be  focussed  on  some  other  objective.  There  is  a  real  danger  in 
overburdening monetary policy if it is expected to achieve both price stability and financial 
stability simultaneously. With two objectives, one needs two independent means of achieving 
them.  The  assignment  of  instruments  to  targets  then  revolves  around  which  instrument  is 
most effective at achieving which objective. 
Though  loose  monetary  policy,  particularly  in  the  United  States  during  2001–5,  arguably 
contributed  to  the  build-up  of  the  financial  imbalances,  it  was  but  one  of  many  causes, 
including a plethora of failings within financial institutions. These include: inadequate care in 
the  extension  of  loans  to  risky  individuals,  when  those  loans  are  then  sold  on;  the 
inappropriate  use  of  off-balance-sheet  vehicles  to  circumvent  capital  requirements;  reward 
packages that encouraged an undue focus on short-term returns; excessive complexity and 
opacity in some asset-backed securities; and distorted incentives facing ratings agencies. 
Although regulators and supervisors conspicuously failed to address these issues during the 
run-up  to  the  crisis,  prudential  regulation  and  supervision  should  surely  be  the  first  line  of 
defence, as they can be focussed directly on the source of the problem. Regulatory policies 
have  a  comparative  advantage  in  combating  excesses  in  financial  markets.  By  contrast, 
inflation  is,  in  the  long  run,  a  monetary  phenomenon,  so  it  is  more  naturally  suited  to  the 
pursuit of price stability.  
Beefing  up  the  regulatory  regime  so  it  is  better  suited  to  preventing  the  re-emergence  of 
financial  excesses  is  very  much  work  in  progress.  There  are  sound  arguments  for  forcing 
banks to build up more capital and reserves during the good times, which they can then draw 
down  if  things  turn  bad,  so  improving  the  general  robustness  of  the  system  –  so-called 
“macro-prudential regulation”. Under instruction from the G20, the Financial Stability Board, 
together  with  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  is  therefore  developing  an 
appropriate  set  of  cyclically-varying  regulatory  requirements  on  financial  institutions5, 
together with a range of other changes to improve the stability of the global financial system. 
Of course, no regulatory regime will be perfect, and financial institutions have an incentive to 
try to circumvent requirements that they perceive as onerous. So there may be times when 
monetary policy will need to work alongside regulatory policy in order to restrain excessive 
credit and asset price growth, even though the achievement of the inflation target may not 
immediately appear threatened. But, in my view, that is best facilitated by retaining the clarity 
of  the  present  remit,  rather  than  muddying  the  waters  by  introducing  another  objective  for 
monetary policy. The onus would then lie with the Monetary Policy Committee to explain that 
it was permitting a temporary deviation from the inflation target so as to reduce the likelihood 
of future financial disruption and improve its chances of meeting the inflation target further 
ahead. 
The past two and a half years have certainly been tumultuous for both the economy and for 
policy  makers.  After  such  an  event,  we  should  certainly  examine  how  the  overall  policy-
making framework should be re-made in order to reduce the chance of a repetition. But we 
                                                 
5  “The  Role  of  Macroprudential  Policy”,  Bank  of  England,  November  2009  provides  an  outline  of  some  of  the 
Bank’s thinking in this area.  
BIS Review 31/2010 
 7
should  be  careful  not  to  throw  the  baby  out  with  the  bathwater.  The  inflation  targeting 
framework served the real economy well for a decade and a half before the financial crisis. In 
addressing  the  shortcomings  in  the  overall  policy  framework  revealed  by  the  crisis,  we 
should be careful not to discard those parts that functioned satisfactorily. Thank you. 
 
 
 8 
  BIS Review 31/2010
  BIS Review 31/2010 
   9
  10 
  BIS Review 31/2010
 BIS Review 31/2010 
   11
    12 
 BIS Review 31/2010
  BIS Review 31/2010 
 13
