Željko Rohatinski: What 2010 may hold for the Croatian economy 
Address by Dr Željko Rohatinski, Governor of the Croatian National Bank, at the business 
conference  “Big  Plans  Day”,  organised  by  the  Lider  business  weekly,  Zagreb,  26  October 
2009. 
 After a turbulent 2009, the year 2010 is expected to be mostly a year of stagnation (viewed 
statistically),  without  major  structural  changes  in  the  real  and  financial  sectors.  More 
important  than  the  statistics,  however,  is  that  no  significant  changes  are  expected  in  the 
modalities  of  economy  functioning,  as  there  are  no  substantial  changes  in  the  economic 
policy. 
But this does not mean that 2010 is going to be a “calm year” and that the “status quo” will be 
restored  and  maintained  by 
the  context  of  current  domestic 
developments which may postpone the country’s exit from recession. 
The three key determinants of our economic situation in the coming year are the following: 
(1) 
itself,  particularly 
in 
Stagnation in Croatia’s most important partner countries in the European Union and 
in the region will curb export demand, while, given the poor propulsiveness of our 
export  demand,  an  “active”  improvement  in  the  current  account  can  hardly  be 
expected. Goods and services exports could go up about 5.5% (dropping by 18.1% 
in 2009). 
A rational domestic demand and import policies will be required (with a 5.3% rise in 
imports, given the oil price growth), in order to keep the current account deficit at 
about 6.5% of GDP (EUR 3 billion), the same as in the current year. 
Of course, this implies a continuation of heavy dependence on foreign sources of 
financing in 2010. 
Given  stagnation  in  direct  and  portfolio  investments  (EUR  2.1  billion  in  2009 
vs. EUR 2.3 billion in 2010), this would mean that: 
− 
− 
the current account deficit will have to be financed by foreign borrowing; 
the external debt-to-GDP ratio will increase from 83% last year and about 
93%  in  2009,  to  about  100%,  which  is  feasible,  but  will  certainly  not 
improve the country’s credit rating, and the question is to what extent the 
global downward trend in interest rates can carry over to this country. 
This is all too important, as we know that in 2010: 
− 
total  debt  repayments  (EUR  8.3  billion  in  principal  and  EUR  1.4  billion  in 
interest) will amount to EUR 9.6 billion (EUR 10.8 billion in 2009); and 
total utilisation of foreign sources of financing will stand at EUR 12.6 billion 
(13.5 billion in 2009). 
 The anticipated fiscal deficit reduction, in terms of consolidated general government 
(including HAC), from HRK 15 billion to HRK 12.1 billion, i.e. from 4.5% to 3.6% of 
GDP, with the deficit being predominantly financed by foreign borrowing, would slow 
down  government  demand  for  domestic  borrowing.  The  growth  in  government 
demand  for  credit  could  decrease  from  this  year’s  32.7%  to  about  6%.  However, 
even  with  this  relatively  low  growth  rate,  there  will  be  little  room  for  the  re-
channelling of banks’ domestic credit potential towards the private sector. 
The  situation  can  be  further  aggravated  by  shipbuilding,  which  is  not  included  in 
these estimates, but can nevertheless affect the budget and its borrowing in 2010. 
(2) 
(3) 
BIS Review 2/2010 
 1
(X)  Under such circumstances, monetary policy will have to balance between reducing the 
current account deficit and providing for the aggregate domestic credit growth accompanied 
by exchange rate (foreign exchange reserves) stability. 
 
Consequently, we expect to continue implementing the existing instruments 
(foreign  exchange  interventions  and  open  market  operations),  for  now, 
without  changing  the  reserve  requirements  (because  of  the  favourable 
liquidity  situation  in  the  banking  sector),  or  relaxing  the  prudential 
measures,  as  well  as  without  raising  regulation  costs.  We  anticipate  that 
total  liquid  assets,  money  supply  and  bank  placements  will  increase  by 
about 7%, 4.5% and 4.4% respectively. 
(X)  Bank behaviour 
It can be expected that the following trends, observed in the previous part of the current year, 
will continue into 2010: 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
stagnation in high foreign sources of financing (standing at EUR 10 billion, 
of  which  about  EUR  2  billion  represents  short-term  inflows  from  parent 
banks in late 2008, which remained in the country throughout the year) and 
a very slight increase in domestic deposits (by 3.2%, suggesting that there 
is no potential for any significant strengthening of banks’ credit activity; 
gradual extension of the maturity structure of both foreign sources (62%–
68%) and domestic ones (73%–77.4%), which is good in terms of safety, 
and  facilitates  longer  maturity  placements,  but  these  sources  are  more 
expensive; 
an increase in the foreign-currency portion of reserve requirements (71%–
76%),  which  also  magnifies  the  currency  risk,  both  on  the  assets  and 
liabilities sides; 
banks trying to reduce credit risk, which also leads to changes in the credit 
structure: an increase in the share of credit to government (from 8.7% to 
13.1%) at the expense of consumer credit (declining from 27.5% to 25.0%); 
an  increase  in  bad  placements  (to  6%),  but  still  a  relatively  strong 
resistance to shocks (provided that the currency shock is prevented); 
Conclusion: Banks’ policies are expected to be very cautious in 2010, without any significant 
changes, with regard to both the growth and purpose of placements. 
(X)  Essentially, the year 2010 is supposed to be some kind of “the day after”, or the year of 
“coming  to  our  senses”,  which  will  show  that  we  became  smarter  after  the  crisis,  that  we 
learned enough from it, and that we are prepared to act differently. 
The  question  is,  however,  whether  this  comes  true,  not  only  due  to  defending  particular 
interests, but also because not even others know exactly what to do. 
There  is  not  much  use  in  repeating  generally  known  facts.  The  general  pattern  has  lately 
been  to  inject  liquidity  and  strengthen  regulations.  We,  too,  injected  liquidity  (over 
EUR 5 billion, in a very short term), but we had to relax regulations in order to activate it. 
So, the stereotype that in the period of expansion we implemented restrictive monetary policy 
and  in  recession  we  should  adhere  to  expansive  policy  –  does  not  apply.  Our  monetary 
policy has never been really restrictive, but was even hyper-expansive in 2009, although this 
was not reflected in the monetary statistics. 
The problem is evidently not in the quantity of money but in its allocation, i.e. the purpose for 
which it is spent, and the effects produced by such spending. This was not so obvious in the 
period of expansion (when there was enough money for everyone). At the time of recession 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2010
and stagnation, the change in allocation has a key role. However, no significant changes are 
possible without the government playing its part. 
(X)  “A  million  dollar  question”  has  been  asked  at  Forbes,  about  whether  exchange  rate 
stability can be maintained under such circumstances. The answer is: yes, given the current 
modalities, it can be maintained as long as we manage to repay our debts and as long as we 
can obtain new loans from abroad. 
In this respect, the current world situation is favourable, because free liquidity grows again 
and  waits  to  be  placed,  credit  supply  goes  up  and  buyers  are  sought  for  this  money.  A 
continuation of EU accession negotiations improves the political perception of Croatia as a 
debtor. Therefore, I have no doubts that the current search for a billion dollars, or euros or 
whatever, will be successful. 
This  is  a  relief,  but  it  also  poses  the  most  serious  dangers  to  this  country:  the  danger  of 
inactivity, the danger of believing that we can go on functioning by following the established 
routine and the danger that we neither have learned, nor will learn enough from the crisis. 
It is often repeated that our problems are of a structural nature and that it takes time to carry 
out  the  necessary  reforms.  This  statement  is  not  unfounded.  However,  an  old  Chinese 
wisdom says: “Even the longest way starts with the first step.” The truth is that the first step is 
often the most difficult, and we have been putting it off for a long time. 
BIS Review 2/2010 
 3
