Svein Gjedrem: A diversified economy 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor and Chairman of the Norges Bank (Central Bank of 
Norway),  at  the  seminar  “Oil  in  the  economy”  at  the  Norwegian  Oil  Museum,  Stavanger, 
8 June 2010. 
The  text  below  may  differ  from  the  actual  presentation.  This  speech  does  not  contain  assessments  of  the 
economic situation or current interest rate setting. 
 “Look what I found!” shouted Askeladden (the Ash Lad) in the Norwegian folktale 
“The  Princess  Who  Always  Had  to  Have  the  Last  Word”.  He  found  a  dead 
magpie, a willow hank, a bit of broken saucer, two ram’s horns, a wedge and a 
worn-out shoe sole, which he managed to transform into a princess and half a 
kingdom.  
Askeladden  is  often  perceived  as  the  embodiment  of  sound  Norwegian  values  such  as  a 
sense  of  adventure,  courage  and  helpfulness.  Askeladden  is  nevertheless  someone  who 
succeeds by pure chance.  
Like Askeladden, we also found wealth, but under the sea floor. We were lucky.  
An  abundance  of  natural  resources  is  in  principle  of  benefit  to  a  country’s  economy.  The 
production of petroleum and other natural resources generate gains that exceed the normal 
return on invested capital, economic rent. But oil is also associated with challenges. As early 
as in 1974, the Storting1 deliberated the economic challenges relating to oil production. 
We were able to learn from the experience of other countries. The concept Dutch disease 
stems from the negative effects on the Dutch economy of the spending of revenues from the 
substantial gas resources of the Groningen field. From the end of the 1960s, these revenues 
financed  strong  growth  in  public  expenditure,  which  led  to  higher  costs  and  a  decline  in 
manufacturing. The situation went too far, resulting in large balance of trade and government 
deficits which required tightening measures. This in turn led to a sharp rise in unemployment 
in the first half of the 1980s.  
But the Netherlands is not the first example of a nation that failed in this respect, and far from 
it2.  A  very  clear  example  is  provided  by  Spain  as  early  as  in  the  17th  century  when  the 
colonisation of South and Central America provided the country with access to vast natural 
resources and gold. The historian David Landes describes the effects on Spanish society in 
his  book  “The  Wealth  and  Poverty  of  Nations”  where  he  cites  a  happy  Spaniard  who 
proclaimed the following in 1675:  
“Let London manufacture those fabrics of hers to her heart’s content; Holland her 
chambrays;  Florence  her  cloth;  the  Indies  their  beaver  and  vicuna;  Milan  her 
brocades: Italy and Flanders their linen, so long as our capital can enjoy them. 
The only thing it proves is that all nations train journeymen for Madrid and that 
Madrid  is  the  queen  of  Parliaments,  for  the  world  serves  her  and  she  serves 
nobody.” 
                                                 
1   See  Report  no.  25  (1973–74)  to  the  Storting:  “Petroleumsvirksomhetens  plass  i  det  norske  samfunn” 
[The role of petroleum activity in Norwegian society]. 
2   The Paradox of Plenty. Oil Booms and Petro-States by Terry Lynn Karl (1997) provides a good overview 
of oil nations’ problems. 
BIS Review 78/2010 
 1
From time to time, I meet representatives of the diplomatic corps in Norway. They seldom fail 
to mention the high cost level in Norway and their bewilderment over aspects of our way of 
life.  A  17th  century  Moroccan  ambassador  was  even  more  critical  in  his  account  of  the 
wealthiest nation at that time: 
“…the  Spanish  nation  today  possesses  the  greatest  wealth  and  the  largest 
income  of  all  Christians.  But  the  love  of  luxury  and  the  comforts  of  civilization 
have overcome them, and you will rarely find one of this nation who engages in 
trade  or  travels  abroad  for  commerce  as  do  the  other  Christian  nations  […]. 
Similarly, the handicrafts practiced by the lower classes and common people are 
despised  by  this  nation,  which  regards  itself  as  superior  to  other  Christian 
nations. Most of those who practice these crafts in Spain are Frenchmen [who] 
flock to Spain to look for work … [and] in a short time make great fortunes.”  
See chart “Petroleum production” at the end of the speech. 
The oil age in Norway has now spanned about 40 years and there are prospects that it will 
continue for some time ahead. We will most likely still be producing petroleum in 40 years’ 
time, but oil production has declined in recent years after peaking in 2000. Gas production is 
rising, but not at a pace sufficient to sustain overall petroleum production.  
The idea of an oil fund was raised in the beginning of the 1980s3. It was intended to be a 
buffer fund to smooth variations in government oil revenues.  
The Act relating to the Government Petroleum Fund was adopted in 1990 in the midst of the 
deepest economic downturn in Norway since the Second World War. Those at the Ministry of 
Finance working on the law at the time were probably in doubt as to whether any savings 
would ever be accumulated in the fund.  
And initially the fund structure was only an exercise in accounting. Government  petroleum 
revenues  were  deposited  in  the  fund,  but  the  entire  amount  was  transferred  back  to  the 
central government budget to cover some of the non-oil deficit. But the Norwegian economy 
rebounded.  
See chart “First deposit in the fund” at the end of the speech. 
It took a generation from the discovery of the first oil field in the North Sea until it became 
possible for the government to set aside a portion of the economic rent. The first net transfer 
to the fund of close to NOK 2 billion was made in 1996. Every year since then, as a savings 
plan, the government has let a substantial share of current income from oil and gas remain 
as deposits in the fund. At the end of the first quarter of this year, the fund’s market value 
stood at NOK 2 763 billion.  
See chart “The fund’s market value” at the end of the speech. 
As the fund increased, the need for a plan for the phasing in of oil revenues became evident. 
In  2001,  the  Government  and  the  Storting  adopted  the  fiscal  rule,  which  is  based  on  the 
deposit  of  government  petroleum  revenues  in  the  oil  fund.  An  amount  equivalent  to  the 
expected  real  return  on  the  fund,  or  4  per  cent,  as  an  annual  average  over  time,  is 
transferred  back  to  the  central  government  budget  to  cover  current  expenditure.  The 
transfers increase as the fund rises in value.  
Along  the  way,  the  name  of  the  fund  has  been  changed  from  the  Government  Petroleum 
Fund to the Government Pension fund Global. 
There  are  prospects  that  new  annual  transfers  to  the  fund  may  be  made  over  the  next 
10 years or so. This implies further growth in the fund, perhaps up to twice the size of today’s 
                                                 
3   See  NOU  (Official  Norwegian  Report)  1983:27  “Petroleumsvirksomhetens  framtid”  [The  future  of 
petroleum activity]. 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2010
fund,  which  corresponds  to  one  and  half  to  two  times  annual  GDP  for  Norway.  Public 
expenditure  accounts  for  about  half  of  GDP.  Withdrawals  from  the  fund  at  4  per  cent  can 
therefore finance 15 per cent of public spending in 10 years’ time. This can continue on a 
permanent  basis  without  reducing  the  capital  in  the  fund.  The  fund  will  therefore  lead  to 
smaller  cuts  in  government  welfare  spending  than  would  have  been  the  case  without  the 
fund  as  the  costs  related  to  the  ageing  of  the  population  have  an  impact  on  government 
budgets.  
The actual building up of the fund may span a short generation. 
A fund with investment abroad enables Norway to separate the revenues generated by oil 
and  gas  production  from  petroleum  revenue  spending.  An  alternative  could  have  been  to 
regulate the production rate, keeping our wealth under the sea bed for a longer period, as 
was attempted in the 1970s when the production ceiling was set at 90 million standard cubic 
metres  per  year.  Oil  companies  currently  produce  240  million  standard  cubic  metres  per 
year. 
The fund acts as a buffer between widely fluctuating oil revenues and domestic expenditure. 
The annual spending decision can be made independently of the size of the revenues. Thus, 
the  fluctuations  in  government  oil  revenues  do  not  have  an  automatic  impact  on  the 
Norwegian economy. The fund also has a stabilising effect on the krone exchange rate as 
capital outflows increase when Norway’s petroleum revenues rise.  
As a savings plan, the fund enables petroleum revenues to be used by not only the current 
generation but also future generations. The fiscal rule ensures that this is the case. 
International  capital  markets  play  an  important  role  for  Norway.  We  drew  on  borrowing 
opportunities abroad when the petroleum industry was under development. We did the same 
in  order  to  expand  welfare  schemes  and  to  finance  the  countercyclical  policy  of  the  
mid-1970s  and  the  early  1990s.  In  the  past  15  years,  international  financial  markets  have 
enabled us to convert national oil and gas resources into foreign equities and bonds.  
See chart “Real return on the fund” at the end of the speech. 
Since its establishment in 1998, the fund’s average annual real return after costs has been 
2.9 per cent, or somewhat lower than the expected long-term return. This figure is marked by 
the challenging character of the financial crisis. The fund lost NOK 633 billion4 in 2008, but a 
market reversal in 2009 has resulted in a positive return of NOK 716 billion over the past five 
quarters.  So  far,  the  fund  seems  to  have  fared  relatively  well  through  the  most  severe 
financial crisis for many decades.  
We  still  consider  a  real  return  of  4  per  cent  as  realistic  over  time.  This  is  based  on  the 
assumption  that  investment  in  sound  government  securities  in  the  market  can  provide  a 
reliable real return of about 2½ per cent. At the same time, the fund can reap a return of 2 to 
2½ per cent in the long term from the three-fifths equity portion, some gains on corporate 
bonds and returns from active management. 
See chart “Real exchange rate against Norway’s trading partners” at the end of the speech. 
Substantial  oil  revenues  are  now  being  ploughed  into  the  Norwegian  economy.  Since  the 
turn  of  the  millennium,  annual  petroleum  revenue  spending  has  increased  by  a  good 
NOK 100  billion.  According  to  uncertain  forecasts  in  government  documents5,  another 
NOK 40 billion or so will be phased in over the next ten years. 
The cost level in Norway is a thermometer indicating how much the Norwegian economy can 
sustain without developing a serious case of Dutch disease. The temperature is now high. 
                                                 
4   Measured in international currency at the exchange rate prevailing on 31 December 2008. 
5   See Table 3.6 in Report No. 2 (2009–2010) to the Storting: Revised National Budget 2010. 
BIS Review 78/2010 
 3
Measured against Norway’s trading partners, the cost level is now almost 20 per cent higher 
than  the  average  for  the  oil  age.  Norwegian  labour  has  never  been  as  costly  as  today. 
Norwegian businesses will often lose contracts given the current high level of spare capacity 
in other countries. And it has never been more profitable to relocate activities abroad.  
The economic geography of Norway will change over the next 10–15 years. Norway’s cost 
level  and  low  growth  in  Europe  will  bring  pressure  to  bear  on  jobs  and  businesses  in 
manufacturing  communities.  Job  losses  will  have  the  most  severe  effects  in  areas  where 
manufacturing is the most important industry. Entire manufacturing sectors may be lost. 
We can also ask whether investment in Norway could be an alternative to our investments in 
international financial markets. It is important to emphasise that the oil fund does not stand in 
the way of corporate investment. The government can choose the composition, required rate 
of return and risk profile for its investments without considering the funding requirements of 
Norwegian enterprises. By the same token, Norwegian companies can choose their debt and 
equity structure independently of the government’s financial investments. There is a capital 
market between the government as investor and corporate capital needs. The government’s 
foreign  savings  plans  do  not  therefore  affect  Norwegian  companies’  access  to  capital  and 
required rate of return on their investments. 
There are sound arguments for investing in infrastructure, better schools and state-of-the-art 
research.  But  this  should  be  possible  anyway  given  the  increase  in  expenditure  that  is 
provided for by the fiscal rule.  
The profitability of government investments is based on a discount rate of 4 per cent. This 
secures about the same required rate of return as the government can expect to achieve on 
its  oil  fund  investments  over  time.6  A  question  that  might  be  raised  is  whether  there  is  a 
queue  of  sound  and  profitable  projects  that  have  to  wait  because  of  an  excessively  tight 
fiscal policy.  
It is difficult to find support for this.7 
In  the  National  Transport  Plan  for  2010–2019,  which  can  perhaps  be  considered 
representative  of  government  spending,  spending  on  road  investments  is  set  at  around 
NOK 140 billion. The profitability of about two-thirds of the investments has been evaluated. 
The  calculations  capture  time  saved  and  reduced  costs  related  to  accidents  and  the 
environment. Investment costs and future operating costs are deducted. The projects show a 
total loss of NOK 20 billion.  
There seems to be few road projects that are economically profitable. A rare example is the 
Finnfast  tunnel  project  that  connects  the  mainland  to  the  beautiful  island  group  here  in 
Ryfylke.  
When  projects  cannot  be  expected  to  increase  the  future  revenue  base  in  society,  it  is 
important  that  the  investments  are  financed  from  current  government  revenues  within  a  
long-term and sustainable framework. Alternatively, projects that involve a large number of 
users can be financed by user fees. A road, infrastructure or research reports for that matter 
can provide benefits and satisfaction over time, but they are not liquid and do not generate a 
flow of returns that can be used for spending. If the investments are made at the expense of 
the savings plan for the sovereign wealth fund, future generations will have to bear the cost. 
                                                 
6   Professor Thore Johnsen has brought to my attention that the government discount rate is calculated 
using an arithmetic mean, while the return on the oil fund is measured as a geometric mean. If the fund’s 
return  had  been  calculated  using  arithmetic  mean,  the  return  would  have  been  about  0.7  percentage 
point higher for the period 1998–2009. 
7   Recent research indicates that a discount rate of 4 per cent may be somewhat high for investments with 
a  very  long  horizon,  see  Kåre  P.  Hagen  and  Karl  R.  Pedersen’s  newspaper  article  “Lønnsom 
infrastruktur (Profitable infrastructure)” in Dagens Næringsliv, 3 June 2010. 
4 
 BIS Review 78/2010
Let me conclude. 
The  adventures  of  Askeladden  are  often  tales  of  success.  Askeladden  embraces  every 
challenge and always comes out ahead.  
It is too early to draw conclusions as to how successful Norway has been in managing its oil 
wealth. In ten years or so, when petroleum production falls markedly and the oil fund is no 
longer increasing in size, the cost level in Norway will have to be reduced relative to other 
countries.  This  process  may  be  painful,  even  though  Norway  has  its  own  currency  and  a 
floating  exchange  rate.  Our  welfare  state  may  also  have  become  too  large  and  the 
adjustment required here may also prove to be very demanding. 
Nonetheless, there are aspects of our oil wealth management that have served us well. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
 
 
 BIS Review 78/2010 
  5
  6 
   BIS Review 78/2010
 BIS Review 78/2010 
   7
