Petar Goshev: Alleviating the negative effects of the financial crisis 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Petar  Goshev,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Macedonia, at the World Bank event, Skopje, 15 March 2010. 
 Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, 
It is my honor to give a welcome address at this important World Bank event that it is taking 
place at a critical transitional stage when it seems that the strongest impact of the severest 
crisis since the Great Depression is behind us and the global economy is beginning to grow 
again.  Still,  although  we  believe  the  worst  is  behind  us,  the  global  crisis  has  had  strong 
negative effects that will continue to be felt in the years to come. Because of that, the efforts 
of  the  national  authorities  and  international  financial  institutions  for  mitigating  the  negative 
effects  have  to  continue.  In  this  regard,  the  enhanced  role  of  the  international  financial 
institutions, including the World Bank, is vital. 
The  economic,  social  and  human  implications  of  the  global  crisis  have  further 
emphasized the World Bank’s mission of eliminating poverty, enhancing growth and 
providing  inclusive  and  sustainable  development.  Achieving  Millennium  Development 
Goals (MDGs), as a set of priorities for the World Bank, is becoming more challenging. As 
stated  in  the  World  Bank  Annual  Report  2009  “targets  that  it  would  have  been  difficult  to 
reach even before the crisis are now considered implausible, and a real risks exists that the 
financial and economic crisis that begun in United States may develop into a humanitarian, 
political, and security catastrophe in the world’s most vulnerable regions.” 
The ECA Region was the hardest hit region by the global crisis. The decline of external 
demand, unfavorable terms of trade, decline in capital flows, as well as spillover effects to 
the domestic demand resulted in a fall of region’s GDP in 2009 of about 6%. With the real 
sector of the economy contracting and financial flows being constrained, unemployment and 
poverty  have  risen.  Although  all  countries  in  the  region  faced  with  challenges  during  this 
turbulent time, still the crisis has had a disproportionate impact on the vulnerable in the less 
developed countries calling for bigger assistance to mitigate social impact.  
The  World  Banks’  assistance  was  of  a  paramount  importance  in  the  past  and  will 
continue to be. It is not only about the financial support, but the support and guidance 
in  implementing  structural  reforms.  The  mix  of  the  World  Bank  programs  aimed  at 
creating  broader  based  growth,  efficient  public  sector  and  social  protection,  has  yielded  in 
decrease of the poor or vulnerable population in the region (18% of the total population has 
exited this group, since 1999).1 The region has grown quite rapidly, reaping the benefits of 
increased  productivity,  to  a  large  extent  being  explained  by  the  restructuring  of  the 
enterprises, technological improvements, enhanced infrastructure and investments in human 
resources. The cross regional comparison indicates that the ECA region is a leader in terms 
of the GNI per capita. What is even more important is the sharp growth of the GNI per capita 
from  6.265  current  international  $  in  2000  to  12.229  current  international  $  in  2008,  thus 
giving the region a feature of a leader in improving living standards. 
However, the region is quite a diverse with GNI per capita ranging from 1860 current 
international $ in Tajikistan to 18420 current international $ in Croatia. This points to the 
fact  that  there  are  big  disparities  that  need  to  be  tackled  to  speed  up  the  process  of 
convergence  which  will  mean  less  political  and  social  tensions,  less  poor  and  homeless 
people,  and  less  desperate  migrations  conducive  to  expression  to  different  sorts  of 
                                                 
1   The World Bank Annual Report, 2009. 
BIS Review 32/2010 
 1
prejudices and frustrations. For many subregions the role of the World Bank is of a crucial 
importance, in particular for the Western Balkan, which is heavily lagging behind the leading 
countries in the region, faced with the problems of undeveloped infrastructure, poor health 
care  systems,  high  unemployment  and  socially  desperate  people,  i.e.,  faced  with  different 
forms of dehumanization of the living standards, including problems of climate change. Some 
parts  of  the  subregion  sometimes  have  problems  with  floods,  but  in  many  parts  there  is 
permanent lack of even drinking water.  
Macedonia’s track record within the relations with the World Bank, can be assessed as 
quite  successful.  The  World  Bank  has  been  one  of  the  most  important  partners  in  the 
process of designing and implementing important structural reforms. The strong focus of the 
World Bank programs on the financial and the enterprise sectors, public administration, and 
business  environment,  has  proved  to  be  an  important  trigger  and  contributor  to  the 
productivity gains and real convergence of the economy.  
Personally,  I  am  deeply  grateful  to  the  World  Bank  and  the  IMF  for  the  contribution 
they  have  made  in  overcoming  our  existential  problems.  It  is  my  personal  opinion, 
however, that our need for the cooperation with and support of the World Bank is more than 
necessary. We have made some progress, but we have also encountered a lot of problems. 
The global crisis emphasized a number of structural issues that are bottleneck for the growth 
of the Macedonian economy. A comparative analysis shows that Macedonia has pretty low 
level  of  investments  (on  average  about  15%  of  GDP  during  1997–2007).  Thus,  further 
support  which  will  lead  to  higher  investments  and  higher  stock  of  capital  will  play  an 
important role for the long-term growth. We substantially lag behind those we want to keep 
up with. The unemployment rate is still staggering (32.4%). Income per capita is only half of 
the highest GNI in the group, or only 33% of the average GDP per capita (PPP terms) of the 
27  EU  countries.  We  have  a  strong  need  of  funds  and  permanent  technical  assistance  in 
order to continue with and accelerate our structural reforms. The Greek example is a newest 
lesson. European and other funds, without all the painful and grave structural reforms, could 
not  protect  the  country  from  facing  the  present  crisis.  However,  it  seems  that,  without 
structural reforms, they just boost the illusion.  
The recent crisis has highlighted the need for the international financial institutions to 
have  adequate  level  of  resources  and  flexible,  innovative  and  swift  technical 
infrastructure.  It  is  a  prerequisite  for  a  well  targeted,  timely,  coordinated  and  efficient 
response to global shocks. The strong increase of IBRD disbursements, policy based lending 
and  advisory  services  in  2009,  the  dominance  of  social  protections  programs,  on  the 
background  of  the  social  implications  of  the  crisis,  pinpoint  the  rapid  and  well  targeted 
adjustments in the lending policy and expertise provided by the World Bank. The share of the 
World  Bank  financial  support  to  the  region  in  the  total  WB  financing  in  2009  rose  to  20% 
(compared to the average of 16% for the previous three years). Significant weight was put on 
the  enhanced  social  protection,  regulation  adjustment  for  the  purpose  of  trade  promotion, 
financial sector reforms and improved governance. 
Dear guests, 
Let me once more repeat that looking forward, the role of the World Bank becomes 
even  more  pronounced.  Unprecedented  policy  support  has  yielded  in  tangible  results 
reflected  in  improved  global  financial  conditions  and  improved  economic  prospects. 
However, financial conditions are far from normal and growth prospects are highly uncertain 
and dependent on a policy support. The fiscal room has substantially narrowed and access 
to private financing is uncertain amidst high budget deficits and rising public debt.   
To  be  able  to  respond  to  the  demand  for  its  services  a  capital  increase  and 
reconsidering priorities in the region seems inevitable. Although current situation calls 
for immediate assistance to protect poor and vulnerable people from the hardship they are 
faced with, the support in implementing structural reforms is of a vital importance. Structural 
reforms should not stall as they are crucial for paving a way for long-term sustainable growth 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2010
and higher living standards, which is one of the main missions of the World Bank. Financial 
and  technical  assistance  by  the  World  Bank  will  play  a  key  role  in  this  process.  Rising 
unemployment and growth in poverty asks for more “aggressive” role when it comes to social 
issues.  But,  also  supporting  reforms  aimed  at  improving  competitiveness,  as  well  as 
addressing  the  issue  of  “climate  change”  should  be  priority  on  the  agenda.  Given  the 
diversity of ECA region, assistance tailored to the specifics of the different groups within the 
region, remains important.   
It is my personal opinion that the World Bank should increase its contribution to the 
accomplishment of global financial stability. It is rare to find another institution with such 
an  experience.  Preservation  of  global  financial  stability  proved  to  be  an  issue  of  utmost 
importance  to  both  the  growth  and  the  fight  against  poverty.  Basel  II  has  been  definitively 
transforming into Basel III. There is a lot of work to be done to promote the micro-prudent 
and  the  macro-prudent  frameworks.  World  Bank’s  contribution  through  its  participation  in 
FSB and other international bodies and its cooperation with countries which use its financial 
and technical assistance is indispensable.  
I  will  finish  my  address  with  quoting  the  leaders  of  the  Group  of  Twenty  from  the 
meeting in London, 2009: “We start from the belief that prosperity is indivisible; that 
growth to be sustained, has to be shared; and that our global plan for recovery must 
have at its heart the needs and jobs of hard-working families, not just in developed 
countries  but  in  emerging  markets  and  the  poorest  countries  of  the  world,  too;  and 
must reflect the interest not just of today’s population, but of future generations, too.” 
Thank  you  for  your  attention  and  I  wish  you  a  fruitful  discussion  and  a  pleasant  stay  in 
Skopje. 
BIS Review 32/2010 
 3
