William C Dudley: Financial conditions indexes – a new look after the 
financial crisis 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the annual US Monetary Policy Forum, University of Chicago 
Booth School of Business, New York, 26 February 2010. 
 Thank you for having me to speak as a panelist today. As always my views are my own and 
do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  or  the 
Federal Reserve System.  
I am glad that Narayana Kocherlakota is here as well as I don’t think I qualify as the most 
“objective”  person  to  be  a  panelist  on  this  particular  topic.  After  all,  I  have  long  been  a 
proponent of using a financial conditions framework to think about the economic outlook and 
monetary  policy.  When  I  was  working  as  the  chief  U.S.  economist  at  Goldman  Sachs,  we 
built one of the earliest financial conditions indexes, the Goldman Sachs Financial Conditions 
Index (GSFCI). 
I  am  going  to  divide  my  remarks  today  into  two  parts.  First,  I  will  discuss  why  a  financial 
conditions  framework  is  useful  when  thinking  about  the  economic  outlook  and  monetary 
policy. Second, I will discuss the paper, “Financial Conditions Indexes: A New Look after the 
Financial Crisis,” by Jan Hatzius, Peter Hooper, Frederic Mishkin, Kermit L. Schoenholtz and 
Mark  W.  Watson,  in  some  detail  –  evaluating  its  considerable  strengths  and  pointing  out 
some areas where additional work would be useful. 
There  are  a  number  of  reasons  that  a  financial  conditions framework  is  likely  to  be  useful 
when evaluating the economic outlook and the conduct of monetary policy. Most important, 
monetary policy works its magic through its effect on financial conditions; it does not operate 
directly  on  real  economic  variables.  That  is  because  the  level  of  the  federal  funds  rate 
influences other financial market variables such as money  market rates, long-term interest 
rates, credit spreads, stock prices and the value of the dollar, and it is these variables that 
influence real economic activity.1 This means that if the linkage between the fed funds rate 
and this broader constellation of financial indicators is not stable or completely predictable, 
then knowing what is happening to the fed funds rate is not sufficient to predict economic 
activity.  The  instability  of  the  linkage  between  the  fed  funds  rate  and  financial  conditions 
indicators means that these indicators provide additional information about real activity and 
also  are  relevant  in  deciding  the  appropriate  fed  funds  rate  target.  In  contrast,  if  the 
transmission mechanism from the fed funds rate to financial conditions and onward to real 
economic  activity  were  completely  predictable,  then  there  would  be  no  need  to  focus  on 
financial conditions as an intermediate target variable. The level and path of the fed funds 
rate matters, but it also matters how this gets transmitted to the real economy through the 
financial sector. 
Over the past 15 years, there have been two important instances in which the relationship 
between the fed funds rate and financial conditions have diverged significantly. The first was 
the late 1990s technology stock market bubble and its aftermath. The second was the mid-
2000s  credit  market  bubble  that  culminated  in  the  recent  financial  crisis.  During  these 
episodes,  the  relationship  between  the  fed  funds  rate  and  financial  conditions  was 
particularly  unstable.  As  a  result,  developments  in  the  financial  markets  became  very 
important in the conduct of monetary policy. 
                                                 
1  
In my comments, I am going to assume that inflation expectations are always well anchored so that I do not 
need to distinguish between the real and nominal fed funds rate. 
BIS Review 23/2010 
 1
In this respect, I would note that financial conditions indicators have implications for “Taylor 
Rule” formulations for monetary policy. As you all know, Taylor-type rules provide a short-
hand metric for the appropriate stance of monetary policy. In such rules, the fed funds rate is 
set at a level equal to the equilibrium real fed funds rate, plus the inflation objective, plus the 
weighted deviation of output from its potential and of the inflation objective from actual or, if 
forward  looking,  expected  inflation.  Often,  analysts  and  economists  assume  that  the 
equilibrium real fed funds rate is equal to 2 percent, its long-term historical value. Although, 
in principle, such rules allow the equilibrium rate to be time varying, it typically is assumed to 
be constant. 
I  have  always  been  uncomfortable  with  this  usage  of  a  2  percent  equilibrium  real  rate 
assumption because it ignores the possibility that the equilibrium rate changes in response to 
technology shocks or in response to changes in how monetary policy is transmitted via the 
financial system to the real economy. For example, in the late 1990s, when trend productivity 
growth shifted upward, it seemed logical that this would also push up the equilibrium short-
term real interest rate. That is because higher productivity growth, by raising the return on 
capital,  spurs  greater  investment,  thereby  driving  the  equilibrium  rate  higher.  Similarly,  if 
stock prices rose sharply in response to higher productivity growth, this should also lead to a 
higher equilibrium real rate through the effect of greater stock market wealth on consumer 
spending. Higher stock prices meant that financial conditions were easier. This needed to be 
offset by a somewhat higher fed funds rate target. 
Financial conditions also appear to have become more important in terms of their influence 
on business cycles. On the one hand, the fed funds rate has been more stable and the range 
of the fed funds rate over the cycle has been smaller. However, on the other hand, relative to 
what  has  happened  to  the  fed  funds  rate  target,  financial  conditions  have  become  more 
volatile. The hypothesis that Ed McKelvey and I put forward in 1997 in response to evidence 
of the so-called “Great Moderation” seems to be well supported by the past two economic 
downturns and their aftermaths: 
Put  simply,  longer  stretches  of  economic  growth  imply  greater  leverage  and  complacency 
and thus, greater financial problems when recessions do occur. In brief, longer U.S. business 
cycles logically lead to four linked consequences – more financial leverage, longer bouts of 
balance sheet repair, more subdued recoveries and longer periods of decline in inflation and 
interest rates during the early stages of recovery.2 
If the economy is more stable, then market participants will have more appetite for risk. This 
works  fine during  the  expansion  stage,  when  growth  is  relatively  stable.  However,  when  a 
recession finally arrives, it is a bigger shock than when recessions were more frequent. This 
surprise  results  in  a  more  substantial  adjustment  in  financial  conditions.  Ironically,  the 
increased stability of the business cycle during the expansion phase appears to increase the 
volatility and importance of financial conditions when recessions do occur. 
At  this  stage,  incorporating  indicators  of  financial  conditions  into  forecasting  and  into 
evaluating the conduct of monetary policy probably requires relying on constructing a “rough 
and  ready”  index.  Macroeconomic  models  –  especially  dynamic  stochastic  general 
equilibrium models – do not incorporate robust financial sectors. Instead, these models have 
implicitly  assumed 
financial 
intermediation process always works smoothly and predictably.3 
transmission  mechanism  and 
the  monetary 
that 
the 
                                                 
2   See The Brave New Business Cycle: No Recession in Sight, William Dudley and Edward McKelvey, January 
1997, Goldman Sachs Economic Research Group. 
3   Adding financial intermediation to these models has become a very active area of research. See, for example, 
the  recent  work  of  Vasco  Curdia  and  Michael  Woodford  in  “Credit  Spreads  and  Monetary  Policy,”  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 385. 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2010
Events of the past decade confirm that financial conditions matter and that the fed funds rate 
is  not  a  sufficient  statistic  with  which  to  assess  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  on  the  real 
economy.  Of  course,  this  is  not  news  to  the  Federal  Reserve,  which  has  explicitly  taken 
financial  conditions  into  account  in  its  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  This  is  evident  in  the 
transcripts of the FOMC meetings that are publicly available and the numerous references to 
financial conditions in the FOMC minutes that go back more than a decade. 
An analysis of the FOMC minutes over the past decade indicates that references to financial 
conditions  have  been  frequent,  especially  recently.  Exhibit  1  illustrates  the  percentage  of 
paragraphs  in  the  minutes  (excluding  the  directive  and  some  other  paragraphs  associated 
with  administrative  matters  such  as  the  election  of  the  chairman)  that  mention  the  phrase 
“financial  conditions.”  As  can  be  seen,  there  have  been  frequent  references  over  the  past 
decade. One peak occurred in 2000 when the stock market peaked and began to deflate. 
Thereafter,  references  fell  off  a  bit  until  rising  sharply  again  recently.  Clearly,  the  recent 
financial crisis has underscored the importance of financial conditions. 
Today’s  paper  makes  clear  the  importance  of  financial  conditions.  The  paper’s  analysis  of 
the  many  financial  conditions  indexes  that  have  been  constructed  as  proxies  for  overall 
financial conditions finds that many of these indexes have done better than the fed funds rate 
or other single-variable financial indicators as predictors of real economic activity. 
However, as the paper also makes very clear, the indexes that have been developed are still 
very rudimentary. In particular, most financial conditions indexes are ad hoc and incomplete. 
In  their  review  of  the  existing  financial  condition  indexes,  the  authors  find  considerable 
differences  across  the  indexes  in  the  way  that  they  are  constructed  and  in  terms  of  the 
variables included. 
In  addition,  there  is  another  difficulty.  As  the  financial  system  changes  over  time,  both  in 
terms  of  structure  and  in  terms  of  financial  products,  the  financial  variables  that  we  might 
determine to be important are also changing. For example, in the wake of the recent financial 
crisis, the variables that the paper’s authors call “neoclassical” – such as the yield curve and 
stock market prices – appear to have become less important relative to the variables that the 
authors term “non-neoclassical” – such as quantity and survey measures of credit availability. 
Variables  that  would  work  best  10  years  ago  as  forecasting  tools  may  no  longer  be  very 
useful. As the structure of the financial system changes, the identity of variables that capture 
financial conditions naturally changes. 
Let me now discuss the paper in more detail. I will do this in two steps. First, I will discuss the 
considerable contributions of the paper. Second, I will talk about where the paper might be 
extended and other areas of future research that might seem appropriate. 
In general, I liked the paper. I think it makes some important contributions in how to construct 
a  more  complete  and  robust  financial  conditions  index.  In  particular,  I  thought  the  paper 
makes two important points: 
 
Financial conditions should measure financial innovations, not changes in financial 
variables  that  are  due  to  past  changes  in  economic  activity.  The  endogenous 
components  of  financial  conditions  should  be  removed  in  the  construction  of  a 
financial conditions index.  
Both  neoclassical  (yield  curve  and  stock  prices)  and  non-neoclassical  (credit 
availability) variables should be included. The GSFCI that I helped to develop only 
included neoclassical indictors and I think that was (and is) a shortcoming. 
 The  authors  deserve  considerable credit  for  constructing  a  financial  conditions index  (FCI) 
that  is  more  rigorous  and  complete  than  any  that  have  been  developed  in  the  past  – 
44 financial variables divided across five categories. Moreover, this is not just innovation for 
its  own  sake.  The  new  FCI  does  a  better  job  than  single-factor  models  in  forecasting  real 
gross domestic product (GDP). 
BIS Review 23/2010 
 3
So what are the shortcomings of this approach? First, including 44 variables may generate 
good  results  more  because  the  additional  variables  add  greater  flexibility  to  soak  up 
variability  in  real  GDP,  rather  than  providing  a  more  solid  theoretical  underpinning.  As  the 
authors note, the variables were selected, in part, on the basis of what we know today about 
which  variables  are  likely  to  be  important.  But  this  type  of  selection  process  –  even  if 
conducted  on  a  pseudo  real-time  basis  –  introduces  selection  bias,  which  the  authors  do 
admit could be important. 
Second, despite the inclusion of a large number of variables, some important ones may still 
be  missing.  In  particular,  leverage  variables  –  such  as  the  leverage  ratio  of  the  major 
securities  dealers  –  may  be  an  important  component  of  financial  conditions.  The  work  of 
Tobias Adrian and Hyun Shin suggests that the increase in leverage of the major securities 
was a major factor that fueled the asset bubble preceding the recent crisis. If this was indeed 
the  case  as  seems  likely,  this  type  of  variable  should  also  be  included  in  a  financial 
conditions framework.4 
Third, as the authors note, the resulting FCI is complex; it is difficult to estimate, update and 
to  communicate  what  the  results  mean.  I  think  FCIs  have  value  as  heuristic  devices  in 
highlighting what is important. One loses that benefit when the number of variables becomes 
large and the indexes become complex. 
Fourth, it would be interesting to know how financial conditions indexes for other countries 
and regions would differ. The authors focus only on the United States. Thus, it is difficult to 
know whether the value of financial conditions indexes are specific to the United States or 
should be applied more broadly. 
Fifth, I thought the paper could have gone further in exploring the implications of its results. 
The focus of the paper is on how to construct a financial conditions index that does a good 
job of forecasting economic activity. The paper does not tackle the implications for monetary 
policy stemming from developments in financial conditions as measured by the new FCI. If 
financial conditions evolve in an unanticipated way, how should this influence the conduct of 
monetary policy? 
In particular, the authors note that during the 2003–06 period, financial conditions tightened 
less  than  expected  given  the  rise  in  the  fed  funds  rate  and,  during  the  2007–08  period 
tightened even as the Federal Reserve slashed its fed funds rate target. These results raise 
a number of interesting questions. In particular, does the behavior of the new FCI imply that 
the Federal Reserve should have tightened more aggressively during the 2003–06 period or 
eased more aggressively during the 2007–09 period? The paper’s results seem to imply this, 
but it would be interesting to see whether this is the case or not. 
It  also  would  be  useful  to  know  how  qualitatively  important  these  differences  are.  If  the 
differences  are  worth  only  a  few  basis  points  on  the  fed  funds  rate,  then  having  a  good 
indicator of financial conditions is not going to be a very important input in the formulation of 
monetary policy. In contrast, if a shift in financial conditions implies that the fed funds rate 
path  was  “off”  by  a  hundred  basis  points  relative  to  what  actually  occurred,  then  this 
obviously has big implications for monetary policy. The development of equilibrium models 
that incorporate financial conditions in a meaningful manner might prove helpful in answering 
these types of questions.5 
In  addition,  I  would  like  to  know  how  the  various  linkages  have  changed  over  time.  Is  the 
linkage  between  the  fed  funds  rate  and  financial  conditions  as  measured  by  the  new  FCI 
                                                 
4   See, for example, Tobias Adrian and Hyun Shin, manuscript in preparation for the forthcoming Handbook of 
Monetary  Economics,  volume  3,  currently  circulated  as  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Staff  Reports, 
No. 398, October 2009. 
5   The work of Vasco Curdia and Michael Woodford referenced above is one step in this direction. 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2010
loosening  over  time  or  not?  If  so,  why  is  this  happening?  Is  it  due  to  financial  market 
innovation or the growth in share of the non-bank financial sector? I also would like to know 
how the linkage between financial conditions and the real economy is changing over time. If 
this  is  happening,  what  are  the  implications  for  macroeconomic  stability  and  monetary 
policy? 
Finally, I would like to know about the dynamic properties of the new FCI. Are particularly 
high  (expansive)  readings  dangerous  and  should  they  be  taken  as  suggestive  of  asset 
bubbles?  Should  the  Federal  Reserve  try  to  prevent  such  occurrences  because  loose 
financial conditions precede episodes of financial instability? In this respect, when financial 
conditions become unusually expansive, is the fed funds rate the right tool to use to constrain 
or counteract such expansiveness? Or would it be better to use macroprudential tools such 
as leverage limits or loan-to-value requirements on residential real estate to keep financial 
conditions  from  becoming  unusually  expansive  in  the  first  place?  I  could  imagine 
circumstances  in  which  macroprudential  tools  might  be  used  to  tighten  up  the  relationship 
between the fed funds rate and financial conditions. Would the use of such tools be helpful in 
achieving greater macroeconomic stability? 
At this stage, there are many more questions than answers. I would strongly encourage the 
authors  and  others  to  continue  their  work  on  financial  conditions  and  in  exploring  how 
developments in the financial sector influence both the real economy and monetary policy. 
The financial crisis has demonstrated that financial market developments matter greatly. The 
paper successfully makes the case that it would be useful to have a good set of summary 
statistics to serve as benchmarks to keep track of such developments. It also would be useful 
to have a better understanding of how shifts in financial conditions should be considered in 
the ongoing conduct of monetary policy. 
Exhibit 1 
The  percentage  of  paragraphs  in  the  FOMC  minutes  that  mention  the  phrase  “financial 
conditions,”  excluding  the  directive  and  paragraphs  associated  with  administrative  matters 
such as election of the chairman. 
 BIS Review 23/2010 
 5
