Kate Barker: Monetary policy – from stability to financial crisis and 
back? 
Speech by Ms Kate Barker, Member of the Monetary Policy Committee, Bank of England, at 
the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, London, 8 March 2010. 
 I would like to thank Matthew Corder and Jake Horwood for research assistance and I am also grateful for helpful 
comments from other colleagues. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the 
Bank of England or other members of the Monetary Policy Committee.  
It is a particular pleasure for me to have the opportunity to return to NIESR, where I worked 
in the early 1980s in the aftermath of a previous recession, to talk in my present role as a 
policy-maker. At that time, one of my responsibilities was to monitor and project world trade – 
I  am  very  thankful  that  I  didn’t  have  to  deal  with  the  analysis  of  a  fall  in  trade  of  the 
magnitude seen in this recession, when world trade1 fell by a cumulative 18% over the fourth 
quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009, before starting to recover – up 11% on the low 
point by the end of 2009.  
Today I want to pursue a number of monetary policy issues, looking back over the almost 
nine years I have been on the MPC and seeking to draw lessons from that experience for the 
very difficult decisions that seem likely to face the Committee over the next couple of years. 
In particular, I will make some observations about the problems that policymakers inevitably 
face in assessing the implications for inflation of the pressure of demand on the economy’s 
supply capacity, and also about the time horizon over which the MPC seeks to bring inflation 
back to target. A more general theme of this discussion reflects on whether the approach to 
policy should be somewhat different in the more uncertain economic environment we face 
today, compared with the relatively tranquil period of the MPC’s first ten years.  
The pre-crisis period 
Given the scale of the recent financial crisis and consequent recession, it is not possible to 
look back over my lengthy period as a policymaker with the degree of satisfaction I would 
have wished. The big question it seems natural to ask is: to what extent did the conduct of 
monetary policy contribute to that crisis? Here the real issue must be about the role of policy 
in the period prior to the summer of 2007. Once the financial crisis was underway, I remain 
doubtful that monetary policy could have done very much more to alleviate the depth of the 
recession. Despite the speed with which Bank Rate was cut to 0.5% in late 2008 and early 
2009, and the rapid move to quantitative easing, the economy is still looking fragile. 
During  the  pre-crisis  period,  MPC  members  recognised  in  a  number  of  speeches  the 
possibility  that  the  upward  trends  in  property  prices  and  in  the  growth  of  credit  were 
increasing  the  risk  of  a  period  of  economic  instability.  For  example,  as  long  ago  as  2003, 
Charlie Bean suggested: “Action taken today to reduce the build-up of imbalances might pay 
off  in  the  longer  term  by  reducing  the  future  uncertainty  that  the  policymaker  will  face  as 
imbalances  unwind.”2  At  around  the  same  time  I  commented,  with  reference  to  the  rising 
household debt/income  ratio,  that  this  “...may  have  increased  the  risk  from  policy  error,  or 
from an adverse shock to the household sector.”3 And Andrew Large argued: “the key issue 
                                                 
1   World trade monitor, source: Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis. 
2   Bean (2003). 
3   Barker (2003). 
BIS Review 27/2010 
 1
for  monetary  policy  is  that  the  more  capital  gearing  or  leverage  increases,  the  greater  the 
vulnerability to shocks and the consequent adjustment to consumption behaviour.”4 
One conclusion might be that the depth of the present crisis might have been mitigated if the 
MPC had taken the view that, in those circumstances, it was preferable to miss the inflation 
target on the downside in the short-term. Some former members of the MPC have certainly 
argued more recently5 that it would have been preferable to have “leant against the wind” of 
credit growth by having had higher interest rates during the mid-2000s. But on the whole, I 
continue to think that there are a number of problems with this proposal. 
Firstly, it is unclear how much higher UK interest rates would have needed to be to have kept 
the expansion of credit and debt to an acceptable level (not least as there is considerable 
uncertainty  about  what  that  level  might  be).  It  seems  likely  that  interest  rates  might  have 
needed  to  be  substantially  higher,  in  real  terms,  to  have  had  any  noticeable  effect.  In  this 
case, CPI inflation could well have seen an extended period below target. (The CPI was in 
any case below target for the first 18 months after the change to CPI from RPIX as the key 
inflation measure.) There would in these circumstances have been a risk of a damaging loss 
of  credibility  in  the  inflation  targeting  regime  –  although  it  would  clearly  have  had  to  be 
weighed against the (as yet uncertain) costs of the subsequent crisis. 
Secondly, and more significantly, it is not clear that this policy would have tackled effectively 
the major problem of banks’ misjudgement of risks and expansion of financial sector balance 
sheets. At the margin, it might have led to a little more caution among financial institutions, 
but  unless  policymakers  had  been  prepared  to  shock  the  economy  into  a  period  of  slow 
growth it seems unlikely that the financial crisis would have been wholly averted. However, 
modestly higher Bank Rate might have had the merit of discouraging households and firms 
from  increasing  their  own  debt  levels,  and  therefore  left  the  economy  somewhat  more 
resilient in the face of the crisis. 
Thirdly,  action  only  in  the  UK  might  have  had  limited  effect  on  what  has  proved  to  be  an 
internationally  widespread  crisis  whose  roots  lie  to  a  significant  extent  in  the  excess  of 
savings in Asian countries and consequent excess of capital inflows into the US and Europe. 
The conventional answer to the question about the pre-crisis period therefore has become 
that policymakers did not have the right tools available. In the UK there was no provision for 
macroprudential instruments to be used to deal directly with the problems building up within 
financial institutions, and to a lesser extent in the indebtedness of households and firms. A 
more  targeted  approach  to  these  issues  seems  highly  preferable  to  using  the  blunt 
instrument of Bank Rate. But despite these cautions, it is possible that it would have been 
preferable  to  have  taken  a  more  long-term  view  of  the  risks  to  inflation  from  economic 
instability.  Certainly  I  seriously  underestimated  the  scale  of  the  downside  risks  from  a 
potential financial crisis, and that implied overrating the ability of monetary policy to offset this 
shock.  I  will  return  later  to  the  question  of  how  a  more  long-term  perspective  might 
sometimes alter the desirable approach to policy. Before that, I want to discuss some issues 
around the MPC’s inflation projections and how we assess uncertainty. 
The balance of demand and supply 
The MPC’s projections for inflation, absent external shocks, are determined to a significant 
extent by our judgements about inflation expectations and about the likely developments in 
the pressure of demand on supply (this phrase is a better description than the more usual 
“output gap” – however I will now use the latter as a convenient shorthand). During my stint 
                                                 
4   Large (2005). 
5   Gieve (2009). 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2010
on the MPC, the way in which we have chosen to assess the output gap, as reflected in the 
assumptions underlying our main macro-model, has changed on a number of occasions. Of 
course,  one  model  has  never  been  the  sole  guide  to  our  projections  –  a  number  of  other 
models are also drawn on as appropriate. And the final shape of the fan charts published in 
the  Inflation  Report  is  the  product  of  the  MPC’s  judgement  including  on  the  insights  from 
these models.  
When I joined in 2001, the output gap concept which underlay the MPC’s judgements was a 
short-run estimate of the difference between the present level of output and full capacity (full 
capacity  was  defined  as  currently  employed  labour  and  capital  being  utilised  at  normal 
levels).  This  implied  that  there  was also  a  medium-term  output  gap  in which  capacity  was 
measured assuming employment was at its natural level.6 
During  2003,  the  MPC’s  thinking moved  on  to  estimate  potential  output  as  what  would  be 
produced at the natural rate of employment with normal levels of factor utilisation (average 
hours, labour productivity and capital utilisation all at trend).7 In 2004, some modification of 
this  concept  was  introduced  in  order  to  account  better  for  the  impact  of  the  government 
sector  during  a  period  of  rising  public  spending.  The  government  sector’s  impact  on 
aggregate demand is most appropriately assessed by considering the government’s demand 
for private sector output and the opportunity costs of employing labour in the government, 
rather than the market sector. During periods of rapidly rising public spending, this tended to 
increase estimates of the level of activity in the economy, and so reduce the level of spare 
capacity.8 
A  subsequent  judgement  was  made  in  2007,  to  use  the  NAIRU,  or  short-term  measure  of 
equilibrium  unemployment,  rather  than  the  longer-term  natural  rate  in  assessing  present 
capacity pressures. This reflected the intuition that the downward pressure on firms’ margins 
from higher oil or import prices would tend to result in downward pressure on real wages as 
firms sought to restore margins. The NAIRU captures the shift in unemployment required for 
workers to accept this real wage adjustment.  
These alterations in the main estimates of the output gap were pragmatic responses by the 
MPC  to  changes  taking  place  in  the  economy.  It  is  not  appropriate  to  ask  which  of  these 
proved in some sense “better” given that the different measures were reflecting the MPC’s 
judgements  about  different  economic  events.  In  any  case,  the  sequence  of  oil  price 
fluctuations  and  the  depreciation  of  sterling  in  2007–08  have  had  short-term  impacts  on 
inflation which have tended to make it more difficult to judge the trend underlying this greater 
volatility. 
However,  earlier  in  the  MPC’s  life  there  is  some  indication  that  the  committee  tended  to 
overestimate  inflationary  pressure.  Up  to  the  end  of  2003,  the  MPC  produced  fan  charts 
around  projections  for  RPIX  inflation.  During  this  period  of  relative  inflation  stability,  those 
projections were  broadly  clustered around  the outturns,  and  indeed  inflation  was  generally 
quite close to target. However, outturns of RPIX, excluding the (misleadingly-named) housing 
depreciation component of the index, would have tend to be below the projections (Chart 1 
shows the opening up of the gap between RPIX and RPI excluding housing costs). The MPC 
does  not  pretend  to  any  ability  to  project  house  prices,  although  there  are  some  broad 
assumptions underlying the central projection. These generally did not foresee the periods of 
strong house price increase in the first half of the 2000s. 
This  suggests  that  there  could  have  been  some  offsetting  error,  and  in  terms  of  the 
underlying  assumptions  used  by  the  MPC  one  candidate  is  a  frequent  overprediction  of 
                                                 
6   Bank of England (2000). 
7   Harrison et al (2005). 
8   Hills et al (2005) sets this issue out fully. 
BIS Review 27/2010 
 3
growth  in  earnings.  It  would  not  be  right  to  suggest  that  this  had  automatically  led  to  a 
systematic  overestimate  of  inflationary  pressure,  since,  as  explained  above,  the  published 
projections  are  also  based  on  overall  MPC  judgements.  But  it  is  notable  that  despite 
frequently-expressed concerns by the MPC about periods of higher inflation leading to higher 
wage inflation, the relationship between earnings growth and RPI has become weaker over 
time. Chart 2 does not suggest a consistent relationship. Indeed, since 1995 the correlation 
between  RPI  (lagged  by  one  quarter)  and  average  earnings  has  been  just  0.3,  compared 
with 0.8 over the 1977–95 period.  
These  comments  on  the  past,  however,  clearly  do  not  exhaust  the  range  of  potential 
uncertainties  about  the  size  and  interpretation  of  the  output  gap.  These  include  mis-
measurement  in  the  data,  incorrect  calibration  of  the  relationship  between  demand  and 
supply,  and  changes  in  the  implications  for  inflation  of  any  particular  estimate  of  excess 
capacity. How might these difficulties affect the outlook at the present time? There is some 
concern about mis-measurement of the level of demand in the economy. But compared to 
the past, changes in ONS methodology and improvements in the measurement of financial 
sector output in particular, should mean that the very large revisions to growth in the past, 
which prompted large revisions to views of inflationary pressure, now seem less likely.9 And, 
in  the  present  context  of  a  fall  in  output  of  6.2%  in  the  six  quarters  to  the  third  quarter  of 
2009, there seems little doubt that a sizeable output gap has opened up. Nevertheless, the 
MPC indicated in the last Inflation Report that we expect GDP data for 2009 to be revised up 
somewhat in due course, and that was taken account of in the forward projections.  
A second source of uncertainty stems from the specification of the output gap. The way in 
which  potential  output  is  estimated  in  BEQM  reflects  largely  shocks  to  supply  (the  capital 
stock and labour supply). However, arguably for judging inflation pressure after some shocks 
this is not necessarily the right approach.10 For example, a rise in commodity prices, or a fall 
in  the  exchange  rate,  may  have  a  long-run  impact  on  supply,  by  making  some  supply 
uneconomic and bringing about some capital scrapping. This is captured in our framework. In 
the  short  term,  the  increases  in  firms’  costs,  leads  to  both  a  fall  in  output  and  a  rise  in 
inflation pressure. This fall in output does not indicate a negative output gap. Indeed, if prices 
are slow to adjust fully, there might even be a positive output gap, on this basis, for a time.  
The degree to which this is important hinges on how flexible firms’ prices are. The Bank’s 
recent  survey  on  firms’  pricing  practices  indicated  that,  while  price  changes  have  become 
more  frequent  for  many  firms  over  the  past  decade,  for  some  sectors  and  smaller  firms  a 
substantial  minority  will  take  more  than  six  months  to  adjust  prices,  and  therefore  output, 
after a cost shock.11 This suggests that the downward effect on supply might have been quite 
strong  recently,  following  the  oil  price  increases  and  fall  in  the  exchange  rate.  It  is  very 
unlikely that this would be sufficient to alter the conclusion that presently the output gap is 
significantly negative, but it might affect interpretation of the effect of the output gap over the 
recent past, and judgements about how quickly the gap could be closed. 
And at the present conjuncture other considerations are also relevant. The key shock firms 
are facing is to the availability and cost of credit. Unlike a one-off shock to commodity prices, 
this will not have affected all firms at the same time, as the impact will be felt when a firm 
seeks to expand, or to replace investment. So the impact on supply capacity may build up 
over a longer period. This kind of effect was reflected in the MPC’s judgment in the February 
2010 Inflation Report that effective supply capacity might at the moment be reduced below 
                                                 
9   Nelson  and  Nikolov  (2005)  suggest  that  in  the  1980s  the  average  real-time  output  gap  measure  was  over 
5 percentage  points  below  the  average  final  measure,  of which  more  than  4  percentage  points  was  due  to 
revisions to the level of output. 
10   Discussed in detail in Neiss and Nelson (2005). 
11   Greenslade, J and Parker, M (2008). 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2010
the  estimate  which  would  result  from  simply  looking  at  trends  in  capital,  labour  and  total 
factor productivity.  
The  MPC  is  prompted  to  look  at  this  type  of  explanation  against  the  background  that  at 
present CPI inflation (adjusted for estimates of the impact of the VAT change and of higher 
oil prices) is rather higher than might have been expected given the sharp fall in output. But 
the possible explanations discussed above suggest that the output gap has recently not been 
as large as simple models might suggest, and therefore higher CPI is less surprising. One 
reason  for  thinking  that  this  effect  may  be  pertinent  is  that  indicators  of  spare  capacity 
(Chart 3 shows one example) have fallen by less in response to the sharp fall in output than 
might be expected. But it is also probably true that these surveys are more difficult than usual 
to interpret in the wake of very large shocks to demand. 
The  implication  of  these  possible  explanations  is,  if  these  exchange  rate  and  commodity 
price effects ease as expected, or credit conditions become less tight, inflation will fall as the 
influence of the underlying demand and supply imbalance becomes the dominant influence. 
But  an  alternative  and  less  reassuring  explanation  might  be  that  the  pricing  climate  has 
changed  (following  a  lengthy  period  in  which  firms  appeared  to  set  prices  in  conditions  of 
intense competition), suggesting that firms’ prices might respond less for a given degree of 
slack in the economy.  
The key conclusion I would draw from this is, that although from time to time criticised for too 
much reliance on one model, the MPC has in fact shown itself open to considering a range of 
interpretations over time, and is fully aware that different circumstances may point to different 
challenges.  At  present,  neither  the  extent  of  excess  capacity  nor  the  impact  of  capacity 
pressures on inflation are easy to assess. The track record of the judgements we made in 
more stable times may well not be a good guide to the future. It therefore makes sense to 
look at a range of estimates both of the gap and of its effect in order to give some guidance 
to the range of likely economic outcomes. 
Implicitly,  such  a  range  is  contained  within  the  fan  charts  of  GDP  and  of  CPI  inflation 
published quarterly in the Inflation Report. In practice, these fan charts are constructed on 
the basis of the experience of past forecast errors and the MPC’s judgement of the present 
degree of uncertainty. Given that the period of the MPC has been characterised by a time of 
unusual  stability  followed  by  one  of  unusual  volatility,  the  more  subjective  element  of  this 
approach has proved to be fully justified. However, an alternative guide to the MPC’s internal 
deliberations on this issue might also be provided by a more explicit consideration of a range 
of approaches to measurement of the output gap and its impact on inflation.  
The policy horizon 
In considering the policy decision month by month, the MPC has tended to put weight on the 
projection  for  CPI  inflation  around  two  years  ahead.  This  has  not  meant  simply  changing 
policy in response to whatever the central forecast is at that horizon; policy decisions will also 
take into account the pattern of deviations from the target over the whole three-year forecast 
period, and, importantly, the balance of risks around the central projection. 
There are clear and familiar benefits to having a forward-looking policy regime. A Taylor rule 
regime  based  on  current  data  would  have  the  considerable  disadvantage  that  it  would  be 
more likely to result in volatility of output growth, and also that policy might tend to react too 
strongly  to  unreliable  current  data.  But  it  is  less  clear  precisely  how  far  ahead  the  policy 
horizon should be. Relevant considerations are likely to include the length of the lags in the 
monetary transmission mechanism, the impact on private sector inflation expectations of the 
period  taken  to  bring  inflation  back  to  target  and  the  expected  impact  on  the  volatility  of 
output. Commenting on  some Bank  of England  work on optimal policy  horizons, Goodhart 
(2001)  suggested  that:  “the…selection  of  monetary  policy  horizons  is  so  model/context 
BIS Review 27/2010 
 5
specific that little advance can be made unless such studies can be brought to apply to the 
specific model/context under consideration as used in practice by the MPC.”  
Inevitably there is uncertainty about all of these factors. But it is worth considering whether, 
in present circumstances, there might be a case for considering a longer-term policy horizon. 
One  reason  for  this  is  that  quantitative  easing  might  have  longer  lags  before  it  reaches 
maximum effect than do changes in Bank Rate – part of the reason for focusing around two 
years ahead is that is judged to be the point at which policy has its maximum effect. This 
would  reflect  the  early  indications  that  one  of  the  key  channels  through  which  this  policy 
takes effect has proved to be an increase in asset prices, whereas for Bank Rate changes in 
the distribution of income plays a larger role. 
In  addition,  in  the  past  three  years  CPI  inflation  has  been  above  target  for  27  out  of 
36 months,  is  now  3.5%  and  likely  to  remain  above  target  for  the  first  half  of  2010.  The 
reasons  for  this  period  of  relatively  high  inflation  are  related  in  large  part  to  external 
pressures  from  past  exchange  rate  depreciation  (and  the  exchange  rate  has  recently 
depreciated  further)  and  the  rise  in  the  oil  price  over  the  past  year.  Some  domestic 
inflationary pressures remain low, as indicated by the present low rate of increase in wages 
(the latest data for average weekly earnings showed an annual increase of just 0.8% for total 
pay  in  the  three  months  to  December  2009).  So  looking  beyond  2010,  the  latest  inflation 
projection suggested there that inflation could be a little below target at the two-year horizon. 
However,  the  present  above-target  inflation  background  suggests  little  cause  for  anxiety 
about  inflation  expectations  becoming  deanchored  on  the  downside,  if  the  MPC  were  to 
suggest  it  might  take  a  little  longer  to  move  the  underlying  inflation  trend  back  to  target. 
Indeed,  that  might  be  one  way  to  respond  to  the  balance  of  risks  the  MPC  faces,  with 
inflation uncomfortably high in the short term, but medium-term prospects still likely to be on 
the downside.  
There  are  other  arguments  on  both  sides.  The  remit  for  the  MPC  invites  us,  subject  to 
achieving  the  inflation  target,  to  consider  the  Government’s  polices  for  growth  and 
employment. In the present context, a strong argument for continuing to focus on the two-
year horizon is that would encourage policy to aim at a rate of growth in the short-term which 
would  reduce  the  scale  of  excess  capacity  in  the  economy  as  fast  as  possible.  Robust 
growth  now  would  also  potentially  have  the  benefit  of  reducing  the  likely  erosion  of  the 
economy’s  supply  capacity  –  the  more  quickly  growth  is  resumed,  the  less  skills  will  be 
eroded  and  the  capital  stock  effectively  run  down.  The  longer-term  outlook  for  growth  is 
therefore improved. 
This is indeed a powerful reason for continuing to focus on the two-year horizon, and one 
which seems to trump the considerations around the lags in the policy process and worries 
about inflation expectations. But it is not the only relevant longer-term consideration. I argued 
earlier  that  in  the  period  running  up  to  the  financial  crisis,  it  might  have  been  beneficial  if 
policy  had  taken  more  explicit  account  of  how  it  was  contributing  to  imbalances  in  the 
economy. And there may be risks in the present circumstances in driving growth up quickly in 
the  UK,  if  the  global  economy,  and  particularly  our  major  trading  partner,  the  EU, 
experiences a somewhat sluggish recovery. 
Slow growth elsewhere would make it more difficult for the UK to achieve an improvement in 
the external balance. The UK’s external sector has so far perhaps had a rather disappointing 
response  to  the  depreciation  of  sterling.  Manufacturing  output  in  the  UK  has  not,  so  far, 
performed any better in the early stages of recovery than has the US, Germany or France. 
Recent surveys do suggest that export orders are improving (for example, the February 2010 
CIPS/Markit survey of manufacturing suggested that export orders grew at their fastest pace 
since the survey began in 1996). But with the public sector now seeking to reduce its own 
deficit, concern over likely improvement in the UK’s external balance would suggest that a 
fast recovery in the UK would only be possible if the household and corporate sector balance 
sheets were to deteriorate. It is relevant for monetary policy decisions to consider whether 
6 
 BIS Review 27/2010
this  implies  a  renewed  risk  to  economic  and  financial  stability  further  in  the  future.  So  the 
judgement  about  the  choice  of  policy  horizon remains,  for  me  at  least,  one  which  is  finely 
balanced. 
I  am  here  suggesting  that  the  optimal  horizon  to  consider  may  depend  on  the  precise 
economic  circumstances.  There  may  be  merit  in  considering  risks  beyond  the  present 
forecast horizon which might result from different choices of paths for future monetary policy. 
Quantitative easing 
These difficulties of policy judgement are compounded by uncertainties around quantitative 
easing  (although  it  is  important  to  recall  that  the  low  level  of  Bank  Rate  is  also  having  a 
continuing  expansionary  impact  on  the  economy).  These  uncertainties  can  of  course  be 
overstated,  as  quantitative  easing  works  in  many  respects  in  a  similar  way  to  changes  in 
Bank Rate. And I have no hesitation in saying that it was the right policy to deploy, and to 
deploy  at  significant  scale,  in  the  circumstances  which  faced  us  last  spring  when  the 
downside risks to the economy were very significant.  
There have been a number of positive effects from the policy of injecting additional money 
into the economy – including a sharp fall in corporate bonds spreads, a rise in equity prices, 
and  the  fall  in  three-month  LIBOR  back  towards  expected  Bank  Rate.12  In  addition,  the 
MPC’s continuing strong commitment to support the economy and therefore achieve of the 
inflation target over the medium-term has had a positive effect on confidence. Most indicators 
of consumer confidence have been improving fairly steadily from low points in early 2009, as 
have indicators of business confidence. 
A significant part of the transmission mechanism has been via the rise in the prices of riskier 
assets. As yet, I don’t consider the evidence suggests that this rise in asset prices has gone 
too far, and therefore do not believe that this has become another risk to future economic 
stability. Rather, my concern is that this channel might become less powerful if quantitative 
easing were to be extended, as confidence effects might be less apparent, and there might 
be reluctance to engage in further portfolio rebalancing as the price of risky assets rose. 
This could prove a concern, given that there are still some risks on the downside to the path 
of economic activity, including a continuing weakness in the world economy, particularly the 
EU. Credit conditions also remain a concern. The cost of credit for households remains high 
relative to Bank Rate (Chart 4), and there is still evidence from smaller firms that credit is 
either difficult to obtain or unacceptably costly. Banks’ own funding has become a little less 
costly, but the major UK banks still face a considerable funding challenge over the next few 
years,  as  well  as  uncertainty  about  how  much  capital  they  will  be  required  to  hold  in  the 
longer-term.  
However,  there  are  grounds  for  optimism  from  recent  data that  the  recovery  is  broadly  on 
track. GDP in the fourth quarter of 2009 is now estimated to have grown by 0.3% with growth 
in  consumer  spending.  Household  balance  sheets  have  already  been  strengthened. 
Employment  trends  have  remained  surprisingly  robust,  and  firms’  employment  intentions 
continue to recover from the low point early in 2009 in the bulk of the business surveys. I 
don’t think it is yet possible to be confident in the pace of recovery, and still expect the path 
to be bumpy. But some of the severe downside risks have diminished. 
                                                 
12   These impacts have recently been set out very effectively in Miles (2010). 
BIS Review 27/2010 
 7
Conclusions 
As this is my final formal talk as an MPC member, it is a good opportunity for me to say that it 
has been a real privilege to serve on the Committee for such a long period, and to have done 
so  alongside  such  excellent  and  stimulating  colleagues.  Since  mid-2007  decisions  have 
become more difficult and the task more stressful, but the overriding objective of achieving 
the CPI inflation target and maintaining confidence in this target has remained the right guide 
for policy. 
A  significant  part  of  an  MPC  member’s  work  is  explaining  policy  to  various  audiences,  or 
accompanying the Banks’ regional Agents on visits and discussions with business and other 
contacts. I am sure that the work of the Bank’s twelve Agents based around the UK, and the 
willingness of MPC members to be seen out and about, both contribute to the credibility of 
the  MPC.  They  also  serve  the  valuable  purpose  of  giving  us  high-quality  and  up-to-date 
feedback on business trends.  
While these visits enable business audiences to question and debate policy, perhaps another 
aspect of accountability has been a little less satisfactory. Once a quarter, several members 
of the MPC accompany the Governor to an appearance before the Treasury Committee. The 
purpose of the sessions is to hold us to account for our individual votes. However, despite 
some recent improvement, it remains the case that the vast majority of questions from the 
MPs tend to be directed at the Governor. My view is that it would be better in future to ensure 
that  each  MPC  member  attending,  including  the  external  members,  has  the  opportunity  to 
explain their recent votes and to comment on the key policy issues. 
As I leave the MPC, the challenges remain considerable. In retrospect, my first two terms on 
the  MPC  were  periods  which  now  look  like  the  small  change  of  monetary  policy  –  small 
changes in Bank Rate aimed at adjusting for relatively small anticipated deviations of inflation 
from target. As I suggested at the start, it may however also have been the period in which a 
large  error  was  made  in  allowing  the  belief  to  become  established  that  policymakers  had 
solved  the  issue  of  economic  instability.  As  Jean-Claude  Trichet  recently  commented: 
“...remedial action has often been triggered as soon as the financial firestorm has threatened 
the  stability  of  the  economic  system.  But  such  action  risks  raising  expectations  that 
macroeconomic  policy  will  always  insure  against  tail  risks,  no  matter  how  large.”13  Even 
when policymakers have added robust macroprudential instruments to their armoury, it will 
be important to be clear that there will still be sources of macroeconomic instability. This may 
not  be  easy  during  any  prolonged  period  without  such  a  shock,  unless  policymakers  are 
prepared to be a little less assiduous about fine tuning.  
More recently policy has certainly not felt like fine tuning. In this talk, I have tried to suggest 
some ways in which policy might be approached a little differently, but without moving away 
from the month-by-month decision-taking which has served the UK well. There is presently 
much uncertainty about the size of the output gap, partly as it is not easy to reconcile a large 
negative output gap with recent upward surprises on inflation. It may be that firms have been 
responding  more  than  expected  to  the  rise  in  unit  labour  costs,  in  which  case  as  growth 
resumes  inflation  pressure  might  diminish.  But  there  are  other  possible  explanations  for 
higher  inflation.  One  suggestion  might  be  that  the  MPC  could  consider  using  a  range  of 
different  plausible  estimates  of  the  output  gap  and  its  effect  on  inflation  as  a  part  of  the 
methodology  of  constructing  the  growth  and  inflation  fan  charts.  It  might  also  be  useful  to 
reconsider the merits of looking to inflation prospects beyond the normal forecast horizon, to 
ensure any future risks to economic stability are taken fully into account. With the benefit of 
hindsight, this approach might have been helpful in the period before the financial crisis. 
                                                 
13   Trichet (2009). 
8 
 BIS Review 27/2010
Since the summer of 2007, life on the MPC has certainly felt very challenging. It may well be 
some time before all the lessons for the conduct of monetary policy can be fully appreciated. 
However,  the  MPC’s  framework  has  overall  proved  to  be  resilient  during  the  crisis  and 
capable of making substantial responses to events. I am sure that this will remain true. 
References 
Bank of England (2000), Economic Models at the Bank of England, September 2000 update. 
Barker, K (2003), “Adjusting to low inflation – issues for policy”, Speech at the Manchester 
Statistical Society. 
Bean, C (2003), “Asset prices, financial imbalances and monetary policy: are inflation targets 
enough?”, Speech at the Bank for International Settlements, Basel.  
Gieve, J (2009), “Seven lessons from the last three years”, Speech at the London School of 
Economics. 
Goodhart,  C  A  E  (2001),  “Monetary  transmission  lags  and  the  formulation  of  the  policy 
decision  on  interest  rates”  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  St  Louis  Review  July/August, 
pages 165–181. 
Greenslade, J and Parker, M (2008), “Price-setting behaviour in the United Kingdom” Bank of 
England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 48, No. 4, pages 404–415.  
Harrison, R, Nikolov, K, Quinn, M, Ramsay, G, Scott, A and Thomas, R (2005), The Bank of 
England Quarterly Model. 
Hills, R, Thomas, R and Yates, A (2005), “The impact of government spending on demand 
pressure” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Summer pages 140–151.  
Large,  A  (2005),  “Monetary  Policy:  Significant  Issues  of  Today”,  Speech  to  West  London 
Business. 
Miles, D (2010), “Interpreting Monetary Policy”, Speech at Imperial College, London.  
Neiss,  K  and  Nelson,  E  (2005),  “Inflation  Dynamics,  marginal  cost  and  the  output  gap: 
Evidence from three countries” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 37.  
Nelson, E and Nikolov, K (2001), “UK inflation in the 1970s and 1980s: the role of output gap 
mismeasurement”, Bank of England Working Paper no 148.  
Trichet,  J-C  (2009),  “Systemic  Risk”  Clare  Distinguished  Lecture  in  Economics  and  Public 
Policy, Cambridge. 
 
BIS Review 27/2010 
 9
 10 
 BIS Review 27/2010
