Philipp M Hildebrand: The international monetary system 
Opening remarks by Mr Philipp M Hildebrand, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the High-Level Conference on the International Monetary System, Zurich, 
11 May 2010. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen. It is a pleasure and special privilege to welcome you 
to this conference on the international monetary system. I am delighted that, together with 
the IMF, we have succeeded in bringing together such an outstanding group of policy makers 
and  academics.  I  want  to  thank  you  for  taking  the  time  to  join  today’s  discussion  at  this 
critical juncture for the international monetary system. 
I am especially grateful that the Managing Director of the IMF is with us today. Dominique, a 
very warm welcome to you. I know I speak on behalf of everyone here today when I say that 
we really appreciate your presence.  
Conferences on the international monetary system are held with great regularity, particularly 
in the wake of financial crises. It is therefore not surprising that the recent crisis has brought 
renewed attention to the functioning of the international monetary system.  
But as Herb Stein noted more than 40 years ago, it is not easy to define the international 
monetary  system.  Where  does  the  international  monetary  system  end  and  domestic 
economic  policy  begin?  Did  the  recent  crisis  have  its  roots  in  shortcomings  of  domestic 
policies or in shortcomings of the international monetary system? 
My role today as the opening speaker is a privileged one. Like a university professor during 
exams, I can ask questions. Unlike a good professor, I am certainly not in possession of all 
the answers. I am confident, however, that the exceptional group of people assembled here 
will make a positive contribution to this difficult and complex debate. 
The problem 
II. 
Arguably, much of the debate surrounding the international monetary system boils down to 
the  following  question:  how  sustainable  is  an  international  monetary  regime,  in  which  one 
national currency serves as the international reserve asset? Over the past few decades, this 
question has been examined under different perspectives.  
A first perspective was the so-called “Triffin dilemma”, discussed in the context of the Bretton 
Woods fixed exchange rate regime. This discussion highlighted that increasing indebtedness 
of the reserve-issuing country would in time undermine the very confidence that forms the 
basis for the reserve asset status.  
A  second  perspective  refers  to  the  alleged  “exorbitant  privilege”  of  the  reserve-issuing 
country.  It  highlights  the  asymmetry  in  the  adjustment  to  shocks,  as  the  reserve-issuing 
country  has  the  privilege  of  not  being  under  much  pressure  to  adjust  to  current  account 
deficits, at least over the short and medium term. It is worth noting that part of Keynes’ goal 
in  setting  up  the  IMF  was  to  try  to  create  symmetry  between  the  need  to  adjust  for  both 
deficit and surplus countries.  
More  recently,  the  question  appeared  under  the  perspective  of  global  imbalances.  This 
discussion highlights that current account surplus countries can forego, at least temporarily, 
the required adjustment by accumulating international reserves instead. The sustainability of 
these imbalances, and the extent to which they have contributed to the recent global financial 
crisis, is still under discussion. 
BIS Review 65/2010 
 1
The question of the reserve asset has often been at the center of the debate. But as Mark 
Carney  has  recently  argued,  the  adjustment  mechanism  may  be  more  important  than  the 
choice of reserve assets. 
If  adjustment  were  rapid,  symmetric,  and  global,  and  if  adjustment  costs  were  fairly 
distributed  amongst  countries,  we  probably  would  not  need  to  gather  here  today. 
Unfortunately, this is not the world we live in now. 
Historically, exchange rate flexibility has often been the answer. While it is not a silver bullet, 
it remains true that adjustment through the exchange rate is usually faster, and in the end 
less costly than adjustment through prices and wages.  
At the same time, of course, discontent with what is often perceived as excessive exchange 
rate volatility has been an important source of dissatisfaction with the present international 
monetary system. What constitutes excessive exchange rate volatility, and whether domestic 
policies  or  the  international  monetary  system  are  at  the  root  of  it,  is a  matter  of  legitimate 
debate. 
The conference 
III. 
Nearly  twenty  years  ago,  Jacob  Frenkel  made  the  following  observation  about  the 
international  monetary  system:  “academics  and  policymakers  have  made  numerous 
proposals  for  reform  while,  at  the  same  time,  the  monetary  system  itself  has  been  in  a 
constant state of change”. 
This points to another problem that any attempt to reform the international monetary system 
faces:  the  world  economy  and  financial  markets,  and  therefore  the  international  monetary 
system never cease to evolve. 
Today’s  conference  is  organized  around  four  panel  discussions.  They  will  focus  on  issues 
that are at the forefront of the current debate on shortcomings of the international monetary 
system. The first panel, chaired by Axel Weber, will discuss the predominant concerns about 
the present system.  
Large global imbalances, volatile capital flows, and rapid reserve accumulation give rise to 
concerns about vulnerabilities. Are they possible sources of instability, and what reforms, if 
any, should be considered? 
As I pointed out earlier, one recurring theme in the debate has been the question of reserve 
assets.  Our  second  panel,  chaired  by  George  Soros,  will  examine  ways  to  improve  the 
supply of reserve assets.  
Is a diversification of reserve assets desirable, and if so, should it be actively promoted? Is 
there a greater role for SDRs in the international monetary system, and if so, what reforms 
would be required to give SDRs a greater role?  
Over the past decades, private capital flows have greatly increased. Although capital account 
liberalization is clearly beneficial in the long run, it entails significant short-run vulnerabilities.  
The third panel, chaired by Duvvuri Subbarao, will take up the question of how to deal with 
these  vulnerabilities.  What  are  the  appropriate  policy  responses,  and  what  is  the  role  for 
regulation and capital controls?  
One policy response has been the accumulation of reserves, which can provide a temporary 
shock absorber. However, reserve accumulation entails costs for the countries accumulating 
reserves as well as for the world economy as a whole. Our last panel, chaired by Masaaki 
Shirakawa, will discuss alternatives to self-insurance. An obvious question here is the role of 
IMF lending facilities. 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2010
As already mentioned, the questions we address today are difficult and complex. Someone 
who played an important role in trying to address them over several decades was Jacques 
Polak. Sadly, he passed away earlier this year.  
Reflecting  on  the  efforts  to  reform  the  international  monetary  system  since  the  Bretton 
Woods  conference,  Jacques  Polak  once  suggested  that  “those  of  us  who  toil  at  the 
international monetary system would do well to adopt Sisyphus as our patron saint”. 
In honor of Jacques Polak, let us then push the stone back up the mountain once more and 
start with our first panel.  
Thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS Review 65/2010 
 3
