Duvvuri Subbarao: Lessons from the financial crisis for monetary policy 
in emerging markets 
Welcome remarks by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, for the 
L K Jha Memorial Lecture given by Prof John B Taylor, Mumbai, 24 February 2010. 
 On behalf of the Reserve Bank of India, I have great pleasure in welcoming Prof. John Brian 
Taylor who will shortly be delivering the L. K. Jha Memorial Lecture. We are very happy to 
welcome  also  Ms.  Raye  Allyn  Taylor  who  has  accompanied  Prof.  Taylor.  I  also  want  to 
acknowledge the family members of late Dr. L.K. Jha – Smt. Dipika Maharaj Singh, Smt. and 
Shri. Aditya Maharaj Singh, Trisha Maharaj Singh. Many thanks to all of you for rejoining the 
RBI family. And of course, a hearty welcome to all our invitees who have made the time to 
come  for  this  lecture.  This  year’s  L.K.  Jha  Memorial  Lecture  has  special  significance  as  it 
forms part of the Platinum Jubilee celebrations of the Reserve Bank. 
2. 
Dr.  Lakshmi  Kant  Jha  was  an  outstanding  economist  and  a  distinguished  civil 
servant. A member of the ICS, he was Governor of the Reserve Bank from July 1967 to May 
1970.  Prior  to  his  appointment  as  Governor,  Dr.  Jha  served  as  secretary  to  the  Prime 
Minister.  He  headed  the  Reserve  Bank  during  one  of  the  most  challenging  phases  of  the 
Indian  economy.  The  country  was  shaken  by  food  security  concerns,  and  initiatives  to 
redress  this  eventually  resulted  in  the  much  celebrated  “Green  Revolution”.  The  Reserve 
Bank, under Dr. Jha, was an influential force in shaping these initiatives. The overall scarcity 
situation renewed the urgency for focusing public policy towards poverty reduction. This led 
to several path breaking policies, including the nationalization of fourteen major commercial 
banks in 1969 on Dr. Jha’s watch. Subsequently, he served as India’s Ambassador to the 
United  States  and  as  Governor  of  Jammu  and  Kashmir.  Dr.  Jha  was  also  member  of  the 
Brandt Commission. In recognition of Dr. Jha’s extraordinary services to the Reserve Bank 
and  to  the  nation,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  instituted  this  lecture  series  in  1990.  So  far, 
there  have  been  10  lectures,  and  the  lecture  by  Professor  Taylor  this  evening  will  be  the 
11th in the series.  
3. 
It is perhaps presumptuous to introduce Prof. Taylor, especially since his views and 
writings have been so central to shaping the debate on the resolution of the crisis that we 
have just gone through. Regardless, I will indulge in the pleasure of introducing Prof. Taylor, 
if also because the occasion demands it.  
4. 
Prof.  John  Taylor  is  presently  the  Mary  and  Robert  Raymond  Professor  of 
Economics at Stanford University. Prof. Taylor has straddled a wide academic canvas and is 
famous for his work on the development of rational expectation models with staggered wage 
setting,  the  design  of  monetary  policy  rules  for  the  conduct  of  economic  policy  and 
international policy co-ordination.  
5. 
Prof. Taylor’s writings have had a profound impact on policy making particularly in 
the  area  of  monetary  policy.  He  has  contributed  to  the  development  of  mathematical 
methods for solving macroeconomic models under the assumption of rational expectations. 
In 1977, Prof. Taylor and Edmund Phelps, simultaneously with Stanley Fischer, showed that 
monetary  policy  is  useful  for  stabilizing  an  economy  if  wages  are  sticky,  even  when  all 
workers and firms have rational expectations. This was insightful and path breaking research 
as  it  demonstrated  that  the  theory  of  rational  expectations  was  not  inconsistent  with 
Keynesian economics.  
6. 
In  the  academia,  reputations  are  built  on  pushing  the  frontiers  of  knowledge.  A 
common  metric  for  this  is  the  quantum  and  quality  of  publications.  But  the  ultimate 
recognition for an academic is to enter text books, and quite understandably very few make 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 1
it. Prof. Taylor is among those select few, and the celebrated Taylor rule, that he propounded 
in 1992, is now part of standard macroeconomic text books.  
7. 
The Taylor rule is a simple equation to describe the response of the Fed’s interest 
rate  target  to  inflation  and  business  cycles.  The  equation  succeeded  in  serving  both  as  a 
description and as a prescription: it described how the Fed had been setting its interest rate 
target  and  prescribed  what  the  Fed  ought  to  –  and  indeed  might  –  do  next.  The  equation 
quickly gained wide acceptance among central banks as a useful guide for policy. Viewed as 
a prescription, the equation says that a central bank ought to raise the target interest rate 
above its neutral level when inflation is above the central bank’s (explicit or implicit) target, or 
when  output  is  above  potential.  In  short,  the  equation  requires  of  central  banks  to  “lean 
against the wind.” The equation also embodies what has come to be known as the Taylor 
principle:  that  a  central  bank  should  respond  to  an  increase  in  inflation  with  a  more-than-
proportional increase in the policy interest rate.  
8. 
Monetary  policy  has  embraced  the  Taylor  Rule  so  firmly  that  there  has  been  an 
intense  debate  in  the  wake  of  the  crisis  on  the  policy  stance  of  the  US  Fed  vis-à-vis  the 
Taylor rule. Some analysts used the Taylor Rule to argue that the Fed funds rate, even at 
this historically low level, was not low enough and made out a case for doing a lot more to 
stimulate the economy. Prof. Taylor himself weighed in on the issue suggesting that those 
analysts  were  not  applying  his  rule  correctly.  He  contended  that,  quite  to  the  contrary,  his 
measure shows just the opposite: that the Fed policy is appropriate, the policy rate cannot 
remain low for too long, that central bankers are right to be considering withdrawal of their 
unprecedented monetary stimulus, and that critics who say otherwise are misinterpreting his 
rule.  According  to  him,  the  formula  is  designed  to  show  the  best  rate  for  spurring  growth 
without stoking inflation.  
9. 
If  the  Taylor  rule  is  so  time  tested  in  prescribing  the  policy  interest  rate,  it  is 
legitimate to ask what role there is left for central bankers. I do not have a simple answer for 
this; perhaps Prof. Taylor does. I do have a complex and somewhat longish answer and here 
it is. 
10. 
For my long and complex answer, it is necessary to refer to the interesting debate 
on whether economics can be a deterministic and exact science like physics. Indeed, some 
people argue that one of the great follies of economics – the reason it often lost direction, if 
also credibility is because it had pretense to being like physics. I have no intention of getting 
into that debate, but in the context of the Taylor rule, I can’t resist the temptation of drawing 
upon a comparison of economics with physics, if at an altogether different level.  
11. 
Sir  Isaac  Newton  gave  us  the  three  laws  of  motion  and  the  law  of  gravity.  The 
mathematical formulation of these laws embodies a complete description of the universe. All 
you need to specify are the initial conditions and using Newton’s laws, you can calculate the 
state  of  the  universe  for  eternity  with  absolute  determinism.  This  is  classical  Cartesian 
reductionist framework in its quintessence. People, therefore, asked, if God has decided on 
the laws and decided on the initial conditions, he has determined the course of the universe 
for eternity. Besides, he gave us Newton to let us know of the laws so that we can estimate 
the course of the universe with immutable precision. After he has performed his initial and 
only task, what need then for God, a question that Stephen Hawking poses powerfully in his 
“Brief History of Time”?  
12. 
In  a  similar  vein,  it  is  possible  to  ask,  if  the  Taylor  rule  is  so  deterministic,  and 
monetary  policy  is  just  a  question  of  plugging  in  numbers  into  an  equation,  and  using  the 
results for the policy, what need then for central banks? 
13. 
Here again, I suppose, the analogy with physics will help. Even though Newtonian 
mechanics  held  intellectual  sway  for  nearly  250  years,  we  now  know  that  the  physical 
universe  is not  as  deterministic  as implied  by  Newton’s  laws.  Newtonian  physics  does  not 
work at the extremely small scale where we need quantum mechanics and at the extremely 
large  scale  where  we  need  the  relativity  theory.  So,  Newtonian  physics  works  and  works 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2010
effectively  as  a  very  good  approximation  for  understanding  the  known  universe.  At  the 
extremes,  we  need  the  sophistication  of  quantum  mechanics  or  relativistic  mechanics. 
Similarly,  the  Taylor  rule,  I  believe,  gives  us  a  basis  for  determining  the  monetary  policy 
stance,  but  central  banks  need  to  superimpose  their  judgement  in  applying  it  to  practical 
policy.  
14. 
Prof. Taylor will be speaking to us today on “Lessons from the Financial Crisis for 
Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets”. Frankly, he could not have chosen a more relevant 
topic. The monetary policy challenges of emerging economies are clearly quite distinct from 
those of advanced economics. But we tend to forget this. During the crisis, for example, there 
was  quite  a  bit  of  pressure  on  us  to  do  everything  that  advanced  economy  central  banks 
were  doing  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  our  situation  was  different  in  many  respects.  Of 
course, the decoupling theory did not work and all emerging economies were impacted by 
the crisis, although to different extents. But our banks and financial institutions did not have 
significant exposure to sub-prime assets and therefore were not threatened by illiquidity or 
insolvency.  Even  at  the  height  of  the  crisis,  our  financial  markets  continued  to  function 
normally.  Our  concern  was  not  so  much  rescuing  a  collapsing  financial  sector  but  rather 
arresting  the  moderation  in  economic  growth.  Second,  we  never  had  a  fear  of  deflation 
although  WPI  inflation  was  negative  for  a  short  period;  in  fact,  inflation  has  been  and 
continues to be our dominant concern. Third, in advanced economies, the crisis spread from 
the financial sector to the real sector whereas in emerging economies, the direction was the 
reverse – the fault lines spread from the real sector to the financial sector. Finally, much of 
our pressures came from the supply side, not the demand side. For all these reasons and 
more, the challenges we faced were different and the responses called for from us had to be 
different. It is important for us as well as the rest of the world to appreciate these differences 
between advanced and emerging economies. What better person than Prof. Taylor to look at 
monetary policy responses from the special perspective of emerging economies? 
15. 
Prof. Taylor’s career has been marked by a seamless back-and-forth between the 
academia and policymaking, most recently as the U.S. Treasury’s top official for international 
affairs. When in academia, he jumps into teaching and research with an abandon that seems 
uncharacteristic  of  a  Washington  policymaker.  To  grab  students’  attention  in  a  class  on 
agricultural supply and demand, he once pranced around the classroom in a California raisin 
costume to the tune of Marvin Gaye’s “I heard it through the Grapevine.” 
16. 
Having a concept named after oneself is as much a mark of honor in economics as 
it  is  in  other  sciences.  By  this  standard,  Prof.  Taylor  is  among  the  most  honoured 
macroeconomists  of  his  generation.  Indeed,  concepts  bearing  his  name  have  become  so 
pervasive that the U.S. Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke once remarked that 
“with our appetites whetted by the Taylor rule, the [Taylor] principle, and the [Taylor] curve, 
we now look forward to the Taylor dictum, the Taylor hyperbola, and maybe even the Taylor 
conundrum.”  
17. 
lecture.  
18. 
11th L.K. Jha Memorial Lecture. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I have great pleasure in inviting Prof. Taylor to deliver the 
Here  in  Mumbai,  and  in  a  more  immediate  sense,  we  look  forward  to  the  Taylor 
BIS Review 21/2010 
 3
