Mario Draghi: Modernisation of the global financial architecture – global 
financial stability 
Remarks by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability  Board,  before  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European 
Parliament, Brussels, 17 March 2010. 
 Thank  you  very  much  for  having  invited  me  to  take  part  in  this  important  debate  between 
European  and  national  parliaments.  International  and  regional  cooperation  and  national 
political leadership are essential complements for achieving global financial reforms; and the 
debate  in  this  Committee  is  really  helpful  for  that  purpose.  It  is  ultimately  national  and 
regional legislatures, accountable to their voters, that must decide and implement reforms.  
The strains in the global financial system have eased considerably in the last twelve months: 
the banks are once again raising funds, asset write-downs have diminished. Nevertheless, 
elements of fragility are still present in various parts of the financial system and risks, mainly 
related to the deterioration of traditional loan books, the bunching of refinancing needs in the 
next few years, and to new sources of risk such as sovereign risk. It is essential that we can 
count, in the years to come, on a fully restored ability of the banking sector to perform its 
essential tasks in the economy.  
We  have  come  a  long  way  towards  strengthening  the  financial  system  since  this  crisis 
began. But we have hard work ahead of us to finish up. In my remarks, I will focus mainly on 
these forward challenges. But let me start by taking stock of where we have gotten to. 
Three things have been important in getting us to where we are now: 
 
 
First, the recognition that, in a closely integrated system, we all sit in the same boat; 
Second,  the  leadership  of  the  G20  process,  in  which  the  EU  has  played  an 
important role, in agreeing objectives and timelines for substantial reform; and 
Third, the establishment of mechanisms, such as the FSB, to hasten and coordinate 
the policy development needed to meet these objectives. 
 When I say we have gotten far, I am speaking to an unprecedented amount of international 
dialogue and co-operation on important financial system issues, and the resulting substantive 
changes that either have or are about to come into place. While many issues remain to be 
resolved, in Europe, in the US and elsewhere, we are, collectively, fundamentally reshaping 
the framework for systemic financial oversight: 
 
First, top-down, system-wide oversight arrangements are being put in place at the 
national,  regional  and  international  level.  These  include  more  encompassing 
surveillance, with broadened macro-prudential perspectives, as well as mechanisms 
for triggering action on identified risks. Examples are the European Systemic Risk 
Board and related arrangements, the US Financial Services Oversight Council, the 
IMF-FSB Early Warning Exercise, and the establishment of the FSB itself.  
Second,  as  part  of  this,  major  jurisdictions  and  regions  are  overhauling  their 
regulatory  and  supervisory  structures  to  strengthen  responsiveness  to  systemic 
risks,  improve  coordination  and  close  gaps.  The  FSB  is  in  many  ways  the 
international manifestation of these efforts;  
Third, the regulatory perimeter is being expanded. Major jurisdictions are finalizing 
legislation  that  for  the  first  time  establishes  formal  oversight  over  the  OTC 
derivatives markets and its major dealers, hedge funds and credit rating agencies. In 
  BIS Review 31/2010 
 1
 Fourth,  we  have  put  in  place  cross-border  oversight  and  crisis  management 
contingency planning for the largest and most complex global financial institutions, 
each  of  which  now  have  functioning  core  supervisory  colleges  and  crisis 
management groups.  
At the level of the essential regulatory policies to buttress financial stability, let me recall: 
 
That we are in the process of calibrating a fundamentally revised global bank capital 
framework which will establish stronger protection through improved risk coverage, 
more  and  higher  quality  capital,  a  counter-cyclical  buffer  and  a  constraint  on  the 
build-up of banking sector leverage; 
Second, we have developed and will implement a global liquidity standard for banks 
that will promote higher liquidity buffers and constrain the maturity mismatching that 
created the condition for this crisis; 
Third,  we  are  making  progress  in  developing  a  policy  framework  and  tools  to  roll 
back the moral hazard risks posed by institutions that are systemically important; 
Fourth,  we  have  eliminated  the  perverse  incentives  that  pervaded  securitization, 
including  the  scope  for  leverage  to  develop  in  opaque  off-balance  sheet  vehicles 
through changes to accounting standards and regulatory and prudential rules; 
Fifth,  we  have  developed  a  series  of  supervisory  tools  to  raise  standards  of 
governance, risk management and capital conservation at core financial institutions. 
In this context, let me note that:  
– 
we  are  making  strong  progress  towards  a  forward  looking  expected  loss 
provisioning regime for credit losses which will dampen procyclicality and align 
accounting and prudential objectives in this key area; and 
we  are  making  good  headway  towards  establishing  compensation  regimes 
that are better aligned with risks taken in significant financial institutions.  
     I have been selective in my enumeration. But the point I want to make is that we should not 
underestimate  what  has  been  accomplished.  Each  of  the  above  areas  are  difficult  in  their 
own  right.  That  we  have  been  able  to  progress  global  policy  development  and  in  cases 
implementation  on  such  a  broad  front,  while  fighting  a  very  serious  financial  crisis,  is 
something that has never happened before.  
So,  the  direction  in  which  we  are  moving  internationally  is  encouraging.  But  as  we  hit  the 
homestretch  in  the  above  areas,  your  political  leadership  will  determine  whether  we 
accomplish credible and robust global reforms that deliver the protections that our citizens 
rightly  demand,  yet  preserve  the  enormous  advantages  of  an  internationally  integrated 
financial  system.  We  must  not  only  reaffirm  our  commitment  to  global  solutions,  but 
demonstrate our willingness to reach agreement on the issues that stand in their way. We 
cannot all have it our own way.  
In  the  process,  we  must  guard  against  pressures  to  water  down  the  stringency  of  global 
reforms.  That  such  pressures  originate  within  a  financial  industry  concerned  to  preserve 
competitive advantages is not a surprise. But such pressures are also evident in hesitation 
by  some  countries  about  the  impact  of  reforms  on  their  own  financial  institutions.  This 
hesitation is stronger where the starting point is weaker. However, it would be a very serious 
and unfortunate mistake to allow these different starting points to result in weaker standards 
than we need for the future. 
Given  the  economic  and  social  costs  of  this  crisis,  we  simply  cannot  afford  sub-standard 
outcomes. And were we to fail, the risks is that countries and regions will go their own way 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2010
and that the system will fragment, with very significant global costs. Hence, we must keep 
our focus on achieving global standards that are credible, and as part of this, agree transition 
and phase-in arrangements that enable all of us to move there. I will come back to this point.  
Let me speak to the key areas where we need to make headway in the months ahead.  
First and foremost, we must complete the revamp of the Basel capital framework and 
the liquidity standard, along with the complementary changes, including provisioning, that 
address the problems of procyclicality that we have seen in this crisis. We made a major step 
forward on this issue in December, when the Basel Committee released – on schedule – the 
full package of reform proposals. Comprehensive impact assessments are now underway to 
assess  the  consequences  of  the  December  capital  and  liquidity  proposals  on  the  banking 
sector.  This  is  complemented  by  a  top  down  assessment  to  calibrate  the  new  minimum 
requirements, taking account of, among other things, loss experience over this crisis, and the 
impact  on  banks’  role  in  the  financial  system  and  the  benefits  and  costs  of  the  new 
requirements in the steady state.  
As I mentioned earlier, it will be critical that we do not let current strained conditions shape 
the  standards,  but  instead  keep  our  focus  on  the  rigorous  framework  needed  to  ensure 
balanced,  sustainable  banking  in  the  years  ahead.  While  the  banking  sector  has  already 
made significant progress to raise the level and quality of its capital and liquidity, immediately 
implementing in full the more stringent minimum requirements could have negative effects. 
We will design appropriate transition and grandfathering arrangements that rule this out. We 
have  set  in  train  jointly  with  the  Basel  Committee,  and  with  the  IMF  as  a  key  partner,  a 
thorough macroeconomic impact assessment to inform these phase-in and implementation 
arrangements. Preliminary results on all assessment streams will be available in June/July. 
Calibration work  will continue  into  the  fall,  and the  broad  features  of the  framework,  along 
with the transition arrangements, will be ready by the G20 Summit in November. Countries 
will need to pass any necessary legislation to implement the reform according to the agreed 
timetable, and the EU is at the forefront of this.  
Second, this year we must agree on measures to credibly reduce the moral hazard and 
systemic  risk  caused  by  firms  that  are  “too  big  to  fail”.  TBTF  is  first  and  foremost  a 
national problem – at worst when institutions are too big to save. But we are all affected by 
the moral hazard consequences of the problem going unresolved. There is no silver bullet or 
one-size-fits-all solution here. One focus of our work is therefore to provide supervisors with 
tools  that  enable  them  to  take  action  in  national  contexts  under  existing  authority  – 
governance,  intensity  of  supervision,  structural  simplification,  capital  surcharges,  etc. 
Systemically  important  financial  institutions  have  to  be  resilient  even  in  periods  of  broad 
financial  system  stress  events.  Capital,  liquidity  and  leverage  expectations  should  reflect 
that.  But  we  will  never  be  able  to  fully  eliminate  the  potential  for  failures,  therefore  a  key 
requirement  across  all  jurisdictions  is  the  establishment  of  effective  resolution  frameworks 
that  allow  all  types  and  size  of  institutions  to  fail,  and  adequate  co-ordination  of  these 
frameworks across borders. This is a tall order, as we all know. However, should effective 
cross-border resolution prove out of reach, it will strengthen the case for alternative solutions: 
to place restrictions on activities/size/structure that make all institutions resolvable, or to raise 
capital and other requirements on systemic institutions to a point where the likelihood and 
impact of default is reduced to a very low level. This will come at a cost to intermediation and 
global financial integration. 
Given the diversity of institutions and financial systems involved, a key challenge will be to 
avoid 
results.  We  must  achieve  consistent  design  and 
implementation  of  new  measures  to  ensure  a  level  playing  field  and  to  address  potential 
concerns about market fragmentation. Our aim is to reduce systemic risks globally by having 
standards  for  TBTF  firms  that  set  a  common  floor,  and  actions  across  countries  that  are 
sufficiently  coordinated  to  avoid  regulatory  arbitrage.  We  will  provide  an  interim  report  on 
inconsistencies 
in  what 
BIS Review 31/2010 
 3
these  issues  to  the  G20  Summit  in  June,  and  final  recommendations  to  the  November 
Summit.  
Third,  we  must  finalise  reforms  to  regulate,  make  transparent  and  centrally  clear  a 
substantial portion of the OTC derivatives markets, and so reduce their scope to act as 
channels of contagion. Legislation is advancing in the US and EU to establish the requisite 
frameworks for this. Among critical questions to resolve are: 
 
which derivatives products can and should be standardised, and ought to be subject 
to a mandatory central clearing requirement; 
whether,  and  if  so  how  to  define  which  type  of,  commercial  end-users  should  be 
exempted from these requirements. 
 We must be careful to avoid inconsistencies here, because this will drive regulatory arbitrage 
in  this  global  market.  To  accomplish  meaningful  systemic  risk  reduction,  we  need  robust 
globally  agreed  standards  of  soundness  for  all  central  counterparties.  And  governments 
should  ensure  that  the  determination  of  which  derivatives  should  subject  be  to  central 
clearing is not left to central counterparties alone. We also need harmonised definitions of 
standardised derivatives, and are setting in train work across the US and EU to this effect. It 
is also imperative that regulators have the information available to them to police the market 
for potential manipulative abuses. This is why there must be mandatory trade reporting of all 
OTC derivatives transactions, regardless of whether they are centrally cleared or bilaterally 
negotiated.  
Fourth,  we  must  firmly  embed  reforms  to  compensation  practices  at  financial 
institutions.  As  you  know,  the  FSB  set  out  Principles  and  Implementation  Standards  for 
Sound  Compensation  arrangements  last  year.  In  December,  we  launched  a  detailed 
assessment  of  implementation  of  these  standards.  This  is  a  very  important  task  not  just 
because this is the FSB’s first peer review, but also because of the importance and political 
dimension  of  this  topic.  We  are  on  schedule  to  conclude  this  review  later  this  month.  The 
review points to a key message – that a lot has been done by national authorities and that 
change is taking place in the major firms. However, differences remain in the approach to 
and  pace  of  implementation.  Greater  progress  has  been  achieved  in  the  areas  of 
governance, supervisory oversight and disclosure of compensation, while much more work 
needs  to  be  done  on  pay  structures  and  risk-alignment.  We  will  be  setting  out  additional 
recommendations in this area later in March. 
Concluding remarks 
At the outset, I noted that international cooperation and national/regional political leadership 
are complementary drivers for achieving global financial reform. Together, we have come a 
long way. But 2010 will be a critical year as we press ahead with global financial reforms. To 
maintain the momentum, we are critically dependent on your support. Indeed, internationally 
coordinated  reforms  cannot  be  agreed  nor  implemented  without  the  support  of  national 
political leaders and those who are in a position to make final decisions. Your decisions, and 
those or your colleagues in other jurisdictions, will determine whether we are able to build a 
more robust and consistent global financial order necessary to preserve the advantages of 
an integrated financial system. 
Beyond the policy development work, full and consistent implementation will take time and 
perseverance. As I said, we must keep our eyes on the end objective, and we will develop 
transition  paths  to  take  us  there.  As  we  work  to  improve  international  cooperation  and  to 
further financial reforms, I hope we can count on the political support and leadership of all of 
you in this room. 
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2010
