Caleb M Fundanga: Improved economic and financial developments in 
Zambia 
Opening remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Bank of 
Zambia/Deutsche Bank workshop on Capital Markets, Lusaka, 15 April 2010. 
 The Deputy Governor – Operations at Bank of Zambia  
Officials from Deutsche Bank  
Officials from the Ministry of Finance and National Planning  
Distinguished Resource Persons  
Colleagues from the Bank of Zambia  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
I am delighted to officiate at this important workshop on Sovereign Bond Issuance. Let me 
from  the  onset  express  my  gratitude  to  our  colleagues  from  Deutsche  Bank  who  have 
demonstrated  a  desire  and  commitment  to  share  with  us  their  experiences  in  the  area  of 
international capital markets, particularly with respect to sovereign debt issues and ratings. I 
am particularly delighted that this workshop is a follow up to an earlier meeting with officials 
from  Deustche  Bank  in December  2009.  The  willingness of  the  Deutsche  Bank officials  to 
come  back  four  months  later  to  further  discuss  the  issues  with  a  wider  audience  is  truly 
heartening to us and commendable indeed.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, Zambia like many other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa is one of 
the  countries  that  have  for  a  long  time  relied  on  concessional  funding  and  multilateral 
financial support in implementing her development agenda. Whereas other parts of the world 
have  enjoyed  respectable  growth  rates  supported  by  private  capital  flows,  our  region  has 
lagged  behind.  Several  years  of  debilitating  external  debt,  regional  political  instability,  and 
doubtful macroeconomic management have all played a role in keeping private capital flows 
away from our economies. However, with endurance, progress in the region generally and 
Zambia in particularly is certainly being recorded. A glimmer of hope is finally showing that 
we are once again being welcomed in the international capital market arena.  
As  you  are  aware,  the  Government  has  over  the  years  set  out  programs  to  reform  the 
country’s  political  and  economic  platforms.  Politically,  Zambia  has  been  one  of  the  most 
stable democracies in Africa boasting peace since independence in 1964. On the economic 
front, Zambia has made respectable progress in the area of macroeconomic management. 
Over the recent past, the Zambian economy has performed relatively well. This is reflected in 
positive growth rates of real Gross Domestic Product (GDP), low inflation, relatively stable 
exchange rate, stable financial sector and improved banking services. In addition, Zambia’s 
access  to  the  Highly  Indebted  Poor  Country  Initiative  and  the  Multi-lateral  Debt  Relief 
Initiative  resources  drastically  reduced  the  country’s  onerous  debt  burden  from  around 
US $ 7 billion  to  below  US  $ 1  billion.  The  removal  of  the  debt  burden  also  made  Zambia 
more attractive to foreign direct investment and capital flows, that have been an important 
source of investment financing.  
Furthermore, over the recent past, the growth in the real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has 
remained  positive  and  above  5%  for  the  last  six  years.  Despite  the  adverse  effects  of  the 
recent global economic crisis, the country recorded an impressive real GDP growth of 6.3% 
in 2009. This is at a time when other countries in the region and world over  were posting 
negative growth rates. The country also attained a single-digit inflation level of 9.9% at end 
December  2009  while  the  exchange  rate  of  the  Kwacha  against  major  currencies  has 
remained relatively stable. In addition, the financial sector has been stable with improvement 
in banking services. These impressive economic trends suggest that the reform programmes 
that the Government has implemented are now bearing fruit. The reforms have focused on 
BIS Review 51/2010 
 1
the restructuring of the economy, to let markets determine key decisions so as to allow the 
private sector take the lead in providing investment in the economy.  
However,  despite  the  progress  noted  above,  we  are  still  far  from  achieving  many  of  our 
developmental objectives. We are alive to the fact that we cannot achieve our development 
ambitions  if  we  close  ourselves  from  the  rest  of  the  world.  The  economy  faces  enormous 
financing needs especially in view of the high levels of poverty among our people. We are 
also  alive  to  the  fact  that  these  challenges  do  not  just  end  at  obtaining  a  good  sovereign 
rating or raising low-cost finance, but more importantly prudently deploying funds raised to 
projects with a high rate of both social and economic return. This is the challenge we face.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  importance  of  obtaining  a  sovereign  rating  and  issuing  a 
sovereign  bond  cannot  be  over-emphasised.  By  providing  access  to  long  term  funds,  a 
sovereign  bond  issue  provides  wide  possibilities  for  countries  to  meet  financing  needs 
demanded  by  their  growing  economies.  At  the  same  time,  issuers  are  assured  that  their 
financing needs will be met in an orderly and timely manner. This will no doubt result in cost 
efficient  investments  in  the  economy.  In  a  country  like  ours  a  sovereign  rating  and  bond 
issuance will lead to availability of relatively less costly finance for the timely execution of a 
number of long term projects in sectors like energy, communication, agriculture and mining. 
The  timely  execution  of  such  projects  would  no  doubt  accelerate  economic  growth  further 
and impact positively on the high levels of poverty.  
This  workshop  has  therefore  come  at  the  right  time  when  our  countries,  which  just  a  few 
years  ago  were  clearly  outsiders  in  the  international  capital  markets,  are  also  now  taking 
financing decisions to fully participate in the international capital markets. I must admit that 
international financial markets can be a maze for new entrants, and so updating our skills by 
consulting others becomes a priority and adds a lot of value. I have little doubt that as you 
remain deliberating here, the sessions will be very interactive and will provide a lot of food for 
thought. I am certain that everyone here will find this event beneficial.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  with  these  few  remarks  I  hereby  declare  this  workshop  officially 
open.  
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2010
