Sanusi Lamido Sanusi: The Nigerian banking industry – what went 
wrong and the way forward 
Text of the Convocation Lecture by Mr Sanusi Lamido Sanusi, Governor of the Central Bank 
of  Nigeria,  to  mark  the  Annual  Convocation  Ceremony  of  Bayero  University,  Bayero 
University, Kano, 26 February 2010. 
 Protocols 
1. 
May  I  begin  by  thanking  the  Vice-Chancellor,  the  Senate  and  Congregation  of  this  great 
university for the honour of inviting me to deliver this year’s convocation lecture. I am not a 
graduate  of  this  esteemed  institution  but  my  links  to  it  are  indeed  very  deep.  On  a  purely 
personal level, this university is named after my great grandfather and I take personal pride 
in being the first among his descendants to stand here and deliver an academic paper. But 
also,  and  this  may  not  be  known  to  many  of  you,  some  of  the  earliest  professors  of  this 
university including a former Provost are my maternal uncles and great uncles. I am proud to 
count among my mother’s uncles some of the professors associated with this university from 
its  earliest  days,  such  as  Professor  Shehu  Galadanci  (Arabic)  and  the  late  Professor 
Muhammad  Kabir  Galadanci  (Hausa),  and  besides  them  countless  uncles  and  cousins  on 
the academic staff. While I did my own stint as an academic in the economics department of 
ABU Zaria in the early 80’s, I am most proud that my younger brother, Abubakar, Wambai 
Sanusi is on the academic staff of the economics department of BUK. But this is not all. The 
2010  convocation  comes  with  other  unplanned  joys.  In  addition  to  honouring  me  with  the 
opportunity to take the podium today, the University will tomorrow honour my great-uncle, an 
illustrious  son  of  this  city,  AVM  Nura  Imam  (rtd,)  with  a  doctorate  degree.  And  before  you 
think  I  am  through,  my  immediate  younger  sister,  Zainab  Sanusi,  is  one  of  the  students 
receiving a Master’s degree tomorrow. This could not have been planned better. For all these 
reasons, and for the many friends and academic colleagues here, this feels truly like a home-
coming and I do pray it will be a successful one. 
As  you  all  are  aware,  the  world  economy  was  hit  by  an  unprecedented  financial  and 
economic  crisis  in  2007–2009,  tipped  into  recession  by  the  subprime  crisis  in  the  US  in 
August 2007. This crisis led to the collapse of many world renowned financial institutions and 
even caused an entire nation to be rendered bankrupt. 
In  Nigeria,  the  economy  faltered  and  the  banking  system  experienced  a  crisis  in  2009, 
triggered  by  global  events.  The  stock  market  collapsed  by  70%  in  2008–2009  and  many 
Nigerian banks had to be rescued. In order to stabilize the system and return confidence to 
the markets and investors, the CBN injected N620bn of liquidity into the banking sector and 
replaced  the  leadership  at  8  Nigerian  banks.  Since  then,  the  sector  has  considerably 
stabilised. 
We  all  know  that  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system  matters  to  everyone  –  to  the 
economy at large and also to each one of us. The Nigerian economy has huge potential for 
growth. To realise that potential, it is imperative that we learn lessons from the crisis and take 
steps to not only fix the problems, but also introduce measures to establish financial stability, 
enable a healthy evolution of the financial sector and ensure the banking system contributes 
to the development of the real economy. The country, like many others hit by financial crises, 
is already feeling the pain of financial meltdown, most evident in the slowdown of credit to the 
economy. This is a natural consequence of bad lending decisions by banks leading to huge 
provisions and erosion in their capital, as well as challenges resulting from lack of progress in 
reforming the macroeconomic environment. 
BIS Review 49/2010 
 1
During this speech, I would like to talk to you about what went wrong within Nigeria’s banking 
industry  and  the  measures  the  Central  Bank  of  Nigeria  is  taking  to  reform  the  industry,  to 
ensure a similar crisis does not happen again and that the financial sector in Nigeria develop 
in a sustainable manner, contributing positively to economic growth. 
The  original  title  of  this  paper  was  “Transformative  Disruption:  Relocating  the  Nigerian 
Banking Crisis from the Economic to the Social”. The choice of title was informed by a strong 
desire to articulate a correct narrative, in an environment in which we are confronted by a 
multi-vocal  opportunism  determined  to  subvert  history  through  the  fabrication  of  false 
narratives. Among these, is the assertion that the actions taken by the Central bank are part 
of a grandiose “northern” agenda against southern Nigeria. Or that perhaps it is an “Islamic” 
agenda  being  pushed  by  a  Muslim  fundamentalist.  There  are  also  other  subtler  and  more 
sophisticated-albeit  just  as  opportunistic-narratives.  For  example  the  new  claim  by  public 
officers and politicians that there is really no corruption in the public service, that politicians 
are not corrupt, and that the real corruption is only in banks. 
My initial plan was to address these narratives, for as a student of Social Theory I am fully 
conscious of the reality that crises are often the spaces in which false consciousness finds its 
articulation.  Do  we  not  remember  Hitler,  and  how  in  post-war  Germany  he  was  able  to 
construct the narrative of Nazism and convince Germans that their problem was all caused 
by the Jews and would end with the extermination of the Jews? Strange and ridiculous as 
this  seems  to  us  today,  it  was  a  narrative  fervently  believed  by  many  otherwise  rational 
people.  It  is  therefore  imperative  for  us  to  confront  headlong  these  narratives  and  not  just 
dismiss  them  lightly,  for  in  times  of  insecurity  we  always  gravitate  towards  a  Popperian 
tribalisation, and confrontations intensify on a mythical plane of constructed-and contested-
identities. 
In  a  sense  the  initial  title  was  inspired  by  recognition  of  a  sad  reality,  which  needs  to  be 
mentioned at the outset. In a moment of such momentous change in our economy and society 
the universities have been as silent as graveyards. Discourse on the banking crisis has been 
left to journalists of varying degrees of sophistication, and to faceless agents and charlatans. 
The voice of the intellectual has been noticeable in its absence. And this is a real tragedy. 
It  is  tragic  because  the  reforms  represent  transformational  moment  for  our  country  if  only 
progressive  intellectuals  grasped  it.  What  we  have  done  in  the  Central  bank,  is  to  fire  the 
opening salvo in what could potentially be a revolutionary battle against the nexus of money 
and influence that has held this country to ransom for decades. This would not be the first 
time banks collapse nor are brought to the brink in our national history. And it will certainly 
not be the last. But this time there is a difference. 
In previous crises we said some banks had failed a passive and complicit phrase that masked 
a  gross  irresponsibility  and  crass  insensitivity.  “The  bank  has  failed”.  This  is  somewhat  like 
coming across the corpse of a man whose throat was slit, or whose body is covered with knife 
wounds or riddled with bullets and saying “the man died”. The man did not die. He was killed. 
He  was  murdered.  And  he did not kill himself. To use the term “death”  instead of  “murder”, 
excuses us from the responsibility of finding the killers and bringing them to book. 
And that is exactly what happens when we refer to “failed banks” as if the bank itself, some 
impersonal structure made up of branches and computers, somehow collapsed on its own. 
By using – or abusing – the term “failed bank” we are able to mask what is almost always a 
monumental fraud. But it is a deliberate act of prestidigitation. Failed banks are handed over 
to NDIC. Insured depositors get paid N50, 000 (later increased to N200, 000). Thousands of 
poor  people,  who  have  kept  their  life  savings  in  the  bank,  lose  it.  Children’s  school  fees, 
savings for retirement, medical bills, gone into thin air. And who is to blame? No one really. 
Or  maybe  the  poor  people  who  were  foolish  enough  to  keep  their  money  in  a  bank  that 
“failed”. 
How  many  people  have  died  of  heart  attacks  due  to  this  tragedy?  How  many  honest 
businessmen  have  been  rendered  bankrupt?  How  many  people  have  committed  suicide? 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2010
How many have died because they were unable to pay medical bills as their monies were 
trapped  in  these  institutions?  How  many  children  have  dropped  out  of  school?  We  do  not 
know. Because we live in a society in which they do not matter. They are anonymous. They 
are poor. 
What we do know is that we have today, among those parading themselves as role models 
in  society,  people  who  profited  from  failed  banks.  Owners  and  managers  who  go  on  to 
become  governors  and  senators.  Bad  debtors  who  are  multi-billionaires,  having  taken  the 
money belonging to those poor dead souls and not paid back. 
So  here  is  the  reality.  The  owners  and  managers  of  banks,  the  rich  borrowers  and  their 
clients in the political establishment are one and the same class of people protecting their 
interest, and trampling underneath their feet the interest of the poor with impunity. 
So this time we turned the tables and said “enough is enough”. The banks did not fail. They 
were  destroyed  and  brought  to  their  knees  by  acts  committed  by  identifiable  people.  As  a 
student in Ahmadu Bello University, in the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences (FASS), and 
later  as  a  lecturer  in  the  same  faculty,  one  of  my  chief  mentors  was  my  uncle,  the  late 
Dr Yusufu Bala Usman. And one thing Bala taught us was we should never shy away from 
naming names and calling a spade a spade. Do not say that government money has been 
stolen. Name the thief. And so, in keeping with that tradition, we did not say that banks had 
failed.  We  named  human  beings  –  the  management  that  stole  money  in  the  name  of 
borrowing,  the  gamblers  that  took  depositors  funds  to  speculate  on  the  stock  market  and 
manipulate share prices, the billionaires and captains of industry whose wealth actually was 
money belonging to the poor which they “borrowed” and refused to pay back. 
Fortunately, the President, Umaru Musa Yaradua, understood from the first day that this was 
an ideological choice we had to make. We could side with the rich and powerful, and say the 
banks  had  failed.  Or  we  could  side  with  the  poor  and  save  the  banks  but  go  after  the 
criminals. And we chose the latter. And the battle was joined. 
This was going to be the subject of my paper. A paper in social theory, locating the on-going 
banking issues in the context of the social. I had wanted to challenge the audience on the 
silence of progressives, and the failure to seize this opportunity to increase the pressure on a 
corrupt establishment. We have come this far with the support of a president who has time 
and again shown his willingness to back us in the struggle. The real challenge is to extend it 
to other spheres of society even while we pursue the reforms to a logical conclusion. That 
was the plan, before it changed. 
The  choice  of  a  new  topic,  albeit  a  wider  one,  was  informed  by  the  emergence  of  a  new, 
more  subtle  and  thus  more  dangerous  narrative.  The  narrative,  which  is  fast  gathering 
momentum, and being fuelled by articles, advertorials and opportunistic editorials, is that the 
Central  bank  really  has  no  strategy.  There  is  no  road  map  to  the  reforms.  A  senior 
government  official  even  suggested  that  perhaps  we  are  acting  “as  the  spirit  directs”.  It  is 
often the case that statements are made very lightly and take on a life of their own. The US 
government is still undertaking its study of what went wrong on Wall Street. This started after 
the restoration of relative stability and will be completed in about 15 months from now. In our 
case we commissioned a detailed study with the involvement of Bank and external resources 
to diagnose the problems and come out with solutions. For the last six months we have been 
studying  internal  memos,  various  reports  and  correspondences,  and  also  interviewing 
regulators, bankers, business persons, government officials and all stakeholders. I am using 
this platform to unfold the full details of the banking reform programme and to outline exactly 
what went wrong and what we are going to do about it. Economics is a lot more boring than 
social theory but bear with me and I will try to make it as painless as possible. 
So now we return to economics. 
BIS Review 49/2010 
 3
2. 
What went wrong 
Introduction 
2.1 
The Nigerian banking sector witnessed dramatic growth post-consolidation. However, neither 
the industry nor the regulators were sufficiently prepared to sustain and monitor the sector’s 
explosive  growth.  Prevailing  sentiment  and  economic  orthodoxy  all  encouraged  this  rapid 
growth, creating a blind spot to the risks building up in the system. 
Prior to the crisis, the sentiment in the industry was that the banking sector was sound and 
growth  should  be  encouraged.  The  IMF  endorsed  the  strength  of  the  banking  system  to 
support  this  growth.  However,  this  sentiment  proved  misplaced.  I  believe  8  main 
interdependent factors led to the creation of an extremely fragile financial system that was 
tipped into crisis by the global financial crisis and recession. These 8 factors were: 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Macro-economic instability caused by large and sudden capital inflows 
Major failures in corporate governance at banks 
Lack of investor and consumer sophistication 
Inadequate disclosure and transparency about financial position of banks 
Critical gaps in regulatory framework and regulations 
Uneven supervision and enforcement 
Unstructured governance & management processes at the CBN/Weaknesses within 
the CBN 
Weaknesses in the business environment. 
8 
Each  of  these  factors  is  serious  on  its  own  right.  Acted  together  they  brought  the  entire 
Nigerian financial system to the brink of collapse. I will now discuss them in turn. 
Economic and macro prudential management 
2.2 
Let me start with the macro-economic issues connected to the financial crisis. Although there 
is some evidence of diversification, oil maintains an overly dominant position in the Nigerian 
economy, introducing volatility and posing significant challenges to macro-economic stability. 
As oil prices increased steadily between 2004 and 2008, Government spending tracked the 
price of oil, making fiscal policy highly pro-cyclical and adding to this volatility. Variations in 
monthly disbursement of oil revenues made it difficult for governments to manage economic 
development  and  caused  tremendous  instability  as  these  varying  amounts  entered  the 
banking sector. 
Simultaneously, the lack of an effective fiscal quarantining mechanism meant that the fiscal 
authorities failed to prevent this excess liquidity from reaching the domestic banking system. 
Banking sector activity closely mirrored the price of oil and its volatility. As amounts held in 
Nigerian deposits increased, banks were able to increase their lending. Consolidation in the 
domestic  banking  sector  and  along  with  abundant  capital  increased  the  speed  of  credit 
creation. Bank deposits and credit, tracking the price of oil, grew four-fold from 2004 to 2009 
and banking assets grew on average at 76% per annum since consolidation. 
There was a belief that financialisation would drive economic growth. However, the reality is 
more  complex.  While  many  developing  countries  have  followed  this  path,  Nigeria’s 
financialisation was far too rapid for the real economy to benefit. The economy was not able 
to  absorb  of  the  excess  liquidity  from  oil  revenues  and  foreign  investments  in  productive 
sectors. This resulted in significant flows to non-priority sectors and to the capital markets, 
mostly in the form of margin loans and proprietary trading camouflaged as loans.. As a result, 
market capitalisation of the NSE increased by 5.3 times between 2004 and its peak in 2007, 
and the market capitalisation of bank stocks increased by 9 times during the same period. 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2010
This set the stage for a financial asset bubble particularly in bank stocks. The rapid rise in 
asset prices and the over concentration of bank shares in the stock market index were clear 
indications of an accident waiting to happen. Instead of raising concern among regulators, 
these  developments  were  cheered  by  most,  and  voices  of  protest  were  waved  aside  with 
arrogance. In 2007, the Nigerian Stock Exchange was “the best performing” bourse in the 
world even though there was no evidence to suggest a commensurate improvement in the 
fundamentals of real sector corporations. 
All other countries that experienced equally rapid financial asset growth crashed and suffered 
years  of  low  or  negative  growth.  As  credit  levels  rose  and  stock  prices  inflated,  the  CBN 
failed to halt this vicious circle and foresee the consequences. The CBN did not highlight or 
failed to communicate the problem to fiscal authorities and the market in general. The sad 
story in all this is that we now have evidence that junior officers in the CBN did document 
their concerns to CBN top management at that time, but no action was taken. We also have 
evidence that the NDIC documented its concerns but its efforts to get the CBN leadership to 
act quickly were rebuffed. Also, during this period, CBN’s macro-prudential management did 
not sufficiently address the impact of these oil-related inflows, and with the fiscal policy being 
pro-cyclical, this exacerbated the crisis. 
Corporate governance at banks 
2.3 
The huge surge in capital availability occurred during the time when corporate governance 
standards at banks were extremely weak. In fact, failure in corporate governance at banks 
was indeed a principal factor contributing to the financial crisis. Consolidation created bigger 
banks but failed to overcome the fundamental weaknesses in corporate governance in many 
of these banks. It was well known in the industry that since consolidation, some banks were 
engaging in unethical and potentially fraudulent business practices and the scope and depth 
of these activities were documented in recent CBN examinations. 
Governance malpractice within banks, unchecked at consolidation, became a way of life in 
large parts of the sector, enriching a few at the expense of many depositors and investors. 
Corporate  governance  in  many  banks  failed  because  boards  ignored  these  practices  for 
reasons  including  being  misled  by  executive  management,  participating  themselves  in 
obtaining un-secured loans at the expense of depositors and not having the qualifications to 
enforce good governance on bank management. In addition, the audit process at all banks 
appeared  not  to  have  taken  fully  into  account  the  rapid  deterioration  of  the  economy  and 
hence of the need for aggressive provisioning against risk assets. 
As banks grew in size and complexity, bank boards often did not fulfil their function and were 
lulled into a sense of well-being by the apparent year-over-year growth in assets and profits. 
In hindsight, boards and executive management in some major banks were not equipped to 
run  their  institutions.  The  bank  chairman/CEO  often  had  an  overbearing  influence  on  the 
board,  and  some  boards  lacked  independence;  directors  often  failed  to  make  meaningful 
contributions  to  safeguard  the  growth  and  development  of  the  bank  and  had  weak  ethical 
standards; the board committees were also often ineffective or dormant. 
We  have  already  published  details  of  the  extent  of  insider  abuse  in  several  of  the  banks. 
CEOs  set  up  Special  Purpose  Vehicles  to  lend  money  to  themselves  for  stock  price 
manipulation or the purchase of estates all over the world. One bank borrowed money and 
purchased private jets which we later discovered were registered in the name of the CEO’s 
son.  In  another  bank  the  management  set  up  100  fake  companies  for  the  purpose  of 
perpetrating fraud. A lot of the capital supposedly raised by these so called “mega banks” 
was fake capital financed from depositors’ funds. 30% of the share capital of Intercontinental 
bank  was  purchased  with  customer  deposits.  Afribank  used  depositors’  funds  to  purchase 
80% of its IPO. It paid N25 per share when the shares were trading at N11 on the NSE and 
these shares later collapsed to under N3. The CEO of Oceanic bank controlled over 35% of 
the  bank  through  SPVs  borrowing  customer  deposits.  The  collapse  of  the  capital  market 
BIS Review 49/2010 
 5
wiped out these customer deposits amounting to hundreds of billions of naira. The Central 
Bank had a process of capital verification at the beginning of consolidation to avoid bubble 
capital. For some unexplained reason, this process was stopped. As a result, we have now 
discovered  that  in  many  cases  consolidation  was  a  sham  and  the  banks  never  raised  the 
capital they claimed they did. 
Investor and consumer sophistication 
2.4 
Bank boards are hardly the only ones to blame for failure to deal with the sudden surplus in 
capital. A lack of investor and consumer sophistication also contributed to the crisis by failing 
to impose market discipline and allowing banks to take advantage of consumers. Investors, 
many  new  to  investing,  were  unaware  of  the  risks  they  were  taking  and  consumers  were 
often subjected to poor service and sometimes hidden fees. 
Nigeria  does  not  have  a  tradition  of  consumer  activism  or  investor  protection  and  as  a 
consequence many Nigerians made investments without a proper understanding the risks. 
The limited consumer protection framework did exist in Nigeria. However, the framework was 
inadequate and as a result consumers’ rights were not sufficiently protected. 
Disclosure and transparency 
2.5 
Given the low sophistication among many consumers and investor, inadequate disclosure by 
the banks was another major contributing factor to the crisis. Bank reports to the CBN and 
investors  often  were  inaccurate,  incomplete  and  late,  depriving  the  CBN  of  the  right 
information  to  effectively  supervise  the  industry  and  depriving  investors  of  information 
required to make informed investment decisions. 
The  CBN  did  not  act  to  enforce  the  data  quality  in  banks  to  ensure  their  reports  were 
accurate.  The  CBN’s  internal  reporting  system  could  not  serve  as  an  effective  warning 
system for bank surveillance. 
In addition, banks made public information on their operations on a highly selective basis and 
investors  were  unable  to  make  informed  decisions  on  the  quality  of  bank  earnings,  the 
strength  of  their  balance  sheets  or  the  risks  in  their  businesses.  Without  accurate 
information,  investors  made  ill-advised  decisions  regarding  bank  stocks,  enticed  by  a 
speculative  market  bubble  which  was  allegedly  partly  fuelled  by  the  banks  through  the 
practice of margin lending. 
Some  banks  even  engaged  in  manipulating  their  books  by  colluding  with  other  banks  to 
artificially  enhance  financial  positions  and  therefore  stock  prices.  Practices  such  as 
converting non-performing loans into commercial papers and bank acceptances and setting 
up  off-balance  sheet  special  purpose  vehicles  to  hide  losses  were  prevalent.  Recently  the 
CBN put an end to these practices and the collapse of the equity markets effectively put an 
end to alleged stock price manipulation. 
Regulatory framework and prudential regulations 
2.6 
Now I will turn to the failure of the authorities, the CBN and other government bodies with 
oversight for the financial sector. Lack of co-ordination among regulators prevented the CBN 
from having a comprehensive consolidated bank view of its activities. In addition, regulations 
concerning the major causes of the crisis were often incomplete. 
There is little co-ordination among the FS regulators. In spite of the widespread knowledge of 
bank malpractice and propensity for regulatory arbitrage, the FSRCC, the coordinating body 
for financial regulators did not meet for two years during this time. Whilst excess capital gave 
rise to strong growth in lending, banks were also allowed to use the capital to enter many 
other non-lending activities such as stock market investments, most of which were hived off 
6 
 BIS Review 49/2010
in subsidiaries thus escaping the ongoing supervisory scrutiny by the CBN. The CBN did not 
receive  examination  reports  from  the  SEC  covering  bank  subsidiaries,  nor  was  there  a 
framework for consolidated bank examination. 
Regulations  governing  the  issues  that  caused  the  crisis  were  incomplete.  In  fact,  of  the 
373 circulars issued by the CBN since January 2008, only 44 addressed issues relating to 
the crisis and none addressed the issue of corporate governance. A comparison of Nigerian 
regulations with those of international regulators indicated the Nigerian set of regulations was 
not  as  comprehensive.  An  example  was  the  lack  of  a  legal  and  regulatory  framework 
governing the margin lending activity. 
Supervision and enforcement 
inadequate  enforcement  also  played  a  significant  role 
2.7 
Uneven  supervision  and 
in 
exacerbating  the  problems  associated  with  the  crisis.  Regulators  were  ineffective  in 
foreseeing  and  supervising  the  massive  changes  in  the  industry  or  in  eliminating  the 
pervasive corporate governance failures. 
The Supervision Department within the CBN was not structured to supervise effectively and 
to enforce regulation. No one was held accountable for addressing the key industry issues 
such as risk management, corporate governance, fraud, money laundering, cross-regulatory 
co-ordination,  enforcement,  legal  prosecution  or  for  ensuring  examination  policies  and 
procedures  were  well  adapted  to  the  prevailing  environment.  Moreover,  the  geographic 
separation of on-site and off-site examiners hindered the building of integrated and effective 
supervisory  teams.  Critical  processes,  like  enforcement,  pre-examination  planning  and 
people  development  were  not  delivering  the  results  required  to  effectively  supervise  and 
engage banks to enforce good conduct. 
There were many instances of weaknesses in the supervision and enforcement process. For 
example,  bank  examinations  were  not  conducted  on  a  bank  consolidated  basis.  Pre-
examination planning did not question banks’ use of the Expanded Discount Window nor did 
it include a review of prior SEC or NAICOM reports (if any) on bank subsidiaries. In addition, 
the CBN did not provide input to the SEC in planning its examinations of bank activities. Also, 
the  ratings  and  depth  of  analysis  wasn’t  sufficient  to  capture  the  issues.  For  example, 
CAMEL ratings did not differentiate the performance of successful and failed banks. While 
some examinations identified critical risk management issues, many issues that caused the 
crisis escaped examination, though they were well known in the industry. Sense of urgency 
was low with some examinations taking between 9 months to more than a year to complete. 
Enforcement was the biggest failure among surveillance processes, despite the CBN having 
all  the  powers  it  needed  to  enforce  examination  recommendations.  Financial  penalties  are 
inadequate  to  enforce  bank  compliance.  By  paying  fines,  banks  effectively  annulled  key 
aspects  of  the  examination  reports.  With  examination  cycles  between  6  and  12  months, 
follow-up on examination recommendations rolled into the following year’s examination. The 
prevailing  view  that  the  sector  was  healthy,  a  culture  of  tolerance,  and  acceptance  of  the 
status quo and the shortage of specialist skills compromised supervision’s effectiveness. 
There was insufficient discipline in holding the banks to clear remedial programmes. While 
banks  responded  to  examination  reports,  they  seldom  committed  to  specific  deliverables, 
timing or executive responsibility for implementation. Hence it was difficult to measure bank 
progress against compliance with some of the major recommendations. Banks’ compliance 
record  was  poor.  They  frequently  ignored  the  examiners  recommendations  in  spite  of  the 
seriousness  of  the  issues.  The  consequence  to  the  banks  of  noncompliance  was  not 
sufficient 
for 
non-compliance. The CBN allowed this practice and behaviour to go unchecked, establishing 
a way of doing business that compromised the supervision process. 
faced  no  personal  consequences 
to  change  behaviour.  Directors 
BIS Review 49/2010 
 7
CBN governance and management processes 
2.8 
Still on the role of the authority in this crisis, the governance and management processes at 
the  CBN  also  had  a  significant  impact  on  its  ability  to  deliver  its  mandate  adequately. 
Governance  and  internal  processes  were  unstructured  and  this  compromised  the  CBN’s 
ability to supervise the industry. Corporate governance at the CBN was laissez-faire. Board 
agendas were set by the Governor and consequently reflected his priorities, and there were 
inadequate committee structures and processes to ensure the CBN Board’s independence in 
assessing whether the CBN was fulfilling its mission. 
Issues concerning the stability of the financial sector and economic development were not 
discussed comprehensively at the CBN Board meetings – these risks include for example, 
global  economic  risks,  federal/state  economic  development  strategies  and  fiscal  policies, 
formation  of  asset  bubbles,  exchange  rate  risk,  capital  market  depth,  informal  sector 
economy etc. 
The CBN was not organised to monitor adequately and analyse the macroeconomic issues 
and  systems  risks  inherent  in  the  financial  sector.  There  is  no  overarching  architecture  to 
manage  the  risks  in  the  banking  system,  linking  economic  indicators  to  macro-prudential 
guidelines  and  to  individual  bank  prudential  guidelines.  As  a  consequence,  managing  the 
risks to the banking system from the impact of oil price volatility, cross-border capital flows, 
asset price bubbles and weak corporate governance did not have the necessary urgency at 
the CBN board or within the CBN itself. Management information to analyse the risks in the 
banking system was inefficient. There were also data quality issues with the CBN’s internal 
reporting system and the research department at the CBN is under-equipped to access the 
latest economic data and analysis. 
Leadership  and  culture  issues  included  an  apparent  lack  of  political  will  to  enforce  the 
sanctions for infractions and a belief, supported by the IMF that the sector was sound and 
that  growth  was  a  healthy  development  blunted  the  understanding  of  the  real  risks 
threatening  the  economy  and  the  banking  system.  It  was  almost  as  if,  having  made 
“consolidation” the hallmark of success, there was a desperate need to remain in a state of 
denial rather than recognise that mistakes had been made and take corrective action. 
Business environment 
2.9 
Finally, a lack of a sufficiently developed infrastructure and business environment has had a 
negative influence on the banking industry. The legal process, an absence of reliable credit 
rating agencies and poor infrastructure all contributed to non-standard banking practices. 
Nigeria’s legal process is long and expensive and banks seldom pursue borrowers in court. 
Few  banks  were  able  to  foreclose  on  borrowers,  and  this  led  to  borrowers  abusing  the 
system. 
Basic  lack  of  credit  information  on  customers,  largely  because  there  is  no  uniform  way  to 
identify  customers,  has  held  back  the  development  of  credit  bureaus  and  hampered 
customer credit assessment at banks, increasing the stock of bad debt in the system. 
3. 
Reform program 
Introduction 
3.1 
Having discussed the causes of the financial crisis let me turn on to the solutions that we are 
pursuing. The blueprint for reforming the Nigerian financial system in the next decade is built 
around 4 pillars. 
– 
– 
Pillar 1: Enhancing the quality of banks 
Pillar 2: Establishing financial stability 
8 
 BIS Review 49/2010
Pillar 3: Enabling healthy financial sector evolution 
Pillar 4: Ensuring the financial sector contributes to the real economy. 
– 
– 
In many areas, CBN needs to take the lead in implementing reforms; in other areas, CBN 
needs to play a key advocacy role. 
Enhancing the quality of banks 
3.2 
Let  me  begin  with  the  first  pillar  –  enhancing  the  quality  of  banks.  The  CBN  will  initiate  a 
5 part programme to enhance the operations and quality of banks in Nigeria. The programme 
will consist of industry remedial programmes to fix the key causes of the crisis. It will also 
include implementation of risk based supervision, reforms to regulations and regulatory 
framework, enhanced provisions for consumer protection, and internal transformation of 
the CBN. 
In the first part, the industry remedial programmes will include a set of initiatives to fix the 
key  causes  of  the  crisis,  namely  data  quality,  enforcement,  governance,  risk  management 
and financial crime. These initiatives will be structured in such a manner that the banks do 
most of the work to embed new behaviours in the industry, with the CBN playing a cross-
industry programme management role. A key plank of this programme is that we must hold 
individuals  responsible  for  their  actions,  we  must  pursue  all  criminal  cases  to  their  logical 
conclusion and  we  must  ensure  that  nobody, no  matter  how  highly  placed,  is  permitted  to 
benefit from the fruits of crime. This is our commitment and we intend to stand by it no matter 
how long it takes and no matter whose ox is gored. 
In order to address failures of corporate governance in the industry, the CBN will establish a 
specialist function focusing on governance issues to ensure governance best practices are 
embedded in the industry. The reform programme will strengthen corporate governance in 
both banks and the CBN, embedding a culture across the industry that good governance is 
good business. A remedial programme will be launched to implement and monitor a new 
set  of  corporate  governance  guidelines  incorporating  a  range  of  reforms.  The  reform 
measures will include updated corporate governance statements prepared by the banks and 
establishment  of  mandatory  board  committees  and  a  definition  of  their  responsibilities. 
Reform measures will also include education of board directors on their responsibilities and 
on  the  unethical  and  allegedly  fraudulent  activities  and  the  penalties  they  carry.  Amnesty 
period for full disclosure of ownership and related party transactions by board directors will 
be introduced. An extended fit and proper test will be developed to include an assessment of 
qualifications  and  face-to-face  interviews.  This  will  include  a  retrospective  review  of 
individuals  admitted  to  a  Board  in  the  last  10  years.  An  enhanced  annual  performance 
measurement  process  for  Boards  and  individual  directors  will  be  introduced  shortly.  In 
addition, any bank with assets larger than a certain pre-defined level will be required to form 
an international advisory panel to aid good corporate governance practices within the bank. 
Furthermore,  the  CBN  will  encourage  all  banks  to  appoint  qualified  directors  with 
international experience. 
The  CBN  has  established  an  internal  risk  management  specialist  function  to  develop 
Nigerian Capital Adequacy and Enterprise Risk Assessment Process guidelines, based on 
the ICAAP (UK) and COSO (US) frameworks, to ensure the industry adapts and complies 
with the highest standards of risk management and Boards are well-informed on how their 
organisations are managing risk. We have already introduced tenure limits for bank CEOs 
and intend to implement the term limits set out in the 2006 Code of Conduct for the banking 
Industry with respect to non executive directors and auditors in the immediate future. 
We have already begun the transition to a risk-based supervision, thus aligning the CBN 
with  international  regulators.  This  is  part  2  of  our  5-part  programme.  The  CBN  will  ensure 
RBS principles, methodology and processes are established across the CBN and NDIC. A 
programme management structure will be established within the CBN to ensure that there is 
BIS Review 49/2010 
 9
to  measure 
the  necessary  skills.  A  monitoring  mechanism 
a  high  level  of  communication  with  the  industry,  implementation  quality  is  measured  and 
examiners  acquire 
the 
programme’s  impact  and  to  ensure  a  high  level  of  responsiveness  to issues  raised  by  the 
industry will also be established. 
The  third  part  in  the  programme  to  enhance  quality  of  banks  is  the  regulation  and 
regulatory framework reform programme that I mentioned earlier. This has three sub-parts: 
First,  in  conjunction  with  other  regulators,  the  CBN  will  embark  on  a  systematic  review  of 
regulations  and  guidelines  around  the  key  contributors  to  the  crisis  namely;  data  quality, 
enforcement,  governance,  and  risk  management.  Second,  sponsored  by  the  FSRCC,  the 
CBN  will  lead  a  programme  to  reform  fundamentally  the  financial  services  regulatory 
framework  focusing  initially  on  harmonising  and  raising  to  world-class  standards  the 
supervision processes, technology and people within the various financial regulators. A multi-
regulator  task  force  will  integrate  process  reforms  across  jurisdictions  to  ensure  a 
comprehensive  bank  regulatory  framework.  Third,  a  centre  of  competence  for  IFRS  and 
N-GAAP+ implementation will be established to support examination teams and contribute to 
the NASB IFRS committee. 
In the fourth part, consumer protection is also an integral part of the reform program. The 
CBN  will  become  the  consumer’s  advocate,  setting  standards  of  customer  service  for  the 
industry and ensuring that customers are treated fairly in all their dealings with the industry. 
The CBN will establish a consumer protection department to restore consumer confidence in 
the industry. Its objectives would be to educate consumers on financial products, to respond 
to major consumer issues and to ensure the industry treats customers fairly. After 3–5 years, 
the consumer protection department will be rolled out into a Nigeria Financial Ombudsman 
Service, with the rules being set by CBN. The consumer protection department will increase 
consumer  understanding  and  ensure  banks  understand 
their  responsibilities.  This 
department  will  work  with  supervisors  to  ensure  appropriate  rules  and  regulations  are 
enforced by the banks. 
In addition to the initiatives I have already mentioned, the reform programme will also include 
measures to transform the CBN itself in its fifth and last part. Core to transforming the CBN 
is corporate governance within the CBN. Board agendas, processes and procedures will be 
structured  and  institutionalised  to  ensure  good  governance  is  not  dependent  on  the 
leadership  of  the  Governor.  The  organisation  structure  within  the  CBN  is  already  being 
streamlined to enable the CBN to better supervise and regulate the industry. In addition, the 
CBN will deploy a stronger management information framework to effectively supervise the 
industry.  Management  information  dashboards  will  be  developed  for  all  key  job  roles, 
including bank examiners, group heads, deputy governors and their direct reports, and the 
Governor. Finally, CBN disclosure will also be enhanced to levels expected in major investor 
countries namely the United States, the United Kingdom, South Africa, China and India. 
Establishing financial stability 
3.3 
The second and very crucial pillar in our four pillar reform program is establishing financial 
stability. The key features of this pillar centre around strengthening the financial stability 
committee  within 
the  CBN,  establishment  of  a  hybrid  monetary  policy  and 
macro-prudential  rules,  development  of  directional  economic  policy  and  counter-cyclical 
fiscal policies by the government and further development of capital markets as alternative to 
bank funding. 
Nigeria has dramatically underperformed its economic potential. Nigeria can only improve its 
economic performance if it deals squarely with two fundamental issues: 
 
Volatility and instability caused by over-reliance on oil and sub-optimal management 
of oil revenue, and 
Ability of the non-oil real economy to productively absorb investment and debt. 
BIS Review 49/2010
 10 
 While the CBN is a critical player, success will require co-operation from many players in the 
economy and specifically fiscal policies that address these two fundamental issues. 
Nigeria’s economic performance falls short of its potential, although GDP per capita has risen 
in  recent  years.  While  oil  should  provide  significant  benefits  to  the  economy,  the  reality  is 
Nigeria will not progress, and will be subject to further financial crises, unless it addresses 
the  fundamental  volatility  induced  by  oil  dependence.  Both  the  federal  and  state 
governments are exacerbating volatility with pro-cyclical fiscal policies. It’s also important to 
bear  in  mind  that  the  current  financial  crisis  resulted  from  dramatic  financialisation  that 
should have been foreseen. 
We need to deal directly with the fundamental economic volatility related to the dominant role 
of  the  oil  sector.  We  need  to  make  better  use  of  our  oil  endowment  by  harnessing  it  for 
strategic  investment  purposes.  We  also  need  to  ensure  lending  and  investment  get  to  the 
real economy, especially its priority sectors, instead of being used to inflate financial asset 
bubbles. 
Economic  orthodoxy,  including  the  “Washington  consensus”,  which  consists  of  ten  broad 
policy recommendations promoted by the IMF and the World Bank since the late 1980s is 
being  fundamentally  rethought  based  on  recent  experiences  and  specifically  the  Financial 
Crises. Beginning with Reaganism and Thatcherism in the 1980, and following the collapse 
of the Soviet bloc, a new orthodoxy was imposed on the world. In Nigeria, beginning with the 
Structural Adjustment Programme of the mid-1980s, successive governments have adopted 
this new religion of Friedmanism. There is a naive belief that the market solves all problems, 
that  rules  and  regulations  are  bad,  that  greed  and  profit  maximisation  by  a  few,  are  the 
ultimate signs of success of an economy. The result is that in the last decade for example we 
have had consistent GDP growth, yet poverty and joblessness have been on the increase. A 
few  individuals  and  corporations  have  amassed  fantastic  levels  of  wealth  while  millions 
languish  in  poverty.  The  stock  market  was  booming  and  banks  were  making  huge  profits 
while factories were closing down and workers were being laid off. 
Privatisation  became  a  polite  name  for  nepotism  and  cronyism,  with  public  assets  sold 
cheaply to politically connected persons. The “free market” came to mean a lack of regulation 
or  protection  for  the  consumer  or  general  public.  In  service  delivery,  competition  rules, 
consumer protection and matters of the environment, we had regulatory agencies that had 
been “captured” by big business. Those who were supposed to regulate operators, be they 
banks,  listed  companies,  stock  exchanges  or  telecoms  companies,  became  themselves 
agents and protectors of those they were supposed to regulate. 
As a country we have pursued international trade policies that have destroyed our productive 
base. Wrong tariffs, a naive believe in free-market platitudes and a willingness to succumb 
too  easily  to  the  wishes  of  western  powers  have  led  us  to  a  state  in  which  we  operate  a 
dysfunctional economy, one capable of delivering rapid GDP growth  without improving the 
quality of life of the majority. 
We need to carefully evaluate the most up-to-date evidence in developing economic policy, 
realising  that  in  some  cases,  the  best  policy  response  will  be  radically  different  than  the 
orthodoxy of just a few years ago. A more interventionist, directional economic policy stance 
should be adopted by Nigeria. 
To address these issues, many new initiatives are being developed within the CBN. 
The first set of initiatives is related to Monetary and macro-prudential policies. 
The CBN will strengthen the Financial Stability Committee (FSC) whose focus will be 
1. 
on  maintaining  systemic  stability;  this  committee  will  be  supported  by  a  strong  technical 
working group. In recent years excessive credit and financial asset growth went unchecked. 
Academic  literature  has  shown  Nigeria  –  as  a  developing  open  economy,  with  a  relatively 
small financial system and a dependence on oil – is particularly prone to asset price bubbles. 
Banking reforms are a necessary but not sufficient condition to ensure this does not happen 
BIS Review 49/2010 
 11
again  –  there  is  need  for  additional  macro-prudential  oversight.  There  is  an  emerging 
international  consensus 
that  price  stability  should  be  supplemented  by  a  robust 
macroprudential  regulatory  framework,  which  monitors  and  acts  on  signs  of  systemic  risk. 
Warning signs are easy to miss without an organisation in place with specific remit to monitor 
systemic  risk  and  act  on  signs  of  distress.  Although  the  CBN  has  for  years  now  had  an 
FSSC, it is  surprising that it did not function when it was most needed and in fact did not 
meet at all for most of the period of the global economic crisis. 
The MPC and the FSC would be at the core of the new macro-prudential framework; The 
MPC and FSC would work together to ensure that monetary policy is shaped by systemic 
risk trends and consistent with the expanded hybrid goals for asset price stability. Informed 
decision-making  by  the  MPC  and  the  FSC  will  be  possible  with  better  data  and  analysis 
following investment in the CBN’s analytical function. We expect a number of members of the 
FSC  to  also  sit  on  the  MPC  to  ensure  Committees  are  working  in  unison.  CBN  will 
communicate  regularly  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  to  ensure  that  monetary  and  fiscal 
policies are consistent. 
As regarding the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), it will continue with its focus on price 
stability. However, we will now task it further with the goal of avoiding asset bubbles. There is 
an emerging international consensus that price stability should be supplemented by a robust 
macroprudential regulatory framework including a function that monitors asset price bubbles 
and acts to eliminate them. Asset price bubbles have been a major source of instability and 
introducing an explicit asset price remit for the MPC is one way to reduce these destabilising 
bubbles.  Nigeria  as  a  developing  open  economy  with  a  relatively  small  financial  system 
dependent on oil is particularly prone to asset price bubbles, which have caused real growth 
volatility.  Volatility  lowers  growth,  especially  for  low  income  countries  like  Nigeria.  A  study 
has  shown  that  a  one  percentage  point  increase  in  real  GDP  growth  volatility  reduces  a 
country’s average growth rate by 0.31 percentage points. 
The  CBN  will  also  introduce  new  macro-prudential  rules  to  address  several  of  the 
2. 
specific causes of the crisis. An oversight function such as the FSC will be ineffective without 
tools with which to effect policy. It is important to have well-specified policy tools so as not to 
adversely affect the real economy. Dynamic provisioning can be one such tool; however it is 
difficult  to  implement  and  needs  to  be  considered  with  care.  Due  to  the  Nigeria’s  unique 
economic  situation,  it  makes  it  more  appropriate  to  have  some  form  of  oil  price  linked 
provisioning regime. Potential levers could include: 
 
 
Limiting capital market lending to a set proportion of a bank’s balance sheets 
Prohibiting banks from using depositors funds for proprietary trading, private equity 
or venture capital investments (the “Volcker rule” or some version of Glass-Steagall) 
Adjusting capital adequacy ratios depending on the perceived riskiness of the bank 
or financial institution 
Adjusting capital adequacy depending on the perceived point in cycle and 
Forward looking capital requirement driven by stress tests conducted by CBN. 
 
 
Some form of an oil price-linked provisioning regime, augmented by consideration of other 
macroeconomic indicators, need to be adopted for Nigeria. 
Furthermore, the current managed exchange rate regime needs to be developed to ensure 
policies  and  reserves  are  in  place  to  credibly  defend  the  currency  in  times  of  distress. 
Exchange rate policies are being designed to limit exchange rate volatility which has been 
shown to reduce growth. Our commitment to maintaining a stable exchange rate has been 
communicated to the market and measures put in place to ensure stability is maintained. Any 
significant  movement  in  the  exchange  rate  will  be  overseen  in  an  orderly  way  with  the 
rationale for it clearly explained to all stakeholders. I am sure you have all noticed that we 
have avoided the volatility that characterised the exchange rate in the first half of 2009 and 
 12 
 BIS Review 49/2010
maintained convergence between the official and parallel market rates of exchange for about 
eight  consecutive  months  now.  A  recent  paper  shows  that,  in  countries  with  relatively 
thin  financial  markets  like  Nigeria,  a  high  degree  of  exchange  rate  flexibility  consistently 
leads to lower growth. A 50% increase in exchange rate volatility leads to a 0.33% reduction 
in annual productivity growth; and a fixed exchange rate could add almost one percentage 
point to a country like Nigeria’s annual GDP growth. 
3. 
Capital  control  approaches  to  prevent  foreign  “hot  money”  from  destabilising  the 
capital  markets  and  the  real  economy  is  another  initiative  under  consideration.  Evidence 
suggests  that  external  capital  flows  are  highly  pro-cyclical  and  are  a  source  of  financial 
instability. Many believe foreign capital flows contributed to the recent credit bubble, as they 
were increasingly channelled into non-priority sectors of the Nigerian economy. Some would 
advise  us  to  institute  “hot  money  controls”  similar  to  those  put  in  place  by  Brazil.  Without 
ruling this option out permanently, our present thinking is that the bubble in our market was 
largely driven by leverage from local banks and any actions now to discourage capital flows 
may be precipitate. We will monitor capital flows but only intervene where they are seen to 
be a major, or primary, contributor to the problem. 
4. 
In addition to the monetary and macro-prudential initiatives I have just mentioned, the 
CBN will become a champion to encourage implementation of directional economic policy 
to  improve  basic  infrastructure,  diversify  the  economy,  and  increase  the  investment 
absorption  capacity  of  priority  sectors  and  support  measures  that  enable  sustainable 
economic  growth.  We  would  like  to  encourage  reforms  to  improve  Nigeria’s  business 
environment, including property rights, rule of law, ease of doing business and investor risk. 
Nigeria  scores  relatively  poorly  on  the  World  Economic  Forum’s  Global  Competitiveness 
Index. Factors contributing to Nigeria’s low GCI score include: 
 
 
 
 
 
Comparator  countries  with  higher  GCI  scores  tend  to  have  higher  GDP  per  capita.  This 
presents  a  strong  argument  for  addressing  some  of  the  structural  weaknesses  of  the 
Nigerian economy that are highlighted by the GCI. 
Nigeria needs to support priority sectors more aggressively. Diversification away from oil can 
be  achieved  either  through  domestic  support  measures  or  through  attracting  foreign  direct 
investment (FDI) to priority sectors. The recent credit boom showed that Nigeria has access 
to plentiful capital which has been misallocated. Nevertheless, Nigeria should still target FDI 
in priority sectors as it tends to lead to valuable inflows of technology and knowledge. Nigeria 
falls  behind  many  countries  with  comparable  macroeconomic  characteristics,  having  low 
levels  of  per  capita  GDP  and  FDI.  Diversification,  typically  with  a  focus  on  exports  from 
sectors, in which a country has a comparative advantage, can also be achieved by protecting 
or subsidizing domestic companies until they attain global scale. Countries that have actively 
sought  to  diversify  their  economies,  whether  through  FDI  (e.g.  Malaysia  and  Brazil)  or 
through domestic support measures (e.g. Brazil and Korea), have increased their GDP per 
capita  more  quickly 
for  driving 
diversification, it is important to select the right sectors that match Nigeria’s human capital 
and natural endowment advantages, such as agriculture, oil refining, petroleum products and 
basic manufacturing. 
In December 2009, in Enugu for the first time in our banking history a weekend retreat was 
held involving the committee of governors and the CEOs of all 24 banks specifically to map 
Low efficiency and the lack of independence and transparency of public institutions, 
Infrastructure of insufficient quality, 
Health and education systems deficiencies, 
Low productivity and the brain drain and 
Low technological readiness. 
the  selected  method 
Irrespective  of 
than  Nigeria. 
BIS Review 49/2010 
 13
out strategies for growing credit to the real sector. We identified three major areas: power, 
transport infrastructure and agriculture. We then agreed to meet as a group with willing state 
governors in order to find bankable projects they are sponsoring. So far we have met with the 
governors of Lagos and Delta. In the middle of March, we shall meet with the governors of 
Cross River, Ogun and Kaduna. We have made rapid progress and this process is opening 
new vistas in the relations between banks and the public sector. In the meantime the Central 
Bank is working on strategies for making long term single digit interest rate loans to small 
and medium-scale manufacturers, as well as to state-sponsored projects identified as viable 
in  the  course  of  implementing  the  decisions  of  the  Enugu  retreat.  We  will  make  an 
announcement in the very near future. 
I  have  always  held  the  view  that  a  central  bank  governor  in  an  emerging  economy  like 
Nigeria must balance the desire for low inflation with the critical need for economic growth 
and poverty alleviation. It is for this reason that I soft-pedalled on the CBN’s earlier effort to 
fast-track to an explicit inflation-targeting regime. The evidence for inflation targeting in poor 
countries  remains  dubious  and  francophone  West  Africa  is  a  case  in  point.  As  we  stand 
today,  countries  like  Botswana  have  abandoned  the  policy.  New  Zealand,  Brazil  and 
Argentina  are  having  second  thoughts  about  the  wisdom  of  pursuing  a  very  low  inflation 
target.  Even  IMF  officials  have  recently  advised  the  central  banks  in  advanced  countries, 
including  the  ECB  to  relax  their  target.  There  is  a  raging  debate  in  South  Africa  over  the 
SARB’s insistence on maintaining an inflation target of 3–6% at a time of very weak GDP 
growth. So while the Central Bank will continue to maintain price stability, it will be an active 
player in the economic development space and encourage policies that and reforms that lead 
to the growth of the real economy, including attracting foreign investment into critical sectors. 
The point here is not to signal that we are abandoning a primary task of central banking, the 
maintenance  of  price  stability.  Without  price  stability  and  some  ability  to  anchor  inflation 
expectations monetary policy begins to lose traction. However in setting inflation targets we 
must set targets that are compatible with our growth and poverty alleviation objectives, and 
then gradually adjust over time as these objectives are attained. History shows us that some 
countries have experienced rapid economic growth with inflation in the lower double-digits. 
The  policy  of  retraining  needed  spending  and  making  huge  sacrifices  to  attain  single  digit 
inflation needs to my mind, considerable review. 
Further  development  of  Nigeria’s  capital  markets  is  yet  another  initiative  under 
5. 
development within the CBN. Individuals and most private sector companies are dependent 
on banks for funding, but there has been a timing mismatch between lending and borrowing 
in  the  Nigerian  financial  system.  There  is  little  long  term  lending  available,  which  reduces 
long  term  investment  and  growth.  Nurturing  other  ways  to  raise  funds  could  increase 
competition  thus  reducing  costs,  encourage  best  practice  lending  and  encourage  better, 
longer term investment. 
A diverse capital market is a necessary step to becoming a financially developed economy. 
Improving capital market depth and accessibility by promoting alternative forms of raising 
finance  for  priority  sectors  is  therefore  very  much  on  our  agenda.  This  can  be  achieved 
through developing an infrastructure for a corporate bond market, more accessible equity 
markets, supporting deeper venture capital and micro-financing of new businesses and 
establishing  a  sustainable  private  equity  environment,  potentially  with  government  seed 
capital. 
In partnership with the Finance Ministry, we are about to obtain presidential approval for tax 
waivers to promote the fixed income market. We will also put in place appropriate measures 
to improve attractiveness of sub-national bonds to the banking sector. 
6.  We are also considering developing measures around counter-cyclical fiscal policies. 
For  example,  one  proposal  under  consideration  is  whether  to  significantly  expand  the 
Excess  Crude  Account  (ECA)  into  a  fully-fledged  stabilisation  fund  that  effectively 
quarantines  oil-related  excess  liquidity  before  it  reaches  the  Nigerian  banking  system.  An 
14 
 BIS Review 49/2010
enhanced  ECA  would  have  four  main  objectives:  revenues  above  a  set  level  would  be 
quarantined  in  the  ECA  before  they  could  reach  the  economy,  predictable  levels  from  oil 
revenues would reach the treasury and the economy, which encourages long-term planning, 
funds  accumulated  in  the  ECA  could  be  used  to  top  up  oil  revenue  flows  to  the  economy 
when they fall below the set, predictable level, or when the economy needs a counter-cyclical 
boost and funds would be invested in needed local infrastructure provided it would not cause 
overheating  by  relying  on  imports  and  idle  labour  capacity.  We  are  also  of  the  view  that 
appropriate hedging arrangements for oil exports will not only protect government revenues 
from sharp drops due to a collapse in commodity prices, but reduce the volatilities that cause 
huge imbalances and precipitate economic cycles. 
Enabling healthy financial sector evolution 
3.4 
I will now talk about the third pillar of our reform blueprint – enabling healthy financial sector 
evolution. Some of the areas that fall under this include banking industry structure, banking 
infrastructure such as credit bureaus and registrars, cost structure of banks, and role of the 
informal economy. 
Let me start by saying that consolidation is not an end in itself in terms of banking industry 
structure. An examination of four countries that successfully-navigated their banking crises 
(Brazil,  Turkey,  Indonesia,  Malaysia)  shows  there  are  many  eventual  banking  industry 
structures that can serve Nigeria well. However, all of them have several common patterns. 
For example – the Central Bank or the apex regulator in each of these countries played an 
important role in determining the ultimate structure of the banking sector. Banking crises in 
Turkey, Brazil and Malaysia resulted in significant consolidation in their banking sectors, with 
the number of banks decreasing post crisis. Also, foreign ownership played an essential role 
in raising standards in the industry. 
The  creation  of  the  Asset  Management  Corporation  will  provide  the  first  step  towards 
resolution  of  the  non  performing  loan  problem  in  banks  and  eventually  facilitate  further 
consolidation. This process is on-going and we expect all banks to be totally weaned off CBN 
support by the end of Q3 2010. 
I should also mention that we are reviewing the basic one-size-fits-all model of banking that 
has emerged since consolidation. In addition to reviewing the universal banking model, we 
consider it appropriate to introduce greater diversity in bank mandates. In the near-term, it 
should be possible to have international, national, regional, mono-line and specialised banks 
such  as  Islamic  banks  in  the  country.  Capital  requirements  will  vary  with  the  range  and 
complexity  of  mandate.  We  will  continue  to  ensure  that  our  banks  are  well  capitalised  but 
bear  in  mind  that  required  capitalisation  is  always  relative  to  risk  profile.  Indeed  there  is 
evidence  that  the  pressure  on  banks  to  deliver high  returns  to  their  shareholders after  the 
rapid  expansion  in  their  capital  base  post-consolidation  contributed  to  some  of  the  highly 
risky behaviour that led to the collapse of some of the banks. 
Ensuring the financial sector contributes to the real economy 
3.5 
The  last  and  final  pillar  of  our  reform  blue  print  is  ensuring  that  the  financial  sector 
contributes to the real economy. 
Rapid  financialisation  in  Nigeria  did  not  benefit  the  real  economy  as  much  as  had  been 
anticipated. Development financial institutions set up for specific purposes such as housing 
finance, trade finance, urban development have not fulfilled their mandates. Many successful 
emerging  markets  have  seen  proactive  government  actions  to  ensure  that  the  financial 
sector contribute to the real economy. Nigeria can learn from countries with successful track 
records in creating financial accommodation for economic growth through initiatives such as 
development 
investment,  venture  capital  and  public  private 
partnerships. The CBN is in a good position to advocate economic development in Nigeria. 
foreign  direct 
finance, 
BIS Review 49/2010 
 15
Nigeria can learn from the experience of other economies. In successful emerging markets, 
many  of  the  successful  policy  lending  programmes  share  common  features.  For  example, 
many  policy  lending  programmes  were  conducted  through  State-owned/State-controlled 
banks particularly in East Asian economies such as Japan, Korea, China and Vietnam. Many 
programmes were funded by state budget or through government controlled savings system 
(such as postal savings in Japan). The state invariably provided seed funding as equity in 
specialised development financial institutions (e.g. Brazil, China). Some funding also came 
from development agencies such as IFAD, WB and ADB. 
To  ensure  the  financial  sector  contributes  to  the  real  economy,  the  following  areas  need 
further consideration: 
1. 
Leveraging  the  CBN  Governor’s  role  as  advisor  to  the  President  on  economic 
matters to ensure that the financial sector contributes to the real economy 
Taking  the  lead  in  measuring  more  accurately  the  relationship  between  the  real 
economy and financial sector and the transmission mechanism 
Evaluating continuously the effectiveness of existing development finance initiatives 
such as agriculture credits and import-export guarantees 
Taking  the  public  lead  in  encouraging  examination  of  critical  issues  for  economic 
development (impact of infrastructure such as power, port and railways) 
Leading  further  studies  on  the  potential  of  venture  capital  and  private  public 
partnership initiatives for Nigeria 
Cooperating  with  a  state  government  to  run  a  pilot  programme  in  directing  the 
financial sector’s contribution to the State’s social economic development. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Closing remarks 
3.6 
Nigeria’s economy in 2009 is like a structurally-compromised ship in a storm. This is partly 
due  to  inherent  economic  weaknesses  such  as  insufficient  diversification  of  the  economy, 
high security risks, a complex business operating environment and inadequate infrastructure. 
Financial sector and overall economic success will require the CBN and Nigeria to do a lot of 
heavy lifting in many policy areas. Rapid financialisation is not just a risky growth strategy; it 
is also a lazy way of growing an economy. A sustainable growth path can be achieved only 
through substantial and fundamental economic reform. This includes ensuring that physical 
and institutional infrastructure is of a scale and quality required. It also calls for political will to 
act to reduce corruption and uphold the rule of law. 
I  have  gone  into  great  detail  to  lay  out  clearly  our  vision  for  the  banking  sector  and  our 
roadmap to the future. It is indeed a great honour for me to have been given this opportunity 
and I can think of no better platform than this. In the next few weeks we will conclude the 
internal  CBN  restructuring  exercise  and  also  set  up  teams  with  clear  targets  and  work 
streams. The reform process is on-going and happens over time. 
A  final  word  to  the  graduating  students.  A  university  degree,  and  especially  a  doctorate 
degree, is the beginning of your education and not the end of it. Walk into life and through life 
as a thirsty woman or man drinking from the fountain of knowledge. At every stage you will 
find your learning in a previous stage useful. Over the course of your life you will discover 
that no knowledge is useless. 
Guard jealously words of wisdom you come across from great men of history and you will 
find them good advice at some stage in your life. During the most difficult days of the on-
going  banking  reforms  I  found  comfort  in  these  short  words  of  the  Roman  Emperor  and 
philosopher-king Marcus Aurelius: “Do what is Right, not Popular; Do what you do for Others 
first, and for Yourself second.” 
16 
 BIS Review 49/2010
Most important for you as you go out into the world, I urge you to remember the words of 
John  F  Kennedy  to  the  American  people  in  the  60s.  Take  those  words  as  if  they  were 
addressed to you. It is time for you to stop asking what your country can do for you. Each of 
you must from now on say to herself or himself: What can I do for my country? Nigeria needs 
you now, more than ever. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 49/2010 
 17
