Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Reflections on small and medium sized enterprises 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
7th Conference of Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Financial Institutions Dealing 
with SMEs, Lanai Kijang, 16 July 2010. 
 Introduction 
This conference takes place at a time of great consequence for the financial industry as the 
world emerges from the recent global financial and economic crisis. Attention continues to be 
focused on supporting this recovery process and to provide more permanent solutions that 
would  ensure  sustainable  global  growth.  In  relation  to  this,  the  development  of  small  and 
medium  sized  enterprises  (SMEs)  is  an  important  and  urgent  agenda.  For  emerging 
economies,  in  particular  in  the  APEC  region,  this  is  not  only  important  as  a  driver  of  the 
economic  growth  process  but  also that  it  would  achieve  a  more  balanced  growth.  It  is  my 
pleasure  to  be  here  this  morning  to  speak  at  this  7th  Conference  of  APEC  Financial 
Institutions Dealing with SMEs, that is organised by the Association of Banks in Malaysia.  
History  has  shown  that  in  the  20th  century,  it  was  large  corporations that  drove  economic 
progress; particularly in the industrial economies. In this century, there is a discernible shift 
towards the increased importance of SMEs as drivers of growth. The growing importance of 
domestic demand and the emergence of new sources of growth and new business models 
have  encouraged  the  emergence  of  small  and  medium  size  businesses.  This  trend  is 
particularly  pronounced  in  the  APEC  economies  in  which  the  economic  activities  are  now 
more diversified – with the growing importance of the services sector, with the agricultural 
sector becoming more advanced and the industrial sector being supported by a supply chain 
of small and medium scale businesses. 
In the APEC region, SMEs account for 90% of the total business establishments and 60% of 
total  employment.  In  Malaysia,  SMEs  constitute  99%  of  all  businesses  and  57%  of  total 
employment.  In  terms  of  output,  the  SME  sector  in  Malaysia  accounts  for  35%  of  gross 
domestic product and 20% of total exports. The SMEs have the advantage of having greater 
flexibility and the ability to adjust more quickly to changes in the market. The SMEs also have 
the  potential  to  meet  the  new  challenges  to  raise  productivity  and  performance.  There  is 
therefore enormous potential for SMEs to create significant positive value for the economy, 
and  thus  contribute  towards  sustainable  and  balanced  economic  growth,  employment  and 
social stability. 
This morning allow me to take this opportunity to share with you some reflections on SMEs in 
the  more  globalised  economy,  and  the  role  of  financial  institutions  and  Governments  in 
supporting the SME sector in the future environment.  
Prospects for SMEs in a more globalised economy  
Globalisation has been described as one of the defining changes of the 21st century. More 
importantly perhaps, is the dramatic change in the nature of the globalization process. The 
initial  wave  of  globalization  was  in  the  form  of  trade,  and  this  was  followed  by  the 
globalization of corporations. More recently the globalization of financial flows and in the flow 
of talent that follow increase in capital and labour mobility across borders. Indeed there has 
been a shift from the domestic sphere to a greater global orientation. This is evident in the 
stronger  trends  in  international  trade,  foreign  direct  investment,  international  capital  flows, 
and  movement  in  labour  across  borders.  Greater  connectivity  enabled  by  technological 
advancements have also significantly increased  the pace of globalisation to an extent that 
was previously not possible.  
BIS Review 98/2010 
 1
For  SMEs,  gaining  access  to  the  expanding  global  market  is  a  strategic  step  forward  that 
would bring tremendous business opportunities. It would enhance the possibilities to exploit 
economies of scale and scope of the business, and the potential for enhanced technological 
capabilities and greater risk diversification. The globalised economy will, however, challenge 
existing  comparative  advantages  and  thus  drive  the  search  for  new  business  models  to 
sustain competitiveness. The SMEs in this new environment need to evaluate new markets, 
move to higher value-added products and services, and develop new synergies by forging 
new business alliances, acquisitions or partnerships.  
Given the important socio-economic contribution of SMEs to national economies, promoting 
an increased participation of SMEs in both domestic economy and international markets has 
become an important agenda in most emerging economies as part of the efforts to enhance 
the overall economic growth potential. Today, while SMEs are growing in significance in most 
emerging economies, SMEs remain under-represented in international trade, accounting for 
only one quarter to one third of manufactured exports and a very small share of foreign direct 
investment. By comparison, SMEs in the developed economies contribute about 50% of total 
value added.  
For  SMEs  that  become  increasingly  knowledge  based  and  technologically  advanced,  the 
opportunities exist to participate in international strategic alliances, to connect into global and 
regional  supply  chains,  and  to  be  part  of  a  production  network.  These  arrangements  will 
require  a  transformation  of  existing  business  models,  management  and  technological 
capability, and the innovative capacity of the SMEs. It will need to involve increased access 
to  financial  resources,  collective  research  efforts,  accelerated  product  development  and 
wider distribution channels.  
The  ability  of  SMEs  to  realise  this  potential  depends  critically  on  providing  the  necessary 
infrastructure and enabling environment for SMEs to enhance their capacity and capability to 
effectively  participate  and  expand  in  the  domestic  economy  and  to  venture  into  the 
international markets. The financial sector and Government support are an essential part of 
this enabling environment for SME development.  
Repositioning of the financial industry to meet the new demands of SMEs 
Banks  are  the  dominant  providers  of  financial  services  to  SMEs.  In  the  recent  period, 
considerable advances have been made among APEC economies towards strengthening the 
scope and access to financial services to the SMEs. The financial sector has become more 
broad based, competitive and efficient in providing entrepreneurs with alternative sources of 
investment capital, a diversified selection of new and innovative products, competitive rates, 
and  more  efficient  services.  This  has  been  accompanied  by  increased  ancilliary  support 
services including business advisory services. These mutually complementary elements are 
in addition to access, choice of products, pricing and the quality of services to the SMEs. 
The  more  globalised  environment  however,  requires  new  approaches  and  paradigm  shifts 
are required for SME financing. First, there needs to be a recognition that SMEs are going to 
be increasingly specialized and diversified. Therefore, the traditional standard transactional 
and  lending-based  banking  approach  needs  to  shift  towards  more  customized  and 
differentiated financial products and services that are tailored to the size, profile and specific 
needs of the different SMEs. This in turn, requires a different approach in the way financial 
institutions  manage  their  relationships  with  SMEs.  As  SMEs  become  more  innovative  and 
entrepreneurial, financial institutions will need to be able to form sound judgments about the 
business of the SMEs based on a broader range of credit information which go beyond the 
narrow traditional focus on collateral and historical financial information.  
Second,  SMEs  are  likely  to  see  a  more  pronounced  shift  towards  more  innovative  and 
creative industries, such as green technology, medical sciences, information technology and 
computer animation. In such knowledge-based industries, the true value of companies is not 
2 
 BIS Review 98/2010
measured  in  tangible  assets,  but  in  intellectual  capital  and  specialist  skills.  Therefore, 
financial institutions will need to deepen their understanding of these new growth industries, 
and build capacity to evaluate and manage the associated and related risks.  
Third,  with  the  increasing  adoption  of  e-commerce  applications  by  SMEs  such  as  internet 
and  mobile  banking, 
the  deployment  of 
technological  capabilities  to  the  SME’s  business  operations.  This can  include  working  with 
SMEs  to  provide  end-to-end  supply  chain  management  solutions  and  the  expansion  into 
regional  production  networks.  Such  support  for  the  growth  of  SMEs  can  bring  substantial 
benefits to financial institutions as SMEs evolve into larger corporations. 
institutions  can  also  encourage 
financial 
Role of the government 
While  the  economy  is  powered  by  private  initiatives,  Governments  have  a  critical  role  in 
providing an enabling environment for private enterprises to thrive. In most economies which 
have  a  successful  SME  sector,  the  Government  has  had  a  major  role  in  coordinating  the 
support and in strengthening the capacity of SMEs and providing an enabling environment 
for  SMEs  to  thrive.  In  Malaysia,  a  comprehensive  approach  has  been  adopted  by  the 
Government. In 2004, the National SME Development Council (NSDC) was established by 
the  Government  to  formulate  broad  policies  and  strategies  aimed  at  creating  an  enabling 
environment for the comprehensive development of SMEs across all sectors. The Council, 
Chaired  by  the  Prime  Minister  is  the  highest  policy  making  body  for  SME  development  in 
Malaysia and brings together more than 15 ministries and 60 agencies under a coordinated 
national strategy. To implement the policies of the Council, the SME Corporation Malaysia 
(SME Corp), a specialised government agency, was established in October 2009 to ensure 
the  effective  implementation  of  SME  development  programs  under  three  broad  strategic 
thrusts: strengthening the enabling infrastructure, enhancing capacity and capability of SMEs 
and  enhancing  access  to  financing.  For  the  year  2010,  a  total  of  354  programs,  with  a 
financial commitment of RM6.02 billion is being implemented to develop high performance 
and resilient SMEs.  
To strengthen the financial infrastructure for SMEs, Bank Negara Malaysia has implemented 
wide ranging measures. The restructuring and consolidation of the banking sector following 
the Asian financial crisis as well as the financial reforms and capacity building efforts taken 
over 
including  enhancing  corporate  governance  and  strengthening  risk 
management practices, had strengthened their capacity to provide more diversified financial 
services  to  SMEs.  The  deregulation  of  the  financial  sector  including  the  new  interest  rate 
framework  allowed  for  flexible  pricing  to  reflect  the  risks  and  it  also  promoted  increased 
competition  in  the  financial  system.  Encouraging  banking  institutions  to  establish  advisory 
units  to  support  SMEs  also  reinforced  increased  access  to  financing.  These  have  been 
reinforced  by  the  establishment  of  the  Credit  Guarantee  Corporation  to  provide  credit 
guarantees to SMEs to facilitate their access to financing from financial institutions. An SME 
Credit Bureau and the Central Credit Reference Information System (CCRIS) complements 
the infrastructure that is in place for SME financing by collating vital credit and transaction 
information  that  enable  SMEs  to  build  their  credit  reputation  from  a  wide  range  of 
informational sources.  
The  Bank  also  continues  to  actively  reach  out  to  support  SMEs  through  the  provision  of 
financial  planning  and  risk  management  services,  and  the  promotion  of  financial  literacy 
alongside similar initiatives by financial institutions. Public-private partnerships between The 
Association of Banks in Malaysia and Bank Negara Malaysia have also worked successfully 
to  encourage  improvements  in  customer  service  levels  and  the  turn-around  time  taken  to 
process  SME  financing  applications.  These  initiatives  have  yielded  tremendous  payoffs  to 
the national economy. Malaysia also ranked in first place in the world in 2009 in the category 
of access to credit by the World Bank in their “Doing Business 2010 Report”. 
the  years, 
BIS Review 98/2010 
 3
International and regional cooperation  
In a global economy, efforts to support SMEs must also address frameworks for facilitating 
trade, payments and financing beyond national borders. Effective regional and international 
collaboration can add significantly to enhance further the long term contribution of SMEs to 
the  economy.  The  endeavour  by  APEC  in  the  establishment  of  the  APEC  SME  Working 
Group in 1995 has provided an important collaborative platform for policymakers and private 
sector  leaders  to  come  together  in  designing  regional  strategies  for  SME  development. 
Under  this  working  group,  policies  have  been  developed  to  improve  the  business 
environment  for  SMEs,  build  SME  management  capabilities,  enhance  access  to  markets, 
promote  innovation,  enhance  access  to  financing  and  encourage  sustainable  business 
practices.  Successful  projects  implemented  in  2009  include  the  replication  of  business 
counselor  training  programmes  across  the  region  and  the  development  of  strategies  for 
enhancing 
the 
Memorandum of Understanding entered into by various APEC financial institutions dealing 
with  SMEs  in  2003,  many  more  financial  institutions  have  benefitted  from  increased  trade 
facilitation, 
transfer  of  knowledge,  expanded  cross-border  growth  opportunities  and 
information sharing.  
trading  houses  and  exporters.  Under 
the  competitiveness  of  small 
Conclusion 
Let  me  conclude  my  remarks.  The  importance  of  SMEs  in  APEC  economies  is  clear. 
However, while their large numbers make them important to the economy, it is their potential 
that  places  them  at  the  centre  of  the  economic  transformation  agenda.  Support  for  SME 
development  requires  cohesive  and  cross-cutting  strategies  which  encompasses  the 
collective  efforts  of  the  financial  sector,  the  Governments  and  SMEs  themselves.  In  the 
global economy, common strategies that are well coordinated across borders would facilitate 
the  participation  of  SMEs  in  the  globalisation  process.  The  ultimate  goal  is  to  promote 
entrepreneurship  and  develop  an  environment  favourable  to  SMEs  that  will  allow  them  to 
become more competitive in both the domestic and international markets. 
In  closing,  I  would  like  to  congratulate  the  Association  of  Banks  Malaysia  for  hosting  this 
event  and  encouraging  wider  international  dialogue  on  important  developments  affecting 
SMEs. I wish you a productive and successful Conference.  
4 
 BIS Review 98/2010
