Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Towards a safer financial system 
Intervention  by  Ms  Gertrude  Tumpel-Gugerell,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the US Financial Services Roundtable, Brussels, 28 June 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to meet you today here in Brussels to discuss the post-crisis regulatory 
agenda from a transatlantic perspective.  
The costs of the crisis have been tremendous on both sides of the Atlantic. Credit market 
related losses amount up to 731 bn. US dollar in the US and 272 bn. US dollar in the euro 
area. Capital had to be raised due to the crisis of 519 bn US dollar in the US and 288 billion 
US  dollar  in  the  euro  area.  Moreover  governments  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  have 
committed support to the banking sector of up to 28% of GDP. So, there is no doubt that this 
crisis  has  come  at  the  cost  of  substantially  lower  profits  and  great  loss  in  overall  income. 
Therefore, looking at these facts makes one thing very clear: We have to come up with a 
global reform of the financial system, so to prevent such deep crisis from occurring again.  
Indeed, it has been one of the key lessons from the financial crisis that financial stability in 
our highly interconnected financial system can only be achieved through globally consistent 
and concerted efforts. Leadership of both public and private decision-makers in sustaining an 
intense  international  dialogue  is  therefore  essential.  Today’s  visit  of  the  US  Financial 
Services Roundtable is a very welcome initiative by leaders of the financial services industry 
to this end.  
The extraordinary nature and consequences of the global financial crisis have demonstrated 
the need to reform the financial system. Various weaknesses have been detected and under 
the  aegis  of  the  G20  a  comprehensive  set  of  measures  have  been  agreed  upon.  It  is 
envisaged to strengthen both macro- and micro-prudential supervision as well as to enhance 
the  use  of  market  infrastructure.  These  measures  will  need  to  be  complementary  and 
supplementary  to  one  another  in  order  to  have  the  desired  effect.  For  this  an  intense 
international dialogue is key. 
The global agenda for strengthening the financial system is very broad and I will not be able 
to cover all areas comprehensively today. I will therefore limit my speech to those areas of 
reform which are of particular importance. I will highlight some important areas as regards 
the regulatory reform, will touch briefly upon the supervisory reform and will then elaborate 
on the reform priorities in the area of market infrastructures.  
Regulatory reform 
The crisis has shown the importance of containing the excessive build-up of leverage in good 
times and enhancing the overall quality of capital with a view to strengthening the resilience 
of the financial sector. The package prepared by the Basel Committee covering capital 
and  liquidity  reform  proposals  is  very  comprehensive  and  addresses  these  issues  by 
improving the quality, consistency and transparency of capital for credit institutions, as well 
as developing a framework for liquidity risk. [The main elements of the proposals are: First, to 
improve the quality of capital, especially Tier-1 capital to improve loss-absorption on a going 
concern  basis.  Second, 
leverage  ratio  as  a 
supplementary measure to the Basel II risk control framework aims at curbing the excessive 
balance  sheet  growth  we  have  witnessed.  Third,  the  introduction  of  a  range  of  measures, 
intended  to  mitigate  the  inherent  pro-cyclicality  of  the  financial  system.  And  lastly,  the 
introduction  of  capital  buffers  and  forward-looking  provisioning  should  ensure  that  the 
introduction  of  a  non-risk-based 
the 
BIS Review 90/2010 
 1
for 
instance 
financial system absorbs the shocks and thus evening the volatility of the financial and real 
economic cycles.]  
As you know, quantitative impact assessments have been conducted in order to assess the 
cumulative  impact  of  the  reform  on  financial  institutions  and  on  the  real  economy.  As  the 
preliminary results will be discussed at the July meeting of the Basel Committee, it would be 
premature  to  take  a  position  on  matters  such  as  the  desirable  calibration.  But  let  me  just 
make  two  points.  Firstly,  from  a  conceptual  point  of  view  the  ECB  supports  the  proposed 
measures, particularly in light of the lessons learned from the crisis. Secondly, the ECB is of 
the view that notwithstanding the outcome of the impact assessments, we should not weaken 
the standards. It would be preferable that where relevant a longer transition period is agreed 
upon, balancing the need for enhancing banking stability and maintaining the stable provision 
of credit to the economy. 
The crisis has also highlighted the particular importance of so-called systemically important 
financial institutions (SIFIs). Therefore another important part of the regulatory reform is the 
need  to  reduce  the  moral  hazard  associated  with  systemically  important  financial 
institutions.  It  will  be  key  to  find  ways  how  SIFIs  can  internalise  the  potential  costs  they 
pose  to  the  financial  system.  This  could  be  achieved  by  the  introduction  of  additional 
prudential  measures, 
through  capital  surcharges  or  contingent  capital 
instruments, liquidity surcharges, more intrusive supervision, and/or the introduction of bank 
levies.  
Although  work  is  still  underway  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board  is  expected  to  provide 
recommendations  to  the  G20  summit  of  November  in  Seoul,  the  European  Council  has 
recently  agreed  that  EU  Member  States  should  introduce  systems  of  levies  and  taxes  on 
financial institutions to ensure fair burden-sharing and to set incentives to contain systemic 
risk.  
As  regards  these  initiatives,  I  would  like  to  underline  that  the  ECB  has  always  been 
supportive of exploring the feasibility of such measures. However, for such measures to have 
the desired effect, it is important that an internationally coordinated solution is ensured. I am 
also of the view that any contribution by financial institutions should be complementary and 
coherent  with  supervisory  and  regulatory  regimes.  Sequencing  of  the  implementation  of 
measures is thus of utmost importance. Finally, it is important that the higher overall cost of 
funding  is  not  passed  on  to  the  customers,  for  instance  in  the  form  of  higher  lending 
rates/fees or lower remuneration on deposits.  
Another important area of regulatory reform is the efforts underway to achieve a single set of 
high-quality  global  and  independent  accounting  standards  by  June  2011.  In  order  to 
have a sound regulatory framework having high-quality and convergent accounting standards 
is crucial. We have to ensure that the current gap between the IFRS and US GAAP narrow 
rather  than  widen.  It  seems  that  the  current  FASB  proposals  on  classification  and 
measurement  of  financial  instruments  would  result  in  more  financial  instruments  to  be 
measured at fair value, leading to an overall expansion of fair value accounting. Accepting 
this  would  not  address  some  of  the  key  lessons  from  the  financial  crisis,  namely  that  fair 
value accounting does not always provide decision-useful information and it may exacerbate 
pro-cyclical  effects.  In  addition,  an  expansion  of  fair  value  accounting  would  be  in  direct 
contradiction  to  the  “mixed  measurement  model”  as  endorsed  by  the  IASB,  and  therefore 
represent a major setback on achieving accounting convergence.  
Supervisory reform 
Let  me  turn  to  briefly  touch  on  the  progress  with  the  supervisory  reform.  If  there  is  one 
uncontested  lesson  from  the  crisis  it  is  the  need  to  further  develop  the  capacity  of  the 
authorities  to  conduct  macroprudential  supervision.  The  ultimate  aim  of  macro-prudential 
policies  is  to  contain  the  build  up  of  financial  vulnerabilities  and  ensure  that  the  financial 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2010
system  is  able  to  withstand  their  unwinding,  minimising  potential  spill-overs  to  the  real 
economy. 
An effective macro-prudential framework aims at delivering a thorough analysis of systemic 
risks, as well as the formulation of appropriate policies to address such risks identifying, in a 
timely  fashion,  the  emergence  and  build  up  of  critical  vulnerabilities,  and  deciding  on 
effective (pre-emptive) intervention.  
In Europe a new body will be set up: the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). It will be 
responsible for the macro-prudential supervision of the EU financial system. The key task of 
the ESRB will be to identify and assess risks to the stability of the EU financial system and 
issue  risk  warnings  when  the  identified  risks  appear  to  be  significant  and  policy 
recommendations for remedial action. I am happy that with its involvement in the ESRB, the 
ECB will continue to play an active role in safeguarding the financial stability in Europe.  
interposing 
themselves  between 
imbalances.  Furthermore,  by 
Financial Market infrastructures 
Let me now turn to the priorities as regards financial market infrastructures. Financial market 
infrastructures underpin the stability of the financial system. By applying highly sophisticated 
standardised risk management procedures and enabling multilateral netting and risk-sharing, 
infrastructures  provide  both  very  resilient  and  efficient  risk  management  services  to  their 
users. Market infrastructures can also act as centralised sources of information for authorities 
and the public, thereby enhancing market transparency and facilitating the early detection of 
financial 
trading 
counterparties,  infrastructures  can  reduce  the  interconnectedness  between  major  financial 
institutions  and  the  associated  contagion  risks.  Therefore,  it  might  not  be  a  surprise  that 
market infrastructures have been soundly withstanding the storm of the financial crisis. Still, I 
would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  three  main  policy  priorities  regarding  financial 
infrastructures in light of the lessons from the financial crisis. 
The first priority relates to the development of financial infrastructures in those markets 
where  they  are  not  yet  sufficiently  used  or  available,  notably  in  OTC  derivatives 
markets. The crisis has shown that markets with adequate infrastructures and hence proper 
risk management and risk provisions have proven to be more resilient than markets without 
such infrastructures, such as the OTC derivatives markets. Therefore, expanding the use of 
central  counterparties  (CCPs)  in  these  increasingly  systemically  relevant  markets  is  a  key 
measure  to  reduce  counterparty  and  operational  risk.  Another  important  step  is  the 
mandatory reporting of all trades to centralised trade registries, so-called trade repositories, 
in  order  to  enhance  market  transparency.  In  my  view,  if  CCPs  and  trade  repositories  for 
credit  default  swaps  had  been  available  before  the  Lehman  default,  Lehman’s  CDS 
exposures  could  have  been  managed  in  a  much  more  transparent  and  resilient  way  and 
could have mitigated the negative chain reaction on CDS markets that followed the demise of 
Lehman.  
CCPs and trade repositories for OTC derivatives are ultimately beneficial for all stakeholders. 
Still, there are the well-known challenges of effective collective action in the context of the 
provision  of  public  goods.  Hence,  private  sector  efforts  alone  may  not  suffice  to  foster 
sufficient progress towards the use of CCPs and trade repositories for OTC derivatives. It is 
therefore important to adopt and implement  the regulatory requirements for the mandatory 
central clearing of all eligible products and the reporting of trades to trade repositories in a 
timely manner. Given, however, the global nature of OTC derivatives markets, it is clear that 
such  regulatory  tools  will  only  be  successful  if  they  are  applied  in  a  coordinated  manner 
around  the  globe.  I  strongly  support  the  recently  launched  work  of  the  Financial  Stability 
Board  to  develop  common  approaches  to  fostering  the  central  clearing  of  eligible  OTC 
derivatives  as  well  as  to  expand  the  range  of  potentially  clearable  products  through 
enhanced standardisation. 
BIS Review 90/2010 
 3
The second priority relates to the need for updated and globally consistent requirements 
to  ensure  the  safety  and  soundness  of  financial  infrastructures.  By  nature  of  their 
business, financial infrastructures concentrate systemic risk, owing to their large size, their 
limited  degree  of  substitutability  and  the  strong  web  of  mutual  interdependencies  across 
infrastructures, e.g. arising from exposures to the same large participants. Increased reliance 
on  market  infrastructures  across  financial  markets  further  underlines  the  importance  of 
effectively  addressing  this  risk.  Therefore,  it  is  crucial  to  ensure  that  CCPs  are  able  to 
manage  these  specific  risks  related to the clearing of OTC derivatives. Furthermore, trade 
repositories need to be designed, operated and overseen in an adequate manner, given the 
novelty  of  these  infrastructures  and  the  reliance  of  other  market  infrastructures,  public 
authorities and market participants on the accuracy and availability of the respective data.  
Two complementary strands of work are underway in these fields. First, legislation for OTC 
derivatives  CCPs  and  trade  repositories  is  being  developed  in  several  countries.  And 
second,  the  international  standards  for  financial  market  infrastructures  are  currently  being 
reviewed by the CPSS and IOSCO. In this respect I believe that given the importance of a 
globally consistent framework for market infrastructures, it is critical to ensure that all relevant 
national  and  regional  legislation  is  drafted  in  a  sufficiently  flexible  way  to  allow  for  the 
effective accommodation of the work of standard-setters. 
The final priority I would like to stress does not relate to measures directly targeting market 
infrastructures  themselves,  but  is  closely  related  to  this  work:  the  need  for  improving 
bilateral post-trading processes in line with the requirements for market infrastructures. 
It is clear that without adequate bilateral risk management and disclosure, a comprehensive 
mitigation of systemic risk arising in post-trading could not be achieved. Moreover, an uneven 
regulatory  level  playing  field  could  create  scope  for  regulatory  arbitrage  and  provide 
disincentives for the use of market infrastructure.  
As  a  concrete  example  for  necessary  regulatory  attention,  let  me  mention  the  risk 
management standards for the bilateral clearing of OTC derivatives. While – as mentioned 
before – in principle OTC derivatives should be centrally cleared to the extent possible, some 
products  are  not  suitable  for  central  clearing,  for  instance  owing  to  insufficient  product 
standardisation,  lack  of  market  liquidity  or  limited  availability  of  robust  prices.  At  the  same 
time,  trades  that  are  not  suitable  for  central  clearing  pose  particular  risk  management 
challenges  given  their  more  bespoke  and  opaque  nature.  Therefore,  in  my  view,  capital 
charges and collateralisation requirements for bilaterally cleared trades must be at least as 
stringent as the requirements for CCPs to ensure a sufficiently robust buffer against adverse 
market  developments,  operational  and  counterparty  risks. 
that  banking 
supervisors  around  the  world  are  developing  strengthened  frameworks  in  this  regard, 
working  in  step  with  the  revision  of  global  prudential  standards  that  is  currently  under 
development by the Basel Committee.  
I  welcome 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  allow  me  to  conclude.  The  regulatory  reform,  the  new  emphasis 
placed  on  macro-prudential  supervision  and  the  measures  to  strengthen  financial  market 
infrastructures,  are  all  key  elements  on  our  path  towards  greater  financial  stability  and  an 
important  complement  to  strengthened  risk  management  and  disclosure  at  the  level  of 
financial institutions.  
More  specifically,  it  is  now  of  key  importance  that  the  proposed  legislation  concerning  the 
enhancement  of  the  EU  institutional  framework  and  in  particular  the  establishment  of  the 
ESRB will be finally agreed, so as to allow its start – as planned – by January 2011. 
Given the interconnectedness of our financial institutions and financial markets it is essential 
that  an  internationally  consistent  framework  is  created,  ensuring  a  level  playing  field  for 
financial institutions. Gatherings like the one today serve as a good forum to further enhance 
4 
 BIS Review 90/2010
our understanding of the issues we are facing and will thus contribute to reaching efficient 
and  workable  solutions.  Therefore,  I  very  much  believe  that  a  continuous  and  effective 
transatlantic dialogue is fundamental.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 90/2010 
 5
