 Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Three trends and their post-crisis implications 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Inaugural 
Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum  (OMFIF)  Global  Lecture,  Frankfurt, 
1 March 2010. 
 It is my great pleasure to be here in Frankfurt to participate in this inaugural OMFIF meeting, 
and to speak at this evening’s inaugural lecture at the Goethe University. 
These are significant times for policymakers and the financial industry. As we come out of 
the worst international financial crisis in decades, there still remain some unresolved issues 
that need to be addressed. The recovery has prompted focus on exit strategies and on the 
search  for  more  permanent  solutions  that  will  put  the  financial  system  on  a  more  solid 
foundation.  These  issues  are  however  being  considered  during  a  period  of  exceptional 
conditions.  Of  concern,  is  that  this  might  significantly  influence  the  direction  of  the  reform 
agenda with its medium and long term implications which could be counter to solutions that 
would lead us to a path of stability and sustainable growth. 
My remarks this evening will focus on three trends that are gaining significance in the global 
economy and the international financial system and their implications as we progress forward 
in this post crisis era. The first, is the increasing significance of Asia in the global economy; 
second,  the  extensive  international  regulatory  reforms  that  is  being  envisaged  by  the 
international community; and third, the rapid growth of Islamic finance and its integration into 
the  international  financial  system.  These  trends  are  set  to  become  significantly  more 
pronounced in the aftermath of this global financial crisis. 
Asia and the global economy 
After one of the worst economic crises in modern history, the global economy is now on the 
path of recovery but with a pace that is set to be uneven. There is now a global shift taking 
place  arising  from  an  increasing  growth  divergence  between  the  advanced  and  emerging 
economies resulting in a change in the configuration of the global economy. This is not only a 
consequence of the crisis related factors but also due to structural factors prevailing prior to 
the crisis. 
We  have  seen  extraordinary  and  unprecedented  measures  been  taken  by  the  advanced 
economies to restore stability and the functioning of the financial systems, and to contain the 
effects  of  the  financial  crisis  on  the  economy.  While  a  catastrophe  has  been  averted,  the 
recovery  in  the  advanced  world  continues  to  be  reliant  on  policy  support,  with  structural 
factors yet to be addressed. The IMF’s projection is for growth in the advanced economies 
for the period 2009 and 2014 to be 1.3% per annum, which is half of what was registered 
during the period 2000 to 2008. 
The emerging economies, in general, and the Asian region in particular, have emerged with 
stronger growth. Several key factors have enabled this faster and stronger rebound. Firstly, 
is the policy flexibility to implement the monetary and fiscal stimulus. Strong fiscal positions 
and  relatively  low  public  debt  levels  have  allowed  many  Asian  governments  to  implement 
larger fiscal stimulus measures. Second, the financial sector in the region is in good shape, 
avoiding any disruption of credit flows to the private sector. The region has benefited from 
the decade long of financial reforms and development of the domestic financial infrastructure. 
The financial systems in Asia have remained resilient throughout this global financial turmoil. 
This  will  be  an  important  factor  in  sustaining  the  economic  recovery  to  support  domestic 
private  sector  economic  activity  when  the  fiscal  measures  are  gradually  withdrawn.  Third, 
households and the corporate sectors are not over-leveraged, and thus better positioned to 
sustain  consumption  and  investment  activity.  Fourth,  increased  intra-regional  trade  in  Asia 
BIS Review 24/2010 
 1
has  supported  the  recovery  in  regional  trade  activity.  This  has  been  reinforced  by  the 
strengthening of the domestic demand in the region. 
While  domestic  sources  of  growth  have  gained  significance,  trade  will  continue  to  be 
important  but  with  a  distinct  change  in  the  pattern  of  trade.  Trade  among  the  emerging 
economies has already increased, with this trend being most evident among the emerging 
economies in Asia. Intra-regional trade in Asia has already risen from 32% of total exports in 
1995  to  an  average  of  50%  in  2008.  Rapid  trade  liberalisation  across  Asia  has  improved 
market  access.  Rising  incomes  in  the  Asian  region  where  more  than  half  of  the  world 
population resides has generated a huge cumulative market. This increase in consumption 
demand has led to the development of an extensive modern retail sector across the region. 
Supported by stronger economic fundamentals, emerging economies are expected to grow 
at higher rates over the next five years compared to the period prior to the crisis in 2000 to 
2008. The IMF projects that emerging economies in Latin America, the Middle East, Africa 
and Asia will, on the average, grow by 6.1% in the period 2010–2014, higher than compared 
to  the  period  2000–2009.  Asia’s  prospects  during  this  period  will  be  sustained  by  several 
structural factors. First, Asia has a favourable demographic structure with a relatively young 
population with a higher propensity to consume. The high savings rate in Asia also allows for 
higher  consumption  demand  with  more  than  adequate  surplus  to  finance  the  required 
investments activity. In addition, financial intermediation in Asia is progressively deepening to 
meet the new financing needs of households and businesses. 
In  this  more  recent  decade,  greater  financial  integration  is  taking  place.  This  financial 
integration  will  result  in  a  more  efficient  recycling  of  Asian  savings  into  investments  within 
Asia. It has been estimated that Asia needs to invest about USD 8 trillion in infrastructure 
development  over  the  next  ten  years.  The  effective  channelling  of  Asia’s  large  pool  of 
savings into such productive investment activity in the region will certainly support more rapid 
growth and development in Asia. Economic and financial linkages are also being established 
with other emerging economies in other parts of the world thereby mutually reinforcing the 
prospects  for  growth  in  the  global  economy.  This  will  in  turn  contribute  towards  the 
rebalancing of global growth. The concentration of economic power in the global economy 
will become more dispersed. 
International regulatory reforms  
Let me now turn to the issue of financial regulatory reform. 
The enormous scale, scope and costs of the global financial crisis has led governments, and 
regulatory  and  supervisory  authorities  from  around  the  world  to  mount  one  of  the  most 
aggressive  agendas  of  reform  to  financial  regulation  seen  in  recent  times.  The  extent  of 
these  reforms  has  been  almost  as  dramatic  as  the  events  that  led  to  their  creation.  In 
particular,  the  potential  impact  that  these  reforms  will  have  in  re-defining  the  financial 
landscape in the future are significant, with broader implications for competition, innovation 
and ultimately, on the overall economic activity. 
Certainly, strengthening financial regulation is an important goal. And  the need to improve 
the  design  of  financial  regulation  is  not  a  point  of  contention.  For  many  emerging 
economies –  certainly  in  Asia  –  strengthening  financial  regulation  and  supervision  and  the 
development of the financial system has been an important priority, particularly in this recent 
decade and well before the onset of this crisis. Our resolve on this agenda has not changed 
since  the  crisis.  On  the  contrary,  it  has  served  to  sharpen  our  focus  in  contemplating 
measures to place our financial systems on a firmer foundation. 
This  crisis  has  focused  attention  on  some  important  issues  that  calls  for  wide  ranging 
regulatory responses. The degree of consensus on the spectrum of recommended reforms 
by the international community has however been mixed. Nevertheless, on some areas there 
has been a clear consensus. There is agreement that the regulatory framework needs to be 
 more responsive to risk. Equally, there is agreement on the need to materially improve risk 
management  in  financial  institutions,  and  to  strengthen  the  role  of  supervisors  in  the 
oversight  of  financial  institutions.  The  need  to  enhance  safety  nets,  in  particular,  in  the 
liquidity support arrangements and deposit insurance, has also been widely acknowledged, 
as  is  the  need  for  greater  disclosure  and  transparency,  particularly  on  off-balance  sheet 
exposures. These have also been the areas of focus of most of the authorities in emerging 
Asia as we set to modernise our financial systems post the Asian financial crisis. 
In other areas, there has been substantial debate by the international community. The first 
concerns the degree of balance of regulation. This crisis has shown that market discipline 
needs to be complemented by regulation. The question however has centred on how far the 
pendulum  should  swing  towards  greater  regulation.  Should  regulatory  constraints  be 
imposed on size, leverage and activities of financial institutions? This would have significant 
implications on the role of the financial sector in the overall economy. The main reservation 
with such reforms has been whether they will in fact deliver greater financial stability beyond 
more  basic  and  well  designed  changes  to  the  regulatory  architecture.  It  also  raises  the 
question as to whether it would significantly raise the cost of financial intermediation. 
A central piece of the ongoing international debate on the regulatory reform agenda is the 
proposal  on  limiting  the  size  of  institutions.  Whether  this  in  itself  will  effectively  reduce 
systemic risks has yet to be demonstrated. The experiences of Australia and Canada which 
have highly concentrated banking systems suggest that the control of systemic risk has less 
to do with size, and more to do with the effectiveness of risk management and supervision of 
the large institutions. 
Malaysia  shares  this  view.  Following  the  Asian  financial  crisis,  measures  were  taken  to 
prompt  the  consolidation  of  our  banking  sector,  thus  creating  larger  institutions  with 
enhanced capabilities not only to operate effectively in the domestic financial system but also 
beyond  domestic  borders.  The  focus  is  to  emphasise  on  the  investment  in  the  risk 
management capabilities of not only management but also the board of the institutions. It is 
plausible that artificial restrictions on size or scope could result in a shift of systemic risks to 
closely  inter-connected  networks  of  smaller  institutions  which  collectively  pose  a  similar 
degree of systemic risk. 
Emerging economies have great interest in the direction of these reforms. For the emerging 
economies  in  Asia,  the  banking  system  remains  the  largest  component  of  the  financial 
system.  Regulatory,  supervisory  and  legal  reforms  have  generally  focussed  on  effective 
governance  and  commensurate  risk  management  capabilities.  In  Malaysia,  the  banking 
system leverage ratio is less than 11 times while the banking system risk-weighted capital 
ratio is 14.1% with Tier-1 capital at 13.6%. 
Equally important is the incentive structure in place for such financial institutions, the level of 
transparency  and  disclosure,  effective  surveillance  and  forward  looking  oversight  by  the 
authorities  and  the  institutional  arrangement  for  effective  resolution  of  problem  institutions 
that will facilitate the orderly exit of such institutions. 
Ultimately,  the  consideration  of  appropriate  reforms  should  not  overlook  the  main  goal  of 
regulation. It needs to be recognised that achieving financial stability is a means to an end. 
The ultimate objective is sustainable growth and a shared prosperity. High regulatory costs 
and  the  increased  burden  on  the  intermediation  process  would  materially  affect  economic 
activity while doing little to alter the risk taking behaviors which was a major factor causing 
the crisis. There needs to be an understanding of the impact of the proposed measures from 
the  many  dimensions  including  how  they  ultimately  influence  institutional  behaviours.  The 
challenges of carrying out such an assessment on a global scale is daunting, but the policy 
response must rise to the challenge in order to avoid unintended consequences that will be 
difficult to roll back without adding further burdens on the financial system. 
The  second  key  area  of  debate  concerns  the  design  of  the  institutional  framework  for 
financial stability. The main issues have tended to centre on the role of the central bank in 
BIS Review 24/2010 
 3
financial  stability  and  as  to  whether  there  should  be  a  single  or  multiple  supervisory 
authorities. Given that the central bank is the lender-of-last-resort in a crisis, the central bank 
is invariably in the frontline of action to restore stability. While there is no general agreement 
on the optimal structure for the supervision function, it is recognised that financial systems 
have  become  increasingly  complex  and  interconnected  and  whether  a  country  adopts  an 
integrated model or a model that is organized along sectoral lines, effective coordination is 
critical  to  support  assessments  of  the  overall  risk  exposures  in  the  financial  system. 
Moreover, the potential for regulatory arbitrage should be avoided. 
A  further  case  made  for  central  banks  to  assume  the  banking  supervision  function  is  the 
informational  efficiencies  particularly  for  effective  crisis  management.  The  insights  gained 
from the economic analysis and market operations performed by central banks for monetary 
policy objectives also contributes significantly towards more informed financial supervision. 
This includes providing a better understanding of the potential for macro-prudential measures 
as  part  of  the  supervisory  responses.  The  chosen  supervisory  structure  needs  to  credibly 
demonstrate that it is able to respond and adapt effectively to the fast-changing environment. 
Additionally,  the  capacity  and  capability  of  the  authority  in  terms  of  the  calibre,  skills  and 
expertise needs to be continuously reinvented to keep pace with the new and more complex 
developments. For most emerging economies, the largest concentration of talent generally 
resides in the central bank. 
Malaysia has adopted an institutional arrangement in which the Central Bank is responsible 
for  banking  and  insurance  supervision.  This  arrangement  has  significantly  benefited 
Malaysia, both during normal times and in crises, as demonstrated during the Asian financial 
crisis  and  during  the  recent  market  turbulence.  During  the  episodes  of  crises,  this 
arrangement  has  enabled  the  Bank  to  quickly  harness  the  diverse  set  of  critical  skills, 
experience and information that resides in the Bank and allowed for prompt decisions and 
actions.  The  Bank  has  also  been  able  to  leverage  on  the  established  internal  processes, 
structures  and  relationships  that  are  already  in  place  during  normal  times  as  part  of 
performing our integrated surveillance function. 
Islamic finance, global growth and stability  
While these issues continue to be decided by the international community, the sustained and 
largely  uninterrupted  expansion  of  global  growth  in  Islamic  finance  has  drawn  significant 
interest. Today, Islamic finance has evolved to become a viable and competitive component 
of  the  international  financial  system.  Following  the  global  financial  crisis,  discussions  have 
increasingly turned to the prospects of the potential role and relevance of Islamic finance in 
contributing to global financial stability and in support of overall economic growth. 
Islamic  finance  is  predicated  on  Shariah,  the  Islamic  law  which  requires  that  an  Islamic 
financial  transaction  be  supported  by  an  underlying  economic  activity,  thus  ensuring  that 
there is a close link between financial and productive flows. This fundamental principle is all 
about the basic banking function of providing financial services that adds value to the real 
economy. Financial flows in Islamic finance are therefore accompanied by the expansion of 
genuine  productive  activity.  Under  this  arrangement  it  also  avoids  over-exposure  to  risks 
associated with excessive leverage. Secondly, Islamic finance is based on profit-sharing and 
therefore risk sharing. Islamic financial transactions, clearly defines the arrangements at the 
onset,  and  provides  the  incentive  for  the  Islamic  financial  institutions  to  undertake 
appropriate due diligence to ensure that the profits are commensurate with the risks being 
assumed. Aspects of governance and risk management are therefore strongly emphasised in 
the arrangements. In particular, such contracts demand higher standards of disclosure and 
transparency to be observed which, in turn, act to strengthen market discipline and minimise 
informational asymmetries. There are also clear value propositions in Islamic finance for both 
investors and issuers. For investors, Islamic financial products offer portfolio diversification 
and  new  investment  opportunities  as  they  avail  themselves  to  this  new  asset  class.  For 
 Islamic 
finance 
ties  with 
these  economic 
today  has  revitalised 
issuers, Islamic finance allows access to a new source of funds and liquidity in addition to 
providing new risk management options. 
As  part  of  ongoing  measures  to  further  strengthen  the  resilience  of  Islamic  finance,  the 
Islamic Development Bank (IDB) in collaboration with the Islamic Financial Services Board 
(IFSB) has formed a Task Force on Islamic Finance and Global Financial Stability in 2008 to 
analyse  and  propose  specific  recommendations  on  the  role  and  contribution  of  Islamic 
finance in promoting global financial stability and to outline the areas for strengthening the 
Islamic  financial  infrastructure  including  for  putting  in  place  the  building  blocks  for  liquidity 
and crisis management in the Islamic financial system. 
In  this  recent  decade,  the  increasing  internationalisation  of  Islamic  finance  is  being 
accompanied by new emerging global patterns of financial and economic interlinkages. This 
can be observed in the strengthening of ties in recent years between Asia and the Middle 
East  in  trade  and  investments  in  a  wide  range  areas.  Both  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  are 
increasingly recognised as dynamic growth regions in the global economy. The two regions 
have a history of strong trade ties that flourished on the old Silk Road, which served as a 
major global conduit between the ancient civilisations in the East and West until about the 
14th  century. 
the 
strengthening of the financial linkages between Asia and the Middle East, a trend that will 
generate  mutually  reinforcing  growth  prospects.  The  emergence  of  these  new  financial 
centres  in  Asia  and  the  Middle  East  and  their  increased  integration  has  paved  the 
foundations  for  a  New  Silk  Road.  It  has  also  opened  up  the  prospects  for  developed 
economies  to  forge  stronger  financial  linkages  with  these  dynamic  growth  regions  of  Asia 
and the Middle East. 
Islamic  finance  is  well  positioned  to  be  a  vehicle  on  the  New  Silk  Road  as  the  enabling 
supporting infrastructure is already in place. The required regulatory and legal frameworks 
for Islamic finance have also been established, not only growing in a number of countries in 
Asia and the Middle East, but also at the international level. It was with the establishment of 
the  prudential  standard-setting  body,  the  IFSB  in  2002  based  in  Malaysia  that  efforts  to 
enforce  common  prudential  standards  have  significantly  progressed.  Efforts  towards  the 
harmonisation of Shariah interpretations and issues concerning mutual recognition are also 
at an advanced stage. 
Today,  Malaysia  has  a  comprehensive  and  well-developed  Islamic  financial  system, 
including a vibrant banking and takaful sector, and well-developed Islamic capital and money 
markets  that  operates  in  parallel  with  the  conventional  system.  Our  sukuk  market  is  the 
largest  in  the  world.  The  Islamic  financial  system  in  Malaysian  is  also  well-supported  by 
comprehensive  Shariah,  legal  and  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  to  ensure  the 
soundness  and  stability  of  the  Islamic  financial  system.  We  have  also  invested  in  human 
capital  development  to  ensure  a  deep  pool  of  talent  and  expertise  to  support  the 
development of Islamic finance. For this purpose, Malaysia has established the International 
Centre  of  Education  in  Islamic  finance  (INCEIF)  and  The  International  Shariah  Research 
Academy (ISRA) to support advanced education and research in Islamic finance. 
With  this  now  more  developed Islamic financial services industry in  Malaysia that includes 
the  advanced  development  of  Islamic  financial  institutions  and  markets,  more  aggressive 
liberalisation  initiatives  have  been  made  in  this  sector  to  strengthen  our  interlinkages  with 
financial  markets  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  This  has  also  been  reinforced  by  the  further 
liberalisation of the capital account of the balance of payments and the implementation of tax 
neutrality measures. These initiatives are aimed at supporting the strengthening of trade and 
cross border investment activities through Islamic finance. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude my remarks on these three major trends occurring in the world economy 
and  the  international  financial  system.  Asia’s  role  in  the  global  economy,  the  international 
BIS Review 24/2010 
 5
regulatory reform agenda and the development and expansion of Islamic finance is likely to 
have a growing influence on the global economy and financial system going forward. As we 
participate  in  this  rapidly  evolving  environment,  these  new  trends  need  to  be  taken  into 
account in creating a global economic and financial order that is profoundly better than the 
one we have today. 
Thank you. 
