Karolina Ekholm: Monetary policy and the exchange rate 
Speech by Ms Karolina Ekholm, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a meeting, 
Stockolm, 12 January 2010. 
 I intend to begin today by talking about the background to the monetary policy decision made 
by  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank  on  15  December  last  year  and  how  I  viewed  the 
economic situation. The main part of my speech will focus on the Riksbank’s assessment of 
the krona exchange rate. I intend to discuss the role played by the exchange rate in a small, 
open economy like Sweden’s, and the difficulties in forecasting the exchange rate.  
The current situation and the monetary policy decision  
As you probably know, the Executive Board decided at our meeting on 15 December to hold 
both the repo rate and the forecast for the repo rate unchanged in relation to the previous 
monetary  policy  meeting  in  October.  I  shall  not  go  into  details  regarding  the  forecasts  on 
which our decision was based, but I will focus on some specific questions that have been 
important for the stance I took.  
The world economy has improved recently, and this benefits developments in the Swedish 
economy. Our most recent assessment contains an upward revision to the forecasts for GDP 
and employment, both in Sweden and abroad.  
However, I see a number of risks relating to international developments in the period ahead. 
Emerging  markets  in  Asia  and  Latin  America  are  now  showing  fairly  good  growth,  while 
growth  in  the  industrial  nations  in  Europe  and  North  America  remains  low.  The  fact  that 
different parts of the world economy are developing fairly differently creates problems that 
have significance for monetary policy.  
The low short-term interest rates and good access to liquidity in Europe and North America 
make it attractive to borrow in the short term to invest in assets with a high expected yield. 
There have been reports of large capital inflows to several of the emerging markets. These 
inflows  tend  to  push  up  asset  prices  –  for  instance,  house  prices  and  share  prices  –  in 
several Asian countries.  
At  the  same  time,  the  experiences  gained  from  the  financial  crisis  over  the  past  year  and 
during the Asian crisis of the 1990s indicate that these flows can change direction abruptly, 
which creates a risk of substantial falls in asset prices in the future.  
It is difficult to say what the consequences of the capital flows we are now seeing will be for 
the  development  of  the  world  economy  in  the  period  ahead,  but  there  is  a  risk  that 
imbalances  will  be  generated.  Development  in  the  economies  that  are  now  growing  fairly 
quickly  may  be  affected  in  the  future  either  by  tendencies  towards  asset  bubbles  or 
appreciating currencies, which would have a negative impact on their competitiveness. In the 
case of the future development of industrial nations in Europe and North America, we can 
expect  that  it  will  be  negatively  affected  by  the  need  to  consolidate  government  finances, 
which  have  suffered  greatly  during  the  recession.  All  in  all,  this  entails  certain  risks  to 
developments abroad in the period ahead.  
With  regard  to  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  decisions,  one  question  is  why  we 
have  not  revised  up  the  interest  rate  path  now  that  economic  activity  appears  to  have 
improved and conditions in the financial markets are beginning to normalise. The forecasts 
made in December, like those in October, contain revisions that have a counteracting effect 
when it comes to our decision. On the one hand there has been some upward revision to the 
forecasts  for  Swedish  GDP  and  resource  utilisation,  which  would  indicate  a  need  for  a 
BIS Review 3/2010 
 1
somewhat tighter monetary policy. But at the same time there has been a downward revision 
of  the  forecast  for  inflation,  which  would  indicate  a  need  for  more  expansionary  monetary 
policy. The question then is what the net effect of these counteracting tendencies will be in 
terms  of  what  is  a  well-balanced  monetary  policy.  My  opinion  is  that  they  in  principle 
counteract one another and that there was thus justification for maintaining the interest rate 
path that we have had since the monetary policy decision in July.  
There  are  a  number  of  factors  behind  the  downward  revision  of  the  inflation  forecast, 
including a new assessment of the development of the Swedish krona. I will go on to explain 
the  background  to  the  Riksbank’s  general  assessment  that  the  krona  is  expected  to 
appreciate in the coming period. This is an assessment I agree with. But in the most recent 
forecast made in December, the appreciation is expected to be greater than was forecast in 
October.  There  are  a  number  of  factors  behind  this  new  assessment,  including  the 
assumption that international interest rates will be slightly lower than was previously thought. 
I  did  not  give  so  much  importance  to  this  particular  revision  of  the  krona  forecast  in  the 
monetary policy decision made in December. Inflation in Sweden is on the whole expected to 
be  lower  in  the  future  than  was  anticipated  in  October,  partly  because  of  lower  inflation 
abroad.  
The effects of the exchange rate on the economy  
Let  me  now  leave  the  recent  monetary  policy  decision  and  move  on  to  a  question  that  is 
always  topical  for  the  Riksbank;  namely  developments  in  the  exchange  rate.  I  thought  I 
would  begin  by  talking  about  why  exchange  rate  developments  are  important  and  then 
discuss the forecasts for the exchange rate.  
Why are developments in the exchange rate important to a central bank? The answer is that 
developments in the exchange rate can have major effects on developments in both inflation 
and the real economy.  
The  krona  depreciated  by  around  15  per  cent  in  a  very  short  space  of  time  during  the 
financial crisis. What effects can this have on Sweden’s economy?  
The effects of the exchange rate on inflation  
One of the most important effects of changes in the exchange rate, and particularly important 
for a central bank with an inflation target, is how inflation is affected. We have seen that the 
nominal exchange rate of the krona depreciated by around 15 per cent over a short space of 
time  in  connection  with  the  financial  crisis.  One  way  of  trying  to  estimate  how  this  affects 
inflation  is  to  study  pricing  behaviour  at  company  level.  Let  us  assume  that  a  company 
imports a product into Sweden. To make the example more concrete, let us assume that it 
imports  cheese  from  France.  When  the  krona  weakens  against  the  euro,  the  importing 
company has to decide how this will affect the price charged in kronor. Let us assume that 
the krona depreciates 15 per cent against the euro. The importing company probably has an 
agreement to buy the cheese for a particular price in euro. This means that the cheese will 
now cost the importer 15 per cent more in kronor. How much of this cost increase should 
then  be  passed  on  to  the  consumer  price?  In  the  long  run,  if  the  krona  depreciation 
continues,  the  importer  can  perhaps  negotiate  a  slightly  lower  purchase  price  in  euro. 
However,  the  importer  must  initially  choose  between  raising  the  price  in  kronor  to 
compensate for the higher purchase price and reducing the company’s own margins.  
Let us assume that the price Swedish cheese importer has to pay is set at 10 euro per kilo, 
and that the price set for customers in shops in Sweden is 120 kronor. The exchange rate is 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2010
initially  10  kronor/euro.  The  purchase  price  thus  corresponds  to  100  kronor  per  kilo.  The 
Swedish importer thus has a profit margin of 20 per cent of the purchase price.1  
If the krona depreciates by 15 per cent, to 11.5 kronor per euro, the import price in kronor is 
15  per  cent  higher,  or  115  kronor  per  kilo.  To  retain  a  profit  margin  of  20  per  cent  of  the 
purchase price, the price offered to customers in Sweden also needs to be raised by 15 per 
cent, from 120 kronor to 138 kronor per kilo. In this case the pass-through of the exchange 
rate to the price of the cheese will be complete, as both the exchange rate and the price of 
the cheese change by 15 per cent. However, this can be expected to lead to lower sales, as 
consumers  may  choose  to  buy,  for  instance,  Swedish  cheese  instead  of  French.  It  is 
therefore not necessarily the most profitable pricing strategy.  
Another  alternative  for  the  importer  is  to  hold  the  price  in  kronor  completely  unchanged. 
Empirical studies indicate that companies only change the price of goods once or so a year, 
on average.2 This could be due to various costs linked to changing the price, for example, 
printing new price-lists. It could also be due to a fear of losing market shares if the price is 
raised.3 If the prices are not changed at all, the effect of the weaker SEK/EUR exchange rate 
will be that the profit margins for the Swedish cheese importer fall.4 In this case, sales can be 
maintained, but profits will fall.  
The  company  can  also  choose  something  in  between  these  two  cases,  that  is,  raise  the 
selling  price  by  between  0  and  15  per  cent.  The  outcome  of  this  will  depend  on  several 
different  factors,  such  as  the  currency  in  which  the  purchase  price  is  set,  to  what  extent 
similar  substitutes  whose  purchase  price  is  not  affected  are  available  and  whether  the 
change in the exchange rate is expected to be lasting or temporary. These factors affect the 
pass-through of the exchange rate to inflation.  
What effects can a change in the exchange rate be expected to have on the economy as a 
whole?  The  pass-through  of  the  nominal  exchange  rate  on  prices  is  a  large  area  for 
research.  In  particular,  researchers  have  studied  how  much  a  change  in  the  nominal 
exchange rate will affect import prices.5 The results of the different studies differ somewhat, 
but the overall assessment based on research in this field is that a change in the exchange 
rate in the short term leads to a change that is half as great in import prices. 
The research has also shown that the pass-through of exchange rate changes on consumer 
prices  is  much  less  than  on  import  prices.6  The  most  obvious  explanation  for  this  is  that 
import prices do not constitute the entire consumer price index (CPI), only around one third 
of  it.7  The  fact  that  the  percentage  is  so  low  is  partly  due  to  several  domestic  factors 
(transports, various types of service, and so on) affecting the final price for imported goods 
charged to the consumer.8 As the example of the cheese importer showed, there may also 
                                                 
1  This example does not claim to offer a correct description of the Swedish cheese market, but merely serves as 
an illustration of the effects of changes in the exchange rate on inflation. 
2  See, for example, Apel, Friberg and Hallsten (2004). 
3  What is known as pricing to market is a reflection of this: in the example we use it would mean that the French 
exporter  determines  different  prices  for  different  export  markets,  such  as  Sweden.  This  could  lead  to  a 
reduced tendency to change the price in Sweden as a result of exchange rate fluctuations. 
4  The new profit margin will be (120–115)/115, which is just over 4 per cent of the purchase price. 
5  Goldberg  and  Knetter  (1997)  summarise  the  results  of  the  research.  Adolfson  (2004)  also  provides  an 
excellent survey, together with new results. 
6  See, for example, McCarthy (2000) and Bachetta and van Wincoop (2003). 
7  However, there are some complications with dividing CPI into import prices and other prices. See Hansson 
and Johansson (2007). 
8  See Burnstein, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2002). 
BIS Review 3/2010 
 3
be various strategic reasons for not allowing import price increases to have a complete pass-
through to consumers.  
Figure 1 illustrates some of the conclusions regarding the pass-through of the exchange rate. 
It shows the nominal exchange rate together with import and consumer prices in Sweden. 
We can see that import prices for consumer goods clearly co-vary with the nominal exchange 
rate,  although  there  is  no  perfect  correlation.  It  would  thus  appear  that  changes  in  the 
exchange rate nevertheless have a relatively large effect on these prices.  
Figure 1 
Consumer prices, import prices of consumer goods and nominal  
trade-weighted exchange rate (TCW index) in Sweden  
Annual percentage change 
Note. The import prices refer to consumer goods in the producer sector. Consumer 
prices are the CPI with a fixed interest rate (CPIF).  
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
 We can also see that the relationship with the exchange rate is much weaker for consumer 
prices than for import prices.  
A simple rough estimate can provide an impression of the effects on prices of a 15-per cent 
depreciation in the krona. Let us assume a pass-through to import prices equivalent to half of 
the  change  in  the  exchange  rate.  This  means  that  they  will  rise  by  7.5  per  cent.9  If  one 
assumes  that  these  prices  constitute  30  per  cent  of  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI),  this 
means that consumer prices will rise by just over 2 per cent as a consequence of the change 
in the exchange rate. According to this rough estimate, the pass-through from the nominal 
exchange  rate  on  the  CPI  is  thus  around  15  per  cent.10  As  the  exchange  rate  fluctuates 
substantially,  it  may  nevertheless  entail  fairly  large  effects  on  inflation,  although  the 
calculations in the example can be taken with a pinch of salt.11  
                                                 
9  We assume here that prices of imported goods in the consumer sector rise by 7.5 per cent. 
10  A 50-per cent impact on import prices,  which comprise around 30 per cent of the CPI, gives a 15-per cent 
exchange rate pass-through to the CPI. 
11  See also the article “The path of the krona and inflation” in IR06:1 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2010
The effects of the exchange rate on the real economy  
One can usually expect a weakening of the exchange rate to lead to a positive effect on net 
exports.  However,  experiences  show  that  it  may  take  time  before  exchange  rate  changes 
have an impact on foreign trade. In the short term, the value of imports adapts in that import 
prices in kronor rise as a result of the weaker exchange rates. The initial effect of a weaker 
exchange  rate  on  net  exports  can  thus  be  negative.  However,  in  the  slightly  longer  term 
producers  and  consumers  adapt  and  export  and  import  volumes  are  affected.  When  the 
exchange  rate  weakens,  exports  increase  while  imports  decline,  as  domestically-produced 
goods and services become relatively cheaper. The effect of a weakening in the exchange 
rate can thus be that net exports follow what is known as a J curve; first they weaken and 
then they improve.12 In the long term one can thus expect a weaker exchange rate to lead to 
increased net exports, which in turn has a positive effect on total production (GDP).  
Overall view is important  
Although it may be informative to reflect on the isolated effects of exchange rate changes on 
the  economy,  it  is  difficult  to  know  what  causes  what.  At  the  same  times  as  the  krona 
weakened  in  connection  with  the  financial  crisis,  production  fell  substantially,  partly  as  a 
result of a large fall in the demand for exports. It is difficult in this type of scenario to isolate 
the  effects  of  the  weaker  krona  from  the  effects  of  other  changes.  One  solution  to  this 
problem is to base the analysis on a theoretical model where everything is linked – what is 
known as a general equilibrium model. Analyses in the Riksbank’s general equilibrium model 
Ramses imply that the weakening of the krona has had considerable effects on inflation in 
particular  but  also  on  production.  Calculations  imply  that  the  weakening  of  the  krona 
contributed  to  the  quarterly  growth  in  GDP  being  a  percentage  point  or  so  higher,  while 
inflation was several percentage points higher than it would have been without the weaker 
krona.13  The  fact  that  inflation  became  so  much  higher  would  normally  have  led  to  a 
monetary policy response in the form of a higher repo rate. But in the situation we were then 
experiencing, inflation was falling below zero and thus risked far undershooting the inflation 
target.  During  this  unusual  period  the  weakening  of  the  krona  thus  contributed  to  bringing 
inflation closer to the target.  
Difficult to forecast the krona  
Developments  in  exchange  rates  are  thus  important  to  developments  in  production  and 
inflation  in  Sweden.  The  Riksbank’s  monetary  policy  decisions  and  interest  rate  path  are 
based  on  forecasts  of  economic  developments  in  Sweden  over  the  coming  years.  In  this 
context,  the  forecast  for  the  krona  is  important.  However,  making  good  exchange  rate 
forecasts  is  one  of  the  most  difficult  aspects  of  macro  economics.  Figure  2  shows  the 
Riksbank’s forecasts at the beginning of each year since 1996 for the krona’s trade-weighted 
exchange rate measured in terms of the TCW index.14 We can see that they have not been 
entirely accurate. The forecasts we have produced for the exchange rate of the krona since 
the exchange rate was allowed to float have often indicated that the krona would strengthen. 
Typically,  however,  this  strengthening  has  only  materialised  in  periods  preceded  by  a 
substantial  weakening  of  the  krona  exchange  rate,  as  in  the  periods  2002–2003  and  
2006–2007.  
                                                 
12  Rose and Yellen (1989) is a classical study in this field. 
13  The  effects  of a  weaker  krona  on  the  Swedish  economy  were  also  described  as  an  alternative  scenario  in 
MPR08:3. 
14  The  TCW  index  weighs  together  the  krona  exchange  rate  against  other  currencies  according  to  the  other 
countries’  share  of  Sweden’s  foreign  trade. The  Riksbank’s  forecasts  in  the  Figure  are  from  the  first report 
(Monetary Policy Report or Inflation Report) of that year, which has usually been published in February. 
BIS Review 3/2010 
 5
Figure 2 
The Riksbank’s forecasts for the krona  
exchange rate (TCW index)  
Index, 18 November 1992=100 
Source: The Riksbank. 
 Figure 3 
Consensus forecasts for the krona  
exchange rate (approximate TCW index)  
Index, 18 November 1992=100 
Sources: Consensus Economics and the Riksbank. 
 6 
   BIS Review 3/2010
However,  the  Riksbank  has  certainly  not  been  alone  in  expecting  that  the  krona  will 
strengthen.  Figure  3  shows  the  forecasts  according  to  “Consensus  forecast”  for  an 
approximate TCW index.15 This can be said to represent the average of the other analysts’ 
forecasts at the same point in time. We can also see that other analysts have predicted that 
the krona would strengthen more than it actually has. 
The difficulties in making forecasts for the nominal exchange rate in the short term are not 
specific  to  the  krona,  but  also  apply  more  generally.  When  assessing  various  forecasting 
strategies, it has proved very difficult to make better forecasts than merely taking the most 
recent outcome for the exchange rate.16  
At  the  same  time,  the  exchange  rate  plays  an  important  role  for  developments  in  a  small 
open  economy  like  Sweden’s.  It  is  therefore  important  to  form  an  impression  of 
developments in the exchange rate to be able to assess future economic developments. How 
should this be done?  
Interest rate differentials and exchange rates – a fragile relationship  
One  means  of  doing  this  is  to  use  interest  rate  levels  in  different  countries  as  a  basis. 
Forward rates for exchange rates are set on the basis of differences in interest rates. This 
can be illustrated by a simplified example: if a one-year interest rate is 2 percentage points 
lower in Sweden than in the United States, the forward rate one year ahead for the krona 
against the dollar is 2 per cent stronger than the current exchange rate. In this way the yield 
is evened out between investments in different currencies.17  
However, research has shown that forward rates are not good forecasts of future exchange 
rate  developments,  particularly  in  the  short  term.18  Contrary  to  the  implications  made  by 
forward rates, the exchange rate often strengthens for currencies with relatively high interest 
rates.19 The so-called carry trade, which arises when investors borrow money from countries 
with  low  interest  rates  and  invest  it  in  countries  with  high  interest  rates,  is  based  on  this 
phenomenon  and  can  be  said  to  be  direct  speculation  against  forward  rates.  One  then 
"hopes” that the exchange rate will either remain stable or that the currency of the country 
with a high interest rate appreciates. One example of such speculation has been borrowing 
in Japan, where the interest rate has been low for a long time, and investing in Australia or 
New Zealand, where the interest rate has been much higher. However, this has been proved 
to be a risky strategy. Financial crises have on numerous occasions led to a severe decline 
                                                 
15  Consensus  forecasts  are  the  average  of  forecasts  made  by  a  number  of  different  analysts  and  reported 
monthly  by  Consensus  Economics.  The  forecasts  shown  are  from  the  month  of  February  in  the  respective 
years. The survey does not include forecasts for the TCW index. Instead, the forecasts for the SEK/EUR rate 
and the implied forecasts (cross rates) for the krona against the USD, GDP JPY and NOK have been used. 
These currencies correspond to approximately 95 per cent of the TCW index. The forecasts for the respective 
currencies entail a percentage change in relation to the current exchange rate at the time of the survey. These 
percentage  changes  have  then  been  weighed  together  using  TCW  weights  to  a  percentage  change  in  the 
TCW index compared with the value of the index at the date of the survey. 
16  A classical study of this is Meese and Rogoff (1983). See also Cheung, Chinn and Pasqual (2005). 
17  This is known as covered interest parity, and means that the forward rate in relation to the current exchange 
rate  corresponds  to  the  interest  rate  differential  between  the  countries.  The  reasoning  is  as  follows:  If  one 
exchanges  kronor  for  dollars,  invests  in  a  US  one-year  bond  and  then  in  one  year’s  time  exchanges  them 
back to kronor according to the current forward rate, the investment contains no exchange rate risk. The yield 
is therefore the same as that given by investing in a Swedish one-year bond. Uncovered interest parity means 
that the interest rate differential corresponds to an equally large expected change in the exchange rate. In our 
example this means that one exchanges the money for kronor in one year’s time at the current exchange rate, 
which entails an exchange rate risk. 
18  See, for example, Froot and Thaler (1990). 
19  This phenomenon has been called the forward premium puzzle. 
BIS Review 3/2010 
 7
in the carry trade, for instance, in connection with the Asian crisis in 1997–98, when “high 
interest rate currencies” in Asia weakened drastically against the dollar and the yen, and the 
carry  positions  had  to  be  settled  quickly.  During  the  recent  crisis  the  currencies  in  “high 
interest rate countries” such as Australia and New Zealand weakened substantially against 
“low interest rate countries” such as Japan and the United States, which once again led to a 
speedy settlement of carry positions.  
One  contributory  factor  to  the  inflows  of  capital  to  the  emerging  markets  in  Asia  and  Latin 
America, as I mentioned earlier, is the relatively low interest rate levels in the “old” industrial 
nations in North America and Europe. The low interest rates in, for example, the United States, 
make it profitable to borrow dollars in order to invest in other currencies that provide a higher 
return  at  given  exchange  rates.  Several  of  the  countries  that  are  now  experiencing  capital 
inflows are unwilling to allow their currencies to appreciate against the US dollar despite the 
fact that the inflows are creating appreciation pressures. This is understandable in the light of 
experiences from, for instance, the Asian crisis. Exchange rates can be come highly volatile if 
they  are  completely  adapted  to  highly  volatile  capital  flows.  But  at  the  same  time,  the 
unwillingness  to  allow  the  exchange  rate  to  appreciate  probably  strengthens  tendencies 
towards capital inflows, as it enables speculation in carry trade, as I described earlier.  
Let me now leave the “speculative” element of the foreign exchange market and talk about 
the  more  long-term  development  of  the  exchange  rate.  While  it  is  admittedly  difficult  to 
forecast developments in the short term, there are some research results that can be used 
as a starting point for assessing developments further ahead. The Riksbank’s forecasts have 
primarily been based on these results.20  
Nominal and real exchange rates  
While  the  nominal  exchange  rate  shows  the  number  of  Swedish  kronor  per  unit of  foreign 
currency, the real exchange rate shows the relationship between Swedish and foreign price 
levels. Put simply, one can say that the real exchange rate shows how much a given basket 
of  goods  costs  in  Sweden  in  relation  to  abroad  when  the  price  of  the  basket  of  goods  is 
expressed  in  the  same  currency.  The  real  exchange  rate  can  change  either  through  the 
nominal exchange rate changing or by inflation differing between countries. A stronger krona 
real exchange rate can thus be attained either through a stronger nominal exchange rate or 
through a faster increase in the price level in Sweden than in other countries. We can use the 
Economist’s Big Mac index as an example. This index shows how much a Big Mac costs in 
different countries in the same currency. In 2001 the krona exchange rate against the dollar 
was at its weakest level so far and oscillated between 10 and 11 kronor. In the United States 
a Big Mac then cost 2.60 dollars, which corresponded to 26.70 kronor. In Sweden a Big Mac 
cost 24 kronor. A Big Mac was thus around 10 per cent more expensive in the United States 
than in Sweden, in Swedish kronor. At the beginning of 2008 the krona had appreciated so 
much that a dollar cost 6 kronor. In the United States a Big Mac cost 3.60 dollars then, which 
corresponded to 21.30 kronor, while in Sweden a Big Mac cost 38 kronor. Now a Big Mac 
was instead more than 40 per cent cheaper in the United States than in Sweden, in Swedish 
kronor. In terms of a Big Mac, the real exchange rate had thus strengthened considerably, 
both as a result of the nominal krona rate strengthening against the dollar and as a result of 
the price level rising more quickly in Sweden.21  
                                                 
20  See also Lagerwall and Nessén (2009). 
21  The price in the United States has increased from 2.60 to 3.60 dollars, which corresponds to almost 40 per 
cent, while the price in Sweden has increased from 24 to 38 kronor, which corresponds to almost 60 per cent. 
One  usually  defines  the  real  krona  exchange  rate  as  ExP*/P,  where  E  is  the  nominal  exchange  rate  (for 
example, the number of kronor per dollar), P* is the price level abroad and P is the price level in Sweden. It 
thus shows the price level in kronor abroad in relation to that in Sweden. An appreciation in the krona’s real 
8 
 BIS Review 3/2010
Figure 4 shows the nominal and real trade-weighted krona rate since 1970. It is this trade-
weighted krona rate that the Riksbank tries to analyse and forecast. If one looks at the period 
with a floating exchange rate (since November 1992), one can draw the conclusion that the 
nominal and real exchange rates are strongly  correlated. This is because exchange rates, 
which  translate  prices  into  a  common  currency,  change  quickly,  while  price  levels  change 
slowly. Nominal exchange rates are determined at the trading counters daily, while it takes 
time to change prices.  
Figure 4 
Nominal and real TCW-weighted exchange rates  
Index, 18 November 1992=100 
Note. Broken lines represent the Riksbank’s forecasts. The real exchange rate has been calculated 
using Swedish and TCW-weighted CPI. Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
 How do we compare the impact from the nominal exchange rate on inflation, which I took up 
earlier,  with  Figure  4,  which  shows  a  strong  correlation  between  the  nominal  and  real 
exchange  rates?  According  to  the  earlier  example,  only  around  15  per  cent  of  a  nominal 
exchange rate change “spills over” into domestic inflation. This means that 85 per cent of the 
nominal  exchange  rate  change  does  not  have  any  effect  on  inflation  and  that  the  real 
exchange rate is thus affected by 85 per cent of the change in the nominal exchange rate. 
There is thus a strong, but not complete, correlation in the short term between the nominal 
and real exchange rates.  
Purchasing power parity and the very long run  
According to the theory of relative purchasing power parity, the relative price of a basked of 
goods  shall  be  constant  over  time  and  the  real  exchange  rate  thus  should  not  show  any 
particular trend. However, as the real exchange rate measured in terms of a Big Mac shows, 
                                                                                                                                                      
exchange rate thus means that it falls. In the example the real exchange rate has gone from 26.7/24=1.11 till 
38/21.3=0.56. 
BIS Review 3/2010 
 9
the real SEK/USD exchange rate has shown substantial fluctuations.22 At the same time, it is 
actually difficult to distinguish any special trend in the real exchange rate in the very long run.  
Nominal and real exchange rates, SEK/USD, 1913–2009 
Figure 5 
Note. The real exchange rate has been calculated using the CPI for Sweden and the United States. 
The real exchange rate has been equated to the nominal for 1913.  
Sources: The Bureau of Labor Statistics, Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
 Figure  5  shows  the  nominal  and  real  krona  exchange  rate  against  the  US  dollar  during  a 
period of almost 100 years. Here we can see a different pattern from that in Figure 4. In the 
long  term  the  nominal  krona  rate  against  the  dollar  has  weakened,  but  this  has  been 
compensated by inflation being higher in Sweden than in the United States, so that the real 
exchange rate is in principle the same at the  end of the period as at the beginning of the 
period.  This  is  consistent  with  the  research  results;  over  very  long  periods  of  time,  real 
exchange rates appear to “level off” and not show any special trend. In the very long run the 
theory of relative purchasing power parity thus appears to apply.23 If the real exchange rate 
does not have any trend, it will return to its average in the long run.  
There  are  thus  results  in  the  academic  research  indicating  that  real  exchange  rates  fulfil 
relative  purchasing  power  parity  in  the  very  long  run.24  However,  these  results  have  little 
value for those trying to forecast exchange rate developments in the short and medium term. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  it  is  moreover  the  trade-weighted  krona  exchange  rate  that  the 
Riksbank tries to forecast. Figure 5 showed only the development of the krona against the 
dollar.  If  we  return  to  Figure  4,  we  can  see  that  the  real  trade-weighted  krona  rate  shows 
                                                 
22  Interestingly, there is research indicating that price differences for a Big Mac between countries even out over 
time in accordance with relative purchasing power parity. See, for example, Cumby (1996) and Parsley and 
Wei (2007). 
23  See,  for  example,  Froot  and  Rogoff  (1995)  and  Rogoff  (1996)  for  a  scientific  survey  of  the  research  into 
purchasing power parity. 
24  See, for example, Taylor (2002) 
10 
 BIS Review 3/2010
large variations over fairly long periods.25 The krona is much weaker in real terms at the end 
of the period than at the beginning of the period. What is the reason for this? It is largely due 
to  developments  in  Sweden’s  real  economy  in  relation  to  other  countries.  The  Riksbank’s 
forecasts for the exchange rate are based on changes in the real exchange rate reflecting 
differences in growth in relation to other countries and being consistent with foreign trade, 
being balanced in the long run.  
Relative growth and the current account explain changes in the real exchange rate  
Countries that have a higher GDP growth than their trading partners usually have a stronger 
real exchange rate.26 The real trade-weighted krona rate has been on average 30 per cent 
weaker  during  the  period  since  1993  than  it  was  in  the  1970s.  Figure  6  shows  Sweden’s 
GDP in relation to TCW-weighted GDP abroad. 
We can see that Swedish GDP in relation to other countries fell heavily from the 1970s until 
the beginning of the 1990s. The Riksbank’s assessment is that the weakened exchange rate 
from the 1970s to the 1990s is linked to lower growth in Sweden than abroad. As we can see 
in Figure 6, Sweden has over the past 15 years recovered some of the relative GDP level 
and had higher growth than other countries. This tendency is expected to continue over the 
coming years, which would in this case imply a stronger real exchange rate.  
One factor that is often discussed in connection with the exchange rate is the development of 
the current account. The current account mainly consists of the difference between exports 
and  imports  of  goods  and  services,  that  is,  net  exports.  A  positive  current  account  means 
that the economy as a whole produces more than is used. This surplus represents savings 
used  to  invest  in  foreign  assets  rather  than  domestic  assets.  A  surplus  on  the  current 
account thus means a situation where domestic saving exceeds domestic investment. 
                                                 
25  Unfortunately,  there  are  no  really  long  time  series  for  the  trade-weighted  development  of  the  krona,  partly 
because of problems with breaks in the time series due to the world wars regarding, for instance, the nominal 
exchange rate and CPI in Germany, which has historically been Sweden’s most important trading partner. 
26  The  most  common  explanation  for  this  is  what  is  known  as  the  Balassa-Samuelson  effect.  Put  simply,  this 
effect arises because countries  with high growth tend to have high productivity growth in the goods sector, 
which results in price increases in the service sector, where productivity growth is lower. Thus, countries with 
high growth typically experience a strengthening of their real exchange rate. For a description of this effect 
with empirical results, see Lothian and Taylor (2008). 
BIS Review 3/2010 
 11
Figure 6  
Swedish GDP in relation to abroad  
Index: 1970=100 
Note. The series in the Figure shows the ratio between Sweden’s GDP and the TCW-weighted 
GDP for countries abroad. The broken line represents the Riksbank’s forecast.  
Sources: National sources, Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
 Figure 7 shows developments in Sweden’s current account and in the real exchange rate in 
Sweden. As we can see, there is a clear correlation. The devaluation at the end of the 1970s 
and  the  beginning  of  the  1980s  only  led  to  short-term  surpluses  in  trade.  The  devaluation 
was instead followed by higher inflation in Sweden than abroad, which led to an appreciation 
in  the  real  exchange  rate.  The  deficit  in  international  trade  returned.  However,  when  the 
krona was allowed to float in November 1992, the real exchange rate immediately weakened 
by almost 25 per cent and has since then remained weak. Sweden has for the most part had 
large surpluses in foreign trade since then. 
How should we then view future developments? Our assessment is that the surplus on the 
current account will decline from almost 10 per cent in 2008 to around 7 per cent at the end 
of  the  forecast  period  (see  Figure  7).  An  important  factor  in  this  assessment  is  that 
households  are  expected  to  reduce  their  saving  in  the  future.  During  the  financial  crisis, 
confidence indicators showed that households had a very pessimistic view, which probably 
led  to  an  increase  in  precautionary  saving.  As  the  economy  recovers  and  households’ 
confidence is restored, which economic survey data now indicates, it is reasonable to expect 
that saving will fall.  
As we saw in Figure 7, a reduction in the surplus on the current account is usually connected 
to a real strengthening of the exchange rate. 
12 
 BIS Review 3/2010
Figure 7 
Sweden’s current account and real exchange rate  
Per cent of GDP and index, 18 November 1992=100 
Note. Striped bars and broken lines represent the Riksbank’s forecasts.  
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
 Many indications that krona will continue to appreciate  
Let me now summarise the Riksbank’s assessment of the more long-term developments in 
the  exchange  rate.  Our  assessment  is  that  the  surplus  on  the  current  account  will  decline 
over the coming years, and this is linked to a stronger real exchange rate. In recent years, 
growth  has  been  relatively  high  in  Sweden  compared  with  other  countries,  and  our 
assessment is that this tendency will continue. There are thus good arguments why the real 
exchange  rate  should  strengthen  in  the  coming  period.  The  real  exchange  rate  can 
strengthen  not  merely  through  an  appreciation  in  the  nominal  exchange  rate,  but  also  by 
inflation  being  higher  in  Sweden  than  in  other  countries.  However,  we  have  no  reason  to 
believe that inflation in Sweden will differ substantially from that of other countries over the 
coming  years.  The  change  in  the  real  and  nominal  exchange  rate  could  therefore  be 
expected to be roughly the same size (see Figure 3). 
In addition to the more long-term driving forces that I have taken up, there is a further factor 
pointing to a stronger krona in the coming period. The severe weakening of the krona as a 
result  of  the  financial  crisis  was  probably  linked  to  the  financial  turmoil  that  arose.  As  the 
financial markets have begun to normalise, the krona has strengthened, and there is reason 
to believe it will continue to strengthen if the normalisation continues. But at the same time, 
renewed  unrest  could  lead  to  further  periods  with  a  weaker  krona  exchange  rate.  The 
assessment of the development of the exchange rate during the coming period is, as always, 
very uncertain.  
Concluding remarks  
The  development  of  the  exchange  rate  is  very  important  to  a  small,  open  economy  like 
Sweden’s. The effects of the exchange rate on the economy can be divided up into effects 
on inflation and effects on the real economy, which are mainly through international trade.  
BIS Review 3/2010 
 13
It is very difficult to forecast exchange rates accurately, but there are good reasons, at least 
in the slightly longer term, to expect the krona to appreciate. At the same time, experiences 
show that the krona rate is sensitive to the unrest in the financial markets. The conditions in 
the financial markets have normalised and the krona has strengthened this year. A continued 
normalisation of the financial markets points to a continued strengthening of the krona. If the 
unrest increases again the krona may once again weaken in the short term. However, this 
possibility is not included in the Riksbank’s main scenario.  
If the krona strengthens in the future, as indicated by our forecasts, one can expect this to 
subdue GDP growth somewhat and to keep down inflation. Moreover, resource utilisation is 
low  to  begin  with,  and  is  expected  to  remain  low  in  the  coming  period.  This  justifies  the 
expansionary  monetary  policy  we  are  now  conducting  to  attain  the  inflation  target  and  to 
stabilise resource utilisation.  
References  
Apel,  M.,  Friberg,  R.  and  Hallsten,  K.  (2004):  “Price-setting  behaviour  in  Swedish  firms”, 
Economic Review no. 4, 2004, Sveriges Riksbank.  
Adolfson, M. (2004), “Exchange Rate Pass-Through – Theory, Concepts, Beliefs and Some 
Evidence”, unpublished paper, Sveriges Riksbank.  
Bachetta, P. and van Wincoop, E. (2003), “Why Do Consumer Prices React Less than Import 
Prices to Exchange Rates?” Journal of the European Economic Association 1, 662–670.  
Burnstein, A., Eichenbaum, M. and Rebelo, S. (2002), “Why Are Rates of Inflation So Low 
after Large Devaluations?” NBER Working Paper 8748.  
Cheung,  Y-W,  Chinn,  M.D.  and  Pascual,  A.  G.,  “Empirical  Exchange  Rate  Models  Of  The 
Nineties:  Are  Any  Fit  To  Survive?”  Journal  of  International  Money  and  Finance,  2005,  
1150–1175.  
Cumby, R.E. (1996): “Forecasting Exchange Rates and Relative Prices with the Hamburger 
Standard: Is What You Want What You Get With McParity?” NBER working paper 5675.  
Froot, K. and Rogoff, K. (1995), “Perspectives on PPP and Long-run Real Exchange Rates”, 
G. M. Grossman and K. Rogoff (red.): Handbook of International Economics 3.  
Froot,  K.A.  and  Thaler,  R  (1990):  “Anomalies:  Foreign  exchange”,  Journal  of  Economic 
Perspectives 4: 179–92.  
Goldberg, P.K. and Knetter, M.M. (1997), “Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What Have 
We Learned?” Journal of Economic Literature XXXV, 1243–1272.  
Hansson, J. and Johansson, J. (2007): “Alternative measures of inflation for monetary policy 
analysis”, Economic Review no. 3, 2007, Sveriges Riksbank.  
Lagervall, B. and Nessén M. (2009), “The long-term development of the krona”, Economic 
commentaries no. 6, Sveriges Riksbank.  
Lothian J.R. and Taylor M.P. (2008): “Real Exchange Rates Over the Past Two Centuries: 
How Important is the Harrod-Balassa-Samuelson Effect?” Economic Journal 118.  
McCarthy,  J.  (2000),  “Pass-Through  of  Exchange  Rates  and  Import  Prices  to  Domestic 
Inflation in Some Industrial Economies”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 3.  
Meese,  R.  and  Rogoff,  K.  (1983),  “Empirical  Exchange  Rate  Models  of  the  Seventies:  Do 
They Fit Out of Sample?” Journal of International Economics 14 , 3–24.  
Rogoff K. (1996), “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 
p. 647–668.  
14 
 BIS Review 3/2010
Parsley, D.C. and Wei, S-J. (2007): “A Prism into the PPP Puzzles: The Micro-foundations of 
Big Mac Real Exchange Rates” Economic Journal 117, 1336–1356.  
Rose, A.K. and Yellen, J.L. (1989), “Is There a J-curve?” Journal of Monetary Economics 24, 
53–68.  
Taylor,  M.  P.  (2002):  “A  Century  of  Purchasing  Power  Parity”,  Review  of  Economics  and 
Statistics 84, 139–150. 
BIS Review 3/2010 
 15
