Simon M Potter: Some observations and lessons from the crisis1 
Remarks  by  Mr  Simon  M  Potter,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Research  and  Statistics 
Group of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Third Annual Connecticut Bank and 
Trust Company Economic Outlook Breakfast, Hartford, Connecticut, 7 June 2010. 
 Introduction 
Among the many important lessons coming out of the global financial crisis that started in the 
summer  of  2007,  possibly  the  most  important  revolve  around  how  complex  the  global 
financial system is, how quickly confidence in that system can deteriorate, and how difficult it 
is  to  come  up  with  simple  and  robust  solutions  to  stabilize  the  system  in  real  time.  My 
remarks today will break the progression of this crisis into four distinct phases. In doing so, 
my intention is to highlight some of the actions taken by the Federal Reserve to manage the 
crisis, and to offer what at least in retrospect seem to be clear lessons on how to promote 
financial stability outside the heat of a crisis.  
The four distinct phases of the recent crisis were as follows: 
 
The initial disruption in money markets in the summer of 2007 – I will call this the 
“what are these securities worth?” phase;  
The  abrupt  takeover  of  Bears  Stearns  by  JPMorgan  Chase  –  I  will  call  this  the 
“unusual and exigent” phase;  
The 30 days following the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers – I will call this the “panic” 
phase; and  
The period from mid-November 2008 to early May 2009 – I will call this the “viability 
of large U.S. banking organizations” phase. 
   One consistent theme that emerges across all these phases is that central banks must have 
the  ability  to  respond  quickly  and  flexibly  in  a  crisis  situation.  This  ability  is  crucial  in 
preventing  the  emergence  of  an  adverse  feedback  loop  between  instability  in  the  financial 
system and weakness in the real economy. Another theme that emerged as these phases 
played out, however, was that an ability to move with speed and flexibility comes with the 
challenge of ensuring that accountability and transparency keep pace with the actions being 
taken.  The  need  for  accountability  and  transparency  is  especially  true  when  central  bank 
actions are being used to innovatively fill holes in a regulatory and legal framework that has 
not kept pace with the evolution of the financial system. 
Phase 1: What are these securities worth? 
On August 9, 2007, the large French bank BNP Paribas announced that it had suspended 
activity in three of its funds so it could more precisely assess their value. The problem was 
stated as follows:  
“The complete evaporation of liquidity in certain market segments of the U.S. 
securitization  market  has  made  it  impossible  to  value  certain  assets  fairly 
regardless of their quality or credit rating.” 
                                                 
1  
I would like to thank my colleagues Meg McConnell, Jamie McAndrews and Brian Peters for numerous useful 
comments and suggestions on these remarks. 
BIS Review 81/2010 
 1
Central banks immediately responded to the evaporation of liquidity in the standard manner. 
For  example,  the  Federal  Reserve  issued  a  statement  on  August  10  indicating  it  was 
providing  liquidity  for  the  orderly  functioning  of  markets,  and  in  that  statement  the  Federal 
Reserve  emphasized  that  “As  always,  the  discount  window  is  available  as  a  source  of 
funding.” One week later it reinforced this statement with a 50 basis point cut in the discount 
rate  and  the  addition  of  30-day  term  loan  to  complement  the  standard  overnight  discount 
window loan. 
At that time, the discount windows of Federal Reserve Banks were only open to depository 
institutions.  Standard  monetary  economic  theory  and  previous  experience  were  consistent 
with  the  notion  that  depository  institutions  could  act  as  intermediaries  to  pass  liquidity 
through to the rest of the financial system. Indeed, in many earlier episodes the mere fact 
that this backstop liquidity was present had been sufficient to calm financial markets. 
Circumstances proved very different in this episode. For one, the rise of the shadow banking 
system  meant  that  a  preponderance  of  financial  intermediation  in  the  United  States  was 
being  performed  by  non-depository  institutions  that  funded  themselves  in  wholesale  rather 
than retail markets. Further, traditional discount window loans have always been vulnerable 
to stigma – that is, if a bank borrows from the central bank it runs the risk that markets and 
counterparties may infer that it is closer to insolvency than was previously thought. 
The potential for stigma to damage the effectiveness of this crucial backstop facility explains 
why  the  identity  of  discount  window  borrowers  is  not  disclosed  by  the  Federal  Reserve. 
Indeed, we saw early in this crisis that many depository institutions proved unwilling to take 
the risk of possible stigma, the result of which was an increasingly severe impairment to the 
flow  of  liquidity  to  the  rest  of  the  financial  system.  In  late  August  2007,  a  new  facility  was 
designed to help overcome stigma through the use of an auction mechanism. As the market 
calmed in September to late October, this facility was shelved but was ultimately introduced 
on  December  12,  2007,  as  the  Term  Auction  Facility  in  a  coordinated  announcement  with 
other central banks. 
This phase has some obvious lessons for financial stability. 
 
Financial  products  that  are  new  and  complex  should  be  treated  with  caution. 
Regulators, credit rating agencies and market participants all have limited ability to 
evaluate  the  properties  of  such  complex  products  at  their  inception.  For  example, 
the  fact  that  the  credit  rating  agencies  bestowed  their  highest  ratings  on  certain 
securities prior to the crisis meant that many investors assumed that the securities 
were  “informationally  insensitive.”  What  was  subsequently  learned,  however,  was 
that instead of being robust to economic developments, structure of the securities 
had merely served to concentrate the systemic “tail risk” in the securities.  
New financial products are often associated with the extension of primary credit to 
previously  underserved  sectors  of  the  economy.  This  extension  of  credit  to  the 
previously underserved often produces abuses or outright fraud, much of which can 
be masked by the newness and complexity of the products. 
 In  many  respects  these  are  old  lessons  that  we  should  have  learned  already  from  what 
occurred  in  the  run-up  to  previous  episodes  of  financial  crisis.  However,  the  remarkable 
stability of the U.S. economy from the mid-1980s to 2007 unfortunately served to  produce 
what  amounted  to  a  collective  amnesia  with  regard  to  these  earlier  learned  lessons.  For 
example, most macroeconomists had become convinced that the widening and deepening of 
the  financial  system  over  the  previous  twenty  years  driven  by  deregulation,  and  given 
additional impetus by the return to low and stable inflation, was an important source for this 
economic stability. 
This is not to say that there was no one pointing out the risks of the low risk premiums and 
the  rapid  growth  of  structured  investment  products,  but  many  economists,  analysts  and 
commentators  had  reached  the  blissful  state  of  mind  that  it  was  different  this  time.  In  this 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2010
context,  it  is  useful  to  recall  an  unease  articulated  by  former  Federal  Reserve  Board 
Chairman Alan Greenspan in 19962: 
“Clearly,  sustained  low  inflation  implies  less  uncertainty  about  the  future,  and 
lower risk premiums imply higher prices of stocks and other earning assets…. But 
how  do  we  know  when  irrational  exuberance  has  unduly  escalated  asset 
values...?” 
This  uncertainty  about  the  link  between  underlying  fundamentals  and  current  asset 
valuations is crucial to interpreting this initial phase of the crisis. For example, one relatively 
benign interpretation of what was playing out was that the financial system was experiencing 
a liquidity problem driven by a maturity mismatch in the shadow banking system. The liquidity 
problem was unusually severe because of the collapse of the shadow banking sector and the 
resulting pressures that collapse placed on the balance sheets and liquidity positions of the 
traditional  bank  sector.  Nonetheless,  the  situation  was  fundamentally  viewed  as  a  liquidity 
problem rather than a solvency problem, meaning that any potential credit losses were likely 
to be small and easily absorbed. 
An  alternative  darker  view  was  that  the  global  financial  system  was  overexposed  to  land 
prices in the United States, through the home sale and mortgage refinancing boom that had 
taken place in the last four years. This darker view was given less credence, in part because 
the  magnitude  of  the  fall  in  U.S.  nominal  house  prices  necessary  to  produce  a  situation 
where the losses could not be easily absorbed was viewed by many as implausibly large. At 
that time, the conventional view was that by standard regulatory and accounting measures, 
most  U.S.  financial  institutions  had  more  than  ample  capital  against  the  risks  they  faced. 
Furthermore,  institutions  were  raising  new  capital  to  fill  the  reduction  in  accounting  capital 
being produced by the write-downs associated with subprime related assets. 
Phase 2: Unusual and exigent 
On Tuesday March 11, 2008, the Federal Reserve announced an expansion of its standard 
securities lending program for primary dealers3 to a facility that accepted a wider range of 
collateral  and  lent  at  a  term  longer  than  overnight.  This  new  facility,  known  as  the  Term 
Securities Lending Facility (TSLF), was designed to help ease the ongoing erosion of liquidity 
conditions in funding markets that was occurring despite the two large cuts in the fed funds 
target in January 2008.  
Two days later after the Federal Reserve announced the TSLF, Bear Stearns Co., the fifth 
largest investment bank in the U.S., ran out of cash to meet its obligations for the next day. 
Over  the  ensuing  three  days,  the  Federal  Reserve,  working  with  the  Securities  and 
Exchange  Commission  and  U.S.  Treasury,  facilitated  the  takeover  of  Bear  Stearns  by 
JPMorgan  Chase.  The  Federal  Reserve  used  a  lender-of-last-resort  authority  it  had  been 
granted  in  the  1930s  under  Section  13(3)  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  to  facilitate  the 
transaction.  Further,  on  that  Sunday,  March  16,  the  Federal  Reserve  announced  the 
introduction  of  the  Primary  Dealer  Credit  Facility  (PDCF),  an  emergency  extension  of  the 
standard discount window facilities to primary dealers. 
Finally two days later on March 18, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) cut the fed 
funds target by 75 basis points, bringing the total decrease in the target since the start of the 
crisis  to  300  basis  points.  At  that  time,  many  saw  this  point  as  the  peak  of  the  crisis  and 
assumed that the weaknesses in the financial and regulatory system would be fixed as the 
crisis subsided. 
                                                 
2   The Challenge of Central Banking in a Democratic Society. 
3   Primary dealers are broker-dealers who trade in government securities directly with the Federal Reserve. 
BIS Review 81/2010 
 3
At  this  point,  it  is  worth  spending  a  moment  to  explain  in  a  little  more  detail  the  basic 
elements of Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, a provision that had only previously 
been used for relatively small loans in the 1930s.4 Section 13(3) allows a Federal Reserve 
Bank  to  lend  to  any  individual,  partnership  or  corporation  under  the  authority  of  a  super-
majority  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  in  unusual  and  exigent  circumstances,  if  adequate 
credit  accommodations  are  not  available  from  other  banking  institutions  and  if  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank is secured to its satisfaction. This last condition effectively represents the 
dividing line between lender-of-last-resort actions on one hand and capital injections or other 
forms of unsecured lending on the other hand, a critically important dividing line the Federal 
Reserve carefully respected in all its actions over the course of the crisis. 
One lesson that emerges from this and later phases of the crisis is that while the Federal 
Reserve’s  authority  and  accountability  for  the  13(3)  actions  taken  in  March  2008  and 
throughout  the  crisis  were  well  established  under  the  Federal  Reserve  Act,  what  was 
crucially lacking was a public transparency regime that would allow the public to immediately 
track and understand the details of the extraordinary action taken. The complexity of creating 
a robust, responsible and safe transparency regime in the midst of rapid change and extreme 
market  fragility  notwithstanding,  the  fact  that  the  public  transparency  of  the  central  bank 
might lag the actions being taken by the central bank creates its own set of risks. In fact, the 
importance  of  transparency  keeping  pace  with  actions  was  actually  the  main  theme  of 
Greenspan’s  1996  speech,  where,  just  as  an  aside,  he  had  coined  the  phrase  irrational 
exuberance. One paragraph in particular seems particularly prescient: 
“If we are to maintain the confidence of the American people, it is vitally important 
that,  excepting  the  certain  areas  where  the  premature  release  of  information 
could  frustrate  our  legislated  mission,  the  Fed  must  be  as  transparent  as  any 
agency  of  government.  It  cannot  be  acceptable  in  a  democratic  society  that  a 
group of unelected individuals are vested with important responsibilities, without 
being open to full public scrutiny and accountability.” 
As I previously noted, establishing an appropriate and responsible transparency regime for 
emergency  lending  in  the  midst  of  a  severe  crisis  is  an  especially  challenging  task.  With 
sufficient time to assess the maximum amount of information that could be released without 
frustrating its mission, the Federal Reserve now discloses extremely detailed information to 
the public about all of its facilities.5 However, the fact that such information was not instantly 
available gave rise to public criticism.  
Another lesson that emerged strongly in this phase of the crisis was the need for adding to 
the regulatory toolkit a robust and effective method for resolving complex financial institutions 
without  imperiling  the  safety  of  the  broader  system.  In  the  case  of  Bear  Stearns,  the 
presence  of  a  willing  acquirer  presented  the  opportunity  for  an  assisted  transaction  that 
effectively  amounted  to an  ad  hoc  resolution  mechanism  for  the  failing firm.  One  sense  in 
which this solution was ad hoc was that policymakers could not be sure that a willing acquirer 
would  be  found  in  the  case  of  distress  in  the  future,  but  another,  perhaps  more  important 
sense is that the rules of the game were not clearly established in advance. 
In  this  context,  it  is  worth  noting  that  the  United  States  had  led  the  world  with  its  Federal 
Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC)  Improvement  Act  in  1991  in  establishing  a  state-of-
the-art resolution regime for depository institutions to avoid the panics and runs associated 
with  the  risk  of  insolvency  of  a  financial  institution,  while  at  the  same  time  protecting  the 
taxpayers. However, this regime did not address how to efficiently resolve holding companies 
                                                 
4  
In the 1930s, Congress had passed legislation giving the Federal Reserve additional flexibility in its lender-of-
last-resort powers but these were removed with the passage of the small business investment act in 1958. 
5   Most of this information can be found at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System’s Credit and 
Liquidity Programs and the Balance Sheet. 
4 
 BIS Review 81/2010
that  included  a  depository  institution,  investment  banks  or  other  financial  institutions  that 
were tightly and very intricately woven into the global financial system. 
Perhaps  because  many  thought  that  March  2008  was  the  height  of  the  crisis,  the 
overwhelming  importance  of  this  lesson  coming  out  of  the  Bear  Stearns  episode  did  not 
translate into this gap in our regulatory framework being addressed with sufficient urgency. 
As I will discuss momentarily, the gap re-emerged as a main accelerant of the crisis with the 
collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  of  that  same  year.  Although,  it  is  worth 
acknowledging  in  this  context  that  Congress  did  approve  legislation  setting  up  a  special 
contingent  resolution  process  for  the  government-sponsored  enterprises  (GSEs)  in  the 
summer of 2008. 
A final lesson from this phase of the crisis was the critical need for policymakers to question 
the  validity  of  the  assumptions  that  are  often  taken  for  granted  in  assessing  the  risks  to 
financial stability. For example, most macroeconomic models do not have an explicit banking 
sector.  Thus,  in  simulations  of  the  effects  of  house  price  declines,  the  main  channel  of 
propagation  is  an  indirect  one  through  a  wealth  effect  on  consumption.  As  house  prices 
continued  to  decline  at  unprecedented  rates,  many  analysts  started  to  reconsider  the 
adequacy of what had previously been considered ample capital in the U.S. banking system, 
and thus the extent to which this capital would be a firebreak against a significantly sharper 
contraction.  If  this  firebreak  was  insufficient  or  perceived  to  be  insufficient,  then  these 
analysts correctly anticipated that a vicious adverse feedback loop might take hold: declines 
in economic activity would make financial institutions reluctant to lend in order to conserve 
capital  for  possible  credit  losses,  the  decline  in  lending  would  further  reduce  economic 
activity and so on. This type of nonlinearity had not been part of pre-crisis evaluation of the 
risks  of  large  house  price  declines,  but  by  the  spring  of  2008,  it  was  becoming  a  central 
concern. 
Phase 3: Panic 
The bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers on September 15, 2008, precipitated a run on the global 
financial system of a previously unimaginable scale. The Federal Reserve was immediately 
confronted with a huge unanticipated call on its lender-of-last-resort power as a result of a 
substantial  liquidity  problem  at  one  of  world’s  largest  insurance  companies,  American 
International Group (AIG). The Federal Reserve’s decision on September 16 to lend to AIG 
was a classic lender-of-last-resort action of exactly the type envisaged by the statutory power 
given  in  13(3).  However,  given  the  speed  of  developments  that  week,  there  has  been 
considerable confusion and misperceptions over the validity of the initial decision to lend to 
AIG.6  
It was unknown on September 16 just how quickly the panic would spread and how harmful it 
would be to the real economy. By the next evening it was already obvious that the panic had 
spread to prime money market mutual funds with devastating effects. These funds provided 
short-term  financing  to  numerous  firms  and  institutions  through  the  commercial  paper 
market.  A  myriad  of  other  breakdowns  were  occurring  as  trust  vanished  from  the  global 
financial system. Against this backdrop, the request for the $700 billion Troubled Asset Relief 
Program (TARP) appropriation was made the next day. 
In the short time it took Congress to pass the TARP appropriation, the panic continued to 
spread;  on  September  25,  Washington  Mutual,  the  sixth  largest  depository  institution,  was 
resolved by the FDIC and just days later Wachovia, the fourth largest bank holding company 
                                                 
6   The  recent  testimony  by  Thomas  Baxter  and  Sarah  Dahlgren  provides  a  detailed  explanation:  Joint  written 
testimony of Thomas C. Baxter and Sarah Dahlgren: The Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Involvement 
with AIG. 
BIS Review 81/2010 
 5
encountered  severe  funding  difficulties  and  was  eventually  taken  over  by  Wells  Fargo.  As 
with the need to place the two largest GSEs into conservatorship, it became apparent that 
much of the supposed ample capital in the U.S. financial system was not an effective bulwark 
against  insolvency  or  the  perception  of  possible  insolvency.  The  latter  possibility,  whether 
true or not at its inception, can ultimately become a self-fulfilling prophesy if it results in a run 
on the financial system. 
There are three broad forms of policy responses available to arrest the self-fulfilling prophesy 
dynamic that can take hold during a run on the financial system: 
 
Lender-of-last-resort  actions  to  assist  the  economy  in  adjusting  to  the  severe 
funding strains produced by the run,  
Guarantees issued to reassure existing liability holders, and  
Capital  injections  to  strengthen  the  actual,  and  therefore  perceived,  solvency  of 
financial institutions. 
 By early October 2008, it was apparent that a substantial escalation on all three fronts was 
required to give the financial system what was essentially a time-out in order to halt the self-
fulfilling prophesy dynamics. It is useful to consider the analogy of the time-outs that parents 
give  to  their  children  when  they  are  misbehaving.  While  the  analogy  is  not  appropriate  in 
terms of the punishment aspect of time-outs for kids, there are a number of similar problems 
in establishment of a robust time-out strategy. 
First, how to define the boundaries associated with the time-out. In the case of arresting a 
run on the financial system, who does and who does not have access to the lender-of-last-
resort,  guarantees  and  capital  injections?  Next,  can  the  parent/government  credibly 
announce and then efficiently operate the time-out? Finally, as all parents are acutely aware, 
how does one build an appropriate exit strategy from the time-out? 
In  the  second  week  of  October  there  was  no  room  for  error  on  any  of  these  strategic 
dimensions  but  instead  of  one  unruly  child  and  a  parent  playing  out  an  enduring  battle,  a 
diverse  set  of  policymakers  were  confronting  a  wide  range  of  financial  institutions  with  no 
experience with time-outs on either side.7 Further, full participation by systemically important 
firms was crucial due to the inter-connectedness of the financial system. 
The solution for the efficient operation of the time-out was “on the fly” to combine the power 
of  the  FDIC  to  provide  guarantees  to  liability  holders  of  banks  under  the  systemic  risk 
exemption embedded in FDIC Improvement Act with two other authorities. The first was the 
U.S. Treasury’s new ability to provide capital from the new TARP funds, and the second was 
the Federal Reserve’s authority in unusual and exigent circumstances to flood the financial 
system with as much liquidity as it needed. In the latter case the appropriate measure of the 
escalation is not the actual amount of liquidity that was drawn from the Federal Reserve but 
the commitment to supply whatever was needed.8 
This  commitment  was  captured  succinctly  in  the  minutes  of  the  October  2008  FOMC 
meeting: 
“...the  Committee  agreed  that  it  would  take  whatever  steps  were  necessary  to 
support the recovery of the economy.” 
Of  course  parents  usually  have  the  capacity  to  perform  on  a  time-out  if  the  initial 
announcement  directs  the  child  in  the  appropriate  direction.  In  this  case,  the  initial 
                                                 
7   The  time-out  of  an  extended  bank  holiday  used  by  U.S.  President  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt  in  1933  was  not 
available. 
8   Around  $1  trillion  was  drawn  but  the  total  capacity  of  the  existing  and  new  facilities  offered  by  the  Federal 
Reserve was closer to $4 trillion. 
6 
 BIS Review 81/2010
announcement had to  direct thousands of institutions in the appropriate direction on equal 
terms,  including  a  majority  that  had  not  been  misbehaving  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis.  In 
particular, stronger institutions might view their agreement to use the guarantees and issue 
equity  to  the  U.S.  Treasury  as  stigmatizing  and  make  them  more  vulnerable  to  runs.  The 
solution was to obtain agreement from nine systemically important institutions to participate 
at the start of the time-out on the same terms available to thousands of other eligible financial 
institutions.  
The time-out announced on October 14 was a critical success in terms of stopping the run on 
the global financial system, but it could not and did not address all the aspects of the crisis. 
The global propagation of the financial shock had already triggered an economic slowdown 
at least as abrupt as any during the Great Depression period. The underlying question was 
now how strong the adverse feedback loop would be between the rapidly deteriorating real 
economy and the condition of the banking sector. 
One clear lesson from this phase was the need for formal coordination among the diverse 
authorities in the U.S. in establishing and maintaining financial stability. Another lesson that 
emerged was that some forms of regulatory and accounting capital were very weak defenses 
against  the  fear  of  insolvency.  Both  lessons  are  informing  the  ongoing  work  of  regulatory 
reform and of enhancing the resiliency of the financial system through stronger capital and 
liquidity requirements. 
Phase 4: Viability of large U.S. banking organizations 
The next phase of the crisis started in mid-November 2008, as both the stock market and 
credit default swaps suggested increasing doubts on the part of market participants that large 
U.S. financial institutions had sufficient capital to withstand the losses that might arise from 
further deterioration in the real economy. For example, on the weekend before Thanksgiving, 
the  FDIC,  Federal  Reserve  and  U.S.  Treasury,  in  response  to  intense  market  pressures, 
came up with a support package for Citigroup, followed by a similar package of support for 
Bank of America in January 2009. From the public’s perspective, these interventions were 
becoming harder to understand, and from a policymaker’s perspective, there seemed no end 
in sight. In the market’s eyes, many banking organizations had become “uninvestable.” Thus, 
as  part  of  the  Financial  Stability  Plan  of  the  new  administration,  a  comprehensive  and 
forward-looking  assessment  of  the  capital  needs  of  19  bank  holding companies  with  more 
than $100 billion in assets was set in motion.  
Meanwhile, the Federal Reserve was reacting with great speed to the deepening recession 
by  cutting  the  fed  funds  target  to  its  lower  bound  of  close  to  zero,  starting  large-scale 
purchases  of  agency  debt,  mortgage-backed  securities  and  treasuries,  and  introducing  a 
facility to re-invigorate the securitization market. 
It  is  important  to  understand  that  the  objective  of  the  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment 
Program (SCAP) – the so-called bank stress tests – was not to assess the solvency of the 19 
companies.  Instead  the  objective  was  to  assess  their  capital  needs  under  a  deeper  and 
longer recession than was the consensus in early 2009, and then require them to meet these 
capital needs in the very near term, before the adverse scenario developed. One important 
rationale  for  the  program  was  that  the  presence  of  the  additional  capital  would  make  the 
adverse scenario less likely. The credibility of this strategy was dependent on the availability 
of  the  U.S.  Treasury’s  Capital  Assistance  Program  to  provide  capital  if  the  private  market 
was  unable  to  do  so.  Moreover,  a  brave  decision  was  made  to  be  transparent  about  the 
procedures  the  supervisors  were  using  in  their  assessment  and  to  pre-commit  to  disclose 
detailed results. In addition, the main measure of capital needs would be in terms of common 
equity rather than the preferred equity that was used in the U.S. Treasury’s Capital Purchase 
Program. 
BIS Review 81/2010 
 7
The  assessment  process  took  just  under  three  months  to  complete.  It  involved  many 
innovations  in  the  supervisory  process  that  will  continue  to  influence  the  approach  to  the 
supervision of large complex financial institutions in the future. The results of the assessment 
were striking. Under the more adverse scenario of a longer and deeper recession, the two-
year loss rates on average across the 19 banks were projected to be as high as experienced 
during the Great Depression. Further, this average hid an incredible amount of heterogeneity 
across both banks and asset classes. Bank’s ability to absorb such projected losses would 
depend on their ability to generate revenue in the future as well as on their current capital 
cushions. The assessment identified a net capital need of $185 billion based on the fourth 
quarter  2008  capital  positions  of  the  firms.  After  taking  account  of  capital-raising  actions 
already underway as well as the revenue generated in first quarter 2009, the net need for 
new capital was $75 billion spread across 10 of the 19 institutions. These capital needs were 
for the highest quality type – common equity. 
Perhaps  the  most  striking  outcome  of  the  process  was  that  a  detailed  publication  of  the 
results  for  individual  banks  proved  to  be  confidence  enhancing  and  served  to  help  make 
banks “investable” again. Thus, a key lesson from the SCAP process was that, under certain 
circumstances,  transparency  about  the  methods  used  and  a  willingness  to  commit  to 
disclosure of the results by public authorities can be a calming force. 
Finally, it is worth noting that while the financial crisis has taught us that financial institutions 
need high-quality common equity capital to absorb losses, that transparency and disclosure 
about their potential exposures are essential, it has not given any definitive indication of how 
much larger the capital buffers of financial institutions need to be to assuage worries about 
future tail events that can drive panics. 
that  short-term 
tactical  missteps  and 
Conclusions 
Looking back over the run-up to the financial crisis and its initial stages, it is obvious now with 
the  benefit  of  hindsight 
long-term  strategic 
miscalculations  were  made  by  both  the  private  and  public  sectors.  Many  of  the  long-term 
strategic  miscalculations  were  related  to  allowing  perverse  incentives  to  build  within  the 
financial  system  and  allowing  significant  gaps  in  the  regulatory  framework  to  persist.  The 
financial reform proposals currently being considered by Congress are appropriately trying to 
ensure that such perverse incentives are removed from the financial system and exploring 
ways  to  endow  regulators  with  an  efficient  resolution  mechanism  for  systemic  financial 
institutions. Some of the short-term tactical missteps were the failure of banking regulators to 
force high quality capital raises early enough in the crisis, and the failure of the private sector 
to  engage  in  adequate  liquidity  contingency  planning  and  the  failure  of  regulators  to 
recognize the vulnerability of the system to erosion in liquidity conditions.  
As the crisis intensified to unparalleled heights and without an efficient resolution process in 
place,  the  ability  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  and  then  other  governmental  agencies  after  the 
TARP appropriation, to act with speed and flexibility was vital to stabilizing the system. 
However,  hindsight  is  much  less  definitive  on  some  of  the  lessons  about  the  underlying 
stability  of  the  financial  system.  In  Alan  Greenspan’s  thoughtful  review  of  the  crisis  he 
summarized the issue this way:9 
“The  aftermath  of  the  Lehman  crisis  traced  out  a  startlingly  larger  negative  tail 
than  most  anybody  had  earlier  imagined.  I  assume,  with  hope  more  than 
knowledge, that this was indeed the extreme of possible financial crisis that could 
be experienced in a market economy.” 
                                                 
9   The Crisis, by Alan Greenspan, March 9, 2010 Draft. 
8 
 BIS Review 81/2010
This motivates a final lesson coming out of this crisis, which is that policy making, whether it 
is  fiscal,  monetary,  supervisory  or  other,  must  always  strive  to  be  as  forward-looking  as 
possible, and to be robust to the possibility that we will experience situations tomorrow that 
are unimaginable today. 
BIS Review 81/2010 
 9
