Ma Delun: Urban and rural integration in China 
Address  by  Mr  Ma  Delun,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the  2010 
Capital Financial Forum, Beijing, 16 April 2010. 
 Respected Executive Vice Mayor of the City of Jilin, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good afternoon! 
It’s  a  pleasure  to  attend  the  Beijing  Financial  Forum  for  2010.  This  annual  meeting  has 
provided us with a platform to discuss theoretical and practical issues of common concerns. 
The discussion last year under the theme of cultural and creative industries and its financial 
support was very impressive. I’m also glad to see that the forum is in a larger scale and more 
innovative form this year, and the theme this year, urban and rural integration in the capital 
and its financial support, is a very pertinent one. 
Agriculture  lies  at  the  foundation  of  China’s  economy  and  the  balanced  development  of 
urban and rural areas is the core in China’s modernization. Deng Xiaoping once pointed out 
that,  coordinated  urban-rural  development  should  be  on  top  of  the  agenda  after  China’s 
economic  and  social  development  reached  a  certain  stage.  It  was  put  forward  by  the 
16th Congress  of  CPC  Central  Committee  that  balancing  urban-rural  social  and  economic 
development  is  an  important  strategy  for  building  a  well-off  society.  The  17th  Congress  of 
CPC Central Committee decided that a long-term mechanism of industrial sector supporting 
agriculture and urban areas to form a new framework for balanced urban-rural economic and 
social development. What’s more, the No. 1 Document of the CPC Central Committee this 
year  has  given  high  priority  to  balanced  urban-rural  development,  stating  it  as  the 
precondition for further consolidating the foundation for rural development. 
Balanced  urban-rural  development  need  the  support  of  the  financing  sector.  As  a  macro 
financial regulator, the PBC attaches great importance to this task and has made strenuous 
efforts  in  advancing  financial  reform,  improving  financial  services  in  rural  areas  and 
strengthening financial support to balanced urban-rural development according to the overall 
arrangements of the State Council. 
First,  deepen  rural  financial  reform.  Efforts  have  been  made  to  promote  the  shareholding 
reform of Agricultural Bank of China (ABC), guide the Agricultural Development Bank to raise 
funds  from  the  market,  steadily  advance  pilot  projects  of  new  rural  financial  institutions 
including micro credit companies, village banks and rural funding cooperatives to establish a 
multi-tiered rural financial service system. 
Second,  strengthen  financial  support  for  rural  areas.  The  PBC  will  continue  to  conduct 
agriculture-supporting central bank lending in a more regionally balanced and well-targeted 
manner.  Timely  and  appropriate  adjustments  should  be  made  to  ensure  that  such  central 
bank  lending  be  used  for  its  intended  purpose.  A  favorable  reserve  requirement  ratio  is 
granted to RCCs to help channel more funds to the agricultural sector. 
Third, reinforce financial service infrastructure in rural areas. The establishment of a nation-
wide clearing center for RCCs has helped them gain access to the LVPS and local clearing 
system in a timely manner. Meanwhile, efforts have been made to advance the development 
of credit reference system in rural areas and promote the use of bankcards and improve rural 
financial environment. 
Fourth, support and cooperate with competent authorities to standardize the transfer of land 
contracting and operation right and to reform the institutional arrangements of rural land use. 
The  pilot  project  of  loan  extension  against  the  collateral  of  rural  land  contracting  and 
BIS Review 64/2010 
 1
operation  right  and  the  right  to  use  rural  housing  site  has  been  conducted  to  meet  multi-
tiered and diversified needs for financial services in rural areas. 
The  PBC  Operation  Office  has  implemented  the  arrangements  made  by  the  PBC 
headquarter  by  guiding  financial  institutions  in  its  jurisdiction  to  bolster  the  support  of 
balanced  urban-rural  development.  Opinions  on  Providing  Financial  Support  for  Building 
Socialist New Countryside in Beijing and Guiding Opinions on Providing Financial Support to 
Form a New Pattern of Balanced Urban-Rural Development in Beijing have been launched to 
advance RCC reform and assess the output of credit policies, adding more vitality into the 
rural  financial  system  in  Beijing.  Following  the  guidelines,  commercial  banks  have  actively 
innovated  financial  products  and  improved  operation  mechanism  and  services,  yielding 
positive results. 
This  year  marks  the  last  in  the  11th  Five  Year  Plan.  What’s  more,  it  is  a  critical  year  in 
mitigating  the  impacts  of  the  international  financial  crisis  and  maintaining  stable  and  fairly 
rapid economic development. All this underpins the importance of further improving the work 
of supporting agriculture, rural areas and farmers. With new challenges to achieve leapfrog 
development  in  the  agricultural  sector,  there  is  a  stronger  need  to  shift  the  pattern  of 
agricultural development and fill in the gap between urban and rural areas. Finance lies at 
the center of modern economy and thus financial support plays a key role in balancing urban 
and  rural  development  and  bolstering  the  agricultural  sector,  therefore  the  PBC  will  make 
targeted  and  prioritized  efforts  to  strike  a  balance  between  short-term  and  long-term 
development. 
First,  establish  a  sustainable  mechanism  of  providing  rural  financial  services.  Efforts  have 
been made to improve agro-linked financial risk compensation system by way of setting up 
risk funds and developing rural insurance so as to incentivise financial institutions to support 
balanced development in urban and rural areas. Further efforts should be made to improve 
the  financial  environment  in  rural-urban  fringe,  strengthen  the  financial  law  system, 
accelerate  the  program  of  creditworthy  rural  households,  villages  and  towns  and  improve 
financial literacy of farmers. 
Second, guide social funds to support agricultural development in an innovative manner. The 
PBC will support eligible agro-linked enterprises to get listed. Efforts will be made to guide 
informal  lending,  standardize  such  practice  by  improving  incentive,  discipline  and  exit 
mechanisms  so  as  to  improve  financial  services  to  low  and  middle-income  rural  residents 
and impoverished population. 
Third,  set  up  an  inter-ministerial  cooperation  mechanism.  Fiscal  policies,  taxation  policies 
and  rural  financial  policies  should  be  coordinated  effectively  by  setting  up  a  market-based 
long-term agriculture supporting mechanism supported by the government. The Agricultural 
Development  Bank  of  China,  ABC,  RCCs,  Postal  Savings  Bank  and  other  agro-linked 
financial  institutions  should  have  various  focuses  in  their  business  when  expanding  agro-
linked credit, in order to optimize the allocation of financial resources. 
We should conduct in-depth analysis on diversified needs of financial services in rural areas 
to develop an optimal profit pattern for agro-linked enterprises, have in place effective risk 
prevention  measures,  innovate  financial  products  and  services  tailored  for  actual  needs  in 
rural areas, rationalize working process, train a professional team to provide financial support 
for agriculture which combines both direct and indirect financing, integrates the strengths of 
the  banking,  insurance  and  securities  sectors  and  features  active  participation  of  private 
capital. 
I wish the forum a complete success. Thank you! 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2010
