Lars E O Svensson: Assessment of monetary policy in Sweden in 2009 
Speech  by  Prof  Lars  E  O  Svensson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the 
Centre for Business and Policy Studies (SNS), Stockholm, 18 March 2010. 
 Carl Andreas Claussen and Gabriela Guibourg have contributed to this speech. 
Assessments  of  monetary  policy  are  important  for  several  reasons.  First,  because  the 
Riksbank  has  had  an  independent  position  in  relation  to  the  Riksdag  and  the  government 
since 1999. This means, for instance, that the Executive Board makes the monetary policy 
decisions  without  seeking  or  taking  instructions.  The  Riksbank’s  independence  gives  its 
governors  a  great  deal  of  power.  It  is  therefore  also  important  that  the  activities  of  the 
Riksbank can be monitored and assessed and that the governors can be called to account. A 
high  level  of  transparency  and  regular  assessments  are  also  necessary  to  maintain  the 
legitimacy of the Riksbank’s activities. Second, regular assessments also help to ensure that 
the Riksbank can develop its monetary policy analysis in the best possible way.  
Every year, the Riksdag Committee on Finance examines and assesses the monetary policy 
conducted  by  the  Riksbank  during  the  preceding  years.  The  Riksbank  compiles  and 
publishes material for this assessment. We published such material just a few days ago. The 
main message in this material is that the Riksbank responded to the crisis by taking forceful 
measures. The repo rate was cut to almost zero and the Riksbank announced its intention to 
let the repo rate remain at this level for a relatively long period of time. The turbulence on the 
financial markets also meant that monetary policy had less of an impact than normal. The 
Riksbank responded to this by complementing monetary policy with extensive lending to the 
banks.  In  this  way,  monetary  policy  has  helped  to  dampen  the  fall  in  production  and 
employment. It has also helped to keep inflation in line with the target in the longer term.  
This is what I intend to talk about today. First, however, I would like to say a few words about 
some of the principles that are important when assessing monetary policy.  
What should we consider when we assess monetary policy?  
When can one say that the monetary policy conducted over the past year has been good? 
The answer to this question naturally depends on what the target for monetary policy is.  
The  Riksbank  has  an  explicit  inflation  target  according  to  which  the  annual  change  in  the 
consumer price index (CPI) should be 2 per cent. As monetary policy acts with a time lag, it 
should be based on forecasts. The Riksbank’s forecasts are based on the assumption that 
the repo rate – the Riksbank’s policy rate – will develop in such a way that monetary policy 
can  be  regarded  as  well-balanced.  In  the  normal  case,  a  well-balanced  monetary  policy 
means that the inflation forecast is close to the inflation target a couple of years ahead at the 
same time as the forecast for inflation and the real economy (production, employment and 
unemployment) does not fluctuate excessively. It thus a question of finding an appropriate 
balance  between  stabilising  inflation  and  stabilising  the  real  economy  and  resource 
utilisation. The Riksbank therefore conducts what is generally referred to as flexible inflation 
targeting.  
One might think that it should be enough to simply compare the outcome for inflation with the 
inflation  target  when  assessing  monetary  policy.  But  it  is  not  that  simple,  for  two  reasons. 
The first is that it takes time for changes in the repo rate to have an effect on inflation and the 
real economy. During this period of time, shocks may occur that can push the economy in a 
different direction than was forecast. The monetary policy adopted may have been right, but 
the  Riksbank  is  unlucky  and  unforeseen  shocks  lead  to  inflation  deviating  from  the  target. 
BIS Review 32/2010 
 1
The  monetary  policy  adopted  may  have  been  wrong,  but  the  Riksbank  is  lucky  and 
unforeseen shocks nevertheless lead to inflation hitting the target.  
The  second  is  that  flexible  inflation  targeting  means  that  the  Riksbank  strives  not  only  to 
stabilise inflation around the inflation target but also to stabilise resource utilisation around a 
normal level. This can sometimes entail a difficult balancing act. Shocks may, for example, 
occur  that  make  it  difficult  to  quickly  bring  inflation  to  the  target  without  creating  major 
fluctuations  in  the  real  economy.  One  may  then  choose  to  let  the  outcome  for  inflation 
deviate  from  the  target.  This  deviation  is  then  deliberate  and  represents  part  of  a 
compromise between stabilising inflation and stabilising resource utilisation.  
So, how should one assess monetary policy? Two approaches can be used. The first is to 
assess monetary policy a couple of years after the monetary decisions concerned, so that 
inflation and the real economy have had time to react to the monetary policy measures, and 
to  use  all  the  information  available  at  the  time  of  the  assessment,  that  is  including  the 
information that has become available after the decision was made. This is, in other words, 
an assessment after the fact, or what can be called an assessment ex post. Although it may 
be very interesting to analyse the shocks that occurred after the monetary policy decisions 
were  made,  it  is  practically  self-evident  that  monetary  policy  could  have  been  better  if  the 
shocks  that  occurred  later  had  been  known  at  the  time  the  decisions  were  made.  An 
assessment after the fact is not therefore necessarily the most relevant form of assessment.  
A more relevant approach is to put ourselves in the position of the decision makers at the 
time the decision was made and to try to assess the decision given the information that was 
then available. In other words. perform an assessment based on the information available to 
the decision makers, or what can be called an assessment ex ante. The question that should 
then  be  answered  is  whether  the  analysis  and  the  interest  rate  decision  were  reasonable 
given the information and the forecasts available at the time. Did the Riksbank, for example, 
arrive  at  a  reasonable  balance  between  stabilising  inflation  and  stabilising  resource 
utilisation?  
An assessment based on the information available to the decision maker also has the great 
advantage  that  it  can  be  conducted  in  real  time  immediately  after  the  publication  of  the 
monetary policy decision and the information and analysis on which the decision is based. 
One does not thus need to wait for a couple years to see what the outcomes for inflation and 
the  real  economy  will  be.  The  decisions  of  the  Riksbank  can  therefore  be  assessed  and 
debated on an ongoing basis.  
An important part of the assessment of a flexible inflation targeting policy is to assess how 
credible  the  inflation  target  is,  measured  in  terms  of  the  extent  to  which  various economic 
agents’ inflation expectations correspond to the inflation target. If inflation expectations are 
stable close to the inflation target then the target is credible and it will therefore be easier for 
the Riksbank to stabilise both inflation and resource utilisation.  
As I have already said, it takes time for monetary policy to have an impact on inflation and 
the  real  economy.  Monetary  policy  is  therefore  governed  by  forecasts.  It  is  a  question  of 
choosing a repo-rate path so that the forecast for inflation and resource utilisation entails the 
best possible stabilisation of inflation and resource utilisation. As the forecasts play such a 
central  role  in  the  monetary  policy  decisions,  it  is  of  course  important  that  the  Riksbank 
employs good forecasting methods and uses all the relevant information available when the 
forecasts are produced so that they are as accurate as possible. An important step in the 
assessment  of  monetary  policy  is  therefore  to  investigate  whether  the  forecasts  are 
reasonably accurate. One way to do this is to compare the Riksbank’s forecasts with those of 
other forecasters. The Riksbank makes such comparisons every year.  
Another  component  of  the  assessment  of  monetary  policy  is  to  analyse  how  predictable 
monetary policy is and what impact it has on market rates. Monetary policy mainly acts by 
influencing expectations regarding interest rates, inflation and the real economy in the future. 
Expectations regarding the repo rate in the years immediately ahead affect interest rates with 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2010
longer maturities, and therefore inflation and the real economy, more than the repo rate in 
the period up to the next monetary policy decision. The predictability of monetary policy can 
be  measured  in  terms  of  how  well  the  market  predicts  the  next  repo-rate  path.  How 
effectively monetary policy steers market expectations and market rates can be measured in 
terms of how closely the market expectations regarding future repo rates correspond to the 
repo-rate path after it is published.  
The Riksbank’s material for the assessment of monetary policy in Sweden in 2009 is based 
on  the  principles  I  have  just  described  and  this  entails  a  certain  renewal  compared  to  the 
assessments of previous years.1 I now intend to present the material for assessing monetary 
policy in 2009 that the Riksbank published a few days ago. As you probably know, from and 
including the  meeting  held  in  April 2009  I  have  entered  reservations  against  the monetary 
policy decisions and advocated a lower repo-rate path, on the grounds that this would better 
stabilise both CPIF inflation and resource utilisation without leading to problems for financial 
stability or the functioning of the financial markets.2 However, in my speech today I will focus 
on the policy conducted by the majority of the Executive Board.  
2009 – an extraordinary year for monetary policy  
In 2009, the Riksbank continued to conduct an increasingly expansionary monetary policy. 
The aim was to attain the inflation target and to mitigate the effects of the financial crisis on 
the real economy. From February to the beginning of July, the Riksbank cut the repo rate 
from  2.0  per  cent  to  the  all-time  low  of  0.25  per  cent.  The  repo-rate  path,  that  is  the 
Riksbank’s forecast of the development of the repo rate in the years ahead, was also revised 
downwards at every monetary policy meeting during this period. During the rest of the year, 
the repo rate and the repo-rate path were left unchanged. As a result of the turbulence on the 
financial markets, however, the impact of monetary policy was weaker than normal in 2009. 
The  Riksbank  responded  to  these  problems  by  complementing  monetary  policy  with 
extensive lending to the banks.  
So,  what  was  the  nature  of  the  forecasts  and  assessments  that  formed  the  basis  for  the 
monetary policy decisions?  
The repo rate was cut to 1 percent and the repo-rate path was adjusted downwards in 
February  
In  February,  it  appeared  that  the  downturn  in  economic  activity,  in  Sweden  and  abroad, 
would be more severe and would happen much more quickly than previously assessed by 
the  Riksbank.  At  the  monetary  policy  meeting  on  10  February,  the  Riksbank  therefore 
decided to cut the repo rate by a whole percentage point to one percent. The repo-rate path 
was  adjusted  downwards  and  a  further  repo-rate  cut  during  2009  was  indicated  (see 
Figure 1). 
 
                                                 
1   For a more detailed description of how one can assess monetary policy see Lars E.0. Svensson, “Assessing 
monetary policy”, speech at Uppsala University, 13 March 2009. 
2   For a more detailed description of the arguments behind my reservations see Lars E. O. Svensson: “Why a 
lower repo-rate path?”, speech at Umeå University, 24 February 2010. 
BIS Review 32/2010 
 3
 The Monetary Policy Report from February 2009 presented forecasts based on the Report’s 
main scenario and alternative forecasts based on the repo-rate path adopted at the meeting 
in  December  2008.3  These  are  shown  in  Figure  2.a,  where  the  higher  repo  rate  path  (the 
blue broken curve) represents the forecast from December 2008. The lower repo rate path 
(the red broken curve) represents the Riksbank’s main scenario from February 2009.  
The Riksbank’s inflation targets are expressed in terms of CPI inflation. However, this varied 
strongly during the later part of 2008 and in 2009, due to the major changes in the repo rate. 
This is because the CPI includes mortgage costs. In such a situation, it is reasonable instead 
to  look  at  inflation  measured  in  terms  of  the  CPIF,  which  excludes  interest  rate  changes. 
Figure 2.b illustrates the Riksbank’s forecasts for CPIF inflation, based on the two repo-rate 
paths. The lower repo-rate path, as proposed in the main scenario, gave an inflation forecast, 
measured in terms of the CPIF, approaching 2 per cent two years ahead. The higher repo 
rate path instead gave an inflation forecast that fell widely short of the target during the entire 
forecast period. Equivalent forecasts for CPI inflation are shown in Figure 2.c.  
The Riksbank uses a number of measures and indicators to measure resource utilisation in 
the  economy.  One  of  these  measures  is  the  output  gap,  calculated  as  the  percentage 
difference between GDP and an estimated trend.4 If the gap is positive, this signifies that the 
level of activity in the economy is high and that GDP is above its trend level. The opposite 
                                                 
3   Alternative  forecasts  for  the  repo  rate  are  published  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Reports,  three  times  per  year. 
Alternative forecasts for the repo rate are also discussed ahead of the remaining monetary policy meetings, 
but these are not published in the Monetary Policy Updates. 
4   The  trend  is  estimated  using  a  so-called  Hodrick-Prescott  filter  (HP  filter).  This  is  a  statistical  method  for 
dividing the movements of a variable into trend and cyclical components. The method can be described as a 
weighted  double-sided  moving  average  where  greater  weight  is  placed  on  observations  close  at  hand  and 
gradually decreasing weight on more distant observations. The output gap according to the HP method should 
not necessarily be interpreted as the Riksbank’s overall assessment of resource utilisation. 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2010
applies when the gap is negative. Figure 2.d illustrates the output gap based on the two repo 
rate paths. Both paths resulted in negative output gaps during the forecast period, that is to 
say resource utilisation below the normal level. However, using the repo rate path in the main 
scenario gave a less negative output gap, using this measurement method, than using the 
repo  rate  path  from  December  2008.  The  lower  repo-rate  path  thus  stabilised  both  CPIF 
inflation and resource utilisation better than the higher repo rate path. 
 Further repo-rate cuts in April and July  
GDP continued to fall dramatically during the first quarter of the year, in Sweden as well as 
abroad,  and  the  GDP  forecast  for  2009  was  revised  further  downwards  compared  to  the 
Riksbank’s assessment in February. The Riksbank also assessed that CPI inflation would fall 
very rapidly during 2009, which was largely due to the rapid interest rate cuts implemented at 
the end of 2008 and start of 2009. At the monetary policy meeting on 20 April, the repo rate 
was cut by 0.5 percentage points to 0.5 per cent. The repo rate was expected to remain at a 
low level until the beginning of 2011 (see Figure 1).  
In  July,  the  assessment  was  that  the  decline  in  economic  activity  during  2009  would  be 
slightly  deeper  than  the  assessment  made  by  the  Riksbank  in  April.  The  Riksbank’s 
assessment  was  that  the  repo  rate  and  the  repo-rate  path  needed  to  be  even  lower.  The 
repo rate was cut by 0.25 percentage points to 0.25 per cent at the monetary policy meeting 
on 1 July. The repo rate was expected to remain at this low level until the autumn of 2010 
(see  Figure  1).  The  Riksbank  also  assessed  that  the  cut  did  not  represent  a  threat  to  the 
functioning of  the  financial  markets.  Furthermore,  the  Riksbank  deemed  that,  following  the 
cut to 0.25 per cent, the repo rate had in practice reached its lower bound.  
BIS Review 32/2010 
 5
The  alternative  repo-rate  paths  published  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  in  July  and  the 
associated  forecasts  for  CPIF  inflation  and  the  output  gap  are  shown  in  Figure  3.  The 
majority of the Executive Board adopted the repo-rate path marked as the main scenario. 
 
The  situation  on  the  financial  markets  in  Sweden  and  abroad  started  to  show  signs  of 
improvement during the spring, but was still highly uncertain. Major divergences between the 
market’s repo rate expectations and the Riksbank’s repo-rate path also arose during the year 
(see Figure 4). This resulted in monetary policy having less impact than intended. Partly for 
this reason, the Riksbank decided to lend up to SEK 100 million to the banks in the form of 
fixed-rate loans at a maturity of 12 months. It was deemed that this measure could contribute 
to lower interest rates on loans to companies and households. 
 6 
 BIS Review 32/2010
The repo rate and the repo-rate path were left unchanged during the rest of the year 
Following the decision in July, there were an increasing number of signs of a turnaround in 
economic activity in Sweden and abroad. At the monetary policy meetings on 2 September 
and  22  October,  it  was  decided  to  keep  the  repo  rate  unchanged  at  0.25  per  cent.  The 
forecast  for  the  repo  rate  was  also  held  unchanged  on  both  occasions  (see  Figure  1). 
Figure 5 illustrates the alternative forecasts for the repo rate, inflation and resource utilisation 
discussed at the monetary policy meeting in October. 
 BIS Review 32/2010 
 7
 As a complementary monetary policy measure, the Riksbank decided, on both occasions, to 
make  further  fixed-rate  loans  of  up  to  SEK  100  billion  available  to  the  banks  for  twelve 
months.  
The recovery from the deep recession continued during the autumn. At the Monetary Policy 
Meeting  on  15  December,  the  Riksbank  resolved  to  leave  the  repo  rate  unchanged,  at 
0.25 per cent. The forecast for the repo rate was also held unchanged. 
How can different monetary policy alternatives be assessed? 
In  connection  with  every  monetary  policy  decision,  the  Executive  Board  makes  an 
assessment of the repo-rate path needed for monetary policy to be considered to be well-
balanced. 
One natural way of assessing which repo-rate path is best in a given situation is to compare 
the  forecasts  for  inflation  and  resource  utilisation  for  alternative  repo-rate  paths.  Such  a 
comparison can be found in Chapter 2 of the Monetary Policy Report and in the material for 
the  assessment  of  monetary  policy  in  2009  that  was  recently  published  by  the  Riksbank.5 
The alternative scenarios are usually presented in the form of figures that show the forecast 
for  inflation and  various  measures  of  resource utilisation  that  a  particular  repo-rate  path  is 
expected to give rise to. 
                                                 
5   See "Material for assessing monetary policy in 2009", Sveriges Riksbank. 
8 
 BIS Review 32/2010
A  box  in  the  material  for  assessing  monetary  policy  in  2009  describes  a  method  for 
summarising the information in the alternative forecasts. This method uses an easily-grasped 
measure, a so-called mean squared gap, of how effectively an interest rate path can stabilise 
inflation around the inflation target and resource utilisation around a normal level.6  
Allow  me  to  illustrate  the  method  by  using  an  example  from  the  Monetary  Policy  Report 
published  in  October  2009,  in  which  a  box  presented  the  method.  Figure  6  shows  the 
forecast  development  of  inflation  measured  in  terms  of  the  CPIF  and  resource  utilisation 
measured  in  terms  of  the  output  gap  for  the  various  repo-rate  paths  discussed  in  the 
Monetary Policy Report of October 2009. 
The various repo-rate paths are shown in Figure 6.a. The path in the middle is that of the 
main  scenario,  the  repo  rate  path  that  the  majority  of  the  Executive  Board  chose  at  the 
meeting in October. The lower path is the one I advocated. 
Figure 6.b shows the forecasts for CPIF inflation that each repo-rate path was expected to 
give rise to.7 The output gap, which is shown in Figure 6.d, is calculated in the same way as 
in the figures I presented earlier. 
Figure 6.c shows the mean squared gap. A lower mean squared gap for inflation entails a 
better  acquisition  of  the  inflation  target;  that  is  a  better  stabilisation  of  inflation  around  the 
inflation target. A lower mean squared gap for resource utilisation entails a better stabilisation 
of resource utilisation around a normal level. Consequently, the closer a point lies to origo, or 
“south-west”  in  the  figure,  the  smaller  are  the  total  deviations  of  inflation  from  the  inflation 
target and of resource utilisation from a normal level. 
From Figure 6.c, it can be seen that the lower repo-rate path from the alternative scenario in 
the Monetary Policy Report of October 2009 was closer to origo in both dimensions when 
inflation  is  measured  in  terms  of  the  CPIF.  It  thus  stabilises  both  inflation  and  resource 
utilisation better. 
                                                 
6   The mean squared gap for inflation measures the gap between the inflation forecast and the inflation target or, 
more precisely, the mean squared deviation between the inflation forecast and the inflation target during the 
forecast period. The mean squared gap for resource utilisation, measured as the output gap, measures the 
deviation between the forecast for resource utilisation and normal resource utilisation – more precisely, as the 
average  squared  gap  during  the  forecast  period.  For  more  discussion  of  this  see  Lars  E.O.  Svensson, 
“Evaluating  Monetary  Policy,”  forthcoming  in  Koenig,  Evan,  and  Robert  Leeson,  eds.,  From  the  Great 
Moderation to the Great Deviation: A Round-Trip Journey Based on the Work of John B. Taylor (revision and 
update of a speech at Uppsala University on 13 March 2009). 
7   One may ask why the focus should be on the CPIF and not the CPI. In a situation in which extensive repo-rate 
changes have very large direct effects on the CPI, I consider it to be more appropriate to focus on stabilising 
the CPIF around the inflation target, instead of the CPI. 
BIS Review 32/2010 
 9
  
However, the assessment of the majority of the Executive Board was that the lower repo-rate 
path  was  not  appropriate.  At  the  monetary  policy  meetings  held  during  the  course  of  the 
year, the view of several members of the Executive Board was that the effects of the very low 
repo-rate levels on the economy and the financial markets were uncertain and that there was 
therefore reason to be cautious about reducing the repo rate below 0.25 per cent.  
It is not easy to make reliable estimates and forecasts of potential production and resource 
utilisation. The Riksbank’s estimates and forecasts for potential production and hours worked 
are  in  need  of  improvement  and  development.  Such  development  work  is  currently 
underway.  In  2009,  the  financial  crisis  reduced  potential  production  so  that  resource 
utilisation in the economy is not as low for a given level of production as before. There is no 
doubt, however, that resource utilisation is very low and will remain lower than normal during 
the forecast period (see Figure 7). 
10 
 BIS Review 32/2010
 
The numerical inflation target has entailed great progress for practical monetary policy and 
made it possible to measure and evaluate the target fulfilment of monetary policy in a much 
more efficient manner than before. However, the fact that monetary policy is not just directed 
towards  stabilising  inflation,  but  also  towards  stabilising  resource  utilisation  has,  in  the 
absence of quantitative measures of stability in these variables, made it difficult to measure 
and evaluate target fulfilment in this stability dimension. Quantitative measures such as the 
mean squared gaps make it possible to measure and evaluate this target fulfilment, however. 
Work is now underway at the Riksbank to determine how such measures can be used. The 
results of this work will be successively reported in the Monetary Policy Report and in other 
documents published by the Riksbank. 
How did the outcome for 2009 compare to our forecasts? 
Inflation far below the target and a record fall in GDP 
The rate of inflation, measured as the change in the CPI, averaged –0.3 per cent in 2009; it 
was thus far below the inflation target of 2 per cent. This is explained – as I have already 
mentioned  –  by  the  Riksbank’s  substantial  repo-rate  cuts,  which  began  in  the  autumn  of 
2008.  The  Riksbank’s  repo-rate  cuts  led  to  lower  mortgage  rates  and  mortgage  rates  are 
included in the CPI. Measured in terms of the CPIF, which is the CPI with a fixed mortgage 
rate, inflation was more stable and averaged 1.9 per cent in 2009.  
The repo-rate cuts in 2008 and 2009 were made in the full realisation that CPI inflation would 
be low. In the longer term, however, the repo-rate cuts will help to keep CPI inflation up in 
line with the target. The fact that CPI inflation was far below the target can thus be seen as 
the result of a deliberate monetary policy from the autumn of 2008. 
GDP fell by 4.9 per cent in 2009. This is the largest fall in Swedish GDP in a single year in 
modern  times.  Average  unemployment  increased  by  approximately  2.2  percentage  points 
during the year and amounted to 8.4 per cent in 2009. Both employment and the number of 
BIS Review 32/2010 
 11
hours worked fell significantly. The reason that Sweden was so hard hit by the global crisis is 
that the Swedish economy is highly dependent on exports. The effect on GDP was reinforced 
by the fact that the households increased their saving. Companies also sold from stock to a 
great extent during the year, thus reducing investments in stock and contributing to the fall in 
GDP. 
The impact of the financial crisis surprised all the forecasters 
The  turmoil  on  the  financial  markets  has  been  part  of  the  picture  and  has  influenced 
monetary policy and the forecasts since 2007. It nevertheless came as a surprise that the 
situation would deteriorate as dramatically as it did in the autumn of 2008 and result in such 
a  dramatic  fall  in  production  around  the  world.  Neither  the  Riksbank  nor  other  analysts 
predicted the strength of the global financial crisis and how much it would affect inflation and 
the development of the real economy. 
Figure 8 shows the forecasts for average CPI inflation in 2009 made by various forecasters 
during 2008 and 2009.8 The figure shows that the pattern over time is roughly the same for 
all  the  forecasters.  During  the  first  half  of  2008,  most  forecasters  expected  that  inflation 
would  be  between  2  and  just  below  3  per  cent  in  2009,  while  the  actual  outcome  was  
–0.3 per cent. The explanation for this overestimation is that the forecasters did not foresee 
that the financial crisis would take such a dramatic turn in the autumn and, consequently, that 
inflation would fall so quickly as a result of the Riksbank’s repo-rate cuts. Once the financial 
crisis was upon us and the dramatic downturn in economic activity that followed in its wake 
had begun, all of the forecasters revised their forecasts downwards quickly and substantially. 
From the beginning of 2009, the forecasts were gathered around the actual outcome. 
                                                 
8   The analysis is based on data gathered by the National Institute of Economic Research. One advantage of 
these  data  is  that  they  show  exactly  when  the  forecasts  were  made.  The  forecast  comparison  covers  ten 
forecasting  institutions  and  their  whole-year  forecasts  for  GDP  growth,  the  CPI  and  the  percentage  of 
unemployed.  The  ten  forecasting  institutions  are:  the  Swedish  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Swedish  Retail 
Institute, the National Institute of Economic Research, the Swedish Trade Union Confederation (LO), Nordea, 
SEB, Svenska Handelsbanken, the Confederation of Swedish Enterprise, Swedbank and the Riksbank. The 
figure is interpreted as follows: Each mark represents a particular inflation forecast. The red marks show the 
Riksbank’s forecasts, while the blue marks show the forecasts made by a number of other forecasters. It is 
possible to see how high an inflation rate a forecaster has predicted by looking at the vertical axel, while the 
horizontal axel shows when the forecast was made. The dotted line in the figure shows the actual outcome for 
CPI inflation in 2009. 
12 
 BIS Review 32/2010
    
Figure 9 shows the forecasts for GDP growth in 2009 made by various forecasters in 2008 
and 2009. In this case, too, it is clear that the forecasts follow a common pattern. Initially, the 
forecasters tended to overestimate GDP growth in 2009 During the first half of 2008, they 
estimated on average that growth in 2009 would be approximately 2 per cent. As it appeared 
BIS Review 32/2010 
 13
that  the  financial  turmoil  would  dampen  growth  in  both  Sweden  and  abroad,  the  GDP 
forecasts were gradually revised downwards. After April 2009, many of the forecasts were 
gathered  around  the  actual  outcome  for  GDP  growth,  which  was  –4.9  per  cent.  However, 
most of the forecasters revised their forecasts upwards towards the end of the year and were 
thus surprised by the lower outcome. 
All in all, it can be noted that the Riksbank overestimated the outcome for inflation in 2009 to 
approximately  the  same  extent  as  the  average  for  other  forecasters,  although  with  the 
exception  of  July  and  September  2008  when  the  Riksbank’s  forecasts  overestimated  the 
prospects  for  inflation  to  a  higher  degree  than  other  forecasters  (see  Figure  8).  This  was 
because energy prices increased more than expected during the spring, which led to inflation 
reaching  over  4  per  cent  in  the  summer  of  2008.  The  Riksbank  thus  saw  a  risk  that  the 
substantial increases in the prices of food and oil would also lead to rapid increases in other 
prices. Unusually high inflation expectations also contributed to this assessment.  
With  regard 
the  Riksbank’s  overestimation  was 
approximately  the  same  as  the  average  of  the  other  forecasters.  All  of  the  forecasters 
continued to overestimate GDP growth for 2009 even during the first quarter of 2009. In other 
words, no forecaster predicted the economic downturn sooner than any other. 
for  GDP  growth, 
the  outcome 
to 
How accurate are the Riksbank’s forecasts? 
As  monetary  policy  is  based  on  forecasts  it  is  important  that  the  Riksbank’s  forecasts  are 
acceptably  accurate.  However,  it  is  not  possible  to  assess  accuracy  by  analysing  the 
forecasts  for  a  single  year.  Even  forecasters  with  a  good  average  accuracy  may  be  less 
successful in an individual year. A fairer assessment requires a longer observation period. 
A fair comparison of the accuracy of different forecasts should take into account the fact that 
the forecasts are made at different points in time and that different forecasters therefore do 
not have the same information available to them. In the comparison of forecasts made in the 
material for the assessment of monetary policy, a method is used that takes such differences 
into account.9 
Figure 10 shows an adjusted absolute average error for the inflation forecasts for the period 
1999–2009, that is the absolute forecasting error for CPI inflation adjusting for differences in 
the forecast horizon.10 The shorter the bar, the smaller the forecasting error and the higher 
the accuracy of the forecast. 
 
                                                 
9   See  M.  Andersson  and  T.  Aranki,  “A  comparison  of  different  forecasters’  ability  given  the  publication  date 
effect”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review, No.1, 2009. 
10   The average error is calculated as the mean value of the forecaster's forecasting errors during the forecast 
period. The absolute average error means that the sign of the individual forecast deviations is not taken into 
account. 
14 
 BIS Review 32/2010
  
The major forecasters – the Swedish Ministry of Finance, the National Institute of Economic 
Research and the Riksbank – are reported individually, while the others are reported as an 
average. It may be worth noting that the Riksbank’s forecasts up to the third Inflation Report 
of  2005  were  based  on  the  assumption  of  an  unchanged  repo  rate  during  the  forecasting 
period. This may have hampered the accuracy.  
The  differences  between  different  forecasters  are  small  and  it  is  hard  to  find  significant 
variations. The forecasts of different forecasters tend to follow each other relatively closely, 
as  indicated  in  Figure  8.  In  the  material  for  the  assessment  of  monetary  policy  there  are 
similar  figures  for  the  forecasts  for  GDP  growth  and  unemployment  (see  Figure  11  and 
Figure 12). Taken together, these figures show that the Riksbank, just like other forecasters, 
tended to overestimate CPI inflation and GDP growth and to underestimate unemployment 
during the period 1999–2009. 
BIS Review 32/2010 
 15
 
With  regard  to  forecasts  of  the  repo  rate  it  is  still  too  soon  to  compare  the  forecasting 
performance of various forecasters as the Riksbank has only published repo rate forecasts 
for three years. With such a short assessment period, chance plays too large a role to make 
it  meaningful  to  draw  any  general  conclusions  about  forecasting  performance.  Figure  13 
nevertheless shows the accuracy of the forecasts for the repo rate in the period 2007–2009 
for those forecasters that publish such forecasts. 
16 
 BIS Review 32/2010
 
On average for the three years, all of the forecasters have tended to overestimate the repo 
rate,  but  the  Riksbank  has  the  largest  forecasting  error  of  the  five  forecasters.  The  main 
reason  for  the  Riksbank’s  relatively  larger  forecasting  error  during  this  period  is  the 
previously mentioned overestimation in the forecasts for CPI inflation in July and September 
2008. On these occasions, the Riksbank’s forecasts overestimated the prospects for inflation 
to  a  greater  degree  than  those  of  other  forecasters.  As  I  said  earlier,  the  overestimations 
were due to concern on the part of the Riksbank that significant increases in the prices of oil 
and food during the spring, in combination with unusually high inflation expectations, would 
lead to an increase in inflation. 
The credibility of the inflation target 
Confidence  in  the  inflation  target  in  the  form  of  stable  inflation  expectations  close  to  the 
target is fundamental to the Riksbank’s efforts to achieve price stability and stable resource 
utilisation.  This  is  because  inflation  expectations  affect  wage  formation  and  pricing.  Stable 
inflation expectations thus contribute to stable inflation.  
A high level of credibility for the inflation target also increases the possibility of the Riksbank 
to  stabilise  resource  utilisation.  If  an  increase  in  inflation  was  rapidly  reflected  in  higher 
inflation expectations, the Riksbank would be forced to act more quickly and more forcefully 
than would otherwise have been necessary to dampen demand and prevent the inflationary 
impulse  gaining  a  lasting  foothold.  The  fluctuations  in  the  real  economy  would  thereby  be 
greater  than  if  inflation  expectations  were  better  anchored.  Establishing  credibility  for  the 
belief that inflation will be keep low and stable is therefore important in the effort to increase 
macroeconomic stability. 
If inflation expectations as indicated in various surveys are stable and close to the inflation 
target a few years ahead, this can be interpreted to mean that the public is confident that the 
Riksbank  will  achieve  its  target.  The  surveys  that  TNS  Sifo  Prospera  has  carried  out  of 
inflation expectations  among  money  market  agents,  employer  and  employee  organisations 
and purchasing managers in the retail sector and the manufacturing industry show that this is 
the case. Figure 14 shows average expectations regarding CPI inflation for one, two and five 
BIS Review 32/2010 
 17
years ahead among all of the participants in the Prospera survey. Inflation expectations five 
years ahead are close to 2 per cent, which shows that the credibility of the inflation target is 
high. 
 
 
Inflation expectations for shorter horizons are based to a greater degree on current actual 
inflation.11 The exceptional circumstances for monetary policy that have followed in the wake 
of the financial crisis, with substantial and rapid cuts in the repo rate, have pushed down CPI 
inflation to unusually low levels. This, together with the severe downturn and the uncertainty 
that prevails concerning the recovery of the economy, means that it is hardly surprising that 
short-term inflation expectations are now below the target. 
 How well did the market’s expectations regarding the repo rate match the Riksbank’s 
repo-rate path?  
Since February 2007, the Riksbank has published its own forecast of the development of the 
repo  rate  in  the  period  ahead.  A  published  repo-rate  path  makes  it  easier  to  explain  the 
Riksbank’s view of developments and its reasoning to the public and the financial markets 
when the monetary policy decisions are made. The aim is to improve the Riksbank’s ability to 
steer  expectations  regarding  the  monetary  policy  that  will  be  conducted  in  the  future. 
Expectations regarding the repo rate influence the more long-term interest rates which in turn 
are important to the economic decisions of the households and companies. 
The Riksbank updates its repo rate paths at the monetary policy meetings, which are held 
approximately  every  other  month.  During  this  two-month  period,  new  information  on  the 
development of the economy may emerge. If the Riksbank is successful in communicating 
the  principles  for  monetary  policy,  the  market  participants  should  be  able  to  predict  rather 
                                                 
11   See  T.  Jonsson  and  P.  Österholm,  “The  Properties  of  Survey-Based  Inflation  Expectations  in  Sweden”, 
Working paper no. 114, 2009, National Institute of Economic Research.   
18 
 BIS Review 32/2010
well how new information will affect the Riksbank’s repo rate path. This should then help to 
ensure that there will be only small deviations between the market’s expectations on the day 
before the publication of a repo-rate path and the repo-rate path that the Riksbank actually 
publishes.  
The Riksbank’s repo-rate paths in 2007 and 2008 were, by and large, well predicted by the 
market. In four cases out of six, expectations were already in line with the Riksbank’s repo-
rate path before publication, which can be interpreted as indicating that the market’s ability to 
predict and understand monetary policy was strong. When there were significant deviations, 
the  market  in  most  cases  adjusted  its  expectations  towards  the  repo-rate  path  after 
publication, which also indicates that in general it has not been so difficult to understand the 
Riksbank’s reasoning.  
Despite the fact that the economic situation was highly uncertain in February 2009 and that 
the repo-rate path was significantly lowered, the new repo-rate path was predicted relatively 
well  by  the  market  and  the  market’s  expectations  also  shifted  closer  to  the  new  repo-rate 
path after publication (see Figure 15). From April 2009, however, relatively large differences 
between the market’s expectations and the Riksbank’s repo-rate path appeared. In advance 
of the monetary policy meeting in April, the market expected that the forecast for the repo 
rate  over  the  next  year  would  be  lowered  again.  However,  the  Riksbank’s  new  forecast 
entailed  a  considerably  lower  repo  rate  in  2010  and  2011  than  the  market  had  expected. 
Even  so,  the  Riksbank’s  new  forecast  did  not  significantly  affect  market  expectations  (see 
Figure 16). 
 
 19
BIS Review 32/2010 
   
In the period leading up to December, market expectations of the development of the repo 
rate changed relatively little, even though the Riksbank cut its repo rate forecast further in 
July  and  then  held  to  this  forecast  during  the  entire  autumn.  However,  from  December, 
market expectations have approached the Riksbank’s forecasts (see Figure 4).  
So how can the gap between market expectations and the Riksbank’s repo rate forecasts in 
2009 be explained? Some of the deviations may be explained, for example, by the possibility 
that statements on the lower bound of the repo rate were interpreted to mean that there were 
only  upside  risks  for  the  repo  rate,  but  this  does  not  explain  them  all.  A  major  part  of  the 
deviations thus remain to be explained. 
One possible explanation may be that money market participants have taken a more positive 
view  of  economic  development.  For  example,  they  may  have  expected  GDP  growth  and 
inflation to be higher in the future than stated in the Riksbank’s forecasts, and thus require a 
tighter  monetary  policy.  However,  this  hypothesis  is  not  supported  by  surveys  of  the 
expected economic development. These show that the money market participants expected 
both  lower  inflation  and  lower  GDP  growth  in  the  period  ahead  than  the  Riksbank.12  The 
market participants seem to have believed in a different reaction pattern from the Riksbank 
than  that  expressed  in  the  repo-rate  path.  The  disagreement  among  the  members  of  the 
Executive  Board  may  have  contributed  to  this.  At  the  monetary  policy  meetings  in  July, 
September, October and December, reservations against the published repo rate path were 
entered  by  members  who  considered  that  the  repo  rate  path  in  2010  should  be  slightly 
higher. 
                                                 
12   See  TNS  SIFO  Prospera’s  surveys  of  expectations  of  inflation  and  GDP  growth  among  money  market 
participants  in  2009.  See  also  Lars  E.O.  Svensson  (2010),  “Policy  expectations  and  policy  evaluations:  the 
role of transparency and communication” Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review, No. 1, 2010. 
20 
 BIS Review 32/2010
Monetary policy has mitigated the effects of the crisis 
The Riksbank has reacted forcefully and successfully to the major shocks that have occurred 
since the autumn of 2008 – even if I personally, as revealed by my reservations during the 
course of 2009, would have liked to have seen the Riksbank react even more forcefully and 
thus stabilise inflation and resource utilisation even better. The global recession that followed 
in the wake of the financial crisis surprised us all and was met by a marked shift in monetary 
policy that entailed rapid and repeated cuts in the repo rate up to the summer of 2009. The 
repo-rate  cuts  led  to  lower  mortgage  rates,  which  in  turn  pushed  down  CPI  inflation. 
However, the cuts helped to keep CPIF inflation close to the target. The series of repo-rate 
cuts that began in the autumn of 2008 was necessary in order to mitigate the effects of the 
financial crisis on the real economy and to achieve a better attainment of the inflation target. 
Without  these  substantial  reductions  in  the  repo  rate,  GDP  would  have  fallen  even  more. 
Monetary  policy  was  also  complemented  by  extensive  lending  to  the  banks.  These 
complementary  measures  have  helped  the  financial  markets  to  function  more  effectively, 
eased the supply of credit and increased the impact of monetary policy. 
BIS Review 32/2010 
 21
