Gill Marcus: Recent global developments and their implications for 
South Africa 
Comments  by  Ms  Gill  Marcus,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  a  Power 
Business Breakfast function, Johannesburg, 7 July 2010. 
 The global economy is at a crossroads. The world is in the midst of significant change, and 
the events in Europe are the most vivid examples of how complex and difficult the current 
environment  is.  The  previous  euphoria  that  the  recovery  was  well  underway  has  now 
translated into greater caution.  
Last week saw an almost synchronised decline in PMIs around the world, with the slowdown 
in manufacturing taking place more quickly than previously anticipated.  
While some analysts now see a double dip as a likely scenario, even the more optimistic who 
have  retained  a  positive  outlook  now  have  a  downside  risk  built  into  their  forecasts,  or 
greater “fat tail” risks.  
The reality is that we probably never really emerged from the crisis, which is now entering its 
next phase.  
These developments have serious implications for the domestic growth outlook.  
The global economy  
Until recently there had been a progressive upgrading of growth forecasts. For example, in 
the  April  World  Economic  Outlook,  the  IMF  exemplified  what  can  be  regarded  as  the 
perceived wisdom:  
 
 
 
that the recovery was proceeding faster than expected;  
that the recovery would be uneven but would proceed;  
that exit strategies from expansionary monetary and fiscal policy would be required, 
and  
that these should be done carefully so as not to upset the recovery. 
 
It  soon  became  evident  that  the  extent  of  the  required  fiscal  consolidation  would be  much 
more significant than initially thought: the explosion of fiscal deficits and debt ratios, that were 
seen  to  be  part  of  the  initial  solution  to  the  crisis,  was  now  seen  as  a  problem,  as  both 
solvency and sustainability issues came to the fore.  
The  Secular  Outlook  of  May  2010  issued  by  PIMCO’s  Mohamed  El-Erian,  stated  that  “the 
drama  paying  out  in  Europe  (includes)  …  the  generalised  and  simultaneous  nature  of  the 
debt  explosion  in  industrial  countries,  the  application  and  content  of  regulatory  initiatives 
across the globe,  the  headwinds  to  job creation  in some  industrial  countries,  the extent  of 
political  polarisation  and  …  the  further  shift  of  growth  and  wealth  dynamics  to  emerging 
economies…”  
It also became clear that in a number of countries and regions growth was dependent on the 
continued stimulus provided by the fiscal and monetary authorities. Initially fiscal expansion 
was required to fill the gap left by the collapse in private sector demand. However, the private 
sector,  particularly  in  the  advanced  economies,  was  not  ready  to  step  back  in  to  support 
domestic demand, largely because of impaired balance sheets.  
BIS Review 97/2010 
 1
Households remain cautious, and the initial driver of the recovery – inventory adjustments – 
cannot continue indefinitely without a recovery in domestic demand. The withdrawal of the 
fiscal stimulus in the US is therefore coming at an inopportune time.  
In  some  countries,  eg  in  Europe,  the  approach  has  moved  beyond  mere  fiscal  stimulus 
withdrawal, as in the US, to one of fiscal austerity or consolidation. These measures, while 
necessary from a sustainability point of view, are coming at a time that is in effect premature, 
and could well undermine the pace of recovery further. For example, it has been estimated 
that  an  attempt  by  the  Greek  government  to  reduce  its  budget  deficit  over  the  next  three 
years  by  the  10  percentage  points  of  GDP  needed  to  bring  that  deficit  into  line  with  the 
Maastricht  criteria  could  cause  GDP  to  decline  over  the  next  few  years  by  between  a 
cumulative 15 and 20 percent.  
The process of fiscal consolidation will place most of the burden of adjustment on monetary 
policies.  In  effect,  we  are  likely  to  have  low  interest  rates  globally  for  much  longer  than 
previously thought. These low interest rates will counteract the negative growth impact of the 
fiscal consolidation.  
Furthermore, central banks will, in all likelihood, need to continue to use their balance sheets 
to help support the financial markets.  
The  PIMCO  Secular  Outlook  has  described  the  crisis  as  one  of  serial  balance  sheet 
contamination. It started off with private sector balance sheets being expanded unsustainably 
(households  and  banks).  With  too  many  balance  sheets  deleveraging  simultaneously, 
threatening global depression, governments were forced to step in with their balance sheets 
which  led  to  the  current  sovereign  risk  issues.  Now  fiscal  authorities  have  to  deleverage, 
leaving the monetary authority balance sheets as the only ones left to prevent a downturn. At 
a regional level, it is the German balance sheet that is bailing out the rest of Europe.  
There are concerns that this implies inflationary pressures down the line. Given the size of 
output  gaps,  it  is  probably  premature  to  be  concerned  about  inflation  at  this  stage  in  the 
advanced economies, but there are limits to what can be done by monetary policy on its own. 
There is also the risk of temptation to solve debt crises through monetisation.  
All  this  is  also  playing  out  in  the  political  terrain,  and  social  contracts  are  coming  under 
considerable stress. Nowhere more so than in Europe where the social fabric in a number of 
countries is coming under strain as people are being asked to pay the price of the adjustment 
in terms of either lower wages, or in terms of their jobs.  
This  is  occurring  at  a  time  when  elections  are  resulting  in  an  increasing  number  of  weak 
coalition governments, reflecting a lack of social consensus on the way forward.  
The obvious solution, namely to grow out of the crisis, is not that easy as growth is likely to 
remain lower for longer.  
Strategies  for  dealing  with  unemployment,  particularly  in  Europe,  are  creating  further 
problems.  For  example,  the  extension  of  the  working  life  of  individuals  in  a  number  of 
countries, while helping with the demographic problems of dealing with an ageing population, 
is leading to more youth unemployment. In Spain the unemployment rate is 20 per cent, but 
youth  unemployment  is  closer  to  40  per  cent.  There  is  a  real  danger  of  young  people 
remaining  unemployed  for  some  time  to  come,  resulting  in  deeper  structural  and  social 
problems.  
Europe remains the biggest area of concern:  
The weaknesses of the fixed exchange rate system have been exposed. It is not enough to 
have  currency  union,  as  there  has  to  be  a  credible  fiscal  union  as  well,  with  enforceable 
limits.  While  there  was  growth,  the  decline  in  competitiveness  in  the  peripheral  European 
countries could be papered over, and the burgeoning fiscal and current account deficits could 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2010
be financed, provided that the sovereign debt of these countries was seen to be of the same 
risk category as the core countries.  
But  that  has  changed  in  a  dramatic  way,  although  it  was  surprising  that  it  took  the 
downgrades by the rating agencies to get the markets to react to something that had been 
evident for some time.  
The fiscal adjustment in Europe and the UK means that growth is going to be very low for 
some  time,  perhaps  not  even  in  positive  territory.  However,  some  countries  may  have 
stronger growth, eg Germany, if they do not require much fiscal adjustment, and are able to 
increase productivity and take advantage of the weaker euro.  
In the US, consumption expenditure is not recovering at the pace initially expected, as high 
levels of unemployment, a de-leveraging banking sector and a weak housing market remain 
a constraint on households still faced with excessive debt.  
China and the Asian region in general, as well as some countries in South America, are seen 
as  the  main  growth  poles.  However,  there  are  signs  that  the  policy-induced  slowdown  in 
China is having some effect.  
The  latest  forecasts  are  for  growth  of  “only”  9  per  cent.  While  a  policy  to  cool  down  the 
Chinese economy was envisaged at the beginning of the year, at that stage it was not seen 
as a threat to the global picture given the expected rebound in the global economy. The fact 
that this cooling down is taking place at a time of a more general slowdown has reinforced 
the increasingly negative global outlook.  
The  growth  outlook  is  also  affected  by  the  slow  banking  sector  recovery,  and  uncertainty 
related  to  regulatory  reforms.  The  need  for  higher  capital  adequacy,  de-leveraging  and 
increased liquidity requirements could also discourage lending. At the same time, a downturn 
in growth will also impede the banking sector recovery.  
The South African outlook  
Given this very challenging global environment, what are we observing in South Africa? The 
recovery  is  taking  place,  but  it  is  hesitant,  fragile  and  uneven.  Its  sustainability  will  be 
dependent  on  the  global  recovery  in  general  and  in  Europe  in  particular,  which  is  the 
destination  for  about  one  third  of  our  manufactured  exports,  as  well  as  how  effectively  we 
use  those  opportunities  that  are  there  to  enhance  our  economic  infrastructure  and  human 
capital capacity.  
Although  our  exposure  to  the  Southern  European  countries  (Greece,  Italy,  Portugal  and 
Spain)  is  relatively  small  –  approximately  5  per  cent  of  our  exports  –  Europe  as  a  whole 
accounts for about one third of our manufactured exports. A slowdown in the euro area as a 
whole will not be inconsequential for South African exports.  
We appear to have become a 4.6 per cent economy:  
 
First  quarter  GDP  growth  measured  4.6  per  cent  (seasonally  adjusted  and 
annualised);  
the current account deficit measured 4.6 per cent in the first quarter; and  
the May CPI inflation rate measured 4.6 per cent.  
 
 
Although growth has improved, the output gap remains wide, and it will take some time to get 
back to pre-crisis levels of output.  
While  the  growth  outlook  remains  positive,  our  growth  is  expected  to  remain  much  slower 
than that in many other emerging markets. In recent days, a number of analysts have also 
downgraded their quarterly growth forecasts for this year in the light of global developments 
BIS Review 97/2010 
 3
and the weaker PMI. Nevertheless we still expect growth to average around three per cent in 
2010.  
The manufacturing sector has led the recovery since the second half of last year, mainly a 
result  of  an  export  recovery.  The  outlook  therefore  depends  on  the  global  prospects. 
Unfortunately the most recent data shows that manufacturing may be slowing down, and the 
PMI is down at 48.4, the fourth consecutive monthly decline, indicating a possible contraction 
going forward. This poses a risk to the growth outlook for the rest of the year.  
Gross fixed capital formation turned positive in the first quarter of 2010, but only marginally 
so  (0,2  per  cent),  driven  mainly  by  public  corporations.  Of  concern  is  the  continued 
contraction of private sector investment.  
Household consumption expenditure appears to have improved and turned (weakly) positive 
(1,6 per cent) in the final quarter of 2009, after five consecutive quarters of negative growth. 
In  the  first  quarter  it  measured  5,7  per  cent  quarter-on-quarter  annualised,  though  some 
moderation may be expected. This is also reflected in the credit extension numbers, which 
although remaining low, recently turned positive.  
The  inflation  outlook  remains  favourable:  in  May  it  measured  4,6  per  cent,  and  we  expect 
inflation to remain within the target range for the remainder of the forecast period, but our 
forecasts are that it will begin to rise moderately by the fourth quarter of 2010. This outlook 
has enabled us to reduce the repo rate to its lowest level in nominal terms at 6,5% since the 
late 1970s.  
Unfortunately, despite positive growth, employment continues to lag. This is not unusual in 
the early phases of the cycle, but there are other factors that seem to indicate that the pick-
up  in  employment  is  likely  to  be  slow.  We  lost  a  disproportionately  large  number  of  jobs 
during the crisis compared with other countries, but despite this, wage settlements remain 
well  above  inflation,  particularly  in  the  public  sector.  If  this  is  not  matched  by  improved 
productivity there are likely to be inflationary consequences.  
The public protests seen abroad in Greece and elsewhere do not reflect the same demands 
ie for higher wages. In Europe the protests are against losing jobs, and the severe austerity 
measures that have been introduced to reduce double-digit sovereign debt.  
South Africa cannot, on the one hand, put employment creation as its priority, and then at the 
same time demand (and agree to) wage and salary increases that are, in some instances, 
double the level of inflation.  
In this regard the behaviour of management is critically important. Outrageous increases or 
bonuses  are  simply  not  acceptable.  Management  has  to  lead  by  example.  According  to 
Computus,  a  forensic  accounting  firm,  executive  pay  has  increased  notwithstanding  the 
financial crisis and global recession. In its sample of 326 listed companies and parastatals, it 
reports that CEO remuneration increased by 11,5% on average from 2006 to 2009.  
South Africa as a whole needs to have a greater understanding of the global financial crisis 
and its consequences for all of us. This requires greater interaction and a common purpose 
determining the appropriate course of action that we, as a nation, need to take to stave off 
the worst ravages of the crisis.  
We have experienced the most remarkable period of togetherness in the past month, built 
around Soccer 2010 and being host to the world, both the hundreds of thousands who have 
come in person, and the millions who have watched on TV and other media. We need this 
togetherness and sense of what we can achieve to continue beyond the world cup, and to 
permeate other aspects of society.  
There  also  needs  to  be  greater  coordination  and  cooperation  between  policies.  It  is  not 
possible to have loose monetary policy and loose fiscal policy and a weaker exchange rate. 
This will not translate into a depreciated real exchange rate. Rather, it is a simple recipe for 
higher  inflation.  We  need  an  appropriate  mix  or  combination  of  both  macroeconomic  and 
4 
 BIS Review 97/2010
microeconomic  policies  that  will  bring  about  higher  productivity,  higher  growth  and 
employment in a low inflation environment.  
Today,  what  is  clear  is  that  central  banks  the  world  over  have  been  given  additional 
responsibilities, explicitly or implicitly. Expectations are that central banks will, and can, deal 
with  macro-prudential,  micro-prudential,  financial  stability,  crisis  management,  provision  of 
liquidity  and  still  meet  their  core  responsibility,  namely  independent  execution  of  monetary 
policy.  
Financial stability crises build up over years, and what the prevailing global crisis has shown 
is  that  it  is  much  harder  to  restore  financial  stability  once  it  has  been  lost  than  previously 
anticipated.  Another  lesson  is  that  there  is  an  increasing  need  for  co-ordination  and  co-
operation  between  central  banks,  governments  and  markets,  within  a  sound  regulatory 
environment and with a focus on maintaining systemic stability.  
In conclusion, what we are seeing is a bifurcated world where the developed countries face 
gradual  de-leveraging  with  lower  growth  for  longer  in  a  more  regulated  environment, 
impacted upon by severe austerity measures and poor public finances. Furthermore, the US 
faces  increasingly  large  structural  headwinds,  including  deteriorating  public  finances,  while 
the Eurozone is likely to see low inflation for some time to come.  
On  the  other  hand,  key  emerging  countries  such  as  China,  India  and  Brazil,  seem  set  to 
continue to grow and develop. Our challenge is to ensure that South Africa, with so much 
going for us, is one of these key emerging countries.  
BIS Review 97/2010 
 5
