Shyamala Gopinath: Financial markets – some regulatory issues and 
recent developments 
Inaugural  address  by  Ms  Shyamala  Gopinath,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India,  at  the  Fixed  Income  Money  Markets  and  Derivatives  Association–Primary  Dealers 
Association of India (FIMMDA–PDAI) Annual Conference, Mumbai, 4 January 2010. 
 1. 
It is my pleasure to be here today again, at the FIMMDA–PDAI annual conference as 
we  enter  into  a  new  decade.  The  last  decade  in  the  Indian  financial  sector  has  been  a 
forward  continuum  marked  by  significant  developments.  It  was  in  1999  that  guidelines  for 
interest  rate  swaps  and  forward  rate  agreements  were  first  introduced.  1999  was  also  the 
year when FEMA was enacted and since then it has been a process of measured opening up 
of the capital account. That was also the time when the LAF framework for modulating short 
term  liquidity  was  introduced  and  a  plan  was  put  in  place  for  making  uncollateralized  call 
money market as a pure inter-bank market. Looking back, we have come along a long way. 
One  thing  that  perhaps  connects  through  the  regulatory  approach  during  this  period  has 
been the pursuit of financial stability. Some may be surprised to note that as far back as the 
start  of  this decade,  the  conceptualization  of  financial stability  had  been  ingrained into  the 
macro-economic and policy framework of the RBI. There was a stated focus on the need to 
treat  financial  stability  as  a  dominant  objective  of  macroeconomic  management  and  as  a 
necessary,  if  not  the  sufficient,  condition  for  accelerating  economic  growth.1  Financial 
stability, of course, has acquired its rightful place as a key policy objective globally since the 
onset of crisis. 
2. 
In my address last year, I had touched upon some of the burning issues that the global 
policy makers were grappling with. The financial markets have since stabilised and there is 
recovery in risk appetite but this primarily reflects the unprecedented and extraordinary policy 
measures taken by central banks and governments. Public sector assumed the role of not 
only the lender but also the risk taker of last resort. Much water has flown in the interregnum 
and in terms of outcomes, at the very least, we have a common minimum globally agreed 
program  for  repairing  the  financial  system.  The  key  elements  of  this  program  are:  a 
strengthened  capital  adequacy  and  liquidity  regime  for  banks,  developing  a  framework  for 
systemically  important  entities  and  resolution  arrangements,  extending  the  regulatory 
perimeter  to  unregulated  pools  of  money,  de-risking  the  OTC  derivatives  trading  and  new 
frameworks for regulating compensation within the financial sector. The main action on the 
above program is primarily concentrated on both sides of the Atlantic for obvious reasons. 
However,  most  of  the  other  countries,  including  India,  have  agreed  to  the  broad 
commitments being driven by the G20 and the FSB.  
3.  My address today will be in two parts. In the first part I propose to discuss broad issues 
relating  to  financial  market  regulation  and  in  the  second  part  will  briefly  review  the  key 
developments in major markets in India and certain unsettled issues. 
Regulatory approach for markets 
I. 
4. 
In  the  post  crisis  scenario,  the  new  important  variable  that  is  being  sought  to  be 
addressed globally is the oversight of systemic risk. It is being acknowledged that institutional 
                                                 
1   RBI Annual Report 1999–2000. 
BIS Review 1/2010 
 1
regulation  alone  is  not  sufficient  in  capturing  and  addressing  systemic  risks  and  it  is 
imperative  to  have  a  mechanism  to  monitor  and  act  upon  the  risks  inherent  in  the 
interconnectedness across the financial system – a macro-prudential approach to regulation 
and  supervision.  It  is  recognized  that  systemic  risk  is  created  endogeneously  rather  than 
having exogeneous origins beyond the remit of financial markets.  
Macro-prudential regulation – the concept 
5.  Macroprudential  approach,  generically,  can  be  defined  as  policy  that  focuses  on  the 
financial  system  as  a  whole,  and also  treats  aggregate  risk  as  endogenous  with  regard  to 
collective behaviour of institutions. It aims to limit system wide distress so as to avoid output 
costs  associated  with  financial  instability.2  The  underlying  philosophy  of  macro-prudential 
regulation  is  that  behind  the  individual  prudence  of  financial  firms  may  underlie  systemic 
problems caused by their collective behavior. A recent Bank of England discussion paper3 
interprets macroprudential policy as lying on a spectrum with monetary policy at one end and 
microprudential policy at the other, concerned with the stability of the aggregate provision of 
financial intermediation services to the real economy. 
The  two  key  elements  of  macro-prudential  regulation4  that  have  acquired  maximum 
6. 
attention are one, existence of common (correlated) exposures which arise either because 
institutions are directly exposed to the same or similar asset classes or because of indirect 
exposures associated with linkages among them (e.g. counterparty relationships) and two, 
collective homogeneous actions on the part of institutions resulting in amplification of risks 
because of interconnectedness, the pro-cyclicality element.  
7. 
Integral  to  the  above  approach  is  also  the  role  of  financial  markets  –  by  and  in 
themselves,  different  market  segments,  assessed  in  terms  of  the  usual  metrics  such  as 
liquidity, turnover, etc. may be functioning absolutely well, but there may still be underlying 
systemic  vulnerabilities  arising  out  of  the  interactions  of  different  market  participants,  both 
regulated as well as unregulated, across different markets.  
8. 
However,  there  is  still  no  coherent  framework  emerging  for  regulation  of  financial 
markets from a stability perspective. Indeed, the joint IMF–BIS–FSB paper on assessing the 
Systemic Importance of Financial Institutions, Markets and Instruments also acknowledges 
that  the  assessment  of  systemic  importance  of  markets  presents  more  conceptual 
challenges than for institutions. In the area of reforming markets, the singular area of action 
has been to address counterparty risks and non-transparency in the OTC market by taking 
all  such  markets  onto  central  clearing  platforms.  Other  elements  impinging  on  market 
functioning flow from the focus on entity regulation such as addressing excessive leverage, 
higher capital charge for trading and securitization transactions.  
9. 
strands, apart from entity regulation: 
(i) 
Holistically speaking, regulation of financial markets per se would involve two separate 
policy  framework  that  includes  the  product  specifications,  macro  level  regulations 
that  apply  to  all  entities  operating  in  this  market,  systemic  safeguards,  nature  of 
participants, reporting requirements etc.  
operational aspects of trading and post-trade clearing and settlement. 
(ii) 
                                                 
2   Borio,  Claudio:  Implementing  the  macroprudential  approach  to  financial  regulation  and  supervision, 
September 2009, Financial Stability Review, Banque de France. 
3   Bank of England, “The role of macroprudential policy”, November 2009, Discussion Paper. 
4   Borio,  Claudio:  Implementing  the  macroprudential  approach  to  financial  regulation  and  supervision, 
September 2009, Financial Stability Review, Banque de France. 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2010
10.  The concept of market regulation in most of the developed financial centres has largely 
been concentrated around the operational aspects of trading – the conduct of business part 
and  has  left  prudential  focus  to  entity  regulation.  More  importantly,  there  was  no  explicit 
policy framework for markets from a stability perspective. Mr. Howard Davies, the previous 
chairman of the FSA recently admitted that “The political mood, and certainly the mood in the 
markets,  was  that  regulators  should  observe  how  markets  evolved  and  try  to  craft  their 
regulatory  environment  to  cope  with  the  risks  that  emerged.  We  have  now  seen  that  an 
approach of that sort can step too far back... We now can see that if you step too far back, 
trends can develop in a way which creates trouble, and that there needs to be, I think, more 
self-confidence in the regulatory world to be prepared to step in at an earlier stage and to 
challenge the judgments of the markets.”5 
11. 
It  is  surprising  that  this  paradoxical  approach  Mr.  Howard  Davies  talks  about  is  not 
being  altered  even  now  though  there  is  recognition  of  the  need  to  monitor  systemic 
interconnectedness.  The  macro-prudential  approach  to  regulation,  now  being  considered 
imperative for financial entities, is still some way from being applied to financial markets.  
12.  Just to illustrate, one of the arguments against the way financial products have evolved 
relates to the problem of information asymmetries: the gulf between the market makers and 
market takers. Large financial firms run huge positions across multiple assets and have the 
ability  as  well  as  incentive  to  move  markets  in  a  way  advantageous  for  them.  This  is  not 
merely an exaggerated concern: there are increasing number of articles trying to interpret the 
link  between  the  creation  and  selling  of  CDOs  by  large  investment  firms  on  underlying 
securities of doubtful nature prior to the crisis and simultaneously going short. In plain words, 
on  the  one  hand  you  sell  the  derivatives  to  less  informed  investors  betting  on  the  upside, 
while at the same time place huge bets to gain yourself from the downside. Here comes the 
systemic perspective in regulation: what may be good for a particular entity may be sowing 
seeds of instability for the system.  
13.  As  part  of  general  public  discourse  many  interesting  issues  are  being  raised  and 
debated fiercely, particularly relating to the social good being contributed by the markets and 
the  systemic  implications  of  some  of  the  innovations.  I  came  across  an  interesting 
classification  of  opinionists  in  the  context  of  the  raging  debate  on  climate  change  – 
calamitists and denialists at the two extremes and warners and skeptics somewhere in the 
middle.6  Through  the  crisis,  there  have  been  similar  voices  in  the  context  of  the  role  of 
markets. On one end of the spectrum are the denialist notions that there is inherently nothing 
wrong  with  the  markets  and  the  primary  drivers  for  the  crisis  lay  in  the  macro-economic 
realm. At the other end, there are the calamitists arguing for a radical shift in the way markets 
are regulated since they have failed spectacularly. The truth, as usual may lie somewhere in 
the  middle.  Some  key  issues  have  indeed  been  acknowledged  and  are  being  addressed. 
There  have  been  broad  agreements  on  the  principles,  the  problem  is  that  these  are  the 
common minimum principles and the implementation is being driven by contextual issues in 
each country. 
Interconnectedness 
14.  The  crisis  has  highlighted  the  importance  of  improving  our  understanding  of  inter-
connectedness in the financial system through direct links between financial institutions and 
the indirect links created through financial markets. The key channels of propagation of risks 
are maturity mismatches and leverage.  
                                                 
5  
6   Stewart Brand, “Four Sides to Every Story”, www.edge.org. 
Interview to the Wall Street Journal, December 13, 2009, Future of Finance Initiative. 
BIS Review 1/2010 
 3
In regard to direct links, there is need for bringing all inter-bank/intra-financial system 
15. 
exposures both on and off-balance sheet within the macro prudential framework. While there 
are  prudential  requirements  for  individual  bank’s  exposures  to  other  banks,  there  is 
appreciation of the need to prescribe safeguards on the liabilities side of the balance sheet 
too and to ensure availability of adequate good quality liquid assets.  
16.  The  growth  in  financial  sector  over  the  past  few  years  has  been  exponential.  While 
many  have  argued  that  this  has  also  contributed  to  real  economy  growth,  behind  the 
numbers lays the critical role of leverage and off-balance sheet financing. As mentioned in 
the  Turner  Review,  from  about  2003  onwards  there  were  significant  increases  in  the 
measured on-balance sheet leverage of many commercial and investment banks, driven in 
some  cases  by  dramatic  increases  in  gross  assets  and  derivative  positions.  This  coupled 
with the growth of “shadow banking” meant that the so-called benefits from financial sector 
growth have been mostly illusory. 
17.  Firms  whose  business  models  were  based  on  high  leverage  and  excessive 
dependence on uninterrupted access to secured funding markets were highly vulnerable in 
the crisis. Many firms relied on excessive short-term wholesale financing of long term illiquid 
assets  including  on  cross  border  basis.  During  the  crisis  they  were  faced  with  lenders 
demanding  substantial  cushions  or  haircuts  on  the  assets  they  were  willing  to  finance. 
Moreover,  these  assets  taken  as  collateral  were  illiquid  and  lenders  failed  to  factor  in  this 
risk. This combined with excessive leverage accentuated the vulnerability.  
18.  The excessive dependence of entities on wholesale funding markets such as repo or 
other  collateralised  markets  is  an  issue  of  systemic  concern  since  one,  it  accentuates 
systemic  procyclicality  through  haircuts/margins  and  two,  the  leverage  loop  that  builds 
through  these  markets  in  high  liquidity  periods  induces  rigidity  and  gets  entrenched  into 
funding  models  of  entities.  It  is  therefore  imperative  to  bring  the  secured  funding  markets 
such  as  repo  markets  within 
framework, 
particularly  since  many  entities  participating  in  these  markets  are  unregulated/lightly 
regulated.  There 
that  are 
repo’ed/collateralised carry credit risk and are illiquid.  
19.  This also raises the issue of interconnectedness of banks to private pools of capital that 
are  largely  unregulated.  While  the  reform  of  the  financial  system  does  cover  regulation  of 
hedge funds, the general issue of banks exposures to these funds directly as well as through 
markets needs greater attention. The same applies to private equity which are unregulated 
entities.  These  entities  rely  on  funding  markets  for  leverage.  From  a  macro  prudential 
perspective it is not just necessary to regulate banks exposures to these entities but also to 
limit the overall leverage of these entities if they are permitted to access funds directly from 
banks and other financial intermediaries and indirectly via funding markets.  
the  regulatory  perimeter/macro  prudential 
for  a  cautious  approach  when 
the  securities 
is  need 
OTC market infrastructure 
20.  A large number of initiatives are underway at the international level to strengthen the 
infrastructure for OTC derivatives, a clear amplifier of stress particularly in credit derivatives 
market in the crisis as evidenced by AIG, Bear Stearns, Lehman episodes. The deficiencies 
within the OTC derivatives market viz. the management of counterparty credit risk and the 
absence  of  sufficient  transparency  have  pushed  the  policy  preference  to  exchange 
traded/centrally cleared models. However the specific proposals being discussed in various 
countries do envisage continuance of non-standardised OTC contracts albeit with a stricter 
bilateral collateralization requirement and higher capital charge. 
21. 
Increasingly more nuanced perspectives on this issue are being articulated, the most 
recent one being the discussion paper of December 2009 from the HMT and the FSA in UK 
which  argues  against  the  need  for  mandating  the  trading  of  standardized  derivatives  on 
organized trading platforms provided steps are taken to improve transparency and mitigate 
the  risks  of  OTC  derivatives.  According  to  this  paper  regulatory  objectives  of  reducing 
4 
 BIS Review 1/2010
counterparty  risk  and  improving  transparency  can  be  achieved  by  other  means  and  they 
would review progress of initiatives in this area. Moreover, mandating the use of organised 
platforms would imply a regulatory imposition of trading structure, which they do not believe 
is necessary. The paper argues that mere standardisability cannot be a sufficient condition 
for central clearing and other factors such as availability of prices, depth of market liquidity 
and  whether  the  product  contains  inherent  risk  attributes  that  cannot  be  mitigated  by  the 
CCP need to be considered by regulators.  
22.  The essence of a CCP arrangement is netting and margining, which are contingent on 
homogeneity of the underlying asset, availability of reliable prices and sound risk models to 
capture  future  potential  exposures.  The  ability  of  models  to  capture  tail  risks  has  been 
comprehensively  put  to  question  post  crisis.  How  would  the  exchanges  be  better  able  to 
measure and manage risk where some of the biggest financial firms with the soundest risk 
management systems failed? This would be particularly true of credit products such as CDS. 
In this context, the nature of collateral regime becomes extremely important. Any instrument 
with a credit risk element would inherently not be suitable for a collateral. If these aspects are 
not addressed by the regulators, mandatory clearing would only result in a potentially riskier 
system. 
23.  The  real  sector  i.e.  end  users  are  opposing  mandatory  move  to  exchanges  and 
clearing platforms on the ground that the crisis was inherently due to complex transactions 
between financial intermediaries and there should be no increase in cost to the real sector, 
i.e. genuine end-users, for undertaking derivative trades.  
24.  Currently,  a  CPSS–IOSCO  Committee  is  looking  into  the  existing  standards  for  the 
systemic entities like the CCP. Given the nature of their functions which require incentives for 
strong risk management and building adequate financial resources in the form of settlement 
guarantee  funds  and  their  systemic  importance,  it  is  worthwhile  to  consider  central 
counterparties as “public utility” and not-for profit entities to reduce moral hazard.  
25.  A  key  criticism  of  the  proposed  reforms  has  been  that  it  doesn’t  address  the 
fundamental  issue  of  speculative  use  of  derivatives  and  excessive  financialisation  of  all 
products.  In  fact,  by  transferring  most  of  OTC  market  onto  exchanges,  it  might  be  further 
accentuating it. It is not surprising to hear major global exchanges as well as brokers betting 
on  a  manifold  increase  in  the  CDS  market  as  a  result  of  electronic  trading  and  central 
clearing. A recent study7 has found that of the gross CDS position of 23 large US Banks only 
around 2 per cent was for hedging the rest was for their dealer activities. Though the figures 
pertain to 2005, they give a fair idea of really how much of the CDS market was actually for 
pure speculation. Speculation does play an economic role in increasing market liquidity and 
price discovery but beyond a point, trading without an underlying interest could only increase 
systemic  risk  particularly  when  the  same  market  prices  and  volatilities  get  entrenched  into 
the balance sheets of the real sector.  
Rating agencies 
26.  Another area where progress has been slow relates to the rating agencies. There have 
been  some  proposals  to  mitigate  conflicts  between  raters  and  issuers  who  pay  them  but 
these have largely been in the nature of more disclosures by rating agencies and separation 
of  the  consultancy/advisory  roles.  Some  of  the  fundamental  issues  have  been  left 
unaddressed, particularly the methodological issues, accountability arrangements and over-
stretching of rating agencies. A key issue that has not been addressed is the ratings given by 
rating  agencies  based  on  implicit  support  without  the  need  to  disclose  the  rating  status 
                                                 
7   Minton,  Bernadette,  René  M  Stulz,  and  Rohan  Williamson,  January  2008,  “How  much  do  banks  use  credit 
derivatives to hedge loans?”, Fisher College of Business Working Paper Series. 
BIS Review 1/2010 
 5
without  such  implicit  support.  From  the  point  of  view  of  transparency  to  investors  and 
accountability there is need for further disclosures in this regard. 
Capital account management  
27.  For  emerging  countries  the  macro  prudential  framework  has  also  to  deal  with 
vulnerability  arising  from  cross-border  capital  flows,  currency  mismatches  and  foreign 
currency liquidity in the financial system. Rapid and volatile capital inflows or outflows can 
present  significant  policy  challenges  –  potentially  leading  to  exchange  rate  overshooting, 
asset price volatility and financial instability. In this context, appropriate and pragmatic use of 
capital  account  regulations  may  have  to  be  considered  by  emerging  markets  in  order  to 
maintain financial stability if considered necessary. 
Market discipline 
28. 
In the past, it has been argued that market discipline can play a key role in incentivising 
market participants to limit their excessive risk taking activities. However, the events of the 
last  few  years  have  proved  the  inadequacy  of  market  discipline  and  bankers  have  been 
engaged  in  risk-taking  activities  disguised  as  value-creation.  Time  and  again  market 
participants  have  engaged  in  herd  behaviour  and  put  the  financial  system  at  risk.  It  is 
poignant  to  note  how  relevant  Charles  Mackay’s  observation  in  his  popular  book 
Extraordinary  Popular  Delusions  and  Madness  of  Crowds,  written  in  1841,  even  today. 
Mackay wrote, ‘‘Men, it has been well said think in herds; it will be seen that they go mad in 
herds, while they only recover their senses slowly, and one by one”. The events of the past 
few years tell us that market discipline expressed via market prices cannot be expected to 
play a major role in constraining risk taking, and that the primary constraint needs to come 
from regulation and supervision. 
29.  So how do we manage the trade-off between financial stability, effective regulations on 
the  one  hand  and  free  markets  on  the  other?  One,  the  responsibility  for  financial  stability 
cannot be fragmented across several regulators; it has to rest unambiguously with a single 
entity, and that single entity optimally is the central bank. And second, that there is need for 
coordination  across  regulators  on  a  regular  basis  and  for  developing  a  protocol  for 
responding to a crisis situation.8 
30. 
In my opinion, any regulation that is envisaged should be based on the touchstone of 
the  following:  Regulations  that  does  not  lead  to  excessive  leverage  of  not  only  financial 
institutions,  but  also  of  households  and  corporates.  Regulations  that  augment  the  market 
process  and  strengthen  the  invisible  hand.  Regulations  that  address  the  information 
problems  associated  with  complex  financial  instruments  and  improve  the  transparency  of 
instruments  and  institutions.  Regulations  that  acknowledge  and  address  the  systemically 
important  nature  of  key  markets  that  have  wider  implications  for  the  real  economy. 
Regulations that recognize and address the country specific circumstances.  
Part II – Indian context 
31.  Having touched upon some of the broad issues for financial regulation in the context of 
emerging global consensus, let me turn to the Indian context. I would like to briefly review the 
key developments in major markets and try to flag some of the unsettled issues.  
                                                 
8   Subbarao, Duvvuri, Financial Stability: Issues and Challenges, September 2009. 
6 
 BIS Review 1/2010
Money markets 
32.  The overnight rates have an important contributory role in terms of managing day to 
day liquidity and as a point of origin for building expectations on the term structure of interest 
rates.  Domestically,  while  the  overnight  rates  have  more  or  less  remained  around  the 
corridor in the recent past, the daily cash maintained by the banking system with RBI – one 
of the most important determinants of the overnight rates – have remained highly volatile as 
compared to the required CRR balances. 
    33.  Therefore, despite the daily overnight rates remaining around the interest rate corridor, 
the daily absolute change in the weighted average rates have not been smooth. 
 BIS Review 1/2010 
 7
  34.  While we are all aware of the skewed distribution of liquidity in the banking system due 
to different balance sheet sizes of the banks, the rapid roll-out of RTGS system and the core 
banking  solutions  perhaps  offers  us  an  opportunity  to  go  back  to  the  drawing  board  and 
optimize  the  day  to  day  liquidity  management  to  reduce  the  opportunity  costs  and  more 
importantly improve the ability to lend on term basis. The term money market continues to 
remain  dormant  with  low  turnover  despite  several  initiatives  taken  by  the  Reserve  Bank, 
mainly  reflecting  the  inability  of  the  market  participants  to  take  a  medium-term  view  on 
interest rates and liquidity, corporates’ continued preference for cash credit and other modes 
of loan disbursements. However, the CD  market is active and reflects the unsecured term 
money market rates.  
 
8 
  BIS Review 1/2010
35.  RBI  has  addressed  the  issue  of  vulnerabilities  arising  from  excessive  intra  financial 
sector activity by limiting the unsecured overnight market to banks and primary dealers and 
imposing limits on unsecured borrowing and lending in overnight markets as also by limiting 
the gross interbank liabilities.  
36.  On the market infrastructure side, over the years, the collateralised segment of money 
market has assumed increasing importance for the entire gamut of market players including 
non-banks without engendering financial instability. All collateralized trades including market 
repos  are  settled  through  a  CCP.  These  developments  have  contributed  to  the  increased 
transparency and liquidity in these markets and imparted stability to the financial markets. 
37.  On the regulatory front, the gap that existed in the case of NCDs with maturities less 
than one year has received the regulatory attention. Non Convertible Debentures of maturity 
of less than one year are being issued with innovative features such as, interest rates linked 
to overnight rate, American style put/call optionality, which imparts demand liability character 
to  these  instruments.  Further,  the  innovative  features  and  the  high  amount  of  issuance  of 
such  instruments  pose  systemic  risks.  The  suggestion  of  the  market  participants  in 
expanding the eligible entities that can act as Debenture Trustees for the issuance of NCDs 
with  less  than  one  year  maturities  is  being  examined  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  However,  the 
suggestion  for  relaxing  the  minimum  tenor  of  these  NCDs  from  the  proposed  tenor  of 
90 days to  7 days cannot be acceded to as under the law, corporates are prohibited from 
issuing unsecured debentures with maturity of less than 90 days. Allowing markets to issue 
very  short-term  instruments  can  have  systemic  implications.  In  any  case,  there  are  other 
instruments  in  the  short-end  like  repo,  CBLO  and  CPs  that  can  meet  the  requirement  of 
investors. 
Fixed income markets 
38.  The  fixed  income  markets  in  India,  as  is  the  case  with  the  developed  world  is 
dominated by the Government securities markets. A lot has been done to develop the market 
infrastructure for the Government securities markets in the past two decades and most of the 
issues that remains now have to do with the development of the non-bank non-institutional 
interests in the government securities. In India, the reasons for lack of retail interest lies in 
the availability of alternative instruments with higher yields and better tax treatment and the 
small  savings  window  for  those  in  need  of  risk  free  instruments.  Nevertheless,  the 
experience gained in the development of the Government securities market microstructure 
will stand us in good stead in further development of the Corporate Bond markets and certain 
other segments of the money markets mentioned earlier. 
Government securities market 
39.  Of the various reforms towards development of the Government securities market, the 
most significant one, I must say was the issuance of G-secs through auction, followed and 
backed  by  development  of  market  infrastructure  such  as  trade  reporting  platforms  for  real 
time  dissemination,  DvP  and  CCP  clearing  and  settlement.  Introduction  and  gradual 
relaxation of repo has also significantly contributed to the liquidity. The Reserve Bank has 
also  taken  up  the  revision  of  repo  accounting  to  reflect  the  true  economic  essence  of  the 
transaction  on  the  books  of  both  the  repo  seller  as  well  as  the  repo  buyer.  The  final 
guidelines are set to be issued shortly. 
Initiatives to widen investor base 
40. 
In last few years, many initiatives have been taken to widen the investor base in G-Sec 
Market.  The  Reserve  Bank,  in  consultation  with  the  Central  Government  and  State 
Governments,  has  introduced  the  Non-Competitive  Bidding  in  the  Auction  of  Central 
Government  securities  and  State  Development  Loans.  NDS-OM  has  been  extended  to 
BIS Review 1/2010 
 9
insurance  companies,  qualified  Mutual  Funds,  Provident  Funds  and  Pension  Funds  in  a 
phased  manner.  Further,  changes  have  been  made  in  the  manner  in  which  bids  are 
submitted  in  the  auctions  of  the  Government  of  India  securities  so  as  to  improve  the 
efficiency of the auction procedure as also the timeliness of data dissemination. 
41.  With the average daily trading volumes of about Rs. 13,000 crore and Rs. 22,000 crore 
in outright and repo market respectively, the G-sec markets are on the growth path. 
Primary dealers  
42.  With an objective to render the Government Securities market vibrant, liquid and broad 
based, the Reserve Bank introduced the system of Primary Dealers (PDs) in 1995. In order 
to broad base the Primary Dealership system, banks were permitted to undertake Primary 
Dealership business departmentally in 2006–07. Further, the standalone PDs were permitted 
to diversify into other business activities. With the induction of two new PDs in 2009, there 
are currently 19 PDs comprising 11 banks undertaking PD business departmentally and eight 
standalone  PDs.  As  you  are  aware,  in  view  of  the  underwriting  and  market  making 
responsibility of PDs, they have been given access to Current Account facility and Subsidiary 
General Ledger (SGL) Account facility (for Government securities) with the Bank, permission 
to  borrow  and  lend  in  the  money  market  including  call  money  market  and  to  trade  in  all 
money  market  instruments,  membership  of  electronic  dealing,  trading  and  settlement 
systems  (NDS  platforms/INFINET/RTGS/CCIL),  access  to  the  Liquidity  Adjustment  Facility 
(LAF)  of  RBI,  access  to  liquidity  support  from  RBI  under  a  scheme  separately  notified  for 
standalone PDs and favoured access to open market operations by the Reserve Bank.  
Performance of PDs in primary auctions of government securities 
43.  The  share  of  PDs  (ratio  of  bids  accepted  from  PDs  to  the  total  notified  amount)  in 
primary auctions of Central Government dated securities (Table 1) has been significant since 
2006 when the Bank stopped participating in primary auctions, ensuring full subscription to 
the Government securities. 
Table 1: Performance of PDs in primary auctions of Government securities 
(In Rs. crore) 
Details 
2006–07 
2007–08 
2008–09 
2009–10*  
Notified Amount 
146,000   156,000  
261,000  
295,000  
Bids Submitted by PDs 
202,462   254,253  
349,393  
361,325  
Bids accepted of PDs 
64,727  
72,122  
111,094  
117,023  
Bid-to-cover ratio 
1.39 
1.63 
1.34 
1.22 
Success Ratio 
Share of PDs 
31.97% 
28.37% 
31.80% 
32.39% 
44.33% 
46.23% 
42.56% 
39.67% 
* – till end-September 2009 
Source: Trend & Progress 2009 
10 
 BIS Review 1/2010
Recent initiatives 
44. 
In  view  of  the  enhanced  borrowings  by  the  Government  of  India  in  2008–09  and 
2009-10 as part of the counter-cyclical policy in response to slowdown, structured meetings 
with  PDs  and  other  major  investors  were  taken  up  on  a  regular  basis  to  obtain  market 
feedback  and  exchange  views  on  relevant  issues.  The  major  initiatives  taken  during  the 
current fiscal are: 
i. 
Consequent to the global financial crisis, the spread between corporate bond and 
Government  securities  turned  out  more  than  500  bps  due  to  credit  crunch  in  the 
financial markets. To enable the PDs to raise Tier II and Tier III capital, ceiling on 
interest  rate  spread  at  the  time  of  issue  of  the  subordinated  instruments  was 
removed effective from April 1, 2009.  
Stand-alone PDs were allowed to categorize a portion of their Government Security 
portfolio in the HTM category till March 31, 2010. 
In  order  to  aid  stand-alone  PDs  in  managing  their  funding  requirement,  PDs  are 
allowed  to  borrow  from  call  money  market,  on  an  average  in  a  fortnight,  up  to 
225 per cent up from 200 per cent.  
In the backdrop of global financial crisis and the need to have strongly capitalized 
entities  to  ensure  financial  stability,  the  minimum  NOF  for  stand-alone  PDs 
undertaking only G-sec business, was increased from Rs. 50 crore to Rs. 150 crore 
and for the stand-alone PDs, which intend to undertake other permissible activities, 
NOF  is  enhanced  to  Rs.250  crore  from  the  existing  level  of  Rs.  100  crore.  The 
enhanced level of NOF requirement shall be effective from April 1, 2010. 
PDs are allowed to deal in Interest Rate Futures (IRFs) for both hedging and trading 
on own account. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
45.  The  RBI  is  impressing  upon  the  PDs  to  expand  their  outreach  to  widen  the  investor 
base  for  government  securities  and  act  as  market  makers  for  the  smaller  entities  in  non-
institutional segment. 
Corporate bond market 
46.  Corporate  bond  market  segment  has  received  intense  attention  in  recent  times  as  it 
has  been  identified  as  one  of  the  growth  engines  for  further  development  of  the  Indian 
economy  with  vast  infrastructure  needs.  A  well  developed  corporate  bond  market  not  only 
enables  the  corporates  to  tap  the  markets  for  their  financing  needs  and  result  in  efficient 
allocation of resources but also acts as a much desired supplement for the bank financing 
thereby  reducing  the  systemic  stress.  There  has  been  a  spurt  in  the  secondary  market 
activity in the corporate bond markets. The secondary market volumes have gone up from 
Rs. 5000 crore in 2007 to about Rs.30,000 crore in 2009. The bond issuance through private 
placement  in  the  first  half  of  2009–10  has  shown  an  increase  of  25  per  cent  over  the 
corresponding period previous year, with financial service sector accounting for 71 per cent 
of the mobilization. The FIIs have been allowed to invest up to $15 bn in corporate bonds. 
The  actual  utilization  is  however  very  low.  The  streamlining  of  clearing  and  settlement 
processes by mandating the DvP settlement of corporate bonds is expected to increase the 
market activity including public issues by mitigating the settlement risks.  
47. 
Introduction  of  OTC  repo  in  corporate  bonds,  as  already  announced,  would  further 
enhance  the  secondary  market  activity  by  encouraging  more  participants  to  hold  bonds. 
However, we need to tread with prudence since the repo facilitates leverage. As indicated 
earlier  secured  funding  markets  globally  were  the  key  leverage-enabling  channels  that 
played  an  exacerbating  role  during  the  crisis.  While  such  collateralized  funding  markets 
generally  help  market  integration  by  enabling  participants  to  fund  their  long  positions  and 
deliver into short positions and by helping them to manage their short term liquidity needs, 
BIS Review 1/2010 
 11
during  times  of  crisis,  the  same  mechanism  may  accentuate  the  crisis  by  forcing  the 
borrowers into insolvency due to steep fall in the value of collaterals, leading to margin calls 
and fire sales (Gorton and Metrick, 2009). 
48.  The  feedback  received  on  the  draft  guidelines  has  largely  been  positive  but  the  key 
issue that has been raised relates to inclusion of short term money market instruments such 
as  CDs/CPs  as  eligible  securities  for  repo.  To  begin  with,  it  is  proposed  to  start  only  with 
highly rated bonds. The final guidelines in this regard would be issued shortly. 
Foreign exchange market 
49.  There  has  been  a  sharp  increase  in  the  liquidity  in  the  Indian  forex  market  between 
1997–98 and 2007–08, resulting from the nine fold increase in turnover over this period and 
low and stable bid-ask spreads.9 The 25% compounded annual growth in turnover and the 
doubling  of  the  merchant  to  inter-bank  turnover  ratio  during  this  period  was  reflective  of 
accelerated  pace  of  economic  growth  and  increased  openness  of  the  domestic  financial 
markets. The turnover is almost equally accounted for by the spot and derivatives markets. 
The derivatives market is dominated by swaps followed by forwards. Currency futures have 
also been introduced in recognised stock exchanges since August 2008 to facilitate hedging 
by residents.  
50.  The  sudden  change  in  the  external  environment  that  started  around  mid-September 
2008  led  to  heightened  volatility  in  the  currency  market.  The  Rupee  exhibited  a  sharp 
downward trend, like other emerging market currencies, in the backdrop of de-leveraging in 
global  financial  markets,  sharp  declines  in  equities  markets  and  deterioration  in  the  inter-
bank money markets prompting investors to shun emerging market assets. While FDI flows 
exhibited resilience, access to ECBs and trade credits was rendered somewhat difficult. The 
net  outflows  under  portfolio  investment,  banking  capital  and  short-term  trade  credit  led  to 
capital account balance having turned negative during the third quarter (October–December) 
of 2008–09, the first time since the first quarter of 1998–99.  
51. 
In this context, the Reserve Bank took all preemptory actions as necessary to preserve 
orderly  conditions  in  the  markets.  Apart  from  undertaking  market  operations  to  bridge  the 
demand  supply  gap,  other  measures  were  also  taken  such  as  upward  adjustment  of  the 
interest  rate  ceiling  on  the  foreign  currency  deposits  by  non-resident  Indians,  substantially 
relaxing the external commercial borrowings (ECB) regime for corporates, and allowing non-
banking  financial  companies  and  housing  finance  companies  to  access  foreign  borrowing. 
The  RBI  had  also  introduced  special  forex  swaps  of  tenors  up  to  three  months  on 
November 7, 2008 in order to provide flexibility to Indian banks in managing their short-term 
funding requirements at their overseas offices. 
52.  The  average  daily  turnover  of  FCY–INR  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  (including 
forwards and FX swaps) decreased from USD 33.44 billion in July 2008 to USD 29.45 billion 
in October 2009. While the turnover in the inter-bank segment fell from USD 25.48 billion to 
USD  20.23  billion,  that  in  the  merchant  segment  increased  from  USD  7.96  billion  to 
USD 9.22 billion. 
Derivatives market 
Interest rate derivatives 
53.  The interest rate deregulation not only made financial market operations efficient and 
cost-effective but also exposed participants to increased risks. The OIS market is the most 
                                                 
9   BIS triennial survey 2007. In the aftermath of the failure of the Lehman brothers, bid-ask spreads increased 
sharply. 
12 
 BIS Review 1/2010
widely used OTC derivative instrument in India for hedging interest rate risk, reflective of the 
absence  of the  term  money  market  in  India.  The  CCIL  launched  the  reporting  platform  for 
OTC  Rupee  Interest  Rate  Swaps  (IRS/FRA)  in  August  2007  and  commenced  non-
guaranteed settlement in November 2008. 
54.  With most of the market microstructure of the G-sec market well established, it set the 
stage for the re-launch of the Interest Rate Futures market in August 2009. RBI has on its 
part  put  in  place  the  physical  delivery  infrastructure  that  creates  an  interface  of  the  Public 
Debt Office with the clearing houses of the exchanges with near straight through processing 
ability. RBI has also given its approval to the exchanges to reduce the delivery period in the 
IRF  to  one  single  day.  The  market  participants  should  ultimately  harness  the  hedging 
potential that this product has to offer. One of the primary reasons for going in for physical 
settlement in the IRF as against cash settlement was precisely to link the cash segment with 
the futures segment, which would be critical for hedging purposes.  
55.  Unlike in other markets, there is a regulatory framework for OTC markets in cash and 
derivatives markets in instruments coming under RBI regulatory purview. There is a role for 
OTC  markets  since  they  can  meet  specific  requirements  of end  users. For  the  purpose  of 
OTC  interest  rate  derivatives  we  have  classified  the  participants  into  market  makers  and 
users.  These  products  have  achieved  considerable  amount  of  standardization  that  has  in 
turn  facilitated  technological  intervention.  We  have  already  achieved  significant  success  in 
the  trade  reporting  and  settlement  of  these  OTC  interest  rate  products.  We  are  therefore, 
significantly ahead on these parameters compared to most of the developed markets.  
56.  While there has been a significant buildup of outstanding notional principal10 the market 
participation is much skewed. As per the latest CCIL data, the foreign banks dominated the 
MIBOR swap market with an average share of 81.96% as against the share of the private 
banks  at  11.76%,  Primary  Dealers  at  5.79%  and  public  sector  banks  at  0.49%  during 
October’09.  Further,  foreign  banks  dominated  the  MIFOR  swap  market  with  an  average 
share of 87.38% as against that of the private banks at 11.79% and public sector banks at 
0.83% during October ’09. There is, therefore, a clear need for some of the participants to 
scale up their level of participation in these markets. 
Currency derivatives 
57.  The traded volume in USD–INR currency futures contracts traded on all the exchanges 
gradually increased over the period and touched the high of USD 5.46 billion on December 8, 
2009. The average traded volume remained at USD 3384 million during November 2009. On 
the  other  hand,  the  open  interest  position  in  the  currency  futures  remained  at  around 
USD 1 billion during the month with the average of USD 1105 million.  
58.  The substantial rise in the currency futures volume, in a sense, is quite natural keeping 
in view cash settlement, the lack of requirement of underlying exposure and absence of any 
restriction  on  cancellation  and  re-booking,  as  currently  applicable  in  the  case  of  forward 
transactions. In case of forward foreign exchange contracts, AD Category-I banks, through 
verification  of  documentary  evidence,  have  to  be  satisfied  about  the  genuineness  of  the 
underlying  exposure,  irrespective  of  the  transaction  being  a  current  or  a  capital  account 
transaction.  
59.  There  has  been  growing  demands  from  the  market  participants  to  allow  trading  of 
currency  future  contracts  in  other  major  currency  pairs  to  facilitate  direct  hedging  of  their 
exchange  risk  in  such  currencies.  Accordingly,  in  the  second  quarter  review  of  monetary 
                                                 
10   As per CCIL data, as on November 27, 2009, the total outstanding notional principal (inter-bank and PDs only) 
under MIBOR OIS stands at Rs. 25,72,339 crore and that under MIFOR-OIS stands at Rs. 7,62,356 crore as 
at November 27, 2009. 
BIS Review 1/2010 
 13
involved 
in  allowing 
the  downside  risk 
policy,  it  has  been  proposed  to  permit  the  recognized  stock  exchanges  to  offer  currency 
futures  contracts 
in  currency  pairs  of  Euro–INR,  Japanese  Yen–INR  and  Pound  
Sterling–INR.  
60.  RBI had placed on its website the draft guidelines on OTC forex derivatives, in light of 
the  developments  in  the  domestic  and  international  financial  markets  and  based  on  the 
feedback  received  from  banks,  market  participants,  industry  associations  and  others.  It  is 
proposed  in  the  draft  guidelines  to  permit  the  importers  and  exporters  having  foreign 
currency exposures in trade transactions, to write covered call and put options both in foreign 
currency–rupee and cross currency and also receive premia. Accordingly, the facility of zero 
cost structures is to be withdrawn.  
61.  There  have  been  concerns  on 
the 
exporters/importers to write covered call and put options. This is the precise reason why the 
draft  guidelines  had  stipulated  stringent  preconditions  for  use  of  such  products.  The 
AD category  I  banks  have  to  ensure  that  the  customers  have  sound  risk  management 
system,  the  corporates  should  have  adopted  AS  30  and  AS  32,  the  corporates  can  not 
combine these options with any other derivative products and moreover, the pricing of the 
premium  has  to  be  done  in  a  transparent  manner.  We  have  also  received  feedback  to 
continue the facility of zero cost structures since some of the companies find the instrument 
useful  in  managing  currency  risks.  However,  the  bundling  of  asymmetric  risks  makes  it 
complex in pricing as well as in valuation and can be opaque to the risk managers and top 
management.  
62. 
It is also proposed to continue to allow persons resident in India, other than banks and 
financial  institutions  to  use  FCY–INR  swaps  to  transform  long-term  INR  borrowing  into 
foreign  exchange  liability.  There  have  been  concerns  that  the  use  of  FCY–INR  swap  to 
convert  long  term  Rupee  borrowing  into  foreign  exchange  liability  may  lead  to  speculative 
trades  in  the  absence  of  underlying  risk  exposures.  However,  this  facility  has  been  in 
existence  for  a  decade  and  has  supported  distribution  of  foreign  currency  risks  within  the 
Indian market without increasing the overall external debt. Such a facility may come handy 
for  a  corporate,  especially  the  exporters,  having  future  foreign  exchange  receivables.  The 
foreign  exchange  liability  position  assumed  through  FX  swap  may  match  with  the  foreign 
exchange receivables and provide the benefit of hedging. The issue is should such swaps be 
limited to only companies which have potential forex exposures. 
The road ahead 
63.  On the anvil is the introduction of credit default swaps. We are at an advanced stage of 
introducing other currency pairs for currency futures and are examining the issue of allowing 
plain vanilla currency options in consultation with SEBI.  
64.  Broadly speaking, the mandate for financial sector development should ideally derive 
from the regulatory assessments for each market. It has been clearly evidenced during the 
crisis that financial sector development per se cannot be an objective in itself. It needs to be 
pursued in the broader context of financial stability and has to necessarily correspond to the 
level  of  maturity  of  the  financial  system  and  the  needs  of  the  real  economy.  Reforming 
financial markets involves improving access to simple, transparent, and easy-to-understand 
products.  Increasing complexity  does  not  facilitate  the  market  mechanism.  The  purpose  of 
financial instruments is to transfer risk to those that understand these risks, not to hide or 
camouflage  them.  Regulatory  comfort  and  assessment  should  therefore  be  a  critical 
determinant in pursuing financial reforms.  
65. 
In  regard  to  derivatives,  we  have  both  OTC  and  exchange  traded  instruments  for 
currency  and  interest  rates.  OTC  markets  in  India  are  well  regulated,  unlike  many  other 
jurisdictions,  to  address  issues  of  leverage  and  customer  appropriateness  and  suitability. 
Only  OTC  contracts  where  one  party  to  the  transaction  is  a  RBI  regulated  entity  is 
considered  legally  valid.  Suitable  reporting  and  post  trade  clearing  and  settlement 
14 
 BIS Review 1/2010
mechanisms are being further strengthened. Given the incentive structures of these market, 
convergence of regulatory frameworks for OTC and exchange traded markets cannot be an 
end in itself under present circumstances, though it is a long term goal.  
66.  The  development  of  markets  is  also  influenced  by  tax  policies.  Debt  instruments  for 
instance do not enjoy tax exemptions of the nature enjoyed by equity instruments whether on 
income or capital gains. Mutual funds fixed income products enjoy certain tax examptions not 
available  to  banks.  But  this  is  outside  the  regulatory  purview.  However,  if  these  policies 
introduce  any  vulnerability  in  the  financial  system  there  is  need  to  address  this  through 
appropriate macroprudential and microprudential regulations.  
67.  Based  on  the  assessment  and  experience,  further  liberalization  measures  for 
expanding  the  product  menu  could  be  undertaken.  However,  participation  of  foreigners  in 
new  products  and  the  financial  markets  in  general  would  continue  to  be  dictated  by  the 
capital account management and financial stability imperatives.  
68.  Thank you. I wish the conference all success.  
BIS Review 1/2010 
 15
