Mario Draghi: “We need a European economic government” – interview 
in Handelsblatt 
Interview with Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, in Handelsblatt, Germany, conducted by Mr Hermann-Josef Knipper and Mrs 
Katharina Kort and published on 19 March 2010. 
 Handelsblatt: The whole Europe is worrying about the Greek crisis. What can Greeks do to 
sort out its financial problems ? 
Mr Draghi: I think the best and only thing they can do is to come out with a credible fiscal 
adjustment plan to be implemented promptly. The more delayed the commitments are, the 
less effective they are on reducing spreads on government bonds. The quicker they do it the 
better, and I should say they started doing. The Commission and the ECB, and the IMF to 
some extent, were involved as well. They must have been persuaded by the fiscal plan. Of 
course  we  have  now  to  monitor  its  timely  implementation  because  that  is  as  important  as 
designing  it.  Greeks  have  clearly  seen  there  is  a  political  price  to  pay  and  that  it  is 
unavoidable.  
Handelsblatt: Are you confident in the Greek plans? 
Mr Draghi: Yes, but I would like to see its implementation. 
Handelsblatt: Do we need stricter rules? 
Mr Draghi: Yes, we obviously need stricter rules. It too early to specify which ones, but the 
Greek crisis has shown that this construction has to be made more resilient.  
Handelsblatt: What have you in mind? 
Mr Draghi: My opinion does not differ from the one expressed by your Minister of Finance, 
Mr. Wolfgang Schäuble. The first thing to bear in mind is that we were able to create a pillar 
of stability with the euro and we have to do everything to preserve it. No matter what many 
critics say, we had low inflation, low financing costs and we have been amazingly protected 
by the world turbulence because we had the euro. So we have to preserve the stability and 
the  credibility  of  this  concept.  the  Greek  crisis  has  shown  that  this  construction  has  to  be 
made more resilient because it has shown potential cracks. 
Handelsblatt: What can be done to make the euro stronger? 
Mr Draghi: First of all we should ask ourselves why are markets so nervous, not only with 
Greece  but  also  with  other  countries.  Incidentally  the  spreads  have  gone  up  also  on  AAA 
rated  countries,  not  only  on  the  A  or  AA  rated  countries.  Markets  are  nervous  because 
financial market conditions have enormously worsened, within the euro and outside the euro-
area. But the other reason for markets to be nervous is that they do not see clear on how we 
collectively will get out of the exit strategies. The first thing we have to do is to have a clear, 
well defined, well-timed exit strategy from the high budget deficits. This is on top of our list of 
priorities. 
Handelsblatt: Which is the second priority? 
Mr Draghi: I think we have to extend the Stability and Growth Pact. So far, we have been 
able  to  have  a  monitoring  mechanism  and  to some  extent  an  enforcing  mechanism  of  the 
balance  sheet.  We  have  to  reinforce  this  concept  and  extend  it  to  structural  reforms.  The 
reason why countries do not grow is because they have not undertaken structural reforms 
which facilitate growth. 
Handelsblatt: Do you have anything specific in mind? 
BIS Review 35/2010 
 1
Mr Draghi: For the people who have been part of the creation of the stability and growth pact 
this discussion goes back to the late nineties and it was suggested at that time by several 
people, myself included, that we should do more in making pension reforms, market reforms, 
competition reforms and so forth. These are the reforms that make you grow in the end. At 
that time, some of the countries objected that these things were so engraved in their history 
and  social  texture  that  they  would  not  accept  to  have  the  same  discipline  that  they  could 
accept in the budgetary area.  
Handelsblatt: What are the implications in the present situation? 
Mr Draghi: I think it is now the time to make one step further. At least for the countries that 
are in the euro we need some mechanism that basically induces greater cooperation among 
governments  and  greater  discipline.  Ultimately,  price  stability,  budgetary  discipline  and 
economic growth are the three pillars of financial stability. This refers to the medium term but 
we have to start working now because this will not be done in a month. 
Handelsblatt: What can be done in the short term? 
Mr Draghi: In the case of a fiscal crisis like the one in Greece, if we have a mechanism of 
identification and intervention that is clear, well-designed, markets will provide all the money 
that the countries want. What markets do not want is to be trapped in a confused muddled 
situation where they do not see clearly – a situation in which nobody would be ready to lend. 
If there is clarity and firmness of direction investors are there to lend the money. Only at the 
end of this, if we think we need some kind of emergency financial assistance like the one that 
Mr. Schäuble proposed, we can think about it. 
Handelsblatt: Do you agree with Minister Schäuble? 
Mr Draghi: The Minister rightly makes a point there. Now we have pooled monetary policy 
so it is considerably complex for the IFM dictate discipline to some country without saying 
anything on the monetary policy. Still, this is the other “macro-lever” of the IMF. 
Handelsblatt: Are you in favour of a European Monetary Fund? 
Mr Draghi: I think that if things are well done in laying out the monitoring and implementation 
mechanism probably you would not need a European monetary fund. We cannot think that 
the European fund would actually resolve the issue. I would not start from the financing of the 
crisis,  but  from  the  solution  of  the  crisis.  In  the  present  market  conditions,  though,  an 
emergency  financing  at  rates  higher  than  market  rates,  could  only  respond  to  temporary 
liquidity problems, but it would be wrong to make this mechanism the linchpin of our actions.  
Handelsblatt: Do we need a new structure for the enforcement mechanism? If so, what kind 
of structure? 
Mr Draghi: Not so much a structure, but we need a concept very much along the way we 
had with the stability and growth pact, a concept to be endorsed by the governments.  
Handelsblatt: Another Pact? 
Mr Draghi: Yes, another Pact. In the euro area we need a stronger economic governance 
providing for more coordinated structural reforms and more discipline.  
Handelsblatt: Going back to the EMF, do you think it might send the wrong incentives? 
Mr  Draghi:  This  danger  exists  and  we  must  do  whatever  we  can  to  consider  it  just  an 
emergency measure exclusively for liquidity purposes. Nobody wants to think about the Fund 
as a mechanism that could resolve the crisis. Countries must not relay on the availability of a 
fund  where  we  can  draw  on  when  having  difficulties.  I  don’t  think  that  Mr.  Schäuble  or 
anybody thinks this.  
Handelsblatt:  Would  you  recommend  stricter  rules  for  countries  which  do  not  respect  the 
agreements? 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2010
Mr Draghi: Yes, we need stricter rules providing for an economic and political cost higher 
than it is the case today for any deviation from the rules or for the use of financial means not 
coming from the market.  
Handelsblatt: Because of the financial crisis, rating agencies have been highly criticised. Do 
you think the Ecb should provide for its own ratings, as some have suggested? 
Mr Draghi: No, I do not think that would be right. The creation of an European rating agency 
could represent a solution if we have no trust in the American rating agencies or in any other. 
But this task should still not be entrusted to a central bank. 
Handelsblatt: Why have the experiences with credit rating agencies been so unsatisfying? 
Mr  Draghi:  Loopholes  in  regulations  have  allowed  for  conflicts  of  interest.  One  should 
wonder  why  the  rating  agencies  did  not  see  the  big  amount  of  dubious  financial  products 
being created between 2005 and 2008 and why they could not rate it properly. One of the 
answers is that the issuers were basically a few big investment banks. So, for some of these 
rating agencies it became clear that 90% of their business was done with these banks. This 
is exactly why they have been captured by the banks. Much has been done to change this, 
but there is still a lot do be done.  
Handelsblatt: What are you thinking of? 
Mr Draghi: We have a project in the FSB now where we, as regulators, are looking for a way 
to  reduce  the  importance  of  rating  in  regulation.  We  must  look  for  alternatives  and  define 
other mechanisms.  
Handelsblatt: But markets need ratings… 
Mr  Draghi:  Markets  need  rating.  Investors  want  ratings.  At  the  FSB  we  think  there  is  the 
need for a better differentiation. One thing is a triple-A government bond, one other thing is a 
triple-A structured bond. It is always possible to have a structured bond in a way that it has a 
triple-A, even if the components are “junk”. So we must have ratings from the agencies which 
allow investors to distinguish one triple-A from another triple-A.  
Handelsblatt:  When  are  we  going  to  find  a  solution?  Which  are  the  further  steps  in  the 
reform of financial regulation? 
Mr  Draghi:  One  of  the  two  most  important  projects  the  FSB  now  has  is  the  capital  and 
liquidity regulation, the reform of Basel 2. Its implementation is scheduled at the end of 2012. 
Handelsblatt:  Is  it  right  to  fear  that  Basel  III  might  limit  credit  flows,  prejudging  economic 
recovery? 
Mr Draghi: First of all I hope that by then the recovery will be on its way. There is a risk but I 
think  fears  are  exaggerated.  Banks  have  done  a  lot  already  in  raising  capital.  We  should 
reach  a  globally  accepted  definition  of  capital.  The  Basel  Committee  and  the  FSB  are 
working so that the timing chosen for the implementation of the new rules do not prejudge 
economic recovery. 
Handelsblatt: Are you confident that we will have a globally coordinated regulation? Lately 
we have seen a lot of tension between the EU and the US.  
Mr Draghi: I think those tensions are being exaggerated. Many of the proposals now being 
publicly  discussed,  like  the  “Volcker  rule”  or  a  tax  on  banks  in  the  US  and  the  UK,  have 
already been discussed by the FSB. 
Handelsblatt:  You  have  been  criticised  for  having  worked  at  Goldman  Sachs,  the 
US investment bank accused of having been involved in dubious transactions with Greece. 
What can you tell us about it? 
Mr Draghi: When I left the Italian Treasury, in 2001, we had no rules in Italy forbidding to 
take  a  position  in  an  investment  bank.  Nevertheless,  I  went  to  Harvard  and  taught  for  six 
BIS Review 35/2010 
 3
months  there.  Then  I  entered  Goldman  Sachs.  Since  the  beginning  I  made  it  clear  that 
having  worked  10  years  with  governments  and  government  officials,  it  would  be  very 
embarrassing to ask them to do business with Goldman. I therefore insisted to develop my 
own clients in the private sector. And that’s what happened. I did that for about 3–4 years.  
Handelsblatt: Any country among your clients? 
Mr  Draghi:  No,  I  have  never  made  any  transaction  with  any  government.  The  reason  is 
simple: I was too busy doing corporate investment banking with private clients. 
Handelsblatt: Have you ever been to Greece? 
Mr Draghi: I have never been to Greece for working reasons. Those transactions were done 
before my arrival at Goldman Sachs. There have been further transactions with Greece but I 
have never been involved. I would also like to point out that I was not deputy CEO, because 
that position does not exist at Goldman Sachs.  
Handelsblatt: When you think now about Goldman Sachs and Greece, do you think it was a 
good idea for Goldman to help Greece mask its budget? 
Mr  Draghi:  That’s  where  the  difference  lies,  the  difference  in  purposes.  One  is  debt 
management, the other one is debt concealment. That concealment is a very bad thing. If 
Greece had made a mess of their budget but not lied about the numbers, it would be much 
easier for them and for all of us. 
Handelsblatt:  Which  are  the  qualities  of  a  good  ECB  president?  Talking  about  monetary 
policy, do you consider yourself an “hawk”?  
Mr Draghi: You should ask ECB observers if they think of me as a “dove”. You must always 
keep  in  mind  price  stability  and  monetary  policy  credibility  and  their  crucial  importance  for 
growth.  
4 
 BIS Review 35/2010
