Svein Gjedrem: Housing finance in Norway 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to the 
Norwegian Covered Bond Forum, Oslo, 27 January 2010. 
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. This lecture does not contain assessments of the 
economic situation or current interest rate setting. 
 From state to private housing finance 
After the Second World War, the credit market in Norway was regulated. Credit demand was 
high. The Norwegian state endeavoured to steer credit flows towards priority sectors and the 
state banks therefore played an important role as credit intermediaries. 
There were considerable housing shortages after the war. For some population groups, living 
conditions were poor. In1946, the Norwegian State Housing Bank was established to provide 
credit  for  new  residential  construction.  This  bank  and  Statens  Landbruksbank  (the  state 
agricultural  bank)  dominated  housing  finance  for  new  house  purchases  up  to  the  1980s. 
State bank mortgage rates were initially set based on political objectives, but were over the 
years gradually revised up and adjusted to market rates. 
With  the  gradual  deregulation  of  the  credit  market  in  the  1980s,  state  lending  institutions 
assumed a lesser role in housing finance and the private market took over. Sales of existing 
homes increased. In 1992 private banks provided the majority of residential mortgages. Their 
share of housing finance was also high compared with other Nordic countries. In Denmark 
and Sweden, mortgage institutions were the primary source of residential mortgages. Even 
though their importance has been reduced in recent years, mortgage companies still provide 
most residential mortgages. 
With the predominance of mortgage companies, fixed-rate mortgages have been a tradition 
in Denmark and Sweden. This has not been the case for Norway. Mortgages from the State 
Housing  Bank  were  primarily  adjustable-rate  loans.  After  credit  market  liberalisation, 
adjustable-rate mortgages were also offered by banks. The supply of fixed-rate mortgages 
was limited. Fixed-rate loans are less common in Norway than in the other Nordic countries.  
From the 1980s to the 1990s, the Norwegian economy moved from high to low inflation with, 
until  recently,  falling  nominal  long-term  interest  rates.  Borrowers  with  fixed-rate  mortgages 
fared  poorly  in  this  period,  and  even  more  poorly  than  maturity  or  mortgage  insurance 
premiums alone would imply. But with a clear monetary policy objective to keep inflation low 
and stable – and with an independent central bank tasked with achieving this objective – the 
result would be different. The high inflation expectations that were built into long-term interest 
rates no longer exist and a further marked fall does not seem likely, nor for that matter does 
any substantial inflation-driven increase in long-term rates. Purchasing a home is a long-term 
investment. A fixed-rate mortgage reduces borrowers’ uncertainty about expenses over the 
life of the loan. 
Longer-term financing in banks 
Banks play an important role in the economy. Their task is to convert short-term deposits into 
long-term  loans.  In  times  of  crisis,  fulfilment  of  this  task  is  put  to  the  test.  A  century  ago, 
depositors could lose confidence in the banks and rush to withdraw their savings. However, 
deposits stabilised when guarantee schemes were established in the 1930s.  
Loans to households make up a third of banks’ assets. Residential mortgage loans are long-
term loans. At the same time, funding for Norwegian banks has changed. Market funding has 
assumed a more important role. In recent years, both short-term market funding and funding 
BIS Review 8/2010 
 1
in  foreign  currency  have  grown  in  Norwegian  banks.  Banks  have  increasingly  transformed 
short-term deposits from international money markets into long-term domestic lending. This 
is the main reason for the strain on liquidity experienced by Norwegian banks when foreign 
funding came to a halt in 2008. For Norwegian banks, the financial crisis has primarily been a 
liquidity crisis and not a solvency crisis. 
The  authorities  all  over  the  world  are  currently  reviewing  the  regulation  of  banks’  liquidity. 
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision presented recommendations on quantitative 
liquidity  requirements  in  December  2009.  The  UK,  Switzerland  and  New  Zealand  have 
introduced, or  are  in  the  process  of  introducing,  stricter  rules.  Norwegian  banks must  also 
expect the regulation of liquidity to be more stringent in the future. It will be more difficult to 
base housing finance on short-term funding. Issuing covered bonds may be an alternative. 
The collateral pool for covered bonds may comprise residential mortgages or mortgages for 
holiday  homes  with  a  loan-to-value  ratio  (LTV)  of  up  to  75  per  cent,  commercial  property 
mortgages with an LTV of up to 60 per cent or loans to public sector entities with an LTV 
ratio of up to 100 per cent. These instruments are highly collateralised, carrying lower risk 
premiums  than  ordinary  bank  bonds,  and  are  well  suited  to  pension  fund  investment  and 
other investments with a long-term horizon. 
According to the rules for the issue of covered bonds, the value of the cover pool is required 
at all times to exceed the value of the covered bonds. Both assets and liabilities are to be 
recorded at estimated market value. This implies that a mortgage company must add further 
collateral  to  the  cover  pool,  for  example  in  the  form  of  government  bonds,  to  replace  any 
shortfall. 
An  efficient  bond  market  can  handle  large  trading  volumes  without  substantially  affecting 
prices. Such a market requires instruments that are easy to understand and clear regulation. 
Trading  should  be  transparent.  Ideally,  there  should  be  multiple  independent  bidders  and 
askers and trading volumes should be high in primary and secondary markets.  
Issues of covered bonds have picked up in Norway since the regulations relating to covered 
bonds entered into force on 1 June 2007, supported since autumn 2009 by the arrangement 
for the exchange of government bonds for covered bonds.  
To  facilitate  banks’  access  to  borrowing  from  Norges  Bank  during  the  period  of  financial 
turbulence, collateral requirements for loans were temporarily eased. In October 2009, it was 
announced  that  the  temporary  rules  for  collateral  requirements  would  be  changed. 
Acceptance of new securities eligible under the temporary rules was discontinued in October. 
Securities  already  approved  under  the  temporary  rules  would  be  eligible  as  collateral  until 
maturity, or at the latest until 15 February 2012.  
Changes in the so-called bank quota were also announced. Under the current rules, up to 
35 per cent of a bank’s borrowing facility can be based on collateral in bonds issued by other 
Norwegian  banks.  Debt  instruments  issued  by  foreign  banks  will  be  included  in  the  bank 
quota  as  from  1  December  2010.  Securities  issued  by  banks  will  no  longer  be  eligible  as 
collateral for loans as from 15 February 2012. 
Covered bonds will still be eligible as collateral, including, until further notice, bonds to which 
no credit rating has been assigned and bonds issued by a bank’s own mortgage company. 
This is expected to contribute to the development of the Norwegian covered bond market. 
The housing market – a source of disturbances in the economy 
Banks  have  had  strong  incentives  to  extend  credit  for  house  purchases.  Even  during  the 
banking  crisis  around  1990,  Norwegian  banks’  losses  on  residential  mortgages  were  low. 
This is reflected in the low risk weights for residential mortgages in banks’ risk models. For 
an individual bank, residential mortgages are low-risk loans. However, market fluctuations, 
accompanied  by  shifts  in  saving  behaviour,  are  nonetheless  a  source  of  business  cycle 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2010
fluctuations and substantial losses when banks have to write off loans to firms selling goods 
and services to households.  
With low risk weights for residential mortgages, banks can lend extensively, operating with a 
substantially reduced equity ratio. As a result, banks are more vulnerable to disturbances in 
funding markets. Thus, low risk weights for residential mortgages also lead to higher liquidity 
risk in our banking system.  
A  high  level  of  tax  incentives  for  house  ownership  and  a  large  volume  of  adjustable-rate 
mortgages  contribute  to  wide  fluctuations  in  activity  and  prices  in  the  Norwegian  housing 
market.1  The  rise  in  house  prices  over  the  past  two  decades  has  also  been  very  strong 
compared with countries where housing bubbles have burst.  
We have been through the longest period of uninterrupted house price inflation. In real terms, 
house prices in Norway have tripled since the trough in 1992. House prices fell in 2007 and 
2008, but have picked up again and have, in nominal terms, surpassed the summer 2007 
peak. 
Norwegian household debt is high compared with households in other countries. The number 
of  residential  mortgages  with  a  high  loan-to-value  ratio,  i.e.  above  80  per  cent,  has  also 
increased.  
Periods of sharply rising house prices have historically been followed by periods of declining 
prices.  House  prices  can  fall  considerably  over  only  a  few  years.  Loan-to-value  ratios  will 
then increase. Mortgage companies should therefore take housing market fluctuations into 
account when issuing covered bonds. 
Conclusion 
I  think  it  is  fair  to  say  that  housing  finance  in  Norway  is  in  its  infancy.  There  is  a  large 
proportion  of  adjustable-rate  loans.  Fixed-rate  loans  offered  in  Norway  are  less  customer-
friendly  than,  for  example,  in  Denmark,  where  it  is  less  expensive  to  cancel  a  fixed-rate 
mortgage  and  where  there  is  a  secondary  market,  providing  risk  diversification.  Mortgage 
companies  have  a  limited  role  in  housing  finance.  Loan-to-value  ratios  are  in  some  cases 
alarmingly high. And last, but not least, banks finance their housing loans by means of short-
term asset swaps in foreign markets. This is not a sustainable solution. I hope that this forum 
can contribute towards the development of a better foundation for housing finance in Norway. 
                                                 
1   See Van den  Noord, Paul (2005): “Tax Incentives and  House Price Volatility in the Euro Area: Theory  and 
Evidence”, Économie Internationale 101, pp.29–45. This paper shows that house price volatility is higher in 
countries where tax regimes favour owner-occupied housing. See also IMF (2004): World Economic Outlook, 
September,  p.81,  where  house  price  volatility  is  higher  is  countries  where  adjustable-rate  mortgages  are 
common. 
BIS Review 8/2010 
 3
  4 
 BIS Review 8/2010
  5
BIS Review 8/2010 
   6 
 BIS Review 8/2010
  7
BIS Review 8/2010 
   8 
 BIS Review 8/2010
  9
BIS Review 8/2010 
   10 
 BIS Review 8/2010
 11
BIS Review 8/2010 
 