Thomas Jordan: Current monetary policy and its significance for the real 
economy 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the 
Swiss  National  Bank,  at 
Industrie-  und 
Handelskammer, Wettingen, 20 May 2010. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
the  General  Meeting  of 
the  Aargauische 
 In the current situation, the challenges for the SNB’s monetary policy remain formidable. On 
the one hand, against the backdrop of the economic recovery we have witnessed since mid-
2009,  there  is  a  danger  of  inflationary  tendencies  and  the  renewed  formation  of  a  bubble. 
This  is  because  the  current  monetary  policy  is  too  expansionary  in  the  long  term.  On  the 
other  hand,  downside  risks  are  still  present  or  are  again  reappearing,  and  should  not  be 
underestimated.  They  relate,  in  particular,  to  the  further  development  of  the  debt  crisis  in 
Europe.  A  deterioration  of  this  situation  entails  the  danger  for  Switzerland  of  renewed 
deflation and recession as well as the risk of another destabilisation of the global financial 
system. Between these opposing risks the SNB must walk a fine line, moving in terrain that is 
constantly  and  rapidly  changing,  depending  on  which  risk  gains  the  upper  hand.  With  a 
monetary  policy  strategy  aimed  at  maintaining  price  stability,  the  SNB  is  well  equipped  to 
face these challenges. 
What  are  the  short  and  medium-term  consequences  for  the  real  economy  of  addressing 
these challenges? It is always true that monetary policy is too restrictive for certain segments 
of  the  economy  and  too  expansionary  for  others.  Since  there  can  only  be  one  monetary 
policy for Switzerland, it must geared to the economy as a whole. Ensuring price stability in 
the  medium  and  long  term  is  the  guiding  principle.  The  SNB’s  monetary  policy  strategy, 
however, is sufficiently flexible to react in an optimal way to uncertainties related to business 
cycle developments or the situation on the financial and currency markets. In implementing 
this  policy,  the  SNB  must  be  able  to  maintain  its  credibility  at  all  times.  Only  then  can  it 
effectively  –  in  the  long  term  –  fulfil  its  constitutional  and  statutory  mandate  of  pursuing  a 
monetary policy in the interests of the country as a whole. 
BIS Review 70/2010 
 1
