William C Dudley: Lessons of the crisis – the implications for regulatory 
reform  
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Partnership  for  New  York  City  discussion,  New  York, 
20 January 2010. 
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  here  today.  I  will  focus  on  the  important 
lessons of the recent crisis and how those lessons should inform the regulatory reform effort. 
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 
In my opinion, this crisis demonstrated that a systemic risk oversight framework is needed to 
foster financial stability. The financial system is simply too complex for siloed regulators to 
see the entire field of play, to prevent the movement of financial activity to areas where there 
are  regulatory  gaps,  and,  when  there  are  difficulties,  to  communicate  and  coordinate  all 
responses in a timely and effective manner. 
Effective systemic oversight requires two elements. First, the financial system needs to be 
evaluated  in  its  entirety  because,  as  we  have  seen,  developments  in  one  area  can  often 
have devastating consequences elsewhere. In particular, three broad areas of the financial 
system need to be continuously evaluated: large systemically important financial institutions, 
payments and settlement systems and the capital markets. The linkages between each must 
be understood and monitored on a real-time basis. Second, effective systemic risk oversight 
will  require  a  broad  range  of  expertise.  This  requires  the  right  people,  with  experience 
operating in all the important areas of the financial system. 
In this regard, I believe that the Federal Reserve has an essential role to play. The Federal 
Reserve  has  experience  and  expertise  in  all  three  areas  –  it  now  oversees  most  of  the 
largest U.S. financial institutions; it operates a major payments system and oversees several 
others; and it operates in the capital markets every day in managing its own portfolio and as 
an agent conducting Treasury securities auctions. Also, as the central bank, it backstops the 
financial system in its lender-of-last-resort role. 
Compared  with  where  we  were  in  late  2008  and  early  2009,  financial  markets  have 
stabilized,  and  the  prospect  of  a  collapse  of  the  financial  system  and  a  second  Great 
Depression now seems extremely remote. Even with this progress, however, credit remains 
tight,  especially  for  small  businesses  and  households.  Economic  growth  has  resumed,  but 
unemployment has climbed to punishing levels. So while circumstances have improved, they 
are still very far from where we want them to be. We have no cause for celebration when the 
challenges facing so many businesses and households remain so daunting. 
Aggressive  and  extraordinary  official  interventions  were  imperative  to  bring  about  this 
nascent stabilization of our financial markets and economic recovery. The Federal Reserve 
has been at the center of many of these interventions. For example, its efforts over the past 
two years to promote market functioning and minimize contagion were critical in preventing 
the  strains  in  our  financial  markets  from  resulting  in  even  more  severe  damage  to  the 
economy. These “lender of last resort” interventions on the part of the Fed, including facilities 
such as the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) and the Primary Dealer Credit Facility 
(PDCF), as well as programs such as the foreign exchange reciprocal currency agreements, 
are  examples  of  the  rapid  and  responsive  application  of  basic  central  bank  tenants  to  the 
unique  challenges  we  faced  as  this  crisis  evolved.  Indeed,  in  many  ways,  the  crisis  has 
underscored  why  the  Federal  Reserve  was  created  almost  a  century  ago:  to  provide  a 
backstop for a banking system prone to runs and financial panics. 
BIS Review 6/2010 
 1
large 
funding 
themselves 
financial  organizations  were 
the  absence  of  effective  consolidated  oversight  of  certain 
Where it proved necessary and feasible to do so, the Fed also used its emergency lending 
authority to forestall the disorderly failure of systemically important institutions. These actions 
truly were extraordinary – well outside the scope of our normal operations, but our judgment 
was  that  not  taking  those  actions  would  have  risked  a  broader  collapse  of  the  financial 
system  and  a  significantly  deeper  and  more  protracted  recession.  Faced  with  the  choice 
between these otherwise unpalatable actions and a broader systemic collapse, the Fed, with 
the full support of the Treasury, invoked its emergency lending authority and prevented the 
collapse of certain institutions previously considered to have been outside the safety net. 
The  fact  that  the  Fed  needed  to  take  those  actions  provides  a  stark  illustration  of  the 
significant gaps in our regulatory structure, gaps that must be eliminated. Among those holes 
was 
large  and  deeply 
interconnected firms; the collective failure of regulators – including the Federal Reserve – to 
appreciate  the  linkages  and  amplification  mechanisms  embedded  in  our  financial  system; 
and the absence of a resolution process that would allow even the largest and most complex 
of  financial  institutions  to  fail  without  imperiling  the  flow  of  credit  to  the  economy  more 
broadly.  Addressing  these  shortcomings  will  require  important  reforms  in  our  country’s 
regulatory architecture. 
We  entered  the  crisis  with  an  obsolete  regulatory  system.  For  one,  our  regulatory  system 
was not structured for a world in which an increasingly large amount of credit intermediation 
was  occurring  in  nonbank  financial  institutions.  As  a  result,  little  attention  was  paid  to  the 
systemic  implications  of  the  actions  of  a  large  number  of  increasingly  important  financial 
institutions – including securities firms, insurance conglomerates and monolines. In addition, 
many 
through  market-based 
mechanisms such as tri-party repo. This made the system as a whole much more fragile and 
vulnerable to runs when confidence faltered. 
With the benefit of hindsight, it is clear that the Fed and other regulators, here and abroad, 
did  not  sufficiently  understand  the  importance  of  some  of  these  changes  in  our  financial 
system.  We  did  not  see  some  of  the  critical  vulnerabilities  these  changes  had  created, 
including  the  large  number  of  self-amplifying  mechanisms  that  were  embedded  in  the 
system.  Nor  were  all  the  ramifications  of  the  growth  in  the  intermediation  of  credit  by  the 
nonbank  or  “shadow  banking”  system  appreciated  and  their  linkages  back  to  regulated 
financial institutions understood until after the crisis began. 
With hindsight, the regulatory community undoubtedly should have raised the alarm sooner 
and  done  more  to  address  the  vulnerabilities  facing  our  banks  and  our  entire  financial 
system.  But  this  was  difficult  because  our  country  didn’t  have  truly  systemic  oversight  – 
oversight  that  would  be  better  suited  to  the  new  world  in  which  markets  and  nonbank 
financial  institutions  had  become  much  more  important  in  how  credit  was  intermediated. 
Without a truly systemic perspective, it was unlikely that any regulator would have been able 
to  understand  how  the  risks  were  building  up  in  our  contemporary,  market-based  system. 
The problem was that both banking and nonbank organizations played an important role in 
credit intermediation but were subject to differing degrees of regulation and supervision by 
different regulatory authorities. 
Although these gaps had existed for years, their consequences were not apparent until the 
crisis.  Difficulties  in  one  part  of  the  system  quickly  exposed  hidden  vulnerabilities  in  other 
parts of the system, in a way that our patchwork regulatory system had not been designed to 
detect or readily address. In the same way, the crisis revealed the critical deficiencies in the 
toolkits  available  to  the  regulators  to  deal  with  nonbank  institutions  in  duress.  Emergency 
lending  by  the  Fed  might  be  enough  to  forestall  the  disorderly  failure  of  a  systemically 
important institution and all the wider damage such a failure might cause, but it was a blunt 
and messy solution, employed as a stopgap measure because better alternatives were not 
available. What is needed – what our country still lacks – is a large-firm resolution process 
that would allow for the orderly failure even of a systemically important institution. 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2010
Thus, in the fall of 2008, regulators and policymakers found themselves facing the prospect 
of the total collapse of a complex and interconnected system. It was these circumstances, 
and  the  prospect  they  created  for  an  even  deeper  and  more  protracted  downturn  in  real 
economic activity and employment, that required truly extraordinary actions on the part of the 
Federal  Reserve,  as  well  as  the  Treasury  and  many  other  agencies.  This  is  a  situation  in 
which the United States must never again find itself. 
For  its  part,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  hard  at  work  on  developing  and  implementing  new 
regulations  and  policy  guidance  that  take  on  broad  lessons  of  the  recent  crisis.  We  are 
working with other banking regulators in the United States and overseas to strengthen bank 
capital  standards,  both  by  raising  the  required  level  of  capital  where  appropriate  and 
improving the risk capture of our standards. We are issuing new guidelines on compensation 
practices  so  that  financial  sector  employees  are  rewarded  for  long-term  performance  and 
discouraged  from  excessive  risk-taking.  And  we  are  working  with  foreign  regulators  to 
develop more robust international standards for bank liquidity. We are working to make the 
tri-party repo system more robust and reducing settlement risk by facilitating the settlement 
of over-the-counter derivatives trades on central counterparties (CCPs). But more needs to 
be done and much of this requires action by Congress. 
Congress  is  now  considering  several  proposals  for  comprehensive  regulatory  reform, 
proposals that merit careful study and debate. Let me offer some general thoughts on the 
principles that should guide how we approach reform. 
First, it’s important to take a clear-eyed and comprehensive view of the financial system we 
have today. As I’ve already suggested, if there is one overriding lesson to be drawn from the 
events of the past 18 months, it is that the financial system is just that: a system, and a very 
complex one at that. The operational, liquidity and credit interdependencies that characterize 
contemporary financial markets and institutions mean that the well-being of any one segment 
of the system is inextricably linked to the well-being of the system as a whole. Because of 
this, our approach to reform must be guided by a coherent sense of the system as a whole, 
not merely by a focus on some of its component parts, as important as they may be. 
We  need  a  new  regulatory  structure  that  provides  for  comprehensive  and  consistent 
oversight  of  all  elements  of  the  financial  system.  This  includes  effective  consolidated 
oversight of all our largest and interconnected financial institutions and oversight of payment 
and settlement systems. We must make sure that the people doing the regulation have the 
power and expertise to ferret out and bring to heel regulatory evasion as it occurs to prevent 
abuse  and  excess  from  building  up  in  the  financial  system.  In  the  end,  the  gaps,  not  the 
overlaps, have been the main shortcoming of our existing regulatory framework. 
A second fundamental point is that regulatory reform has to ensure that the financial system 
will be robust and resilient even when it comes under stress so that it will not fail in its critical 
role  in  supporting  economic  activity.  No  economy  can  prosper  without  a  well-functioning 
financial system – one that efficiently channels savings to the businesses that can make the 
most productive use of those savings, and to consumers that need credit to buy a home and 
support a family. The fact that our financial system isn’t functioning well right now is part and 
parcel  of  our  current  economic  difficulties.  This  critical  link  between  the  “real”  and  the 
“financial” is why we care so much about the systemic risks inherent in banking and finance. 
One critical element of systemic risk is what is known as the “too big to fail” problem. Without 
sufficiently high capital and liquidity standards, and, as a backstop, a resolution mechanism 
that  is  credible,  regulators  are  faced  with  a  Hobson’s  Choice  when  a  large,  systemically 
important  financial  firm  encounters  difficulties.  On  the  one  hand,  if  authorities  step  in  to 
respond to prevent failure, contagion and collapse of the broader system, that action rewards 
the imprudent and can create moral hazard – that is, encouraging others to act irresponsibly 
or recklessly in the future in the belief that they will also be rescued or “bailed out.” On the 
other hand, if authorities do nothing and let market discipline run its course, they run the risk 
BIS Review 6/2010 
 3
that the problem will spread and unleash a chain reaction of collapse, with severe and lasting 
damage to markets, to households and to businesses. 
So what can we do about the “too big to fail” problem? It is clear that we must develop a truly 
robust resolution mechanism that allows for the orderly wind-down of a failing institution and 
that limits the contagion to the broader financial system. This will require not only legislative 
action  domestically  but  intensive  work  internationally  to  address  a  range  of  legal  issues 
involved in winding down a major global firm. Second, we need to ensure that the payments 
and  settlement  systems  are  robust  and  resilient.  By  strengthening  financial  market 
infrastructures,  we  can  reduce  the  risk  that  shocks  in  one  part  of  the  system  will  spread 
elsewhere. Third, we need to reduce the likelihood that systemically important institutions will 
come close to failure in the first place. This can be done by mandating more robust capital 
requirements  and  greater  liquidity  buffers,  as  well  as  aligning  compensation  with  the  risks 
that  are  taken  by  the  firm’s  employees.  In  addition,  instruments  such  as  contingent 
capital-debt that would automatically convert to equity in adverse environments – need to be 
considered.  Such  instruments  would  enable  equity  capital  to  be  replenished  automatically 
during stress environments, dampening shocks rather than exacerbating them. 
I  would  now  like  to  take  some  time  to  discuss  some  of  the  proposals  that  Congress  is 
debating  regarding  regulatory  reform.  As  Congress  and  the  Administration  consider  what 
legislative changes are warranted, the Federal Reserve’s actions before and during the crisis 
have  been  getting  close  inspection.  Given  the  Federal  Reserve’s  key  role  in  our  financial 
system, and the scale of the damage caused by the financial crisis, this careful scrutiny is 
necessary, appropriate and welcome. 
Not  surprisingly,  there  are  legislative  proposals  that  would  significantly  alter  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  powers  and  responsibilities,  particularly  with  respect  to  supervision  of  bank 
holding  companies.  Again,  that’s  entirely  within  Congress’s  purview:  the  Federal  Reserve 
only has the powers and responsibilities that Congress has entrusted to us. But in drawing 
up new legislation, it’s important not to throw the baby out with the bathwater – we should 
preserve what has worked and fix what hasn’t. A dispassionate analysis of what is needed 
will almost certainly lead to better decisions and a more effective regulatory framework. 
The  legislative  proposals  concerning  the  Federal  Reserve  are  not  limited  to  the  Federal 
Reserve’s role in supervision. Consider, for example, one proposal that calls for what it terms 
“audits” of the Federal Reserve by the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO), an arm 
of Congress. These wouldn’t be audits at all in the commonly understood sense of the term. 
The Federal Reserve’s financial books and transactions are already audited by wide range of 
professionals internal and external to the institution. Rather, these new audits would involve 
ex-post review of Federal Reserve monetary policy decisions, a potential first step toward the 
politicization  of  a  process  that  Congress  has  carefully  sought  to  insulate  from  political 
pressures. 
The notion that the Federal Reserve’s financial dealings are somehow kept hidden from the 
public is a surprisingly widely held view – and it is simply incorrect. An independent outside 
audit of the Federal Reserve’s books is conducted annually. You can find the results online, 
including a detailed accounting of the Federal Reserve’s income and operating expenses in 
its annual report. The financial books of the regional Federal Reserve Banks also undergo 
independent  outside  audits,  also  available  online.  In  addition,  the  GAO  is  empowered  to 
review  almost  all  Federal  Reserve  activities  other  than  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy, 
including the Federal Reserve’s financial operations, which the GAO has done so frequently. 
The  Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet  is  posted  online  weekly,  with  considerable  detail,  in 
what’s  called  the  H.4.1  report.  Finally,  an  additional  accounting  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
emergency lending programs created over the last two years is available online in a monthly 
report. 
But my objection that GAO oversight would be broadened to include a review of monetary 
policy decisions is not based just on the fact that the Fed is already subject to considerable 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2010
oversight. My principal concern is the damage that could potentially result to the Fed’s ability 
to  achieve  its  mandate  of  price  stability  and  maximum  sustainable  employment.  The 
effectiveness of monetary policy depends most of all on the Federal Reserve’s credibility with 
market participants and investors. In particular, both groups need to know that the Fed will 
always act to keep inflation in check. That’s why Fed Chairman William McChesney Martin 
famously joked that the Fed would sometimes need “to take the punchbowl away just as the 
party  gets  going.”  As  you  can  well  imagine,  this  may  not  always  enhance  our  popularity, 
especially among those who were enjoying the party. But, the fact that markets know that the 
Federal Reserve will tighten monetary policy when needed helps keep inflation expectations 
in  check.  This,  in  turn,  helps  keep  inflation  low  since  inflation  expectations  affect  actual 
inflation. The consequence is credibility with respect to the conduct of monetary policy. This 
gives the Fed more latitude not to tighten when inflation rises for transient reasons – say, due 
to a short-lived spike in oil prices – and more scope to ease credit to support the economy 
during economic downturns. 
Recognizing  these  benefits,  Congress  wisely  acted  many  years  ago  to  exempt  monetary 
policy decisions from the GAO’s wide powers to review Federal Reserve activities. Congress’ 
decision  to  bolster  the  Fed’s  monetary  policy  independence  has  been  followed  by  similar 
actions around the world – substantial independence for the central bank in the conduct of 
monetary policy is now widely regarded as international best practice. Policy independence 
does not absolve the Federal Reserve from accountability for its monetary policy decisions 
and  the  need  to  clearly  explain  why  they  were  taken.  But  it  avoids  the  politicization  of 
monetary  policy  decision-making.  And  this  is  good  because  politicized  central  banks 
generally do not have enviable records with regard to inflation, economic growth or currency 
stability. Risk premia on financial assets are typically much higher in countries with politicized 
central banks. 
Of course, a reversal of Congress’s earlier decision would not amount to legislative control 
over  monetary  policy  decisions.  That’s  not  the  issue.  The  issue  is  that  a  reversal  of 
Congress’ earlier decision could create the appearance that the legislature seeks to influence 
monetary  policy  decisions  by  establishing  a  mechanism  to  publicly  second  guess  those 
decisions. Such a move would blur what has been a careful separation of monetary policy 
from  politics.  Market  confidence  here  and  abroad  in  the  Federal  Reserve  would  be 
undermined. Asset prices could quickly build in an added risk premium, which might lead to 
tighter credit conditions. These unintended consequences would undermine the legislation’s 
intent. 
I’m  also  concerned  about  those  proposals  under  consideration  that  would  move  the 
regulatory  and  supervisory  functions  now  held  by  the  Federal  Reserve  to  other  agencies, 
new  or  existing.  At  present,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  the  consolidated  supervisor  for  bank 
holding  companies,  a  group  that  has  expanded  recently  as  investment  banks  and  other 
companies formerly outside the Federal Reserve’s purview have been brought under Federal 
Reserve  oversight.  In  my  view,  further  disaggregation  or  fragmentation  of  regulatory 
oversight  responsibility  is  not  the  appropriate  response  to  our  increasingly  interconnected, 
interdependent financial system. Funneling information streams into diverse institutional silos 
leads to communication breakdowns and too often to failure to “connect the dots.” 
In  addition,  there  are  clear  synergies  between  the  supervisory  process  and  the  Federal 
Reserve’s monetary policy and financial stability missions. The information we collect as part 
of the supervisory process gives us a front-line, real-time view of the state of the financial 
industry and broader economy. Monetary policy is more informed as a result. Only with this 
knowledge  can  a  central  bank  understand  how  the  monetary  policy  impulse  will  be 
propagated through the financial system and affect the real economy. 
Similarly, involvement in the supervisory process gives us critical information in fulfilling our 
lender-of-last-resort responsibilities. Information sharing with other agencies is simply not as 
good  as  the  intimate  knowledge  and  understanding  of  markets  and  institutions  that  is 
BIS Review 6/2010 
 5
gathered from first-hand supervision. Indeed, many institutions at the center of the crisis and 
arguably  the  most  troubled  –  Bear  Stearns,  Lehman  Brothers,  Merrill  Lynch,  AIG  and  the 
GSEs – were not supervised by the Federal Reserve. Consequently, when those institutions 
came under stress, the Federal Reserve had poorer quality and far less timely information 
about the condition of these institutions than would have been the case if we had had the 
benefit of direct supervisory oversight. 
In  fact,  some  of  the  hardest  choices  the  Federal  Reserve  had  to  make  during  the  most 
chaotic weeks of the crisis concerned systemically important firms we did not regulate. It is 
not  surprising  that,  in  the  wake  of  the  crisis,  some  countries  that  had  separated  bank 
supervision from the central bank monetary policy role are now reconsidering that division of 
labor. That is mainly because coordination problems created difficulties in responding quickly 
and effectively in the crisis. Separation made it more difficult to communicate in a timely way 
and to understand the broader implications of what was transpiring. It is critical that we not 
introduce  new  inefficiencies  and  impediments.  No  matter  what  steps  are  taken  to  improve 
our  regulatory  system  and  strengthen  market  discipline,  history  tells  us  that  there  will 
inevitably be circumstances in which an informed and effective lender of last resort will play a 
critical  role  in  preventing  shocks  and  strains  in  financial  markets  and  institutions  from 
generating a broader collapse of the financial system. 
Of course, there are legitimate questions as to how broad the Federal Reserve’s regulatory 
and supervisory responsibilities should be. That question is up to Congress, and should be 
decided on the merits. What is fundamentally at issue here is not “turf”, but rather how we as 
a nation can best ensure that we never again re-live the events of the past few years – that 
the  legitimate  public  interests  associated  with  a  safe,  efficient  and  impartial  banking  and 
financial system are well served. 
In the end, it is critical that financial reform be decided on the basis of the merits. If objective 
and careful policymaking prevails, we will all be the better off for it. In contrast, if we fail in 
this endeavor, that would truly be tragic. We must act informed by the important lessons that 
we have learned from this crisis. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 6/2010
