Jean-Claude Trichet: Hearing before the Economic and Monetary Affairs 
Committee of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
at  a  hearing  before  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  Committee  of  the  European 
Parliament, Brussels, 22 March 2010. 
 Dear Madam Chair, 
Dear Members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
It is a pleasure to be with you today for the first regular hearing in 2010. 
Over the last few months, since our meeting in December 2009, the euro area economy as a 
whole  has  continued  to  gradually  recover.  But  there  are  a  number  of  issues,  related  to 
country and financial market developments, which have led to an intense discussion about 
the euro area and its functioning. This makes today’s discussion all the more timely. 
Wir sehen, welche großen Herausforderungen sich durch die Finanzkrise für die europäische 
Wirtschaftspolitik  ergeben.  Wir  sehen  auch,  was  es  heißt,  mit  Wirtschafts-  und 
Währungspolitik  verantwortungsvoll  umzugehen.  Die  Stabilität  der  gemeinsamen  Währung 
ist die Verantwortung aller. 
Aujourd’hui, comme le veut la tradition, je commencerai mon intervention par une évaluation 
de la situation économique, en portant une attention particulière à l’élimination progressive 
des mesures non conventionnelles prises lors de la période de crise. Ensuite, j’aborderai les 
deux sujets sur lesquels nous nous sommes mis d’accord concernant la politique budgétaire 
et les déséquilibres mondiaux. 
Economic and monetary developments 
As mentioned, since the previous hearing last December, economic and financial conditions 
have continued to improve, albeit only at a moderate pace. Economic activity is estimated to 
have increased by 0.1% from the third to the fourth quarter of last year. Recent information 
confirms that we can expect a moderate recovery in the current year. This is in line with the 
latest ECB staff projections. Also forecasts by other institutions confirm this expectation, with 
an annual growth rate round 1% in 2010, gaining pace in 2011. In the assessment by the 
Governing  Council,  the  risks  to  this  outlook  remain  broadly  balanced,  but  as  predicted 
already last year, the recovery is likely to be uneven across regions and sections and over 
time. High uncertainty continues to prevail. 
As  regards  price  developments,  we  have  continued  to  witness  low  inflation  and  low 
inflationary pressures over the recent months. Inflation in February 2010 stood at 0.9%. The 
outlook for inflation remains in line with price stability and risks to this outlook remain broadly 
balanced. Specifically, we expect inflation to stay around 1% in the near term, and to remain 
moderate over the policy-relevant horizon, in line with a relatively slow recovery in demand. 
Our monetary analysis continues to confirm the expectation of low inflationary pressures over 
the medium term, as reflected in weak expansion of money and credit. The growth of loans 
to  enterprises  in  particular  is  anticipated  to  remain  weak  for  some  time  ahead,  while  the 
annual  growth  rate  of 
is  positive  and  strengthening.  These 
developments  are  still  in  line  with  regularities  over  past  business  cycles.  We  will  monitor 
credit developments very closely in the months to come. While there is no clear evidence of 
credit constraints in the euro area as a whole, the situation differs across countries, sectors 
to  households 
loans 
BIS Review 34/2010 
 1
and company sizes. To a large extent, the weak growth of loans is due to the unprecedented 
severance of the 2009 recession. 
Indicators of inflation expectations over the medium to longer term remain firmly anchored in 
line with our aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. It is 
against this background that the Governing Council kept the level of key ECB interest rates 
unchanged earlier this month, regarding the current level as appropriate. 
The  significant  monetary  impulse  stemming  from  our  interest  rate  reductions  last year  has 
spread  to  market  interest  rates,  and  the  transmission  to  rates  charged  by  banks  to 
households and corporations has continued to perform well. This transmission needs to be 
seen  in  conjunction  with  the  non-standard  measures  that  the  ECB  has  taken.  These 
measures, notably the provision of full allotment of liquidity to banks with a one-year maturity 
against collateral, have been effective in providing funding to banks at favourable conditions, 
stabilising the money market, and fostering the pass-through of our interest rate reductions. 
Phasing out from non-standard measures 
In line with the above economic and monetary assessment, the Governing Council decided 
earlier  this  month  to  continue  the  gradual  phasing  out  of  some  of  the  extraordinary 
measures. We do not wish to breed dependency. Banks are to take up their intermediation 
again  and  should  have  all  appropriate  incentives  to  do  so.  The  12-month  operations  have 
already been discontinued and the 6-month operation upcoming next week will be the last 
one. In addition, we now decided to re-introduce variable-rate tenders for the regular three-
month operations as of late April. At the same time, we continue to provide the euro area 
banking  system  with  unlimited  access  to  central  bank  refinancing  through  shorter-term 
operations (with one-week and one-month maturity), for as long as needed and in any case 
until mid-October this year. This is to continue to support the credit provision to the euro area 
economy. 
Let me also say something on longer-term monetary policy issues , that I know is of interest 
to  you,  namely  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  asset  prices.  The  financial 
crisis has revived the long-standing debate on the relationship between monetary policy and 
asset price bubbles. This debate is centred on a straightforward question: Should monetary 
policy  aim  to  prevent  the  emergence  of  asset  price  bubbles?  While  this  question  has  no 
simple answer, the ECB’s monetary policy strategy is an approach that is well suited to cope 
with the challenges brought about by unsustainable asset price developments. 
Our mandate is to maintain price stability over the medium term. Protracted, unsustainable 
financial trends or atypical swings in risk pricing in financial markets can pose risks to price 
stability  down  the  road.  The  close  link  between  monetary  developments  and  evolving 
imbalances in asset and credit markets implies that our monetary policy needs to detect such 
imbalances  at  an  early  stage  and  to  respond  to  the  implied,  longer-term,  risks  to  price 
stability in a timely and forward-looking manner, thereby contributing to financial stability. Our 
monetary analysis, which concentrates on the monitoring of money and credit, does just that. 
It  is  a  strategic  framework  that  embeds  a  degree  of  implicit  “leaning  against  the  wind”  of 
excessive  money,  credit  and  asset  price  growth.  Judgement  is  of  course  necessary  in 
addressing  asset  price  dynamics.  The  ECB  has  developed  considerable  expertise  in  the 
analysis  of  monetary  and  credit  developments  and  their  implications  for  risks  to  price 
stability, which has proved an invaluable asset also throughout the financial crisis. 
Fiscal policies in the euro area 
I  would  like  to  turn  to  fiscal  policies  now.  As  you  know,  financial  sector  support  and  the 
budgetary loosening in the context of the financial and economic crisis has – in most euro 
area  countries  –  caused  sizable  fiscal  imbalances.  Meanwhile,  most  countries  in  the  euro 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2010
area have exceeded the 3% reference value for the deficit ratio. Under these circumstances, 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  which  has  been  put  in  place  to  safeguard  sound  and 
sustainable  fiscal  positions,  should  be  rigorously  applied.  The  ECB  calls  to  strengthen  the 
governments’ commitment to strictly adhere to its provisions. 
National policy makers should give fiscal consolidation top priority in the context of ongoing 
economic  recovery,  and  bring  the  deficit  ratio  to  below  3%  of  GDP  in  line  with  the  Ecofin 
recommendations. Based on the Stability Programme updates, governments appear to be on 
track  this  year,  but  further  measures  will  be  necessary  in  the  coming  years  to  correct 
excessive deficits within the set time horizon. 
As regards the composition of the fiscal adjustment, we welcome a focus on the expenditure 
side,  because  the  size  of  the  public  sector  has  significantly  increased  in  the  crisis  and 
because expenditure-based consolidation has proven to be more effective in the past. 
Governments  can  enhance  the  credibility  of  fiscal  consolidation  by  strengthening  national 
budgetary frameworks and implementing structural reforms to increase potential growth. In 
this context, I welcome the European Commission’s initiative for a Europe 2020 strategy and 
the stronger role of the Eurogroup in multilateral country surveillance which is overdue. At the 
same time, it is important that fiscal surveillance under the Pact remains a process of its own 
right and that the fundamental principles of the Treaty and the Pact are fully preserved. 
A successful exit from the strong fiscal expansion in the wake of the recent crisis will require 
ambitious measures and a strong political will regarding implementation. I am confident that 
European fiscal policy makers will succeed in restoring the sustainability of public finances. 
The adjustment efforts undertaken by the Irish government and more recently by the Greek 
government can be seen as promising first steps in the upcoming consolidation process. 
Policy responses to imbalances 
One  of  the  main  drivers  of  the  financial  crisis  were  the  large  global  external  imbalances. 
These  imbalances  implied  massive  capital inflows  into  deficit  countries.  Those  inflows  had 
partly been financed by the issuance of financial instruments, whose value was shattered in 
the turmoil. The imbalances reflected a lack of medium-term orientation towards stability and 
sustainability of macroeconomic policies in key deficit and surplus economies. The euro area 
did  not  contribute  to  the  build-up  in  global  imbalances.  Its  current  account  has  remained 
close to balance over the years. 
The crisis has induced a partial reduction in global imbalances, but this correction appears to 
be  largely  cyclical.  Some  important  structural  factors  that  led  to  unsustainable  imbalances 
remain largely in place. A risk that unsustainable global imbalances might re-emerge in the 
period  ahead  can  therefore  not  be  ruled  out.  Ruling  it  out  would  require  rigorous  policy 
adjustments in key deficit and surplus economies. 
The  G20’s  decision 
its  members’ 
macroeconomic and structural policies is fundamental in this respect. To be successful, this 
process requires that peer surveillance is executed fairly and without complacency, and that 
the countries and economies concerned have the will and the operational capacity to change 
their  domestic  policies  accordingly.  These  are  necessary  conditions  to  pave  the  way  for  a 
better  functioning  of  the  global  economy.  The  euro  area  can  enter  this  process  from  a 
positive standing, given its medium-term orientation in monetary, fiscal and macroeconomic 
policies. 
Let me conclude by recalling that macroeconomic imbalances are not only confined to the 
global  level  but  also  appear  within  the  euro  area.  These  imbalances  remain  a  challenge, 
largely  reflecting  a  lack  of  adjustment  in  a  number  of  Member  States.  It  remains 
indispensable  that  the  countries  concerned  bring  their  monitoring  of  cost  competitiveness 
indicators, their structural reforms, and their fiscal consolidation efforts more into line with the 
to  create  a  process  of  mutual  assessment  of 
BIS Review 34/2010 
 3
principles and rules underlying the functioning of monetary union. This would allow euro area 
economies to reap fully the macroeconomic benefits of EMU. 
4 
 BIS Review 34/2010
