Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The role of regulators when markets fail 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the conference on the Squam Lake Report “Fixing the Financial System”, New York 
City, 16 June 2010. 
 I  wish  to  thank  Marco  Protopapa,  Olya  Ranguelova,  and  Fabio  Recine  for  their  contributions  to  this  speech.  
I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a pleasure to be here to discuss the Squam Lake Report in front of such a distinguished 
audience. The report offers valuable insights into how to improve the financial regulatory and 
supervisory architecture, with the aim of achieving a more resilient financial system. 
In  my  comments  today,  I  would  like  to  highlight  three  important  points  in  this  area:  i)  the 
reform of capital requirements, ii) the role of proper supervision and regulation, with a focus 
on the changes needed to achieve greater effectiveness, and iii) the regulation of executive 
compensation in financial services. 
Capital requirements and the role of supervision 
1. 
Let me start with the main pillar of banking regulation, i.e. capital requirements. The Squam 
Lake  Report  makes  three  recommendations.  Capital  requirements  should:  i)  be  higher  for 
larger  banks;  ii)  depend  on  the  liquidity  of  the  assets  held  by  a  bank;  and  iii)  increase  in 
proportion  to  a  bank’s  short-term  debt.  The  recommendations  examine  three  of  the  most 
prominent elements that have characterised the crisis: the build-up of systemic risk, which 
has been exacerbated by the behaviour of large and complex financial institutions; the price 
spirals triggered by the fire sale of illiquid assets under distressed market conditions; and the 
fragility of a business model based on widespread recourse to short-term financing. 
The  main  thrust  of  these  recommendations  has  been  high  on  the  post-crisis  regulatory 
agenda. Allow me to briefly recount the most relevant features of the ongoing reform of the 
financial sector at the international level.  
First,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  is  investigating  the  options  for  introducing 
regulations  covering  the  specific  risks  related  to  large  and  complex  systemic  financial 
institutions.  Systemic  institutions,  by  definition,  entail  higher  interconnectedness.  They 
increase the complexity and fragility of the system; they end up amplifying the inherent pro-
cyclicality  of  the  financial  system  and  lead  to  the  materialisation  of  systemic  risk.  In  a 
downswing,  the  intensity  of  deleveraging,  liquidity  hoarding  and  asset  fire  sales  is 
proportional to the size of an institution’s balance sheet, as the Squam Lake Report notes, 
but  also  to  its  interconnectedness  and  opacity.  Against  this  background,  regulators  are 
working to devise measures of systemic importance based on a combination of factors such 
as  size,  substitutability  and  interconnectedness,  which  could  be  drawn  on  to  calibrate 
additional prudential requirements, for instance a surcharge.  
BIS Review 85/2010 
 1
Turning  to  the  core  of  prudential  regulation,  in  December  2009,  the  Basel  Committee  of 
Banking Supervision (BCBS), under the aegis of the G20, proposed a major overhaul1 of the 
micro-prudential framework. There is a consensus that in the years prior to the crisis financial 
institutions were operating with too little capital, with excessive leverage and with insufficient 
recognition of the risks undertaken – including liquidity risk. 
The  Basel  Committee’s  proposals  envisage:  raising  the  quality  and  quantity  of  capital2, 
strengthening risk coverage3, and introducing a non-risk-based leverage ratio4 as well as a 
regime  of  countercyclical  capital  buffers.  Importantly,  the  new  rules  will  comprise  a  novel, 
harmonised treatment for liquidity risk. Rather than imposing capital requirements based on 
the liquidity of assets, the Committee has opted for specific quantitative provisions (outright 
liquidity  ratios)  for  directly  promoting  stronger  liquidity  buffers.  In  particular,  banks  will  be 
required to hold sufficient high-quality liquid assets to withstand episodes of financial stress 
as well as to shift towards more stable sources of funds on the liability side. 
A substantive advantage of the liquidity framework proposed by the Basel Committee is its 
ability to improve the management of liquidity risk, which is inherently a cash flow risk and 
cannot be fully addressed via liquidity-based capital requirements only. The chosen option 
directly gears both the assets and liability mix towards, respectively, higher liquidity and more 
structural (longer-term) composition, also providing observable and verifiable metrics for the 
purposes  of  rigorous  monitoring.  By  doing  so,  it  explicitly  promotes  prudent  liquidity  risk 
management, thus minimising the likelihood of unexpected liquidity shortages, which may be 
covered only at prohibitively high cost at times of distress.  
Agreement  has  been  reached  at  G20  level  that  the  new  standards  will  be  phased  in  as 
financial  conditions  improve  and  the  economic  recovery  firms  up,  with  implementation 
envisaged by end-2012. The Basel Committee will also consider appropriate transition and 
grandfathering arrangements. 
Given the scope of the reform, I wish to emphasise that regulators and central bankers are 
fully aware of the importance of a thorough assessment of its overall impact, including the 
interaction  between  different 
financial 
intermediation and for the real economy. In this context, the Basel Committee and the FSB 
are carrying out both a bottom-up (focused on the impact on the institutions’ balance sheets) 
and a top-down macroeconomic impact assessment5. The first results of these exercises are 
expected  to  be  available  next  month.  The  BCBS  will  issue  by  the  end  of  this  year  a  fully 
calibrated, comprehensive set of measures based on the outcome of this work . 
The  bottom-up  impact  assessment  will  provide  policy-makers  with  guidance  on  the  proper 
calibration  of  the  proposed  measures  as  well  as  form  a  basis  for  establishing  a  credible 
minimum after cumulating the effects of the changes, taking into account their interactions. 
The  top-down  assessment  will  inform  the  decision  on  the  overall  level  of  minimum  capital 
requirements the system should hold, while  also gauging the long-term benefits of a safer 
financial system. It will also deliver insights into the impact of the new capital standards on 
the  potential  consequences 
rules  and 
for 
                                                 
1   The  reform  package  comprises  two  consultative  documents  entitled:  “Strengthening  the  resilience  of  the 
banking sector” and “International framework for liquidity risk measurement, standards and monitoring”. 
2   The new rules recognise common equity as the highest quality component of capital. 
3   The introduction of capital requirements for counterparty risk exposures arising from derivatives and securities 
financing activities is being proposed, as are incentives for the central clearing of over-the-counter derivatives. 
These measures complement the higher capital charges for trading book exposures and securitisations that 
were adopted in July 2009. 
4   The leverage ratio, covering also off-balance sheets items, is envisaged to act as a backstop measure to curb 
excessive balance sheet growth. 
5   The ECB is a key contributor to the top-down macroeconomic impact, focusing on the euro area. 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2010
credit availability, ensuring that the introduction of the proposed measures will not hamper 
credit extension or affect economic growth. Estimates of the macroeconomic impact are still 
in  progress  and  thus  it  is  too  early  to  draw  solid  conclusions.  But  –  I  should  add  –  it  has 
recently been suggested6 that the impact of the Basel Committee reforms on growth may be 
limited, especially when compared with figures circulated by the industry, which tend to be 
based on somewhat extreme assumptions. In particular, it has been observed that there are 
reasons to expect a relatively smooth balance sheet adjustment by the banking system and 
therefore  a  less  pronounced  macroeconomic  impact.  First,  the  impact  of  the  new  liquidity 
rules may be significantly mitigated by adjustments to both the composition and the maturity 
of the balance sheet: for instance, lengthening the maturity of the liabilities to better match 
that of the assets would likely result in lower riskiness overall and thus lower funding costs. 
Second, the investors’ required rate of return on banks’ equity and other sources of funding, 
such as long-term bonds, can be expected to decline, reflecting a lower risk for share and 
bondholders resulting from the enhanced resilience and safety of banks, hence decreasing 
the cost to banks.  
Nevertheless, macroeconomic conditions and the health of banks’ balance sheets would still 
be relevant factors when deciding on proper implementation arrangements. With regard to 
the latter, I would also like to comment on the crucial role of international coordination and 
cooperation for the success of the regulatory efforts to shape a better prudential framework. 
Large  and  complex  financial  institutions  are  global  players  and  thus  require  a  global 
response.  In  this  context,  international  collaboration  between  the  authorities  and  a  strong 
commitment  to  enforce  a  timely  and  harmonised  implementation  will  be  of  the  essence  to 
promote a level playing field and prevent international regulatory arbitrage. 
Strengthened cooperation has already taken place at the level of policy-making bodies such 
as  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  in  the 
context  of  the  implementation  of  the  G20  regulatory  reform  agenda.  This  has  fostered 
convergence,  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic,  in  the  approaches  to  bolstering  the  national 
frameworks. In this respect, it is worth mentioning that at the outset of the crisis, while the 
EU legislation  already  reflected  the  amendments  referred  to  in  the  Basel  accord,  the 
US committed to do so by 2011. I am confident that the US authorities will live up to their 
commitment and will take the necessary steps to further enrich their national framework so 
as to take into account the latest proposals formulated by the Basel Committee. I would also 
point  out  that  Europe  is  currently  working  on  strengthening  its  legislative  framework  in 
respect of issues such as a bank levy or broadening the scope of regulation to hedge funds 
and credit ratings agencies. Although similar initiatives are under way in the US, I would like 
to  point  out  that,  by  contrast,  our  approach  does  not  aim  to  limit  the  size  of  systemically 
important financial institutions, but rather to strengthen their supervisory framework through 
the implementation of internationally agreed principles.  
Effective and comprehensive supervision and regulation 
2. 
The  final  result  of  the  reform  of  the  international  regulatory  architecture  will  be  a  financial 
system  with  more  and  better-quality  capital,  enforced  by  appropriate  micro-prudential 
standards.  Yet  there’s  a  question  we  cannot  avoid:  would  a  stronger  micro-prudential 
framework  be  enough  to  prevent  a  repetition  of  the  events  we  experienced  during  the 
financial crisis?  
I don’t think so. Higher and better capital and liquidity requirements are an essential condition 
to improve the stability of the financial sector. But they are not a sufficient condition per se, if 
not accompanied by a sweeping change in the orientation and practice of micro-prudential 
                                                 
6   See “Bankers’ ‘doomsday scenarios’ under fire”, Financial Times, 30 May 2010. 
BIS Review 85/2010 
 3
oversight. I believe that one of the most crucial lessons to be drawn from the crisis concerns 
the  twin  failures  of:  i)  light-touch  regulation,  and  ii)  the  narrow  perimeter  of  regulation  and 
supervision,  excessively  focused  on  the  banking  system  and  on  the  legal  status  of  the 
supervised entities.  
We have observed many instances of supervisory failure in which supervisors did not fully 
understand the business models of the institutions they were overseeing or the nature, scope 
and  location  of  the  underlying  risks.  This  has largely  been  due  to  the light-touch model  of 
regulation and supervision, which has been proven ineffective because it failed to keep pace 
with  financial  innovation  and  with  the  financial  sector’s  capacity  to  dynamically  alter  the 
profile  and  the  location  of  its  risk  exposures.  I  am  convinced  that  the  main  failing  of  light-
touch  regulation  and  supervision  lies  in  its  overwhelming  reliance  on  rules.  Too  much 
emphasis is placed on monitoring a mostly formal compliance with the rules. In other words, 
the  light-touch  approach  to  supervision  is  ineffective  because  it  failed  to  recognise  the 
powerful incentives of financial institutions to game what on the surface appeared to be well-
intentioned and granular requirements.  
Historical experience has demonstrated that supervisory emphasis on mechanical rules such 
as  capital  requirements  may  encourage  perverse  behaviour  that  ultimately  leads  to 
excessive  risk-taking.  Why  is  this?  In  the  absence  of  adequate  supervision,  banks  have 
incentives and opportunities to game the rules by developing financial innovations that allow 
a  shifting  of  risk  beyond  the  perimeter  of  the  regulated  sector  and  by  devising  novel 
strategies which increase their exposure to risks but which, on the surface, appear compliant 
with the rules.  
Since  the  introduction  of  the  Basel  Accord  in  1988,  supervisory  authorities  have  been 
equipped with the tools of risk-based supervision, as underpinned by capital rules. Over time, 
and  in  many  respects  as  an  attempt  to  arbitrage  away  prudential  requirements  and  gain 
capital  relief,  financial  institutions  began  packaging  their  exposures,  shifting  them  to  off-
balance sheet entities and distributing them across the financial system. As a consequence, 
aided  by  the  development  of  financial  derivatives  and  structured  products,  a  seamless 
transition to the “originate and distribute” business model took place, alongside the growth of 
the shadow banking system. 
It would not be correct to say that such a fundamental shift went ignored by supervisors. In 
fact, it was even regarded7 – often with the approval of academics and central bankers – as 
a highly positive improvement in the risk-transfer capacity of the system, while the system-
wide effects it was producing on risk-taking, lending standards and risk management went 
unheeded. Overall, the dangers associated with the migration of risks to less regulated and 
thus less capitalised parts of the financial sector – the shadow banking system – were largely 
neglected.  The  received  wisdom  mistakenly  saw  the  shadow  banking  system  as  a  club  of 
sophisticated  market  participants,  in  principle  detached  from  the  core  of  the  traditional 
banking system and free to operate without appropriate rules and oversight. Now we know 
that this perception was not only incorrect, in that the shadow banking system turned out to 
trigger  far-reaching  systemic  effects,  but  also  that  it  fostered,  through  herding  pressure 
behaviour, the widespread adoption of dangerous financial strategies and activities. Indeed, 
even traditionally regulated financial institutions took advantage of the regulators’ passivity, 
perhaps  best  exemplified  by  the  lack  of  regulation  for  the  burgeoning  credit  derivatives 
market,  by  taking  on  risks  that  the  regulators  were  only  dimly  aware  of.  The  recourse  to 
leveraged trading exposures8, already incentivised by the preferential regulatory treatment of 
                                                 
7   For a prescient contrarian view, see Rajan, R. (2005), “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?”, 
keynote  address  to  the  2005  European  Financial  Management  Association  (EFMA)  Meetings,  Milan,  Italy, 
1 July 2005. 
8   Called the leverage “game”, in Acharya V. and M. Richardson (2009), editors, “Restoring Financial Stability: 
How to Repair a Failed System”, New York University Stern School of Business, John Wiley & Sons, March. 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2010
the  trading  book  as  compared  with  the  banking  book,  ultimately  fostered  the  retention  of 
larger  and  larger  senior  tranches  of  asset-backed  securities  and  CDOs  and  to  the 
proliferation of vehicles such as ABCP conduits and SIVs. In this respect, the failings of light-
touch regulation and the short-sighted focus on the banking system appear overwhelmingly 
clear.  On  the  one  hand,  the  tail  risks  hidden  in  the  payoff  profiles  of  highly  rated 
securitisations  were  not  understood  by  financial  supervisors.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
migration  of  risks  outside  the  traditional  banking  sector  into  a  thinly  capitalised  shadow 
banking system lacked appropriate oversight.  
This process resulted in a weakening of the prudential rules, a sharp deterioration in bank 
capital,  an  overall  decline  in  lending  standards,  an  unsustainable  growth  of  leverage,  a 
persistent under-appreciation of risks and, ultimately, in an unprecedented degree of fragility 
and interdependence in the financial system. Looking ahead, supervision will have to move 
towards taking a proactive and forward-looking approach. Likewise, the regulatory net needs 
to  be  cast  wide  enough  to  encompass  all  financial  institutions  and  activities  capable  of 
generating systemic effects. 
Finally, an assessment must be made of how the supervisory authorities applied the tools 
available  to  them  and  whether  their  decisions  were  taken  on  the  basis  of  an  independent 
judgement  or  were  somehow  influenced  by  external  factors.  Historical  experience  offers 
ample  evidence  that  inadequate  arrangements  as  regards  the  independence  of  the 
supervisory authorities contributed to the emergence of financial instability. The East Asian 
crisis  of  1997–1998  is  a  frequently  quoted  example  of  weak  regulations  and  forbearance, 
resulting from political interference in supervisory activity and leading to a financial crisis.  
Institutional arrangements should ensure that supervisors are independent from the political 
authorities and not at risk of regulatory capture by the supervised institutions. In some cases 
the  desire  to  enhance  the  competitiveness  of  domestic  financial  institutions  may  have 
influenced  decisions  that  allowed  such  institutions  to  behave  in  a  less  prudent  manner. 
These are important issues, and should be part of the international debate on how to enforce 
effective supervision so as to strengthen the capacity to mitigate future financial crises. 
Compensation of top executives  
3. 
Let me now turn to the topic of executive compensation. Remuneration of top executives has 
recently attracted special attention, notably in the financial sector, where the distribution of 
sizeable severance payments, entirely disconnected from the institutions’ performance, has 
caused  a  public  outcry.  Moreover,  the  financial  crisis  has  revealed  that  inappropriately 
designed  compensation  mechanisms  could  lead  to  excessive  risk-taking  and  should 
therefore be subject to policy intervention. The Principles for Sound Compensation Practices 
elaborated by the FSB has been a crucial step forward in this regard. Input from academia 
will be essential to refine this framework. In this respect, the emphasis in the Squam Lake 
Report on executive compensation is of interest, especially as it concerns an area which has 
not yet been fully addressed at the international level9.  
I broadly agree with the report’s first idea, namely that governments should not regulate the 
absolute levels of executive compensation in financial institutions. On that point, I would like 
to make the following remarks. 
                                                 
9   At  the  present  juncture,  the  principles  and  standards  for  sound  compensation  practices  have  mainly  been 
designed to apply to a relatively large range of employees, i.e. those “categories of staff whose professional 
activities have a material impact on the bank’s risk profile” (see “Compensation Principles and Standards – 
Assessment  Methodology”,  January  2010,  BCBS).  These  categories  include  senior  managers  and  others; 
material risk-takers (e.g. traders) and staff performing important risk management and control functions are 
also targeted by the framework. 
BIS Review 85/2010 
 5
First,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  average  level  of  executive  remuneration  has  substantially 
increased10  in  recent  years.  While  this  trend  is  perceived  by  some  stakeholders  to  be  a 
problem, it is not necessarily evidence of economic inefficiency. However, the financial and 
economic crisis has highlighted not only the high level of executive pay, but also a mismatch 
between executive pay and performance. The payment of very high salaries, bonuses and 
severance  payments  to  executives  while  companies  are  underperforming  and  banks  are 
being bailed out by taxpayers’ money could be seen as evidence of inadequately designed 
compensation schemes. 
Second, I would like to comment on the idea in the report that “market prices are typically the 
best way to allocate resources”. In my view, the precise scope of such a statement should be 
carefully  specified.  Indeed,  it  has  been  recently  pointed  out  that  the  importance  of  factors 
other  than  the  ones  usually  associated  with  “free”  market  conditions  (productivity, 
competition, initiative, talent), such as executives’ bargaining power and tactics to influence 
their pay levels, should not be overlooked. This seems to be particularly true in the case of 
large lump-sum payments such as the “golden parachutes”. 
In  this  context,  although  I  believe  that  direct  intervention  by  governments  in  the  absolute 
levels  of  executive  compensation  is  not  desirable,  national  authorities  and  policy-makers 
should  monitor  their  evolution.  Furthermore,  an  indirect  public  intervention  may,  in  some 
cases,  be  justified.  The  setting  of  limits  on  severance  pay  with  respect  to  the  fixed 
component of the remuneration and the banning of severance pay in case of failure are two 
examples 
its 
recommendation  issued  in  April  200912.  Overall,  the  boundary  between  the  change  in  the 
structure and the level of executive pay is rather blurred. 
The  Squam  Lake  Report  also  argues  that  the  structure  –  and  form  –  of  executive 
compensation should not only aim to eliminate excessive risk-taking but also to reduce the 
possibility  of  taxpayers’  bailouts.  In  short,  it  should  address  the  anomaly  of  gains  being 
privatised and losses being socialised during the financial crisis. Withholding a fraction of an 
executive’s compensation for a number of years and not paying it if the firm goes bankrupt or 
receives significant government support should help to align the incentives of managers with 
those of taxpayers and reduce excessive risk-taking. Such an approach is relatively new in 
comparison  with  the  measures  developed  so  far  at  the  international  level  (e.g.  deferral 
arrangements,  clawback/malus  provisions),  which  essentially  seek  to  align  individual 
incentives with those of the institutions’ shareholders. The BCBS proposal13 will introduce a 
framework  that  will  give  supervisors  stronger  tools  to  promote  capital  conservation  in  the 
banking sector with payout restrictions. 
Measures to defer compensation are important, but they have at least one major drawback. It 
is very difficult to compute the “right” time span between the peaks and troughs of a cycle. 
For  instance,  the  report  proposes  to  defer  (a  part  of  the)  compensation  for  five  years. 
Although such a period is longer than the minimum deferral period of three years targeted by 
this  respect.  The  European  Commission11 
this  approach 
took 
in 
in 
                                                 
10   For  evidence  on  remuneration  in  the  financial  sector,  see  Philippon  T.  and  A.  Reshef  (2009),  “Wages  and 
Human Capital in the U.S. Financial Industry: 1909–2006”, NBER Working Paper No. 14644, January. 
11   Note  that  the  underlying  logic  of  the  European  Commission  approach  is  aligned  with  the  FSB’s 
Implementation  Standard  12,  according  to  which  “Existing  contractual  payments  related  to  a  termination  of 
employment should be re-examined […]; prospectively, any such payments should be related to performance 
achieved over time and designed in a way that does not reward failure”. 
12   See  Commission  Recommendation  of  30  April  2009,  complementing  Recommendations  2004/913/EC  and 
2005/162/EC as regards the regime for the remuneration of directors of listed companies. According to the 
Recommendation, termination payments should be limited to a certain amount or duration beforehand, which, 
in general, should  not be more than two  years’ annual remuneration (on the basis of  only the non-variable 
component of the annual remuneration). 
13   “Strengthening the resilience of the banking sector”, December 2009, BCBS. 
6 
 BIS Review 85/2010
the FSB Implementation Standards, some of the groups responsible for packaging structured 
products  which  caused  billions  of  losses  for  the  financial  system  have  earned  substantial 
fees for more than five years. It is therefore essential that such deferral arrangements, which 
function  as  the  first  risk  adjustment  mechanism,  incorporate  measures  linking  the  deferral 
payment to future performance within a reasonable time horizon. 
From a more general perspective, it is important to recall that agency costs and excessive 
risk-taking  behaviours  can  be  traced  back  to  unsatisfactory  corporate  governance  and 
regulatory frameworks as well as to shortcomings in the design of compensation plans. In 
this  regard,  the  use  of  stocks  and  stock  options  in  the  remuneration  packages  did  not 
alleviate  the  agency  costs  imposed  on  the  shareholders  during  the  market  turmoil.  This 
circumstance highlights the need for policy-makers to promote longer stock holding periods 
and  stricter  forfeiture  rules  so  as  to  make  these  instruments  more  capable  of  providing 
incentives  for  long-term  value  creation.  In  addition,  rather  than  maximising  the  return  on 
equity,  the  compensation  structure  should  encourage  the  maximisation  of  the  return  on 
assets, i.e. the total value of the firm, as this would help to curb excessive risk-taking and 
leverage. 
Profit  centres  should  also  be  provided  with  long-term  incentives  in  order  to  avoid  creating 
“fake  alpha”.  To  this  end14,  financial  institutions  should  have  in  place  independent  risk 
management functions with sufficient authority to lean on the decision-making process. It is 
essential that risk managers are not isolated from the business lines they oversee and that 
they have access to the necessary information. Their analyses should be communicated to 
the  Board  and  top  executives  in  a  comprehensive  and  comprehensible  manner  (with  a 
forward-looking view of the risks taken). Shareholders and Board members should also have 
sufficient  knowledge  and  expertise  relevant  to  the  financial  activities  the  institution  is 
pursuing  to  permit  effective  governance.  Transparency  in  compensation  packages  should 
perhaps also be encouraged. 
Conclusion 
The  financial  crisis  has  exposed  major  shortcomings  in  micro-prudential  regulation  and 
supervision.  A  sweeping  reform  of  the  rules,  in  particular  of  capital  adequacy  and  liquidity 
requirements, is in the making. It’s needed, but it’s not enough. The supervisory orientation 
has to shift from a light-touch approach to one that is more proactive, forward-looking and at 
times necessarily intrusive, as an indispensable complement to the rules. Supervisors need 
to look more closely at the business and strategic risks of systemic institutions, gaining full 
knowledge of the strategies pursued and the sources of excess returns. Supervisors should 
also be able to gain access to all the parts of the group, regardless of the legal status of the 
supervised entity. Furthermore, regulators and supervisors have to be alert to the fact that 
financial innovation, by adding layers of leverage, complexity and opacity, can transform the 
risk profile of even traditionally safe assets.  
At  the  same  time,  the  regulatory  net  must  be  extended  to  the  whole  range  of  leveraged 
institutions which can trigger systemic risk, including the shadow banking system and other 
firms that pose potential systemic risks such as hedge funds. Any changes in the regulatory 
framework must be carefully scrutinised so as to minimise the risks of regulatory arbitrage 
and not provide incentives to transfer certain types of systemically relevant risk beyond the 
perimeter of the regulated sector. Higher prudential requirements, whether inside or outside 
the banking system, should be imposed on riskier activities, regardless of their location. 
                                                 
14   The following developments are in line with the BCBS “Principles for enhancing corporate governance”, issued 
in March 2010. 
BIS Review 85/2010 
 7
Furthermore, changes to the prevailing practices in executive compensation are needed. An 
effective – and stringent – executive compensation framework should be designed to ensure 
that  managers,  who  play  a  key  role  in  defining  their  institutions’  risk  strategies,  are  not 
rewarded  for  artificial  excess  returns,  such  as  those  stemming  from  positions  whose  risks 
have not yet materialised. In addition, enhanced supervisory cooperation, especially between 
major  financial  centres,  as  well  as  an  extension  of  the  coverage  of  the  international 
framework,  to  all  the  financial  services  institutions,  notwithstanding  their  legal  status,  is 
essential. 
8 
 BIS Review 85/2010
