Caleb M Fundanga: Advanced payment system oversight and management 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the 
Macroeconomic and Financial Management Institute of Eastern and Southern Africa (MEFMI) 
workshop on Advanced Payment System Oversight and Management, Lusaka, 12 July 2010. 
 The Director – Financial Sector Management at MEFMI  
Representatives from MEFMI Secretariat  
Distinguished Resource Persons  
Dear participants  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
 
 
 
 
 
It is my pleasure and honor to be here today to officiate at this important regional workshop 
on  Advanced  Payment  System  Oversight  and  Management  organized  by  the  Financial 
Sector Management Programme of the Macroeconomic and Financial Management Institute 
of Eastern and Southern Africa (MEFMI).  
Ladies and Gentlemen, allow me to begin by expressing my gratitude to MEFMI, for having 
organized this workshop that has brought together officials from the regional central banks 
and  ministries  of  finance  and  economic  planning  to  address  and  brainstorm  on  important 
aspects concerning regulation and supervision of the payment systems.  
I warmly welcome you all to Zambia and in particular to the City of Lusaka. In particular, I 
would  like  to  welcome  and  thank  our  distinguished  resource  persons,  some  of  whom  are 
here  present  and  others  still  to  join  us  during  the  week.  We  thank  you  for  accepting 
invitations  to  join  us  for  this  workshop  and  hope  that  your  participation  will  enrich  the 
deliberations of this workshop as well as the knowledge of the participants.  
I am aware that the quest to hold this workshop was driven by the deep conviction that a well 
developed  and  regulated  payment  system  plays  an  important  role  in  enhancing  and 
promoting  soundness  in  the  financial  system  and  is  a  catalyst  for  creating  efficient 
transmission of monetary value in the economy. A well functioning and developed payment 
system  is  an  essential  requirement  for  the  development  of  a  market  economy  and  deep 
financial markets. 
Equally important is its role in the enhancement of the conduct and transmission of monetary 
policy.  Conversely,  inefficient  payment  system  operations  can  be  a  channel  for  causing 
distortions in the economy through inordinate delays in the monetary policy implementation 
and in settlement of financial transactions. This will invariably prevent the central bank from 
achieving its objectives of price stability and a sound financial sector.  
The  MEFMI  region  still  faces  a  lot  of  challenges  with  respect  to  the  development  and 
oversight of payment systems. Notable among these are:  
1.  
Regulation  of  non-bank  payment  system  providers  such  as  mobile  phone 
companies;  
Regulation of innovative payment system products;  
Ensuring the law contributes to payment system developments and operations;  
Ensuring full utilisation of large value payment system by all stakeholders including 
the Government;  
Enhancing and retaining skills in oversight of payment systems;  
Ensuring  effective  cooperation  between  different  regulatory  authorities  in  the 
regulation of payment systems;  
2.  
3.  
4.  
5.  
6.  
BIS Review 95/2010 
 1
7.  
Maintaining and enhancing market competition and cooperation in the development 
and operation of payment systems; and  
Ensuring consumer protection in payment system services.  
8.  
I  am  glad  that  this  workshop  is  going  to  address  these  key  issues  and  challenges  with 
respect to the above and I am confident that the rich discussions you are going to hold and 
the lessons of experience you are going to share will not only enhance your skills but also 
bring  out  pertinent  issues  that  require  to  be  addressed  when  you  go  back  to  your  home 
countries.  
Ladies and Gentlemen; let me take this opportunity to express my gratitude to the North-
West  University,  South  Africa,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Zimbabwe for releasing their officials to share with us their knowledge and experience at this 
workshop.  
To  all  of  you,  I  wish  you  the  best  and  I  encourage  you  to  participate  actively  during  the 
presentations and discussions. Use every opportunity to tap from the vast experiences of the 
resource persons during these five days.  
Last  but  not  least,  I  wish  to  thank  the  MEFMI  Secretariat  for  organising  this  important 
workshop and for choosing Zambia as the venue.  
With these remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, I declare this workshop officially open. 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2010
