Erkki Liikanen: The enlargement of the euro area 2011 – trust in the future 
Introductory statement by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Euro 
Conference, Tallinn, 20 September 2010. 
 Estonia has made an impressive journey over the past two decades. This journey, from the 
rebirth of the country two decades ago, through rapid economic transition, and now into the 
heart of Europe, has always been followed keenly on the northern side of the Gulf of Finland. 
In my short introductory statement, I would like to offer some observations on that journey 
and some wishes for the future. 
I  will  try  to  draw  some  lessons  for  other  prospective  EMU  members,  but  also  for  the 
Eurosystem and the EU as a whole. 
I make these observations from the vantage point of a close neighbour and long-time friend 
of Estonia.  
Timing 
My first observation concerns the choice of timing. 
At the same time as Estonia’s EMU criteria were being assessed in Brussels and Frankfurt, 
European bond markets were under considerable strain. There were signs of panic in trading 
floors, and the financial press was predicting even the breakdown of the Monetary Union. 
The  reactions  were  proven,  as  usual,  overblown,  and  the  breakdown  predictions  badly 
informed fantasy, but it did all create a rather curious welcome for Estonia into the Monetary 
Union. 
But, in a way, in those hectic weeks the EU showed many of its best qualities. It’s institutions 
were  able  to  take  brave  decisions  when  needed  as  is  shown  by  the  establishment  of  the 
European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF). 
EU also showed the ability to concentrate on Estonia’s case on its own merits, undisturbed 
by the ongoing instability on the financial markets.  
Convergence criteria 
My second observation is that, although we now have considerable experience in applying 
the convergence criteria, we still need to work on fine-tuning the way we interpret them. 
Examination  now  puts  more  weight  than  before  on  sustainability  –  and  rightly  so. 
Convergence is not about hitting an admissible combination of economic indicators at one 
point in time. 
But we may still be concentrating too much on the near term. Convergence is about a lasting 
commitment  to  sustainable  economic  policy.  It  includes  commitment  to  price  stability,  to 
sustainable public finances, and to sustainable private sector development. 
And, ultimately, it requires the capacity to take the appropriate political decisions when things 
go wrong. 
I  think  it  is  this  last  aspect  that  in  the  end  made  Estonia’s  admittance  relatively  smooth. 
Estonia has shown a remarkable capacity to take difficult political decisions when they are 
needed. 
BIS Review 120/2010 
 1
This, I believe, was widely recognized and respected, and helped pave the way for Estonia to 
join the Monetary Union. It also bodes well for Estonia’s future in EMU.  
Boom and bust 
My third observation regards another factor that also bodes well for Estonia as part of the 
euro area: the recent boom and bust episode in this country. 
Estonia went through a very classical cycle of low interest rates, easy credit, and unrealistic 
expectations, which eventually built into a substantial overheating of the economy, and finally 
a spectacular bust in 2008–2009. 
Some countries experienced this as part of the Monetary Union, while Estonia experienced it 
all by herself. 
I  am  optimistic  that  the  experience  will  prove  to  be  a  vaccination  against  future  financial 
excesses. 
The Finnish depression in the early 1990s resulted in suffering and economic hardship for 
many, but it also re-established a more cautious economic attitude that resulted in stronger 
balance sheets, and ultimately a stronger economy. 
Finland received a vaccination against financial excesses that has lasted well over a decade. 
I am optimistic that Estonia will benefit from a similar vaccination, and will emerge from the 
recession as a stronger economy.  
Only the beginning 
My fourth observation is that this is only the beginning. 
A lot is going on inside the euro area and the Eurosystem. Economic policy coordination is 
being given much greater traction than before. 
In  particular,  the  crisis  has  shown  that  a  group  of  countries  with  a  common  currency  and 
highly  interconnected  banking  sectors  have  a  great  deal  of  interest  in  each  others’  public 
finances. 
How  each  country  chooses  to  allocate  its  public  expenditure  remains  mostly  its  own 
business.  But  how  a  country  finances  its  public  expenditure  must  be  a  matter  of  common 
interest to a much greater degree than we were willing to acknowledge in the past. 
Enhanced economic governance, including the European Semester, creates a framework for 
ensuring  that  budgetary  policies  take  into  account  the  common  European  interest.  I  trust 
Estonia will be a like-minded partner for all of us who will ensure that this framework will work 
as intended. 
I  am  also  looking  forward  to  working  with  the  Governor  of  Eesti  Pank  on  the  European 
Systemic Risk Board that will be established as of the beginning of next year. 
We  have  high  expectations  for  this  new  body.  The  financial  crisis  showed  that  there  is  a 
considerable gap between microprudential supervision and monetary policy. 
We need stronger policy instruments to tackle fluctuations in the credit cycle, the pricing of 
risk and systemic risk. 
I also believe that such policy instruments must be able to operate at the cross-border level 
since,  in  today’s  financial  markets,  systemic  risk  propagates  very  quickly  across  national 
boundaries. 
The European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) is well placed to take the primary responsibility 
for  controlling  systemic  risk  in  Europe.  It  will  have  the  expertise,  access  to  relevant 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2010
information and close cooperation with central banks and financial supervisors. What it may 
still need is more effective instruments to deal with systemic risk. 
The first couple of years will be a critical in establishing the ESRB’s precise institutional role 
and operational modalities. 
The  ESRB  will  no  doubt  face  challenges,  and  the  risk  of  institutional  turf  wars  is  real  – 
particularly with  strong national  supervisors.  But  we  need  to  be  ambitious  and  provide  the 
ESRB with sufficient powers to do its job. 
Again, I hope we can work together with Estonia also on this issue.  
Finland and the euro 
Finally, a few remarks on our own experiences from being a member of the Economic and 
Monetary Union from the very beginning. 
As in other countries, there was intensive debate in Finland on the pros and cons of the EMU 
membership before the final decisions were taken in May 1998. Not surprisingly, opinions at 
that time were widely divided. 
Much attention was devoted to the possibility of “asymmetric shocks”. The Finnish economy 
was judged to be structurally different from those of the so called core European countries, 
such as Germany, France and the Benelux countries. 
The  sceptics  believed  the  economic  stability  of  Finland  was  likely  to  suffer  if  economic 
development were too “asymmetric” vis-à-vis the core countries. 
There  were  good  historical  reasons  for  this  early  scepticism.  The  structure  of  the  Finnish 
economy had been one-sided. The share of forest-based industries in industrial production 
and exports, although declining, was much larger than in other European countries. 
Only one-third of Finland’s exports went to the prospective euro area countries, implying that 
the country was likely to be more vulnerable than others to shocks coming from outside the 
euro area. 
There was also a particular concern about exchange rate movements. Especially, there were 
fears  that  the  movements  in  the  Swedish  krona,  the  pound  sterling  and  the  US  dollar  
vis-à-vis the euro would undermine the competitiveness of the Finnish economy. 
After 12 years in EMU it should be possible to draw at least preliminary conclusions about 
whether these fears were justified or not. 
Firstly,  we  did  face  an  “asymmetric”  shock  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  Monetary  Union. 
However, contrary to the pre-EMU fears, this shock turned out to be a positive shock, not a 
negative one. In 1998–2000, Finland was surfing on the wave of the ICT boom. 
In normal circumstances this would have called for real appreciation of the currency, either in 
the  form  of  nominal  appreciation  or  accelerating  inflation.  Neither  of  these  happened.  In 
retrospect, it seems that membership of EMU, in fact, had a stabilising effect on the economy 
in the face of an “asymmetric” shock. 
The  current  global  crisis  hit  the  Finnish  economy  more  severely  than  other  euro  area 
countries. GDP dropped by 8% in 2009, the biggest decline since 1918. 
In the course of two decades Finland had become increasingly specialized in the production 
of capital goods and ICT products. When global investment activity collapsed together with 
world trade, Finnish exports and industrial production dropped by one third. 
Normally, a sharp decline in exports and industrial production would have been followed by a 
sizable  decline  in  private  consumption  as  disposable  income  diminished  and  the  risk  of 
unemployment increased. None of these developments occurred. 
BIS Review 120/2010 
 3
Consumer confidence was held up by low interest rates, the feared collapse in construction 
activity did not materialize, the rise in unemployment proved to be far less than forecast. 
Three additional factors contributed to this relatively favourable outcome. 
Firstly, government finances were initially in good shape. As a result, risk premia remained 
low, despite significant deterioration in the fiscal balance. 
Secondly, the banking sector remained in a strong position throughout the cycle. It seems 
that  the  vaccination  against  extravagancies  obtained  during  the  banking  crisis  of  the  early 
1990s was still effective 15 years later. 
Thirdly,  house  price  increases  remained  relatively  moderate,  at  least  compared  with  most 
other  euro  area  countries  and,  indeed,  most  other  OECD  countries.  The  avoidance  of  a 
house price decline helped stabilize the economy during the downturn. 
Please,  do  not  misunderstand  me.  My  intention  is  not  to  be  complacent  on  the  Finnish 
economy and economic policy in Finland. Membership of EMU and good policy explain only 
a part of the relatively good performance of the Finnish economy since the introduction of the 
euro. 
Good luck explains an important part as well. Had the ICT boom lasted two more years at the 
beginning of the past decade, it is very likely that serious imbalances would have developed 
in the Finnish economy. 
Had the global investment boom, which “asymmetrically” strongly favoured Finnish exporters, 
lasted two more years in the latter half of the decade, we would probably have seen wage 
inflation accelerate and a house price bubble emerge in Finland, too.  
The bottom line 
The  bottom  line  of  these  remarks  is  that  membership  in  the  Monetary  Union  has  had  a 
stabilizing effect on the Finnish economy over the past 12 years. However, membership in 
itself does not guarantee stability and growth. 
What economic policy could and should do, both inside and outside the Monetary Union, is to 
prevent the emergence of excessive indebtedness in both the public and the private sector, 
and the development of asset price bubbles. 
On both sides of the Gulf of Finland, we know from experience that this is not an easy task. 
4 
 BIS Review 120/2010
