Jean-Pierre Landau: An international financial architecture for the 
21st century – some thoughts 
Remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Landau, Second Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, at the 
17th Central Banking Seminar of the Bank of Korea, Seoul, 1 June 2010. 
17th  Central  Banking  Seminar  of  the  Bank  of  Korea;  Seoul,  2  October 2009  (this  text  is  a  revised  version: 
1 June 2010). 
 International  financial  and  monetary  arrangements  are  currently  extensively  debated.  For 
many countries, both advanced and emerging, the crisis has shown that there is a close link 
between  internal  and  international  financial  stability.  In  addition,  rebalancing  of  the  world 
economy stands at the forefront of the G20 policy agenda and there is a perception it may be 
difficult to achieve under current arrangements.  
In this paper, I would like to discuss the foundations for a future international financial and 
monetary  system.  One  central  point  I  will  make  is  that  “financial”  and  “monetary”  aspects 
cannot  be  dissociated  from  one  another.  To  a  large  extent,  international  monetary 
arrangements, as well as current account imbalances, are the by-products of policy choices 
made  by  countries  on  their  capital  account  regimes  and  financial  development.  Therefore, 
one  must  try  and  take  a  long  term  view,  encompassing  all  aspects  of  the  financial 
interrelationships  between  nations. I  will  only  deal  tangentially  with  exchange  rate  regimes 
and  their  implications  for  monetary  policies.  Those  have  been  abundantly  analysed  and 
discussed in the literature and the policy debate (Blanchard et al., 2005). Instead, I will focus 
on three topics: international capital markets, the provision of international liquidity and the 
newly  emerging  question  of  an  international  store  of  value.  These  are  issues  of  joint  and 
common interest for all countries, whether emerging or developed, and whether their current 
account is in surplus or deficit. Getting to a common understanding on those matters would 
help  in  making  progress  on  other,  more  contentious  questions.  Opinions  expressed  are 
solely mine and do not represent the views of Banque de France or the Eurosystem.  
What is an international monetary system?  
According to an apt definition, an international monetary system consists of (i) exchange rate 
arrangements;  (ii)  capital  flows;  and  (iii)  a  collection  of  institutions,  rules,  and  conventions 
that govern its operation (Carney, 2009). Presumably, the purpose of such “institutions, rules, 
and  conventions”  is  to  ensure  the  sustainability  and  mutual  consistency  between  national 
policies.  There  may  be  also  an  implicit  objective  of  “fairness”  in  the  sense  that,  when 
international imbalances need to be corrected, the burden of adjustment should be equitably 
shared. Accordingly, an international monetary system should be based on explicit or implicit 
“rules of the games” to which national economic policies would be subordinated.  
This  is  an  ambitious  approach  and  it  may  seem  too  normative  to  some.  But  it  has  a  long 
history: 
 
the gold standard, from which the phrase “rules of the games” originated, was based 
on mechanisms which imposed automatic and symmetric adjustments in balance of 
payments, according to specie flows. 
the  Bretton  Woods,  system  was  built  around  an  elaborate  framework  of  rules, 
disciplines and support mechanisms aimed at ensuring convertibility for the current 
account – but, crucially, not the capital account – together with fixed but adjustable 
exchange rates. All these conventions were enforced through IMF surveillance and 
were supported by IMF facilities 
 BIS Review 76/2010 
 1
With the generalisation of flexible exchange rate regimes, and the ensuing changes in the 
IMF  articles,  the  normative  approach  to  the  international  monetary  system  was  somehow 
weakened. Capital account liberalisation led to entrust international financial markets with the 
“disciplining” function. When it became apparent that the discipline would not be gradual and 
progressive,  but,  instead,  often  lead  to  abrupt  capital  flows  reversal  and  crisis,  the 
international  community  attempted  to  strengthen  the  IMF  surveillance  and  develop  its 
facilities so as to pre-empt such shocks and make them more manageable. That is, basically, 
where we are today. 
Everything must be done to ensure that IMF surveillance works. But, like any “disciplinary” 
approach, it meets with three essential difficulties:  
 
first, diverging interests between countries. At any single point in time, conflicts may 
arise  as  to  how  much  adjustment  is  needed  and  by  whom.  Situations  when  all 
national policies naturally point in the same direction – such as in the first quarter of 
2009 – are very exceptional.  
second, enforcement problems : the IMF has naturally more leverage on countries 
that need its help than on others.  
those 
in 
two  difficulties  combine 
IMF surveillance.  It  may  be  compounded  by  a  more  fundamental  and  natural 
asymmetry  between  surplus  and  deficit  countries,  when  it  comes  to  implementing 
adjustment  measures.  And,  some  would  say,  there  might  also  be  a  de  facto 
asymmetry  between  reserve  and  non  reserve  currencies,  although,  as  I  shall 
mention later, the situation is more subtle.  
to  produce  a  perception  of  asymmetry 
  These  difficulties  were  apparent  during  the  last  part  of  the  20th  century.  They  led  to  many 
discussions  about  the  proper  role  and  organisation  of  the  IMF1.  But  what  makes  the 
“disciplinary” approach almost impracticable today are the changes that have occurred in the 
world at the turn of the 21st century. The world today stands in stark contrast with both the 
Bretton Woods era and the period that followed immediately:  
 
that  coordination  problems  will  be  more  difficult 
The first – and most obvious – difference is the number of countries that are active 
participants  to  the  system  and  have  a  stake  in  its  functioning.  The  monetary  and 
financial  world  is  becoming  increasingly  “multipolar”.  While  the  current  system 
comprises three currency blocs, at least one (the Chinese RMB) and may be other 
additional systemic currencies will emerge in the future. Greater diversity goes with 
increased  complexity.  “Hegemonic”  systems  are  easier  to  build  and  manage  than 
multipolar  ones  where  responsibility  is  more  diffuse.  So,  in  the  future,  one  can 
expect 
to  solve.  Charles 
Kindleberger  used  to  say,  “the  international  financial  system  doesn’t  work  unless 
somebody takes the responsibility for it” (as quoted by Fisher, 2008). 
Second, those participants are more diverse from the point of view of their economic 
structure, their demography, their level of development, and, more importantly, their 
social choices and preferences. For instance, different saving rates may be seen as 
resulting  from  divergent  time  preferences.  Likewise,  asymmetries  in  financial 
development  may,  to  some  extent,  reflect  different  choices and  tradeoffs  between 
efficiency and stability in the organisation of capital markets and the architecture of 
financial systems.  
Finally,  linkages  between  economies,  whether  through  trade,  capital  or  more 
intangible “confidence” channels are continuously getting stronger as witnessed by 
                                                   
1   See, for instance, the proposals aiming at separating the “surveillance” and “financing” functions and making 
the former more independent from the Executive Board. 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2010
the speed and amplitude of contagion of economic and financial shocks during the 
last eighteen months, which took everybody by surprise.  
Pending  some  economic  catastrophe,  these  characteristics  will  persist  over  time.  A  large 
number  of  different  countries,  with  different  preferences,  will  permanently  be  linked  and 
interdependent  through  active,  but  imperfect  capital  markets.  Any  future  international 
architecture  must  be  compatible  with  those  basic  features  of  today’s  world  which,  prima 
facie, create the potential for more complexity and, maybe, instability.  
International capital markets and the allocation of savings 
Let’s  suppose,  for  an  instant,  that  there  is  a  unified,  fully  integrated,  and  complete  world 
capital  market.  Excess  saving  in  some  parts  of  the  world  would  be  efficiently  allocated  to 
investments  in  other  regions.  Risk  would  also  be  efficiently  shared  between  agents  and 
countries  according  to  their  respective  needs  and  risk  appetite.  Shocks  to  GDP  and/or 
consumption  would  be  smoothed  over  time.  And,  finally,  liquidity  would  be  permanently 
available for those agents and countries whose solvency was not in doubt. In such a world, 
balance of payments crisis would not exist. Current account imbalances would not matter as 
they  would  reflect  savings  and  investment  decisions  made  by  fully  informed  and  non 
constrained  rational  agents.  This  vision  may  serve  as  a  reference  for  future  reforms:  “The 
vision that underlies most proposals for reform of the international financial system is that the 
international  capital  markets  should  operate  at least  as  well  as  the  better  domestic  capital 
markets” (Fisher, 1999). 
But, of course, we don’t live in such an ideal world. Global capital markets are neither fully 
integrated nor complete. Complete markets do not exist, either at the national or international 
level, for a broad array of securities. Moreover financial markets are still naturally fragmented 
by national borders. Specifically, we can identify five important deviations from the model of 
perfect international markets:  
1. 
Information  asymmetries.  These  are  natural  features  of  all  financial  markets  and 
they  give  rise  to  significant  frictions  through,  in  particular,  adverse  selection  and 
moral  hazard  which  prevent  many  profitable  investments  to  be  properly  financed. 
There  are  good  reasons  to  think  that  information  asymmetries  are  especially 
prevalent in international capital markets since “foreign” investors find themselves at 
a disadvantage when assessing “domestic” projects and investments. 
Exchange rate risk is, obviously, specific to international capital allocation decisions. 
So is sovereign risk, always present, if often remote and limited in ordinary times for 
an increasing number of countries. 
It is increasingly recognized that differences in financial development play a major 
role in influencing capital flows and, consequently, current account imbalances. In 
particular,  capital  tends  to  flow  from  financially  repressed  economies  to  countries 
and markets which provide and abundant supply of safe and liquid assets. For the 
same  reason  those  countries’  currencies  are  the  main  vehicle  for  holding  official 
foreign exchange reserves. 
Finally, deliberately or not, public policies have a significant impact on the level and 
national  or  international  allocation  of  domestic  savings.  These  influences  can  be 
direct,  as  in  the  case  of  capital  controls.  They  may  be  more  diffuse,  for  instance 
when  authorities  build  up  foreign  exchange  reserves.  By  doing  so,  public  entities 
essentially substitute themselves to private agents in managing and allocating part 
of the nation’s net foreign savings. Most likely, their choices and preferences will be 
different from those of the private sector and, therefore, their intervention would alter 
the  country’s  external  position,  tilting  it  towards  holding  foreign  assets  in  liquid 
instruments.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
BIS Review 76/2010 
 3
The first three factors – information asymmetries, exchange and sovereign risk – account for 
the  well  known  “home  bias”  exhibited  by  most  investors  and  asset  managers  who  tend  to 
privilege their own domestic assets when deciding on portfolio allocation. They also explain 
why, until recently, most emerging economies had to live with the “original sin” of not being 
able  to  issue  public  debt  denominated  in  their  own  currency.  Because  information 
asymmetries  have  been  reduced  through  the  development  of  modern  securities  markets, 
emerging  economies  have  somehow  freed  themselves  from  this  constraint,  although  less 
than often assumed (Hausmann and Panizza, 2010). 
The last two factors – differences in financial development and public interventions – may be 
more pervasive and significant. Together, they have a major impact on the composition and 
direction of capital flows, as well as the level and persistence of global imbalances.  
Global imbalances in the 21st century 
Current account imbalances have increased both in amplitude and durability during the last 
decade. In fact, they have become a permanent characteristic of our economic environment. 
This,  by  itself,  may  be  a  consequence  of  increased  financial  integration  and  greater 
reallocation  of  savings  across  national  borders.  Since,  at  the  same  time,  real  long  term 
interest rates have kept to historically low levels, the situation has been characterized, as a 
“saving glut” (Bernanke, 2005), a concept which has come to dominate our thinking about the 
international economy. 
However, for the saving glut to result in growing imbalances, net savings have to be more 
and more asymmetrically distributed across nations. In addition, for more than a decade now, 
capital  has  been  continuously  flowing  “uphill”,  i.e.  from  poor  to  rich  countries  with  current 
accounts surpluses in emerging economies mirrored in growing deficits in the US. This is one 
of the most salient and puzzling features of modern economic history and has attracted a lot 
of attention.  
Some  explanations  focus  on  the  domestic  drivers  of  private  saving  behaviours  in  both 
emerging and advanced economies. Cyclical factors, such as productivity shocks, or fiscal 
policies, have likely played a role (Bussière et al. 2010, and Henriksen and Lambert, 2009) 
But this can only be part of the story. It may well be that saving / investment imbalances are 
endogenous to the system itself.. 
According to the “Bretton Woods II” approach (Dooley et al. 2003, 2008, 2009), the pattern of 
capital flows results from a mutually beneficial equilibrium between two groups of countries. 
On the one hand, emerging economies which follow an export-led development strategy and 
seek  to  prevent  appreciation  of  their  real  exchange  rates  by  constant  foreign  exchange 
intervention  (together  with  capital  controls).  As  a  consequence,  they  accept  to  accumulate 
increasing stocks of liquid assets denominated in dollars. On the other hand, the US is happy 
to get both reserve inflows to finance their deficits and cheap imports to fuel their demand for 
consumption  goods.  Such  equilibrium  is  stable  by  virtue  of  the  mutual  benefits  it  brings  to 
both  groups.  Moreover,  the  more  it  lasts,  the  more  it  is  impossible  to  change  since  both 
group  become  mutually  dependant  through  the  stock  of  claims  and  debts  they  have 
reciprocally accumulated. Any significant break, for instance, in the allocation of reserves by 
surplus  countries,  would  both  trigger  major  exchange  and  interest  rate  volatility  in  deficit 
countries and lead to significant valuation losses in surplus countries. This “financial balance 
of terror” is supposed to keep the system in place for a long period of time. Implicit behind 
this  doctrine,  however,  is  the  assumption  that  the  creditor country  can  live  with  the  risk  of 
losses  on  its  reserves  and  accept  that  possibility  as  a  price  to  pay  for  the  success  of  its 
growth strategy.  
A  more  recent  explanation  is  provided  by  the  “asset  shortage”  theory  (Caballero,  2006), 
which helps and explains why asymmetries in financial developments generate both payment 
imbalances and asset bubbles. According to the theory, the world has a shortage of liquid 
4 
 BIS Review 76/2010
and  riskless  assets.  Moreover,  the  supply  of  those  assets  is  asymmetrically  distributed 
between regions, with the US providing a large chunk of the total. Hence, there is a structural 
excess demand for dollar denominated securities, which sustains permanent capital inflows 
in the US. To the extent that the US financial system does not generate enough “pure” safe 
assets, this creates an incentive for the financial sector to manufacture such assets from the 
securitization  of  lower  quality  ones,  but  at  the  cost  of  greatly  increased  financial  fragility 
(Caballero, 2009). 
Global imbalances and the policy agenda  
Contemporary  analysis  therefore  points  to  “structural”  causes  behind  the  pattern  of  capital 
flows and global imbalances (Blanchard and Milesi-Ferretti, 2009). The policy consequences 
are important. 
First, current account imbalances will likely prove more resilient than expected to exchange 
rate movements or inflexions in macro policies. If the causes are “structural”, significant shifts 
in  demand  and  relative  prices  between  countries  may  well  lead  to  suboptimal  growth  and 
excess  volatility.  In  the  immediate  future,  “financing”  those  imbalances  should  take 
precedence over their “adjustment”.  
Second,  global  imbalances  reflect  a  mix  of  different  national  preferences  and  inflexions 
caused  by  public  interventions.  One  important  focus  in  the  policy  debate  should  be  to 
disentangle  those  two  types  of  structural  causes,  and  eliminate  pure  policy  induced 
distortions. Obviously, this is no easy task, but, in the end, a crucial one if imbalances are to 
be addressed and reduced. 
Finally,  financial  development  matters.  This  is  one  area  where  preferences  differ  between 
nations and public policies have a huge impact. This is also a source of major uncertainty for 
the future. Will there be convergence or divergence in financial regulation across countries? 
Will there be a move towards liberalisation of capital accounts or will existing restrictions and 
controls be maintained in some parts of the world? 
Under current international arrangements, this is a matter for sovereign choices: IMF articles, 
in  particular,  do  not  cover  capital  account  convertibility.  Nevertheless,  in  a  more  diverse, 
multipolar world, interactions between countries with different financial systems will become 
more complex and, as the crisis has shown, very destabilizing.  
International cooperation should therefore aim at creating an environment where incentives 
to structural distortions in capital flows are reduced.  
Opening the capital account exposes countries to increased financial volatility. The impact, 
however, is different for capital importers and exporters. Capital importers face the possibility 
that flows would abruptly dry up, thus inflicting damaging shocks to their financial systems 
and  national  economies.  Capital  exporters  accumulate  claims  on  the  outside  world  and, 
therefore, run the risk of valuation losses (through exposure to country and exchange rate 
risk).  Ideally,  an  international  open  capital  account  regime  would  protect  both  capital 
importers  towards  sudden  liquidity  shocks  and  capital  exporters  toward  abrupt  changes  in 
the value of their assets. This is, obviously, unrealistic in the current environment. But these 
are potential avenues for progress and debate.  
International liquidity  
The  provision  of  international  liquidity  has  been  severely  disrupted  during  the  crisis. 
Emerging  (and  some  industrialized)  countries  have  suffered  from  acute  dollar  liquidity 
shortages  which  had  to  be  remedied,  inter  alia,  through  a  network  of  currency  swaps 
between Central Banks. The crisis is a powerful reminder that liquidity – both domestic and 
BIS Review 76/2010 
 5
international – can never be taken for granted. How will international liquidity be provided in 
the future, and by whom?  
These  are  not  new  questions.  Over  the  last  ten  years,  the  build  up  in  foreign  exchange 
reserves  in  emerging  economies  has  been  spectacular,  which  is  a  sign  that  the  supply  of 
international liquidity was seen both as insufficient and uncertain. More recently, Governor 
Zhu, from the People Bank of China has raised the issue of reserve currencies. According to 
Governor  Zhu,  current  arrangements  for  liquidity  provision  are  a  source  of  instability  and 
have  played  a  role  in  causing  the  crisis.  Governor  Zhu  has  mentioned,  in  particular,  the 
intrinsic  contradiction  embodied  in  the  famous  “Triffin  dilemma”.  Because  the  dollar  is  the 
major  reserve  currency,  international  liquidity  supply  depends  on  the  US  running  a 
sufficiently  large  current  account  deficit  which, by  itself,  aggravates  global  imbalances  and 
creates  instability.  Governor  Zhu  suggested  that  the  role  and  status  of  the  SDR  be 
enhanced, with the long term objective of creating a “super reserve” currency. 
However, international liquidity provision should now be considered in a broader framework. 
The  Triffin  dilemma  goes  back  to  a  period  when  international  capital  markets  were  poorly 
developed. By then, international liquidity was limited to instruments used to settle payments 
between official monetary authorities. It was represented by claims on such official entities. 
By contrast, in today’s world, most international liquidity is privately provided and represented 
by claims on private institutions. Interbank markets play a crucial role in this process. The 
more capital markets become integrated at the short end, the more international liquidity is 
provided by the private sector. 
As a consequence, there is a strong continuity and complementarities between domestic and 
international  liquidity.  Both  depend  on  the  willingness  of  counterparties  to  extend  credit  to 
each other. Both are subject to aggregate supply and demand shocks with sudden shifts in 
risk aversion or liquidity preference. Both result from leveraging and deleveraging by private 
institutions (Adrian and Shin, 2008). When markets seize, counterparty risk is perceived as 
excessive, uncertainty settles in, financial institutions deleverage their positions towards non 
residents, and then international liquidity dries up and disappears.  
The  importance  of  global  private  liquidity  conditions  has  been  apparent  during  the  period 
which  followed  Lehman’s  failure.  Output  and  trade  fell  across  the  world  with  astonishing 
simultaneity. It seemed natural to assume, at the time, that “traditional” forms of contagion  
–  through  goods  or  capital  markets  –  were  at  work.  Policy  makers  were  looking  to  trade 
finance as a major channel. However, contagion takes time and cannot fully account for the 
exceptional synchronization in the drop of output. With hindsight, the phenomenon may best 
be  seen  as  a  global  liquidity  shock.  Net  supply  of  liquidity  dried  up  at  the  same  time 
everywhere in the world. International banks faced a sudden and ample shortage of dollars. 
Firms  started  to  hoard liquidity.  Investment  and,  for  a  part,  production,  came  abruptly  to  a 
halt. 
When such a shock occurs, public provision of liquidity has to substitute to private provision. 
In a domestic context, this is the function of the lender of last resort. But when the shortage is 
about foreign currency liquidity, this role has to be played by foreign exchange reserves. 
Foreign exchange reserves 
Following  the  1997–98  crisis,  emerging  countries  have  constantly  sought  to  expand  their 
foreign  exchange  reserves.  The  emerging  markets’  average  reserve  ratio  has  more  than 
quintupled  from  4  percent  to  over  20  percent  of  GDP  since  1990  (Obstfeld  et  al.  2009, 
Matteo y Lagos et al., 2009). 
One cannot assume, however, that equilibrium has been reached and that the demand for 
reserves will stabilize. On the contrary, there are strong indications that this trend will persist, 
or even be amplified, following the crisis.  
6 
 BIS Review 76/2010
How  much  reserves  are  enough?  Theoretical  reasoning  would  balance  the  benefits  of 
holding reserves against their cost, with some notion that there is an optimum. 
On the benefit side, reserves can be detained or accumulated for a variety of motives: 
 
to smooth out the impact on consumption of shocks on the current account, which is 
the  most  basic  and  traditional  motive,  even  in  the  absence  of  international  capital 
flows 
as  a  result  or  by-product  of  foreign  market  intervention  to  prevent  exchange  rate 
appreciation. This is usually defined as a “mercantilist” motive.  
as precaution against possible abrupt capital outflows (the “sudden stop” syndrome) 
and,  finally,  to  provide  liquidity  to  domestic  financial  institutions.  (Obstfeld  et  al. 
2009). That use of foreign exchange reserves was especially apparent in 2008 when 
Central  Banks  in  many  emerging  (and  some  industrialized)  countries  put  those 
reserves at work to ease domestic tensions created by dollar liquidity shortages. 
  The costs of holding reserves are also well identified:  
 
intermediation  of  national  savings  by  a  public  entity  is  never  neutral.  By  nature, 
those entities don’t have the same risk appetite and liquidity preference as private 
agents. A significant part of national savings (up to 30% in some countries) might 
find itself subject to a “directed” allocation towards liquid instruments denominated in 
foreign currency. 
as  a  consequence,  there  is  a  direct  opportunity  cost  because  foreign  exchange 
reserves’ risk / return profile may be lower than for other, alternative, investments.  
finally,  as  reserves  accumulate,  countries  are  getting  increasingly  exposed  to 
exchange rate risk and face the possibility of significant valuation losses.  
  This kind of cost / benefit analysis seems less and less able, however, to account for the true 
behavior  of  reserve  holders.  First  there  may  be  immeasurable,  but  very  powerful,  benefits 
such as increased security, lower external interest rates and lower exchange rate variability 
over the long run. Second, part of the costs may be borne by the system itself and not fully 
internalized by each individual country. And, finally, new precautionary motives may lead to a 
fundamental indeterminacy in the demand for reserves. 
The future demand for reserves  
As mentioned above, during the crisis, foreign exchange reserves were used as a tool for 
internal – as well as external – financial stability. National Central Banks, especially in Latin 
America, acted as dollar lenders of last resort to their domestic banks.  
This function will develop in the future and is bound to impact the demand for reserves. In a 
sense, countries face the same dilemma as private institutions. They need liquidity in times 
of  stress  but  it  is  costly  to  hold  in  normal  times.  Their  reactions,  however,  are  opposite. 
Private institutions tend to underestimate their liquidity needs because, in case of shock, the 
Central Bank can step in as a lender of last resort. For countries, the bias goes in the other 
direction.  Provision  of  international  liquidity,  whether  private  or  official,  is  contingent, 
conditional and uncertain. With no international lender of last resort, precautionary motives 
could lead to unlimited accumulation of liquidity. 
This may be seen as major market failure and source inefficiency but is also unavoidable in 
the current financial architecture. One characteristic of liquidity shocks is that the net demand 
for liquidity may become almost infinite. Ex ante, no buffer is ever big enough. No amount of 
reserves  will  fully  protect  a  financially  open  economy  against  a  systemic  shock.  It  is 
noticeable  that  countries,  such  as  Korea,  which  possessed  very  important  amounts  of 
BIS Review 76/2010 
 7
reserves  prior  to  the  crisis  and  has  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime,  nevertheless  felt  the 
need to enter into currency swaps with the Federal Reserve.  
Financial openness and integration means that domestic banks will engage more and more 
into foreign currency operations. In turn, the expansion of international balance sheets will 
increase the potential demand for liquidity support in case of shocks. This trend should be 
accepted  as  a  normal  consequence  of  open  capital  markets  and  international  banking, 
together  with  the  predominance  of  a  very  limited  number  of  currencies  in  international 
finance.  
As a consequence, past benchmarks used to assess the adequacy of reserves are no longer 
valid. Current research (Obstfeld et al. 2009) shows that broad domestic money aggregates 
may  be  the  best  explanatory  factors  for  the  amount  of  reserves.  Internationalisation  of 
finance has created a fundamental indeterminacy in the demand for reserves, which reflects 
the indeterminacy in the demand for liquidity.  
Multilateral provision of international liquidity: the search for financial safety nets 
The rationale for a multilateral source of liquidity provision is straightforward: stabilizing the 
demand for international reserves would bring huge benefits in terms of world welfare.  
At  the  moment,  reserve  accumulation  can  only  occur  through  a  conjunction  of  balance  of 
payment surplus and some degree of exchange rate intervention. In addition, if sterilization 
proves  difficult  or  impossible,  it  also  leads  to  unwanted  changes  in  monetary  policy. 
Therefore, precautionary reserve accumulation, however legitimate, unavoidably creates side 
effects on domestic macro policies as well as spillover effects on other countries.  
Now, suppose there is “ex ante” an existing pool of reserve assets which countries could tap 
into  under  specific  circumstances.  If  access  to  this  pool  is  credible  and  predictable,  there 
would be no need for getting those reserves on the market. The search for precaution would 
not impact domestic or foreign macroeconomic management. It would be neutral as regards 
exchange rate regimes and polices. It would reduce the incentive for countries to conduct a 
whole set of policies such as:  
 
 
generating current account surpluses  through active exchange rate management 
ring fencing pools of liquidity and capital in local subsidiaries, therefore creating a 
potential segmentation of international financial markets.  
implementing  “soft”  capital  controls  to  limit  the  impact  of  shocks  and  diminish  the 
need for reserves  
 All  countries,  therefore  have  a  common  interest  in  finding  ways  to  disconnect  reserve 
accumulation  from  exchange  rate  management  and,  more  generally,  from  balance  of 
payment situations and monetary policies 
The need for national reserves could be reduced if credible mechanisms exist to provide for 
the supply of official liquidity on a multilateral basis. Significant progress has been achieved 
in this direction during the recent period. A dense network of forex swaps has been put into 
place between major Central Banks in the midst of the crisis. Other recent official initiatives 
include:  
 
the creation by the IMF of a new facility – the Flexible Credit Line – aimed at easing 
liquidity  pressures  on  countries  with  no  fundamental  balance  of  payments 
difficulties. It has been used, in particular, by Mexico and Poland and has powerfully 
contributed to restoring confidence. It has marked a decisive step in the evolution of 
the IMF towards a truly universal provider of international liquidity (and not only for 
countries facing balance of payments difficulties) 
8 
 BIS Review 76/2010
 A new SDR allocation, the biggest ever, for the equivalent of 250 bn USD,  which 
has  been  enacted  by  the  IMF  Executive  Board.  This  will  be  complemented  by  a 
network of voluntary arrangements allowing SDRs to be effectively traded between 
members.  
These are, however, revocable and limited sources of liquidity provision. Swap agreements 
can be (and have been) terminated. Out of the total, only a small part of the SDR allocation 
will  benefit  countries  which  may  effectively  need  to  use  them.  More  may  be  needed  to 
substitute for national foreign exchange reserves as a permanent insurance mechanism.  
Contingent liquidity 
The search for new liquidity sources meets with an inescapable moral hazard problem. On 
the  one  hand,  to  be  equivalent  to  reserves  going  forward,  multilateral  liquidity  must  be 
available  ex  ante  and  without  condition.  On  the  other,  there  is  a  danger  that  fully 
unconditional liquidity be used to deal with fundamental “solvency” imbalances. In real life, 
this is not an easy distinction to make. The dilemma is solved, at the domestic level, by the 
provision  of  eligible  collateral.  This  may  prove  very  uneasy  for  international  liquidity: 
transferring ownership  of  substantial  amounts  of  sovereign  assets  between  countries  or  to 
international institutions would meet with huge legal and political difficulties.  
This  is  the  rationale  for  conditionality.  But,  of  course,  conditionality  creates  an  uncertainty 
which is incompatible with the purpose of instant supply of liquidity. A conditional facility will 
never be a perfect substitute for reserves. Many countries fully eligible to the Flexible Credit 
Line (FCL) have used foreign swaps instead. Anecdotal evidence suggests that swaps are 
often perceived as carrying less of a stigma effect.  
One way to deal with moral hazard would be to distinguish explicitly between two different 
risks facing each country: on the one hand idiosyncratic risk, created by national policies and 
country specific shocks; on the other hand, “systemic” risk stemming from aggregate liquidity 
shocks occurring on a broader – global or regional – scale. At the moment, foreign exchange 
reserves are meant to cover both risks. Since systemic risk is not related to a country size or 
GDP level there is potentially no limit to the demand for self insurance. A the same time, if 
systemic risk is defined in such a way that it is truly independent from individual countries 
behaviour  or  policies,  protection  through  a  multilateral  mechanisms  would  not  create  any 
moral hazard problem.  
It  should  therefore  be  possible  to  define  and  build  a  framework  around  the  following 
principles:  countries  should  self  insure  against  idiosyncratic  risk  by  holding  a  sufficient 
amount  of  reserves.  Protection  against  systemic  risk  would  come  from  a  multilateral 
mechanism for international liquidity provision.  
Of  course,  the  distinction  between  idiosyncratic  and  systemic  risk  may  be  difficult  and 
involves a broad degree of judgment. But two basic rules should be guiding future work on a 
multilateral safety net: (1) conditions for access should be specified ex ante; and (2) those 
conditions should be fully delinked from the situation of individual economies. Rather, they 
should depend on the state of the global economy and international financial markets. From 
the point of view of an individual country, access should be fully unconditional, once global 
conditions are met. 
A  considerable  amount  of  work  is  currently  devoted  to  devise  instruments  of  contingent 
capital  for  financial  institutions  in  times  of  crisis.  The  same  intellectual  framework  can  be 
extended to liquidity. What is needed is contingent liquidity i.e. liquidity available to nations in 
times of aggregate shocks to the international financial system. This raises two questions: 
where would such liquidity come from? How could it be mobilized? 
As to the source, a possibility would be to create a process of periodic general allocation of 
SDRs,  according  to  a  predetermined  schedule  .Those  SDRs,  however,  would  not  be 
BIS Review 76/2010 
 9
immediately  available  for  use  by  their  beneficiaries.  Rather,  they  would  be  “frozen”  and 
unblocked only in pre – specified circumstances (Landau, 2009). Criteria for use would not 
be  defined  on  the  basis  of  individual  countries’  situations,  but  on  consideration  of  the 
conditions  prevailing  in  the  global  economy  and  international  capital  markets.  If  properly 
constructed, such a scheme may provide, for no cost, the kind of insurance that countries are 
currently seeking by building excess reserves. 
How would countries access to this new source of liquidity? The traditional approach would 
allocate contingent liquidity to countries according to their quota shares in the IMF. However, 
those are very imperfect representations of countries’ liquidity needs especially in times of 
crisis.  Taking  inspiration  from  the  contingent  capital  literature,  one  could  imagine  that 
countries could “buy” the access to contingent liquidity in crisis times by paying, in normal 
times, a premium to the issuer (the IMF?). This could prove less costly than accumulating 
excess reserves. Going one step further, and transposing an idea from Caballero and Kurlat 
(2009), the IMF could issue tradable instruments giving access to contingent liquidity once it 
has been activated. If broadly traded between public entities, the price of such instruments 
would  give  a  useful  indication  of  underlying  systemic  tensions  in  international  financial 
markets. 
Regional arrangements  
Another  approach  would  privilege  regional  arrangements  either  for  pooling  reserves  or 
redistributing  them  though  permanent  swap  agreements.  Asian  countries,  especially,  are 
working on and implementing progressively such schemes through the Chiang Mai initiative. 
It should be noted that regional pooling is efficient only when countries are facing asymmetric 
liquidity shocks within the region. Pooling brings no additional benefits when shocks occur on 
a global scale and all countries are hit simultaneously. Also, regional arrangements cannot 
avoid the moral hazard problem that all multilateral schemes are facing.  
Nevertheless, there seems to be considerable scope for regional arrangements to prosper in 
the  future.  First,  they  can  act  as  useful  complements  to  more  global  schemes  and  be 
articulated with (and supported by) IMF facilities. Second, one can expect regional financial 
integration to progress, especially in those parts of the world where huge pools of savings 
are  available  and  currently  intermediated  through  financial  systems  located  outside  the 
region.  With  deeper  financial  integration,  the  probability  of  significant  portfolio  shifts  inside 
one  region  increases  markedly,  creating  the  potential  for  asymmetric  liquidity  shocks.  The 
development  of  regional  liquidity  arrangements  may  appear  very  useful  to  underpin  the 
development of regional financial markets. 
Stores of value 
One consequence of the crisis has been to cast doubts on the ability of some assets, up to 
now  considered  as  riskless,  to  serve  as  reliable  stores  of  value.  The  ability  of  the  private 
sector  to  create  “safe”  assets  through  financial  innovation  has  proved  largely  illusory 
(Caballero,  2009).  So,  in  the  period  to  come  there  may  be  both  an  increased  demand 
worldwide for risk free assets and much less certainty on their future supply. 
The search for a liquid instrument which would also provide a reliable international store of 
value has been going on for many decades. When discussions were held to build the Bretton 
Woods system, Keynes proposed the creation of a new international currency, the “Bancor” 
which could serve both as a source of liquidity and a store of value. Thirty years ago, there 
was extensive discussion in the IMF on the creation of a substitution account. This was a 
mechanism through which countries could exchange their reserve currencies against SDRs, 
and get a protection against exchange rate risk. Most recently, Governor Zhu has reopened 
the debate and suggested, over the long run, the creation of a new “super reserve” currency, 
while, in the meantime, enhancing the role and status of the SDR.  
10 
 BIS Review 76/2010
There  are  good  arguments  to  create  international  instruments  providing  a  reliable  store  of 
value:  
 
First, the safer investors feel about the risk-return profile of their holdings, the bigger 
the exposures they are prepared to accept. In that way, structural characteristics of 
the International Monetary System have an influence on the sustainability of global 
imbalances.  
Second,  once  uncertainty  on  relative  values  settles  in,  it  would  likely  be 
accompanied by extreme volatility as investors, whether public or private, constantly 
reshuffle  their  existing  portfolios  between  countries  and  currencies  in  order  to 
manage their exposure.  
face  an 
Finally,  and  most 
intertemporal  choice  between  extracting  resources  and  keeping  them  on  or  under 
the  ground.  According  to  standard  economic  reasoning  (the  Hotelling  rule),  one 
important determinant is the return earned on financial assets, to be compared to 
the  expected  commodity  price  increase  over  the  long  run.  The  possibility  of  large 
valuation losses on financial assets makes it optimal to reduce the rate of extraction, 
which would durably lower the supply of oil and other commodities.  
important,  many  oil  and  commodity  producers 
  However, there are also practical and conceptual difficulties:  
 
A  choice  would  have  to  be  made  as  to  the  true  nature  of  the  “super  reserve 
currency”. Would it be a basket of existing monies or a new “fiat” currency? If the 
“super reserve” is a basket of existing currencies (such as the SDR today) it would 
basically serve as an instrument for diversification of foreign exchange reserves (or 
private  portfolios),  and  such  a  diversification  can  easily  be  achieved  by  using 
existing  currencies.  On  the  other  hand,  the  “super  sovereign”  could  be  issued  as 
such  as  a  fiat  currency.  Then,  the  international  community  would  have  a  basic 
choice.  Either  the  new  currency  could  be  made  “strong”  and  never  depreciate 
against any other major existing currencies, which probably  means that its supply 
would be severely restricted. Or, the “super sovereign” would be issued according to 
pre-specified  rules,  and  depreciation  against  existing  currencies  could  not  be 
excluded.  It  would  ensure  regular  supply  of  international  liquidity,  but  could  only 
provide  partial  protection  against  exchange  rate  volatility  and  valuation  losses. 
There  is  an  important  trade  off,  there  ,  which  is  the  essence  of  a  new  “Triffin 
dilemma”  and  which  cannot  be  avoided  when  looking  at  the  public  supply  of 
international liquidity, whether by one nation or within a multilateral framework.  
More fundamentally, a new currency which would provide a reliable store of value 
would, in fact, grant its holders a collective guarantee against exchange risk. That 
guarantee would benefit surplus countries and would be given by deficit countries. 
This issue was intensely debated when the substitution account was discussed and 
negotiated within the IMF, more than 25 years ago. It became clear, at the time that 
it  would  not  be  accepted  by  many  countries  unless  some  explicit,  binding  and 
symmetric  rules  on  balance  of  payment  adjustments  were  agreed  upon 
simultaneously.  Most  likely,  those  questions  would  be  raised  again  today  and  the 
creation of a new reserve currency would have to be part of a broader framework. 
 Conclusion and provisional policy lessons 
Looking at the next decade, one can project two alternative – and polar – scenarios for the 
evolution of the international financial system. 
First,  a  scenario  of  progressive  and  partial  fragmentation:  no  significant  capital  account 
opening  would  occur  in  many  parts  of  the  world.  On  the  contrary,  new  barriers  could  be 
erected either in the form of capital controls or through national regulations forcing financial 
BIS Review 76/2010 
 11
institutions to ring fence local pools of capital and liquidity. There would be little convergence 
in  domestic  financial  systems  and  regulations.  Foreign  exchange  reserves  would  keep 
growing, both in absolute and in percentage of world GDP.  
This scenario may be seen as the only realistic response to increased diversity in a multipolar 
world. Such an evolution could also be defended on the ground that the assumed benefits of 
financial  harmonization  and  integration  have  not  really  materialized  (Rodrik  et  al.  2008). 
Furthermore,  the  crisis  has  shown  that  no  financial  system  can  claim  to  be  intrinsically 
superior and countries could feel justified in adopting and promoting their own models. 
The  systemic  consequences,  however,  are  not  clear.  In  such  a  world,  current  account 
imbalances  would  be  heavily  influenced  by  public  actions  and  policies.  Regulatory 
competition  would  dominate  the  localization  of  financial  activities  and  the  allocation  of 
savings. In the absence of some “rules of the game”, tensions would naturally arise between 
countries, most likely through conflicts about exchange rate regimes and policies.  
An opposite scenario would see the progressive opening of all capital accounts, together with 
some (more or less intensive) convergence in financial systems and regulations. This would 
allow for the emergence of a unified world capital market, an efficient allocation of savings 
across  countries  and  a  smooth  financing  of  current  account  imbalances.  Such  a  scenario 
could prove attractive both for capital exporters (through better returns on excess savings) 
and  capital  importers,  which  may  not  have  the  option  of  isolating  themselves  from 
international capital markets anyway.  
Experience  shows,  however,  that  an  open  international  financial  system  is  not  inherently 
stable and, therefore, very dependent on a strong infrastructures and conditions. The move 
towards  a  financially  open  world  would,  at  the  very  least,  have  to  be  supported  by  robust 
arrangements on international liquidity provision.  
Pending ambitious reforms, a lot can still be done to provide investors with stable stores of 
value.  One  very  promising  avenue  would  be,  for  countries  which  have  surplus  savings,  to 
develop their own internal stores of value by expanding the range of safe and liquid financial 
assets  available  to  domestic  and  international  investors.  By  doing  so,  they  would  achieve 
several goals at the same time. They would bring more efficiency in the financing of their own 
domestic  needs.  They  would  provide  their  own  investors  with  a  broader  range  of  choices. 
They would also eliminate some of the currently existing incentives to export capital in order 
to protect its value. They would contribute to reduce the “asset shortage” with all its negative 
consequences,  including  international  imbalances  and  the  financing  of  asset  bubbles. 
Financial  development  in  many  countries  would  address  both  the  causes  of  international 
imbalances and some of the roots of the financial crisis. 
References: 
Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin (2008), “Liquidity and Leverage”, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York Staff Report No 328. 
Aizenman,  J.,  Y.  Jinjarak  and  D.  Park  (2010),  “Reserves  and  Swap  Lines:  Substitutes  or 
Complements ?”, NBER Working Paper No 15804 March. 
Backus,  D.,  Henriksen,  E.,  Lambert,  F.  and  C.  Telmer  (2009),  “Current  Account  Fact  and 
Fiction”, NBER Working Paper, 15255, November. 
Baclet,  A.  and  Vidon  E.  (2008),  “The  World  Distribution  of  External  Imbalances:  Revisiting 
the Stylised Facts”, Banque de France Occasional Paper, 6, June. 
Bernanke,  B.  (2005),  “The  Global  Saving  Glut  and  the  U.S.  Current  Account  Deficit”, 
Remarks at the Sandridge Lecture, 19 March. 
Blanchard  O.,  Milesi-Ferretti  G.M.  (2009),  “Global  Imbalances:  In  Mid-Stream?”  IMF  Staff 
Position Note. 
12 
 BIS Review 76/2010
Blanchard, O., F. Giavazzi and F. Sa (2005), “The U.S. Current Account and the Dollar”, MIT 
Department of Economics Working Paper, No 05–02 and NBER Working Paper No 11137, 
February. 
Bracke, T., M. Bussière, M. Fidora and R. Straub (2008), “A Framework for Assessing Global 
Imbalances”, ECB Occasional Paper No. 78, January 2008. 
Bussière, M., M. Fratzscher and G. Müller (2010), “Productivity Shocks, Budget Deficits and 
the  Current  Account”,  ECB  Working  Paper  No.  509,  August  2005,  forthcoming  Journal  of 
International  Money  and  Finance  (December  2010).  Caballero  R.  (2006),  On 
the 
Macroeconomics of Asset Shortages. 
Caballero R. (2009), “The ‘Other’ Imbalance and the Financial Crisis”, Paolo Baffi Lecture, 
Bank of Italy. 
Caballero R. and P. Kurlat (2009), “The ‘Surprising’ Origin and Nature of Financial Crises: a 
Macroeconomic Policy Proposal”. 
Caballero, R. (2009), “Sudden Financial Arrest”, IMF 10th Jacques Polak Annual Research 
Conference. 
Caballero,  R.,  E.  Fahri  and  P-O.  Gourinchas  (2008),  “An  Equilibrium  Model  of  Global 
Imbalances and Low Interest Rates”, American Economic Review, 98(1), 358–393 
Caballero,  R.  and  A.  Krishnamurthy  (2009),  “Global  Imbalances  and  Financial  Fragility”, 
NBER working paper, 14688, January. 
Carney,  M.  (2009),  “The  Evolution  of  the  International  Monetary  System”,  Remarks  at 
Foreign Policy Association, New York, 19 November 2009. 
Chinn,  M.  and  H.  Ito  (2006),  “What  matters  for  financial  development?  Capital  controls, 
institutions, and interactions”, Journal of Development Economics. 
Dooley,  M.,  D.  Folkerts-Landau,  and  P.  Garber  (2003),  “An  Essay  on  the  Revived  Bretton 
Woods system”, NBER Working Paper No 9971. 
Dooley, M., D. Folkerts-Landau and P. Garber (2008), “Will Subprime be a Twin Crisis for the 
United States”, NBER Working Paper, 13978, May. 
Dooley  M.,  Folkerts-Landau  D.,  Garber  P.  M.  (2009)  –  “Bretton  Woods  II  Still  Defines  the 
International Monetary System”, NBER Working Paper, 14731, February. 
Eichengreen, B. and R. Hausmann (1999), “Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility”, in New 
Challenges  for  Monetary  Policy,  Kansas  City,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City, 
pp. 329–368.Fisher,  S.  (1999),  “On  the  Need  for  an  International  Lender  of  Last  resort”; 
Paper prepared for the American Economic Association, January 3, 1999. 
Fisher, S. “A New Global Financial Architecture”, The trilateral commission (Europe); 32nd 
regional meeting Paris, 7–9 November 2008. 
Gertler, M. and K. Rogoff (1990), “North-South Lending and Endogenous Domestic Capital 
Market Inefficiencies”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol 26, pp. 245–66. 
Glick,  R  and  K.  Rogoff (1995), “Global versus country-specific productivity shocks and the 
current  account”,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics,  Elsevier,  Vol.  35(1),  pp.  159–192, 
February. 
Gourinchas, P-O. and H. Rey (2007), “International Financial Adjustment”, Journal of Political 
Economy, 115(4) 
Hausmann,  Ricardo and Federico Sturzenegger (2005), “U.S. and Global Imbalances: can 
Dark Matter Prevent a Big Bang?”. 
Henriksen, E. and F. Lambert (2009), “Technology Shocks and Current Account Dynamics”, 
mimeo, New York University. 
BIS Review 76/2010 
 13
on 
J.P. 
May 
2009. 
24–26 
Mumbai 
Lessons. 
Available 
the  G20  Workshop  on 
(2009),  Some  Thoughts 
the  global  economy:  Causes  of 
Hausmann,  Ricardo  and  Panizza,  Hugo  (2010),  “Redemption  or  Abstinence?  Original  Sin, 
Currency  Mismatches  and  Counter-Cyclical  Policies  in  the  New  Millennium”,  CID  Working 
Paper, Center for International Development, Harvard University, February 2010. 
Jeanne  O.  and  Ranciere  R.,  (200),  “The  Optimal  Level  of  International  Reserves  for 
Emerging Market Countries: Formulas and Applications”, CEPR Discussion Papers 6723. 
Kashyap, A. K., R. G. Rajan and J. C. Stein (2008), “Rethinking Capital Regulation”, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium, August 2008. 
International  Monetary  Reform.  
Landau, 
the  Crisis:  
Remarks  at 
Key 
at: 
http://www.g20.org/Documents/g20_workshop_causes_of_the_crisis.pdf?bcsi_scan_7B0403
5E3E2807B8=1. 
Lucas,  R.  (1990),  “Why  Doesn’t  Capital  Flow  from  Rich  to  Poor  Countries?”,  American 
Economic Review, Vol. 80, No 2. 
Matteo  y  Lagos,  I.,  R.  Duttagupta  and  R.  Goyal  (2009),  “The  Debate  on  the  International 
Monetary System”, IMF Staff Position Note, SPN/09/26. 
Mendoza,  E.,  V.  Quadrini  and  J-V  Rios-Rull  (2006),  “Financial  integration  and  financial 
deepness and global imbalances”, NBER Working Paper No 12909 and Journal of Political 
Economy, Vol. 117, 3. 
Obstfeld,  M.  and  K.  Rogoff  (2004),  “The  Unsustainable  US  Current  Account  Position 
Revisited”, NBER Working Papers 10869, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc. 
Obstfeld  M.,  Rogoff  K.  (2009),  “Global  imbalances  and  the  Financial  Crisis:  Products  of 
Common Causes”. 
Obstfeld, M., J. C. Shambaugh and A. M. Taylor (2009), “Financial Stability, the Trilemma 
and International Reserves”, NBER Working Paper 14826. 
Ostry, J. D., A. R. Ghosh, K. Habermeier, M. Chamon, M. S. Qureshi and D. B. S. Reinhardt 
(2010) “Capital Flows : The Role Of Controls”, IMF Staff Position Note SPN/10/04. 
Rodrik  D.  and  A.  Subramanian  (2008):  “Why  Did  Financial  Globalization  Disappoint?”, 
http://www.iie.com/publications/papers/subramanian0308.pdf. 
14 
 BIS Review 76/2010
