Jürgen Stark: Enhancing the ECB’s monetary analysis – what have we 
learnt? 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the conference “The ECB and Its Watchers” XII, Frankfurt am Main, 9 July 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The title of this session asks: “should money and credit play a greater role in central bank 
strategies?”  
Money has always played a distinctive role in the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. From our 
perspective, it would be more natural, therefore, to ask: “how should monetary developments 
be  analysed  in  practice”  and  “how  can  monetary  analysis  reflect  the  role  it  has  been 
assigned in our strategy?”.  
The distinctive role of money 
First,  let  me  briefly  recall  the  benefits  of  assigning  a  distinctive  role  to  money  when 
formulating monetary policy decisions.  
There  is  overwhelming  consensus  regarding  the  empirical  long-run  relationship  between 
money and prices. As such, money provides a reliable nominal anchor for monetary policy. 
What is more, monetary developments can signal risks to price stability beyond the business 
cycle. In turn, such signals support the medium-term orientation of monetary policy, guarding 
against  an  excessive  focus  on  short-term  developments  in  inflation  forecasts,  as  well  as 
misguided attempts to fine-tune economic developments.  
This commitment to conducting a monetary analysis provides us with an insurance device.  
It disciplines decision-making.  
It ensures that risks to price stability are assessed on the basis of a comprehensive set of 
information.  
It compels policy-makers to consider trends in money and credit growth, which may exert an 
influence on price developments beyond that identified by a purely conjunctural or output-gap 
view of the world.  
On the basis of these considerations, over the dozen years since the creation of the ECB, we 
have continued to employ and develop new tools for monetary analysis. We did this even in 
the face of vocal criticism from a significant camp of economists. They questioned whether 
money and financial frictions had a role to play in the inflation targeting frameworks that they 
had identified as “best practice” for central banking.  
Money  has  been  ignored.  In  the  canonical  New  Keynesian  macro-model  on  which  the 
intellectual foundations of inflation targeting rests, money has been considered a redundant 
element  in  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism.  At  best,  money  is  seen  as  a  useless 
appendix  to  the  model,  serving  only  to  confuse  and  distract  any  policy-maker  misguided 
enough to consider it.  
Now that the financial crisis has exposed the fault lines underlying this model; 
now  that  it  has  been  recognised  that  the  inflation  targeting  approach  focused  unduly  on 
short-term cyclical developments in the real economy;  
now that economists agree that insufficient attention has been paid to financial imbalances 
and vulnerabilities, critics of the ECB have acknowledged the benefits of monetary analysis.  
BIS Review 97/2010 
 1
Yet, they tell us that we have pursued such analysis for the wrong purpose!  
The  right  purpose,  they  tell  us, is to  support  a  broader  view  of  our  mandate,  paying  more 
attention to risks to financial stability in formulating our policy decisions. It is a little bit as if 
they are telling us to forget about monetary policy in principle.  
Of  course,  the  tools  of  monetary  analysis  can  support  an  assessment  of  risks  to  financial 
stability. However, we cannot deny their intrinsic value for monetary policy by limiting their 
role to episodic and extreme events.  
Of course, owing to their influence on financial stability risks, monetary trends impinge on the 
outlook for price stability, although not exclusively. The interaction between monetary trends 
and the macroeconomy is multifaceted.  
Not all historical episodes of private sector money and credit balances going off track have 
been followed by threats to financial stability. But, every  major economic crisis in the 20th 
century was preceded by the emergence of monetary imbalances. 
There is no need to dwell on the obvious case of hyperinflation. However, the Great Inflation 
of the 1970s was also fundamentally of a monetary nature. It is widely documented that it 
was caused by confusion, not only about what drove inflation, but also by denial that central 
banks  bear  ultimate  responsibility  for  price  developments.  The  inability  to  assess  the 
monetary policy stance in the light of monetary trends was highly damaging.  
The  Great  Depression  is  another  case  in  point.  It  is  certainly  true  that  the  banking  crisis 
brought about by the failure of central banks to understand their role as a lender of last resort 
under the gold standard was detrimental. But equally detrimental was the sheer unavailability 
of monetary data that could have signalled the need, given the collapse in money and credit, 
for monetary policy to be accommodative much earlier on, to a higher degree and for much 
longer.  
Although various scenarios exemplify how monetary trends are transmitted, not all of them 
involve risks to financial stability.  
Benign  scenarios  for  transmitting  shifts in  monetary  trends  tend  to  mostly  reflect  structural 
changes in liquidity preference. In this case, shifts in monetary trends may be re-absorbed 
without posing any risks to price stability.  
Another  scenario  sees  such  trends  as  harbingers  of  changes  in  spending  on  goods  and 
services, thereby affecting price developments.  
Yet  another  scenario  could  be  that  increased  money  holdings  may  be  associated  with 
increased  purchases  of  assets  and  higher  asset  prices.  If  sustained,  wealth  effects  would 
ultimately exert upward pressure on consumer prices. If this is not sustainable, a subsequent 
bust is likely to create downside risks to price stability.  
Only in this latter sub-case would we be confronted with financial stability issues too. But in 
all cases, the long-run relationship between money and prices is preserved. 
Enhancing monetary analysis 
Let me turn to the more central questions. Recognising the distinctive role that money plays 
in the economy does not tell us how we should conduct monetary analysis. In the light of our 
analysis,  how  does  the  transmission  from  money  to  prices  work  and  how  precisely  is  it 
supposed to inform the policy-maker? 
I cannot provide you with a static toolkit to answer these questions. As in any other field in 
economics,  we  have  continuously  refined  and  updated  the  tools  in  the  face  of  constant 
structural change.  
2 
 BIS Review 97/2010
In  spring  2007  the  Governing  Council  endorsed  the  pursuit  of  an  agenda  to  enhance  the 
ECB’s monetary analysis. Why did we start this? How did we come to organise it? Finally, 
what have we achieved over the past three years? 
Reasons for enhancing monetary analysis 
1. 
Looking  back,  I  must  say  that  the  timing  was  most  opportune.  M3  had  persistently  been 
growing, far in excess of the reference value, and had actually started to increase by double-
digit rates compared with a year earlier.  
What  was  going  on?  Did  this  reflect  an  underlying  trend?  How  would  this  end?  These 
developments seemed to expose a number of shortcomings in our analysis.  
The expert’s judgement was that between 2001 and 2003 portfolio shifts into M3 owing to 
heightened  economic  and  financial  uncertainty  had  pushed  M3  headline  growth  above  its 
underlying trend. But this was not fully reflected in our modelling tools.  
Over  the  past  decade  as  a  whole  we  have  experienced  a  continual  process  of  financial 
innovation  and  structural  change.  We  have  constantly  needed  to  adapt,  refine  and  update 
our tools.  
In  addition,  these  tools  could  not  describe  the  multifaceted  way  in  which  monetary  trends 
may  transmit  to  the  economy.  Until  then,  we  had  relied  mostly  on  partial  equilibrium, 
reduced-form models. They served us well in forecasting, but failed to capture structural or 
behavioural  interpretations  of  monetary  trends.  This  would  have  helped  us  to  understand 
how the observed shift might, or might not, unwind.  
2. 
Avenues  
 Given the challenges we faced in understanding how monetary trends impinge on risks to 
price stability, we drew up an agenda to enhance monetary analysis and structured it along 
the following four broad avenues:  
 BIS Review 97/2010 
 3
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
improving money demand models;  
developing money-based indicators of risks to price stability;  
incorporating money and credit into structural general equilibrium models; and  
further  exploring  the  link  between  monetary  variables,  financial  imbalances  and 
asset prices, to support cross-checking between the ECB’s economic and monetary 
analyses. 
Achievements  
3. 
In  mapping  out  these  avenues  our  intention  was  not  to  imply  that  specific  tools  would  fall 
exclusively  into  any  of  these  categories.  In  fact,  in  many  respects  we  have  experienced 
convergence across avenues. We have been increasingly analysing money and credit in the 
context  of  macroeconomic  systems.  To  this  end,  to  complement  the  partial  equilibrium 
money  demand  specifications,  we  have  developed  models  with  a  more  coherent  causal 
structure.  We  have  started  to  use  a  structural  general  equilibrium  model  with  a  fully 
articulated banking sector, incorporating an active role for money and credit. This work is not 
limited to a single avenue, but has a bearing on the agenda to enhance monetary analysis as 
a whole.  
 
  
The sum of papers that have so far been published under the enhancement agenda provide 
us with a variety of tools for different purposes. Unfortunately, time will not allow me to go 
through this list in detail.  
Given  our  constant  striving  for  comprehensiveness,  we  have  not  sought  to  condense  the 
information stemming from monetary analysis into one, easily tractable indicator, comparable 
perhaps to a fan chart for inflation.  
Of all the available tools, I will focus on two specific examples. First, the reconfirmation of a 
stable  relationship  between  money  and  key  macroeconomic  variables.  Second,  the 
identification of underlying trends in money used to assess risks to price stability. 
4 
 BIS Review 97/2010
  
Money  demand  models,  for  example,  have  been  improved  to  restore  our  ability  to  explain 
monetary developments in a coherent, statistically stable money demand framework – and 
therefore to have a better understanding of the causes of monetary growth. This has been 
made possible through the modelling of money demand in the context of a broader portfolio 
choice framework. It entails systems comprising a richer set of explanatory variables, notably 
wealth and a broader set of opportunity costs including yields on foreign assets. Likewise, 
modelling money demand across sectors with different motives and persistence in portfolio 
behaviour has strengthened our ability to detect underlying trends in money. 
 BIS Review 97/2010 
  5
To define “historical regularities” in the monetary data we now rely on a comprehensive set of 
state-of-the-art tools, exploring a wider set of variables, including financial spreads and yields 
and providing a richer representation of MFI balance sheets.  
 
  
To  further  support  the  identification  of  underlying  monetary  trends,  we  have  developed  a 
whole range of indicators signalling risks to price stability. In the past we have relied mostly 
on  bivariate  models,  which  proved  relatively  robust,  but  were  hard  to  interpret.  We  have 
complemented  these  tools  by  non-linear  models,  providing  an  estimate,  based  on  money 
growth, of the probability of staying in an inflation regime that is consistent with price stability. 
Here,  the  identification  of  underlying  trends  in  money  is  supported  by  the  persistence  of 
these regimes. 
 
6 
  BIS Review 97/2010
to  bear 
institutional  knowledge 
formally  on  money  demand 
Looking at the toolkit as a whole, we have made progress on three levels:  
 
first,  bringing 
specifications;  
second, technically refining existing tools;  
and third, interpreting monetary developments in a more structural manner.  
 
 
Expanding our set of models and indicators has helped to formalise the multifaceted ways in 
which  monetary  trends  are  transmitted  to  the  economy.  But  challenges  remain.  Structural 
equilibrium  models,  for  example,  capture  economic  developments  in  terms  of  unobserved 
deviations from trend rather than in terms of how they are measured.  
While the structural models provide a coherent view across various sectors of the economy, 
they do not offer a definitive view of how money affects the economy. Although they have the 
capacity to bridge the real and the nominal sphere, they should not be construed as creating 
a single fat pillar, in the sense of economic and monetary analyses being merged into one 
analytical framework. 
Our experience has shown that while progress has been achieved in improving the analytical 
toolbox  for  monetary  analysis,  no single  model  can  integrate  all  elements  of  the monetary 
analysis  simultaneously.  We  will  therefore  maintaining  a  plurality  of  tools  in  monetary 
analysis.  
Concluding remarks  
The timing of this work in 2007 to enhance monetary analysis was most opportune. Having 
faced excessive money growth for years, we were indeed perceiving severe challenges. The 
calls  we  received  at  the  time  were  to  simply  ignore  them.  We  did  not  find  reassurance  in 
these calls. We remained uneasy, but we had no idea ex ante how the excesses in money 
and credit would eventually unwind.  
At  the  time,  we  issued  warnings  about  upside  risks  to  inflation.  Eventually  the  imbalances 
manifested  themselves  in  successive  asset  price  collapses,  a  systemic  banking  crisis,  a 
sharp deceleration in money and credit growth, and a precipitous fall in output.  
Despite  our  humble  performance  as  economists  in  forecasting  this  specific  sequence  of 
events, no one can credibly claim that what actually materialised was the most likely among 
a range of possible scenarios. I think it is fair to say that in order to contain risks to price 
stability – whether to the up or the downside – there was a pressing need to head off these 
excesses, instead of dealing with them after the fact.  
Irrespective of the conjunctural assessment, of how these excesses might eventually unwind 
and of whether or not this process might affect the financial system, such a response was 
clearly  needed.  Being  agnostic  about  monetary  developments  would  not  have  been 
appropriate.  
BIS Review 97/2010 
 7
  
To conclude: the improvement in our tools has been evolutionary, rather than revolutionary. 
A high degree of continuity has been maintained, as our results support the monetary policy 
strategy. Progress has been achieved through the pursuit of our enhancement agenda, but 
open questions remain.  
Because of the current financial stability issues, we have been applauded for the monetary 
analysis,  but  we  are  again  called  to  limit  its  scope.  Previously  we  were  asked  to  plug 
monetary information into an inflation forecast. Now we are being asked to plug it into the 
emerging framework for macro-prudential analysis. As a by-product, monetary analysis may 
both  help  and  be  helped  by  the  analysis  of  bank  balance  sheets  for  macro-prudential 
purposes.  However,  we  do  not  want  to  limit  monetary  analysis  to  this  end.  We  need  to 
maintain a comprehensive view of the transmission of money to the economy and to focus 
on pursuing price stability, in line with our mandate. 
8 
 BIS Review 97/2010
