Ben S Bernanke: Economic and financial conditions and the federal 
budget before the Committee on the Budget 
Speech by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, at the US House of Representatives, Washington DC, 9 June 2010. 
 Chairman  Spratt,  Ranking  Member  Ryan,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am 
pleased  to  have  this  opportunity  to  offer  my  views  on  current  economic  and  financial 
conditions and on issues pertaining to the federal budget. 
The economic outlook 
The recovery in economic activity that began in the second half of last year has continued at 
a  moderate  pace  so  far  this  year.  Moreover,  the  economy  –  supported  by  stimulative 
monetary policy and the concerted efforts of policymakers to stabilize the financial system – 
appears to be on track to continue to expand through this year and next. The latest economic 
projections of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve Bank presidents, which were made 
near  the  end  of  April,  anticipate  that  real  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  will  grow  in  the 
neighborhood of 3-1/2 percent over the course of 2010 as a whole and at a somewhat faster 
pace next year.1 This pace of growth, were it to be realized, would probably be associated 
with only a slow reduction in the unemployment rate over time. In this environment, inflation 
is likely to remain subdued. 
Although the support to economic growth from fiscal policy is likely to diminish in the coming 
year, the incoming data suggest that gains in private final demand will sustain the recovery in 
economic activity. Real consumer spending has risen at an annual rate of nearly 3-1/2 percent 
so  far  this  year,  with  particular  strength  in  the  highly  cyclical  category  of  durable  goods. 
Consumer spending is likely to increase at a moderate pace going forward, supported by a 
gradual  pickup  in  employment  and  income,  greater  consumer  confidence,  and  some 
improvement in credit conditions. 
In the business sector, real outlays for equipment and software posted another solid gain in 
the first quarter, and the increases were more broadly based than in late 2009; the available 
indicators point to continued strength in the second quarter. Looking forward, investment in 
new  equipment  and  software  is  expected  to  be  supported  by  healthy  corporate  balance 
sheets,  relatively  low  costs  of  financing  of  new  projects,  increased  confidence  in  the 
durability of the recovery, and the need of many businesses to replace aging equipment and 
expand  capacity  as  sales  prospects  brighten.  More  generally,  US  manufacturing  output, 
which has benefited from strong export demand, rose at an annual rate of 9 percent over the 
first four months of the year. 
At the same time, significant restraints on the pace of the recovery remain. In the housing 
market, sales and construction have been temporarily boosted lately by the homebuyer tax 
credit. But looking through these temporary movements, underlying housing activity appears 
to have firmed only a little since mid-2009, with activity being weighed down, in part, by a 
large  inventory  of  distressed  or  vacant  existing  houses  and  by  the  difficulties  of  many 
builders in obtaining credit. Spending on nonresidential buildings also is being held back by 
high vacancy rates, low property prices, and strained credit conditions. Meanwhile, pressures 
                                                 
1   See “Summary of Economic Projections”, an addendum to the April Federal Open Market Committee minutes, 
available at Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010), “Minutes of the Federal Open Market 
Committee, April 27–28, 2010”, press release, May 19. 
on state and local budgets, though tempered somewhat by ongoing federal support, have led 
these governments to make further cuts in employment and construction spending. 
As you know, the labor market was hit particularly hard by the recession, but we have begun 
to see some modest improvement recently in employment, hours of work, and labor income. 
Payroll employment rose by 431,000 in May, but that figure importantly reflected an increase 
of  411,000  in  hiring  for  the  decennial  census.  Private  payroll  employment  has  risen  an 
average of 140,000 per month for the past three months, and expectations of both businesses 
and households about hiring prospects have improved since the beginning of the year. In all 
likelihood,  however,  a  significant  amount  of  time  will  be  required  to  restore  the  nearly  
8-1/2 million jobs that were lost over 2008 and 2009. 
On the inflation front, recent data continue to show a subdued rate of increase in consumer 
prices.  For  the  three  months  ended  in  April,  the  price  index  for  personal  consumption 
expenditures rose at an annual rate of just 1/2 percent, as energy prices declined and the 
index excluding food and energy rose at an annual rate of about 1 percent. Over the past two 
years,  overall  consumer  prices  have  fluctuated  in  response  to  large  swings  in  energy  and 
food  prices.  But  aside  from  these  volatile  components,  a  moderation  in  inflation  has  been 
clear and broadly based over this period. To date, long-run inflation expectations have been 
stable,  with  most  survey-based  measures  remaining  within  the  narrow  ranges  that  have 
prevailed for the past few years. Measures based on nominal and indexed Treasury yields 
have  decreased  somewhat  of  late,  but  at  least  part  of  these  declines  reflect  market 
responses to changes in the financial situation in Europe, to which I now turn. 
Developments in Europe 
Since late last year, market concerns have mounted over the ability of Greece and a number 
of other euro-area countries to manage their sizable budget deficits and high levels of public 
debt.  By  early  May,  financial  strains  had  increased  significantly  as  investors  focused  on 
several  interrelated  issues,  including  whether  the  fiscally  stronger  euro-area  governments 
would  provide  financial  support  to  the  weakest  members,  the  extent  to  which  euro-area 
growth would be slowed by efforts at fiscal consolidation, and the extent of exposure of major 
European financial institutions to vulnerable countries. 
US financial markets have been roiled in recent weeks by these developments, which have 
triggered a reduction in demand for risky assets: Broad equity market indexes have declined, 
and implied volatility has risen considerably. Treasury yields have fallen as much as 50 basis 
points since late April, primarily as a result of safe-haven flows that boosted the demand for 
Treasury  securities.  Corporate  spreads  have  widened  over  the  same  period,  and  some 
issuance of corporate bonds has been postponed, especially by speculative-grade issuers. 
In  response  to  these  concerns,  European  leaders  have  put  in  place  a  number  of  strong 
measures. Countries under stress have committed to address their fiscal problems. A major 
assistance  package  has  been  established  jointly  by  the  European  Union  (EU)  and  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) for Greece. To backstop near-term financing needs of its 
members  more  generally,  the  EU  has  established  a  European  Financial  Stabilization 
Mechanism  with  up  to  500  billion  euros  in  funding,  which  could  be  used  in  tandem  with 
significant bilateral support from the IMF. EU leaders are also discussing proposals to tighten 
surveillance  of  members’  fiscal  performance  and  improve  the  design  of  the  EU’s  fiscal 
support mechanisms. 
In  addition,  to  address  strains  in  European  financial  markets,  the  European  Central  Bank 
(ECB) has begun purchasing debt securities in markets that it sees as malfunctioning, and 
has  resumed  auctions  of  three-  and  six-month  loans  of  euros  in  unlimited  quantities  to 
borrowers with appropriate collateral. To help ease strains in US dollar funding markets, the 
Federal  Reserve  has  reestablished  temporary  US  dollar  liquidity  swap  lines  with  the  ECB 
and other major central banks. To date, drawings under these swap lines remain quite limited 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2010
and far below their peaks reached at the height of the financial crisis in late 2008, but they 
are  nevertheless  providing  an  important  backstop  for  the  functioning  of  dollar  funding 
markets. More generally, our ongoing international cooperation sends an important signal to 
global  financial  markets  that  we  will  take  the  actions  necessary  to  ensure  stability  and 
continued economic recovery. 
The  actions  taken  by  European  leaders  represent  a  firm  commitment  to  resolve  the 
prevailing  stresses  and  restore  market  confidence  and  stability.  If  markets  continue  to 
stabilize, then the effects of the crisis on economic growth in the United States seem likely to 
be  modest.  Although  the  recent  fall  in  equity  prices  and  weaker  economic  prospects  in 
Europe  will  leave  some  imprint  on  the  US  economy,  offsetting  factors  include  declines  in 
interest  rates  on  Treasury  bonds  and  home  mortgages  as  well  as  lower  prices  for  oil  and 
some other globally traded commodities. The Federal Reserve will remain highly attentive to 
developments abroad and to their potential effects on the US economy. 
Fiscal sustainability 
Ongoing developments in Europe point to the importance of maintaining sound government 
finances. In many ways, the United States enjoys a uniquely favored position. Our economy 
is large, diversified, and flexible; our financial markets are deep and liquid; and, as I have 
mentioned, in the midst of financial turmoil, global investors have viewed Treasury securities 
as a safe haven. Nevertheless, history makes clear that failure to achieve fiscal sustainability 
will,  over  time,  sap  the  nation’s  economic  vitality,  reduce  our  living  standards,  and  greatly 
increase the risk of economic and financial instability. 
Our nation’s fiscal position has deteriorated appreciably since the onset of the financial crisis 
and  the  recession.  The  exceptional  increase  in  the  deficit  has  in  large  part  reflected  the 
effects of the weak economy on tax revenues and spending, along with the necessary policy 
actions  taken  to  ease  the  recession  and  steady  financial  markets.  As  the  economy  and 
financial markets continue to recover, and as the actions taken to provide economic stimulus 
and promote financial stability are phased out, the budget deficit should narrow over the next 
few years. 
Even  after  economic  and  financial  conditions  have  returned  to  normal,  however,  in  the 
absence of further policy actions, the federal budget appears to be on an unsustainable path. 
A  variety  of  projections  that  extrapolate  current  policies  and  make  plausible  assumptions 
about  the  future  evolution  of  the  economy  show  a  structural  budget  gap  that  is  both  large 
relative to the size of the economy and increasing over time. 
Among  the  primary  forces  putting  upward  pressure  on  the  deficit  is  the  aging  of  the  US 
population, as the number of persons expected to be working and paying taxes into various 
programs  is  rising  more  slowly  than  the  number  of  persons  projected  to  receive  benefits. 
Notably, this year about 5 individuals are between the ages of 20 and 64 for each person 
aged 65 or older. By the time most of the baby boomers have retired in 2030, this ratio is 
projected to have declined to around 3. In addition, government expenditures on health care 
for both retirees and non-retirees have continued to rise rapidly as increases in the costs of 
care  have  exceeded  increases  in  incomes.  To  avoid  sharp,  disruptive  shifts  in  spending 
programs and tax policies in the future, and to retain the confidence of the public and the 
markets, we should be planning now how we will meet these looming budgetary challenges. 
Achieving  long-term  fiscal  sustainability  will  be difficult.  But  unless  we as  a  nation make  a 
strong  commitment  to  fiscal  responsibility,  in  the  longer  run,  we  will  have  neither  financial 
stability nor healthy economic growth. 
