Ooi Sang Kuang: Managing risks in mortgage financing 
Welcoming  address  by  Mr  Ooi  Sang  Kuang,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia, for the talk on “Managing Risks in Mortgage Financing”, Kuala Lumpur, 13 January 
2010. 
 It is my great pleasure to welcome all of you today to this dialogue on “Managing Risks in 
Mortgage Financing”. This event is jointly organised by Bank Negara Malaysia and Cagamas 
Berhad  to  review  and  exchange  perspectives  on  developments  in  the  area  of  mortgage 
financing. At least two factors make this a highly topical subject at this particular time. Firstly, 
the  dramatic  events  of  the  global  financial  crisis  have  shed  the  spotlight  directly  on  the 
mortgage  market,  prompting  many  questions  to  be  raised  about  current  practices  in 
mortgage financing. These questions have challenged traditional assumptions that mortgage 
lending is generally a safe and low-risk activity, and drawn attention to the blind spots that we 
need  to  be  concerned  about.  Secondly,  the  current  accommodative  stance  of  monetary 
policy coupled with the increasing intensity of competition in the mortgage market calls for 
greater vigilance by banks in monitoring risks in the mortgage portfolio. Expectations of faster 
and stronger recovery prospects for Asia, and that Asia will begin the process of unwinding 
of accommodative policies ahead of the rest of the world, could also lead to strong capital 
inflows  and  asset  price  increases.  These  combined  conditions  require  banks  to  carefully 
monitor any changes in the direction of risks emanating from the housing market.  
Today’s discussion aims to contribute towards a deeper awareness and understanding of the 
risks and emerging issues in mortgage financing. We hope that this, in turn will be useful to 
the boards and senior management of financial institutions in framing your own approaches 
to managing risks in this area.  
Tremendous  growth  prospects  exist  in  the  mortgage  market  in  Malaysia.  Over  the  last 
5 years, mortgage financing experienced a strong and sustained average annual growth of 
more than 9%. Such loans now constitute a significant 27% of the total industry loan books. 
With emerging signs of an early and stronger recovery in the domestic economy, renewed 
optimism  can  be  expected  for  more  robust  growth  in  the  domestic  mortgage  market.  The 
demand  for  housing  will  also  receive  additional  support  from  continuous  efforts  by  the 
government to promote home ownership and investments. For example, the new scheme to 
be launched this year for EPF contributors to fund the purchase of higher value or additional 
houses is expected to increase consumer purchasing power for homes in the coming years. 
The growing stream of new entrants in the labour market has also enhanced prospects for an 
expanded market among first time home buyers.  
At  present,  the  overall  mortgage  financing  portfolio  in  Malaysia  remains  sound,  with  gross 
non-performing loan on a declining trend since 2000. However, while mortgage financing has 
continued  to  be  a  profitable  business  for  most  banks,  competition  has  intensified 
considerably, with lending yields falling dramatically over the last decade. To a large extent, 
such competition has been the outgrowth of a fundamental change in the general approach 
to mortgage lending. Traditionally, mortgage financing was approached as a credit rationing 
process. In contrast, today banks compete aggressively for borrowers by packaging highly 
competitive spread of home loan products to meet different needs of borrowers. In the more 
developed markets, this has manifested in more prevalent sales of non-traditional mortgage 
products  to  sub-prime  borrowers  as  competition  for  borrowers  has  intensified.  The  rise  of 
investment property has also been striking, with significant growth in this loan class observed 
in Malaysia relative to owner occupiers.  
In this environment, it is important that banks develop a more complete understanding of the 
full  spectrum  of  risks  presented  in  this  business.  The  dangers  of  complacency  have  been 
BIS Review 3/2010 
 1
clearly  demonstrated  in  the  devastating  consequences  of  this  global  financial  crisis.  Basic 
failures in risk management and oversight have been cited as a key characteristic of financial 
institutions that suffered large losses during the crisis. In many instances, boards and senior 
management  of  these  institutions  neglected  to  understand  and  control  their  institutions’ 
balance sheet growth and the risks that they were exposed to. Some institutions in fact made 
deliberate strategic decisions to retain large exposures to financial instruments linked to sub-
prime  assets  but  failed  to  take  appropriate  measures  to  control  or  mitigate  those  risks.  In 
many financial institutions, the rigor of board scrutiny and due diligence was replaced with an 
over-reliance on external ratings or complex internal models for credit evaluations. This was 
compounded by incentive structures that were not adequately risk-aligned and inconsistent 
with long-term value creation, eventually undermining the soundness of banks.  
These  failures  have  extracted  a  high  price  on  affected  financial  institutions,  investors  and 
national economies at large. Some of the large financial institutions that entered aggressively 
into the sub-prime market are now no longer around, while losses from the write-downs of 
loans and provisions have been staggering. Between the second quarters of 2007 and 2009, 
the global write-down of loan provisions had amounted to USD1.3 trillion. In October 2009, 
the International Monetary Fund indicated that the estimates could rise further to as much as 
USD2.8 trillion1.  
The  events  which  have  since  unfolded  underscore  the  fact  that  effectively  managing  risks 
associated  with  mortgage  financing  encompasses  a  much  broader  set  of  considerations  – 
including the consequences of an adverse and broad downturn in the housing market. The 
crisis  has  reinforced  the  need  for  banks  to  consider  the  cyclical  developments  in  the 
mortgage  financing  market  more  explicitly  in  their  risk  assessments.  Factors  such  as  a 
sustained growth in house prices, low interest rates and modest equity commitment should 
inform banks of the risk outlook for the mortgage segment and corresponding risk mitigation 
actions that are needed to avert potential losses. 
Changes observed in the market features of the business in other countries also foreshadow 
what may in time characterise the mortgage market in Malaysia. In some markets, brokers of 
home loans are commonplace and a growing proportion of loans are protected by insurance.  
In an increasingly challenging environment, banks will need to demonstrate that they have 
sufficiently strong balance sheets, processes, and management plans in place to contain the 
risks, while providing continued support for portfolio expansion and product innovation in the 
mortgage financing segment. This will entail continuous assessments of the changing profile 
of risk and the appropriate consideration of new and alternative ways to manage risks. The 
board in particular is responsible to ensure that product innovation and the re-packaging of 
risks in the mortgage portfolio do not outstrip the bank’s capacity to manage the associated 
risks.  
Today, we are pleased to have three distinguished speakers address some of these issues 
and developments in greater depth. They are Dr. Yeah Kim Leng from RAM Holdings Berhad 
and Dr. John Lee from KPMG who will share an overview and their perspectives on risks in 
mortgage  markets  in  Malaysia,  as  well  as  their  experiences  with  approaches  to  managing 
these risks in the light of the many changes taking place in this area.  
We are also especially honoured to welcome Mr. Peter Pang, the Deputy Chief Executive of 
the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, who will speak on Hong Kong’s experience in the area of 
mortgage  financing.  As  you  all  know,  Hong  Kong  has  one  of  the  most  developed  and 
healthiest mortgage markets in the region with a delinquency ratio reported at only 0.04% in 
October  20092.  Hong  Kong’s  leadership  in  advancing  innovations  in  sound  mortgage  risk 
                                                 
1 
2  HKMA Monthly Statistical Bulletin. 
IMF Global Financial Stability Report, October 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2010
management practices over the years, including through the role of the Hong Kong Mortgage 
Corporation  (HKMC),  provides  many  useful  parallels  and  lessons  that  can  be  drawn  for 
Malaysia. Cagamas is very pleased to have established a strategic partnership with HKMC in 
2007  which  will  allow  us  to  avail  of  HKMC’s  significant  expertise  to  provide  the  banking 
industry in Malaysia with expanded options for effectively managing mortgage risks.  
We  are  encouraged  by  the  strong  turnout  from  among  members  of  the  board  risk 
management committees, senior management and risk managers at this event today. Your 
roles are critical in bringing visibility and attention to the key risk issues in mortgage financing 
within  your  institutions  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  associated  risks,  both  present  and 
foreseeable, are identified and effectively controlled. It is particularly useful to bear in mind 
that vigilance is needed to be alert to problems that can quickly arise in business segments 
that may not have presented difficulties in the past. By acting proactively to avoid controllable 
risks, material future losses can be avoided at far lower costs to banks and the society at 
large. On that note, I look forward to a fruitful and constructive dialogue.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 3/2010 
 3
