Alan Bollard: New Zealand’s economic recovery, external vulnerabilities 
and the balancing act ahead 
Speech by Mr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the Wellington 
Regional Chamber of Commerce, Wellington, 14 June 2010. 
 How is our recovery going? 
1. 
We have been out of recession for a year now, and we can take stock of the recovery so far. 
We  hit  a  trough  in  the  New  Zealand  economy  in  the  second  quarter  of  2009,  marking  a 
turning point after a year during which we contracted a total 2.2 percent. This was a long and 
deep recession by our standards, but compared with other OECD countries, we got through 
reasonably lightly. A period of fragile stimulus – assisted growth followed. 
We have now removed most of the temporary liquidity measures that we introduced during 
the  crisis.  We  believe  we  are  in  a  more  robust  growth  situation,  and  that  is  why  we  have 
judged this to be the right time to start removing monetary policy stimulus and move towards 
more normal policy settings.  
 BIS Review 82/2010 
 1
 The recovery has been assisted by strength in our Asian-Australian trading partners, and in 
our international commodity prices. We have been enjoying very strong export price growth 
by  the  standards  of  the  last  two  decades.  While  it  will  take  time  to  confirm  this,  there  is 
evidence that we have moved to a stronger terms of trade track, and this is clearly good for 
our growth future. 
The  domestic  recovery  has  been  much  more  muted.  Both  the  business  and  household 
sectors  have  been  through  harsh  times  and  this  has  changed  their  behaviours  –  they  are 
reducing  debt  and  reassessing  their  spending.  Understanding  how  much  these  are 
temporary  or  enduring  behaviours,  is  complicated  by  the  tax  and  spending  changes 
announced  in  the  recent  Budget.  These  will  likely  rebalance  investment  from  property  to 
other assets but it is too early to be clear about this. In addition, the indirect tax changes will 
offset the pattern of consumption. The overall effect is that we expect a gradual recovery in 
business investment, housing and general consumption, but off a low base, and less funded 
by debt than in the past.  
The  Greek  fiscal  crisis,  the  subsequent  European  support  package,  and  the  resulting 
financial market concerns have not changed our central view about economic recovery, but 
they have certainly given us food for thought about the strength of European markets for our 
exports, about the robustness of the term funding markets for our banks, and about financial 
market tolerance for fiscal deficits. We will keep watching these developments closely.  
Is our economy rebalancing? 
2. 
There has been a lot of discussion about the big global imbalances that had been allowed to 
develop  over  the  last  decade,  and  the  extent  to  which  they  contributed  to  the  Global 
Financial Crisis. More importantly we are all keen to see how much global rebalancing is now 
underway with the recovery. So far the answer is that some rebalancing has happened, but it 
is still quite unclear whether this will be lasting or sufficient. 
What  about  New  Zealand?  Here  we  are  seeing  strong  improvements  in  export  prices,  but 
they are not yet translating into strong domestic consumption or strong investment. Instead 
households and businesses are using extra income to stabilise their balance sheets. 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2010
 In assessing the state of balance of the New Zealand economy, we might view it through four 
different lenses: funding imbalances for banks, fiscal imbalances on the government account, 
savings  imbalances  on  the  household  account,  and  external  imbalances.  These  are  all 
inter-related, though in complex ways. 
Funding imbalances – Australasian banks have relied heavily on short term foreign funding, 
and that proved a vulnerability in the crisis. For that reason we have put in place a liquidity 
policy  requiring  banks  to  hold  longer-term  foreign  funding  plus  retail  deposits  to  meet  an 
increasing core funding ratio. That has already contributed to longer duration funding. This 
recently proved its worth during the Greek crisis when there were renewed signs of fragility in 
international funding markets. 
BIS Review 82/2010 
  3
Fiscal  imbalances  –  The  Greek  crisis  also  focussed  attention  on  to  government  funding 
deficits. The Global Financial Crisis led to many governments assuming the costs of rescue 
packages and the risks of the financial sector more generally, during the recession at a time 
when  their  tax  revenues  were  falling  and  social  expenditures  rising.  The  result  has  been 
some very unattractive fiscal deficit positions and forward projections that will strain available 
funding.  The  markets  have  focussed  on  cases like  Greece  with  no  independent  exchange 
rate or monetary policy. However as the Bank for International Settlements shows, the issue 
of fiscal sustainability goes much wider. They show rapid growth in public debt to GDP ratios 
for the next 30 years, even under an assumption of fiscal retrenchment, resulting in interest 
payment to GDP ratios that could go as high as 20 percent or more. Many OECD countries 
would  need  to  run  at  least  2–3  percent  budget  surpluses  consistently  for  several  decades 
just to stabilise their public debt ratios at pre-crisis levels. 
 The New Zealand fiscal accounts continue in deficit, but with a credible and improving track 
going  forward.  The  recent  budget  confirmed  this.  The  financial  markets  have  seen  this  as 
very credible, and New Zealand is generally rated very positively for its fiscal approach. This 
is shown in the following international estimates of financial fragility by the UBS, an index that 
includes public sector debt and private credit. New Zealand is rated in the middle of the pack. 
Household  balance  sheet  –  The  household  sector  has  been  the  most  obvious  source  of 
imbalance in New Zealand with balance sheets heavily skewed to housing, high debt ratios, 
and  very  low  traditional  savings  via  financial  instruments.  By  comparison  with  other 
OECD countries  New  Zealand  households  are  very  low  savers,  on  average  consuming 
around 9 percent more than they earned over the past decade, according to Statistics New 
Zealand  estimates.  Figures  like  these  may  over-state  Kiwi  households’  vulnerability  and 
there are other data that present a less worrying picture, but by any standards New Zealand 
household balance sheets do not look healthy. This was one reason why we have had such 
high levels of the OCR over the last decade. 
 
4 
 BIS Review 82/2010
Based on our Monetary Policy Statement, we forecast New Zealand household savings to 
improve from a very poor position to one that has improved, but is still insignificant deficit. 
We  believe  that  since  the  crisis,  New  Zealanders  have  decided  they  are  over-exposed  to 
property assets and to high debt, and they are prepared to constrain consumption to improve 
their savings. But we are unclear how much rebalancing they contemplate, and for how long.  
 BIS Review 82/2010 
  5
In addition much will depend on how these extra savings are invested, and whether this is 
domestically or internationally. Financial markets do not judge our savings balance directly, 
but rather through its funding implications and its contributions to the external balance. 
Balance of Trade – Strong export prices for much of our primary products (somewhat muffled 
by  the  strongish  exchange  rate)  have  been  yielding  improved  export  returns.  At  the  same 
time consumers, farmers and businesses are all moderating their demand for imports. The 
result  has  been  a  quick  and  significant  improvement  in  the  direction  of  trade,  recording 
positive  balances  once  again.  However  we  forecast  that  only  part  of  this  improvement  is 
permanent, as import growth will revive. Were the New Zealand dollar to drop improving our 
competitiveness, export prices would improve in local currency, and there would also be a 
positive supply response in some products. 
Investment Income – While the trade component in our balance of payments has improved, 
the other major component is far more problematic: that is the investment income balance. 
This measures incoming earnings from the very limited amount of New Zealand investment 
abroad against outgoing earnings from the much larger stock of foreign investment in New 
Zealand. New Zealand runs a large investment income deficit of around 6–7 percent of GDP, 
which is showing little sign of enduring improvement. Indeed it will be difficult to improve this 
metric as that would require us to get our net external debt position on to a downward trend 
and  that  would  require  a  significant  change  in  historic  patterns  of  inward  and  outward 
investment.  
 These  two  components  combine  into  the  current  account,  which  has  been  in  significant 
deficit in New Zealand for 40 years. That is not problematic in itself, but if it is consistently 
funding consumption rather than investment, then that cannot continue. The deficit worsened 
during the housing boom years of 2005–2008, sitting near 9 percent, a very deep deficit by 
OECD  standards.  Interestingly,  throughout  the  crisis  we  experienced  little  sign  of  financial 
market  discomfort  with  that  position.  We  are  now  experiencing  a  big  improvement  in  the 
current account, reducing the deficit to 3 percent, but we believe it will deteriorate again as 
the recovery picks up. 
6 
 BIS Review 82/2010
Our overall external imbalance  
3.  
Years of running these external deficit flows means that we are now significantly in debt to 
foreigners: in plain terms, they have more than twice as much invested in NZ ($290 billion) 
as we have invested overseas ($125 billion). This means the country is running a sizeable 
net investment deficit of around 90 percent of GDP. Most of the debt inherent in this position 
is  in  the  private  sector,  not  the  public  sector.  A  significant  proportion  of  this  relates  to  the 
banking system which does most of the country’s offshore borrowing, effectively on behalf of 
households  and  businesses.  Most  of  it  is  currency-hedged,  so  we  do  not  suffer  major 
currency risks from it. The graph shows how the position has grown over the last decade. 
Our forecasts see this external deficit continuing to grow.  
Financial  markets  and  credit  rating  agencies  use  a  range  of  indicators  to  form  their 
assessment  of  a  country’s  viability  or  fragility.  At  the  moment  most  of  the  focus  is  on 
sovereign  debt  and  the  fiscal  accounts.  However  as  the  recent  credit  downgrade  of  the 
Government  of  Spain  showed,  overall  external  indebtedness  can  play  a  role  in  this.  New 
Zealand is one of the very few developed counties with net external liabilities so high. The 
UBS country risk index mentioned above rates us rather higher in terms of external fragility 
(an index based on exports, current account, external debt, and foreign exchange cover). 
 BIS Review 82/2010 
 7
 This  external  deficit  cannot  keep  increasing  with  impunity.  Ultimately  the  markets  would 
penalise the large external liabilities and deficit position by requiring a larger premium for its 
continued  funding,  and  the  sheer  size  of  servicing  our  obligations  could  become  an 
intolerable burden to the country. Already we spend around 6–7 percent of GDP servicing 
debt and returning profits off-shore to owners of New Zealand domiciled businesses.  
As the recent IMF Report on New Zealand makes clear, there are a number of aspects of our 
external position that are unusual by world standards: 
 
We have relatively high foreign investment here, but we do not do much investment 
overseas.  
We have high levels of private debt, predominantly overseas funded, short-term, but 
fx hedged.  
Almost all of this debt is channelled through bank lending.  
We do not save much, with very limited financial savings and stocks and shares. 
Overwhelmingly our household assets are invested in housing and other property. 
  How to reduce our vulnerability  
4.  
If this growth in our external indebtedness cannot continue, then it will not. But rather than 
await the market descriptions noted above, are there proactive steps that can improve the 
situation?  
The diagram shows a highly simplified picture of how the actions of households, businesses, 
banks and government feed into our balance of payments, in a way that over time drives our 
net international position. While the actions of government and businesses can be significant, 
the  real  impact  comes  from  household  consumption  and  savings,  and  from  the  actions  of 
banks.  
8 
 BIS Review 82/2010
 With this is mind, how can we see this external position best being controlled and improved? 
Reducing our external vulnerability is a long-term proposition that would mean running lower 
current  account  deficits  than  we  have  in  the  past  and  sustaining  them  over  an  extended 
period,  not  just  one  or  two  years.  Our  calculations  suggest  that  reducing  current  account 
deficits to no more than about 5 percent of GDP on average is necessary to stabilise the Net 
Investment Position as a share of GDP, while reducing that share over time would require 
lower deficits to be run. 
There are many factors that can influence the size of our deficits, some of which are within 
New  Zealand’s  control  and  some  that  are  not.  Changes  in  national  savings,  the  terms  of 
trade,  exchange  rates,  interest  rates,  and  the  fiscal  balance  can  all  affect  New  Zealand’s 
external vulnerability. Most would take some time to have an effect on the external balance 
sheet.  
From  a  policy  perspective,  there  are  no  magic  bullets  for  running  better  current  account 
balances. However, there are a range of policy areas underway that can certainly make a 
positive difference:  
 
Continuing  to  move  New  Zealand’s  tax  system  in  favour  of  saving  rather  than 
consumption.  
Ensuring  fiscal  policy  remains  focused  on  achieving  a  conservative  path  for  the 
public debt.  
Ensuring that our framework for financial regulation discourages excessive rates of 
credit expansion and excessive leverage. The core funding requirement for banks is 
already  resulting  in  a  lengthening  maturity  structure  for  their  offshore  borrowings 
which has helped them reduce their exposure to recent financial market volatility.  
Continuing to search for ways to help ensure that monetary policy adjustment is not 
borne excessively by the tradables-producing industries. However some of this will 
continue to be dependent on how other countries run their exchange rate policies.  
   BIS Review 82/2010 
 9
 Ensuring that public policy facilitates investment activities that achieve sustainable 
real returns and does not inadvertently encourage activities that are of little lasting 
economic value.  
But this challenge is not primarily up to the Government. It mainly requires the changes that 
we are seeing in household behaviours to continue. Helping them are higher returns for bank 
deposits,  revamped  regulation  of 
finance 
companies, more attention to financial literacy, and a rising interest rate track which favours 
savers. More of these savings will be in asset areas other than property and some of them 
will be in overseas investments. Ultimately the onus is on households to continue the current 
trend of saving more and investing better. 
investment  offers  and 
financial  advisors, 
10 
 BIS Review 82/2010
