Duvvuri Subbarao: Post-crisis reforms to banking regulation and 
supervision – think global, act local 
Inaugural  address  by  Dr  D  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & Industry-Indian Banks’ Association (FICCI-IBA) 
Conference on “Global Banking: Paradigm Shift”, Mumbai, 7 September 2010. 
 1.  
Thank  you  very  much  for  inviting  me  to  inaugurate  this  FICCI-IBA  Conference  on 
“Global Banking: Paradigm Shift”. This Conference is a flagship event in the annual banking 
calendar, and I attach a lot of value to this opportunity of speaking to and interacting with the 
banking community.  
2.  
When I spoke at this forum last year, I had touched on some of the early lessons of 
the global crisis and how they were shaping the debate on reforms to banking regulation and 
supervision. Over the last one year, there has been significant progress in crystallizing the 
reform agenda and in reaching a shared understanding on most of the measures. The thrust 
of  the  reform  package  has  been  to  fortify  the  banking  system,  correct  the  incentive 
framework and ensure its long term stability. Reflecting one of the big lessons of the crisis 
that a collection of healthy banks does not necessarily result in a healthy banking system at 
the  aggregate  level,  the  reforms  focus  on  both  the  microprudential  dimension  at  the 
individual institution level and the macroprudential dimension at the systemic level. 
The effort has been led by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) 
3.  
which  held  several  meetings  and  consultations  over  the  last  year  to  define  the  reform 
agenda  and  to  flesh  out  the  individual  components.  India,  as  you  know,  has  been  a 
newly inducted member of the BCBS, and the Reserve Bank has been actively engaged 
in the process of crystallizing what has now come to be called Basel III.  
4.  
In  July  2010,  the  BCBS  put  out  a  comprehensive  paper  indicating  the  broad 
agreement reached on the Basel III proposals. Broadly, these reforms will require banks 
to  hold  more  and  better  quality  capital  and  to  carry  more  liquid  assets,  will  limit  their 
leverage and mandate them to build up capital buffers in good times that can be drawn 
down  in  periods  of  stress.  The  Basel  III  process  is  not  yet  complete.  In  particular,  the 
actual calibration of the measures and their phasing in is yet to be determined. This will 
be done after a further assessment of the reasonableness of these measures and their 
impact on banks’ balance sheets as well as the national economies.  
5.  
Quite  understandably,  there  has  been  a  lot  of  international  media attention  on 
the implications of the Basel III proposals and their pros and cons. We have had some of 
that in India too focusing on what the proposed reforms might mean for us. I thought the 
most efficient way to use this FICCI-IBA platform that you have so kindly provided me is 
to highlight the broad contours of the Basel III proposals and their potential implications 
for Indian banks. The theme of this conference, “Banking 2020 – Making the Decade’s 
Promise Come True” is very appropriate as the banking sector needs to evaluate how 
best it can contribute to the double digit growth and rapid poverty reduction that we are 
aspiring  to.  Hopefully,  the  assessment  of  the  Basel  III  package  that  I  will  give  will 
contribute to a more informed evaluation of the role that banks should play in our growth 
process.  
6.  
Let me start by taking each of the major components of the Basel III package. 
On each, I will explain what the proposal implies in general and then look at it from an 
Indian perspective.  
BIS Review 114/2010 
 1
I.  
Capital adequacy framework – BCBS proposals  
Improving quality, consistency and transparency of capital  
7.   The  proposals  regarding  the  capital  adequacy  framework  aim  at  ensuring  that  the 
quality  of  capital  is  high,  there  is  consistency  in  the  definition  of  capital  across  various 
jurisdictions and that there are appropriate disclosures to make the capital base transparent. 
The focus is on making common equity the predominant form of bank capital and to enhance 
the  loss  absorbing  capacity  of  the  other  elements  of  regulatory  capital.  The  key  changes 
include  prescription  of  an  explicit  minimum  Tier  I  requirement;  deduction  above  a  certain 
threshold,  from  common  equity,  of  significant  investments  in  the  common  shares  of 
unconsolidated financial institutions and deferred tax assets arising from timing differences 
etc.; limiting the recognition of minority interest in group capital to the extent of its share in 
the  minimum  capital  required  for  subsidiary  banks;  and  appropriate  disclosure  of  various 
elements of capital.  
Improving risk coverage of the Basel II framework  
8.  
The  crisis  has  exposed  several  flaws  in  the  quantitative  risk  management  models 
used by banks. One of the flaws is the inability of the models to capture the market risk in 
their  trading  book  positions,  particularly  under  stressed  conditions.  This  is  sought  to  be 
corrected  by  requiring  that  the  capital  calculations  be  made  on  parameters  calibrated  to 
stressed conditions.  
9.  
The  last  decade  witnessed  a  quantum  jump  in  the  derivatives  activities  of  banks 
leading  to  a  phenomenal  rise  in  counterparty  credit  risk.  One  of  the  shortcomings  of  the 
prevailing  Basel  II  framework  is  that  it  does  not  fully  capture  the  unexpected  rise  in 
counterparty  exposures  under  stressed  conditions.  Besides,  during  the  crisis  we  saw  the 
financial condition of counterparties worsen at the same time when they suffered losses on 
their  derivatives  transactions,  leading  to  the  so  called  “wrong  way  risk”.  The  counterparty 
credit risk framework of Basel II is being revised to address these concerns.  
Capital adequacy framework: impact on Indian banks  
10.  
Indian banks are not likely to be significantly impacted by the proposed new capital 
rules. As on June 30, 2010, the aggregate capital to risk weighted assets ratio of the Indian 
banking  system  stood  at  13.4  per  cent  of  which  Tier  I  capital  constituted  9.3  per  cent. 
Although the Basel III norms are yet to be calibrated, it is unlikely that they will be higher than 
the above figures. As such, we do not expect our banking system to be significantly stretched 
in  meeting  the  proposed  new  capital  rules  both  in  terms  of  the  overall  capital  requirement 
and the quality of capital.  
11.  
Indian banks already make most of the deductions from capital now being proposed 
under  Basel  III.  Moreover,  our  banks  do  not  have  re-securitisation  exposures  and  their 
trading books are small. However, there may be some negative impact arising from shifting 
some deductions from Tier I and Tier II capital to common equity.  
12.  
The proposed changes relating to the counterparty credit risk framework are likely to 
have  capital  adequacy  implications  for  some  Indian  banks  having  large  OTC  bilateral 
derivatives  positions.  This  underscores  the  importance  of  enlarging  the  derivatives 
transactions coming within the scope of a multilateral settlement mechanism through central 
counterparties (CCPs).  
Containment of financial leverage of banks: BCBS proposals  
II.  
13.  
The  severity  of  the  downturn  during  the  crisis  was  accentuated  by  the  excessive 
financial  leverage  of  large  international  banks,  typically  as  high  as  50:1.  The  Basel 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2010
Committee’s response to containing this excess is the introduction of a leverage ratio which 
will  be  a  simple,  transparent,  non-risk  based  measure  calibrated  to  act  as  a  credible 
supplement and backstop to the risk-based requirements.  
Containment of financial leverage of banks – impact on Indian banks  
14.  
Estimates show that the leverage in the Indian banking system is quite moderate. In 
the BCBS deliberations, we argued that the SLR portfolio of our banks, which is a regulatory 
mandate, should be excluded from the calculation of the leverage ratio as this carries only a 
moderate risk (i.e. no credit risk and only market risk). However, BCBS took an in-principle 
position that no assets, including cash which obviously has the least risk, should be excluded 
from the measurement of the leverage ratio. Nevertheless, since the Tier 1 capital of many 
Indian banks is comfortable (more than 8%) and their derivatives activities are also not very 
large, we do not expect the leverage ratio to be a binding constraint for Indian banks.  
III.   Reducing the pro-cyclicality of – financial sector regulation: BCBS proposals  
15.  
Critics contend that a major flaw of the Basel II capital regulations is their inherent 
procyclicality. The procyclicality debate came into sharp focus during the crisis. Banks found 
themselves  constrained  in  lending  by  already  shrunk  capital  ratios  owing  to  losses  when 
more  lending  would,  in  fact,  have  helped  in  containing  the  downturn.  To  minimise  the 
procyclical  effects,  BCBS  has  proposed  to:  (a)  base  the  calculation  of  capital  on  more 
conservative estimates of default probabilities, (b) promote more forward looking provisions, 
(c) conserve capital to build capital buffers at individual banks and the banking sector that 
can  be  used  under  stress,  and  (d)  manage  system-wide  risk  by  containing  excess  credit 
growth.  
16.  
The  concept  of  making  countercyclical  provisions  and  establishing  capital  buffers 
simply implies that banks should build up higher levels of provision and capital in good times 
which  could  be  run  down  in  times  of  economic  contraction  consistent  with  safety  and 
soundness considerations. This will be done by defining buffer ranges above the regulatory 
minimum capital requirement. The concept has an intuitive appeal. Operationalizing it though 
is a complex task and poses many challenges.  
17.  
The first and foremost challenge is the difficulty of identifying the inflection point in 
an economic cycle based on objective and observable criteria which would indicate when to 
begin building up a capital buffer and when to start using it. Second, what economic indicator 
do we use? It is difficult to identify a single macroeconomic variable that can be a reliable 
indicator of both good and bad times. For instance, credit growth could be a good indicator of 
the build up phase but credit contraction is usually a lagging indicator of emerging strains in 
the  system.  Third,  any  approach  to  creating  a  capital  buffer  whose  size  varies  with  the 
economic  cycle  poses  the  challenge  of  defining  an  economic  cycle  in  a  global  setting  as 
economic cycles are not globally synchronised. Fourth, experience shows that vulnerabilities 
build up gradually, often over several years, but distress emerges quite rapidly. Hence, the 
capital buffer may have to be released rather abruptly. Fifth, determining the right size of a 
capital  buffer  is  both  a  difficult  task  and  also  a  contentious  issue;  it  will  need  to  be  large 
enough to absorb losses in a downturn and still enable banks to continue lending but not so 
large as to make the insurance against failure too expensive. Finally, any scheme of capital 
buffers needs to be simple and transparent, entail low implementation costs and be as rule-
based  as  possible.  Can  we  design  a  framework  for  reducing  procyclicality  that  meets  all 
these requirements?  
18.  
BCBS is working on addressing all these issues. It must be recognised though that, 
given  the  different  structures  and  stages  of  development  of  financial  systems  across 
countries,  it  will  be  absolutely  essential  to  allow  national  discretion  in  applying  the 
“framework”.  
BIS Review 114/2010 
 3
Reducing the pro-cyclicality of financial – sector regulation: Indian perspective  
19.  
The proposed measures to contain the procyclicality of financial sector regulations 
through capital buffers and provisioning will impose additional costs on banks. Apart from the 
general  concern  in  this  regard,  in  India  we  have  an  additional  concern  about  the  variable 
used to calibrate the countercyclical capital buffer. The most widely discussed candidate for 
this is the credit to GDP ratio. Using the credit GDP ratio is, however, problematic. Unlike in 
advanced economies where this ratio is stable, in emerging economies such as India, it will 
likely go up for structural reasons – enhanced credit intermediation owing to higher growth as 
well as efforts at deepening financial inclusion.  
20.  
In fact, a study undertaken by the Reserve Bank shows that the credit to GDP ratio 
has not historically been a good indicator of build up of systemic risk in our banking system. 
Furthermore,  some  economic  sectors  such  as  real  estate,  housing,  micro  finance  and 
consumer credit are relatively new  in India, and banks have only recently begun financing 
them in a big way. The risk build up in such sectors cannot accurately be captured by the 
aggregate  credit 
to 
countercyclical policies, and I believe we need to continue to use them. To effectively deploy 
countercyclical  measures,  we  also  need  to  improve  our  capabilities  to  predict  business 
cycles at the aggregate and sectoral levels, and identify them in real time. This will require 
better quality of economic and financial data as well as improved analytical capabilities.  
therefore  used  sectoral  approaches 
to  GDP  ratio.  We  have 
Liquidity risk management: BCBS proposals  
IV.  
21.  
The  financial  turmoil  highlighted  the  feedback  loops  through  which  institutional 
liquidity constraints cascade into systemic solvency crises because of interconnectedness. A 
typical chain reaction runs as follows. An institution gets into a liquidity problem, is unable to 
tide over that because of a hostile funding environment, indulges in fire sale of its assets to 
generate  liquidity,  incurs  losses  in  the  process  which  makes  raising  funding  even  more 
difficult and is then forced into further fire sales. This leads to a sharp drop in asset prices 
and  the  pressures  transmit  rapidly,  and  then  explosively,  to  other  banks  and  financial 
institutions pulling the whole system into a “death spiral”.  
22.  
The  BCBS  proposals  involve  two  regulatory  standards  for  managing  liquidity  risk:  
(i) a Liquidity Coverage Ratio to ensure resilience over the short term; and (ii) a Net Stable 
Funding  Ratio  to  promote  resilience  over  the  longer  term.  Reckoning  that  there  is  wide 
diversity  in  the  measures  used  by  supervisors  for  monitoring  the  liquidity  risk,  the  new 
proposals also include a set of common liquidity-risk monitoring tools.  
Liquidity risk management: Indian perspective  
23.  
The major challenge for banks in India in implementing the liquidity standards is to 
develop the capability to collect the relevant data accurately and granularly, and to formulate 
and predict the liquidity stress scenarios with reasonable accuracy and consistent with their 
own  situation.  Since  our  financial  markets  have  not  experienced  the  levels  of  stress  that 
advanced country markets have, predicting the appropriate stress scenario is going to be a 
complex judgement call.  
24.  
On the positive side, most of our banks follow a retail business model and also have 
a substantial amount of liquid assets which should enable them to meet the new standards. 
There is an issue about the extent to which statutory holdings of SLR are counted towards 
the proposed liquidity ratios. An argument could be made that they should not be counted at 
all  as  they  are  supposed  to  be  maintained  on  an  ongoing  basis.  However,  it  would  be 
reasonable to treat at least a part of the SLR holdings in calculating the liquidity ratio under 
stressed conditions, particularly as these are government bonds against which RBI provides 
liquidity.  
4 
 BIS Review 114/2010
V.  
Dealing with systemically important – financial institutions (SIFIs): BCBS 
proposals  
25.  
BCBS is engaged in evolving an appropriate framework for dealing with systemically 
important banks and financial institutions in the international context. This involves a host of 
tasks:  development  of  indicators  of  systemic  risk,  identification  of  systemically  important 
financial  institutions  (SIFIs),  differential  systems  for  SIFIs  by  way  of  capital  and  liquidity 
surcharge  and  enhanced  supervision,  improving  the  capacity  to  resolve  SIFIs  without 
recourse  to  taxpayer  money,  reducing  the  probability  and  impact  of  a  SIFI  failure, 
strengthening  the  core  financial  market  infrastructure  to  reduce  contagion  risks  if  failure 
occurs and improving the oversight of SIFIs.  
26.  
Even if we accept that SIFIs should be subject to some additional regulation on top 
of the base level regulations, there are several issues that need to be addressed in fleshing 
out  the  necessary  framework.  The  first  issue  is  of  evolving  objective  criteria  for  identifying 
systemically important institutions. Second, how do we apply the criteria since the systemic 
importance  of  an  institution  is  likely  to  be  time-varying  and  state-dependent  as  per  the 
economic environment? Finally, drawing a sharp distinction between a SIFI and a non-SIFI 
requires considerable judgement and has a moral hazard downside.  
Containment of systemic risk: Indian perspective  
27.  
The framework for identification of SIFIs that will evolve is expected to be applicable 
uniformly  to  all  countries.  India  will  also  need  to  adopt  that.  The  identification  under  the 
BCBS  framework  will  happen  from  an  international  perspective,  and  we  need  to  do  a 
supplementary exercise to identify SIFIs in the domestic context even if they are not in the 
international list. In either case, if the proposal for levying systemic risk capital and liquidity 
charge  is  eventually  agreed  upon,  a  few  Indian  banks  may  be  called  upon  to  maintain 
additional capital and liquidity charges.  
28.  
Then there is the issue of resolution of SIFIs in the event of failure. We also need to 
promote  structures  which  make  such  resolutions  smooth  and  orderly.  The  recent  Reserve 
Bank  initiative  to  constitute  a  working  group  to  examine  the  suitability  of  financial  holding 
companies  in  India  is  a  step  in  this  direction. RBI  has  also  been  constantly  upgrading  the 
regulatory and supervisory framework for financial conglomerates. Efforts are also under way 
to bring a larger number of financial transactions within the ambit of multilateral settlement 
through central counterparties.  
Regulation of compensation practices of banks: BCBS proposals  
VI. 
29.  
It is now widely acknowledged that the flawed incentive framework underlying the 
compensation  structures  in  the  advanced  country  banking  sectors  fuelled  the  crisis.  The 
performance-based compensation of bank executives is typically justified on the ground that 
banks need to acquire and retain talent. We now know, with the benefit of hindsight, that the 
compensation  framework  overlooked  the  perverse  incentives  it  would  engender.  Bank 
executives focused too much on short-term profits and compromised long term interests with 
disastrous consequences. The Financial Stability Board has since evolved a set of principles 
to govern compensation practices and the Basel Committee has developed a methodology 
for assessing compliance with these principles. The proposed framework involves increasing 
the proportion of variable pay, aligning it with long-term value creation and instituting deferral 
and claw-back clauses to offset future losses caused by the executives.  
Regulation of compensation practices of banks: Indian perspective  
30.  
Since  70  per  cent  of  our  banking  sector  is  accounted  for  by  public  sector  banks 
where compensation is determined by the government, and where the variable component is 
BIS Review 114/2010 
 5
very limited, the proposed reform to compensation structures is relevant in India only to the 
remaining 30 per cent of the non-public sector industry segment. Private, foreign and local 
area  banks  in  India  are  statutorily  required  to  obtain  RBI’s  regulatory  approval  for  the 
remuneration of their whole time directors and chief executive officers. In evaluating these 
proposals  in  respect  of  Indian  banks,  Reserve  Bank  has  historically  ensured  that  the 
compensation is not excessive, is consistent with industry norms, is aligned to the size of the 
bank’s business and that the variable pay component is limited. In respect of foreign banks, 
the Reserve Bank has largely gone by the recommendation of the bank’s head office.  
31.  
However, reflecting the spirit of the global initiative on compensation structures, we 
determined  that  there  is  need  for  reform  in  India  too  towards  aligning  compensation 
structures  to  FSB  principles.  Accordingly,  in  July  2010,  RBI  issued  draft  guidelines  on 
Compensation  of  Whole  Time  Directors/Chief  Executive  Officers  /Risk  Takers  and  Control 
Staff  inviting  public  comments.  The  intent  behind  the  guidelines  is  to  encourage  banks  to 
ensure  effective  governance  of  compensation,  align  the  compensation  with  prudent  risk 
taking, 
facilitate  constructive 
engagement  by  all  stakeholders.  The  guidelines  require  banks’  boards  to  formulate  and 
adopt  a  comprehensive  compensation  policy  covering  all  employees  (risk  takers  and 
control/compliance staff). We have advised that variable pay should be risk aligned, but we 
have not proposed any limit on the variable components. As regards foreign banks, we will 
require them to submit an annual declaration that their compensation structure in India is in 
conformity with FSB principles and standards.  
32.  
As I have said earlier, the remuneration and incentive structure of public sector bank 
executives  are  determined  by  the  Government.  The  executive  compensation  in  the  public 
sector, as is well known, is lower than that in the private sector. Notwithstanding the historical 
reasons  for  this,  there  is  perhaps  a  good  reason  to  revisit  this.  If  public  sector  banks  are 
required  to  compete  with  private  banks  on  a  level  playing  field,  there  is  a  good  case  for 
compensating them too on a competitive base. There is also the risk that if the public sector 
bank compensation is not improved, the public sector may lose talent to the private sector.  
improve  supervisory  oversight  of  compensation  and 
International financial reporting standards (IFRS): reform proposals  
VII.  
33.  
In  the  wake  of  the  crisis,  fair  value  accounting  has  come  in  for  criticism  for  its 
inadequacy to deal with the typical features of a financial crisis: illiquid markets and distress 
sale of assets. It is argued that fair value accounting, no matter that it has logical appeal, is 
too rigid for a crisis situation and that it, in fact, fuels a downturn. The G-20 Working Group 
on  Enhancing  Sound  Regulation  and  Strengthening  Transparency  recommended  that  the 
accounting  standards  setters  and  prudential  supervisors  should  work  together  to  identify 
solutions that are consistent with the complementary objectives of promoting the stability of 
the  financial  sector  and  improving  the  transparency  of  results  in  the  financial  reports. 
Accordingly,  the  IASB  has  initiated  appropriate  modifications  to  the  relevant  accounting 
standards.  
International financial reporting standards (IFRS) – Indian perspective  
34.  
For  banks in  India,  the  Accounting  Standards issued  by  the  Institute of  Chartered 
Accountants  of  India  (ICAI)  together  with  the  prudential  regulations  of  the  Reserve  Bank 
constitute the framework of the “Indian GAAP” (Generally Accepted Accounting Principles). 
Given India’s growing global integration, the ICAI recognized the need for Indian companies 
to  converge  to  global  standards  in  presenting  their  financial  results.  The  Core  Group 
appointed by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) has since put out phased road maps for 
convergence of Indian corporates and banks with IFRSs. Accordingly, scheduled commercial 
banks in India will have to adopt the converged Indian Accounting Standards for preparing 
their opening balance sheets as at April 1, 2013.  
6 
 BIS Review 114/2010
In moving towards convergence with the IFRSs, there will be challenges for Indian 
35.  
banks. First, the Accounting Standard IFRS 9 relating to financial instruments, which is the 
crucial standard for banks, is itself still evolving and thus convergence with IFRS becomes a 
moving  target.  Second,  the  IT  systems  of  banks  which  are  programmed  to  producing 
financial results as per Indian GAAP will need to be modified. Third, as for any other new 
venture,  banks  will  need  to  build  capacity  for  making  a  seamless  transition  to  the  new 
standards and for the adoption of the expected-loss approach to loan loss provisioning.  
36.  
The Reserve Bank has constituted a Working Group to address the implementation 
issues  and  to  formulate  operational  guidelines  to  facilitate  the  convergence  of  the  Indian 
banking system with the IFRS. The members of the Group include representatives from the 
Indian Banks’ Association (IBA), the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) and 
various  regulatory  and  market  related  departments  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  Besides, 
professionals with core competence, expertise and experience in IFRS implementation have 
been drafted in as special invitees.  
Macroeconomic impact of the proposed BCBS reforms  
37.  
The benefits of the reform package arise from reducing the frequency, severity and 
public costs of financial crises and minimizing the consequent output losses. The costs arise 
by way of possible higher lending rates and lower overall lending. Will the benefits of more 
stringent regulation and supervision outweigh the potential costs? Will the result be the same 
in the short-run as well as in the long-run? These are the questions uppermost in everyone’s 
mind,  most  of  all  in  the  minds  of  governments  and  regulators.  Three  recent  studies  have 
addressed this question – two by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and the third 
by  the  Institute  for  Industrial  Finance  (IIF),  a  Washington  based  private  sector  body  which 
articulates the banks’ point of view.  
38.  
The BIS studies report that if the new requirements are phased in over four years, 
each  percentage  point  increase  in  capital  would  reduce  annual  growth  by  0.04  to 
0.05 percentage points during the implementation period or about 0.2 per cent over the four 
year period. However, as the financial system makes the required adjustment, these costs 
will  dissipate  and  then  reverse  in  the  medium  term,  and  the  growth  path  will  revert  to  its 
original  trajectory.  To  summarize,  the  cost-benefit  calculus  will  possibly  be  negative  in  the 
short-term, albeit modestly, but will be distinctly positive in the medium to long term.  
39.  
The IIF study estimates significantly higher sacrifice ratios. According to this study, 
the  G3  (US,  Euro  Area  and  Japan)  will,  if  they  implement  the  reform  package  in  full,  lose 
growth of up to 0.6 percentage points over the five-year period 2011–15 and 0.3 percentage 
points  over  the  ten-year  period  2011–20.  The  differences  between  the  two  sets  of  studies 
stem  obviously  from  differing  assumptions.  Notably,  the  IIF  study  assumes  a  much  larger 
increase  in  lending  rates  but  does  not  take  into  account  the  putative  benefits  arising  from 
improvements  in  operational  efficiency,  a  more  resilient  financial  system  and  an  executive 
incentive structure aligned to sustainable profitability.  
40.  
Such  significant  differences  in  the  projection  of  the  macroeconomic  impact  of  the 
reform package should not be surprising given the weak database as also the fact that many 
of  the  relationships  are  non-linear.  What  is  significant  though  is  that  notwithstanding  the 
differences  in  projected  outcomes,  all  studies  agree  that  the  benefits  of  a  stronger  and 
healthier financial system will be there for years to come.  
41.  
The  Reserve  Bank  has  also  made  a  preliminary  assessment  of  the  impact  of 
increased capital requirements on our GDP growth path. We will calibrate the phase in of the 
new standards to ensure that the sacrifice ratio is within acceptable limits.  
BIS Review 114/2010 
 7
Implementation of Basel III in India  
42.  
Basel III reflects the lessons of the crisis, and I believe it is going to be quite game 
changing.  However,  as  I  indicated,  not  all  the  reform  measures  are  going  to  be  binding 
constraints for us. Nevertheless, we should not underestimate the challenge of implementing 
Basel III. It will demand greater capacity on the part of both banks and the regulators. I urge 
this conference to flesh out the specifics in this regard.  
43.  
As is well known, India’s prudential regulations are ownership neutral. They will be 
applicable uniformly to public sector banks, private banks and foreign banks. The impact of 
the measures will of course vary and will depend on the business model and risk profile of 
the banks and their domestic and overseas balance sheets. The buffers built into the reform 
package are expected to provide automatic stabilizers obviating the need for external support 
during a downturn. Also, as the buffers will be built-up over time and during the upturn of the 
business cycle, the system should not be unduly stretched.  
44.  
In the case of public sector banks, Government, as the owner, will have to contribute 
to building the capital buffers so as to maintain the floor of 51 per cent in the ownership. This 
is unlikely to put undue pressure on the Government’s fiscal position as it will happen during 
the  cyclical  upturn  when  banks’  profits  and  Government’s  revenues  would  be  buoyant. 
Consequently,  public  sector  banks  should  anticipate  no  problem  in  building  the  buffers 
contemplated under Basel III.  
Conclusion  
45.  
Let me now conclude. My attempt in this address has been to highlight the important 
components  of  the  global  reform  package  on  bank  supervision  and  regulation  and  to 
evaluate them from an Indian perspective. I have also given an assessment of the estimates 
made at the global level of the macroeconomic impact of these reform proposals.  
46.  
Several concerns persist – some immediate and some long-term. By far the most 
pressing immediate concern is about the calibration of the standards and their phasing in. 
The BCBS and the regulators are sensitive to these concerns, and are mindful of the need to 
facilitate  a  smooth  transition  to  the  new  norms,  and  in  particular,  to  ensure  that  the  more 
stringent capital and liquidity requirements do not impede as yet fragile recovery process.  
47.  
Two  features  of  the  reform  package  warrant  special  mention  because  of  the 
communication effort they require. First, banks across the world are apprehensive that even 
as they incur the cost of building the capital buffers they will not be able to use them during a 
downturn, because ironically that is when markets would expect and demand higher capital. 
Second,  some  components  of  the  reform  package  may  have  a  “comply  or  explain” 
framework which allows individual jurisdictions to deviate from any specific provision of the 
package  by  explaining  why  it  has  made  deviations.  There  is  a  risk  though  that  even  well 
reasoned and perfectly justifiable deviations may be interpreted as wilful non-compliance, or 
worse  still  as  unwarranted  regulatory  forbearance,  and  markets  may  penalize  such 
jurisdictions.  What  these  problems  basically  highlight  is  the  need  for  effective  and  timely 
communication  to  explain  the  rationale  for  opting  for  deviations.  Central  banks  have 
traditionally attached considerable importance to communication regarding monetary policy 
to guide market expectations. Now regulators too need to hone their communication skills.  
48.  
There  are  many  reasons  cited  for  India  having  moved  up  to  a  higher  growth 
trajectory.  Most  of  the  reasons  are  familiar.  But  one  of  the  big  unacknowledged  drivers  of 
India’s growth has been the impressive improvement in the quality and quantum of financial 
intermediation over the last decade. The Indian financial sector in general, and Indian banks 
in particular, can be proud of this very credible achievement. As you contemplate, during this 
conference and beyond, the challenge of delivering on your promise over the next decade, I 
urge you to think global and act local. 
8 
 BIS Review 114/2010
