K C Chakrabarty: Banking technology beyond CBS – issues and way 
forward 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Executive  Roundtable  organised  by  the  Institute  for  Development  &  Research  in  Banking 
Technology (IDRBT), Kolkata, 2 July 2010. 
Assistance  provided  by  Dr  Himanshu  Joshi,  Smt  Pallavi  Chavan,  Shri  M  K  Mall  and  Smt  Nikhila  Koduri  in 
preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
 Mr Sambamurthy, Director IDRBT, Shri J P Dua, CMD, Allahabad Bank, Mr Bhaskar 
1. 
Sen, CMD, United Bank of India, and other distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. I am 
indeed very happy to be in your midst today for the IT Conclave being organised by IDRBT 
and  share  my  thoughts  with  you  on  banking  technology  beyond  Core  Banking  Solution 
(CBS). 
2.  
Let me begin by asking, what is the purpose of technology? All of us would agree 
that  technology  has  no  longer  remained  just  a  means  for  automating  processes.  It  has 
revolutionised every industry in the world by  rendering faster and cost effective delivery of 
products and services to customers, who in the normal course could not have afforded the 
same,  and  at  the  same  time  producers  of  goods  and  services  would  remain  viable  and 
profitable. Technology is the surest and most appropriate way of bringing inclusion in 
respect of any product and/or service. 
3.  
As regards the banking sector, technology has completely changed the nature and 
pace of delivery of banking services world over. Not only has it improved the speed but also 
the  quality  of  the  services  delivered,  and  has  at  the  same  time  ensured  tremendous 
reduction  in  transaction  costs  for  the  banks  as  well  as  customers  and  made  it  possible  to 
provide customer service through various delivery channels. 
4.  
In a developing country like ours, technological advancement enables a broader and 
inclusive banking sector and in the process, is a key driver for the sustained and inclusive 
growth of the economy. Having realised the close association between technology, inclusion 
and economic growth, the Reserve Bank of India with the help of institutions, such as IDRBT 
on the one hand, and the banking sector on the other, have been actively involved in utilising 
technology for the development of the Indian banking sector. IDBRT, let me note here, has 
been  an  important  facilitator  in  the  adoption  and  development  of  technology  in  the  Indian 
banking sector. 
5.  
The changing face of the banking sector aided by technological innovations can be 
seen  from  various  developments  in  the  recent  past.  The  most  noteworthy  has  been  the 
usage of the ATM technology. ATMs started as substitutes for bank branches allowing their 
customers to withdraw cash anytime and to extend their services wherever it would not be 
viable  to  operate  a  physical  branch.  The  delivery  channel  revolution  can  be  said  to  have 
begun  with  the  ATM.  The  phenomenal  success  of  ATMs  had  made  the  banking  sector 
develop  more  innovative  delivery  channels  to  build  on  cost  and  service  efficiencies.  As  a 
consequence, banks have begun to introduce tele-banking, call centres, Internet banking and 
mobile banking. 
6.  
Tele-banking is a good medium for customers to make routine queries and also an 
efficient tool for banks to cut down on their manpower resources. The call centre is another 
channel  that  captured  the  imagination  of  banks  as  well  as  customers.  At  these  centres, 
enormous  amount  of 
trained  customer  service 
representatives.  A  call  centre  not  only  cuts  down  on  costs  but  also  improves  customer 
satisfaction.  Moreover,  it  facilitates  24x7  working  and  offers  the  “human  touch”  that 
customers seek. Mobile banking can be regarded as “the delivery channel of the future”. This 
fingertips  of 
information 
is  at 
the 
BIS Review 94/2010 
 1
is because it offers portability and convenience to the user. It is just like having a bank in the 
pocket. 
7.  
It would not have been possible for banks to give the full benefits of tele-banking, 
mobile  banking,  internet  banking,  card  banking  (multiple  delivery  channels)  to  all  its 
customers  without  an  appropriate  banking  solution.  Centralised  CBS  has  been  one  such 
development which has revolutionised the banking sector. CBS can be defined as a solution 
that enables banks to offer a multitude of customer-centric services on a 24x7 basis from a 
single  location,  supporting  retail  as  well  as  corporate  banking  activities,  as  well  as  all 
possible  delivery  channels  existing  and  proposed.  The  centralisation  thus  makes  a 
“one-stop”  shop  for  financial  services  a  reality.  Using  CBS,  customers  can  access  their 
accounts  from  any  branch,  anywhere,  irrespective  of  where  they  have  physically  opened 
their accounts. 
8.   CBS  has  now  stabilised  in  the  banking  sector.  Most  branches  of  commercial  banks, 
including  the  RRBs,  are  being  progressively  brought  into  the  core-banking  fold.  So  far, 
79.4 per cent of the total number of public sector bank branches has adopted CBS. With this 
remarkable  progress  in  the  adoption  of  the  CBS  technology,  let  us  pose  a  few  basic 
questions  to  ourselves.  Do  we,  as  bankers,  know  how  many  customers  our  banking 
sector  serves?  Do  we,  as  bankers  and  as  customers,  know  how  many  products  our 
banks offer? I am sure, the answers based on credible information to both these and many 
such simple questions are not available with us even after the adoption of CBS technology. 
“Information” from “Information Technology” indeed seems to be missing or seriously lacking. 
9.  
Globally, after technology adoption, 90 per cent of the banking staff is involved in 
“front office” jobs of enhancing customer base and ensuring customer loyalty. Only 10 per 
cent of the banking staff is involved in “back office” jobs. The situation in India even after the 
adoption  of  CBS  is  exactly  the  reverse.  A  large  part  of  our  back  office  staff  is  still  heavily 
involved  in  the  preparation  and  submission  of  various  returns.  To  these  concerns,  I  would 
say  that  we  need  a  MIS  server  to  generate  returns  automatically.  We  also  need  the 
centralisation  of  KYC  Norms  and  one-window-for-all-functions  in  the  banking  sector.  A 
mammoth  public  sector  enterprise  like  the  Indian  Railways  has  managed  to  harness  IT  to 
ensure one-window-for-all-functions. We should then ask ourselves, why the banking sector 
cannot  emulate  the  same.  Answer  is  simple,  we  need  to  change  our  business 
processes, systems and delivery models. 
10.  
IT  should  help  banks  not  just  to  deliver  robust  and  reliable  services  to  their 
customers at a lower cost, but also generate and manage information effectively. Information 
should  consist  of  data  which  should  be  collected  based  on  the  principles  of  integrity, 
reliability, and accuracy. Banks are piling up large volumes of data relating to customers and 
transactions. However, how far has this information been subjected to meaningful analysis, 
usage and creation of a database with the banking sector, with an objective to meet not only 
the  diversified  internal  and  external  MIS  requirements  but  also  using  this  information  to 
increase 
techniques  of  Customer 
Relationship Management (CRM), is also not known. 
This is why, I would say, there is a need to look beyond CBS. In today’s world of cut 
11.  
throat  competition  in  the  banking  sector,  retaining  customers  along  with  growing  customer 
base  has  become  very  important.  In  order  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  the  various 
channels such as branch banking, mobile banking and internet banking, banks may consider 
the  use  of  a  comprehensive  CRM  solution  which  would  enable  them  to  access  the  entire 
customer details and provide a 360 degree view across channels and products and enhance 
service quality. 
12.  
CRM can be defined as the process that has the potential to make the right offer to 
the  right  client,  at  the  right  time  via  the  right  channel.  Information  on  business  profiles  of 
banks and its margins, risks associated with the businesses, number of products, customer 
the  volume  of  profitable  business  using  unique 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2010
information,  business  volumes  and  income  from  various  verticals  play  an  important  role  in 
focussing on a profitable and effective CRM. 
13.  
There are four ways in which CRM enables the development of new capabilities in 
CBS to cope with emerging realities around risk, regulation and customer retention. First, it 
can  offer  a  unified  view  of  the  customers.  Secondly,  it  can  help  provide  a  consistent 
message  to  customers.  Third,  it  can  provide  end-to-end  customer  care.  Fourth,  it  helps  in 
building long-term customer relationships. Fifth, it helps in identification of best customers. 
CRM  is  thus  recognised  as  an  avenue  for  banks  to  go  beyond  other  banks  in  terms  of 
customer retention and increase in business volumes. 
14.  
CRM,  however,  has  certain  pre-conditions  for  its  successful  implementation.  First, 
business requirements and targets have to be defined. I would say that technology has to 
make the solution, not the other way round. Secondly, it is important CRM does not solve all 
the  problems  a  bank  has,  so  first  it  may  be  necessary  to  analyse  the  problems,  and  the 
possible impact of CRM, then prioritise. Third, banks need to understand that they need to 
make  a  beginning.  It  may  be  a  small  start  but  it  is  important  to  start.  They  can  learn  and 
improve  later.  Fourthly,  Business  Process  Re-engineering  (BPR)  of  processes  would  be 
required  before  implementing  the  CRM.  Fifth,  there  is  a  need  to  change  the  mindset  of 
employees. 
15.  
Finally, for CRM to succeed, we also need to have in place IT governance, which is 
another  area  that  would  be  covered  in  today’s  seminar.  Governance  is  not  about  what 
decisions get made – that is management – but it is about who makes the decisions and how 
they  are  made.  IT  governance  is  the  process  of  specifying  the  decision  rights  and 
accountability framework to encourage desirable behaviour in the use of IT. As in the case of 
corporate  governance,  IT  governance  is  the  responsibility  of  the  board  of  directors  and 
executive management. In fact, it could be said that in the banking sector, IT Governance is 
an important sub-set of overall Corporate Governance. 
16.  
Given  the  enormity  of  investment  in  IT  infrastructure  and  the  ever-increasing 
dependence on IT for operating and managing the day-to-day business activities, there are 
concerns  among  various  stakeholders  and  the  upsurge  in  the  call  for  IT  Governance  has 
stemmed  from  this  concern.  IT  Governance  in  banks  focuses  on  information  technology 
systems, their performance and risk management. 
17.  
With  the  high  rate  of  technological  obsolescence,  the  need  for  proper  IT 
governance,  particularly  in  the  case  of  banks,  is  gaining  prominence.  Adoption  of  IT 
Governance in banks would result in effective control and derive better value on the huge IT 
infrastructure  created  by  banks.  This  would  ultimately  result  in  enabling  better  alignment 
between IT and Business, create efficiencies, enhance conformity to internationally accepted 
best practices and improve overall IT performance of banks. 
18.  
To  implement  an  effective  governance  structure,  organisations  particularly  those 
having significant IT investments are constrained by certain factors. Common among such 
inhibiting factors are poor strategic alignment between business and IT strategy, absence of 
appropriate  and  re-engineered  business  processes  and  delivery  models,  lack  of  project 
ownership,  poor  risk  management,  ineffective  resource  management.  Time  has  come  for 
banks  to  focus  on  these  issues  by  going  beyond  CBS  systems  and  thereby  reap  the  full 
benefits of technology upgradation. 
Another  important  aspect  of  IT  governance  is  the  need  to  address  enhanced 
19.  
security concerns associated with technology. Though the seminar will be addressing such 
issues, I would only like to draw your attention to the plethora of terms used in cyber crime 
world, such as, Malware, Viruses, Trojans, Worms, Spyware and Bots, Phishing Spam and 
Spoofing,  etc.  Basic  security  measures  involve  protection  by  well  selected  passwords, 
change of file permissions and back up of computer’s data. Security will probably always be 
high on the IT agenda simply because cyber criminals know that a successful attack can be 
very profitable. This means they will always strive to find new ways to circumvent IT security, 
BIS Review 94/2010 
 3
and users will consequently need to be continually vigilant. This again requires banks to go 
beyond CBS as of today. 
20.  
To  sum  up,  I  would say  that  Information  Technology  has  come  a  long  way  in  the 
Indian  banking  sector.  However,  a  lot  still  needs  to  be  done  particularly  in  terms  of 
reorienting the existing CBS and other technological solutions in the banking sector towards 
more customer centric and yet, more well-governed technological solutions, improving MIS 
capability in terms of quality, speed and integrity, harnessing IT for effective CRM, thereby, 
increasing business and profitability. Robust IT security and finally better IT governance for 
achieving better risk management should be the key focus areas of the banks beyond the 
physical implementation of CBS in the coming years. 
21.  
Banks need to know that IT holds the way forward for a more cost effective and yet, 
inclusive banking system. They also need to remember that banking is about branding and 
relation  building  with  customers  and  in  this  relation  building,  IT  can  be  an  important 
instrument. It is the realisation of this potential of IT among banks and their ability to harness 
this potential that would pave the way for growth of the banking sector in the years to come. 
22.  
the deliberations of the roundtable all success. 
I thank the IDRBT for inviting me over to share my thoughts with you all, and wish 
4 
 BIS Review 94/2010
