Axel A Weber: Challenges and opportunities for the competitiveness of 
EMU member states. The euro in the financial crisis – the German 
experience 
Presentation  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
Copenhagen Business School, Copenhagen, 22 March 2010. 
 Introduction 
1  
Dear President Johann Ross (Copenhagen Business School),  
dear Professor Peter Birch Sørensen (Chairman of the Economic Council, Denmark),  
dear Gouverneur Christian Noyer and Governor Niels Bernstein,  
ladies and gentlemen 
The  global  financial  crisis  that  we  have  been  experiencing  since  the  autumn  of  2007  has 
been  a  challenge  for  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  in  nearly  all  industrialised  countries.  In 
addition, it called our regulatory regimes into question and caused a profound reform process 
to be initiated at the national, European and global level. With respect to European Monetary 
Union  (EMU)  the  financial  crisis  has  made  clear  just  how  important  the  euro  is  as  a 
stabilising factor for the economies of its member states. 
Nonetheless,  the  challenges  that  lie  ahead  after  the  financial  crisis  and  the  economic 
downturn that accompanied it have not diminished. In particular, the financial crisis has led to 
a renewed debate about perceived imbalances in the euro area. This discussion is not new, 
as divergencies have been building up steadily since the launch of the euro. However, during 
the  years  preceding  the  financial  crisis,  the  strong  global  economic  expansion  and  the 
ongoing economic integration within the euro area partly masked the problems arising from 
these  differential  developments.  As  the  financial  crisis  has  called  unsustainable  business 
models  into  question  and  ruthlessly  revealed  the  structural  nature  of  the  disparities,  they 
have  now  moved  centre  stage.  Taking  the  specific  adjustment  processes  in  a  monetary 
union into account, we have to think about the conditions for sustainable growth in all euro-
area economies and about how they can be achieved. 
In my following remarks, I will address these two aspects of the recent experiences within the 
euro area. First, the advantages of monetary union during the financial crisis. Second, the 
challenges that will have to be overcome in order to resolve the divergencies that have built 
up  within  the  euro  area.  The  current  debate  focuses  on  the  differences  in  price 
competitiveness  between  EMU  member  states.  However, 
in 
competitiveness  are  not  the  root  of  the  problem  but  rather  a  symptom  of  underlying 
unsustainable  structural  developments  in  some  member  states.  Accordingly,  the  marked 
gains in price competitiveness the German economy has experienced have been a result of 
necessary  structural  reforms  that  were  finally  addressed  in  2003  when  domestic  problems 
such  as  high  structural  unemployment,  rising  social  security  contributions  and  repeated 
excessive public deficits became more and more pressing. I will therefore take a closer look 
at this German experience trying to draw some conclusions for those countries that have lost 
competitiveness since the launch of the euro. 
in  my  view 
losses 
Euro – what have we gained? 
2  
My positive assessment of the first ten years of monetary union results mainly from the fact 
that  EMU  clearly  contributed  to  a  favourable  climate  for  economic  growth  within  the  euro 
area. Throughout the financial crisis, however, the euro proved to be far more than a growth 
factor  for  the  euro  area.  In  several  respects  it  has  stabilised  the  member  economies.  As 
market participants’ risk aversion increased, any additional risk would have depressed their 
BIS Review 34/2010 
 1
propensity to invest. Therefore, the absence of exchange-rate risk within the euro area has 
represented an additional benefit during the crisis. 
More specifically, even though the effective exchange rate of the euro area rose sharply in 
the financial crisis – before falling again more recently – the euro prevented EMU member 
states from witnessing a scenario that Europe had experienced in former times, for example 
during the crisis of the European Monetary System (EMS) in 1992/93. At that time, the EMS 
had been exposed to a massive flight primarily into the D-Mark, which resulted in significant 
tensions  among  EMS  currencies.  This  caused  massive  adjustment  problems  for  those 
economies with appreciating currencies and inflationary pressure. 
Finally,  the  fact  that  banks  within  the  euro  area  obtain  short-term  liquidity  through  the 
Eurosystem at the same terms and conditions has proved to be a great advantage during the 
financial crisis. It has significantly mitigated money market tensions and therefore served as 
a  buffer  against  global  financial  market  shocks.  This  has  protected  smaller  economies 
especially. Otherwise some of them would probably have needed to make additional efforts 
to defend the credibility of their currencies, for example in the form of higher interest rates, 
interventions on the foreign exchange market or swap agreements with other central banks. 
3  
Economic divergencies – a challenge for EMU 
Increasing intra-EMU heterogeneity 
3.1  
The search for the causes of the financial crisis has intensified the discussion about global 
imbalances. What is often overlooked in this discussion is the fact that the euro area as a 
whole  has  an  almost  balanced  current  account.  Consequently,  the  euro  area  has  not 
contributed to the build-up of global imbalances. However, the economic divergencies within 
EMU do need addressing. 
One important reason for growing heterogeneity within the euro area is that the benefits of 
monetary union, in particular lower interest rates and the elimination of exchange rate risk, 
have  not  always  been  used  wisely  and  have  tempted  some  countries  to  live  beyond  their 
means: Too often inflowing capital did not reach the most productive sectors, and in some 
cases cheaper and easier access to funding led to excessive credit dynamics facilitating a 
rise  in  household  and  corporate  debt  and  ultimately  causing  the  real  estate  markets  to 
overheat. In addition, fiscal policy often failed to use higher growth and lower interest rates to 
reduce deficits sufficiently. In economies with rigid or only partly flexible labour markets all 
these  large  expansionary  stimuli  resulted  in  accelerated  wage  increases  that  were  well  in 
excess of productivity growth, reducing price competitiveness and exports of domestic firms. 
Consequently, price competitiveness has diverged significantly from one euro-area member 
state to another since the introduction of the euro. Whereas a small group of countries, led 
by Germany, has achieved gains in price competitiveness, a larger group suffered significant 
losses,  amongst  others  Greece,  Italy,  Spain  and  Portugal.  These  underlying  economic 
divergencies within the euro area are also reflected in persistent discrepancies in the current 
account positions of EMU member states. As long as a flourishing world economy and the 
growth dynamics within the euro area masked the associated problems, those developments 
were neglected. However, the financial crisis has revealed the unsustainability of this state 
and  therefore  increased  awareness  of  the  risks  it  involves.  These  risks  imply  depressed 
future growth prospects, disturbances in capital flows if markets doubt the sustainability of 
large external borrowing requirements as well as difficulties for monetary policy as a result of 
the  growing  heterogeneity  of  euro-area  member  states.  Hence,  correcting  the  structural 
problems that are at the root of the economic divergencies is one of the major challenges for 
the  future:  For  example,  domestic  firms  have  to  become  more  competitive  by  increasing 
productivity and keeping costs in check, labour market flexibility has to be increased in order 
to  mobilise  a  larger  share  of  the  working  age  population  and  to  facilitate  reallocation  of 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2010
workers  to  more  profitable  sectors.  And  structural  deficits  have  to  be  brought  down  to 
sustainable  levels  by  broadening  the  tax  base  or,  preferably,  cutting  expenditure  on 
government consumption and certain transfers.  
Taking the current account as one indicator of the extent of these divergencies, one could 
get  the  impression  that  the  financial  crisis  has  halted  the  trend  of  growing  heterogeneity 
within the monetary union, since current account positions have narrowed significantly in the 
years  2008  and  2009  (except  for  Italy  and  France).  However,  a  closer  look  at  the 
developments that underlie the changes in current account deficits shows that the reductions 
are still largely cyclical as they have been driven mainly by sharply falling imports rather than 
increasing export market shares. Hence, more profound and far-reaching changes have to 
be  undertaken  in  countries  that  have  lived  beyond  their  means  and  thereby  driven  the 
divergencies within the euro area. 
In order to sketch how structural reforms can initiate the necessary adjustments and bring 
back heterogeneity within the euro area to a natural and sustainable level, I will now turn to 
the experience of Germany which has just undergone such an adjustment process.  
The German experience 
3.2  
This  adjustment  process  is  often  perceived  and  portrayed  as  a  significant  improvement  in 
price competitiveness due to ongoing wage moderation and major reforms on labour markets 
and in the social security system. However, this perception misses the point of what actually 
occurred in past years. 
The price competitiveness of the German economy had indeed declined dramatically in the 
years 1990 to 1995. During the reunification process, a number of domestic imbalances had 
built up and became apparent as of the mid-1990s. The most prominent were an oversized 
construction sector and strong wage and price increases despite a decline in average labour 
productivity owing to the inclusion of the eastern German economy. 
The  German  corporate  sector  reacted  to  this extremely  unfavourable  position  on domestic 
and  international  markets  by  a  painful,  but  eventually  successful  restructuring  process 
including innovation, outsourcing, wage moderation as well as a balance sheet clean-up. It 
should be noted that these were market-based adjustments neither initiated nor managed by 
policy makers. 
However, what actually forced the German government to undertake a set of major reforms 
was  a  couple  of  intensifying  domestic  problems  which  depressed  growth  and  increasingly 
constrained policy makers’ scope of action. In the economic downturn following the burst of 
the “New Economy” bubble in the early 2000s, persistently high unemployment peaking at 
more than 5 million people in 2005 as well as overburdened social security systems led to 
high fiscal deficits and a protracted period of only meagre GDP growth. Thus, adjustments in 
the areas of economic and social policy had become inevitable. Finally, in 2003, bold labour 
market reforms were introduced, which modernised the labour market structure and lowered 
the  high  employment  threshold  of  economic  growth.  They  were  accompanied  by  fiscal 
consolidation  and  adjustments  in  the  social  security  systems,  in  particular  the  pension 
system.  These  structural  reforms  have  paved  the  way  for  further  necessary  market-based 
corrections, for example in wage setting and intra-plant working-time flexibility, to take place. 
They have been painful, but the economy was in much better shape afterwards. In my view, 
this is the core lesson that can be drawn from Germany’s experience. 
It is true that economic growth in Germany was unusually dependent on foreign trade during 
the last upswing between mid-2003 and early 2008, but we would be ill-advised to deduce 
from  this  experience  the  need  for  actively  propping-up  domestic  demand,  for  example  via 
encouraging higher negotiated wages. Rather, German exports were boosted by strong, but 
ultimately unsustainable global economic growth, whereas a pick-up in private demand once 
high  unemployment  started  to  decline  was  repeatedly  burdened  by  exogenous  forces.  For 
BIS Review 34/2010 
 3
example, the need to cut excessive public deficits required a more restrictive stance of fiscal 
policy and the rapid rise in energy prices in 2008 absorbed the sizeable pick-up in nominal 
disposable income as the upswing was about to broaden to the domestic economy. What is 
therefore often neglected is that Germany was able to serve as an important buffer for world 
demand at the height of the financial crisis via its still robust private consumption as well as 
large fiscal stimulus packages. 
Looking ahead and bearing in mind the prospects for global economic growth as well as its 
regional  breakdown,  the  German  economy  is  unlikely  to  replicate  the  growth  profile  of  the 
most recent upswing. In an external environment characterised by a less steep but hopefully 
healthier expansion, German enterprises will naturally have to focus more on the domestic 
market than before. Political coordination of this process which goes beyond the purpose of 
setting  a  framework  for  a  market-induced,  smooth  reallocation  of  resources  is  neither 
necessary nor helpful. 
Conclusion 
4  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
the adjustment process the German economy  underwent after reunification and during the 
first  years  of  monetary  union  has  shown  that  a  market-based  correction  even  of  severe 
domestic structural problems is possible if the necessary reforms are addressed. In addition, 
the effort and inconvenience associated with those adjustments will pay off as they lead to 
strengthened economic conditions in the individual economies and the euro area as a whole. 
The  EMU  urgently  needs  such  market-based  adjustments  as  they  are  a  prerequisite  for 
economic divergencies to come to  a halt, for sustainable economic growth within the euro 
area and thereby for the continuing success of the euro. 
4 
 BIS Review 34/2010
