Sanusi Lamido Sanusi: Evolving financial landscape – strategies for 
economic resilience 
Keynote address by Mr Sanusi Lamido Sanusi, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, at 
the  4th  Annual  Banking  and  Finance  Conference  of  the  Chartered  Institute  of  Bankers  of 
Nigeria (CIBN), Abuja, 23 September 2010. 
 Protocol 
1.  
Let me begin by appreciating the opportunity and the honour given to me to be part 
of  this  important  occasion,  which  is  meant  to  chart  a  course  for  sustainable  economic 
development of our dear country, Nigeria. The theme of this conference “Evolving Financial 
landscape: Strategies for economic Resilience” is indeed very apt and topical, and could 
not  have  come  at  a  more  opportune  time  than  now,  considering  not  only  the  needs  of 
country, but the rapid changes that are taking place in the financial sector and the role it is 
expected to play in the evolving economic landscape. It is my expectation, therefore, that the 
issues  that  will  be  discussed  during  this  conference  will  further  assist  in  laying  a  solid 
foundation  for  the  much  needed  economic  transformation  of  the  Nigerian  economy.  It  is 
usual at this conference for the Governor, if delivering the keynote address, to update the 
industry on his stewardship in the past year, and the expected duration of policy. 
2.  
As you are aware, since the commercial banking business commenced in 1892 in 
Nigeria, the financial system has experienced several episodes of banking crisis. The first of 
such  crisis  took  place  in  the  late  1940s  and  early  1950s,  mainly  as  a  result  of  lack  of 
appropriate regulation, leading to the collapse of about 21 of the 25 indigenous banks which 
had  been  established  by  1954.  While  these  failures  were  resolved  mainly  through 
self-liquidation, the outcome was a bitter experience, especially for depositors who lost their 
money. 
3.  
Systemic  crises  re-appeared  in  the  Nigerian  banking  industry  between  1989  and 
1998, which many attributed to the withdrawal of public sector deposits from the banks, and 
as a consequence exposed the weak financial condition of most financial institutions whose 
financial fragility had been concealed by a combination of factors, including public subsidy 
and improper accounting systems. The deregulation of the banking system in the mid-1980s 
facilitated  a  dramatic  increase  in  the  number  of  financial  institutions  and  also  exposed  the 
banks  to  intense  competition  for  which  many  of  them  were  ill-prepared  for.  Some  of  the 
banks  attracted  a  significant  market  share  through  improved  customer  services  at 
competitive  prices.  In  contrast,  many  banks  appeared  to  have  been  set  up  largely  to  take 
advantage  of  the  arbitrage  opportunities  in  the  foreign  exchange  market,  rather  than 
undertake  more  conventional/traditional  banking  business.  The  consequence  was  a  mass 
distress that laid the foundations for the bank consolidation exercise in 2004, which induced 
a breath of life to our banks, enhanced their capital position and increased their involvement 
in business activities. 
4.  
The  recent  global  financial  crisis,  however,  strained  the  gains  that  had  been 
achieved  post-consolidation  in  the  sector.  The  immediate  impact  of  the  global  financial 
turbulence on the Nigerian financial system, particularly the banking system, mirrored global 
trends but was largely contained because of the limited integration with the global financial 
system.  While  offshore  funding  of  the  domestic  banking  system  was  growing  before  the 
crisis,  its  scale  was  manageable  and  the  Central  Bank  was  able  to  accommodate 
commercial  banks  foreign  exchange  needs  in  the  depth  of  the  global  crisis.  Coupled  with 
major  internal  management  problems  in  some  of  the  banks,  the  crises  impacted  the 
economy  through  various  channels  –  significant  decline  in  oil  revenue  leading  to  revenue 
attrition  for  all  tiers  of  government;  reduced  capital  inflows  into  the  economy;  significant 
BIS Review 124/2010 
 1
drawdown  of  external/foreign  reserves;  demand  pressure  in  the  foreign  exchange  market; 
substantial  decline  in  stock  market  capitalization  and  share  prices;  huge  bank  losses  on 
margin  loans  and  share-backed  facilities  as  well  as  loans  to  the  downstream  oil  and  gas 
sector; low valuation with many banks trading below book value; declining asset values; and 
declining credit growth. 
5.  
Distinguished  ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  became  clear  that  the  CBN  had  to  act 
decisively when it became evident that some of the banks had more deep-rooted problems 
that  were  not  discernable  from  the  regular  reports  rendered  to  the  regulatory  authorities. 
Some  of  these  actions  included  replacing  the  chief  executives/executive  directors  of  the 
banks  identified  as  the  source  of  instability  in  the  industry  and  injection  of  the  sum  of 
N620.0 billion into the banks in an effort to prevent a systemic banking crisis. The injection of 
this  fund  (Tier  II  capital)  into  these  banks  then  was  considered  sufficient  to  resolve  and 
stabilize  them  to  enable  them  to  continue  normal  business  operations,  with  arrangements 
made to recover non-performing loans from the banks’ debtors while guaranteeing all foreign 
credits and correspondent banking commitments. 
6.  
As an additional measure to strengthen the reform process, the CBN commenced 
the process of creating an Asset Management Company, as an important vehicle for dealing 
with  Non  Performing  Loans  of  the  banks.  As  you  are  all  aware,  the  Asset  Management 
Corporation  of  Nigeria  (AMCON)  has  already  been  established  by  law  and  its  Board  is 
awaiting  Senate  confirmation  for  it  to  formally  take-off.  As  a  resolution  vehicle,  AMCON  is 
expected  to  soak  in  the  toxic  assets  of  the  CBN-intervened  banks  and  provide  liquidity  to 
them while facilitating their eventual re-capitalization.  
While  efforts  are  being  made  to  stabilize  the  Banking  system  and,  indeed,  the 
7.  
financial  system  and  restore  public  confidence,  the  CBN  is  also  focusing  attention  on 
ensuring that the financial system, in general, and the banking system, in particular, begin to 
serve  the  needs  of  the  Nigerian  economy  so  as  to  make  the  Nigerian  economy  to  be 
resilient. This, the Bank has been doing through ensuring the availability of long-term funds 
at an affordable interest rate to drive industrial activities and infrastructural developments in 
the country, having identified low industrial basis and huge infrastructural deficit as binding 
constraints on achieving Nigeria’s economic development objectives. In a bid to address the 
problem of infrastructure deficit and enhance credit to the real sector, a total of N500.0 billion 
Fund was set up by the CBN made up of N300.0 billion for Power/Infrastructure projects and 
for intervention in the Aviation sector and N200.0 billion for the Refinancing/Restructuring of 
banks’ existing loan portfolios to manufacturers and small and medium enterprises (SMEs). 
A  N200.0  billion  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme  for  SMEs  and  N200.0  billion  Commercial 
Agricultural Fund for the agricultural sector were also established. In addition, the CBN had 
recently  released  N150.0  billion  credit  facility  to  the  manufacturers  at  a  fixed  rate  of  7% 
through  the  Bank  of  Industry  (BOI)  and  deposit  money  banks.  Pencom  to  unlock  pension 
assets for private sector – AGRA-UNIDO – Fund plan chain.  
8.  
In  addition,  the  Bank  has  also  collaborated  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission (SEC), the Nigerian Stock Exchange (NSE), FPLS and Ministry of Finance to 
reduce the cost of transactions, particularly bond issues so as to diversify funding sources 
away from banks as well as attract more long term foreign investors into the sector. Efforts 
are also being intensified towards strengthening regulatory and supervisory framework and 
enhancing monitoring of the operations of the Deposit Money Banks (DMBs) to ensure that 
they remain safe, sound and healthy. These efforts are expected to ensure the sustenance of 
public confidence through the enforcement of appropriate disclosures and reinvigorating the 
policy  of  zero  tolerance  on  all  unprofessional  and  unethical  banking  practice,  and  greater 
emphasis  on  enforcement  of  Code  of  Corporate  Governance.  FSRCC  revamped,  joint 
CBN/SEC examinations. 
9.  
Standby teams of target examiners are being deployed to any bank at any time to 
ensure timely regulatory actions, if it is deemed necessary. In addition, to further engender 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2010
public  confidence  in  the  banking  system  and  enhance  customer  protection,  the  CBN 
established  the  Consumer  and  Financial  Protection  Division  to  provide  a  platform  through 
which  consumers  could  seek  redress,  and  directive  has  been  given  to  banks  to  establish 
Customer Help Desks at their head offices and branches. Also, a comprehensive review of 
the Guide to Bank Charges has commenced with a view to making the charges realistic and 
consumer-friendly. Furthermore, the Consumer and Financial Protection Division is expected 
to  commence  a  programme  of  consumer  education  and  enlightenment  and  is  also 
collaborating  with  the  Consumer  Protection  Council  on  the  review  of  the  Consumer 
Protection Council Act No. 66 of 1992 to enforce discipline in the market. 
10.  
The  CBN  has  taken  steps  to  integrate  the  banking  system  into  the  global  best 
practices in financial reporting and disclosure through the partial adoption of the International 
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) in the Nigerian Banking Sector by end 2010. This is 
expected  to  enhance  market  discipline,  and  reduce  uncertainties  which  limit  the  risk  of 
unwarranted contagion. The CBN is also, closely collaborating with other stakeholders like 
the Nigerian Accounting Standard Board (NASB), Federal Ministry of Finance (FMF), NDIC, 
SEC,  and  NAICOM;  PENCOM,  Federal  Inland  Revenue  Service  (FIRS),  and  Institute  of 
Chartered  Accountant  of  Nigeria  (ICAN),  among  others,  towards  ensuring  a  seamless  full 
adoption of IFRS in the Nigerian banking sector by 2012. These efforts are being pursued 
under  the  aegis  of  the  Roadmap  Committee  of  Stakeholders  on  the  Adoption  of  IFRS  in 
Nigeria inaugurated by the NASB and facilitated by the World Bank. 
11.  
The universal banking (UB) model adopted in 2001, allowed banks to diversify into 
non-bank  financial  businesses.  Following  the  consolidation  programme  in  2004,  banks 
became  awash  with  capital,  which  was  deployed  into  various  high-risk  areas.  The  system 
was abused by operators with banks engaging in non-banking practices to the detriment of 
core  banking  practices.  Banks  took  unnecessary  speculation  provisions  and  bets on  asset 
prices.  To  address  the  observed  challenges,  the  CBN  has  reviewed  the  UB  Model  with  a 
view to steering the banks towards core banking businesses. Under the new model, banks 
would  not  be  allowed  to  invest  in  non-bank  subsidiaries,  while  banks  currently  with  such 
investments  would  be  required  to  either  divest  or  spin-off  the  businesses  to  holding 
companies that will be licensed by the CBN as other financial institutions. Depositors’ funds 
can no longer be used for insurance, stock broking and other non-banking activities. This will 
pave the way for the orderly development of the capital market. 
12.  
Other  measures  that  have  been  taken  to  drive  the  evolving  financial  landscape 
include:  the  strengthening  of  the  institutional  coordination  through  the  Financial  Services 
Regulation Coordinating Committee (FSRCC), adoption of a common accounting year end 
for  all  banks,  aimed  at  improving  data  integrity  and  comparability;  conducting  own-risk 
assessments and relying less on classifications by rating agencies; limiting the tenor of Chief 
Executives/Directors of Banks to 10 years and non-Executive Directors to 12 years; limiting 
the tenor of a bank’s auditing firm to 10 years; sound and timely regulation and supervision of 
the financial sector; stringent demand for transparency in the financial sector; and improved 
transparency in structured credit instruments for easy assessment of associated risk. 
13.  
Activities at the Central Bank of Nigeria are being guided by the Bank’s blue print, 
christened  “The  Alpha  Project  (A4)  Initiatives  of  the  CBN”,  which  is  built  on  4  pillars,  of 
enhancing  the  quality  of  banks,  establishing  financial  stability,  enabling  healthy  financial 
sector evolution and ensuring that financial sector contributes to the real economy. 
Furthermore, leveraging on the CBN Governor’s role as Adviser to the President on 
14.  
Economic  Matters  to  ensure  that  the  financial  sector  contributes  to  the  real  economy,  the 
CBN  is  taking  the  lead  in  measuring  more  accurately  the  relationship  between  the  real 
economy  and  financial  sector,  as  well  as  cooperating  with  state  governments  to  run  pilot 
programmes  in  directing  the  financial  sector’s  contribution  to  social  and  economic 
development within the states. Priority is being given to Power, Agriculture, Transportation 
infrastructures. The Bank has continued to fine-tune its monetary policy instruments against 
BIS Review 124/2010 
 3
the  backdrop  of  developments  in  the  economy  to  ensure  the  effectiveness  of  monetary 
policy.  As  adviser  to  the  government,  the  CBN  has  played  a  critical  catalytic  role  in 
kickstarting the power programme and reopening the debate on deregulating the sector, we 
are now engaging actively in the funding of agricultural and industrial policy to ensure that 
banks’ lending goes into the real economy.  
15.  
The  Microfinance  Policy,  Regulatory  and  Supervisory  framework  for  Nigeria  was 
launched in December 2005 with the main objective of making financial services accessible 
to  the  active  poor,  promoting  synergy  and  mainstreaming  of  the  informal  sector  in  the 
national financial system and contributing to rural transformation. Since the launch, quite a 
number of microfinance institutions have been licensed while the policy is being reviewed to 
address key challenges such as capital base, skill gaps, operational manual, geographical 
spread and self regulation in the sub-sector. An audit exercise of all microfinance banks has 
just  been  launched  and  the  CBN  is  determined  to  clean  up  the  sector  and  “sanitize”  it  as 
thoroughly as it is sanitizing Deposit Money Banks. 
16.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  in  order  to  remain  relevant  as  financial  intermediaries, 
financial institutions in the country would need to be sensitive to customer needs for greater 
efficiency and convenience. Customers’ expectations have taken a quantum leap in the new 
global  financial  landscape.  Financial  services  no  longer  involve  providing  only  standard 
products to customers. The need for financial products to be personalized and customized to 
the  individual  needs  of  corporate  and  retail  clients  is  the  order  of  the  day.  Financial 
institutions  would,  therefore,  need  to  be  more  proactive  and  innovative  in  packaging  and 
marketing their products. Furthermore, in the new financial environment, the need to ensure 
adequate  and  effective  consumer  education  and  protection  has  also  become  even  more 
compelling  and  challenging  so  as  to  prevent  any  disruption  in  the  level  or  reliability  of 
services to customers and their protection from potential unfair practices. Given the criticality 
of  …  efficiency  to  cost  of  funds,  the  Central  Bank  has  recently  started  a  shared  services 
project in collaboration with banks aimed at centralizing back offices and the industrialization 
of common processes. In the next three years, we will reduce overhead costs in the banking 
industry by 30%. We are also working towards establishing an IPP for independent power 
supply for all banks operating in Lagos as a pilot cluster. 
The intense competition among financial institutions call for the management of the 
17.  
country’s banks to re-examine their existing business models to see where their strengths lie 
and to what opportunities these strengths could be applied to enhance returns. There may be 
the need to move towards strategic differentiation among the financial institutions in order to 
better serve the relevant market segment or niches. This may involve market or functional 
specialization  as  institutions  decide  which  functional  areas  or  combinations  of  risk 
management,  customer  services,  product  innovations,  to  exploit  and  maximize  to  their 
advantage  thereby  buttressing  the  new  blueprint  of  the  CBN  (specialized  banking)  for  the 
banking  sector.  The  different  levels  of  authorization  introduced  also  allow  banks  to  be 
international, national or regional players. 
18.  
One big lesson learned from the recent crisis is the need to review the existing rules 
and  laws  relevant  to  the  financial  industry  in  Nigeria  in  line  with  the  new  financial 
environment  and  international  best  practice.  In  the  wake  of  growth  in  the  volume  and 
complexity  of  financial  transactions  involving  both  local  and  foreign  investors  in  the  post-
reform era, the challenge is to ensure the cooperation of both the legislature and the judiciary 
to  work  closely  in  the  enforcement  of  the  existing  laws  relating  to  the  financial  system  in 
order to engender confidence in the system. There is a compelling need to reform the laws 
that  pertain  to  the  mortgage  sector  particularly  the  Land  Use  Act.  This  requires  the 
strengthening of the primary mortgage institutions and the review of the relevant laws such 
as  the  Land  Use  Act.  With  respect  to  loan  recovery  within  the  framework  of  the  financial 
services  industry,  there  is  need  to  establish  special  courts  that  will  handle  cases  of  loan 
defaults, credit fraud and insider abuse-related cases promptly. The CBN is scaling through 
4 
 BIS Review 124/2010
on a number of legislative reforms aimed at unlocking the bottlenecks to the smooth flow of 
credit to the real sector and especially to Small and Medium Enterprises. 
19.  
A major challenge in the liquidation of the failed financial institutions in the country is 
the  prompt  disposal  of  their  assets  for  the  settlement  of  the  depositors.  This  calls  for 
expedited action on the operationalization of the Assets Management Corporation (AMCON) 
as well as the revision of the necessary laws that will make it possible for both the CBN and 
NDIC to liquidate failed institution(s) without prolonged litigation by the institution(s).  
Maintaining  a  safe  and  sound  banking  sector  is  essential,  given  the  key  role  that 
20.  
banks play in facilitating economic growth and financing developmental projects, particularly 
key  infrastructure,  agriculture  and  industry.  Most  emerging  market  economies  have  been 
known to use the domestic financial institutions to execute real sector big ticket projects and 
financial  institutions  in  Nigeria  should  not  be  an  exception  if  we  hope  to  achieve  our 
developmental objectives. 
21.  
Distinguished  ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  conclude  by  noting  that  the  evolving 
financial  landscape,  with  benefit  of  hindsight,  is  capable  of  providing  the  platform  for 
sustainable economic growth and development and economic resilience if all stakeholders in 
the Nigerian economic commit to all the various reforms and initiatives being implemented as 
well as commit to good governance and transparency in their respective areas of operation. I 
have no doubt in my mind that Nigeria is destined to be an economic power and a force to be 
reckoned with in the global economic arena if we consistently do the right things at the right 
time.  But  we  have  to  end  the  past  practice  of  seeking  quick  fixes  and  easy  solution.  A 
resilient economy requires hard work, intelligence, consistency and time. We will go through 
difficulties in the short term. Tough decisions have been taken and we will continue to take 
them. Market condition must improve. We have made the point, and will continue to make 
the point that there are lines in this country that cannot be crossed. And that no one can be 
so rich or so powerful as to get away with putting an entire system at risk to feed personal 
greed. 
22.  
As  a  final  thought,  there  is  no  uniform  effect,  neither  is  there  a  single  remedy  to 
every crisis. Each brings its own surprises and risks. Clearly, we should not assume that past 
remedies will fully solve the current and next set of problems or address all future crises. The 
key is to take lessons from the past and tailor them appropriately to address future situations 
of potential crisis. 
Thank you for listening. 
BIS Review 124/2010 
 5
