Ewart S Williams: The future of the financial industry after the crisis 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago,  at  the  14th  Caribbean  Business  Executive  Seminar,  Caribbean  Centre  for  Money 
and Finance, Port of Spain, 30 April 2010. 
 Let me first thank the Caribbean Centre for Money and Finance for inviting me to make a few 
opening remarks at this their 14th Business Executive Seminar. Given the CCMF’s mandate, 
the  theme  of  your  conference  “The  Future  of  the  Financial  Services  Industry  after  the 
Crisis”  is  most  timely.  Let  me  also  congratulate  CCMF  on  assembling  a  most  impressive 
cast of speakers, who could be expected to bring diverse perspectives and unique insights 
into how our financial sector is likely to evolve over the next few years. 
Since the international financial crisis, governments and central banks in both developed and 
developing countries have been giving serious thought to the future of the financial services 
industries in their respective economies. In particular, a lively debate continues to rage on 
about the regulatory response to the crisis and on the measures needed to avoid a repetition. 
The causes of the financial crisis have been well-documented and analysed and I don’t plan 
to review that discussion here. Suffice it to say that there is widespread agreement that the 
legacy  of  the  crisis  will  be  long-lasting  with  significant  changes  expected  in  the  global 
financial landscape going forward. There is perhaps less consensus on what shape the new 
landscape will take. 
In respect of the advanced economies, where the crisis originated, and which suffered most 
from  the  ravages  of  the  crisis,  the  good  news  is  that  the  near-term  outlook  for  the 
financial sector has improved significantly. In the United States (US), bank stocks have 
rallied  and  those  of  the  four  largest  banks  have  been  among  the  best  performers  in  the 
S&P 500 since the market hit bottom in March 2009. This month, four of the largest financial 
institutions  in  the  US,  JP  Morgan  Chase,  Bank  of  America,  Citigroup  and  Goldman  Sachs 
reported healthy first quarter earnings. 
Despite these indicators, there continues to be serious risks to financial stability in these 
economies,  arising  from  the  withdrawal  of  government  support,  continued  write-downs  to 
compensate  for  further  asset  deterioration  and  funding  pressures,  as  institutions  seek  to 
reduce leverage and raise capital and liquidity buffers. 
In these advanced economies, debate is still raging on the long term financial sector outlook. 
For example: 
 
The  optimal  size  of  financial  institutions  –  many  experts  expect  that  financial 
institutions will seek to scale down their global ambitions, focusing more on specific 
market  segments,  in  which  they  have  particular  comparative  advantage.  In  this 
context, the future of the investment bank is in doubt. 
Some analysts project that long term returns from banking would face a structural 
decline as banks reduce leverage and build up their deposit bases to reduce their 
dependence on wholesale markets. 
There  are  proposals  for  a  return  to  basics  as  customers  steer  clear  of  the  non-
transparent exotic products that precipitated the crisis. 
And  then  there  is  the  much  publicized  issue  of  compensation  packages  in  the 
industry. Here, the future is likely to see a shift away from pay incentives structures 
that encourage excessive risk taking and reward short-term profits. Instead, there is 
   BIS Review 63/2010 
 1
the  proposal 
performance, rewarding sound risk management. 
that  compensation  packages  be 
tailored  more 
to 
long 
term 
There  is  also  intense  debate  going  on  in  the  US  on  regulatory  reform.  Two  main  issues 
here  are  a  proposal  to  force  banks  to  spin-off  their  risky  derivatives  business  to  reduce 
systemic  risk,  and  whether  future  resolution  strategies  should  specifically  preclude 
government bailouts. 
As regards the Caribbean, you may recall that we suffered only a limited contagion from the 
international financial crisis largely because: 
 
Like in most developing countries credit expansion in our banks is based on deposit 
mobilization rather than on inter-bank borrowing or overseas borrowing. 
Our banking systems tend to be generally conservative and for the most part, were 
not exposed to the sub-prime mortgages or to the exotic derivative instruments that 
were standard fare for banks in the advanced countries. 
 Of  course,  our  regional  financial  system  was  more  affected  by  the  international  recession 
that ensued and by the collapse of two regional institutions – the Stanford Bank in Antigua 
and the CL Financial conglomerate, which is headquartered in Trinidad and Tobago but with 
financial subsidiaries throughout the Caribbean. 
Notwithstanding the limited contagion, the international financial crisis and our own regional 
financial  distress  have  set  in  motion  a  new  dynamic  that  is  bound  to  lead  to  important 
changes  in  our  financial  landscape.  It  is  difficult  to  be  certain  about  what  these  changes 
would be. I would, however, like to hazard a few thoughts about the possible evolution of our 
financial landscape, based in part, on measures already in train, and the likely reaction to the 
distress that has left deep scars. 
I expect that the recent financial crisis would lead to: 
 
Greater  consolidation  of  the  financial  system  –  currently  three  large  foreign 
banking groups dominate banking activity in the region (accounting for about 45 per 
cent  of  total  banking  assets).  The  remaining  assets  are  held  by  smaller  locally 
owned banks including a few state-owned banks. I would expect bank concentration 
in  the  region  to  intensify  over  the  next  few  years.  As  part  of  this  consolidation,  I 
would  expect  the  trend  towards  the  disappearance  of  merchant  banks,  which  are 
being absorbed into universal banking structures, to intensify. 
I  would  expect  a  similar  trend  towards  consolidation  in  the  insurance  industry, 
though,  led by  regional insurance  firms.  In  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  for  instance,  the 
proposal in the draft Insurance Act for a significant increase in regulatory capital will 
certainly tend to promote consolidation. 
 The crisis could also provide impetus for greater recourse to: 
 
Technology  and  innovation  –  the  general  perception  is  that  (apart  from  the 
expansion  of  ATMs)  the  region  has  not  come  close  to  maximizing  the  use  of 
technology  to  increase  efficiency  and  reduce  banking  spreads.  It  is  therefore 
reasonable  to  expect  that  competition  and  the  drive  to  maintain  profitability  will 
provide the necessary impetus to the greater use of technology. 
As regards innovation, I do not anticipate our relatively small conservative regional 
banking system will establish a market for exotic derivatives. I, however, expect an 
expansion in the markets for basic hedging instruments and the continued evolution 
of new banking products designed to facilitate greater credit expansion to the energy 
sector, to small businesses and to agriculture. 
Greater  attention  to  customer  service  –  this  is  an  emerging  trend  which  will 
become  more  commonplace  over  time.  Financial  institutions  will  continue  to 
BIS Review 63/2010
  2 
 increase their interaction with their customers through more active use of web-based 
social  networking  such  as  facebook  and  twitter.  This  will  be  extremely  useful  as 
institutions  attempt  to  rebuild  the  trust  and  confidence  that  were  eroded  by  the 
financial crisis. 
Rise in information portals – the increasing sophistication of customers and the 
availability  of  a  wider  array  of  financial  products  will  lead  to  the  expanding  use  of 
financial information portals. 
 There would also be important changes in the regional regulatory environment as a result of 
the international financial crisis. 
Basically, as is now happening in several of the advanced economies, we in the Caribbean 
are likely to see a change in our regulatory philosophy. For years, we have been taking a 
“soft touch” approach to regulation, aligned to the philosophy of the market mechanism. In 
the Caribbean, as elsewhere, this approach has led to the excesses, which caused the crisis. 
In  the  post  crisis  environment,  I  would  expect  regulation  to  be  more  comprehensive  and 
much more intrusive, designed to include a macro-economic perspective. 
If there is anything that the crisis in the CL Financial Group underscored it was the critical 
importance for updated legislation and regulation to match, as much as possible, the rapidly 
evolving  of  the  operations  of  the  financial  institutions.  As  you  know,  the  favored  form  of 
organization  for  the  large  financial  institutions  in  the  Caribbean  is  the  conglomerate  or 
holding-company structure. Unfortunately, up to now, most regional regulators do not have 
supervisory authority over bank holding companies. The lesson is that, in the future, systems 
should be in place to adjust the regulatory perimeter as needed and to ensure that legislation 
keeps abreast of developments in the financial sector. 
In  addition  to  the  regulatory  gaps,  our  recent  experience  also  made  it  clear  that  poor 
corporate governance, weak risk management practices, and inadequate management 
information systems also contributed significantly to the excesses that led to the difficulties 
faced by the CL financial group. 
We  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  are  involved  in  a  comprehensive  review  of  our  financial 
legislation. We have recently completed a new Financial Institutions Act (FIA) and are well 
underway  to  completing  a  new  Insurance  Act  (IA).  Both  pieces  of  legislation  raise  the  bar 
with respect to the respective roles of Boards of Directors, external auditors and in the case 
of the insurance sector, actuaries. I would expect that all regional regulators will increase the 
focus  on  corporate  governance  in  much  the  same  way  as  is  being  done  in  Trinidad  and 
Tobago and in the advanced economies. 
The  increasing  complexity  of  investment  products  will  require  that  financial  institutions  pay 
more  attention  to  rigorous  risk-management  practices.  In  the  region,  this  will  require  a 
change  in  mind  set,  as  well  as  the  hiring  of  individuals  with  the  requisite  expertise  and 
knowledge.  Going  forward,  companies  will  need  to  make  greater  use  of  stress-testing  in 
order to better identify and manage risks. 
Financial institutions in the region are beginning to recognize the crucial role of adequate 
and properly designed information systems. These are necessary tools for management 
as  well  as  the  basis  for  oversight  by  Boards  of  Directors  and  the  regulators.  Robust 
information systems could add significantly to the company’s costs. However, they invariably 
represent monies well spent as they could facilitate major improvements in the company’s 
operations. 
Finally, in the post-crisis world, I expect to see more attention being paid to compliance and 
sanctions. New legislation and upgraded regulations will have limited effect unless there are 
provisions for meaningful sanctions and unless there is certainty that sanctions will be levied 
for  non-compliance.  In  many  cases,  it  is  more  efficient  to  rely  on  sanctions  in  the  form  of 
fines and other penalties administered by the regulator, than to depend entirely on recourse 
to  the  Courts  which  could  be  time-consuming.  Also,  Courts  sometimes  fail  to  grasp  the 
BIS Review 63/2010 
 3
seriousness of the breaches of financial regulations. Enforcing compliance with financial laws 
in the Caribbean will need a change in regulatory culture and a strengthening of political will. 
I  am  hopeful,  however,  that  this  will  happen  since  the  high  cost  of  the  recent  crises 
(particularly  CL  Financial),  has  clearly  provided  ample  rationale  needed  for  much  stricter 
enforcement of financial legislation. 
This  is  what  comes  from  my  crystal  ball.  In  the  course  of  your  deliberations  today  there 
would be other views to which I anxiously look forward. 
4 
 BIS Review 63/2010
