Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Le Monde 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in 
Le Monde,  France,  conducted  by  Mr  Frédéric  Lemaître,  Mr  Stéphane  Lauer  and 
Mrs Marie de Vergès, on 31 May 2010. 
 Is the euro in danger? 
The euro is a very credible currency which keeps its value. Since its introduction 11½ years 
ago, average annual inflation has been below but close to 2%, in line with our definition of 
price  stability.  The  euro’s  capacity  to  maintain  its  value  is  absolutely  essential  for  the 
confidence of investors both inside and outside the euro area.  
So what is the problem? 
The issue is that of financial stability within the euro area on account of bad fiscal policy in 
certain countries, in particular Greece. It is imperative that this be corrected.  
The responsibilities of each of the countries concerned are the primary cause. But there is 
also a true collegial responsibility. Close multilateral surveillance, which is fundamental in the 
spirit and the letter of the Stability and Growth Pact, has been terribly neglected. This is not 
particularly  surprising,  given  that  in  2004  and  2005  the  Pact  was  unfortunately  subject  to 
severe criticism, including from large countries such as Germany, France and Italy. They set 
a very bad example, both in terms of managing and being accountable for their own fiscal 
policy, and as members of the Eurogroup and thus essential figures in the surveillance of the 
fiscal situation in each country. All of Europe’s monetary team – including Christian Noyer 
and  the  Banque  de  France  –  joined  the  ECB  in  opposing  these  attempts  to  dismantle  the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  The  dismantling  of  the  letter  of  the  Pact  was  prevented,  but  its 
application suffered enormously.  
Economists  have  underlined  the  positive  impact  on  growth  of a  lower  euro.  Do  you 
share this view?  
As I just said, the euro is a credible currency which inspires confidence. Confidence is the 
most important ingredient for the consolidation of Europe’s economic recovery.  
How do  you interpret  the fact that the financial markets are still very nervous, even 
though a massive rescue plan was drawn up some weeks ago? 
In order to reinforce the strength and financial stability of the euro area, in addition to what 
had already been decided on for Greece, European countries in liaison with the European 
Commission agreed to mobilise, if necessary, €500 billion. Only a few weeks ago, domestic 
and international investors would never have imagined that this could be possible. They need 
a certain amount of time to take in decisions of such magnitude. This will happen gradually. 
But the measures are so significant in terms of both their nature and their scale that there is 
no doubt that they will have a positive effect on the markets.  
BIS Review 76/2010 
 1
The amounts involved are indeed sizeable, but it appears that the markets are unclear 
about the way in which they might be mobilised… 
In my view, the concrete implementation of the mechanism is taking place properly, and the 
most remarkable aspect is the speed with which parliamentary decisions have been taken in 
the countries in question. 
If, for some reason, Greece does not honour its commitments, might there be a need 
for a “plan B”? 
That is not part of our working assumption. Greece must and will honour its commitments. 
The  European  Commission,  together  with  the  ECB  on  the  one  hand  and  the  IMF  on  the 
other, is following developments in the recovery programme very closely.  
Should we anticipate a debt restructuring programme? 
No, but allow me to make a general comment: the euro area has an average annual deficit  
– as a percentage of gross domestic product – of around 6.5% and 7%, which is substantially 
lower than that of the United States, Japan or the United Kingdom, where it is around 10% or 
higher of their gross domestic product.  
Sometimes, one imagines a sort of Anglo-Saxon plot against the euro. What do you 
think of this? 
No, one should be wary of any conspiracy theories. I simply believe that some international 
investors  struggle  to  understand  Europe  and  its  decision-making  mechanisms.  They  have 
difficulty in gauging the historical size of the European construction and in anticipating the 
capacity of Europeans to take decisions that are just as important as those taken a few days 
ago. Having said that, one should not be complacent: we have some very serious problems 
and  we  need  to  draw  some  serious  lessons.  The  supervision  of  fiscal  policies,  of 
developments  in  competitiveness  in  the  euro  area  economies  and  of  structural  reforms 
needs to be radically improved. We are a monetary union. We now need the equivalent of a 
fiscal union in terms of monitoring and supervising the implementation of policies on public 
finances.  
Can this be achieved by creating new institutions?  
As a first attempt, we have to take the Treaties as the starting point, as they stand. However, 
if  we  fully  exploit  everything  that  the  Treaties  permit  and  greatly  improve  the  “secondary 
legislation”  from  Brussels,  I  believe  that  we  will  be  able  to  make  the  “quantum  leap”,  the 
radical  improvement  that  I  would  like.  Europe,  as  an  historic  construction,  has  often  been 
able to make radical progress during times of difficulty and crisis. The Governing Council of 
the ECB is ready – within the scope of its responsibilities – to help Europe to make essential, 
new  progress.  This  supposes  of  course  that  each  of  the  European  partners  takes  all  its 
responsibilities which are, today, fully of a historic nature.  
Would you like to be able to inspect Member States’ budgets prior to their adoption by 
national parliaments as the Commission proposes to do? 
Each institution has its own responsibilities. The ECB is very closely involved in the work of 
the Commission and the Eurogroup. I support the Commission’s proposal, which I consider 
to be perfectly aligned with the goal of improving governance in the euro area. I have noticed 
some negative reactions, in particular in France, and I don’t understand this, especially in a 
country that has a tradition of favouring a strong “economic governance”. 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2010
Can  non-democratically  elected  bodies  grant  themselves  a  supranational  inspection 
right?  
The governments of the Eurogroup all stem from a democratic process! They are the ones 
who, following any clarifications from the Commission – and where necessary from the ECB  
– take the decisions. Economic and Monetary Union includes a very close supervision and, 
when  necessary,  injunctions  and  sanctions  imposed  collectively  by  the  governments 
participating in the Union. We are interdependent, which means that bad management on the 
part of a single member leads to problems for all of the others.  
Austerity plans are multiplying in Europe but certain economists are warning against 
an overzealousness that could jeopardise growth. What is your view on this? 
When  a  household  systematically  spends  more  than  it  earns,  so  that  its  debt  rises 
exponentially,  its  situation  is  clearly  untenable.  Correcting  this  situation  demonstrates  both 
wise and sound judgment. It is also wise and sound judgment for a country to return to a 
sustainable fiscal situation in the medium term. There is a semantic issue here. What you call 
austerity plans I call plans for a progressive return to a sound fiscal situation. In any case 
these  wise  policies  are  favourable  to  growth  since  they  increase  the  confidence  of 
households, businesses and investors. Today this confidence is – as I have said – essential 
for the recovery. 
The OECD has just raised its growth estimates for 2010 and 2011. Do you share this 
view? 
At the global level we are seeing very robust growth among the emerging economies. This is 
true of China and Asia in general, but also of Latin America, in particular Brazil and Mexico. 
Africa  is  also  performing  better  than  expected.  All  these  emerging  economies  are  driving 
global growth. 
Within the euro area, some recent data suggest a phenomenon of a recovery in growth in the 
second  quarter  of  2010  that  is  slightly  higher  than  expected.  But  we  must  remain  very 
cautious. Our future growth is nowhere set in stone. It depends on all of us and on our ability 
to strengthen confidence as quickly as possible.  
When the ECB decided on 9 May to purchase government bonds that had found no 
takers in the market – a decision criticised notably by the President of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank – did it endanger its independence? Does it run the risk of becoming a 
kind of “bad bank”? 
As  you  know,  I  never  comment  on  what  my  colleagues  have  said.  On  the  basis  of  our 
decision, which was taken by the Governing Council with an overwhelming majority, I would 
like to emphasise the following points. First, we are totally independent of governments and 
pressure groups of any kind. It is not by chance that we have guaranteed price stability, but 
by taking decisions which have pleased neither governments nor lobby groups. Second, our 
mandate  is  price  stability.  From  1999  to  the  present  we  have  delivered  average  annual 
inflation of 1.98% for 330 million European citizens. We are unswervingly committed to price 
stability. Third, we re-absorb all of the liquidity that is injected through our interventions. We 
are  not  printing  money  and  there  is  no  change  to  monetary  policy.  Fourth,  the  aim  of  our 
interventions is to enable certain markets to function more normally, in order to ensure the 
correct transmission of our monetary policy, which is unchanged. Fifth, we have taken note 
of the decision by governments not only to strictly comply with their undertakings to reduce 
deficits, but also, on the part of a number of them, to step up their budgetary consolidation 
efforts. For us, this is absolutely of the essence. 
BIS Review 76/2010 
 3
Does the situation of the Spanish banks concern you? 
I have no particular comments at this stage. On the international level, prudential supervision 
by the Banco de España has always been regarded as rigorous, particularly with its concept 
of dynamic provisioning.  
What  do  you  think  of  the  European  Commission’s  proposals  for  each  country  to 
create an insurance fund specifically for banks to assist them in case of need? 
We  take  a  very  cautious  view  on  bank  taxes.  It  seems  to  us  that  we  must  first  draw  the 
lessons  from  the  financial  crisis  with  regard  to  prudential  regulations,  in  particular  the 
Basel III rules. The question of a possible tax should come second. That said, I am deeply 
concerned  by  this  gulf  between  the  values  of  our  democracies  and  those  of  the  financial 
world,  reflected  particularly  in  the  abnormal  behaviours  observed  so  often  in  recent  years. 
This problem is faced by all of our democratic societies, and certainly on both sides of the 
Atlantic. The values of the financial world must change. In the prevailing ethos, they will no 
longer be tolerated as they are. 
4 
 BIS Review 76/2010
