Sada Reddy: Promoting microfinance in Fiji 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Sada  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  third 
Microfinance Expo, Labasa, 24 September 2010. 
 The Commissioner Northern, Lieutenant Colonel Inia Seruiratu 
Labasa Town Administrator Mr. Vijay Chand 
Microfinance clients and entrepreneurs 
Representatives of banks and financial institutions 
Government agencies and NGOs 
People of Labasa 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen 
Introductory remarks 
Bula si’a and a very good morning to you all.  
It is a real pleasure for me to be here today in Labasa on this occasion. The reception we 
received since arriving yesterday has been overwhelming. Indeed the people of this region 
live up to your reputation as “the Friendly North”.  
I am sure that the Macuata Province is still celebrating its rugby team’s successful challenge 
and promotion to play amongst the big boys in the 2011 Digicel Cup, after the win over the 
Namosi rugby team last weekend. Congratulations and well done!  
We  have  been  monitoring  with  much  anticipation  the  developments  that  have  been  taking 
place here in the North. We want to be part of it and this is the reason we are here today. 
I  wish  to  acknowledge  the  tremendous  support  we  have  received  from  the  Commissioner 
Northern’s  Office  and  all  the  stakeholders  here  today  in  organizing  this  event.  Thank  you 
very much!  
This is the third Microfinance Expo organized by the Reserve Bank this year. The support 
and co-ordination that we have received in all three have been fantastic. Our partners are 
here  again  today  –  the  banks,  financial  institutions,  the  non-bank  financial  institutions, 
investment  agencies,  government  agencies,  mobile  network  operators,  NGOs,  MFIs,  the 
NCSMED and the micro enterprises. All combine their efforts to promote greater awareness 
about financial inclusion and microfinance. It is a good example of the public, private sectors 
and  civil  society  partnership  towards  common  goals.  Results  are  produced  through  such 
coordination and understanding. At the end of the day, it is the general population that will 
benefit from such collaboration.  
Why promote microfinance? 
Some  of  you  may  be  wondering  why  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  is  so  keen  on  promoting 
microfinance. Various studies on microfinance around the world have shown the significant 
improvement in the lives of people through the outreach of microfinance. It has: 
 
 
 
 
contributed significantly in tackling poverty; 
seen improvements in housing, health & sanitation; 
resulted in better access to education; and  
more particularly the empowerment & participation of women in social and economic 
activities.  
BIS Review 122/2010 
 1
So you see, we are interested for the simple reason that microfinance can play a key role in 
the economic development and wellbeing of our people and country. We believe that through 
microfinance, many of the poor and unbaked in our communities will have the opportunity to 
access financial services to improve their living standards. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  microfinance  is  not  only  about  loans.  It  also  includes  savings, 
payments, micro insurance services and capacity building of clients. I hope that at the end of 
our Expo, the people of Labasa would be better informed about these financial services. Not 
only  that,  but  we  would  like  to  see  new  micro  business  initiatives  spring  up,  resulting  in 
improved living standards. 
The theme for this third microfinance expo is “Inspiring Growth through Microfinance”. 
When  we  look  at  statistics,  the  informal  sector,  which  includes  small  and  micro-
entrepreneurs,  contributes  around  17percent  of  our  GDP.1  In  some  Asian  countries,  this 
particular sector form around 60–80 percent of GDP. You can see then that there is a lot that 
can  be  done  to  develop  the  microfinance  and  small  business  sector  to  become  a  major 
contributor to the development and growth of our country.  
The  North  can  contribute  to  this  objective.  Labasa,  as  well as  the  entire  Northern Division 
has  become  a  national  priority  in  Government’s  current  development  focus.  There  is 
availability of vast untapped resources in the Northern Division.  
With  proper  policies  and  support  in  place,  these  resources  can  be  harnessed  to  produce 
business opportunities and source of living for the people in this region. The Government is 
keen  on  realizing  this.  We  intend  to  visit  some  projects  under  the  Northern  Development 
initiatives today. We have heard some encouraging developments and will see them whilst 
we are here. 
RBF policies to support and promote microfinance 
In  the  last  17  months,  you  may  have  noticed  that  the  Reserve  Bank  has  implemented  a 
number of new initiatives to promote microfinance and greater financial inclusion in Fiji.  
In  April  2009  a  new  department  was  established  in  the  Bank,  the  Financial  Systems 
Development  and  Compliance  Group.  This  Group  has  been  tasked  with  spearheading 
developments  in  the  areas  of  microfinance,  financial  literacy,  remittances,  complaints 
management, capital markets and payments systems. 
To develop microfinance in Fiji, the Reserve Bank issued a policy in December last year to 
all  commercial  banks  to  establish  microfinance  units  at  all  their  branches  by  January  this 
year. These banks are all participating at this Expo and you can talk to their staff to find out 
more on the services and products they offer. 
In February this year the RBF facilitated the establishment of the National Financial Inclusion 
Taskforce – an apex body of stakeholders from the public, private sectors and civil society in 
implementing targeted strategies to promote greater financial inclusion, and has taken on the 
leadership role.  
The  goal  of  this  Taskforce  is  “to  reach  150,000  unbanked  clients  by  2014  through  a 
nationally coordinated effort, supported by a variety of financial service providers, offering a 
broad range of relevant, accessible, affordable and cost effective financial services.”  
I am pleased to say that good progress has been made on this front. Both the mobile phone 
network  operators  in  Fiji,  Vodafone  and  Digicel  have  complemented  the  microfinance 
initiatives by recently launching their mobile money financial services, with the approval of 
                                                 
1  Source: Fiji Islands Bureau of Statistics (2009 GDP Release as at September 2010). 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2010
the Reserve Bank. New services and products are available and more are expected in the 
market. New innovations, vision and new technology have enabled this.  
In  June  this  year,  the  Reserve  Bank,  in  partnership  with  stakeholders,  hosted  the  first 
microfinance expo in Ba. The second Expo was in Suva during the 2010 Hibiscus Festival. 
We  had  set-up  a  Microfinance  Village  during  the  Festival  to  promote  microfinance  and 
financial  literacy.  A  green  ribbon  campaign  was  launched  that  same  week  to  promote 
financial literacy. As usual, our partners were with us during the occasion. 
It is pleasing to see that the commercial banks, are now actively participating in microfinance 
programs. We hope that these new services and products will make financial services more 
accessible and affordable. 
Another area that the Reserve Bank has been actively promoting is local value adding and 
import substitution, especially with fruits and vegetables. We hope that this is an area that 
many of our rural farmers here in the North can actively engage in. I believe the Department 
of Agriculture officials will be available over the next two days to assist those of you who may 
have questions and need assistance. 
We also sponsored a Chef this year for a two month attachment in Malaysia at a five star 
hotel to study the use of local produce in hotel menus. He returned in August and we have 
collaborated  with  TPAF  to  organize  a  two  day  commercial  cooking  workshop  at  the  Takia 
Hotel, where this Chef will conduct training. Training is open to school leavers, professional 
chefs, or budding home based caterers.  
To support local value adding and small business development we have also collaborated 
with  the  Ministry  of  Women  and  the  Indonesian  Government  in  facilitating  a  training 
workshop for women on making handcrafts utilizing batik, bamboo and coconuts.  
We  hope  that  the  two  workshops  today  will  enable  participants  to  learn  about  creating 
income generating activities that could be used to start a small business. 
We  also  have  on  hand  commercial  banks  and  microfinance  institutions  that  offer  free 
financial literacy trainings and advice on their products and services. 
Of course, we have also invited the micro entrepreneurs to come and sell their wares at this 
expo. You can extend your support to these entrepreneurs.  
Conclusion 
We hope that you will invite and encourage as many of your friends and families to come 
down  and  enjoy  the  wide  variety  of  goods  and  services  available  from  the  different 
stakeholders.  
Ladies and gentlemen, this is a rare opportunity; we have brought microfinance and financial 
literacy to your door-step. I hope you will grab this opportunity. This occasion is also meant to 
be educational and fun. Apart from the abundance of useful information and products by the 
institutions represented, there are also lots giveaways for the children and the entire family. 
With these words I declare the Labasa 2010 Microfinance open. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 122/2010 
 3
