Daniel Boamah: The state of the manufacturing sector in Barbados 
Remarks  by  Dr  Daniel  Boamah,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados,  at  a 
meeting of manufacturers and private sector officials, Bridgetown, 27 April 2010. 
 To  say  that  the  manufacturing  sector  has  been  in  a  secular  decline  would  be  an 
understatement because it is so obvious to the keen and not so keen observer. 
Let  us  look  at  its  performance  during  the  last  decade  or  so  beginning  in  1998.  As  a 
proportion  of  GDP,  the  sector  has  so  far  declined  from  a  position  just  under  7.6%  of  real 
GDP in 1998 to approximately 4.9% in 2009. At the same time, employment in the sector has 
fallen from about 10,900 persons in 1998 to approximately 6,800 in 2008. If we were to take 
a  much  longer  view,  the  secular  decline  becomes  even  starker.  In  1980,  for  instance,  the 
share  of  manufacturing  in  real  economic  activity  was  11.8%,  while  the  sector  employed 
approximately 15,000 persons. 
Part  of  the  reason  for  the  secular  decline  may  be  related  to  the  fact  that  the  country  has 
indeed  become  a  service-based  economy.  A  major  part  of  the  fall  may  be  attributed  to  a 
gradual loss of market share to regional and international competitors. In its last statement 
on the performance of the economy during the first quarter, the Central Bank reported that 
the recession in the economy appears to be bottoming out. Real output declined by about 
0.1% compared with a decline of 4.8% witnessed during the first quarter of 2009.  
New and emerging evidence from international forecasters suggest that the world economy 
is poised to emerge from the worst recession in eighty years. The IMF has raised its forecast 
of world growth in 2010 to 4.2% in its April 2010 analysis from about 3.9% while affirming 
growth of 4.3% in 2011, with little inflation. 
The United States is expected to record growth of about 3.1% in 2010, followed by a slightly 
reduced expansion of 2.6% in 2011. The United Kingdom is projected to grow at about 1.3% 
in 2010 and 2.5% in 2011, following a decline of 4.9% in 2009. Canada is also expected to 
experience growth of about 3.1% and 3.2% in 2010 and 2011, respectively. 
Based on the new evidence, the Central Bank of Barbados has also revised the outlook for 
the  Barbados  economy.  We  now  expect  economic  growth to  be  between  0.5%  and  1%  in 
2010 and between 2%  and 2.5% for 2011. We therefore see some light at the end of the 
proverbial tunnel but one is not sure how helpful this new found optimism would be for the 
manufacturing sector. Although the sector is estimated to have expanded by 1% during the 
first quarter of 2010, the Bank is forecasting a decline of nearly 4% for the sector in 2010, 
following a fall of nearly 13% in 2009. 
It goes without saying that the revised projection is largely predicated on the performance of 
tourism,  as  the  sector’s  performance  has  a  spill-over  effect  on  several  industries,  notably 
wholesale  and  retail,  transportation  and  construction  activity.  Various  reasons  have  been 
suggested for the continued weaknesses in the manufacturing sector. These include:  
(a) 
High cost of production, particularly for energy, and hence the inability of the sector 
to compete with regional and international products. 
Low productivity, partly due to the adoption of relatively inefficient processes which 
in turn may be attributed to. 
The continued reliance on aging and obsolete plants.  
(c) 
A few years ago I read an article about the US auto industry. The author was trying to explain 
why  the  US  industry  was  becoming  increasingly  unable  to  compete  with  its  Asian 
competitors, during the period from the mid 1980s to 1990s. The indicator used by the author 
was the labour-income ratio. This is the proportion of value added that goes to wages and 
(b) 
BIS Review 66/2010 
 1
factors  of  production  consisting  of 
fringe  benefits.  If  that  ratio  goes  above  a  certain  threshold,  apparently  between  80%  and 
85%,  productivity  declines  and  capital  formation  falls  too  low  to  maintain  present  jobs,  let 
alone create new ones. The author intimated that the US auto industry was operating with a 
labour – income ratio of between 85% to 90%. In contrast, the Germans and Japanese auto 
makers  were  operating  on  labour  –  income  ratio  of  75%  to  80%.  It  was  not  surprising 
therefore  that  the  Germans  and  especially  the  Japanese  auto  industry  gained  significant 
market shares at the expense of the US auto makers in the US market. The fact is that the 
labour – income ratios of 85% to 90% made capital formation impossible as US companies 
were barely able to generate or raise the investment capital needed to modernize their plants 
and convert them to the production of fuel efficient cars. We should recall that only recently 
General Motors had to be supported by the US Federal Government, otherwise the company 
would have collapsed. It is my considered opinion that the manufacturing sector in Barbados 
can take a valuable lesson from this. It would not be easy to estimate the labour – income 
ratio  for  the  entire  industry  in  Barbados  (as  data  may  not  easily  be  available).  What  I  can 
suggest  is  for  each  firm  to  do  its  own  analysis.  One  is  assuming  here  that  the  average 
manufacturer  operates  with 
(including 
management) and physical capital. A company may estimate value added in its operations 
by netting out purchases of inputs from other firms from total sales. After that if it is a simple 
issue of estimating the proportion of income that goes to pay wages, including the cost of 
absenteeism and fringe benefits. Each firm may then be able to roughly determine where it 
stands with respect to the labour – income ratio yardstick. In conclusion, one could say that 
prospects  for  the  traditional  manufacturing  products  are  weak.  Only  certain  niches  could 
survive and the industry needs to create more niches. One can note that the Jamaican jerk 
food industry has caught the imagination of North America and Europe to such an extent that 
jerk meat products are gradually becoming standard fare in many restaurants in these areas. 
It is even difficult to obtain some of the leading jerk products in Jamaica because of the high 
demand by foreigners. 
The Barbados manufacturing sector should be ready to diversify product lines and markets, 
including export markets. Some of the larger firms have already tightened their operations, 
shed labour and re-visited investment plans.  
There are indications that finance is not a major constraint. The Central Bank’s own financing 
schemes  are  under-utilized.  Nevertheless,  available  evidence  points  to  about  30% 
delinquency rate among small and medium-sized companies which access funds to finance 
their operations. In order to ensure uninterrupted availability of finance, it may be necessary 
to provide basic accounting skills to companies in the sector so as to keep the proportion of 
companies which are unable to service their debts to the minimum. 
labour 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2010
