Michael C Bonello: Financing the small business sector – constraints 
and opportunities 
Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the European 
Federation  of  Ethical  and  Alternative  Banks  and  Financiers  Seminar,  St.Julian's,  15  April 
2010. 
 The holding of a seminar on credit for small businesses is both appropriate and timely given 
the  important  role  played  by  these  enterprises  in  modern,  free-market  economies  and  the 
contribution  they  are  likely  to  make  in  the  recovery  phase  as  economies  emerge  from 
recession.  It  is  perhaps  not  widely  known  that  of  the  almost  20  million  enterprises  active 
within the European Union (EU) in 2005, 99.8% were small and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMEs),  defined  as  businesses  that  employ  fewer  than  250  persons.1  In  turn,  more  than 
nine-tenths  of  these  were  micro  enterprises,  with  a  workforce  of  fewer  than  10.  In  2005 
SMEs  accounted  for  58%  of  the  value  added  generated  in  the  EU  and  67%  of  all 
employment, compared to 55% in the US.2 
Small  businesses  are  a  major  source  of  dynamism  in  the  Maltese  economy  too.  SMEs 
constitute the overwhelming majority of businesses, accounting for over 99% of the total and 
two-thirds  of  total  employment.  The  vast  majority  are  micro  enterprises.  These  small 
operations  act  as  customers  of,  and  suppliers  to,  larger  companies  and  are  an  essential 
source of entrepreneurship and innovation. It is thus no exaggeration to say that small IMF 
Update  of  World  Economic  Outlook,  January  2010.businesses  form  the  backbone  of 
European economies, including Malta’s.  
A better understanding by policymakers of this sector and of the constraints it faces, which 
are often different from those encountered by larger firms, is therefore crucial for the purpose 
of 
the  current  environment 
characterised by a reduced availability of credit and tighter lending standards, the financing 
needs of small businesses deserve particular attention. In this regard it is important to recall 
that  SMEs  in  general,  and  micro  enterprises  in  particular,  are  more  dependent  on  the 
banking  sector  than  larger  firms,  which  have  the  expertise  and  the  resources  to  tap  the 
capital market. This is very much the case in the euro area: between 2004 and 2008, banks 
accounted for roughly 70% of the total external financing requirements compared to just 20% 
in the US.  
This  critical  role  of  bank  credit  partly  explains  the  unprecedented  liquidity-providing 
operations undertaken by the European Central Bank since August 2007 designed to sustain 
the  flow  of  credit  to  the  real  economy  during  the  crisis,  and  the  repeated  calls  by  the 
Governing Council for banks to reinforce their balance sheets so as to be better able to fulfil 
their responsibility in this regard. 
the  economy’s  growth  potential. 
further  expanding 
In 
The economic environment in the near term 
The  world  economy  is  finally  emerging  from  the  most  severe  recession  in  recent  history. 
Global  output  declined  by  0.8%  in  2009,  while  trade  volumes  shrank  by  more  than  12%.3 
Economic  activity  in  both  the  euro  area  and  the  United  Kingdom,  Malta’s  largest  trading 
                                                 
1  Eurostat Statistics in Focus 31/2008. 
2  Financial Times “The cogs are clogged ”, 16 February 2010. 
3 
IMF Update of World Economic Outlook, January 2010. 
BIS Review 50/2010 
 1
partners,  declined  by  4.1%  and  4.9%,  respectively.  This  contraction  had  inevitable 
consequences  for  labour  markets,  with  unemployment  increasing  to  levels  not  seen  in 
decades.  The  combination  of  lower  tax  revenues  and  higher  outlays  arising  from  the 
operation  of  automatic  stabilizers  and  fiscal  stimulus  programmes  took  their  toll  on  public 
finances,  with  deficits  in  a  number  of  countries  rising  close  to,  or  even  exceeding,  double 
digit levels. The growth rate of these economies over the coming years will be constrained by 
the inevitable fiscal consolidation required to bring deficit and debt ratios back to sustainable 
levels.  
These  recessionary  headwinds  inevitably  took  their  toll  on  Malta’s  open  economy.  The 
impact, however, proved less severe than might have been expected. The economy came 
out  of  the  recession  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2009,  after  contracting  for  three  consecutive 
quarters. On a seasonally adjusted basis, the peak-to-trough drop in GDP was around 3.0%, 
compared to 4.7% in the euro area. 
The  relative  resilience  of  the  Maltese  economy  is  attributable  to  four  factors.  First, 
membership  of  the  euro  area  has  enhanced  its  capacity  to  withstand  external  shocks. 
Second,  the  impact  of  the  financial  crisis  was  mitigated  by  the  strength  of  the  domestic 
banking system, underscored by the absence of toxic assets in bank balance sheets, prudent 
lending policies and a funding structure based primarily on retail deposits. The third factor 
was  the  strategy  of  temporary  government  assistance  targeted  to  those  non-financial 
corporations (NFCs) that were in difficulty, mostly in the manufacturing and tourism sectors, 
along with the implementation of some infrastructure projects. Besides limiting the number of 
potential  job  losses,  this  approach  proved  to  be  more  appropriate  in  the  domestic  context 
than  an  across-the-board  increase  in  spending  whose  impact  would  have  been  severely 
weakened through import leakages. The fourth factor was the continuing diversification of the 
economy  towards  high  value-added  services,  which  have  proved  less  vulnerable  to  the 
downturn. Small businesses have featured prominently in this process. Indeed, most of the 
enterprises  in  the  emerging  sectors  of  the  economy,  such  as  those  in  pharmaceuticals, 
remote gaming, ICT and business and financial advisory services are SMEs. 
Going forward, the prospects are for only slow growth in Malta’s external demand. While IMF 
projections suggest that global activity and trade volumes will expand by around 4% and 6% 
this year, respectively, the recovery in the euro area promises to be less robust and more 
gradual than in other advanced economies, and is expected to be conditioned, inter alia, by 
the ongoing process of balance sheet adjustment in both the private and the public sectors. 
Economic activity is therefore expected to remain sluggish and uneven in 2010, with GDP 
expanding by less than 1.0% in both the euro area and the United Kingdom.4 
Mirroring these expected trends abroad, the Central Bank of Malta’s projections point to a 
modest  GDP  growth  rate  of  around  1.0%  in  2010.  Net  exports  are  likely  to  contribute 
negatively  to  growth,  so  that  the  main  growth  impulse  is  expected  to  come  from  domestic 
demand,  driven  by  higher  investment  outlays  on  infrastructure  projects  and,  to  a  lesser 
extent,  by  a  moderate  expansion  in  private  consumption.  Labour  market  conditions  are 
unlikely to improve this year, with the unemployment rate remaining above 7%. This subdued 
growth outlook, together with the expectation that inflation will remain more elevated than in 
the euro area, will exert downward pressure on disposable income.  
Overall,  therefore,  the  economic  environment  facing  small  businesses  in  the  foreseeable 
future, both domestically and in our main trading partners, will be less favourable than that 
which prevailed before the onset of the financial crisis in 2007.  
                                                 
4  European Commission Interim Forecasts, February 2010. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2010
Small businesses access to finance 
Since  SMEs  and  micro  enterprises  are  typically  more  dependent  on  bank  financing  than 
larger  firms,  the  ongoing  deleveraging  of  bank  balance  sheets  in  many  EU  countries 
represents a potential threat. The prospect of a prolonged period of restricted access to both 
working and investment capital at a time of subdued demand could result in the closure of 
many enterprises.  
In the euro area, credit growth has indeed slowed progressively during the past year. The 
latest figures, for February, suggest that loans to the private sector contracted by 0.4% from 
a year earlier. The annual growth rate of loans to all NFCs – large, medium and small – fell 
from a peak of almost 15% in April 2008 to –2.5% in February.  
With regard to credit flows to SMEs, a recently published ECB survey, which however does 
not include the five smallest countries in the euro area, including Malta, shows that SMEs 
were generally less successful than large companies in obtaining bank loans in 2009, even if 
the majority received part or all of what they had applied for. In the second half of 2009, 75% 
of all SMEs reported successful approaches, slightly less than in the first half of the year. The 
main reasons given by the banks were the general economic and the firm-specific outlook, 
together with a reduced willingness to extend credit.  
It  would  appear,  therefore,  that  both  demand  and  supply  factors  explain  recent  credit 
developments  in  the  euro  area.  This  conclusion  is  corroborated  by  the  evidence  from  the 
Bank  Lending  Survey,  which  points  to  factors  associated  with  the  weak  macroeconomic 
conditions, such as a lower demand for credit due to less fixed investment, combined with 
supply side factors such as the tightening of credit standards. 
The  restricted  flow  of  credit  in  the  euro  area  does  not,  however,  appear  to  have  been 
replicated in Malta, whose banking sector emerged from the financial turmoil with high capital 
and  liquidity  ratios.  Domestic  credit  to  the  private  sector  continued  to  expand  at  steady, 
though slower, rates in 2009. The annual rate of increase in bank loans to the private sector 
declined  from  around  10%  in  2008  to  8.3%  last  year,  and  the  latest  figures  for  February 
suggest  that  total  credit  is  still  expanding  by  over  6%.  Lending  to  NFCs,  meanwhile,  is 
growing at an annual rate of 3.9%.  
With regard to the recent experience of domestic small enterprises, our estimates suggest 
that bank lending to them expanded by around 6.6% per annum between 2005 and 2009. 
This impression of a sustained credit flow is confirmed by a joint survey carried out by the 
European Commission (EC) and the ECB during 2009.5 The results for Malta are based on a 
sample  of  100  enterprises,  of  which  94%  were  categorized  as  micro  enterprises  in  the 
services sector with an average annual turnover of less than EUR 2 million in 2008.  
One  of  the  most  significant  results  was  that  small  enterprises  in  Malta  did  not  consider 
access to finance a main concern. Only 8% of respondents cited it as their most pressing 
problem, compared to 16% in the EU. In addition, only 12% thought that the willingness of 
banks to provide a loan had deteriorated, while the number of those replying that banks were 
actually more willing to extend credit was among the highest in the EU. 
At the same time, however, the demand for bank loans by domestic small enterprises last 
year was weak. Only 10% of respondents applied for bank loans compared to 22% in the 
EU. The indication of a subdued demand for loans is confirmed by information derived from 
the Bank Lending Survey and from other intelligence collected by the Central Bank of Malta.  
One possible explanation could be the fact that small businesses in Malta rely on a mix of 
internal and external finance to a greater extent than their European counterparts. Another is 
                                                 
5  Flash Euro Barometer No. 271. 
BIS Review 50/2010 
 3
the reported postponement of investment plans in the light of the slowdown in both domestic 
and external demand.  
Albeit to a lesser extent, supply side factors also seem to have been present. For example, 
according  to  the  joint  EC/ECB  survey  more  than  half  of  the  small  businesses  in  Malta 
considered  the  interest  rate  as  the  most  limiting  factor  for  obtaining  a  bank  loan,  a  higher 
proportion  than  in  any  other  country  surveyed.  And  about  one  fifth  reported  that  they  had 
actually  refused  the  loan  offered  because  they  considered  the  interest  rate  as  too  high. 
Again, this was by far a higher percentage than anywhere else in the EU, where on average 
only around 6% cited high costs as a reason for turning down a loan. In the same vein, the 
proportion  of  Maltese  businesses  replying  that  interest  rates  charged  on  loans  had 
decreased was among the lowest.  
These  results  support  the  information  obtained  from  an  analysis  of  bank  interest  rates.  In 
general, while domestic banks have reduced interest rates charged on loans to households 
by more than the average in the euro area following the cumulative cut of 325 basis points in 
official rates by the ECB since 2008, the opposite is true for loans to NFCs. This suggests 
that domestic NFCs, most of which are small enterprises, are finding it more expensive to 
obtain  or  service  a  loan  than  their  counterparts  in  the  euro  area.  This  apparent  relative 
rigidity of domestic interest rates charged to NFCs merits further analysis as it could harm 
the recovery process, particularly if businesses continue to postpone their investment plans.  
Other constraints faced by small enterprises in Malta 
The  same  survey  also  provides  an  insight  into  the  broader  range  of  concerns  faced  by 
domestic  micro  and  small  enterprises.  These  include  the  limited  purchasing  power  of 
customers, obstacles faced in trying to expand market share and competitive pressures. In 
addition, a disproportionately high percentage of these businesses reported higher costs in 
2009.  
In this regard, the automatic adjustment of wages to inflation through the COLA mechanism, 
irrespective  of  the  level  of  productivity,  is  one  of  the  factors  that  has  been  contributing 
adversely  to  the  cost  structure  of  these  enterprises,  and  consequently  to  their  competitive 
position. Here I must reiterate that a currency union member country like Malta, whose only 
sustainable source of long-term growth are its exports, cannot afford to allow nominal wages 
to grow faster than productivity, which is what has happened during the past decade.  
The competitive position of these enterprises is also constrained by their ability to introduce 
more  efficient  production  processes.  The  proportion  of  enterprises  that  did  not  undertake 
some form of restructuring last year was one of the highest in Europe. This is probably one 
reason why Malta has lagged behind its European peers in pursuing the targets set by the 
Lisbon  Innovation  Scoreboard,  in  particular  in  the  areas  of  entrepreneurship  and  human 
resources.6 
Another  frequently  mentioned  cost  factor  are  administrative  burdens.  This  is  an  endemic 
problem in Malta, confirmed by a recent survey in which a reduction in such burdens featured 
as the priority recommendation by executives of foreign-owned companies operating in Malta 
as a means of enhancing the attractiveness of the island to foreign investors.7 
Finally, with regard to the constraint represented by the small size of the domestic market, 
Maltese entrepreneurs have no option other than to attempt to break into foreign markets. 
This is not an easy task. During the past decade, Malta has registered one of the slowest 
                                                 
6  European Innovation Scoreboard 2009. Link available at: 
<>http://www.proinno-europe.eu/sites/default/files/page/10/03/I981-DG%20ENTR-Report%20EIS.pdf 
7  Ernst & Young’s 2009 Malta Attractiveness Survey. 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2010
average  annual  export  growth  rates  in  volume  terms  in  the  EU.  Survey  information  from 
micro  and  small  enterprises  reveals  that  the  most  frequently  cited  obstacles  to  exporting 
relate to taxation issues in foreign markets, inadequate market intelligence and insufficient 
capital.8  
Recent initiatives and the way forward 
This suggests the need for a comprehensive strategy to help these small enterprises exploit 
the opportunities offered by the EU Single Market, building on the existing public and private 
initiatives. The Budget for 2010, for example, included measures aimed specifically at easing 
some  of  the  constraints  I  have  just  referred  to.  Chief  among  these  is  a  40%  tax  credit 
scheme, which is directed at micro enterprises that invest in productive processes or create 
more jobs.  
Meanwhile  Malta  Enterprise  is  playing  an  active  role  in  assisting  small  businesses  to  tap 
EU regional  funds.  It  has  been  recently  reported  that  applications  for  grants  from  the 
European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), from which EUR 20 million for industry and 
EUR 10 million for investment in renewable energy are available, have led to the selection of 
almost 400 projects with a proposed outlay of EUR 25 million. An additional EUR 7 million, 
announced in the Budget for 2010, is also being made available. Maltese entrepreneurs have 
submitted more than 600 proposals for funding under the third call of the ERDF scheme, with 
the total value of assistance requested expected to exceed EUR 40 million.  
At  the  same  time,  an  agreement  between  the  Government  and  the  European  Investment 
Fund will provide another EUR 10 million by the end of this year from a specialized EU fund 
aimed at small enterprises that would otherwise find it difficult to raise up to EUR 25,000 to 
improve  their  operations.  These  initiatives  should  also  help  to  increase  awareness  about 
EU funding schemes. 
Malta  Enterprise  is  also  involved  in  the  management  of  the  Kordin  Business  Incubation 
Centre. Between 2003 and 2008, this facility produced over 50 start-ups, with a success rate 
of  86%.  Some  of  the  most  successful  ventures  have  gone  on  to  employ  more  than 
100 workers. Within the next few months small enterprises will also benefit from more than 
300  industrial  spaces  that  will  be  made  available  in  three  locations,  while  other  parks  for 
micro  enterprises  in  both  Malta  and  Gozo  are  in  the  pipeline.  Such  initiatives  facilitate 
networking  among  SMEs  and  can  lead  to  the  development  of  business  clusters  and 
consequent positive spillover effects.  
Initiatives  to  assist  small  businesses  have  also  been  taken  by  the  private  sector.  For 
instance, a major domestic bank has recently teamed up with a leading international software 
house in a programme designed to increase the success rate of ICT start-up companies. A 
number of banks have established dedicated funds or have tailored business packages that 
are specifically designed to meet the demands of small enterprises. In contrast, however, the 
concept of investing private money in small enterprises has yet to gain currency in Malta, and 
the commitment of government funds for the establishment of the first official venture capital 
fund has so far not been followed up by private investors. 
Conclusion 
Small  businesses  have  undoubtedly  contributed  to  the  resilience  shown  by  the  Maltese 
economy during the recession. Indeed, the majority of emerging niche industries in both the 
manufacturing  and  the  services  sector  belong  to  this  category.  Going  forward,  they  could 
also play an important role in sustaining the recovery. This calls for the creation of a more 
                                                 
8  Flash Euro Barometer No. 196 – Observatory of European SMEs. 
BIS Review 50/2010 
 5
congenial environment, which not only allows entrepreneurship to flourish but also focuses 
on  the  ingredients  that  will  become  increasingly  important  in  the  post-crisis  economic 
environment.  These  include  a  greater  emphasis  on  innovation,  research  and  development 
and marketing, drawing on EU and public and private financial assistance schemes. Without 
such  a  proactive  orientation,  small  businesses  cannot  hope  to  overcome  the  limitations 
inherent in a small domestic market.  
6 
 BIS Review 50/2010
