Mark Carney: Principles for interesting times 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  Carleton  University, 
Ottawa, Ontario, 11 March 2010. 
 I would like to thank students from universities across Canada for joining me on this special 
day, the 75th anniversary of the Bank of Canada. This afternoon, I will speak about the past 
and the present in the hope of enticing some of you to participate in the Bank’s future. 
Let me caution market participants that nothing that follows relates to the “near future,” that 
is,  the  horizon  relevant  for  monetary  policy  decisions,  so  if  you  are  not  interested  in  the 
Bank’s history, the Bank’s gift to you on our birthday is an hour of found time. 
Introduction 
The  Bank  of  Canada’s  mandate  is  to  preserve  the  value  of  the  nation’s  currency  and  to 
promote the economic and financial welfare of Canadians. As a consequence, we focus on 
the  major  macroeconomic  issues  of  the  day.  Over  the  past  two  years,  these  have  been 
considerable. 
With current debates ranging from the relationship between price and financial stability to the 
future of the international monetary system, it is an exciting time in central banking. However, 
I  would  argue  that  for  students  such  as  yourselves,  the  issues  facing  central  banks  are 
always intriguing since they go to the heart of how modern economies function and, indeed, 
how human beings behave. 
The  Bank  in  turn  needs  you.  The  Bank  is  a  learning  organization,  with  immense 
responsibilities. Our work is grounded in academia, honed by analysis, and disciplined by an 
unrelenting focus on our mandate. Our response to the recent economic crisis has risen to 
the  highest  standard  set  over  our  history.  Guided  by  well-researched,  policy-based 
frameworks,  the  Bank  has  acted  decisively.  As  a  result,  the  clarity  and  credibility  of  these 
frameworks has made action more powerful. The importance of this combination has been 
repeatedly demonstrated. 
The formidable economic and financial challenges facing Canada today are not necessarily 
more intractable than those in the past. Economic forces do not change. However, the speed 
and scale of information, capital flows, and trade are radically different. The global economy 
is more fundamentally interconnected than ever before – and that means the response times 
for policy-makers have shortened dramatically. In this environment, the value of principles-
based policy frameworks is supreme. 
I  am  reminded  of  a  story  told  to  me  by  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European 
Central Bank. A mutual colleague, at the start of the crisis, was visiting a small village in the 
Scottish highlands. He was bereft of his BlackBerry and was anxious for the latest financial 
news. He entered a newsagent and asked for the Financial Times. 
– 
– 
– 
In today’s world, policy-makers cannot wait until tomorrow. They must act immediately. To do 
so effectively, they need guiding principles. 
Permit me to elaborate by recounting three challenges that have resonated over the years. 
The shopkeeper said, “Would you like yesterday’s paper or today’s?” 
Given the weight of events, he answered without hesitation, “I would prefer today’s.” 
To which the shopkeeper replied, “Then come back tomorrow.” 
BIS Review 29/2010 
 1
Monetary policy response to global economic crisis 
First, consider a severe, synchronous global recession, triggered by a financial crisis at the 
heart  of  capitalism.  Commodity  prices  crash,  protectionism  is  on  the  rise.  There  are  bank 
failures  around  the  world,  although  not  in  Canada.  Nonetheless,  our  country  is  not  left 
unscathed.  Unemployment  rockets  and  economic  activity  plummets.  Does  that  sound 
familiar? 
Triggered  by  the  stock  market  crash  of  October  1929,  the  Great  Depression  had  a 
devastating impact on the global and Canadian economies. By 1933, Canadian equity prices 
had fallen more than 70 per cent from their peak, and national output had dropped by 40 per 
cent,  with  the  drought-stricken  prairies  especially  hard  hit.  Nationwide,  deflation  was 
punishing, with consumer prices falling by more than 9 per cent in both 1931 and 1932. The 
human cost was staggering, with the unemployment rate hitting a high of 20 per cent in 1933. 
By  1933,  with  bank  lending  still  contracting,  pressure  on  the  federal  government  to  “do 
something” had become intense. Reflecting the high cost and low availability of credit, there 
was  widespread  public  distrust  of  the  chartered  banks.1  Western  farmers,  suffering  from 
sharp  declines  in  both  crop  yields  and  prices,  were  vocal  critics  of  the  Eastern-controlled 
banks and strongly favoured the creation of a central bank. The Government responded with 
the passage of the Bank of Canada Act, and we opened our doors for business and issued 
our first bank notes exactly 75 year ago. 
So  what  did  the  Bank  do?  Initially,  with  respect  to  monetary  policy,  the  answer  was,  not 
much. The economy was already starting to recover, and the Bank maintained its Bank Rate 
unchanged  at  2  1/2  per  cent.2  As  well,  the  notion  that  central  banks  could  stabilize 
macroeconomic activity within their borders is relatively new.3, 4 
Moreover, the Bank retained a “gold mentality,” even though Canada had officially broken the 
formal  link  between  the  Canadian  dollar  and  gold  in  1931.  Consequently,  there  was  a 
reluctance to do anything that might induce capital outflows. It was also widely believed that 
U.S. rates provided an effective floor for comparable Canadian rates.5 
Contrast that to the recent experience. The so-called “Great Recession” from which we are 
just emerging had the potential to replicate the dire experience of the 1930s. However, while 
the reverberations of the recent experience are far from finished, the aggressive and timely 
actions  of  global  central  banks,  including  the  Bank  of  Canada,  have  not  only  averted  the 
worst, but also created the prospect of a sustained recovery. 
Recognizing the strong headwinds caused by the seizing up of financial markets, the Bank 
has dramatically eased monetary conditions and provided significant liquidity to the financial 
system. The Bank’s actions were guided by its forward-looking inflation-targeting framework, 
                                                 
1   The traditional rate for prime commercial loans was 6 per cent in the early 1930s, implying real interest rates 
(after inflation) of as much as 15 per cent or more. 
Indeed, the first cut in the Bank Rate did not occur until 1944. 
2  
3   See D. Dodge, “70 Years of Central Banking in Canada,” Bank of Canada Review (Winter, 2005–2006): 3–5. 
4   The Bank believed that since chartered banks rarely, if ever, borrowed from the central bank, its Bank Rate 
had little impact on commercial rates. It did not apparently consider whether banks would change their policy if 
the  Bank  Rate  were  dropped.  The  Bank  Rate  was  seen  as  a  lender-of-last-resort  rate  as  opposed  to  a 
monetary policy tool. 
5   The Bank was active on other fronts. In April 1936, Alberta defaulted on its provincial debts and unilaterally 
reduced  the  rate  paid  on  bonds.  Other  Western  provinces  threatened  to  follow  suit.  As  monetary  policy  is 
national in scope, it could not address such regional problems. Fearing a second provincial default, Towers 
instead advanced $3 million to Saskatchewan. This was an extraordinary move, unique in the history of the 
Bank. 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2010
which prompted easing before the recession began and accelerated stimulus once the crisis 
intensified. 
Between December 2007 and April of last year, the Bank lowered the overnight target by a 
total of 425 basis points, cutting it to a historic low of 1/4 per cent, its lowest possible level. 
Once we reached that effective lower bound, we developed and published a framework for 
unconventional  monetary  policy.  Our  conditional  commitment  is  the  only  element  of  that 
framework  that  we  have  activated.  While  the  Bank’s  unconventional  policy  framework 
demonstrated  to  Canadians  that  we  were  not  out  of  bullets,  the  use  of  the  conditional 
commitment  reassured  them  that  we  were  not  trigger  happy  but,  rather,  disciplined  by  the 
pursuit of our inflation target. 
Action  alone  is  not  sufficient.  It  must  take  place  within  the  proper  context.  Once  again,  I 
stress that the Bank places supreme importance on policy measures within a well-developed 
framework. 
The  Bank’s  monetary  policy  response  to  the  current  crisis  has  been  consistent  with  Ben 
Bernanke’s mea culpa to Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz, regarding the lack of action 
by the Federal Reserve during the Depression: “You’re right, we did it. We’re very sorry. But 
thanks to you, we won’t do it again.” 
Bernanke’s admission underscores the importance of research and learning – something the 
Bank  has  long  understood.  In-depth,  comprehensive,  and  impartial  research  has  always 
been  critical  to  our  success.  One  of  the  first  steps  taken  by  our  first  governor,  Graham 
Towers,  was  to  create  a  research  and  statistical  department.6  Through  aggressive 
recruitment  of  promising  young  academics  and  co-operation  with  university-based 
researchers and international colleagues, innovations have included leading macro models 
(such  as  RDX  and  ToTEM),  work  on  price-level  targeting,  and  cutting-edge  research  on 
payments systems.7 
The Bank has also learned from the conduct of policy, including from our mistakes. Gerald 
Bouey  famously  recognized  that  “we  did  not  abandon  M1,  M1  abandoned  us,”  before 
initiating a search for a new monetary anchor. More recently, the Bank has been determined 
not to repeat the errors of the 1970s, when we overestimated the rate of potential growth in 
the wake of a major global shock.8 
Most  significantly,  the  Bank  is  now  guided  by  the  discipline  of  an  inflation  target.  Canada 
helped pioneer inflation targeting, having adopted it in 1991 under the Governorship of John 
Crow.9 During the Great Recession, its value was clear. By disciplining our objectives and 
promoting  transparency  and  accountability,  the  target  has  anchored  inflation  expectations, 
thereby  ensuring  that  reductions  in  our  overnight  rate  drive  down  real  interest  rates  and 
stimulate the economy. 
Financial system stability and the provision of liquidity 
Consider now a second challenge that has echoed across the decades. In the midst of an 
economic  crisis,  a  mid-sized  financial  institution  fails,  potentially  triggering  a  host  of 
                                                 
6   See D. McQueen, “Economic Research at the Bank of Canada, 1935–65,” Canadian Business Economics 5, 
No. 2–3 (Winter/Spring 1997): 89–95. 
7   See  J.  F.  Helliwell,  “From  Flapper  to  Bluestocking:  What  Happened  to  the  Young  Woman  of  Wellington 
Street?” Bank of Canada Review (Winter, 2005–2006): 31–39. 
8   See Bank of Canada, “Revisions to Potential Output,” Monetary Policy Report (April 2009): 12. 
9   New Zealand was the first country to adopt an inflation target, doing so in 1990. Canada followed, 11 months 
later. 
BIS Review 29/2010 
 3
counterparty  defaults  across  financial  systems.  The  shock  spreads  globally,  threatening 
market functioning and financial stability. 
This is the story of Bankhaus Herstatt, a mid-sized German bank, active in foreign exchange 
markets,  that  failed  in  1974  during  the  first  oil  shock.  It  was  shut  down  at  the  end  of  the 
business  day,  when  many  banks  still  had  foreign  exchange  contracts  for  settlement.  The 
international impact was substantial, even in the “less-connected” world of the 1970s. As the 
repercussions from failed transactions mounted, gross funds transferred in New York fell by 
60 per cent over the next several days. 
The  Herstatt  failure  exposed  how  inadequate  market  infrastructure  and  more  open  capital 
accounts  transmit  shocks  globally.  It  led  to  a  deliberate,  global  process  to  address  these 
shortcomings. 
That  same  year,  governors  of  the  central  banks  of  G-10  countries,  including  Bouey, 
established the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, which continues to serve today as 
an important forum for co-operation on banking supervisory matters. In 1980, a second group 
on  payments  systems  was  established;  later  upgraded  to  the  Committee  on  Payment  and 
Settlement Systems (CPSS). 
Following  smaller  episodes  of  settlement  and  other  financial  failures,  the  work  of  these 
committees eventually led to the establishment of CLS Bank.10 CLS links national payments 
systems and simultaneously settles on its books the foreign exchange transactions submitted 
by its member banks. 
Although the response to the failure of Herstatt was slow, it did eventually develop market 
infrastructure to remove daylight payment risk. It also promoted the deepening of institutional 
structures such as the G-10. Crucially, this work paid off during the recent crisis. The G-10 
has coordinated some of the most important central bank initiatives. The foreign exchange 
payments system itself was rock solid, despite the enormous financial turmoil. However, new 
channels of contagion were revealed in new markets. 
Following the collapse of Lehman Brothers, a mid-sized U.S. investment bank, in September 
2008, the cost of interbank borrowing spiked up to unprecedented levels. The functioning of 
repo, stock, loan, and derivatives markets seized as collateral values plunged and a panic 
over counterparty risk swept the financial system. Within days, other storied institutions either 
collapsed or were pushed to the brink. The seizure of the entire global financial system was a 
very real possibility. 
The  virulence  of  open  global  capital  flows  meant  that  the  response,  this  time,  had  to  be 
crafted in days, not decades. 
G-10 central banks, including the Bank of Canada, acted swiftly, by conducting a coordinated 
50-basis-point interest rate cut. Then, in a historic meeting, G-7 countries, including Canada, 
committed to: 
 
use  all  available  tools  to  support  systemically  important  financial  institutions  and 
prevent their failure; and 
take all necessary steps to ensure that banks and other financial institutions have 
broad access to liquidity and funding. 
 The G-7 actions – while absolutely necessary – left the system awash in moral hazard. The 
need for principles-based policy frameworks once again became clear. 
The Bank’s extraordinary liquidity operations met this standard. As the crisis intensified, we 
introduced facilities anchored to a principles-based framework developed in the spring prior 
                                                 
10   For  instance,  Drexel  Burnham  Lambert,  Bank  of  Credit  and  Commerce  International,  Barings  Bank,  Long 
Term Capital Management. 
4 
 BIS Review 29/2010
to  the  Lehman  failure.  Total  outstandings  peaked  at  $41  billion.  These  are  now  being 
unwound consistent with market conditions and our principles.11 
The  crisis  also  revealed  grave  shortcomings  in  market  structure  and  regulation.  On  the 
former,  rather  than  wait  three  decades,  the  Bank  has  already  assisted  an  industry-led 
process to develop a central counterparty for Canadian repo markets. This initiative, which 
will  go  live  later  this  year,  will  help  keep  core  funding  markets  functioning  continuously, 
including  in  times  of  stress.  The  Bank  is  also  very  active  through  the  BIS  in  advancing 
reforms of global margining practices in order to dampen liquidity spirals, consistent with both 
the findings of academic literature and practical experience.12 
Finally, through the G-20 and the Financial Stability Board, the Bank is helping to create a 
more resilient global financial system. In this regard, imperatives include a new bank capital 
regime,  the  development  of  a  more  systemic  approach  to  regulation;  and  a  series  of 
initiatives to create a system that can withstand failure.13 
In all of these initiatives, the Bank is relying on a combination of academic research, in-house 
analysis, and pragmatic judgment. 
International monetary system 
Finally, consider a third challenge. The international monetary system frustrates adjustment 
and builds stresses. Current account surplus countries accumulate massive reserves, forcing 
a deflationary response on others. As a consequence, global economic growth is both more 
volatile  and  suboptimal.  There  is  a  need  for  a  new  international  architecture,  one  that 
promotes timely and symmetric adjustment. 
This challenge bedevilled the global economy during the 1930s. It could only be addressed 
after  World  War  II,  during  the  career  of  Louis  Rasminsky,  our  third  governor.  Allow  me  to 
provide  a  little  history.  In  the  1930s,  the  combination  of  fidelity  to  gold  and  tight  Federal 
Reserve  monetary  policy  meant  that  the  deflationary  pressures  from  the  United  States 
spread  quickly,  further  weakening  the  global  economy.  Unable  to  adjust,  countries  were 
forced to abandon the gold standard, which had been adhered to for more than a hundred 
years.  Though  deficit  countries  experienced  the  crisis  first,  all  countries  suffered  from  the 
eventual collapse of the rules of the game. 
In  1944,  to  avoid  revisiting  the  problems  of  the  1930s,  730  delegates  from  44  nations 
gathered  in  the  village  of  Bretton  Woods,  New  Hampshire.  Rasminsky  was  prominent  in 
these  efforts.14  During  three  weeks  in  July,  he  and  his  peers  hammered  out  a  new 
                                                 
11   See D. Longworth, “Bank of Canada Liquidity Facilities: Past, Present, and Future,” remarks delivered to the 
C.D.  Howe  Institute  in  Toronto,  2010.  Available  at  http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/.  See  also 
W. Engert,  J.  Selody,  and  C.  Wilkins,  “Financial  Market  Turmoil  and  Central  Bank  Intervention,”  Bank  of 
Canada Financial System Review (June 2008): 71–78; L. Zorn, C. Wilkins, and W. Engert, “Bank of Canada 
Liquidity Actions in Response to the Financial Market Turmoil,” Bank of Canada Review (Autumn 2009): 3–22; 
C.A. Northcott and M. Zelmer, “Liquidity Standards in a Macroprudential Context,” Bank of Canada Financial 
System Review (December 2009): 35–40. 
12   See “The Role of Margin Requirements and Haircuts in Procyclicality,” a report of the Bank for International 
Settlements’ Committee on the Global Financial System, forthcoming, March 2010; M. K. Brunnermeier and 
L. H.  Pedersen,  “Market  Liquidity  and  Funding  Liquidity,”  Review  of  Financial  Studies  22,  6  (June  2009): 
2201–38;  and  M.  K.  Brunnermeier,  “Deciphering  the  Liquidity  and  Credit  Crunch,  2007–2008,”  Journal  of 
Economic Perspectives 23, 1 (Winter 2009): 77–100. 
13   For a more detailed discussion, see M. Carney, “Reforming the Global Financial System,” remarks delivered 
financiers,  Montréal,  2009.  Available  at 
the  Rendez-vous  avec 
l’Autorité  des  marchés 
to 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/speeches/. 
14   As chair of the drafting committee, Rasminsky helped to reconcile views, mediating between the British and 
the  Americans.  After  the  formation  of  the  IMF,  Rasminsky  became  Canada’s  first  Executive  Director,  on  a 
BIS Review 29/2010 
 5
these 
institutional  changes,  surplus  countries  still 
international  monetary  order  aimed  at  establishing  a  system  that  allowed  for  a  symmetric 
adjustment of balance of payments problems and a liberalized trading regime. 
The Bretton Woods system of pegged, but adjustable, exchange rates was a direct response 
to  the  instability  of  the  interwar  period.  Bretton  Woods  was  very  different  from  the  gold 
standard: it was more administered than market-based; adjustment was coordinated through 
the  International  Monetary  Fund;  there  were  rules  rather  than  conventions;  and  capital 
controls were widespread. 
resisted  adjustment. 
Despite 
Foreshadowing  present  problems,  countries  often  sterilized  the  impact  of  surpluses  on 
domestic money supply and prices. Like today, these interventions were justified by arguing 
that  imbalances  were  temporary  and  that,  in any  event,  surpluses  were  evidence  of  virtue 
rather  than  “disequilibria.”  In  contrast,  the  zero  bound  on  reserves  remained  a  binding 
constraint for deficit countries, which eventually ran out of time.  
In  1950,  Canada  faced  adjustment  problems  of  its  own,  and  the  Bank,  as  a  learning 
institution responded. Large capital inflows threatened to drive up inflation in Canada in the 
context of our then-fixed exchange rate. In an effort to maintain price stability, the decision, 
unpopular  internationally,  was  taken  to  float  the  Canadian  dollar,  which  duly  appreciated. 
While this was inconsistent with the rules of Bretton Woods, it was consistent with their spirit, 
as a floating dollar allowed both for domestic stability and for the market to determine the 
rate,  rather  than  being  set  by  government  for  national  advantage.  Canada’s  move  to  a 
flexible  exchange  rate  was  a  precursor  to  the  breakdown  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system 
20 years later. 
Fast forward to today. 
The intensity and scope of the recent crisis reflected unprecedented economic disequilibria 
among national economies. Integral to the buildup of vulnerabilities in many asset markets 
were large, unsustainable current account imbalances across major economic areas. Once 
again,  the  international  monetary  system  failed  to  promote  timely  and  orderly  economic 
adjustment. Some emerging markets today face challenges similar to those of Canada in the 
1950s. 
Last  November,  the  G-20  launched  an  important  process  to  address  the  challenges. 
Countries committed to promote strong, sustainable, and balanced growth in global demand 
and agreed on a framework that stresses the shared responsibility of member countries to 
ensure that their policies support the commitment. 
In  short,  the  success  of  these  discussions  is  critical  for  sustainable  medium-term,  global 
growth. Canada brings to the table one of the soundest financial systems in the world and a 
macroeconomic  strategy  that  contributes  to  sustainable  and  balanced  global  growth.  Our 
economy is among the most open, and our policy response to the crisis has been one of the 
most aggressive. We also have a long experience with floating exchange rates and a deep 
understanding of how to best manage domestic policies in that environment.15 
                                                                                                                                                      
part-time, unpaid basis, while remaining a senior official of the Bank of Canada. J. Powell, A History of the 
Canadian Dollar (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, 2005): 65. 
15   See, among others, J. Murray, S. Van Norden, and R. Vigfusson, “Excess Volatility and Speculative Bubbles 
in  the  Canadian  Dollar:  Real  or  Imagined?  Bank  of  Canada  Technical  Report  No.  76,  1996;  J.  Murray, 
L. Schembri, and P. St-Amant, “Revisiting the Case for a  Flexible Exchange Rate in  North America,”  North 
American Journal of Economics and Finance 14 (2003): 207–240; J. Murray, “Why Canada Needs a Flexible 
Exchange  Rate,”  in  The  Dollarization  Debate,  eds.  D.  Salvatore,  J.  Dean  and  T.  Willett  (New  York:  Oxford 
University  Press,  2003);  R.  Issa,  R.  Lafrance,  and  J.  Murray,  “Turning  Black  Tide:  Energy  Prices  and  the 
Canadian Dollar,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 41, 3(2008): 737–769. 
6 
 BIS Review 29/2010
Conclusion 
In conclusion, the Bank of Canada has faced formidable challenges over the past 75 years. 
These experiences have led us to innovate and to become a more effective institution. 
As the global crisis revealed, the stakes are high. Canada is a small open economy subject 
to  immense  global  economic  forces.  Shocks  can  be  large  and  response  times  short.  This 
reality places a premium on the disciplined application of principles-based policy frameworks. 
The  Bank  must  combine  the  best  of  academic  research,  empirical  analysis,  and  practical 
experience to manage in such a world. 
This  means  that  we  will  need  people  such  as  you:  to  take  the  torch  and  join  our  effort  to 
maintain an environment in which Canadian households and firms can invest and plan for the 
future with confidence. 
BIS Review 29/2010 
 7
