Jean-Paul Redouin: Monetary and financial stability – a dual role for a 
central bank: recent lessons 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Paul  Redouin,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  
at  the  Money  and  Banking  Conference  2010,  Central  Bank  of  Argentina,  Buenos  Aires, 
3 September 2010. 
 It is an honor to be speaking at such a distinguished conference on the occasion of 
Anniversaries  of  central  banks  are  special.  It  is  so  because  time  is  inherent  to 
Introduction 
1. 
the 75th anniversary of Central Bank of the Republic of Argentina.  
2. 
central banking.  
Indeed, time is at the root of a Central Bank credibility and is essential to its tool kit. Time 
plays a great role in many aspects of a Central Bank action. Let me just take three concrete 
examples: 
 
the  first  and  obvious  one  is  inflation :  time  is  necessary  to  firmly  anchor 
expectations; 
foreign  exchange  interventions  played  a  great  role  in  the  European  construction: 
time is necessary for a Central Bank to play against the market; 
time  will  also  be  necessary  to  monitor  systemic  watch  responsibilities;  this  new 
approach of the risks will require the Central Banks to develop their capacity to take 
“the long view”. 
Being the first speaker in this session, I will focus my remarks on the dual role of 
3. 
central banks in terms of monetary and financial stability.  
I will address three main points closely interlinked in the light of our recent experience. The 
first tells that an efficient monetary policy requires financial stability. The second that financial 
stability cannot be achieved irrespective of fiscal conditions. The third, that financial stability 
is contingent on a sound regulatory framework agreed upon at the internationally level and 
robust supervisory management at the domestic level. 
  An effective monetary policy requires well-functioning financial systems 
I. 
4. 
All the decisions taken by the European Central Bank during these last three years 
had the primary goal to secure the transmission of monetary policy. Three channels could 
affect these mechanisms through: 
 
the price channel: the increase in government bonds yields may spill-over to the 
cost  of  financing  of  the  private  sector.  Under  normally  functioning  bond  markets, 
sovereign bonds provide a floor for the funding conditions of the private sector. 
the liquidity channel: government bonds are the primary collateral used by banks. 
Interruptions  in  the  sovereign  debt  market  reduce  the  function  of  government 
securities  as  liquidity  buffers.  This  in  turn  impedes  banks’  capacity  to  issue  loans 
and refinance the real economy. 
the balance sheet channel: falling bond prices induce valuation losses on assets 
and  balance  sheets  of  financial  and  non  financial  actors.  For  banks,  these  losses 
reduce their capital base, decreasing, hence, their supply of loans to the economy. 
  BIS Review 113/2010 
 1
For borrowers, the losses on assets held, diminish their creditworthiness, affecting, 
thus, their capacity to borrow. 
5. 
A core motivation, for the quick actions taken by central banks during this crisis, has 
been  to  restore  an  orderly  functioning  of  money  markets.  High  volatility,  high  risk  premia, 
impaired interbank and funding markets hurt the normal transmission of monetary impulses. 
Starting  in  the  summer  of  2007,  Central  Banks  were  confronted  with  major  and 
unprecedented  tensions.  Increasing  uncertainty  led  to  liquidity  hoarding  by  financial 
institutions.  Banks  severely  limited  the  maturity,  the  scale  and  the  number  of  their 
counterparties, severely affecting the functioning of the interbank market.  
These interventions were adjusted to the specific structures of the financial system in which 
central  banks  operate.  In  the  US,  where  financial  intermediation  is  heavily  dependent  on 
securitized credit markets, this involved significant asset purchases by the Central Bank. By 
contrast, in the Euro area, where financial intermediation occurs mainly through the banking 
system,  ECB  actions  were  aimed  at  providing  banks  with  sufficient  liquidity  through  repo 
operations to secure the flow of credit to the economy.  
6. 
In  the  Eurosystem,  we  have  entered  the  crisis with  a  large  set  of  tools.  From  the 
outset, our operational framework was based on a broad list of eligible counterparties and 
collateral. So, we could adjust rapidly to the shocks in money and credit markets even if the 
environment in which we had to operate has changed profoundly.  
7. 
Following the intensification of the financial crisis in Autumn 2008 – and against the 
background  of  rapidly  receding  inflationary  pressures  –  we  have  taken  monetary  policy 
measures that are unprecedented in terms of nature, scope and magnitude. These measures 
fall into two categories: first, standard measures in the form of interest rate changes (Since 
October 2008, our key policy rate has been cut from 4.25% to 1%); second, what is known 
as “non-standard” measures, encompassing a policy of fully accommodating banks’ liquidity 
needs, enlarging the list of eligible assets, lengthening maturities for refinancing operations, 
the provisioning of liquidity in foreign currencies but also the purchasing of covered bonds 
and, more recently, government bonds. 
8. 
Let me add that we never ruled out to implement asset purchases, when it appeared 
necessary to repair dysfunctional markets to ensure a proper transmission of monetary policy 
impulses. Indeed, in 2009, the ECB embarked into a program of covered bonds purchases, 
which is now completed. Although modest in size (60 bn euros), this program has been fairly 
successful  in  reviving  a  market  segment  which  in  turn  supported  bank  funding  at  a  time 
where bond issuance were secure.  
9. 
The recent decision to purchase Government securities should be seen in the same 
light. The objective of this program is to address the malfunctioning of securities markets to 
restore  an  appropriate  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism.  These  interventions  are 
sterilized  as  liquidity  injected  is  exactly  drained,  thus  fully  neutralizing  the  effect  on  the 
banking system. 
10. 
In  taking  these  initiatives,  the  Eurosystem  has  maintained  a  clear  separation 
between monetary policy and financial stability operations. This clear separation has ensured 
that we kept fulfilling our primary mandate to safeguard price stability. My sense is that we 
have  been  successful.  In  the  Euro  area,  at  no  time  during  the  crisis  have  inflation 
expectations significantly deviated from our price stability objective. This was most crucial, 
when headline inflation stayed in negative territory, the output gap was strongly negative and 
the risks of deflation about to materialize.  
Financial stability cannot be achieved irrespective of fiscal conditions  
II. 
11.  
Recent developments in Europe have proven that disorder in public finances could 
lead to disorder in financial systems. This did not come as a surprise. Central banks have 
2 
 BIS Review 113/2010
long been concerned with fiscal positions in Euro area countries. Indeed, we, at the Banque 
de France, as well as many ECB members, have regularly called upon policy makers to pay 
due attention to debt dynamics.  
12.  
Delay  in  addressing  long-lasting  fiscal  imbalances  is  primarily  responsible  for  the 
situation,  but  the  financial  crisis  has  exacerbated  the  problems.  The  first  trigger  was  the 
mechanism of automatic stabilizers that resulted in rapidly declining fiscal receipts due to the 
synchronized recession. Secondly the imbalances have been aggravated by greater public 
spending  via  unprecedented  fiscal  stimuli  plans  and  large  public  financial  commitments,  in 
particular via capital injection into the banking sector and debt guarantees schemes. Public 
interventions have been massive to contain the scale of the turmoil but in return have implied 
a cost and led to a transfer of risk out of the banking sector onto the public sector balance 
sheet.  For  instance,  interventions  from  European  governments  amounted  to  about 
1800 billion EUR or 14% of the European GDP. 
13.  
Let me also underline that – like in many previous financial crisis such as the Latin 
American ones – financial markets ignoring the long term risks of their investments helped 
accommodate unsustainable financing requirements of many countries. A major assumption 
underpinning  our  fiscal  governance  frameworks  in  Europe  has  been  that  markets  would 
impose discipline earlier on. Experience reveals that this has not been the case: the market 
discipline was imposed, far too late.  
14.  
All  this  emphasizes  that  sound  fiscal  frameworks  are  essential  to  sound  financial 
regulatory frameworks. Indeed, no longer will be raised the question of the importance of the 
Stability and Growth Pact and the role it plays in anchoring market confidence. 
15.  
Let me add how fiscal problems in Europe have been addressed. First, the Greek 
adjustment package, relying on IMF financing and conditionality plus bilateral loans has been 
decided.  Beyond  Greece,  the  European  Financial  Stabilization  Facility  provided  the  Euro 
area  with  massive  resources  to  fight  contagion  risk  within  the  area.  Elsewhere  in  Europe, 
governments  have  embarked  into  sizeable  fiscal  consolidation  efforts  and  in  many  cases 
have frontloaded their efforts. 
16.  
Against  this  background,  no  alternative  solutions  –  sometimes  advocated  by 
advisers referring to the Latin American previous crisis – were suitable options for the Euro 
area. In fact, the Euro area is not only built with a single currency ; it has also developed into 
a  highly  integrated  economic  and  financial  area.  In  this  context,  debt  restructuring  would 
hammer the banking sector impair financial markets and destabilize the real economy. 
17.  
In addition, an EU stress test exercise was instrumental in alleviating pressures as 
we  have  observed  significant  spread  reduction  in  the  wake  of  the  release  of  their  results. 
Tensions  on  sovereign  spreads  have  indeed  abated  somewhat  as  a  result  of  an 
unprecedented  transparency  effort  leading  91  European  banks  to  disclose  their  detailed 
exposures  to  EU  sovereigns.  The  severity  of  the  stress  scenario,  which  beyond  assumed 
adverse macroeconomic conditions also incorporated assumption of losses due to renewed 
and  persistent  tensions  in  sovereign  long  term  interest  rates,  revealed  that  even  under 
extremely adverse conditions, European banks capital would still be maintained well above 
minimum regulatory requirements. 
III. 
Financial stability is contingent on sound international regulation and robust 
domestic supervisory management 
The  financial  crisis  has  taught  us  some  clear  lessons  which  force  us  to  review  in 
18.  
depth the way the financial system is regulated and effectively supervised. 
The crisis has revealed weaknesses in the international regulatory framework.  
19.  
The main flaws fall into three broad categories.  
BIS Review 113/2010 
 3
 integrating 
these  markets 
20. The first relates to the scope of the regulatory framework.  
 
We  entered  this  crisis  with  many  unregulated  entities  and  opaque  and  complex 
financial products playing a major role in the financial system. There were, therefore, 
huge  “black  holes”,  including  what  has  been  called  a  “shadow  banking  system” 
where  most  of  the  excesses  of  securitization  took  place.  Regulation  was  not 
reaching far enough and when it applied it did not always ensure an adequate risk 
capture.  
The G20 has fostered coordinated efforts by industrialized and emerging countries 
to bring the most important financial actors under the umbrella of supervision, while 
rating  agencies  and  hedge  funds  were  receiving  closer  attention.  Beyond  these 
actions, the G20 and the Financial Stability Board (FSB) have focused their efforts 
on  the  systemic  importance  of  certain  institutions  or  markets,  due  to  their  size  or 
their  interconnection.  One  example  is  the  necessary  reform  of  OTC  derivatives 
markets that has gained traction with a clear roadmap designed by the G20. Efforts 
aimed  at 
into  regulated  and  supervised  market 
infrastructures are an essential policy response to monitor the risks accumulated in 
these markets. 
The second problem highlighted by the crisis is the procyclicality generated by the 
21.  
interplay  between  prudential  and  accounting  rules.  Some  of  this  procyclicality  can  be 
trimmed  through  prudential  regulation.  I  therefore  strongly  believe  that  our  first  line  of 
defense  against  procyclicality  should  be  the  accounting  framework.  We,  at  Banque  de 
France, firmly support the current focus on reducing the scope of mark-to-market accounting 
and  moving  from  an  incurred  loss  model  to  a  forward-looking  model  for  provisioning.  We 
expect that accounting standards will converge but this should not come at the expenses of 
these two dimensions. 
Thirdly,  the  crisis  also  raised  questions  about  the  nature  of  our  regulatory 
22.  
frameworks. There is a trend towards complementing the micro-prudential supervision with 
macro-prudential oversight. In Europe we are putting in place a Systemic Risk Board at the 
European  Union  level  that  will  combine  expertise  from  Central  Bank  Governors  and 
supervisors in charge of banks, insurance companies and securities markets. In the US, the 
Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  is  also  a  landmark  in  the  overhaul  of  the  financial 
supervision architecture. 
23.  
Soon,  the  European  Council  will  grant  the  ECB  a  special  assignment  regarding 
financial  stability  with  the  responsibility  to  run  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board.  This 
should  not  be  seen  as  constituting  an  additional  objective  of  monetary  policy.  Rather,  the 
creation of this Board does not change the clear allocation of responsibilities enshrined in the 
Treaty. 
The international initiatives about to be finalized will strengthen prudential frameworks 
and make financial systems less prone to systemic shocks. 
24.  
One such initiative is the commitment by all G20 jurisdictions to implement Basel II 
by  2011  and  to  finalize  this  year  a  new  package  aimed  at  strengthening  bank  capital  and 
liquidity  standards.  This  is  a  great  achievement.  The  challenge,  now,  is  to  calibrate  and 
phase  in  the  new  framework  in  a  way  that  does  not  impede  the  recovery.  The 
macroeconomic assessment of the reforms underway will help us strike the optimal balance.  
25.  
Beyond  capital  and  liquidity,  other  important  initiatives  are  aiming  at  addressing 
systemically important financial institutions and cross-border resolutions. To better deal with 
the problem associated with systemic firms, progress is being made to improve the capacity 
to  resolve  them  orderly,  and  to  strengthen  ex  ante  preparedness,  contingency  planning, 
cooperation and information exchange among the relevant authorities.  
4 
 BIS Review 113/2010
There is a broad agreement for an approach that may have two pillars. One is about 
26.  
tools and measures to limit the risk of their failure; the other is about tools and measures to 
limit the consequences of their failures. Discretion is required to allow national authorities to 
strike  the  balance  between  the  two  pillars  and  tailor  regulatory  and  supervisory  actions  to 
domestic  conditions.  The  challenge  is  to  ensure  that  national  policies  to  address  the  risks 
associated with these firms are consistent, mutually supportive and thus avoiding regulatory 
arbitrage. 
But  beyond  international  initiatives,  enhancing  supervision  at  the  domestic  level 
remains very critical.  
27.  
Higher  and  better  capital  and  liquidity  standards  are  not  sufficient  conditions  to 
secure  the  stability  of  the  financial  sector.  Changes  in  the  practice  of  micro-prudential 
oversight are also needed. Indeed, a lesson from the crisis is that the way supervision was 
performed  prior  to  the  crisis  has  likely  contributed  to  it.  This  is  recognized  by  the  G20 
leaders,  at  their  recent  Summit  in  Toronto,  which  make  more  effective  supervision  the 
second of the four pillars of its strategy towards more resilient financial systems. The FSB is 
engaged in a thorough review of supervisory practices. 
28.  
directions: 
29.  –   First, supervision should be intrusive into the affairs of regulated firms.  
 
With  hindsight,  the  way  supervision  is  conducted  should  be  enhanced  in  two 
Weak intrusiveness was a problem because supervisory rules such as Basel 2 rely 
extensively on banks’ own risk valuation, management and governance. It was also 
a problem because discipline imposed on banks by investors did not always work: 
due  diligence  was  weak  and  rating  agencies  were  conflicted.  If  market  discipline 
does not bind early on and if supervision is not intrusive because it follows a light-
touch  approach,  then  failures  in  banks’  internal  oversight  and  systems  are 
mechanically imported into supervisory assessments, without adequate checks and 
balances. The consequences of this have been dramatic for some financial systems.  
In practical terms, being intrusive for a supervisor means having the capacity to go 
beyond off-site control and engage frequently and consistently with banks through 
on-site inspections. 
 30.   –  Second, supervisors should develop a proactive attitude; why?  
 
Regulated  entities  have  powerful  incentives  to  arbitrage  regulation,  to  keep 
complying with formal regulation while at the same time maximizing returns through 
unheeded risk taking. As time flows and risks are moved outside of the regulatory 
radar, supervision loses its grips on risks to financial stability.  
To  overcome  these  difficulties  supervisors  need  to  look  ahead,  be  sensitive  to 
changing practices in banks, and anticipate the impacts of emerging risks not only to 
new products but also to new or disproportionate sources of income. I believe that 
some sort of “benevolent skepticism” towards them is warranted from supervisors. 
Indeed, the potential costs in terms of financial stability and economic output of not 
digging  deeply  enough  into  complex  products  or  not  controlling  that  firms  do 
understand their own risks may simply be too high.  
 Regulated 
financial  entities  are  complex  and  evolving 
Supervision should spur better risk analysis and control at the firm level. 
31.  
Internal 
governance processes are the first line of defense against excessive risk-taking whether at 
the  management  or  technical  level.  To  make  sure  that  this  first  line  of  defense  is  solid, 
supervisors should pay attention to compensation and governance issues.  
32.  
Under the aegis of the Financial Stability Board, major advances have been made to 
ensure that compensation policies in financial firms are better aligned with long-term value 
institutions. 
BIS Review 113/2010 
 5
creation,  and  do  not  support  excessive  short  term  risk-taking.  Principles  for  sound 
compensation practices have been published at the end of last year. Endorsed by the G20 
they will be incorporated into supervisors’ rule book. Supervisors will have the responsibility 
to review firms’ compensation policies and structures with institutional and systemic risk in 
mind and, to apply corrective measures, such as higher capital requirements, to those firms 
that  fail  to  implement  sound  compensation  policies  and  practices.  Supervisors  would  also 
have  the  ability  to  modify  compensation  structures  in  the  case  of  firms  that  fail  or  require 
extraordinary public intervention.  
33.  
As I already alluded to, supervisors should pay a major attention to financial firms’ 
governance.  As  it  stands,  prudential  regulation  to  a  large  extent  is  build  on  trust  in  their 
ability to value, manage and control their risks. Supervisors should have the power to hold 
boards responsible for the performance of their institutions. They should ensure that boards 
and  individual  directors  are  sufficiently  empowered  and  informed  to  understand  and  to 
respond appropriately to their risk taking policy.  
In  light  of  the  crisis,  proper  liquidity  risk  management  should  also  stand  high  in 
34.  
firms’  own  agenda.  In  many  respect,  the  recent  crisis  revealed  wrong  liquidity  pricing  and 
poor liquidity risk valuation by financial firms. There is ample evidence that in an environment 
of  excess  global  liquidity  prior  to  the  recent  crisis  many  financial  institutions  were  led  to 
(i) overestimate the liquidity of their assets, (ii) have overly optimistic assumptions on their 
ability  to  refinance,  and  (iii)  ignore,  or  pay  insufficient  attention  to,  liquidity  risks  in  their 
internal pricing processes.  
35.  
One should never forget that liquidity has a price. But the pricing of liquidity risk was 
either non-existent or inadequate in fully incorporating the maturity and currency mismatch, 
contingent and market liquidity risks embedded in the various banking business lines.  
36.  
But  liquidity  is  not  only  a  matter  of  individual  firm’s  supervision;  it  is  also  of  huge 
importance  for  the  functioning  of  a  whole  system,  which  mainly  relies  on  the  liquidity 
management of a few firms. It is because of inaccurate liquidity risk pricing methodologies 
that  large  financial  firms  have  built  critical  cash  flow  mismatches,  and  held  substantial 
holdings  of 
instruments  with  overestimated  profitability  profiles,  based  on 
unsustainable leverage strategy.  
37.  
The Basel Committee’s renewed attention to liquidity issues is very topical. A major 
innovation  of  the  proposed  reform  package  deals  with  liquidity.  In  principle,  no  one  will 
challenge the need to implement liquidity regulation for banks. Indeed, the new regulation will 
be calibrated and designed to help raise banks’ awareness of the cost of liquidity.  
illiquid 
Conclusion 
38.  
In  the  past,  financial  crises  have  always  triggered  important  changes  in  the 
organization and practice of Central Banking. The latest one is for me not an exception. Central 
banks  have  managed  to  adjust  and  confront  several  new,  unprecedented  challenges  rather 
effectively and, it should be noted, with unprecedented degree of coordination and cooperation.  
39. 
In  many  countries,  the  need  to  develop  stronger  macro-prudential  policies  has 
resulted in new assignments. As for my home county, I can say that having both monetary 
policy and financial stability responsibilities under the same roof has proved rather useful.  
40.  
This expanded role reminds us that the monitoring responsibility of a Central Bank is 
crucial. Our dedication to stability and our forward looking approach in a globalised financial 
world is a challenging task. 
Long  lasting  cooperation  among  Central  Banks  and  stimulating  conferences  like  this  one 
largely contribute to this achievement. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 113/2010
