Ioannis Papadakis: Combatting the impact of the financial crisis 
Welcome remarks by Mr Ioannis Papadakis, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the 
European Bank Coordination Meeting, Athens, 19 March 2010. 
 It is an honor and a pleasure to welcome you to Athens for the European Bank Coordination 
Meeting, hosted by the Bank of Greece and co-organized with the European Commission, 
the IMF and the EBRD. Moreover, I am very pleased to be given the opportunity to share 
with  you  some  preliminary  thoughts  on  the  achievements  of  our  efforts  to  support  IMF 
programs in the region through concerted private sector involvement. 
The financial crisis that erupted in 2007 is now in its third incarnation. Having started as a 
crisis affecting certain marginal financial markets in the US, it subsequently spread fast with 
its impact being felt on the financial and the real sectors of most economies in the world. In 
its current incarnation, it is turning into a fiscal crisis, as markets realize the true cost of the 
measures implemented to minimize the damages and the impact on the macroeconomy. In 
addition, the crisis has brought to the fore a number of weaknesses and deficiencies in the 
functioning of the international financial system, putting the effectiveness of the supervisory 
and regulatory framework under the microscope. 
The discussion regarding the origins of the crisis and the work that needs to be done has 
created  a  long  list  of  “do’s  and  don’ts”.  It  has  also  led  to  an  even  more  lively  and  lengthy 
discussion about the appropriate means to achieve the ultimate goal and the timing of the 
required  measures.  Let  me  briefly  mention  five  areas  of  action,  which  I  believe  deserve 
priority: 
 
First, there is need to deal effectively with short-termism in the quest for high profits, 
by protecting the system from the incentives created by excessive bonuses and the 
irrational pricing of risks. 
Second, the transparency of financial markets and structures needs to be enhanced 
by putting greater emphasis on risk disclosure by systemically important institutions, 
instruments and markets. 
Third, the pro-cyclicality of the financial system needs to be mitigated by improving 
both  the  quality  and  quantity  of  bank  capital  and  by  ensuring  that  banks  create 
enough prudential liquidity buffers in good times to have reliable shock-absorbers on 
which to depend, if and when bad times come. 
Fourth, there is a need for a macro-prudential approach to financial supervision that 
takes into account not only the links between financial behaviour, economic activity 
and macroeconomic policies (e.g. the crisis triggered a freefall in economic activity 
that  called  for  policy  relaxation,  the  exit  from  which  could  postpone  economic 
recovery),  but  also  the  interconnectedness  between  financial  institutions,  markets 
and cross-border activity. 
Last  but  not  least,  the  whole  system  of  checks  and  balances  must  not  breed 
complacency in any of the actors involved, as the crisis has shown that tail events 
may be rare but are still possible. 
    With the benefit of hindsight, it would not perhaps be too unfair to say that the initial policy 
response to the crisis was timid and to some extent reluctant. Soon however, in the face of 
such unprecedented challenges, governments, national central banks, international financial 
institutions and supervisory and regulatory authorities around the globe all demonstrated a 
remarkable unity of purpose. The extraordinary magnitude of the crisis led to the acceptance 
that  extraordinary  measures  were  needed,  if  a  repeat  of  the  1930s  was  to  be  averted.  In 
BIS Review 33/2010 
 1
order  to  forestall  the  impact  of  the  crisis,  policy  makers  deployed  both  conventional 
instruments (such as cutting key policy interest rates and increasing public spending) as well 
as a battery of non-conventional ones. I would add, if I may, that intellectually this has been 
an  exciting  period,  as  we  were  often  driven  to  think  outside  of  our  usual  toolbox.  Indeed, 
sometimes we were forced to think the unthinkable, as we realized that in crisis situations the 
accepted wisdom is not always wise. 
Even more importantly for our purpose, we all came to realize that in our globalized world “no 
country is an island.” International interrelationships are today so strong that no country can 
go  it  alone  in  the  open  seas.  This  has  led  to  enhanced  international  efforts  to  coordinate 
through  both  existing  and  new  arrangements.  The  international  financial  institutions  have 
played a catalytic role here. We must acknowledge this and thank them for it. The institutions 
themselves accepted that the magnitude of the crisis was such that it could not be addressed 
by any of the actors acting alone. The European Bank Coordination initiative started just a 
little over a year ago as an ad hoc effort to stabilize the flow of funds to a few economies in 
Central  and  Eastern  Europe.  It  has  now  attained  the  stature  of  a  successful  coordinating 
mechanism, which is worth keeping and, when appropriate, replicating in other parts of the 
world. 
This initiative of ours has achieved an admirable coordination between the official and the 
private sector. The mere fact that so many diverse actors were brought together to act in a 
consensual way for the common, as well as their own, good is an encouraging indication that 
the international community has matured. After years of endless theoretical discussions on 
the potential merits of private sector involvement in crisis management and resolution, the 
EBCI  emerged  almost  spontaneously  as  the  appropriate  response  to  actual  and  acute 
problems. Coordinated international assistance to countries that both needed and deserved it 
has been crucial for mitigating the impact of the crisis. For example, the balance of payments 
support packages by the IMF and the EU to six European countries have helped to deflate 
the  mostly  exaggerated  market  concerns  about  the  fundamental  viability  of  the  region’s 
economies and banking sectors. The size and firmness of such a wide commitment is what 
acted as a catalyst to mitigate and reverse the negative mood toward particular countries in 
the  region.  The  precision  and  timeliness  of  our  mutual  commitments  is  what  marked  the 
turning point that brought us back from the brink of a fully fledged regional crisis in late winter 
2008/early spring 2009. 
Given  the  importance  of  foreign-owned  banks  for  the  region’s  financial  sectors,  our  co-
ordination  was  pivotal  in  addressing  the  reversal  of  capital  flows  and  in  dampening  the 
economic  cycle.  The  precise  and  firm  commitment  by  each  and  every  one  of  the  parties 
involved  allowed  us  to  promptly  address  potential  co-ordination  failures,  shape  a  macro-
prudential approach for dealing with the impact of the crisis on the region and, by doing so, 
enhance the efficiency of the policy measures taken by each individual country. We at the 
Bank of Greece are proud to have been supportive of this initiative, right from its inception. 
Needless to say, we shall continue to support it whatever the circumstances. As the initiative 
now stands, we are even in position to successfully tackle the details where the devil often 
lurks. For example, how should the need for adequate external financing and reserves build-
up be balanced with the need to strengthen financial stability and avoid excessive lending 
expansion. 
The European Bank Coordination initiative owes much of its success to the efforts made by 
each and every one of us. What we have achieved so far provides us all with the impetus to 
continue  our  efforts  towards  more  and  better  cooperation  in  concert.  Here  in  Europe,  the 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  of  2008  among  the  supervisory  authorities  is  already 
fostering  better  and  deeper  cooperation,  while  the  creation  later  this  year  of  a  new 
institutional framework for financial supervision and regulation will also provide a firm basis 
for effective coordination. What we all wish and strive for is the enhanced and long-lasting 
stability of the European and, ultimately, the international financial system. 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2010
I congratulate you all for your good efforts over the last year to bring about and safeguard 
stability in the countries involved. I thank you for participating in today’s meeting. The Bank of 
Greece as host owes a special thanks to the European Commission, the IMF and the EBRD 
for the help they have provided us in organizing today’s event. I wish you all a fruitful meeting 
and a pleasant stay in Athens. 
BIS Review 33/2010 
 3
