Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The euro area macroeconomic situation – where 
do we stand, where are we going? 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Lorenzo  Bini  Smaghi,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  New  Year’s  Reception  2010  organised  by  Industrie-  und 
Handelskammer, Frankfurt am Main, 18 January 2010. 
 Ich freue mich sehr, am Beginn des neuen Jahres bei Ihnen zu sein und die Gelegenheit zu 
haben, mit Ihnen über die ökonomische Situation im Euro-Raum und den Ausblick für 2010 
zu diskutieren.  
I would like to stop here with my very poor German and switch to English, which is, after all, 
the language of business. And Frankfurt is a city of business, so much so that even parking 
tickets are written in the two languages. This is the excuse I give for not having improved my 
German over the last four years: English is so widespread. 
I guess that at the beginning of any New Year we are all quite interested in looking ahead, 
but especially after such a horrendous year as 2009. As business people, you know well how 
severely affected the euro area economy was, in terms of the speed and depth of the fall in 
economic activity. By the middle of 2009, euro area real GDP was more than 5% below its 
peak at the beginning of 2008, wiping out much of the growth witnessed between 2005 and 
2007.  Euro  area  industrial  production  excluding  construction  fell  by  more  than  18%,  while 
export volumes came down by more than 17%.  
The euro area was not alone – indeed, this stark decline in economic activity took place amid 
a global slowdown unprecedented in recent times. But with its high degree of openness, the 
euro area economy was hit particularly hard by weak external demand. 
The  extreme  financial  tensions  triggered  a  strong  response  from  governments  and  central 
banks, without which the downturn would have been even more dramatic. On the monetary 
policy side, the ECB reacted swiftly to ensure that liquidity risk did not become solvency risk 
and  lead  to  a  major  systemic  financial  crisis.  Fiscal  policies  also  significantly  helped  to 
contain the growth fallout in the euro area. 
Against this background, where do we stand now? The latest available information suggests 
that  euro  area  quarterly  real  GDP  growth  turned  positive  in  the  third  quarter  of  last  year. 
Information for the last quarter of 2009 is still incomplete, but survey indicators suggest that 
real GDP growth remained positive. The euro area benefited from a steady recovery in global 
demand throughout 2009, driven in part by the monetary and fiscal policy stimuli in most of 
the world’s regions since the beginning of the recession, as well as by modest improvements 
in confidence. Activity has also been boosted by a reversal of the inventory cycle. But growth 
remains  sluggish,  reflecting  the  ongoing  balance  sheet  adjustments  in  the  euro  area  and 
elsewhere.  This  process  has  not  only  affected  the  financial  sector,  but  also  households, 
which  have  cut  back  consumption  and  increased  their  savings,  and  firms,  which  have 
restrained their investment spending. 
The key question now concerns the economic recovery, its strength and fragilities.  
Let me start with a comment of a general nature. I have the impression that many people, 
whether  in  the  business  sector,  the  financial  markets,  or  in  academic  and  political  circles, 
think that the post-crisis world will be quite similar to the pre-crisis one in 2006–2007. In other 
words,  they  expect  the  economic  recovery  to  bring  us  back  to  where  we  were  before  the 
crisis.  
BIS Review 3/2010 
 1
My feeling is that those who think like that are deluding themselves. The pre-crisis situation 
was  not  in  equilibrium.  It  was  not  sustainable.  The  crisis  occurred  precisely  because  the 
situation was unsustainable, both within certain countries and globally.  
If the world economy were to return to the pre-crisis situation, within a short time span a new 
crisis would be likely to occur because the same imbalances that led to the crisis would build 
up again. Considering some recent developments and behaviour, and considering the way 
certain policies are being discussed and the thinking of some key players, such a scenario 
does not seem that unlikely.  
I think that it would be a big mistake to regard the recession we experienced in 2008 and 
2009 as just a somewhat sharper cyclical downturn. There has been a major structural shift 
in our economies. Once the crisis is over, the world economy will look very different. This is 
true not only for the overall aggregates, but also for individual enterprises. The longer people 
take to recognise it, the more difficult it will be to recover.  
Some would say that it is useless to make forecasts under the current circumstances, given 
the state of uncertainty. I don’t think so. After all, economic agents – individuals, households, 
companies, financial institutions – have to have some idea about the future in order to take 
their day-to-day decisions on investment, expenditure, education, savings. This is especially 
the  case  in  the  aftermath  of  a  crisis  like  the  one  we  have  just  been  through.  Many  of  the 
decisions that economic agents will take over the next few months will turn out to be right or 
wrong  depending  on  whether  they  have  fully  understood  the  implications  and  the 
opportunities of this crisis and have made a realistic assessment of how the post-crisis world 
could turn out. Not being forward-looking is a luxury that cannot be afforded under current 
circumstances.  But  being  forward-looking  is  quite  difficult  amid  the  current  uncertainties, 
even for a central bank. Indeed, all our economic models are estimated over a sample period 
in  which  imbalances  were  accumulated.  These  models  may  thus  consider  disequilibrium 
behaviour as “equilibrium”. The resulting forecast might inevitably be biased. Judgement is 
thus required, but also some ability to think “outside the box”. 
Let me come back to the economic perspectives. The pick-up in activity since mid-2009 has 
been supported by a rebound in global trade and a reversal of the inventory cycle. It has also 
been  underpinned  by  unprecedented  monetary  and  fiscal  stimuli.  Overall,  the  recent 
economic recovery has largely relied on temporary factors. Yet, it is also clear that firms and 
households  are  also  coping  with  the  longer-term  challenges  of  restructuring  and  adjusting 
balance sheets. These elements contribute to the moderate pace of growth projected for the 
euro area economy this year. The latest Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections place 
euro area real GDP growth between 0.1% and 1.5% – well below the annual growth rate of 
above  3%  witnessed  in  2006.  As  for  next  year,  euro  area  activity  is  expected  to  improve 
further, but with the expansion remaining moderate and probably uneven.  
As the recovery unfolds, euro area activity should be supported not only by exports, but also 
by  stronger  domestic  demand.  Global  economic  growth  is  expected  to  remain  below  past 
trends. Advanced economies, in particular, are likely to experience a subdued recovery given 
the  ongoing  effects  of  the  crisis.  Indeed,  it  is  likely  that  a  number  of  factors  will  weigh 
negatively on the economic outlook, making it difficult to achieve pre-crisis growth rates. Let 
me briefly mention a few of these factors. 
First, before the crisis erupted, economic growth was sustained by excessive credit, which in 
turn reflected unsustainable domestic and international developments. We are experiencing 
a  substantial  de-leveraging  of  the  financial  system,  which  will  have  an  impact  on  the  real 
economy. I will come back to this issue shortly. 
Second, the dramatic drop in economic activity could have lingering effects on potential and 
actual output. There are several sectors of the economy where activity is unlikely to return to 
pre-crisis  levels  because  of  structural  shifts  in  the  composition  of  world  demand  or 
permanent changes in relative prices. The construction and automotive sectors are perhaps 
the most obvious examples.  
2 
 BIS Review 3/2010
Third, the increase in public debt and the cost of servicing it may crowd out private spending. 
This  risk  is  not  apparent  yet  because  of  the  fall  in  private  investment.  However,  as  the 
recovery picks up, the pressure on financing both private investment and public spending will 
mount. 
Fourth, the slower the recovery, the greater the impact on unemployment, which may in turn 
affect confidence and thus reduce spending and heighten uncertainty.  
Finally, supply shocks stemming from rises in commodity prices cannot be ruled out. 
On the domestic side, a continued need to repair balance sheets in various sectors will affect 
the outlook, as it did in 2009. In the near term, uncertain labour market prospects might also 
continue to constrain household spending. Indeed, while the recession may have ended in 
terms  of  GDP  contraction,  we  should  bear  in  mind  that  employment  growth  typically  lags 
business cycle fluctuations. Moreover, there are reasons for believing that such lags may be 
more pronounced in the current context. Many euro area governments implemented special 
working time schemes – such as Germany’s Kurzarbeit programme – as the economic crisis 
unfolded, in an attempt to prevent a sharp rise in unemployment and to smooth the process 
of adjustment. But if capacity utilisation remains at low levels, job losses may increase further 
as the impacts of these schemes fade. The pace of private consumption will be affected by 
employment prospects. 
Concerning private investment, the pace of contraction is expected to slow over the year. But 
business investment is likely to be held back by low capacity utilisation, weak demand, high 
uncertainty and depressed profits.  
As I said earlier, this – or any other scenario – is surrounded by high uncertainty. There are 
several risk factors. I will not mention all of them. I would like to consider one which may be 
relevant for you, related to the financing conditions of companies.  
During the financial crisis, there was a sharp fall in bank loans to non-financial corporations, 
partly reflecting banks’ balance sheet difficulties, and partly the plummeting loan demand.  
It  seems  that  some  firms  have  replaced  some  of  their  bank  financing  with  market-based 
financing, as was reflected in the strong recourse to financial markets by non-financial firms 
during  2009.  Relatively  favourable  cost  developments,  but  also  the  refinancing  needs  of 
corporations have contributed to this development. While generally large and high-rated firms 
are able to profit from favourable market conditions, the high-yield bond market segment is 
also benefiting.  
Let  me  turn  now  specifically  to  the  financing  conditions  of  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs) in the euro area. These companies typically have a strong dependence 
on  bank  financing.  SMEs  play  an  important  role  in  the  euro  area  corporate  sector.  They 
account for the vast majority of all non-financial businesses, for roughly 60% of gross value 
added  and  for  about  70%  of  employment.  So  it  is  important  to  monitor  not  only  the  non-
financial corporate sector as a whole, but also large firms and SMEs separately. 
Recent  survey  results1  confirm  the  finding  that  SMEs  were  generally  somewhat  less 
successful than large firms when applying for bank loans in the first half of 2009. Typically, 
the larger and the older a firm, the more successful it was when applying for a bank loan. 
This  is  a  familiar  story:  banks  typically  have  greater  difficulties  in  assessing  the  financial 
situation  of  SMEs,  which  are  subject  to  greater  information  asymmetries  between  lenders 
and borrowers.  
Let  me  now  look  ahead  to  this  year  with  respect  to  financing  conditions.  I  will  focus  in 
particular on the recovery in bank lending, which is subject to some risks. 
                                                 
1  See European Central Bank, “Survey on the access to finance of small and medium-sized enterprises in the 
euro area”, September 2009. 
BIS Review 3/2010 
 3
Experience shows that loans to non-financial corporations recover with some lag vis-à-vis the 
turning point in the economic cycle. As I mentioned, the latest available information indicates 
that the economic recession in the euro area ended in the third quarter of 2009. Therefore, it 
can be expected that corporate loan growth will continue to decelerate in the first few months 
of this year. However, the uncertainty surrounding the outlook for loan growth is exceptionally 
high, related to the depth of the current economic cycle.  
One factor that contributes to the uncertainty of the loan recovery is the interplay between 
the supply and demand of loans. While subdued bank lending has so far mainly reflected the 
weak state of the real economy, credit supply restrictions may become more binding when 
loan demand by enterprises picks up as the economy recovers. At the same time, however, 
there  are  signs  that  banks  are  starting  to  ease  their  credit  conditions  and  that  efforts  to 
support the financial system are bearing fruit.  
The  recovery  in  both  loan  demand  and  credit  supply  in  2010  depends  to  a  considerable 
extent on further improvements in the corporate sector as well as in the banking sector.  
The banking sector plays an essential part in any economic recovery. When the demand for 
credit based on enhanced investment perspectives rises again, the banking system will have 
to be able to accommodate it. The traditional role of banks is to grant credit to projects which 
promise a return on their money. This is vital if SMEs are to realise their investment plans 
and finance their working capital. 
This raises at least a couple of questions, from a policy perspective. First, how can banks be 
made sound enough to extend credit as soon as the real economy picks up and investment 
demand  increases?  Second,  how  can  the  environment  for  private  companies,  in  particular 
SMEs, be improved so that they can boost investment and start growing again? 
Let me briefly answer the two questions.  
Let  me  start  with  the  banking  system.  Large  and  complex  banking  groups  have  recently 
benefited from higher trading income, associated largely with the low level of interest rates. 
At the same time, however, banks’ profitability remains fragile. The expected losses on loan 
exposures to households and corporations are likely to increase, as a lagged effect of last 
year’s recession. Furthermore, the short-term profits obtained through trading activities hide 
risks which may materialise over the medium term and weaken banks’ profits over time. This 
second factor appears to be widely underestimated, as banks seem to be conducting carry 
trades  –  including  those  in  the  same  currency  which  exploit  maturity  mismatches,  i.e. 
borrowing  short-term  to  buy  long-term  bonds  –  on  the  assumption  that  such  activities  are 
risk-free. Experience shows instead that the short-term gains of such trades may be eroded 
by capital losses at a later stage, resulting from changes in short-term financing conditions 
and in the underlying value of the asset. Each bank may think that it can unwind its trades 
before its competitors and avoid capital losses. But not all banks will be able to do that at the 
same time. There is thus a risk that, in addition to the losses resulting from non-performing 
loans,  banks  may  suffer  capital  losses  on  their  trading  activities  that  further  hinder  their 
willingness  and  ability  to  provide  loans,  adding  to  the  generally  high  uncertainty  about  the 
economic recovery.  
Banks  thus  need  to  recapitalise  and  restructure  so  as  to  prepare  themselves  to  meet  the 
stronger demand for credit, when the latter materialises. Banks should use the substantial 
profits they obtained in 2009, in particular through trading activities, to strengthen their capital 
position rather than to remunerate their shareholders and their managers. This policy is not 
only  preferable  over  the  medium  term;  it  is  also  more  ethical.  Indeed,  it  does  not  appear 
appropriate under the current circumstances that banks use the profits stemming from the 
direct  or  indirect  support  of  public  policies,  be  they  fiscal  or  monetary,  for  remuneration 
purposes. 
This  applies  not  only  to  those  banks  that  have  received  direct  public  support,  but  also  to 
those  that  did  not.  In  fact,  without  the  support  for  some  of  the  weaker  banks,  those  that 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2010
claimed  to  be  stronger  would  have  succumbed  as  well.  Furthermore,  these  banks  are 
benefiting from very easy liquidity conditions, which have allowed them to be profitable. To 
sum  up,  even  for  the  banks  that  look  healthier,  their  profits  are  the  result  of  public 
interventions  and  should  thus  be  used  to  bolster  their  capital  position  rather  than  for 
remuneration purposes. 
There  is  still  a  lot  of  work  to  be  done,  in  several  countries,  including  in  the  euro  area,  to 
ensure that banks are sufficiently equipped to support the real economy as it recovers. This 
work  is  urgent  and  cannot  be  delayed  in  the  expectation  that  other  policies  will  bear  the 
burden. The experience of the past, particularly the case of Japan in the 1990s, has shown 
the dangers of underestimating the problem. 
This  brings  me  to  the  second  question.  Monetary  and  fiscal  policies  have  successfully 
averted  a  collapse  in  economic  activity.  This  success  may  now  create  the  illusion  that 
monetary and fiscal policies will be able by themselves to restore economic activity to its pre-
crisis level. Why is it an illusion? 
As I said earlier, the pre-crisis situation was not in equilibrium, in particular because of the 
excessive  level  of  private  indebtedness.  If  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  aimed  at  re-
establishing that situation, especially by replacing private debt with public debt, they would 
themselves  become  unsustainable.  It  is  already  widely  expected  that  most  advanced 
countries will come out of the crisis with higher public debt, and with higher payments to be 
made on that debt through higher public revenues. The sustainability of the debt depends on 
the ability of governments to withdraw their very expansionary fiscal policies in a timely way.  
The  only  way  to  get  the  economy  back  on  a  path  of  sustainable  growth  is  to  improve  the 
growth  potential  of  the  economy  through  profound  structural  reforms.  There  are  still  huge 
inefficiencies  in  our  economies,  largely  due  to  restrictions,  barriers  to  entry,  monopolistic 
rents and other factors. This affects all sectors in all euro area countries.  
The objective of structural reforms is to make markets function better, in particular the labour 
as well as the goods and services markets. Greater competition has to be achieved in many 
sectors.  This  would  create  job  opportunities  and  reduce  prices,  thereby  increasing  the 
purchasing power of consumers.  
Let me give you an example of the positive effects of better functioning markets, taken from 
the experience we have had in planning the new premises of the ECB, here in Frankfurt.  
When we launched the tender procedure, we initially opted for a general contractor to build 
the  new  premises  in  the  area  of  the  Frankfurter  Großmarkthalle.  But  there  was  little 
competition and few truly competitive bids as not many large firms were able to take on such 
a  large-scale  project  on  their  own.  We  then  split  the  original  tender  into  12  distinct  sub-
tenders,  with  smaller  lots;  this  encouraged  competition  as  it  allowed  many  SMEs  to 
participate in the tender and it led to considerably lower bids for the construction work, which 
is,  overall,  within  the  agreed  budget.  We  will  now  proceed  with  the  construction,  which  is 
expected to be finalised by mid-2014. 
The lesson from this episode is not new but it is a reassuring one. Although the changes in 
the economic environment have certainly contributed to reducing the costs, competition has 
been  beneficial,  not  only  for  the  ECB  but  also  for  the  contractors.  A  construction  project 
which was not possible under the previous tender model can now be realised.  
This is obviously only one example, but we should ask ourselves: how many times do we as 
individuals decide to postpone projects because they are too costly? I am sure we can spend 
a whole evening talking about how difficult it is to get certain services, and how expensive 
they are just because of market rigidities and a lack of competition. 
This  example  reminds  us  that  without  major  structural  reforms,  in  all  euro  area  countries, 
growth potential cannot be achieved and the recovery is likely to be subdued. As in the past, 
there is a risk that growth will only rely on exports, while domestic demand remains sluggish. 
BIS Review 3/2010 
 5
The  euro  area  economy  cannot  grow  in  a  sustainable  way  only  on  the  basis  of  exports. 
Employment and productivity have to start rising again if purchasing power is to increase and 
thus support private consumption and investment.  
The  reforms  needed  vary  from  country  to  country,  because  both  the  problems  and  the 
rigidities  differ.  But  all  countries  need  to  work  hard  to  remove  the  numerous  obstacles  to 
growth, starting with the labour and product markets. Ultimately, this effort should be stepped 
up  also  at  European  level,  with  a  view  to  implementing  a  true  internal  market.  The  most 
serious  repercussion  of  this  crisis  would  be  that  the  integration  of  Europe’s  economies 
moves into reverse and that protectionism within the Union stages a comeback. 
Let me conclude. 
The  prospects  for  economic  recovery  are  fraught  with  considerable  uncertainty.  However, 
this should not be an excuse for inaction, either for policy-makers or for companies. After all, 
this is not the first time that we have been through very uncertain times. When we look back, 
can  we  really  say  that  our  countries  –  whether  in  Europe  or  even  the  US  –  have  never 
experienced  comparable  levels  of  uncertainty?  Consider  1947–48,  with  the  post-war 
recession and the start of the cold war. Can we say that in those days the uncertainty was 
any less than it is today? Or even in 1974, immediately after the first oil shock, people here in 
Germany,  for  instance,  were  not  allowed  to  drive  their  cars  on  four  successive  Sundays. 
Nobody  knew  exactly  how  long  the  world’s  oil  reserves  would  last.  Was  the  world  less 
uncertain than it is today?  
It’s difficult to answer, but I guess there have been cases of high uncertainty also in the past. 
And people coped and ultimately the economy recovered.  
Of course, the world is more complex today than it was forty or sixty years ago. Our societies 
are  older,  wealthier.  As  a  result,  the  reaction  might  be  slower.  I  think  that  what  is  most 
important is not to fool ourselves into thinking that problems can be overcome by repeatedly 
postponing them, by borrowing indefinitely from future generations. Our economies will face 
serious  challenges  in  the  coming  years,  not  least  because,  as  I  mentioned,  the  post-crisis 
world will be different from the pre-crisis one. Facing up to those challenges calls for action 
not  only  from  policy-makers  but  all  economic  agents  –  companies,  unions,  financial 
institutions, households. Immobility is the biggest danger ahead.  
I  hope  that  over  the  last  couple  of  years  the  ECB  has  shown  that  it  can  act  quickly  and 
effectively. But it cannot solve all problems. All those who play a part in economic life have to 
take action, they have to reform our economies so as to restore prosperity. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 3/2010
