Mario Draghi: Economic overview and banking supervision reforms 
Address by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, at the Italian Banking Association Annual Meeting, Rome, 15 July 2010. 
 In the life of the Italian Banking Association (ABI), today’s gathering marks the handing over 
of the baton to a new President.  
To Corrado Faissola, I would like to convey my personal appreciation, and that of the Bank of 
Italy as a whole, for his competent, level-headed and decisive leadership of ABI through one 
of the most difficult periods in the history of economies and financial systems.  
To Giuseppe Mussari, I wish success in his new undertaking. He will accompany our banking 
system  during  a  phase  fraught  with  perils  but  also  offering  excellent  opportunities  for  a 
financial system that is able to interpret and serve the real needs of households and firms. 
The state of the world’s economies 
The  global economic  recovery  is  uneven  and of  uncertain  resilience but  it is going  ahead. 
The  International  Monetary  Fund  estimates  growth  in  global  output  at  around  4.5  per  cent 
this year and next: 8 or 10 per cent in some large emerging economies and scarcely 1 per 
cent in the euro area. Here in Europe the recovery, driven by the expansion of world trade, 
remains  exposed  to  risks:  the  persistent  weakness  of  domestic  demand  in  our  countries; 
turmoil  in  still-fragile  financial  markets  that  overreact  to  the  heightened  perception  of 
sovereign risks; and possible inflationary pressures in the emerging countries, which would 
lead to more restrictive policies. 
The Italian economy is now benefiting from the renewed vivacity of world trade. The Bank of 
Italy’s  Economic  Bulletin,  published  today,  presents  a  scenario  in  which  the  volume  of 
exports expands by 9 per cent this year and 5 per cent in 2011. Consumption and investment 
will remain weak because real incomes are stagnant and employment prospects uncertain. 
Economic policy bottlenecks 
The  consequences  of  all  nations’  economic  policies  are  ever  more  interwoven  and 
interdependent.  An  acceleration  in  the  adjustment  of  imbalances  in  the  public  finances  is 
indispensable; the effect on the economic recovery will be positive if the adjustment helps to 
reduce yields on sovereign debt, which often constitute banks’ benchmark in determining the 
cost  of  credit.  But  if  the  cloud  of  uncertainty  hanging  over  bank  balance  sheets  is  not 
removed, funding difficulties will persist. 
Monetary policy in the euro area remains strongly expansive. 
The Governing Council of the ECB has continued to satisfy the entire demand for liquidity. 
Inflation expectations, by contrast with some other countries, are firmly anchored. This fact 
must not be forgotten: it is the credibility built up by the ECB over the years that has enabled 
monetary policymakers to exploit the full scope for flexibility in dealing with the crisis. 
The Securities Markets Programme for the purchase of the securities of euro-area countries 
under  financial  pressure  injected  liquidity  into  markets  in  a  state  of  crisis,  averting  the 
collapse of the European financial system and preserving the monetary policy transmission 
mechanism. The resolute commitment to sterilize the liquidity so created remains. 
Once the solidity of the economic recovery is confirmed, the phasing out of unconventional 
monetary  measures  will  need  to  be  resumed.  Although  temporarily  suspended  in  recent 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 1
weeks because of the severe strains originating in the Greek government securities market, 
this process has been under way since the end of 2009. 
No  twelve-month  refinancing  operations  have  been  offered  in  2010.  The  operation  that 
resulted  in  the  unprecedented  liquidity  injection  of  over  €400  billion  a  year  ago  reached 
maturity on 1 July. In the auctions held in the past two weeks banks requested far less than 
the amounts maturing, resulting in a significant reduction of excess liquidity. Because some 
banks  are  still  having  difficulty  in  accessing  market  funding,  this  has  translated  into  a 
moderate rise in money market rates of about 10 basis points. The monetary policy stance 
must not be altered by the condition of these marginal intermediaries. Their problems need to 
be dealt with by the relevant national authorities using appropriate instruments.  
In Italy, a three-year budgetary adjustment package was approved in late May – ahead of the 
usual  schedule  in  view  of  the  financial  market  tensions  provoked  by  the  Greek  crisis.  The 
measures are designed to reduce net borrowing by €12 billion in 2011 and €25 billion in both 
2012  and  2013.  Two  thirds  of  the  adjustment  is  to  come  from  reductions  in  expenditure, 
above all current expenditure. On the revenue side, the measures focus mainly on combating 
tax evasion. 
Notwithstanding  the  short-run  costs  of  the  budgetary  adjustment  in  terms  of  economic 
growth, prompt action was unavoidable: the projected scenario was not sustainable. We are 
still paying the price of the slowness with which Italy’s public debt-to-GDP ratio was reduced 
in the decade following the inception of the European monetary union. 
Whether  the  adjustment  measures  will  effectively  succeed  in  attaining  the  net  borrowing 
objectives  can  only  be  determined  in  the  course  of  the  next  few  months,  taking  account 
among other things of macroeconomic developments and their feedback impact on the public 
accounts. The estimated revenue effects of the measures to curb tax evasion are subject to 
uncertainty, both upside and downside. Curbing expenditure growth will necessitate a sharp 
change  of  course  with  respect  to  the  tendencies  of  the  past  decade.  The  limits  on  the 
resources at the disposal of central and local government will require, if service cuts are to 
be  avoided,  a  serious  overhaul  of  organization  and  territorial  coverage.  Trade  payables  of 
government  bodies  and  their  public  service  firms  must  not  be  allowed  to  serve  as  an 
instrument for circumventing budget constraints. 
Public  financial  adjustment  and  economic  growth,  together,  are  essential  conditions  for 
financial  stability,  which  is  in  turn  the  pilaster  of  sustained  growth.  The  indispensable 
modification of the overall composition of the public budget must be directed to stimulating 
growth.  The  reforms  under  way  in  the  public  administration  and  those  that  will  raise  the 
retirement age move in this direction. The curtailment of tax evasion can be a major factor for 
growth if it corresponds to the lowering of the rates levied on honest taxpayers. 
With  the  economic  upswing,  global  payments  disequilibria  will  tend  to  widen  once  more, 
heightening  the  connected  risks  to  the  sustainable  growth  of  the  world  economy.  The 
International  Monetary  Fund  is  fully  committed  to  ensuring  macroeconomic  stability,  but 
these imbalances, in being for more than a decade now, will persist for an extended period, 
and they will have to be funded. This is a titanic enterprise in both size and duration, and one 
that will only be feasible – without growth-threatening tempests – with capital markets that 
are far more robust, more transparent and better regulated than in the past.  
Reform of the rules of finance 
The recent G20 Summit in Toronto observed that the agenda of essential regulatory reforms 
is proceeding on schedule. 
Some  aspects  of  the  Summit’s  final  Declaration  deserve  special  emphasis.  First,  the 
importance attached to the reform of Basel 2 in order to increase the solidity of the system, 
including  ambitious  requirements  on  banks’  capital  levels  and  the  definitions  of  capital. 
2 
 BIS Review 100/2010
Second, the affirmation of the need for further intensification of supervision, the extension of 
regulation  to  the  shadow  banking  system,  and  the  reinforcement  of  the  derivatives  market 
infrastructure. Third, the resolution to reach an agreement at the time of the next Summit in 
November. 
The new prudential rules will significantly increase banks’ capital and improve its quality, limit 
financial  leverage,  contain  liquidity  risk  and  attenuate  the  procylicality  of  intermediation. 
Capital will have to comprise resources that can effectively absorb loses; its level will be set 
by assessing its capacity to deal with stress situations similar to those observed during the 
crisis.  Deductions  from  capital  will  be  harmonized  and  applied  to  core  capital.  Banks  with 
more  capital  and  less  risk  will  have  lower  probability  of  default;  they  will  be  able  to  fund 
themselves on the market at lower rates and reduce the cost of credit for customers. 
In addressing the concern that the reforms could slow down the economic recovery, the G20 
chose  not  to  lessen  their  scale  but  instead  to  carefully  evaluate  the  timeframe  for  their 
implementation. Taking account of the initial conditions of financial institutions in the different 
countries, adaptation may proceed at a faster or slower pace, but it must be completed by 
the  end  of  the  transition  period,  whose  length  is  the  subject  of  negotiations  at  the  Basel 
Committee meeting that concludes today. 
A  crisis  management  and  resolution  system  built  on  a  sure,  agreed  legal  foundation  is 
essential to an approach that can reduce systemic risk and thus the moral hazard generated 
by  large  banks.  Generally  speaking,  then,  the  orderly  management  of  a  crisis  requires 
access  to  sources  of  financing.  In  the  first  place,  resources  must  be  procured  by  capital 
writedowns, the sale of assets and the reduction of exposures to unsecured creditors. This 
can  be  followed  by  recapitalization  through  the  conversion  of  debt  into  equity.  These 
methods  can  be  usefully  supplemented  by  a  deposit  insurance  system  or  crisis  resolution 
fund, which should be privately financed, pre-funded, and subject to very stringent conditions 
for utilization. 
The  introduction  of  additional  prudential  requirements  and  more  incisive  supervision  of 
systemic  institutions  can  help  to  limit  the  build-up  of  risks;  in  some  countries  structural 
constraints  are  also  being  considered.  To  avoid  the  propagation  of  situations  of  instability, 
market  infrastructure  must  be  designed  so  as  to  reduce  the  possibility  of  contagion,  and 
derivatives  transactions  must  be  brought  back  into  the  regulated  markets.  The  specific 
instruments  will  necessarily  differ  from  country  to  country,  given  the  variety  of  financial 
systems, but suitable, shared criteria for evaluating the different measures will ensure their 
efficacy  and  guarantee  a  level  playing  field  internationally.  The  Financial  Stability  Board 
(FSB) will draft a first report on these issues for the next G20 Summit in Seoul. 
But even the best rules are useless if their implementation is not full, if supervisors’ powers 
are limited. Countries will submit to peer reviews of their supervisory standards, coordinated 
by the FSB. 
The impact of the new Basel rules on Italian banks  
The Bank of Italy’s selective standards for admitting hybrid instruments in the calculation of 
regulatory  capital  have  been  reflected  in  the  comparatively  high  quality  of  Italian  banks’ 
capital,  which  should  facilitate  their  adaptation  to  the  new,  stricter  Basel  standards.  The 
instruments already issued based on the current rules will nonetheless continue to be eligible 
for  a  sufficiently  long  period.  The  level  of  attention  paid  to  the  quality  of  capital  must  be 
raised further. We have already invited banks to refrain from issuing instruments that will no 
longer be recognized under the new standards.  
Since  the  Italian  banking  system  remains  anchored  to  the  core  business  of  traditional 
lending, the tougher capital requirements for trading and the introduction of financial leverage 
caps will have a lesser impact than in other countries.  
BIS Review 100/2010 
 3
The various proposals to deduct deferred tax assets from regulatory capital are likely to have 
greater effects. Their value is high in Italy owing to uncommonly severe constraints on the 
tax  deductibility  of  loan  loss  provisions.  If  it  is  deemed  appropriate  in  order  to  avoid  the 
further penalization of Italian banks, Parliament might consider eliminating the limits on the 
deductibility of loan losses in favour of a tax that is equivalent in terms of revenue but has a 
less distortionary impact. 
The crisis has demonstrated that rules on liquidity are also indispensable. We have already 
urged banks to prepare for the new standards. 
European supervision 
The  reform  of  the  European  supervisory  architecture  envisages:  a  new  macroprudential 
supervisory  body,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB),  entrusted  with  the  prompt 
identification of vulnerabilities and risks to financial stability and with recommending policies 
for  containing  them,  and  three  sectoral  supervisory  authorities  assigned  to  apply  the  rules 
and institute common supervisory practices. 
Beyond  the  rules,  uniform  and  incisive  controls  are  also  essential.  When  one  national 
supervisory authority adopts a lax approach, a dangerous breach is opened, through which 
potential  vulnerabilities  may  be  quickly  propagated  to  other  systems.  Supervisory  models 
and methods continue to display marked differences across countries: in data availability, in 
the use of on-site and off-site controls, and in the instruments for intervention. Convergence 
must be ensured by capitalizing on the experience of the countries that have withstood the 
crisis best. 
The European Parliament is rightly pushing for the supranational authorities to be endowed 
with the requisite powers of coordination. A leading role within the ESRB must be secured for 
the ECB and the national central banks: this would boost the Board’s technical capabilities, 
fully exploiting the synergies between monetary policy and macro-prudential policy. 
Stress testing of banks’ balance sheets  
In  the  spring  of  last  year,  the  stress  tests  at  the  major  US  banks  revealed,  under  the 
responsibility of the prudential authorities that had conducted them, the scale of the risks of 
individual  banks,  above  all  those  in  connection  with  the  “toxic”  assets  on  their  balance 
sheets. This transparency drive was amply repaid by the markets: these banks, several of 
which had been assisted initially by public money, succeeded in raising over $200 billion in 
private  capital,  an  unthinkable  figure  prior  to  the  publication  of  the  test  results.  Stock 
exchange assessments and fund-raising also benefited from the release of the results. 
Now Europe, albeit in less severe market conditions, has decided to proceed down the same 
road and will confront the US exercise. 
But the European tests examine more risk factors than those contemplated in the American 
case. In addition to adverse macroeconomic conditions, they also assume an increase in the 
market’s perception of sovereign risk. 
The stress test hypothesizes: GDP growth three percentage points lower than that currently 
estimated  by  the  European  Commission  for  the  two  years  2010–11;  and  a  larger  rise  in 
medium- and long-term interest rates than that recorded during the Greek crisis in the early 
days of May of this year. 
Compared with the US exercise, which involved 19 banks and three supervisory authorities, 
the European stress testing is much more complex, involving 91 banks in 20 countries. It is 
being carried out by national supervisory authorities in accordance with common guidelines 
and coordinated by the Committee of European Banking Supervisors with the participation of 
the ECB. The effort made by the authorities and the banks themselves has been exceptional. 
4 
 BIS Review 100/2010
We hope that communications will be marked by a high degree of transparency. The results 
of the tests will be published on 23 July.  
By that date European governments will need to be ready to adopt appropriate measures if 
the results point to capital weaknesses and market solutions are not available.  
The Italian banks  
The tests on the Italian banks participating will inevitably produce a range of different results, 
but I am confident they will show individual banks’ capital to be adequate.  
In  the  first  quarter  of  this  year  the  ratio  of  new  bad  debts  to  total  bank  lending  remained 
stable at 2 per cent, a high value by comparison with the last ten years. We expect the flow 
of new bad debts to remain substantial in the coming months. 
The conditions of the markets and the economy continue to impinge on banks’ profitability. 
The  low  interest  rates  compress  the  margins  on  traditional  banking  business.  In  the  first 
quarter the operating profit of the five largest Italian banking groups was the same as in the 
first quarter of 2009. Loan losses absorbed more than half of this aggregate. 
In  this  newly  delicate  phase  on  the  markets  Italian  banks’  ability  to  raise  funds  has  not 
diminished. Their one-month liquidity position continues to be more than satisfactory, thanks 
among  other  things  to  their  ample  endowment  of  assets  eligible  for  refinancing  operations 
with the ECB. 
Bank credit is showing signs of recovery. In the three months ending in May, lending to firms 
grew by an annualized 2.1 per cent on the three preceding months and that to households by 
5.0 per cent. Firms’ demand for credit is on the rise.  
Customer protection 
To protect retail customers, who represent the strength of the Italian banking system, is an 
objective the Bank of Italy is pursuing with great determination. In the last few years we have 
issued radically new rules in this field, laid the foundations for banks to supply simpler and 
cheaper products that make it easier for weaker consumer to access financial services, and 
prepared guidance that helps even the least expert customers to make choices consistent 
with their needs. Where – as in loans and overdrafts – the risk of opacity is greatest, we have 
introduced  additional  defences,  carried  out  investigations  and  put  forward  proposals  to 
improve the law. 
The Banking and Financial Arbiter (ABF), for which the Bank of Italy provides the resources 
for  its  operation,  has  ruled  in  favour  of  the  customer  in  60  per  cent  of  the  cases  it  has 
examined.  The  customers  who  incurred  losses  have  been  indemnified.  The  ABF’s  rulings 
strengthen the protection of customers not only in individual cases but also more generally 
because they guide banks towards correct behaviour. 
The  checks  made  at  banks’  branches,  head  offices  and  websites  assess  not  only  formal 
compliance  with  the  new  provisions  on  transparency  but  above  all  the  degree  to  which 
customer relations are correct in substance. 
The  checks  on  non-bank  intermediaries  and  their  distribution  channels  are  more  severe 
today, and the requirements for entry in the register referred to in the Consolidated Law on 
Banking are stricter. We have intervened in the situations where the anomalies were most 
notable: loans secured by pledge of salary, revolving credit cards, the issue of guarantees, 
foreign  exchange  dealing  and  money  transfers  abroad.  We  have  stepped  up  cooperation 
with the Finance Police, especially in the sectors most involved in criminal investigations. 
Additional  safeguards  for  consumer  protection  are  now  being  discussed.  We  have  worked 
with the Government on the transposition of the European directive on consumer credit. The 
BIS Review 100/2010 
 5
intention, properly, was to take this opportunity to carry out a broader reform, one that would 
also tackle the regulation of non-bank intermediaries and their channels of distribution. The 
reform bill is now before Parliament: it is essential that the proposed self-regulatory bodies 
have the tools and the means to work to good effect; that only reliable intermediaries inhabit 
the market; and that the granting of credit be restricted to institutions subject to supervision, 
with extremely limited exceptions. 
The  crisis  has  shown  the  importance  of  promoting  the  acquisition  of  adequate  financial 
knowledge. In this area, too, the Bank of Italy has stepped up its activity. The experimental 
financial education programme for schools developed together with the Ministry of Education, 
Universities and  Research  has continued  during  the  past academic  year;  the  considerable 
improvement in knowledge that has been observed encourages us to pursue and expand the 
programme. 
Measures to combat money laundering 
The infiltration of criminal elements into economic activities has become diffuse, partly as a 
result of the crisis.  
The  banks  are  the  cornerstone  of  the  battle  against  this  degeneration.  They  must  have  a 
thorough  knowledge  of  each  customer  and  assess  the  risk  of  their  involvement  in  illicit 
dealings. 
The Bank of Italy has tightened the application of rules and controls further. The inspections 
performed at numerous bank branches – 120 in late 2009 and early 2010 – have brought to 
light  widespread  shortcomings  in  the  scrutiny  of  clients,  the  training  of  personnel,  and  the 
procedure for reporting suspicious transactions. 
The role of the senior management of banks is crucial: combating money laundering must be 
made part of corporate culture, including suitable systems of incentives and compensation. 
 The  path  for  economic  policy  today  is  narrow  and  arduous.  There  is  no  alternative  but  to 
consolidate  the  public  finances,  unwind  the  monetary  expansion,  recapitalize  the  banking 
system, and return to a culture of stability, which is the founding characteristic of the euro 
area. 
But there is also no alternative to a resumption of economic growth, without which these very 
objectives  become  unattainable.  Growth  that  is  not  driven  either  by  debt  or  by  monetary 
policy but whose engine, especially in Italy, is reform and corporate technological innovation. 
The  banks have  a  special  role  to play  in  sustaining  growth.  If  they  are  strong  they  will  be  
–  they  are  –  a  pillar  of  growth.  But  we  also  want  banks  that  are  once  again  close  to  the 
productive economy, as they were before the crisis. There is only one way to do this: “know 
how to discern a creditworthy firm even when the numbers are against it”. 
The  whole  agenda  is  ambitious.  It  demands  an  extraordinary  capacity  for  analysis, 
exceptional  know-how,  great  willingness  to  innovate  and  change.  If  undertaken  resolutely 
and equitably, this programme will have the wholehearted support of markets and the entire 
population. 
6 
 BIS Review 100/2010
