Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Presentation of the 2009 Annual Report 
Testimony  of  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  to  the 
Parliamentary  Committee  on  Economic  and  Financial  Affairs,  on  the  occasion  of  the 
presentation of the 2009 Annual Report, Madrid, 22 June 2010.  
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
The presentation of the Banco de España Annual Report for 2009 – the reason behind my 
testimony today – has taken place at an exceptional time for both the Spanish economy and 
the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  The  economic  and  financial  crisis  spanning  2008  and 
2009,  from  which  most  European  countries  had  started  to  emerge  in  recent  months,  has 
given way to a crisis in the euro area which was triggered by a specific episode, namely the 
Greek fiscal crisis, but whose systemic implications are proving most severe. In particular, 
the  Spanish  economy,  along  with  that  of  other  countries,  has  been  seriously  affected  by 
these tensions and it is still too early to know whether the measures adopted in Europe to 
safeguard EMU and those currently under discussion will be capable of fully dispelling the 
doubts  that  have  emerged  in  recent  months  over  the  soundness  of  this  institutional 
framework. The responsibility of national authorities in this respect is also crucial.  
In recent years the diagnosis by the Banco de España of the Spanish economy pointed to 
the presence of major imbalances, which had progressively built up in the long expansionary 
phase from the mid-1990s to 2007. These problems made it difficult to maintain a sustained 
growth rate in the medium and long term, and rendered our economy particularly sensitive to 
the  adverse  events  that  might  occur.  Accordingly,  redressing  these  problems  through 
resolute economic policy action, especially in the area of structural reforms, was unavoidable. 
Notable among these imbalances was the excessive concentration of resources in the real 
estate  sector  and  high  private-sector  debt,  which  were  compounded  by  the  persistence  of 
serious structural deficiencies in the functioning of the labour market. Under these conditions, 
the 2008 and 2009 recession had a most virulent effect on Spain. This gave rise to a very 
intense  fiscal  policy  response  which,  along  with  the  other  expansionary  economic  policy 
measures, helped soften the adverse effects of the crisis on activity. However, the budget 
deficit rose to a very high level and did not prevent more severe job destruction than in other 
countries, despite the fact that the decline in output was on a similar scale. The excessive 
levels reached by both the budget deficit and the unemployment rate opened up additional 
fronts of vulnerability in our economy, which was particularly affected by its high dependence 
on  external  borrowing,  despite  the  enormous  correction  the  external  imbalance  has 
undergone in the past two years.  
Against this background, the Greek crisis has undoubtedly had a contagion effect, exposing 
the weaknesses of the European institutional arrangements and the potential implications for 
the more vulnerable countries, Spain among them owing to the above-mentioned reasons. 
Given the scale of the challenges facing us, it is vital that the economic policy response be 
sufficiently  ambitious  and  resolute,  so  as  to  speed  the  adjustment  of  the  accumulated 
imbalances and to lay the foundations for a more stable and flexible economy. This would 
not only be to the benefit of the Spanish economy; it is also essential for the very stability of 
the common European project.  
On this economic policy response will hinge the strength of the recovery, which in Spain’s 
case has hitherto been very incipient and very reliant on temporary stimuli, that will tend to 
peter  out  in  the  short  run.  Even  without  the  high  degree  of  uncertainty  surrounding  us  in 
recent weeks, the recovery would only be gradual and would take some time to attain a pace 
of  expansion  sufficient  to  generate  employment,  which  underscores  the  need  to  act 
decisively to avoid prolonged low growth. 
BIS Review 92/2010 
 1
The Annual Report of the Banco de España addresses the current situation of and outlook 
for the Spanish economy in great detail. Accordingly, given the limited time for my testimony, 
I  shall  focus  on  three  issues  that  are  essential  in  my  view  in  order  to  be  able  to  exit  the 
current situation and bring about a rapid return to sustained growth: fiscal consolidation; the 
steps that must be taken to set in place an efficient labour market that rapidly promotes job 
creation; and, lastly, the restructuring of the financial system, where substantial progress has 
been made in recent weeks.  
Evidently, one fundamental challenge we face is the need to correct the strong deterioration 
of the budgetary position and ensure a rapid return to stability; otherwise, the expansionary 
momentum of public finances would become an obstacle to recovery. The challenge is an 
exceptional one since the budget deficit stood at 11.2% of GDP in 2009, up more than 13 pp 
of GDP in only two years, and there was a substantial increase in the public debt/GDP ratio, 
which  stood  at  53.2%  in  2009,  a  level  nevertheless  below  the  European  average.  This 
marked  fiscal  deterioration  is  partly  due  to  the  functioning  of  the  automatic  stabilisers,  the 
discretionary  measures  adopted,  the  strong  inertia  of  public  spending  and,  above  all,  the 
decline  in  revenue  linked  to  the  end  of  the  real  estate  boom,  which  will  be  difficult  to  turn 
around in the future. This means that much of the fiscal imbalance is structural, and it must 
be checked urgently with highly ambitious consolidation measures that manage to reverse 
the trend of spending and build revenue back up.  
In  other  circumstances  it  would  probably  have  been  feasible  to  reduce  the  budget  deficit 
more gradually. But at present it is impossible to pursue such a strategy, in a setting in which 
investors  are  demanding  a  speedier  return  to  a  credible  path  of  budgetary  stability. 
Responding  to  this  objective  is  the  ambitious  package  of  measures  approved  by  the 
government on 22 May, complementing the initial consolidation efforts included in the State 
budget for 2010 and in the updated Stability Programme presented in January this year.  
The  authorities  committed  themselves  in  the  updated  Stability  Programme  to  reducing  the 
budget deficit to 3% of GDP in 2013, in line with EU requirements under the Stability and 
Growth Pact.  
The package of measures approved in May involves bringing forward to 2010 and 2011 a 
sizeable portion of the drive to reduce the deficit. As a result, a deficit target of 6% of GDP 
was  set  for  2011.  This  fiscal  consolidation  objective,  entailing  a  reduction  in  the  deficit  of 
more than 5 pp of GDP in only two years, is exceptional. But it is also vital so as to clearly 
bring public finances back onto a path of stability and dispel the risks perceived in connection 
with our fiscal position.  
This budget deficit target of 6% of GDP in 2011 should, moreover, be immovable and not 
conditional upon other factors, even though these are beyond the control of the authorities, 
such  as  lower-than-expected  economic  growth.  The  financial  markets’  perception  of  the 
likelihood  of  this  objective  being  met  will  be  a  yardstick  for  the  authorities’  degree  of 
commitment to pursuing an exit from this crisis, meaning this is the essential factor guiding 
decisions and budgetary conduct in the coming months. Accordingly, strict compliance with 
the  target  must  be  ensured,  both  through  special  budgetary  monitoring  and  surveillance 
procedures  and  through  additional  measures  that  should  be  applied  if  deviations  from  the 
target  are  detected.  Naturally,  to  be  in  a  position  to  react  promptly  and  effectively,  the 
measures  most  suited  to  the  objectives  set  and  which  least  interfere  with  a  return  to 
sustained growth must be designed in advance.  
Given  the  high  decentralisation  of  public  spending  in  Spain,  the  regional  and  local 
governments’ participation in this austerity drive and their commitment to attaining budgetary 
targets are vital. And I must say that the measures announced so far by most of these tiers of 
government do little to respond to the radical reduction in unproductive public spending that 
our economy needs.  
As I said earlier, the recently approved fiscal adjustment measures were urgent, since they 
were  vital  to  curb  a  situation  of  extremely  high  instability  that  might  have  had  disastrous 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2010
consequences.  But  there  are  other  measures  which,  without  having  the  same  degree  of 
urgency,  are  nonetheless  more  important,  since  their  goal  is  to  ensure  medium-  and  
long-term budgetary stability. Clearly, I am referring to the measures to reform our pension 
system. At an earlier date, the government tabled some proposals in the updated Stability 
Programme  and,  on  this  basis,  the  Toledo  Pact  Commission  will  set  about  work  in  the 
coming weeks. I do not wish to go into details here on the possible avenues of reform. But 
clearly, a combination of changes that were to raise the legal retirement age, the minimum 
number  of  years  necessary  to  qualify  for  pension  benefits  and  the  period  over  which 
pensions are calculated would be optimal for ensuring the system’s viability.  
Pension  reform  will  not  entail  a  significant  improvement  in  the  budget deficit  figures  in the 
very short term, but it will exert a powerful influence on the recovery of confidence in Spain’s 
economy  and  in  its  public  sector’s  solvency,  and  that  will  translate  into  better  financing 
conditions and sounder growth prospects. Therefore, I can but urge that discussions under 
the  aegis  of  the  Toledo  Pact  take  place  as  promptly  as  possible,  with  the  widest  political 
consensus, as I believe this may be a key factor for dispelling the uncertainty we have been 
facing in recent weeks.  
The fiscal consolidation programme and the measures adopted to reinforce the institutional 
arrangements of the Monetary Union are fundamental, but they do not suffice to return the 
Spanish economy to a path of high growth, particularly following the strong adverse impact 
the  recession  has  had  on  all 
the  European  countries’  potential  growth  capacity. 
Consequently, the other centrepiece of the response to the current emergency situation is to 
adopt  a  series  of  structural  reforms  conducive  to  the  resumption  of  sustained  growth  in 
output  and  employment.  These  reforms,  in  turn,  would  contribute  to  progress  in  fiscal 
consolidation, as they would enhance the perception of the sustainability of public finances 
and would reduce the degree of sacrifice implicit in the necessary fiscal austerity that must 
be maintained in the coming years.  
There are several fields in which the Spanish economy requires an overhaul of its structures, 
to make them more consistent with our membership of a monetary area and with a highly 
competitive and globalised world economy. Two such fields are the labour market and the 
financial system, on which I shall elaborate in detail later on in my address.  
Correcting  the  inefficiencies  weighing  down  on  the  functioning  of  our  labour  market  is  of 
paramount importance since, as the market is currently structured, the obstacles to gaining 
competitiveness  and  generating  sustainable  employment  are  patently  clear.  In  particular, 
these shortcomings have meant that the adjustment of the economy in the recent crisis has 
fallen  disproportionately  on  employment  as  a  result,  among  other  reasons,  of  the  scant 
sensitivity  of  collective  bargaining  to  the  specific  situation  of  firms.  The  extent  of  these 
rigidities  is  not  merely  cyclical;  their  effects  are  largely  permanent  as  they  force  firms  and 
workers out of the market, causing lasting damage to productive capacity and human capital. 
Last  week  the  government  approved  a  series  of  measures  aimed  at  correcting  these 
inefficiencies, specifically at reducing duality in hiring and at reinforcing companies’ internal 
flexibility. To do this, it opted to amend some of the features of the system currently in place, 
albeit  without  altering  its  most  substantial  aspects.  In  particular,  the  collective  bargaining 
system  has  remained  outside  the  bounds  of  the  reform;  this  limits  its  scope  and 
effectiveness,  since  the  interaction  of  bargaining  with  the  labour  hiring  system  is  a  key 
determinant of the labour market’s adjustability.  
Notwithstanding, the reform promises headway in terms of internal and wage flexibility that 
requires  proper  assessment,  since  it  broadens  the  scope  for  firms  in  difficulty  to negotiate 
wage conditions with their workers that are better suited to the actual situation and to help 
save  jobs.  As  I  have  indicated  on  numerous  occasions,  had  this  possibility  actually  been 
available  during  the  recent  crisis,  the  labour  market  adjustment  would  not  have  fallen  so 
severely on employment.  
BIS Review 92/2010 
 3
In parallel, in order to reduce the duality in hiring, certain measures have been adopted to 
increase  the  incentives  for  permanent  hiring.  These  involve  extending  the  possibilities  of 
using stable employment-promoting contracts and the elimination of some of the causes that 
encouraged an unwarranted use of dismissals for reasons other than economic ones. The 
categories  of  workers  that  may  avail  themselves  of  permanent  employment-promoting 
contracts  have  also  been  widened,  and  certain  restrictions  on  temporary  hiring  have  been 
introduced.  The  passage  of  the  reform  through  Parliament  should  be  used  to  add  greater 
clarity to the wording of the permanent employment-promoting measures so as to rule out 
restrictive interpretations and boost its implementation. But the most debatable issue is the 
imposition  of  new  restrictions  on  temporary  hires,  especially  if  permanent  hiring  does  not 
improve  sufficiently.  In  the  current  conditions,  with  more  than  4.5  million  Spaniards 
unemployed, all job creation opportunities must be kept open and not in the least impaired 
until the new channels for permanent hiring prove effective.  
In  short,  the  fiscal  consolidation  programme,  the  pension  reform  proposals  and  the  labour 
market reform measures are three areas in which significant advances have been made by 
the authorities in the last few weeks, but in which much work remains to be done. Let me 
now move on to the area of reform which falls directly under the responsibility of the Banco 
de  España,  namely  the  restructuring  of  the  financial  system  and,  more  specifically,  of  the 
savings bank sector, where there has been appreciable progress in recent weeks.  
In  the  last  few  months  a  very  significant  portion  of  Spanish  savings  banks  has  concluded 
merger  agreements  with  other  savings  banks,  in  what  is  the  largest  restructuring  of  the 
Spanish  banking  sector  in  a  long  time.  These  movements  started  with  the  creation  of  the 
FROB (the Fund for the Orderly Restructuring of the Banking Sector) in June 2009, nearly 
two years into the international banking crisis affecting the markets and financial systems of 
all developed countries, and to which Spanish financial institutions were exhibiting a marked 
resilience that most have maintained to date.  
This new Fund responded to the need to downsize the Spanish banking sector, particularly 
the savings bank segment. After a prolonged period of growth, this segment had reached a 
size  which,  given  the  evolving  demand  for  banking  services,  entailed  a  clear  excess  of 
capacity.  
From  an  individual  standpoint,  the  prolongation  of  the  crisis  affected  the  capacity  of 
institutions to generate profits for the following reasons: an increase in non-earning assets 
(doubtful loans and repossessed real estate assets), the narrowing of margins due to a fall in 
income associated with rising non-earning assets and to a higher cost of funds, the decrease 
in business volume, etc.  
Moreover, the high growth of previous years, due particularly to increased business with the 
real estate sector, had raised the dependence on wholesale debt markets, exposing savings 
banks  to  the  liquidity  risk  associated  with  adverse  developments  in  those  markets. 
Compounding this is the intrinsic limitation of savings banks when it comes to raising core 
capital,  a  limitation  which  is  important  because  the  trend  in  both  the  markets  and  the 
prudential  financial  regulation  currently  under  international  revision  is  clearly  towards 
stepping up requirements in this area.  
Given  the  need  to  downsize  this sector  and  the  conviction  that  the  productive  structure  of 
many credit institutions had to be rationalised to hold efficiency at adequate levels in a sector 
characterised by growing competition, the time was ripe for the creation of the FROB, under 
whose auspices many savings banks have arranged their mergers or institutional protection 
systems (hereafter referred to by the Spanish acronym “SIP”). These two forms of action are 
equivalent  insofar  as  their  main  effects  are  concerned,  because  in  SIPs  (which  are 
agreements containing clauses to ensure stability) the capacity to define key strategies and 
policies is transferred to a central entity and the participating credit institutions largely share 
their net assets and their liquidity, as well as pooling a high proportion of their profits.  
4 
 BIS Review 92/2010
The  FROB  has  a  second  mandate:  to  participate  in  the  restructuring  of  unviable  credit 
institutions, acting in this case secondarily to the traditional deposit guarantee funds (DGFs). 
This dual nature of the FROB and the consequent possibility that a distressed institution not 
involved in  a merger or SIP process may undergo a crisis requiring the Fund to intervene 
(replacing  directors  and  selling  the  credit  institution  or  transferring  its  business  to  a  third 
party)  are  an  implicit  incentive  for  financial  institutions  to  seek  partners  with  which  to 
conclude merger or SIP agreements.  
The FROB has €9 billion in capital and €3 billion of funds from a debt issue and, if needed, it 
could raise up to €90 billion of funds from third parties.  
Since the FROB was set up, a period of 12 months has practically elapsed. The end of this 
period  is  marked  by  the  deadline  of  30  June  2010  set  by  the  European  Commission 
notification of 28 January 2010 on how to apply the general framework envisaged in it. This 
time  limit  applies  only  to  the  FROB’s  competence  to  assist  merger/SIP  processes,  not  to 
processes  of  individual  restructuring.  At  the  present  date,  38  of  the  45  Spanish  savings 
banks (39 including Cajasur, a credit institution awaiting a solution within the framework of 
the FROB) are involved in merger/SIP processes affecting 92% of savings bank assets.  
Of the 12 merger/SIP processes, seven are planned with FROB aid estimated at a total of 
about €10 billion, and the other five without government assistance. Also participating in one 
of these processes is Caja Castilla-La Mancha, a credit institution seized by the Banco de 
España which received total aid of €3.8 billion from the deposit guarantee fund (DGF). The 
merger/SIP  plans  of  these  12  processes  have  already  been  authorised  by  the  Banco  de 
España or are at the authorisation stage, except in one case in which three credit institutions 
are participating in a project still under negotiation but which will not require FROB aid.  
The operations involving merger/SIP plans with FROB aid envisage cuts of 20–25% in the 
number  of  offices  and  of  around  15%  in  staff,  which  gives  an  idea  of  the  scale  of  the 
measures proposed to improve bank efficiency. The structure rationalisation measures are 
an indispensable requirement for receiving FROB aid and are being included naturally in the 
other  planned  voluntary  operations,  since  these  measures  are  responsive  to  the  need  to 
achieve more soundness, more efficiency and more economic rationality.  
In addition to these savings bank merger/SIP operations, it should be mentioned that in the 
three  years  of  international  financial  crisis,  only  two  savings  banks  saw  their  solvency 
deteriorate to such an extent as to require the application of precautionary special measures.  
First,  the  directors  of  Caja  Castilla-La  Mancha  were  replaced  by  the  Banco  de  España  in 
March 2009 (before the FROB was set up). It received aid from the DGF totalling €3.8 billion, 
of  which  €1.3  billion  consisted  of  preference  shares  and  €2.5  billion  were  in  the  form  of 
guarantees  of  asset  value,  as  well  as  €350  million  of  bridge  financing.  This  savings  bank, 
following the agreements reached by it with Cajastur, has joined one of the 12 merger/SIP 
processes under way.  
Second,  CajaSur  was  subjected  to  compulsory  restructuring  due  to  lack  of  solvency  and 
viability, following its failure to approve a merger with Unicaja, a sound and solvent project in 
which the two savings banks had agreed on a private solution for the failed institution. The 
FROB  granted  temporary  aid  through  the  subscription  of  €800  million  of  non-voting  equity 
units  and  €1.5  billion  in  liquidity  support,  which  so  far  it  has  not  been  necessary  to  use. 
Definitive  arrangements  are  being  worked  out  for  this  savings  bank  through  a  competitive 
process in which the aid finally granted will be defined.  
At present, the provisional amount of the aid to be received by Spanish savings banks in this 
process is as follows. The FROB will furnish around €10 billion to strengthen own funds in 
merger/SIP processes. This amount has to be repaid within five years (extendable to seven 
years) and earns the market rate of interest (at least 7.75%). The figure is not final because 
four  processes  have  yet  to  be  authorised.  In  addition,  Cajasur  will  receive  the  aid  finally 
resulting from the competitive procedure.  
BIS Review 92/2010 
 5
Furthermore, the savings bank DGF, which is financed by contributions from savings banks, 
undertook to provide €3.8 billion to Caja Castilla-La Mancha.  
These amounts, while substantial, are small compared with those provided by the taxpayers 
of other countries. Therefore, it is fitting at this point to recall that Spain is now enjoying the 
benefit of the decision in 1999 to oblige banks to record a general provision: since January 
2008 our banks have used some €18.2 billion of this provision to cushion the impact of the 
crisis on their income statements. As can be seen, this amount is more than the sum of the 
funds  used  or  to  be  used  by  the  FROB  and  the  savings  bank  DGF  in  the  operations 
described above.  
Thus  the  main  decisions  have  already  been  taken  on  the  required  restructuring  and 
downsizing  of  the  savings  bank  sector.  One  task  remains  in  connection  with  these  credit 
institutions:  a  legal  reform  to  enable  them  to  issue  instruments  eligible  as  top-quality  own 
funds and to provide formulas conducive to improved governance and professionalisation of 
savings bank management.  
The Banco de España’s confidence in the soundness and competitiveness of the Spanish 
banking sector is based on the extensive information we have on the situation of each bank, 
obtained in the exercise of a supervisory function based on in-depth scrutiny and closeness 
to the supervised party. We also have the results of regular stress tests of the capacity of 
banks  to  cope  with  possible  negative  changes  in  the  economic  conditions  in  which  they 
operate. At this moment, as the markets and some sectors of international public opinion are 
expressing  distrust  and  reservations  about  the  situation  of  several  European  financial 
systems, and particularly Spanish savings banks, the Banco de España has announced its 
decision  to  publish  the  results  of  stress  tests  in  order  to  ensure  the  highest  possible 
transparency  of  the  situation  of  Spanish  banks.  Since  agreement  has  been  reached  in 
Europe  to  conduct  and  publish  common  stress  tests,  the  Banco  de  España  will  join  this 
initiative and, therefore, publish the results of the stress tests on Spanish banks as soon as 
this common framework allows.  
The restructuring and reform of the financial system, together with the budgetary adjustment 
and the pension and labour market reform, are the most urgent measures needed to restore 
confidence in the Spanish economy. They should therefore be implemented immediately. But 
the agenda of reforms required by our economy to move back to steady growth of economic 
and  social  well-being  and  continue  modernisation  does  not  end  there.  There  are  still 
important  tasks  which  have  to  be  tackled  in  unison  by  all  Spanish  political,  economic  and 
social  actors.  And,  having  said  that,  I  cannot  conclude  without  underlining  the  Banco  de 
España’s firm commitment to contribute accordingly. 
6 
 BIS Review 92/2010
