Thomas C Baxter, Jr and Sarah J Dahlgren: The Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York’s involvement with the American International Group (AIG) 
testimony  before 
Joint  written 
the  Congressional  Oversight  Panel  by  Mr  Thomas 
C Baxter, Jr,  Executive  Vice  President  and  General  Counsel,  and  Sarah  J  Dahlgren, 
Executive  Vice  President,  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  Washington  DC, 
26 May 2010. 
 Chair Warren and Members of the Panel, thank you for giving us the opportunity to testify 
here today regarding the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s (New York Fed) involvement 
with AIG.  
The decision to lend to AIG 
I. 
On the morning of September 16, 2008, it became clear to Federal Reserve and Treasury 
policymakers  that  AIG,  then  one  of  the  world’s  largest  insurance  and  financial  firms,  was 
facing  a  potentially  fatal  liquidity  crisis.  AIG’s  crisis  was  coming  amidst  the  collapse  of  the 
housing  market,  within  weeks  of  the  receiverships  of  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac,  and 
within  24  hours  of  the bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers.  Confidence  in  the  financial  system 
was exceptionally fragile, and financial firms were taking dramatic and unusual measures to 
protect  their  balance  sheets.  Money  market  funds,  long  viewed  as  a  safe  investment  by 
millions of Americans, were experiencing massive withdrawals. The run on these funds, in 
turn, severely disrupted the commercial paper market, a vital source of funding for American 
businesses.  Securitization  markets  started  to  seize  up,  especially  those  that  relied  upon 
instruments backed by consumer loans. Banks sharply curtailed their lending.  
A full fledged panic had started and was spreading rapidly; the financial system was facing 
the threat of collapse. 
In  light  of  the  circumstances  at  the  time,  a  bankruptcy  filing  by  AIG  would  have  had 
disastrous consequences. Federal Reserve Chairman Bernanke has stated that it could well 
have “resulted in a 1930’s-style global financial and economic meltdown, with catastrophic 
implications for production, income, and jobs.” Because of the decisions made that morning, 
we can never really know. 
Let us be clear, though, about the risks that the policymakers did know. Policymakers knew 
that AIG’s largest creditors were other financial firms and that those firms clearly would have 
been directly impacted by an AIG bankruptcy filing. But the gravest risks were not the direct 
exposure  of  other  financial  firms  to  AIG.  The  gravest  risks  related  to  the  indirect 
consequences of a bankruptcy of AIG, indirect consequences that would impact millions of 
Americans. 
AIG’s  role  as  one  of  the  world’s  largest  and  storied  insurance  companies  meant  that  its 
failure likely would have had a contagion effect, causing damage as it spread throughout the 
insurance  industry.  Policy  holders  would  be  hurt.  Municipalities,  who  were  already  reeling 
from  a  lack  of  financing  options  for  their  building  projects,  would  have  seen  their  financial 
protection  disappear.  Workers  whose  401(k)  plans  had  purchased  $40  billion  of  insurance 
from AIG against the risk that their stable value funds would decline in value would see that 
insurance  disappear.  Pension  plans  that  had  placed  funds  in  AIG  guaranteed  investment 
contracts,  or  GICs,  which  function  much  like  deposits  in  a  bank,  would  have  experienced 
significant  losses,  losses  that  would  be  passed  along  to  retirees  or  to  others  whose 
aspirations to be retirees would surely have been changed. 
BIS Review 73/2010 
 1
And these indirect consequences of an AIG bankruptcy would not have stopped at the U.S. 
border. AIG was global in scope. It conducted its operations in more than 130 countries, and 
across  various  parts  of  the  financial  industry,  insurance  as  well  as  banking.  The  damage 
from  an  AIG  filing  would  have  been  felt  from  the  farms  of  Iowa  to  the  streets  of  San 
Francisco to the far off corners of the world. The unplanned and chaotic bankruptcy of this 
trillion dollar financial conglomerate (especially a day after Lehman’s filing) would have been 
a global catastrophe. 
That catastrophe did not happen. 
More than a year and a half later, it is easy to forget the level of panic and fear that gripped 
the world during the week of September 16, 2008. A bankruptcy of AIG would have fueled 
the  fear,  much  as  gasoline  fuels  a  fire.  And  let  us  not  forget  what  Federal  Reserve  and 
Treasury officials have said many times in testimony – we did not have the necessary tools, 
such as legal authority for a special resolution regime, with which to limit the damage of an 
AIG collapse. 
We also did not have the luxury of time. AIG needed liquidity and it needed it that day. In the 
early  days  of  the  intervention,  when  we  knew  precious  little  about  AIG,  but  knew  that  it 
needed  billions  of  dollars,  we  were  truly  facing  a  binary  choice  to  either  let  AIG  file  for 
bankruptcy or to provide it with liquidity. It is worth noting that this choice fell to the Federal 
Reserve because Congress had equipped it with an ability to lend to a non bank like AIG in 
extraordinary and exigent circumstances. Given AIG’s situation on September 16, 2008, and 
given what had transpired over the preceding days and months, how could we responsibly 
not have lent pursuant to our statutory authority? 
With authorization from the Board of Governors under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve 
Act,  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  had  the  ability  to  provide  liquidity  to  AIG  by 
making  a  fully  secured  loan.  The  decision  to  activate  the  authority  and  lend  was  clearly 
justified  on  the  merits  but  was  difficult  because  of  the  collateral  consequence,  the  moral 
hazard  resulting  from  AIG’s  rescue.  Within  hours  of  the  policy  determination,  the  Federal 
Reserve  took  over  the  term  sheet  originally  created  by  a  private  sector  consortium  of 
commercial banks. In the aftermath of Lehman’s bankruptcy, the consortium was no longer 
prepared  to  lend  to  AIG.  On  the  evening  of  September  16th,  we  advanced  $14  billion  in 
credit to AIG through a fully collateralized lending, and announced the term sheet for what 
would become an $85 billion revolving credit facility with AIG (Fed Facility).1 
Some  have  asked  why  the  Federal  Reserve  did  not  see  the  threat  that  AIG  posed  to  the 
financial  system  before  September  16th.  The  short  answer  is  that  AIG  had  hundreds  of 
regulators, none of which was the Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve had no regulatory 
authority over the firm – no authority over its capital, no authority over its liquidity, and no 
oversight over its control functions. The Federal Reserve was not engaged in supervision of 
AIG. It did not have the legal authority to do so. These roles and responsibilities remained 
with  state  insurance  regulators,  and  with  the  comprehensive  consolidated  supervisor,  the 
Office of Thrift Supervision. Throughout the weekend of September 13th and 14th we were 
assured  by  those  regulators  that  a  private  sector  consortium  of  commercial  banks  had  a 
solution to AIG’s liquidity problems, and we had no basis to question those assurances. But 
then Lehman filed for bankruptcy protection and the private sector consortium unequivocally 
stated that they were no longer prepared to lend to AIG. 
The  AIG  situation  is  both  different  and  similar  to  that  of  Long-Term  Capital  Management 
(LTCM), a  hedge fund that nearly collapsed in the fall of 1998. In the LTCM situation, the 
                                                 
1   The Fed Facility  was (and remains) secured by a pledge of a substantial portion of AIG’s assets, including 
ownership 
insurance  subsidiaries.  As  additional 
compensation  for  the  Fed  Facility,  AIG  agreed  to  issue  to  a  trust  for  the  benefit  of  the  Treasury,  preferred 
stock convertible into 79 percent of AIG’s outstanding common stock. 
the  company’s  domestic  and 
interests 
foreign 
in 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2010
Federal  Reserve  called  together  a  private  sector  consortium  made  up  of  LTCM’s  major 
counterparties, who agreed to rescue LTCM by investing about $3.6 billion in new equity, in 
return for a 90 percent equity stake in LTCM’s portfolio along with operational control. The 
counterparties made this decision after the Federal Reserve encouraged them to recognize 
their self-interest in saving LTCM. The consortium invested in LTCM because its members 
came  to  believe  that  the  Federal  Reserve  staff  was  right.  Several  years  later,  when  the 
investors received back all of their capital with interest, they came to see that the Federal 
Reserve  was  right.  The  market  conditions  in  September  2008  presented  a  very  different 
situation to AIG’s counterparties who, in the aftermath of Lehman’s failure, found themselves 
facing liquidity concerns that compelled them to maintain cash on their balance sheets rather 
than lend to AIG. Moreover, the unprecedented size of AIG’s liquidity need – ultimately more 
than $150 billion – could not have been met by the private sector. There is, however, one 
very important similarity. We believe that we will receive full payment of principal and interest 
from AIG, much like the consortium did in LTCM. 
Still others have wondered why Lehman went bankrupt, while the Federal Reserve extended 
credit  to  AIG  that  prevented  its  default.  The  answer  is  that  AIG  presented  a  very  different 
case.  AIG  had  enough  high-quality  collateral  to  permit  the  Federal  Reserve  to  extend  a 
secured loan to provide liquidity to the firm. On September 16th, our focus was on providing 
liquidity so that AIG could meet its obligations and avoid default. To be clear, we were not 
making an investment in AIG; we were making a fully secured loan. We were not assuming 
management responsibility for the company; we were a lender to the company. The recently 
released Volukas Report shows in a thorough, exhaustive manner that an effective solution 
to  Lehman  required  a  strong  merger  partner  that  could  provide  much  needed  capital  to 
ensure a going concern. While Federal Reserve and Treasury officials tried very hard to find 
that  merger  partner  for  Lehman,  in  the  end  we  did  not  succeed  as  we  had  succeeded  in 
March of 2008, when we brought in JPMorgan Chase to acquire Bear Stearns. 
As a liquidity provider, we did not consider conditioning our lending to AIG on a requirement 
that  the  company  obtain  concessions  from  some  of  its  major  creditors.  Conditioning  our 
lending  on  AIG  coercing  certain  creditors  to  agree  to  reduce  the  amounts  due  and  owing 
from AIG would have been to ensure failure. The tactic would have undercut our primary goal 
in providing AIG with necessary liquidity – enabling AIG to pay creditors, maintain consumer, 
regulator,  and  counterparty  confidence,  and  avoid  default.  A  default  would  have  triggered 
AIG’s  bankruptcy,  with  all  of  the  systemic  risk  that  bankruptcy  would  have  entailed.  While 
these tactics have been used in certain sovereign debt restructurings, they can be used there 
only because sovereigns cannot go bankrupt, and only with months of pre-planning. 
Any attempt to condition our lending would have created further uncertainty in a time of panic 
as  to  which  of  AIG’s  counterparties  would  get  paid  and  which  would  be  forced  to  take 
substantial  losses.  One  of  our  objectives  was  to  calm  market  participants,  and  uncertainty 
(and the allegations of favoritism that surely would have followed) does not do that – it fuels 
fear. Would the conditions extend only to AIG’s Credit Default Swap (CDS) counterparties, or 
might  the  Federal  government  make  value  judgments  as  to  other  AIG  contracts?  Would 
senior unsecured debt holders be forced to take concessions? And most importantly, would a 
creditor  who  was  pressed  for  a  discount  simply  refuse  and  declare  a  default?  Conditional 
lending would have heightened the risk of an AIG default, which is what we were trying to  
– and did – avoid. 
The  default  risk  would  have  been  exacerbated  by  the  credit  rating  downgrade  that  almost 
certainly would have followed any effort by AIG to coerce creditor concessions. AIG’s failure 
to  pay  all  of  its  contractual  obligations  in  full  would  likely  constitute  a  selective  default 
resulting  in  a  downgrade.  That  downgrade  not  only  would  have  triggered  potential 
terminations  and  collateral  calls  at  AIG’s  Financial  Products  unit  (AIG  FP),  but  also  would 
have resulted in substantial value destruction at AIG’s insurance companies. Large annuity 
distributors likely would have stopped selling AIG products, replacing them with better-rated, 
more stable competitors. High-end life insurance sales would have decreased significantly, 
BIS Review 73/2010 
 3
and  remaining  sales  would  have  been  vulnerable  to  adverse  selection.  Withdrawals  and 
surrenders  among  existing  customers  would  have  increased,  depleting  cash  reserves  and 
creating pressure for asset sales at depressed levels. As a result of a downgrade, many of 
AIG’s  insurance  companies  may  have  been  unable  to  write  new  business,  and  state  and 
foreign insurance regulators may have begun seizing AIG insurance company assets in their 
respective jurisdictions. Conditional lending would not have allowed AIG to remain a going 
concern, but rather would have pushed it into bankruptcy. 
Continuing pressures on AIG 
II. 
By  the  end  of  September  2008,  AIG  had  drawn  $61  billion  from  the  Fed  Facility.  While 
successful in providing AIG with the liquidity it needed to avoid default and bankruptcy in the 
short term, over the longer term AIG’s borrowings from the Fed Facility were perceived by 
some  to  be  potentially  unsustainable.  The  company  continued  to  experience  pressing 
liquidity  needs  that  necessitated  rapid  draws  on  the  Fed  Facility  and  concerns  that  AIG’s 
needs  might  well  exceed  the  facility’s  capacity.  Even  greater  concerns  arose  out  of  the 
continued  downgrade  risk.  The  probability  of  a  ratings  downgrade  was  considered  high 
unless the Federal Reserve took further action because the aggregate size of AIG’s draws 
on the Fed Facility was greater than rating agency expectations – the rating agencies felt that 
AIG  had  too  much  debt  –  and  AIG’s  expected  third  quarter  losses,  which  were  to  be 
announced on November 10, 2008, far exceeded analyst estimates. 
As discussed in Vice Chairman Kohn’s testimony of March 5, 2009, in early October 2008, 
the  Board  of  Governors  approved  an  additional  credit  facility  (the  Securities  Borrowing 
Facility)  that  permitted  the  New  York  Fed  to  lend  to  certain  AIG  domestic  insurance 
subsidiaries  up  to  $37.8  billion  in  order  to  allow  them  to  return  the  cash  collateral  they 
received  from  their  securities  borrowing  counterparties.  Additionally,  toward  the  end  of 
October, four AIG affiliates began participating in the Federal Reserve’s Commercial Paper 
Funding Facility (CPFF) on the same terms and conditions as other participants. The CPFF 
is  a  generally  available  program  that  involves  the  purchase,  through  a  special  purpose 
vehicle  with  financing  from  the  Federal  Reserve,  of  three-month  unsecured  and  asset-
backed commercial paper directly from eligible issuers. 
Notwithstanding  AIG’s  access  to  these  additional  Federal  Reserve  credit  facilities,  AIG 
remained extremely vulnerable to the ongoing and intensifying financial crisis. Falling asset 
values  generated  both  substantial  losses  on  its  balance  sheet  and  increases  in  required 
payments  to  AIG’s  counterparties  under  the  terms  of  its  credit  protection  contracts.  The 
liquidity crisis was not driven solely by AIG’s need to meet collateral calls on its CDS; AIG 
also faced severe liquidity pressures arising out of its losses on residential mortgage backed 
securities (RMBS) in which its domestic life insurance companies had invested as part of its 
securities lending program. These factors undermined market confidence in AIG and again 
put its investment-grade credit rating at risk. 
To address AIG’s untenable debt burden, the Federal Reserve decided to reduce AIG’s debt 
by transferring RMBS and CDO exposures from AIG’s balance sheet to the balance sheets 
of the two Federal Reserve Limited Liability Companies (LLCs), Maiden Lane II and Maiden 
Lane  III.  The  LLCs  acquired  these  assets  by  paying  to  AIG  the  cash  proceeds  of  certain 
loans  and  capital  contributions  made  to  the  LLCs  by  the  Federal  Reserve  and  AIG 
respectively.  On  November  10,  2008,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  and  the  Treasury 
announced  this  restructuring  of  the  government’s  financial  support  to  establish  a  more 
durable capital structure, resolve liquidity issues, facilitate AIG’s execution of its plan to sell 
certain  of  its  businesses  in  an  orderly  manner,  promote  market  stability,  and  protect  the 
interests of the U.S. government and taxpayers. The details of this restructuring have already 
been the focus of an examination by the Treasury Special Inspector General for the Troubled 
Asset  Relief  Program.  They  have  also  been  the  focus  of  testimony  before  a  number  of 
committees  in  Congress,  including  Secretary  Geithner  and  Thomas  Baxter’s  January  27, 
4 
 BIS Review 73/2010
2010  testimony  before  the  House  Oversight  and  Government  Reform  Committees.  A 
summary of the salient facts, however, follows. 
As part of the November 2008 restructuring, Treasury invested $40 billion in newly issued 
Senior Preferred Stock of AIG under its TARP authority.2 In connection with that investment, 
the  Federal  Reserve  modified  the  terms  of  the  Fed  Facility  to  be  more  sustainable:  The 
maturity  of  the  Fed  Facility  was  extended  to  five  years  (due  2013),  the  maximum  amount 
available was reduced from $85 billion to $60 billion, and the interest rate and commitment 
fees were reduced. The Fed Facility remained secured by substantially all of AIG’s assets, 
and the company continued to be required to apply proceeds of asset sales to permanently 
repay any outstanding balances under the facility. 
At the same time, the Board approved the establishment of an additional lending facility that 
would  provide  a  permanent  solution  to  the  AIG  securities  lending  program’s  losses  and 
liquidity drains, thus eliminating the need for the Securities Borrowing Facility. Under the new 
facility,  the  New  York  Fed  extended  approximately  $19.5  billion  in  secured,  non-recourse 
credit to a special purpose limited liability company, Maiden Lane II, in which AIG would hold 
a $1 billion first-loss position. Maiden Lane II then purchased, at market prices, RMBS with a 
par value of $39.3 billion from certain AIG domestic insurance company subsidiaries. This 
facility allowed AIG to terminate its domestic securities lending program and to repay fully all 
outstanding amounts under the Securities Borrowing Facility, which was then terminated. 
The  Federal  Reserve  also  took  steps  to  help  address  the  drain  of  liquidity  on  AIG  arising 
from potential collateral calls associated with credit default swap contracts written by AIG FP 
on multi-sector CDOs. The New York Fed made a secured, non-recourse loan in the amount 
of $24.3 billion to another special purpose limited liability company, Maiden Lane III. Maiden 
Lane III then purchased, at market prices, multi-sector collateralized debt obligations with a 
par value of approximately $62 billion from credit default swap counterparties of AIG FP in 
return  for  the  agreement  of  the  counterparties  to  terminate  the  credit  default  swaps.  AIG 
provided $5 billion in equity to Maiden Lane III to absorb any potential future losses on the 
CDOs held by Maiden Lane III. The Federal Reserve loans to Maiden Lane II and III have a 
term of six years and are secured by the entire portfolio of each LLC. 
III. 
Ongoing investment management of the Maiden Lane II and Maiden Lane III 
portfolios 
The  Panel  has  asked  us  to  discuss  the  New  York  Fed’s  “strategy  for  divesting  its  AIG 
holdings.” We must emphasize that the New York Fed did not ever decide to invest in AIG. 
We cannot make such an investment. Our role has always been that of lender, although we 
are  a  lender  that  re-structured  our  original  Fed  Facility  to  accommodate  AIG’s  changing 
circumstances. The New York Fed is the managing member of Maiden Lane II and Maiden 
Lane  III,  and,  as  set  forth  above,  has  control  rights  over  the  RMBS  and  CDOs  that  were 
acquired  by  these  LLCs.  BlackRock  Financial  Management  Inc.,  an  investment  manager, 
has been retained to serve as the New York Fed’s agent in managing the RMBS  and the 
CDOs. The management objective for both is maximization of long-term cash flows to pay 
the New York Fed’s Senior Loans to the LLCs (subject to certain fees, costs, and reserves 
that  are  senior  to  the  Senior  Loans),  and  refraining  from  investment  actions  that  would 
disturb  general  financial  market  conditions.  Distribution  of  all  cash  flows  realized  by  the 
Maiden Lane II and Maiden Lane III occurs on a monthly basis. 
Cash proceeds from the assets may be invested solely in U.S. Treasury or agency securities 
that  have  a  remaining  maturity  of  one  year  or  less,  U.S.  2a-7  government  money  market 
                                                 
2  
In  April  2009,  Treasury  restructured  this  investment  and  provided  an  additional  preferred  stock  facility  of 
$29.8 billion, of which only $7.5 billion has been drawn. 
BIS Review 73/2010 
 5
funds,  reverse  repurchase  agreements  collateralized  by  U.S.  Treasury  and  agency 
securities,  and  dollar  denominated  deposits.  However,  in  the  case  of  Maiden  Lane  III,  a 
broader  range  of  assets  may  be  acquired  as  part  of  a  portfolio  liquidation  of  one  or  more 
CDOs held in the Maiden Lane III portfolio. 
The Maiden Lane II and Maiden Lane III assets continue to generate substantial proceeds, 
which  are  distributed  monthly  to  pay  down  the  New  York  Fed’s  Senior  Loans  to  the 
respective Maiden Lane LLCs. While the New York Fed may direct its investment manager to 
sell Maiden Lane II and Maiden Lane III assets into the market at any time, as a practical 
matter, the value maximizing strategy has been largely to hold the assets to maturity while 
collecting interest income, and principal repayments. Currently, the hold-to-maturity expected 
proceeds of each LLC’s portfolio are greater than the LLC’s debt to the New York Fed. As of 
May  20,  2010,  the  balance  on  the  New  York  Fed’s  Senior  Loan  to  Maiden  Lane  II  was 
$14.9 billion (inclusive of accrued interest), while the total asset value was $15.8 billion. The 
balance on the New York Fed’s Senior Loan to Maiden Lane III was $16.6 billion (inclusive of 
accrued interest), while the total asset value was $23.4 billion. In sum, the LLCs have repaid 
approximately $13.1 billion of the loans made to them by the Federal Reserve. Based on the 
current performance of both portfolios, as well as our analysis of forecasts provided by our 
investment  advisor,  it  is  anticipated  that  the  proceeds  from  both  portfolios  will  exceed  the 
principal and interest due on the New York Fed’s Senior Loans to both Maiden Lane II and 
Maiden Lane III. 
We expect to recover our principal and interest on the loans to the LLCs, and on the Fed 
Facility.  The  funds  necessary  to  repay  the  balance  of  the Fed  Facility  will  ultimately  come 
from  the  cash  proceeds  of  the  AIA  and  ALICO  transactions,  cash  AIG  generates  as  it 
monetizes the non-cash sales proceeds of the AIA and ALICO transactions, the divestiture of 
certain non-core assets, and profit derived from AIG’s core operating businesses. That said, 
our goal was never to make money – it was to avoid the systemic consequences that would 
have resulted from an AIG default and bankruptcy and to foster financial stability. 
Conclusion 
IV. 
In all that the Federal Reserve has done, we have been motivated by two goals: to foster 
financial  stability  and  to  protect  the  U.S.  taxpayer.  Had  we  not  acted  to  prevent  an  AIG 
failure, the financial crisis would have been substantially worse and even greater economic 
damage and suffering would have occurred. The decision to lend to AIG was a difficult one 
because  addressing  the  systemic  issues  required  us  to  provide  liquidity  to  a  non-banking 
company we did not supervise whose management had made poor business decisions. Still, 
our understanding of the consequences of an AIG failure left us no real choice. 
Thank you again for giving us the opportunity to appear before you today. We look forward to 
answering your questions. 
6 
 BIS Review 73/2010
