 Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The primary dealer system in Uganda 
Remarks  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
Annual Primary Dealer Award Ceremony, Kampala, 25 February 2010. 
 Distinguished Guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  welcome  you  all  to  this  function  which  is  organized  to 
recognize the best performing Primary Dealer in Uganda Government Securities for the year 
2009.  
The  Bank  of  Uganda  introduced  the  primary  dealer  system  in  February  2003.  The  main 
objectives were to:  
i.  
ii.  
Promote financial markets development  
Facilitate secondary market trading and market efficiency through the reduction in 
the costs associated with issuing government securities  
By  and  large  these  objectives  have  been  achieved.  The  Primary  Dealer  system  has 
contributed to the growth of the government securities market. During the year 2009, the bid 
cover ratio in the primary market was 2.346 (compared to 1.445 in 2008), an indicator that 
there was increased demand for government securities.  
Furthermore the Primary Dealers have continued to provide liquidity in the secondary market 
by quoting effective two-way prices in all market conditions. The turnover in the secondary 
market increased from 1.555 trillion the previous year to 1.909 trillion in 2009. This is a big 
achievement.  
However,  there  are  still  outstanding  challenges.  Just  to  mention  a  few,  volatility  in  the 
interbank  rates,  wide  bid/ask  spreads,  thin  trading  during  tight  market  conditions,  buy  and 
hold trading strategies and low horizontal repo trading activity among others.  
In order to address these challenges BOU has undertaken a comprehensive review of the 
PD regulatory framework in order to enhance the system and to create a more competitive 
market environment.  
Effective 1st September 2009, risk based approach to capital for PDS was introduced.  
In  addition,  market  making  valuations  have  been  reinforced  whereby  PDS  clearly  indicate 
what is available in categories for sale, trading and held until maturity.  
Let  me  also  mention  that  Bank  of  Uganda  has  now  embarked  on  the  second  phase  of 
reforms which will involve introduction of non-bank PDS, through a Tiering system as well as 
underwriting provisions.  
Consultations are ongoing and it is our expectation that in the 1st quarter of the new financial 
year we shall be ready to implement.  
Furthermore,  in  order  to  enhance  the  above-mentioned  PD  reforms,  Bank  of  Uganda  has 
embarked  on  a  process  of  acquiring  a  state  of  art  Central  Securities  Depository  system, 
which will provide among other functionalities, e-bidding in primary auctions, automated repo 
auctions, and secondary market trading at the primary dealer level.  
Turning to today’s function, this is the 5th ceremony BOU is hosting to recognize the PD of 
the year. I wish to acknowledge the role this year’s award winner has played especially in 
providing  more  consistent  coverage  in  the  primary  auction  and  repo  operations  and 
particularly their pricing.  
BIS Review 24/2010 
 1
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  on  behalf  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  I  wish  to  announce  that 
STANDARD CHARTERED BANK UGANDA is the Primary Dealer of the YEAR 2009. I now 
invite the Managing Director to receive the award.  
Congratulations.  
I thank you. 
