Budi Mulya: Indonesia – pursuing a better shape of the economy 
Address  by  Mr  Budi  Mulya,  Deputy  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the  Deutsche  Bank 
Access Asia Conference, Singapore, 12 May 2010. 
 It is such a great pleasure to be here today, to share and exchange view with all of you. I 
would like to thanks Deutsche Bank for the invitation to join at this important event where, 
various  investors,  business  leaders  and  senior  government  officers  gather  to  have  a 
constructive dialogue. 
It  is  increasingly  recognized  that  intensive  communication,  such  as  what  we  have  today, 
becomes  more  important  both  from  the  authorities’  perspective  as  well  as  from  investors’ 
point of view. In particular, in the periods where despite signs of a growing global economic 
recovery, some uncertainties remain. The most recent concern on global recovery is on the 
sustainability  path  of  the  recovery  and  the  further  possible  impact  of  the  most  recent 
sovereign debt crisis that just emerged in the Euro area. As we just observed a couple of 
days ago, the global financial market was again shocked by a “semi-panic” behavior brought 
about by the uncertainty with regard to the rescue package on the Greece debt crises, and 
sort of “safety net” provided for some peripheral countries in the Euro area. 
Thus, having a more convergence view from various parties, with regards to the stage of the 
particular  economy  and  various  government  measures  will  help  to  avoid  unnecessary 
distortion into the recovery process. 
With  that  background,  I  will  start  today  with  briefly  describing  what  Indonesia  has  been 
through  during  the  crisis  and  then  on  how  Indonesia  has  changed  within  the  last  decade, 
before I discuss the prospect of Indonesian economy and its challenge ahead. 
Indonesia during the recent global crisis 
During the most recent global crisis, which we all knew as one of the worst global crises in 
history,  the  Indonesian  economy  has  demonstrated  to  be  fairly  resilience.  Despite  some 
negative  impacts  on  the  economy,  particularly  in  the  domestic  financial  market,  the 
Indonesian economy was still experiencing a positive growth of 6.0% in 2008 and 4.5% in 
2009.  That  achievement  was  mainly  sustained  by  high  and  inclusive  growth  of  domestic 
demand, in particular consumption. Indonesia is relatively less exposed to external shocks 
than other economies in the region as its trade share to GDP is relatively small at around 
50 percent  of  GDP,  with  its  export  is  still  dominated  by  natural  resource  commodities. 
Accordingly, the unemployment rate fell back from 9.1% in 2007 to 7.9% in 2009. 
On inflation, while it has experienced an increase in 2008 of 11.68% year-on year, is now 
back  in  a  significant  declining  trend  of  2.78%  in  2009  and  3.91%  in  April  2010.  This 
development is mainly supported by rupiah exchange rate appreciation trend and adequate 
supply  side  responses.  The  balance  of  payments  is  also  well  maintained.  The  current 
account  and  capital  account  still  record  a  surplus,  contributed  to  a  sizeable  reserves 
accumulation  of  around  US$78  billion  in  April  2010,  in  line  with  the  exchange  rate 
appreciation trend. 
Meanwhile,  the  banking  industry  and  the  domestic  financial  market  also  showed  a  sound 
performance despite, as I previously mentioned, some pressures during the peak of the crisis 
brought  about  mainly  by  liquidity  scarcity  perception,  and  as  an  impact  of  flight  to  safety 
phenomenon.  Those  pressures  in  the  Indonesian  financial  market  was  caused  by  an 
increasing money market interest rate spread, high exchange rate volatility, as well as the 
BIS Review 70/2010 
 1
increase  of  government  bonds  yield  along  the  curve.  All  of  those  indicators  have  recently 
returned to their normal pattern. 
What Indonesia has achieved so far shows that various measures taken by the Indonesian 
authorities  can  be  reasonably  considered  effective.  The  fiscal  and  monetary  stimulus 
employed in measured manner has helped the economy to endure from external shock. The 
various policies were mainly aimed at maintaining confidence to cope with panic and fear of 
scarce liquidity, and preserving domestic purchasing power. However, we noticed that there 
were  some  doubts,  in  particular  from  foreign  investor,  with  regard  to  the  strength  of  the 
economy  and  the  efficacy  of  the  policy  that  has  been  taken.  This  clearly  shows  from  the 
significant  increase  of  credit  default  swap  (CDS)  during  the  peak  of  the  crisis.  That 
perception was somewhat understandable since the situation was extremely uncertain, such 
that there was unclear on how the impact of the crisis would be into any particular country. 
From  those  experiences,  there  are  at  least  two  important  lesson  learned.  Firstly,  it  has 
highlighted the more crucial role of transparency with regard to the economic fundamental 
information  and  macroeconomic  policy  rationality.  Secondly,  it  is important  to  preserve  the 
consistency  of  prudent  macroeconomic  policy.  On  the  later,  it  will  be  very  challenging 
recently as the policy trade-off has significantly increased. 
With  regard  on  how  Indonesia  was  dealing  with  the  recent  global  crisis,  Indonesia  has 
actually employed all that has been learned from a painful 1998 crisis. Ever since, the 1998 
crisis has brought structural changes in Indonesian economy and financial system, and more 
importantly  in  political  structure.  Indonesia  was  transformed  into  one  of  the  largest 
democratic country in the world. 
Indonesia after more than a decade from 1998 crisis 
As I just mentioned, Indonesia is now structurally different with what was in a decade ago. 
This is as a result of more than ten years of consolidation and dynamic transition in almost all 
sectors.  The  extensive  transformation  measures  became  a  continuing  agenda  with  full 
commitment. 
In  the  last  ten  years,  we  have  embarked  upon  a  far-reaching  transformation  measures, 
especially  in  the  area  of  improving  our  institutional  capacity.  During  this  process,  the 
Government  has  taken  steps  to  improve  our  economic  efficiency  through  policy  reform 
packages covering key areas of concern, such as taxes, customs, legal frameworks, and the 
financial  sector.  So  to  speak,  one  of  the  most  notable  steps  are  the  introduction  of  open 
capital  account  through  promulgating  Law  No.  24  of  1999  and  increasing  the  investment 
flexibility by stipulating Investment Law No. 25 of 2007 to encourage offshore financing for 
the economy. 
The  Government  and  Bank  Indonesia,  as  a  central  bank,  are  always  committed  to 
consistently  undertake  fiscal  and  monetary  discipline,  as  well  as  strengthening  domestic 
financial market resiliency. Learning from the failure of 1998 crises, our policies were focused 
on  enhancing  policy  transmission,  improving  financial  market  efficiency  through  prudential 
practices and financial market deepening. The Government is also improving their capacity 
on fiscal budgeting by adopting a better debt and cash management. Prudent fiscal policy 
can partly be observed by gradually reducing the debt to GDP ratio, in particular the foreign 
debt. The debt to GDP ratio has declined significantly within the last couple of years, from 
77% in 2000 to around 30% recently. 
From  a  monetary  policy  perspective,  Bank  Indonesia  has  consistently  pursued  Rupiah 
stability as mandated by the new  Bank Indonesia law that was first introduced in 1999. In 
practice this has been manifested in an effort to focus on achieving the medium term (three 
years) inflation target set by the government and avoiding excessive exchange rate volatility 
consistent  with  the  free  exchange  rate  regime  adopted  since  1998.  On  this  regard,  Bank 
Indonesia  has  increased  the  transparency  and  clarity  of  its  monetary  policy  stance  by 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2010
introducing  “the  BI  Rate”  as  a  policy  rate  since  June  2005.  Further  improvement  has  also 
been  undertaken  in  mid  of  2008  by  translating the  BI  Rate  as  a  short-term  money  market 
interest rate target (known as PUAB overnight target). Thus, PUAB overnight has been used 
as an operational target in executing the monetary policy decision through Bank Indonesia’s 
domestic  market  operation.  The  main  reason  behind  this  enhancement  is  based  on  two 
reasons. First, the increasingly importance of agents’ expectation in forming inflation along 
with  the  development  of  domestic  financial  market,  in  particular,  the  government  bond 
market. Second, the need to increase the efficiency of domestic money market, which in turn 
benefits to enhance and to further strengthen banks’ liquidity management. 
Steps were also taken in the area of improving the capacity of financial institution, as well as 
improving financial market efficiency. Banks are encouraged to strengthen their capital and 
compel to conduct best practices, especially in the area of risk management. On the other 
hand, we are also bounded to increase our supervisory capacity to ensure a prudent banking 
practice. 
Years of strong commitment on reform has resulted in a resilient economic fundamental, at 
least,  in  the  last  five  years.  The  economic  growth  accelerated  to  a  10-year  high.  Fiscal 
consolidation  significantly  reduces  government  debt,  a  proof  of  commitment  of  fiscal 
discipline.  Prudent  macroeconomic  management  has  also  led  to  the  declining  trend  of 
inflation and exchange rate volatility as well. In the financial sector, the banking sector is well 
capitalized and in a better balance sheet structure. 
Strong macroeconomic fundamentals and resilient microeconomics structures lead to better 
risk  perception,  or  a  more  accurate  valuation  from  my  point  of  view,  as  reflected  by  the 
recent  rating  upgrade.  But  to  be  frank,  I  feel  that  from  the  sovereign  risk  assessment, 
Indonesia is still somewhat “undervalued”. It is perhaps that major rating agencies tend to be 
too conservative in assessing Indonesia’s risk profile. This might possibly be a reflection of 
the “traumatic” view relate to the 1998 crisis. However, the recent update from some rating 
agencies has become a promising recognition into the fundamental transformation process in 
Indonesia.  Following  Standard  and  Poor’s,  Fitch,  and  Moody’s,  OECD  has  also  upgraded 
Indonesia’s  Country  Risk  Classification  ranks  from  5  to  4  on  early  April  2010.  Similar 
progress also came from the ranking upgrade of our global competitiveness index from 72 in 
2003 to 54 recently. 
Prospect and challenge ahead 
Global  recovery  coupled  with  favorable  risk  perceptions  support  our  optimism  toward  the 
outlook in 2010 and 2011. We are quite confident that the Indonesian economy will grow at 
around 6.0% in 2010 and to 6.0–6.5% range in 2011. This is mainly supported by the upturn 
on export and increasing investment. For the next periods, we expect that the economy will 
keep growing in an upward trend given the proven strong commitment from the Government 
to  implement  reform  measures  on  infrastructure  projects  and  investment  climate.  On  the 
later, it is important to note that the public check and balance mechanism, to ensure a more 
efficient  bureaucracy  and  to  improve  business  climate,  has  been  increasing  significantly 
compare  to  a  decade  ago.  Meanwhile,  the  continuing  prudent  fiscal  policy  by  maintaining 
public  debt  at  the  manageable  level  will  ensure  fiscal  sustainability,  to  sustain  economic 
growth commitment. 
We  expect  that  inflation  will  continue  to  be  moderate  at  the  lower  middle  of  the  target  of 
5% +/-1%  in  2010,  as  there  is  still  “room”  from  the  output  gap  to  support  the  increase 
domestic demand. On this regard, the central bank’s monetary policy will always commit to 
ensure the low and stable inflation going forward. While on the external side, current account 
and capital account are expected to continue reasonably strong. Overall balance of payment 
is  expected  to  strengthen,  partly  supported  by  an  increasing  trend  of  foreign  direct 
investment. 
BIS Review 70/2010 
 3
Stronger macroeconomic outlook and ample domestic liquidity will maintain financial stability, 
especially in banking industry. Bank’s loan is expected to grow at around 20% in 2010, held 
by strong capital adequacy ratio of around 19%, recently. While, banks’ non-performing loans 
(NPL) is expected to be maintained at to below 5% level (gross). 
However, we are fully aware that despite growing positive signs of the economic prospect, 
yet many domestic agendas are still required to ensure their implementation. I am optimistic 
on this prospect, but of course it is more in a consistent step by step progress, rather than in 
an instant change. 
In addition, to ensure for a sustainable and strong economic growth, Indonesia will also have 
to  ensure  that  access  to  financial  services  should  be  enhanced  through  a  well-functioning 
and  deep  financial  market.  The  later  is  needed  to  facilitate  and  to  promote  longer  term 
investment,  maintain markets confidence, especially on short-term investment, and thus to 
prevent  from  the  unnecessary  external  shocked.  This  can  be  done,  partly  by  improving 
market  efficiency  through  enhance  financial  market  liquidity  and  wider-range  of  financial 
instruments as well as better financial market infrastructure. As part of those concerns, Bank 
Indonesia will consistently improve its liquidity management strategy. 
On the global economic recovery, as I previously mentioned, the risk is still quite challenging. 
It will much depend on the solution prospect of Euro zone debt threat. Yet, considering the 
Euro  area  authorities  measures  such  as  what  they  took  during  this  weekend,  and  their 
coordination with other authorities in other region, I do hope that there will be a promising 
solution. 
To  conclude,  I  am  very  cautiously  optimistic  to  the  prospect  and  the  direction  of  the 
Indonesian economy ahead. I do hope that you would share the same view. 
Thank you. 
References 
Badan Koordinasi Penamanan Modal (BKPM), Investment Policies Statement, June 2009. 
Badan Pusat Statistik (BPS – Statistic Indonesia), several Press Releases and publications. 
Bank  Indonesia,  various  Monetary  Policy  Review,  Quarterly  Monetary  Report  and  Press 
Releases. 
International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, 2009. 
Joint Asian Development Bank–World Bank Report, Improving the Investment Climate in 
Indonesia, May 2005. 
Moccero,  Diego.  Improving  The  Business  And  Investment  Climate  In  Indonesia, 
Economics Department Working Paper No. 638, OECD, September 2008. 
Mulya, Budi. The Need To Strengthen Indonesian Financial Market, Delivered at JICA’s 
Seminar on “The Challenge in Developing Indonesia’s Financial Market”, held in Nikko Hotel, 
Jakarta, 11 December 2009. 
Raldi  Hendro  Koestoer,  Promoting  Regulatory  Reform  for  Investment  in  Indonesia, 
Office  of  Coordinating  Ministry  for  Economic  Affairs,  Republic  of  Indonesia  (CMEA-RI), 
presented  at  APEC  High  Level  Conference  on  Structural  Reform,  8–9,  September  2004, 
Tokyo, Japan. 
World Bank, Global Competitiveness Report, 2000 edition up to 2009–2010 editions. 
World Investment Prospect 2009–2011, UNCTAD. 
World  Bank,  Investing  in  Indonesia’s  Institutions  for  Inclusive  and  Sustainable 
Development, Country Partnership Strategy For Indonesia Fiscal Year 2009–2012, 2008. 
4 
 BIS Review 70/2010
