Lucas Papademos: The ECB’s accountability towards the European 
Parliament 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the presentation of the ECB’s Annual Report 2009 to the Committee on Economic 
and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 27 April 2010. 
 I  will 
first  briefly  review 
Dear Madam Chair,  
Dear honourable Members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
It is a privilege to present to you today the ECB’s Annual Report for 2009. This presentation 
is  a  cornerstone  of  the  ECB’s  accountability  towards  the  European  Parliament.  In  my 
introductory  statement, 
the  key  economic  and  monetary 
developments  in  2009,  summarise  our  current  assessment  of  the  macroeconomic  outlook 
and  explain  our  monetary  policy  decisions.  I  will  then  focus  on  two  highly  topical  policy 
issues, namely the current fiscal policy challenges in the euro area and the planned reform of 
financial regulation and supervision in the EU and globally. 
Before doing so, I should like to highlight an important event in 2009: the entry into force of 
the Lisbon Treaty on 1 December 2009. The new Treaty substantially increases the powers 
of  the  European  Parliament.  It  also  gives  the  ECB  the  status  of  a  Union  institution  and 
strengthens  its  independence  by  explicitly  anchoring  the  ECB’s  institutional  features  and 
financial  independence  in  primary  law.  Moreover,  the  Lisbon  Treaty  emphasises  the 
importance of the Eurosystem’s mandate by making its primary objective of maintaining price 
stability an objective of the EU as a whole. 
Economic developments and monetary policy  
In 2009 the European Central Bank performed its functions in an exceptionally challenging 
environment  as  the  global  financial  crisis  continued  to  unfold.  Following  the  severe 
intensification of financial market tensions in autumn 2008, euro area real GDP contracted by 
4.0%  in  2009,  largely  driven  by  a  sharp  decline  in  exports  and  in  private  investment.  The 
decrease  in  private  consumption  was  relatively  contained,  although  households  increased 
their saving rates substantially. Economic activity in the euro area reached a trough in the 
second quarter of 2009 and has increased at a slow pace since then. 
The significant macroeconomic stimulus, the measures taken to support the financial system, 
and the pick-up in global activity have underpinned the recovery of the euro area economy. 
Looking  ahead,  the  Governing  Council  expects  real  GDP  to  continue  to  expand  at  a 
moderate pace in 2010 and to strengthen further in 2011. This expectation is in line with the 
latest ECB staff projections and the forecasts of other institutions. The recovery is likely to be 
uneven over time and across regions. The risks to this growth outlook are assessed to be 
broadly balanced, but uncertainty remains high. 
With  regard  to  price  developments,  average  annual  HICP  inflation  fell  sharply  to  0.3%  in 
2009, from 3.3% in 2008, largely due to substantially lower oil and other commodity prices as 
well as a result of the impact of the severe contraction in activity and  rapidly deteriorating 
labour market conditions. In the course of 2009, annual HICP inflation turned negative for a 
few months, primarily as a consequence of the dynamics of commodity prices, particularly oil 
prices, and the associated base effects. Excluding energy and food prices, HICP inflation has 
been  on  a  gradual  downward  trend  since  mid-2008,  primarily  reflecting  a  substantial 
moderation in labour costs and a sharp fall in profit margins over the course of 2009. 
BIS Review 57/2010 
 1
In March 2010, euro area annual HICP inflation rose to 1.4%, from 0.9% in February, mainly 
driven  by  energy  and  unprocessed  food  price  developments.  Nevertheless,  in  view  of  the 
projected slow economic recovery and high unemployment, inflation is expected to remain 
moderate  in  2010  and  over  the  rest  of  the  policy-relevant  horizon.  Risks  to  this  inflation 
outlook  remain  broadly  balanced.  Inflation  expectations  over  the  medium  and  long  term 
continue to be firmly anchored in line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation 
rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  The  firm  anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations  to  price  stability  reflects  the  high  degree  of  credibility  of  the  ECB’s  monetary 
policy. 
The  analysis  of  monetary  and  credit  developments  confirms  the  assessment  of  low 
inflationary  pressures  over  the  medium  to  longer  term.  In  the  course  of  2009,  the  annual 
growth  rates  of  the  broad  monetary  aggregate  M3  and  of  MFI  loans  to  the  private  sector 
declined substantially and in parallel. Towards the end of last year, these growth rates were 
in  negative  territory.  The  continuous  decline  in  annual  M3  growth  in  the  course  of  2009 
largely reflected the strong downward impact of the exceptionally steep yield curve, while the 
subdued levels of activity and trade, and the uncertainty surrounding the business outlook, 
dampened firms’ demand for bank financing.  
Overall, the latest developments in money and credit markets support the assessment of low 
inflation risks over the medium to longer term. In February 2010, the annual growth rates of 
M3 and of loans to the private sector both stood at –0.4%. The growth of M3 and loans to the 
private sector is likely to remain weak in the coming months as well. It is worth pointing out 
that  the  negative  annual  growth  in  bank  loans  to  the  private  sector  masks  diverging 
developments in the annual growth in loans to households, which has been positive over the 
past  few  months,  and  in  loans  to  non-financial  corporations,  which  has  been  negative, 
although in February the flow of such loans was positive. These differences in sectoral loan 
developments are in line with past regularities: growth in loans to households tends to pick 
up  early  in  the  economic  cycle,  while  lending  to  non-financial  firms  typically  lags  behind 
improvements in economic activity. 
In an environment of subdued inflationary pressures, the Governing Council lowered, in four 
steps, the rate on the ECB’s main refinancing operations between January and May 2009 by 
a further 150 basis points, to the historically low level of 1%, bringing the total reduction since 
October  2008  to  325  basis  points. The  interest  rate  on  the  deposit  facility  was  reduced  to 
0.25%. The key ECB interest rates have not been changed since May 2009. The Governing 
Council is of the opinion that the current ECB interest rates remain appropriate and it expects 
price stability to be maintained over the medium term. 
In  addition  to  reducing  the  policy  interest  rates,  the  Governing  Council  adopted  further 
enhanced credit support measures in 2009, in order to ensure the smooth functioning of the 
money  market,  improve  financing  conditions  and  foster  the  provision  of  credit  to  the 
economy.  These  non-standard  measures  have  achieved  the  intended  objectives.  In 
particular, they have exerted significant downward pressure on term money market rates and 
bank lending rates, thereby supporting the financing of households and corporations. Overall, 
the timely and effective policy actions of the Eurosystem in response to the crisis and the 
ECB’s credible commitment to price stability have been instrumental in fostering confidence, 
preserving  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  supporting  economic  recovery  in  the 
euro area in an environment of heightened uncertainty. 
When  the  ECB  adopted  these  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures,  it  already  had  a 
phasing-out strategy in mind. As financial market conditions improved and economic activity 
started  to  recover,  the  Eurosystem  initiated  a  gradual  phasing-out  of  those  non-standard 
measures  that  were  no  longer  needed.  The  timely  exit  from  these  measures  was  and  is 
appropriate,  so  as  to  avoid  market  distortions  that  could  result  from  maintaining  such 
measures  longer  than  necessary  and  to  provide  incentives  for  banks  to  restructure  and 
strengthen their balance sheets. Thus, in December 2009, and again in early March 2010, 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2010
we  decided  to  phase  out  gradually  some  of  the  extraordinary  liquidity  provision  measures 
and  scale  back  the  number,  frequency  and  maturity  of  longer-term  refinancing  operations. 
We conducted the last 12-month operation in December 2009 and the last 6-month operation 
in  March  2010.  In  early  March,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  return  to  variable  rate 
tender  procedures  for  the  regular  three-month  longer-term  refinancing  operations,  starting 
with the operation to be conducted on 28 April 2010. At the same time, we will continue to 
provide  adequate  liquidity  to  the  euro  area  banking  system  by  conducting  the  main 
refinancing  operations  as  fixed  rate  tender  procedures  with  full  allotment  for  as  long  as 
needed and, at least, until October this year, so as to facilitate the provision of credit to the 
euro area economy and further support its recovery. Needless to say, if upside risks to price 
stability were to emerge, the Governing Council would take timely and appropriate action.  
Fiscal policies in the euro area 
Let  me  now  to  turn  to  fiscal  policies.  Budgetary  positions  in  the  euro  area  deteriorated 
significantly  in  2009  as  a  result  of  the  economic  contraction,  fiscal  policy  stimulus  and 
government support measures for the financial sector. Eurostat’s latest estimates show that 
the average general government deficit ratio in the euro area increased from 2.0% of GDP in 
2008  to  6.3%  in  2009.  Out  of  the  16  euro  area  countries,  13  are  already  subject  to  an 
excessive deficit procedure. This year, all euro area countries are projected to record deficits 
above 3% of GDP. According to the updated stability and growth programmes, a discernible 
improvement in fiscal positions is not foreseen in most countries until 2011 and 2012. The 
magnitude of the worsening of public finances is underscored by the official estimate that the 
average debt-to-GDP ratio is expected to reach 87% in 2012, compared with 66% in 2007 
 –  that  is  21  percentage  points  higher  than  five  years  earlier.  Thus,  fiscal  imbalances  are 
sizeable, broad-based and likely to persist for some time to come. 
The deterioration in the fiscal position has been especially acute in a number of euro area 
countries, with Ireland, Greece and Spain having recorded double-digit deficit ratios in 2009. 
The  large  revisions  to  Greece’s  budget  deficit  for  2009  revealed  a  very  serious  fiscal 
imbalance and triggered adverse financial market reactions. Following the announcement of 
additional  fiscal  consolidation  measures  by  the  Greek  authorities  in  March  2010,  the  ECB 
welcomed  these  measures  as  convincing  steps  towards  achieving  the  ambitious  but 
appropriate budgetary objectives for 2010. All these measures should be implemented in a 
timely  and  effective  manner.  Despite  the  commitment  of  the  Greek  government  to  fully 
implement the announced measures for 2010 and the statements by the euro area Heads of 
State  or  Government  of  25  March  and  by  the  Eurogroup  of  11  April,  financial  market 
pressures  persisted  and  recently  intensified.  It  is  essential  that  the  economic  programme 
currently being prepared by the European Commission, the ECB and the IMF together with 
the  Greek  authorities  specifies  comprehensive  fiscal  measures  and  structural  reforms  that 
will address the root causes of Greece’s fiscal imbalances and structural weaknesses, so as 
to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  its  public  finances  and  improve  the  country’s  international 
competitiveness.  
More generally, there is concern that the persistence of sizeable fiscal imbalances in Europe 
and elsewhere may undermine the public’s trust in the sustainability of public finances and 
entail  risks  to  economic  growth  and  to  financial  stability.  In  the  current  circumstances,  the 
Stability and Growth Pact, which has been put in place to safeguard sound and sustainable 
fiscal positions, is facing its biggest challenge since its adoption in 1997. Therefore, it is now 
imperative that all euro area countries strictly adhere to the Pact’s provisions. On the positive 
side,  it  is  promising  that,  according  to  the  updated  stability  programmes,  all  euro  area 
countries subject to an excessive deficit procedure plan to correct their deficits in line with the 
Council’s  deadlines.  It  is  also  encouraging  that  most  of  these  programmes  focus  on 
containing government expenditure, as the available evidence demonstrates that this is the 
most effective way to achieve a lasting reduction in fiscal imbalances. 
BIS Review 57/2010 
 3
Nevertheless,  in  several  stability  programmes,  the  fiscal  strategies  presented  are  not 
underpinned  by  adequately  specified  measures,  in  particular  for  the  latter  years  of  the 
projection horizon. Moreover, in a number of cases, the stability programmes are based on 
optimistic  macroeconomic  assumptions  that  put  the  correction  of  the  excessive  deficits, 
according to the Council’s deadline, at risk. 
In this context, let me stress that the ECB welcomes the statement by the European Council 
on  25  March,  expressing  its  commitment  to  strengthen  and  complement  the  existing 
institutional framework  so  as  to  foster  budgetary  discipline and  ensure fiscal sustainability. 
The establishment of a task force, which will be chaired by the President of the European 
Council, to make proposals to achieve this objective and to explore all options to reinforce 
the legal framework, is an important step forward. In particular, it is essential to improve the 
incentives for national authorities to pursue policies, particularly in good times, that support 
the  sustainability  of  public  finances,  and  to  ensure  that  economic  surveillance  results  in 
effective  policy  actions  that  prevent  budgetary  risks  and  address  structural  problems  to 
promote the competitiveness of the European economies.  
Towards a more resilient financial system 
Let me now conclude by addressing issues concerning financial regulation and supervision. 
As regards the regulatory reform agenda defined by the G20 leaders, significant and wide-
ranging work has already been carried out or is under way, but we should not be complacent. 
It is crucial that the momentum for regulatory reform does not wane. There is still much to do: 
First,  it  is  essential  that  the  planned  reforms  effectively  lead  to  a  harmonised  global 
regulatory framework. Second, it is an urgent priority that the Basel Committee proposals on 
capital requirements and liquidity standards are properly calibrated and finalised by the end 
of  2010.  Third,  we  need  to  ensure  that  the  regulatory  framework  effectively  captures  all 
systemically important financial institutions, and that moral hazard problems related to them 
are fully addressed.  
In the European Union, the enhancements to the Capital Requirements Directive should be 
swiftly adopted and an agreement on the Directive on Alternative Investment Fund Managers 
be  promptly  reached.  As  regards  the  establishment  of  the  new  EU  financial  supervisory 
framework, it is important that the legislative process concerning the proposals made by the 
Commission in September 2009, which are currently being discussed by your Committee, is 
completed as expeditiously as possible and that all relevant parties reach an agreement on 
the  legal  texts  so  that  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  and  the  three  new 
European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) are operational by 1 January 2011. We should not 
risk losing momentum. 
The  ECB  has  made  good  progress  with  its  preparations  to  ensure  that  the  ESRB  will 
efficiently and effectively perform its tasks from the moment of its inception. Let me assure 
you that the support to be provided by the ECB and the ESCB to the ESRB and the future 
links  between  them  will  not  affect  the  ECB’s  objectives  and  the  performance  of  its  tasks, 
which are clearly defined in the Treaty. The primary objective of the ECB is to preserve price 
stability, and the conduct of the single monetary policy is geared towards achieving this goal. 
Moreover, the ECB and the NCBs are fully independent in carrying out the tasks conferred 
upon  them  by  the  Treaty.  Thus,  there  cannot  be,  and  will  not  be,  any  potential  conflict 
between the conduct of the ECB’s monetary policy that aims to preserve price stability and 
the  performance  of  its  tasks  that  contribute  to  the  safeguarding  of  financial  stability.  The 
ESRB’s recommendations will not concern the definition and implementation of the monetary 
policy of the ECB nor the monetary policies of the EU central banks that are outside the euro 
area. At the same time, macro-prudential supervision can facilitate the conduct of monetary 
policy by helping to prevent systemic risks and mitigate their effects, if they materialise. 
Before  concluding,  let  me  stress  that  the  timely  and  consistent  implementation  of  the 
regulatory and supervisory reforms, and, in particular, the establishment of a new framework 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2010
for  macro-prudential  supervision,  will  greatly  contribute  to  containing  systemic  risks  and  to 
strengthening the resilience of the European financial system. For the ECB, it is a privilege to 
have  been  entrusted  with  a  very  special  role  in  the  performance  of  macro-prudential 
supervision in the EU. Although, we have ahead of us a very challenging task to carry out, I 
am fully confident that the ECB, in collaboration with the NCBs and the other members of the 
ESRB, will successfully meet this challenge. 
Madame Chair, honourable Members of the Committee, my presentation today before your 
Committee is the last in my capacity as Vice-President of the ECB. I should like to warmly 
thank you for our enriching and constructive exchange of views. Over the past eight years, I 
have  always  appreciated  the  cooperation  and  the  fruitful  dialogue  with  the  Committee  on 
Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament.  
Thank you for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 57/2010 
 5
