Axel A Weber: Growth prospects after the crisis 
Speech  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
21st European Business School (EBS) Symposium, Oestrich-Winkel, 17 September 2010. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Professor Jahns, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am delighted to have been asked to assume the patronage of the 21st EBS Symposium 
and thus to have the opportunity to speak to you today. Occasions like this which provide a 
platform for students to meet professionals are an agreeable complement to academic study. 
This  symposium  has  traditionally  been  organised  by  first-year  students  who,  I  must  say, 
appear to have done very well in performing their task.  
Growth and the financial system – some general remarks 
2. 
The  topic  of  this  year’s  symposium  is  “Growth  –  A  Future  Without  Boundaries”.  Economic 
growth is widely associated or even equated with prosperity, and in light of the current crisis 
the  topic  is  receiving  a  lot  of  attention:  After  all,  the  crisis  not  only  resulted  in  the  most 
pronounced  downturn  since  World  War  II,  for  many  it  also  cast  doubt  on  the  path  of 
economic  activity  once  the  crisis  is  over.  Nevertheless,  if  we  wish  to  make  a  sound  and 
comprehensive judgement it is not advisable to look only at current gross domestic product 
(GDP).  Economic  growth  is  a  concept  that  embraces  a  longer-term  perspective  and  we 
would  be  well  advised  to  look  beyond  the  current  crisis.  The  concept  of  potential  output 
permits  a  calm  and  objective  view  of  the  matter.  Abstracting  from  cyclical  fluctuations,  it 
covers the medium to long-term trend of GDP and links it to the driving factors for such a 
time horizon. 
To be more specific and to focus our minds on the lasting economic impact of the crisis, it 
helps to take a simple textbook model of economic growth as a starting point. In this stylised 
model, growth is determined by three factors: capital, labour and technical progress. How are 
these three factors, in turn, affected by the financial system? The first factor – capital – points 
perhaps  most  obviously  to  the  importance  of  the  financial  system.  After  all,  the  financial 
sector is not only a part of the economy with a distinct value added, it also plays a crucial role 
in  capital  accumulation.  However,  especially  in  highly  developed  economies  that  typically 
boast sizeable and sophisticated financial sectors, the role of the financial system goes far 
beyond that of mere capital accumulation. In such economies, the financial system plays a 
key role in identifying and funding innovations, thus helping to advance the state of technical 
knowledge  and  promoting  technological  progress.  For  these  reasons  –  and  leaving  aside 
additional  effects  due  to  the  labour  force  and  investment  in  human  capital  –  an  efficient 
financial  system  is  indispensable  for  growth  and  necessarily  becomes  more  complex  with 
each advancing stage of economic development. 
In  a  sense,  even  the  crisis  with  its  massive  repercussions  for  the  real  economy  and  its 
enormous  costs  illustrates  how  important  the  financial  system  and  its  stability  are  for 
economic  performance  and  welfare.  Consequently,  financial  stability  has  become  a  top 
priority on the global policy agenda. But stability is not an end in itself. Historical record tells 
us that financial crises have always been an element of market economies. Therefore, the 
objective should not be to avoid them entirely but rather to contain their consequences. Put 
differently,  the  challenge  for  regulatory  reforms  is  to  strike  the  right  balance  between  the 
stability of the financial system and its efficiency. And, given the experience of the past few 
years as well as the channels through which the financial system affects economic growth, 
BIS Review 118/2010 
 1
the two objectives are, to a significant degree, complementary. This means that the trade-off 
between  stability  and  efficiency  should  not  be  seen  as  a  zero-sum  game.  Well-designed 
regulatory  reform  should  make  the  financial  system  more  stable  without  cutting  into 
sustainable growth.  
for 
The crisis, regulatory reform and future growth 
3. 
The strength and scale of the financial crisis were unforeseeable. There had been warnings 
about various exaggerations and undesirable developments. But perceptions of where these 
might lead fell well short of the reality when it  actually materialised. Prior to the crisis, the 
global economy had been growing at a rapid pace. This was due, not least, to the fact that 
emerging  markets  were  becoming  increasingly  integrated.  This  set  free  a  large  labour 
potential, provided high-yielding investment opportunities, and led to significant growth in per 
capita income. Another driving factor behind growth was less benign, however. In too many 
areas,  capital  was  not  always  channelled  into  the  most  productive  areas.  Consider  the 
housing market in some advanced economies as a point in case. An environment in which 
interest rates were exceptionally low as well as loopholes and weaknesses in the regulatory 
framework  acted  as  catalysts 
these  undesirable  and,  ultimately,  unsustainable 
developments.  Eventually,  the  underlying  imbalances  erupted  and  suddenly  came  to  the 
surface – with the well-known costs. The situation in which the global economy found itself 
was comparable to a rose bush that had sprouted too many new buds too quickly. The new 
rosebuds had many attractive blossoms but as soon as it started to rain, most of them had 
no support and broke off. 
Against  this  background,  what  are  the  deficiencies  of  the  financial  system  that  have  to  be 
remedied? At the microeconomic level, a whole cocktail of different factors led to the financial 
crisis.  These  included  a  general  lack  of  transparency,  insufficient  capital  buffers,  the 
development of a scarcely regulated shadow banking system, and moral hazard in various 
forms  –  owing  to  ill-designed  remuneration  schemes,  for  example,  or  insufficient  risk  and 
liquidity  management  at  the  level  of  individual  institutions.  At  the  macroeconomic  level,  in 
particular, the pivotal role of certain agents and their influence on financial markets – in other 
words, their systematic importance – was underestimated for too long. 
In order to prevent the rose bush from sprouting too many weak buds and blossoms again, 
reforms at both the micro and macro levels are needed to make the financial system more 
resilient  to  future  shocks.  As  a  first  line  of  defence,  the  microprudential  level  of  regulation 
needs  to  be  strengthened.  The  measures  that  have  been  proposed  include  higher  capital 
and  liquidity  requirements.  These  are  intended  to  lower  the  probability  of  an  institution’s 
insolvency by enabling it to cope better with losses. Proposals for reform were published by 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) in December 2009. The discussion is 
well  advanced.  A  final  proposal  was  adopted  last  weekend,  and  the  G20  meeting  in 
November will yield a final decision. As a result, financial institutions will be requested to hold 
not  only  a  higher  quantity  of  capital  in  their  books  but  also  capital  of  increased  quality: 
minimum core capital requirements will go up from 2% to 4.5%, for Tier 1 capital from the 
current  4%  to  6%.  This  will  be  supplemented  by  an  additional  buffer  of  2.5%  built  up  of 
common  equity.  This  is  designed  to  enable  banks  to  absorb  losses  during  periods  of 
economic  and  financial  disruptions.  Furthermore,  a  stricter  definition  of  core  capital  will  be 
applied. 
Yet,  this  first  line  of  defence  needs  to  be  supplemented.  In  a  market-based  economy  it  is 
neither possible nor desirable to entirely prevent the failure of individual enterprises. Thus, a 
second line of defence has to be drawn at the macroprudential level of regulation in order to 
contain the impact of individual bank failures on the financial system as a whole and to make 
the financial system more transparent. This part of the reform process is being dealt with by 
the  FSB.  Major  topics  on  its  agenda  are  the  handling  of  systemically  important  financial 
institutions and the “too-big-too-fail” problem, resolution regimes, the role of rating agencies, 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2010
harmonising accounting standards, and rolling back trading in OTC derivatives. Even though 
these issues seem to have attracted less attention than Basel III, I am confident that we shall 
see significant progress in this area by the time of the G20 meeting in November as well. 
Once  implemented,  the  reforms  at  the  microprudential  and  the  macroprudential  levels  will 
have  a  profound  impact  on  the  financial  system,  increasing  its  resilience  and  hence  its 
stability significantly. But, going back to what I said earlier, do the reforms also strike the right 
balance  between  stability  and  growth?  I  am  certain  they  do.  True,  the  development  of  the 
new  Basel  III  proposals  has  been  accompanied  by  concerns  that  such  tighter  regulation 
might  have  a  negative  impact  on  economic  performance  by  severely  restricting  access  to 
credit.  Several  studies  on  the  potential  effects  of  the  new  regulatory  requirements  on  the 
economy have been published recently. A comprehensive cost-benefit analysis has revealed 
that such fears of a significant negative impact on growth are unfounded. This is all the more 
the case given that there will be the transition period before the new requirements enter fully 
into force, which will give banks sufficient time to strengthen their capital base. 
This  favourable  overall  assessment  of  the  macroeconomic  impact  of  well-designed 
regulatory  reform  highlights  the  fact  that  there  is  no  inherent  conflict  between  the 
G20 agenda’s  objectives  of  a  more  stable  financial  system  and  of  ensuring  strong  and 
sustainable growth. And, in terms of the general future outlook for growth, we should bear in 
mind that the financial crisis has not impaired major drivers of growth. Emerging markets, for 
instance, will still make great efforts to catch up, and technical progress will continue. Thus, 
the crisis certainly does not mark the end of economic growth. Rather, what it has done is 
highlight  the  importance  of  sustainable  growth  and  the  need  for  supportive  policies  –  in 
financial regulation, but also in many other policy areas. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the events and implications of the current financial crisis have clearly 
demonstrated how vulnerable our financial system has been. The necessity of reform cannot 
be  denied,  financial  stability  has  to  and  will  be  reinforced.  However,  as  said  earlier, 
enhancing financial stability is not an end in itself nor is it an obstacle to growth. Rather, it is 
a  major  prerequisite.  Regulatory  reform  along  the  lines  currently  proposed  lowers  the 
probability of crises occurring as well as their impact, but does not unduly hamper access to 
funding for consumers and firms. The outcome will be a significant improvement in welfare in 
the long run. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 118/2010 
 3
