Jean-Claude Trichet: The changing world of global governance 
Keynote speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Institute of International Finance, Spring Membership Meeting, Vienna, 10 June 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I remember vividly when the Institute of International Finance (IIF) was founded back in 1983 
at the time of the international debt crisis. One of its key early tasks was to inform members 
about  fundamentals  and  policies  in  borrowing  countries.  Since  then,  the  range  of  the 
Institute’s activities has broadened a great deal.  
I have continuously interacted with the IIF since its beginning; in the 1980s as chairman of 
the  Paris  Club,  later  as  Governor  of  the  Banque  de  France  and  over  the  last  years  as 
President of the European Central Bank. And as Co-Chairman of the Group of Trustees of 
the  “Principles”,  I  enjoy  the  regular  events  together  with  distinguished  colleagues  from  the 
public and private sectors.  
I  want  to  thank  Charles  Dallara,  in  particular,  for  his  dynamism  and  constant  efforts  in 
fostering  dialogue  between  the  private  sector  and  the  official  sector.  The  IIF  gatherings 
always provide a fantastic opportunity for stimulating exchanges of views on the international 
financial system.  
When  preparing  my  remarks  for  tonight,  I  looked  at  my  text  from  the  25th  Anniversary  IIF 
Membership Meeting in October 2007. At the time, I concluded that “it is the task of all the 
stakeholders of the global financial system […] to live up to their respective responsibilities 
and contribute appropriately to the stability of this system.”  
I trust that all will agree that this statement remains valid today.  
 In  recent  weeks,  we  have  had  difficult  news  not  only  on  the  financial  system  but  also  the 
ecosystem – the news that the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico is spreading ever wider – from 
the  riggers  who  lost  their  lives  in  the  explosion  to  their  employers,  local  communities, 
environmental agencies and public policy-makers. Similarly, the financial events of the last 
three years, which began in a seemingly small part of the US housing market, have touched 
all  of  our  lives  and  come  to  test  the  resilience  of  our  whole  system  of  global  economic 
governance.  
The financial crisis has tested the business models and risk management systems of market 
participants, and the rules and structures of the markets in which they operate. It has tested 
the  preparedness  of  central  banks  and  governments  to  take  unprecedented  support 
measures to preserve confidence in markets and the economy. And it has tested the ability 
of the institutions of global governance to restore financial and economic stability.  
Just  as  the  Deepwater  Horizon  oil  spill  is  doing  for  environmental  protection  and  natural 
resource management, the financial crisis offers many lessons for management of the global 
economy  –  lessons  about  private  sector  incentives,  lessons  about  regulation  and  lessons 
about global interdependencies and the ever-growing need for effective policy coordination.  
Tonight, I would like to share with you a few thoughts on the strengths and weaknesses of 
our system of global governance.  
But before doing so, let me say a few words on the current situation in Europe.  
 BIS Review 81/2010 
 1
In recent weeks, the euro area governments and the ECB were once again called upon to 
demonstrate  their  ability  to  take  swift  and  essential  action  to  face  up  with  exceptional 
circumstances.  
In 2008, the ECB decided on unprecedented measures when private financial intermediation 
was first impaired and then on the verge of collapse, and we restored it to its prime function. 
On  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic,  we  had  to  cope  with  impaired  money  markets.  We  set  the 
conditions  for  banks  to  resume  lending  to  each  other  and  to  their  customers.  We  helped 
reconstruct the market when it had disappeared. And we laid the foundations for the nascent 
recovery to start and consolidate.  
Throughout these actions, the ECB has maintained price stability and the stability of inflation 
expectations.  A  month  ago,  we  sprung  into  action  for  a  second  time.  It  was  for  the  same 
reasons. Once more, private financial intermediation – often secured by government paper – 
was  threatened.  The  market  for  government  paper  –  the  basis  for  the  pricing  of  many 
financial assets, from fixed-income instruments to equity – was seriously impaired. 
We judged – and we continue to judge – that our monetary policy stance was appropriately 
tuned to the conditions and the prospects of the broader economy. But once more – as in the 
autumn  of  2008  –  we  could  see  that  the  transmission  mechanism  was  not  functioning 
sufficiently well to channel our policy intentions to the broader economy.  
Therefore, we intervened. Our Securities Markets Programme is targeted to those segments 
of the euro area government debt markets that are most dysfunctional. The aim is to restore 
a precondition to our primary function of accomplishing price stability in the medium term. 
At the same time, we have taken note of the commitment of the euro area governments to 
take all measures needed to meet fiscal targets this year and the years ahead, and that each 
one of them is ready to take the necessary measures to accelerate fiscal consolidation. And 
we are in close contact with the Commission and authorities to verify that further convincing 
and concrete consolidation and reform strategies are prepared and implemented.  
The  Greek  authorities  have  started  to  implement  the  ambitious  economic  and  financial 
programme 
the  European 
Commission, in liaison with the ECB. This programme itself is an important achievement. It is 
based  on  prudent  macroeconomic  assumptions.  It  is  frontloaded.  It  has  the  potential  to 
correct  long-standing  flaws,  because  it  entails  a  very  comprehensive  structural  reform 
package. This structural reform package to my surprise seems still largely unknown to many. 
The three institutions will regularly come to Athens to monitor the programme and support 
the government in its efforts to implement the measures, so as to secure a better future for 
the Greek people.  
We  consider  that  the  Greek  programme  has  the  appropriate  features  to  succeed.  Many 
policy adjustments that seemed Herculean at the start have succeeded in history. And we 
have  indications  that  the  budget  execution  in  Greece  in  the  first  five  months  of  2010  
– despite a painful recession – is on track. The central government cash deficit is more than 
40% below the level over the same period last year. 
We see encouraging signs in other countries too. Measures are being prepared to credibly 
advance fiscal consolidation. Those measures are particularly helpful if they focus strongly 
on  the  expenditure  side,  because  such  measures  have  in  the  past  proven  more  effective, 
and if they address one prime cause of a loss of competitiveness in recent years: the rise of 
public salaries relative to the rest of the economy.  
The  view  that  fiscal  consolidation  is  generally  negative  for  growth  is  too  narrow.  Demand-
side economics has in the past underestimated the risks of excessive spending, and is now 
overestimating  the  risks  of  consolidation.  We  have  to  take  into  account  that  today’s 
adjustments are being made in strict association with structural reforms and they enhance 
confidence. Both elements will increase supply and, along with supply potential, prospective 
incomes and thus demand. These adjustments are therefore ultimately growth-friendly. 
International  Monetary  Fund  and 
that  was  agreed  with 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2010
There  are  very  important  decisions  under  way.  It  is  true  that  Europe’s  decision-making 
process is complex. This is because it involves both national and supranational actions. But 
complexity does not mean ineffectiveness. Europe has been remarkably effective during the 
2007/2008  financial  crisis.  Not  a  single  systemically  important  institution  has  failed,  not  a 
single recovery programme has been refused by any parliament.  
What  markets  often  underestimate  is  Europe’s  complete  dedication  to  the  degree  of 
integration achieved so far. Decisions were taken recently, which were difficult to foresee by 
observers  and  markets  only  a  few  months  or  weeks  ago:  a  negotiated  fully-fledged 
adjustment programme for a member state, a €80 billion support loan by member states for 
that programme, and a €440 billion financial stability facility, on top of a €60 billion existing 
facility.  This  provides  Europe  with  a  highly  significant  endowment  of  a  total  of  €580  billion 
(around $700 billion), without even counting the possible additional IMF co-financing.  
Let me now turn to the main topic of my remarks: global governance.  
Global governance and the crisis 
1. 
Global  economic  governance  embraces  supranational  institutions  –  such  as  the  IMF  –  as 
well as informal groupings – such as the G7 and the G20. Both are necessary, and both are 
complementary.  Supranational  institutions  offer  a  framework  for  dialogue  and  formal 
agreement. Informal fora are invaluable for “softening the ground” in areas where decision-
making  processes  remain  largely  national  –  whether  in  forging  a  consensus  on  prudential 
standards and codes, or facilitating the coordination of economic policies when appropriate.  
How did this system of formal and informal elements fare during the crisis? Let me highlight 
one strength and two areas that are still in need of strengthening.  
To  my  mind,  particular  resilience  was  shown  by  the  central  banking  community  –  both 
bilaterally and channelled through the various Basel-based committees. This institutionalised 
cooperation ensured an unprecedented degree of collaboration in, for instance, the provision 
of cross-border liquidity – the network of temporary currency swaps or repos set up bilaterally 
by central banks such as the Fed and the ECB. This cooperation has been reaffirmed and 
further  activated  in  recent  weeks  as  market  conditions  have  deteriorated,  underlining  the 
strong commitment of the central banking community to addressing the global crisis in a co-
ordinated way.  
Of  the  areas  still in  need  of  strengthening,  the  first  relates  to  macroeconomic  policies  that 
were clearly insufficiently oriented towards medium-term sustainability. This led to the build-
up of unsustainable external imbalances between deficit and surplus economies prior to the 
crisis. No effective mechanism existed to influence macroeconomic and structural policies in 
key  countries  where  those  policies  appeared  unsustainable  from  the  standpoint  of  global 
economic and financial stability.  
This  must  change  –  and  it  requires  both  improvements  in  the  efficiency  and  legitimacy  of 
international  institutions  and  a  broader  awareness  by  national  authorities  of  their  global 
responsibilities. The G20 Mutual Assessment Framework is promising in this regard. Just this 
last weekend, G20 Ministers and Governors in Korea reviewed this process, which will now 
be examined by Heads of State in Toronto in early July. The momentum is here, and we fully 
support this overall process.  
The second shortcoming was the insufficient coordination in financial regulation before the 
crisis,  which  encouraged  regulatory  arbitrage.  This  was  the  unavoidable  result  of  the 
disparity between the increasingly global financial players, and the largely national approach 
to financial regulation, with only relatively weak coordination at the international level, despite 
the remarkable efforts of the Basel Committee in respect of the banking sector.  
The crisis demonstrated quite clearly that proceeding too far down the road of deregulation is 
not  always  conducive  to  better  functioning  markets.  Rather,  markets  require  an  effective 
BIS Review 81/2010 
 3
regulatory  and  supervisory  infrastructure  to  function  properly.  Of  course,  setting  common 
rules in complex and innovative fields such as finance requires finding the balance between 
allowing  financial  innovation  and  growth,  and  preserving  stability  for  the  good  of  the  real 
economy.  But  it  should  remain  foremost  in  all  our  minds  that  the  prime  purpose  of  the 
financial  sector  is  to  serve  the  real  economy,  not  the  other  way  around.  Changes  to  the 
regulatory environment should reflect that.  
Given  the  current  downturn  and  the  volatility  of  financial  markets,  it  is  imperative  that  the 
timelines  for  regulatory  reform  agreed  by  the  G20  in  the  autumn  of  2008  are  met.  Policy-
makers  should  remain  committed  to  setting  rigorous  standards  and  designing  appropriate 
transition periods that will allow countries and financial institutions to implement the agreed 
regulatory standards consistently and fully.  
In  this  context,  the  Basel  Committee’s  reform  package,  released  last  December  for 
consultation, forms one of the cornerstones of the financial regulatory reform. It is important, 
however, that the cumulative impact of the reform package on financial institutions and the 
real  economy  is  thoroughly  assessed.  We  will  carefully  consider  the  impact  analysis 
presented  by  the  IIF  in  the  process  of  evaluating  the  multifaceted  impact  mechanisms  of 
regulatory changes. There may well be differences in views on the most appropriate way of 
computation  as  well  as  on  underlying  assumptions.  We  have  to  deliver  a  much  safer  and 
much more resilient financial system that it to the benefit of the sustainable development of 
the real economy.  
The evolution of global governance 
2. 
Let me now turn to how the system of global governance is evolving in response to the crisis. 
I see three major trends:  
First, the scope of international cooperation is broadening significantly.  
Second,  the  efficiency  and  legitimacy  of  global  governance  is  being  addressed:  the 
mandates  and  governance  structures  of  existing  international  institutions  are  being 
strengthened, existing informal fora adjusted and new fora developed.  
Third,  the  system  is  moving  decisively  towards  a  much  more  inclusive  system  of  global 
governance, encompassing key emerging economies as well as the industrialised countries. 
The acknowledgment of the increasing role of emerging economies is a trend that predates 
the recent crisis. But the crisis has made it even more pressing. Although emerging countries 
have also been immediately affected, they have rapidly become a source of strength for the 
world economy. In 2009, the contribution of emerging countries to global growth was 57%. In 
the same year, they represented roughly one third of world GDP at market exchange rates 
(31%), and close to a half using PPP rates (46%).  
There are several examples where these three trends become apparent:  
The emergence of the G20 as the prime group for global economic governance is probably 
the most prominent example. It provided policy impulse and took decisive actions during the 
crisis.  It  is now  making  the  transition  from  crisis  resolution  to  crisis  prevention.  This  is  the 
purpose  of  its  framework  for  strong,  sustainable  and  balanced  growth.  Its  primary  goal  is 
collectively to implement coherent and medium-term policies to attain a mutually beneficial 
growth path. Since this process is fully owned by the G20 members, and involves Heads of 
State and Government, it also confirms the strong commitment at the global level to more 
multilateralism in economic decision-making. 
A second example is the designation of the  Global Economy Meeting (GEM) as the prime 
group  for  the  governance  of  central  bank  cooperation.  This  forum  includes  central  bank 
governors from all systemic emerging economies. I currently have the privilege of chairing 
the  GEM,  and  find  the candid  exchange  of  views  at  our  bi-monthly  meetings  of  enormous 
value. 
4 
 BIS Review 81/2010
And a third example is the reform and the expansion of the Financial Stability Board (FSB). It 
now includes all the systemic emerging market economies, largely overlapping with the G20. 
Its  mandate  has  been  enhanced  to  strengthen  the  international  financial  architecture  and 
global  financial  stability.  The  FSB  assesses  vulnerabilities  affecting  the  global  financial 
system and reviews the regulatory, supervisory and related actions needed to address them.  
Insights from the crisis  
3. 
Let  me  draw  to  a  close.  Looking  ahead,  and  distilling  insights  from  the  financial  and 
economic turbulence of recent years, I would like to stress three points. 
First, the crisis has shattered previously held convictions that “keeping one’s house in order” 
and self-regulation are sufficient to ensure global welfare. We have seen that improvements 
are  needed  to  preserve  the  safety  of  the  global  economic  and  financial  system.  These 
improvements  concern  rules  of  the  game  and  procedures,  but  they  also  concern  attitudes 
and  underlying  values. Countries  have  to  recognise  the  global  impact  of  their  policies  and 
financial market players have to accept that the prime purpose of the financial sector is to 
serve the real economy. 
Second, more than in the past, global governance must demonstrate a capacity to coordinate 
and decide extremely swiftly. A characteristic of the turbulences that intensified in September 
2008 was the extreme rapidity in the succession of events as the crisis unfolded. The very 
high  degree  of  interdependency  between  all  economies  calls  for  a  much  higher  level  of 
cooperation than in the past. 
Third, the crisis has rightly accelerated the inclusion of emerging markets into the framework 
of  global  governance.  But  there  are  two  reasons  for  this  change.  One  is  positive:  the 
emerging economies are now economically and financially so important, and systemically so 
influential, that they must be fully involved in global governance. I hesitate to unveil the other 
reason  that  is  not  flattering  for  industrialised  countries:  they  did  not  live  up  to  their 
responsibilities prior to the crisis. Now, the industrialised countries are called on to contribute 
to  the  stability  and  prosperity  of  the  global  economy  within  the  new,  more  inclusive 
framework. 
Looking ahead, we see that the global recovery has started to proceed at different speeds 
across  regions,  with  a  relatively  modest  recovery  in  advanced  countries  like  the  United 
States, Japan and the euro area and a stronger expansion in the emerging economies. And 
yet,  there  is  no  time  for  complacency  as  recent  tensions  in  financial  markets  have  amply 
demonstrated.  
Let me stress that it is important that the recovery should be measured in broader terms than 
the simple resumption of GDP growth and a return to sustainable fiscal positions: it means a 
full restoration of trust in our financial institutions; it requires the healing of wounds inflicted 
by  the  irresponsible  behaviour  of  some  financial  players  on  our  societies  and  on  the  real 
economy; and it requires renewed confidence that global governance is strong, broad and 
flexible enough to ensure global economic and financial stability and resilience in the future.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 81/2010 
 5
