Malcolm Edey: Competition in the deposit market 
Speech by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, at the Australian Retail Deposits Conference 2010, Sydney, 19 May 2010. 
 Introduction 
The  theme  for  this  session  is  Pricing  and  Competition  in  the  Deposit  Market.  It’s  a  highly 
topical subject, because we have been seeing some very strong competition in this area in 
the recent period. To give one summary indicator: the average interest rate banks have been 
offering  on  their  term-deposit  “specials”  recently  have  been  around  6  per cent,  or  about 
100 basis  points  above  the  bill  rate.  A  few  years  ago  they  were  typically  about  50 points 
below the bill rate – so there’s been a price movement, in relative terms, of around 150 basis 
points.  
That’s a significant shift although, to keep it in perspective, we have to remember that this is 
not  the  whole  market  –  it’s  just  the  part  where  competition  has  been  most  intense.  Other 
rates  are  not  as  high.  Nonetheless,  across  the  board,  spreads  between  deposit  rates  and 
wholesale rates have generally shifted in the same direction over the past couple of years.  
Obviously this is good news for depositors. It means that, if you have funds to invest, and 
you’re prepared to shop around, now is a very good time to find a favourable rate. Of course, 
from  the  point  of  view  of  deposit-takers1  and  the  people  they  lend  to,  it  mightn’t  seem 
particularly  good  news,  because  this  is  one  of  the  factors  that  have  been  adding  to  the 
relative cost of funds, and therefore adding to the cost of lending.  
I’ve been asked to talk today about what’s driving this competition in the deposit market, and 
how it might develop from here. I’m going to stick to that brief, but I also want to place it in a 
broader context by looking at how competition has evolved over a longer period.  
Evolution of competition in the post-deregulation period 
I’ll take as a starting point a snapshot of the aggregate balance sheet of the banking system 
in  1980  –  just  before  the  main  sweep  of  financial  deregulation  got  under  way  (Table  1). 
Banks’ balance sheets back then looked rather different from the way they do now. Roughly 
speaking, the liabilities side of the balance sheet consisted of close to 90 per cent deposits. 
On the asset side, loans were around 60 per cent of the total, and much of the rest consisted 
of  government  securities,  which  were  held  under  the  “captive  market”  arrangements  that 
were then in place.  
                                                 
1  
In this talk I focus mainly on banks, though much of what I have to say applies to the deposit-taking sector in 
general. 
BIS Review 69/2010 
 1
  In simplified terms, we can think of the banks’ core business in that environment as being a 
mix  of  three  main  elements  –  namely,  deposit-taking,  lending,  and  providing  transactional 
services.  Banks’  net  interest  margins  were  quite  a  bit  wider  than  they  are  now.  That  was 
partly  because  their  (non-interest)  costs  were  higher.  But  in  a  deeper  sense,  it’s  also  a 
reflection of the way competition has evolved in the meantime.  
In the regulated environment, banks generally faced a situation of excess demand for their 
loans.  As  a  result,  competition  within  the  banking  sector  was  not  very  strong,  and  banks 
faced relatively weak pressure to contain costs.  
These conditions affected not just the intensity of competition, but also its focal point. In the 
regulated environment, competition within banking tended to take place at the whole-of-bank 
level, rather than at the level of the individual product. There was no point competing to offer 
lower lending rates when the market was in structural excess demand. Instead, the banks 
competed to offer their full mix of services on terms that would be attractive as a package.  
Typically  the  pricing  structure  that  this  type  of  competition  generated  involved  significant 
elements  of  cross-subsidy.  In  particular,  the  net  interest  margin  tended  to  cross-subsidise 
transaction services and other activities (such as the maintenance of branch networks) to a 
much  greater  extent  than  is  the  case  today.  This  is  the  business  model  that  used  to  be 
referred to, only half jokingly, as 3–6–3 banking – borrow at 3 per cent, lend at 6 per cent and 
be on the golf course by 3 o’clock – although even then the joke was probably well past its 
use-by date.  
Obviously, a great deal has changed in the banking industry since then. Banks have become 
much  more  diversified,  both  in  their  funding  sources  and  in  the  range  of  businesses  they 
engage in.  
But for the purpose of today’s subject, the thing I particularly want to focus on is the change 
in the way they compete. Post-deregulation, competition has been both more intense, and 
increasingly  directed  at  the  level  of  the  individual  product.  That’s  been  true  of  both  the 
competition  between  banks,  and  the  competition  provided  by  specialist  institutions  that 
targeted the banks’ most profitable product lines.  
One early example of that, on the deposit side, was the introduction of cash management 
trusts,  which  came  in  as  providers  of  what  were  effectively  stand-alone  deposit-taking 
services.  The  effect  was  to  put  upward  pressure  on  deposit  interest  rates  relative  to 
wholesale  rates  –  in  other  words,  to  give  depositors  a  better  deal.  Specialist  mortgage 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2010
originators  later  did  a  similar  thing  on  the  lending  side.  Over  time,  these  sorts  of 
developments had the side-effect of reducing the amount of net interest margin available for 
banks  to  cross-subsidise  their  other  activities.  In  addition,  technological  improvements  like 
internet banking have contributed to the intensity of product-level competition, by making it 
easier for customers to shop around on a product-by-product basis.  
The  results  of  all  this  can  be  seen  in  some  summary  indicators  of  the  banking  sectors’ 
aggregate performance.  
Let’s start by looking at the relativities between deposit and loan rates and interest rates in 
the  wholesale  market  (Graph  1).  For  much  of  the  1980s,  the  90-day  bill  rate  was  actually 
higher than the average rate that banks charged on loans, a result of regulations that held 
lending rates much lower than they would otherwise have been.2 Of course, that didn’t mean 
that  borrowers  were  on  average  getting  a  favourable  deal.  It  just  meant  they  were  being 
rationed for funds and may have had to go outside the regulated sector where rates were 
much higher.  
Graph 1 
In  the  post-deregulation  environment,  from  the  1990s  onwards,  the  whole  interest  rate 
structure  was  much  lower  because  of  the  fall  in  inflation  that  occurred  at  that  time,  but 
wholesale rates fell significantly further than both deposit and lending rates. This restored the 
structure to a more logical configuration where average lending rates were usually above the 
wholesale rate and deposit rates below it.  
                                                  
2  
Interest rate regulations on deposits and loans were progressively removed during the 1980s. The last major 
control to be removed was the ceiling on housing loan interest rates. This was removed for new loans in 1986, 
but  since  existing  loans  were  grandfathered,  it  continued  to  affect  the  average  rate  on  loans  outstanding 
through the remainder of the decade. 
BIS Review 69/2010 
 3
An important driver of the fall in banks’ intermediation margins on the liabilities side has been 
the declining share of deposits bearing either zero or very low interest (Graph 2). That was 
partly a regulatory effect, since before 1984 banks were prohibited from paying interest on 
current accounts. But it was also a consequence of stronger competition. In 1980, around a 
third  of  bank  deposits  were  either  in  interest-free  current  accounts  or  in  low-interest 
passbook accounts. Twenty years later, that proportion was down to around 5 per cent. Not 
only did this proportion decline, but the relative benefit to banks from any given amount of 
low-interest deposits has fallen substantially, as the overall interest-rate structure has come 
down.  
Graph 2 
 Another important development on the liabilities side, which I alluded to earlier, was that an 
increasing  proportion  of  banks’  funding  was  coming  from  wholesale  sources.  That  was  a 
partly a consequence of the growth of the superannuation system as a recipient of household 
funds, some of which were then channelled into bank securities; it was also partly a result of 
the banks’ diversification into offshore funding sources.  
We  see,  then,  that  a  combination  of  structural  factors,  regulatory  changes  and  increased 
competition  has  been  working  to  narrow  average  margins  on  the  liabilities  side  for  quite 
some time. A similar thing happened on the lending side: after the initial reconfiguration of 
interest rates that occurred in the early 1990s, competition over the subsequent decade put 
substantial downward pressure on most lending rates relative to wholesale funding costs.  
The  result  of  all  this  is  that  the  major  banks’  net  interest  margins  in  the  period  since 
deregulation  have  been  trending  downwards  (Graph  3).  They  roughly  halved,  from  an 
average  of  around  4½ per cent  in  1980  to  a  bit  over  2 per cent  in  the  latest  period. 
Notwithstanding its most recent uptick, the average margin now is well below where it was a 
few years ago.  
4 
 BIS Review 69/2010
Graph 3 
 To  complete  the  story,  the  downward  trend  in  net  interest  margins  hasn’t  resulted  in  any 
structural decline in banks’ overall profitability (Graph 4). In broad terms it has been offset by 
two  factors  –  namely,  reduced  non-interest  costs,  and  increased  non-interest  income  as 
banks diversified their business models and reduced cross-subsidies. The net effect is that 
banks’ combined income from all sources has been declining in relation to assets, but this 
has been broadly matched by a downward trend in the cost-to-assets ratio.  
Graph 4 
 BIS Review 69/2010 
 5
Probably much of this is familiar territory. My reason for going through it is to make the point 
that a trend towards increased competition in the deposit market, and an increased relative 
cost  of  deposits,  is  not  something  new.  It  has  been  an  ongoing  consequence  of  the  way 
market forces have evolved in a deregulated environment.  
Effects of the crisis on the deposit market 
Having made that point, it’s also clear that the trend has been amplified by factors flowing 
specifically from the financial crisis. Let me turn to that part of the story now.  
For some time, banks have tended to operate with a two-tier pricing structure on their term 
deposits,  offering  significantly  higher-than-average  rates  at  certain  points  on  the  maturity 
spectrum. Often these are at non-standard terms like four or seven months. These “specials” 
have been the part of the market where banks competed most vigorously for price-sensitive 
customers.  
The average rates on these specials are shown in the accompanying chart (Graph 5). In the 
years just prior to the crisis, the pricing of these term-deposit specials was fairly stable. They 
were typically priced at about 50 basis points below the bill rate. As I noted at the outset, that 
margin has now shifted to around 100 points above.  
Graph 5 
 Another indication of more intense competition is that institutions have become more active 
in  offering  special  rates  at  terms  of  longer  than  a  year,  and  often  out  to  as  much  as  five 
years. They have also begun to offer higher rates in other parts of the market. Rates on “non-
special” term deposits have tended to move up closer to the specials, and margins on at-call 
deposits have moved in the same direction, though by a lesser amount.  
So, clearly the intensity of competition has stepped up.  
This has been a consequence of two factors associated broadly with the crisis and with the 
post-crisis environment.  
First, the crisis has focused the attention of investors, regulators, rating agencies and, not 
least,  the  banks  themselves,  on  the  need  for  stable  sources  of  funding.  What  constitutes 
stable  funding  is,  of  course,  a  good  question.  There  is  some  tendency  for  analysis  in  this 
area  to  be  overly  simplistic,  and  in  particular  to  assume  that  deposits  are  unambiguously 
more  sticky  than  various  forms  of  wholesale  funding.  That  might  not  always  be  the  case. 
6 
 BIS Review 69/2010
Within short-term wholesale funding, for example, holdings of bank paper by domestic super 
funds  are  actually  likely  to  be  quite  stable.  Conversely,  those  types  of  deposits  designed 
specifically  to  appeal  to  price-sensitive  customers  will  be  less  stable  than  others.  So  in 
analysing  funding  stability,  it  is  important  to  focus  on  the  specific  characteristics  of  each 
instrument, and not just to rely on broad summary measures like aggregate deposit ratios.  
That said, markets have clearly been taking a general view that banks should source more of 
their funding from deposits rather than from short-term wholesale liabilities, and there is no 
doubt  that  this  has  been  a  factor  in  market  pricing  in  the  post-crisis  environment.  It’s  also 
clear  that  prospective  regulatory  developments  are  going  to  put  more  emphasis  on  stable 
deposit funding, although there are many details of this still to be worked out.  
A second factor is that the crisis made non-deposit sources of funding more expensive, or in 
some cases more difficult for lending institutions to obtain, than was previously the case. In 
this environment, it is to be expected that deposit rates would be bid up. One element of the 
change in funding conditions was the drying up of the RMBS market early in the crisis period. 
That was a factor that disproportionately affected the smaller lenders and induced them to 
compete more vigorously for deposits as an alternative source of funding.  
These factors are of course not unique to Australia. There are, however, some arguments 
that it may be more difficult for banks to attract deposit funding in Australia than elsewhere, 
because  a  structurally  higher  share  of  their  funding  comes  from  non-deposit  sources  – 
particularly  from  international  markets  and  from  domestic  super  funds.  These  funding 
patterns  may  be  hard  to  change  quickly,  although  we  certainly  shouldn’t  think  of  them  as 
being immutable.  
How far these Australia-specific factors might be adding to competitive pressure on deposit 
markets is hard to judge. But it’s notable that significant shifts in deposit margins have been 
occurring  in  a  number  of  other  economies  besides  Australia  (Graph  6).  Although  strictly 
comparable data are hard to come by, term deposit margins in the UK look to have risen by 
more  than  those  in  Australia.  In  the  euro  area,  average  margins  rose  initially  by  a  similar 
amount to those in the UK, though they have since retraced some of that. So, on the face of 
it,  it  seems  likely  that  a  good  deal  of  the  recent  pressure  on  deposit  rates  has  reflected 
common international forces, not just conditions specific to Australia.  
Graph 6 
 BIS Review 69/2010 
 7
Assessment and outlook 
Let me conclude with a few more general remarks about what all this means and how things 
might develop from here.  
My first remark is that we shouldn’t talk as though competition in this market is a bad thing in 
itself.  The  point  of  financial  deregulation  was  to  deliver  efficiency  gains  through  increased 
competition. Among other things, that should mean a better deal for banks’ customers. The 
particular customer we’ve been talking about today is the depositor, someone who is often 
neglected in these sorts of discussions. As I said at the outset, if you’re a depositor who is 
prepared to shop around, now is a very good time to find favourable rates.  
It’s also important to put these things in a longer-term context. The tendency for competition 
to put downward pressure on banks’ net interest margins is not new – it’s been going on for a 
couple of decades, to the benefit of both borrowers and depositors.  
Having said all that, there’s a legitimate question as to how far the most recent step-up in 
competition  for  deposits  will  prove  to  be  sustainable.  There  do  seem  to  have  been  some 
instances of anomalously high deposit rates being offered on occasion. It seems likely that, 
over time, banks and other deposit-takers will get better at managing these more competitive 
conditions and avoiding paying rates that are unnecessarily high relative to the market.  
There are other reasons to think that the factors giving rise to the current wave of competitive 
pressure  might  prove  to  be  partly  transitory.  In  particular,  conditions  in  alternative  funding 
markets  have  been  improving.  A  further  recovery  in  securitisation  markets,  for  example, 
would  help  lenders  to  diversify  their  funding  sources  and  probably  help  to  take  some 
pressure  off  the  deposit  market.  Similarly,  any  further  narrowing  of  risk  spreads  in  other 
wholesale  funding  markets  would  work  in  the  same  direction.  Possibly  reflecting  some  of 
these factors, there does seem to have been some easing in deposit margins recently.  
On the other hand, we should expect the increased emphasis on stable funding sources to 
continue.  It  is  also  possible  that  the  recent  wave  of  competition  has  itself  helped  to  make 
depositors  more  price-sensitive.  With  the  availability  of  special  rates  being  more  widely 
advertised,  households  may  be  learning  to  be  more  active,  and  more  sophisticated,  in 
seeking out the most favourable rates. If so, then we would expect this to have an ongoing 
impact on the dynamics of the market.  
In a nutshell then, a good deal of what is happening in deposit markets is not new, but is 
actually a continuation of existing trends. Some of what is new might prove to be temporary, 
but some of it is likely to persist. To me, that sounds like an environment where competitive 
pressure in the deposit market is going to remain strong, even if some of the recent intensity 
has been somewhat overdone. 
8 
 BIS Review 69/2010
