José De Gregorio: Macroprudential regulation, financial stability and 
capital flows 
Presentation by Mr José De Gregorio, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, at the 13th Annual 
International Banking Conference, Chicago, 24 September 2010. 
 I am very grateful to Gabriel Aparici, Herman Bennett, Kevin Cowan and Pablo Garcia for very useful discussions 
and comments. 
I am grateful to the Chicago Fed for inviting me to participate in this important policy panel. 
Most recent conferences on macro and financial policies have been dealing with the causes, 
consequences and implications of the financial crisis of late 2008 and early 2009, and the 
Great  Recession  that  ensued.  This  panel  has  been  persuasively  entitled  Where  to  from 
Here? 
I  would  like  to  focus  on  two  issues:  capital  inflows,  which  is  a  very  relevant  issue  for 
emerging market economies, and the recent agreement of the Basel Committee on Banking 
Regulation. For  this  purpose  I  will  start  with  a  brief  review  of  some  facts  regarding  capital 
inflows. Then I will discuss the policy toolkit to deal with them. I will take a look from a macro 
perspective  and  then  from  the  point  of  view  of  financial  stability.  Finally  I  will  make  some 
comments  on  the  Basel  agreements,  focusing  on  the  Chilean  banking  system  and  its 
financial regulation framework. 
Some evidence and factors behind the resumption of inflows 
There  is  concern  in  emerging  market  economies  about  resuming  capital  inflows  and  the 
challenges they impose on monetary policy. I will first refer to some stylized facts and factors 
behind the recent surge in capital inflows, and then on the policy challenges. 
Monetary policy in the developed world has had to take on the burden of cyclical stimulus. 
Hence, policy interest rates in the main high-income economic zones have been kept low for 
longer  than  expected  at  the  end  of  last  year,  and  several  central  banks  have  actually 
reinforced traditional monetary policy with further unconventional measures. The discussion 
about  exit  strategies  has  morphed  into  further  balance-sheet  stimulus,  and  markets  are 
pricing-in that monetary accommodation will continue well into 2011. 
In contrast to the situation in the largest developed economies, emerging markets and some 
financially-stable  developed  countries  have  transited  to  a  quick  recovery  phase,  which  in 
some  cases  is  leading  to  above-trend  growth  and  the  fast  closure  of  output  slack. 
Macroeconomic  policy  has  responded  accordingly,  first  through  the  normalization  of 
extraordinary  liquidity  and  financial  stability  measures,  then  by  moderating  their  fiscal  and 
monetary impulses. Interest rates in emerging economies have, therefore, started to increase 
and are, according to most expectations, slated to continue increasing over the course of the 
next few years. 
These monetary policy trends have naturally led to discussions regarding their implications 
for capital flows, current accounts, economic growth, and real exchange rates. In particular, 
some concerns have been voiced about the risk of returning to a situation much like the one 
observed in the mid 2000s, when low interest rates in the developed world boosted capital 
flows into emerging economies. With the purpose of increasing their liquidity safeguards and 
stabilizing  real  exchange  rates,  official  reserves  in  emerging  economies,  accumulated 
through  sterilized  interventions,  precluded  current  account  adjustment,  artificially  boosting 
tradable sector growth. This led to global imbalances and, so the argument goes, facilitated 
(or even caused) global financial unrest. 
BIS Review 124/2010 
 1
The  above  argument  depends  on  whether  capital  inflows  to  emerging  economies,  which 
were  indeed  substantial  in  2006–2008  (see  Figure  1),  are  driven  primarily  by  interest  rate 
differentials or by medium term growth prospects. It is noteworthy to see how these interest 
rate  differentials  have  evolved  over  time.  Figure  2  plots  (simple)  average  monetary  policy 
rates for a group of developed and emerging economies, as well as Chile. It is striking that, 
whereas on average it stood at 440 basis points (bp) between January 2006 and July 2008, 
now  it  is  barely  50  bp  lower  (390  bp).  Intriguingly,  market  expectations  for  interest  rate 
differentials  hover  between  400  bp  and  450  bp  over  the  next  year.  It  would  require 
substantial sensitiveness to interest rate differentials to make the argument that these are the 
main  drivers  of  capital  inflows.  Moreover,  the  decade  from  1996  to  2005  witnessed  an 
average differential above 1000 bp, affected of course by risk premia, but still indicates that 
crude  short-term  interest  rate  differentials  by  themselves  are  not  suggestive  of  substantial 
capital inflows. 
In terms of growth prospects, the picture is markedly different. Figure 3 presents IMF’s past 
data and forecasts for economic growth in developed and emerging economies. It is clear 
that, from 2000 to 2010, the growth differential between developed and emerging economies 
widened  significantly,  reaching  around  5.5%  between  2007  and  2010.  Hence,  the  Great 
Recession did not affect significantly this growth differential, and prospects for the near term 
also  indicate  that  growth  in  emerging  economies  will  outpace  growth  in  developed 
economies, but at a rate (4%–4.5%) not that different from the average between 2003 and 
2005. 
A  simple  observation  of  the  data  therefore  suggests  that  growth  differentials  are  more 
important in driving capital inflows than interest rate differentials. The latter have remained 
quite stable for several years, and the main stylized fact of the past decade and a half has 
been  a  significant  shrinkage  of  short  term  interest  rates  in  emerging  economies.  A  more 
suggestive interpretation of these broad medium-term trends is that high growth in emerging 
economies  attracted  capital  inflows.  Prudent  macroeconomic  management  in  emerging 
economies (especially compared to previous decades), allowed an improvement in external 
and fiscal solvency, alongside appreciation pressures. These factors helped implement lower 
interest  rates.  This  different  macroeconomic  backdrop  has  also  implied  that  today  current 
account balances in emerging economies do not display the significant deficits observed in 
the run-up to crises during the 1980s or 1990s (Figure 4). The lack of a significant widening 
of the current account deficits should also indicate that current concerns about (net) capital 
flows  into  emerging  economies  could  be  premature,  although  for  specific  economies  they 
could be posing more immediate policy challenges. 
Dealing with capital inflows 
Traditionally, the primary concern in emerging market economies about large capital inflows 
has  been  that  they  may  be  financing  an  unsustainable  current  account  deficit  that  could 
derive in a sudden stop of capital inflows. A sudden stop scenario is particularly costly since 
it involves a painful restructuring of the economy from non-tradables to tradables and a large 
correction  in  the  exchange  rate  with  potentially  large  balance  sheet  effects,  which  could 
result in high volatility and output losses. This view regarding large capital inflows has largely 
been shaped by current account crises like the ones in Mexico and East Asia in the 1990s. 
As the evidence I showed, the current account in emerging market economies still displays, 
on  average,  a  surplus.  Therefore,  they  do  not  currently  present  a  serious  threat,  but  it  is 
necessary to explore the policy implications of large capital inflows.1 
                                                 
1   Here I will discuss briefly the main tools from a macro point of view. For further discussion on these policy 
options, see De Gregorio (2010a).  
2 
 BIS Review 124/2010
In  many  experiences  capital  inflows  have  been  exacerbated  by  policy  actions.  Most 
noteworthy  are  the  attempts  of  authorities  to  defend  an  artificially  weak  currency.  The 
expectations of an appreciation generated by this policy create further incentives for capital 
inflows. For this reason a flexible exchange rate should be the first line of defense. This is 
also consistent with providing the monetary authority independence to use monetary policy. 
However, and as I discuss below, this may not be enough to ensure macroeconomic stability. 
Monetary policy in the context of an inflation targeting regime also contributes to stability by 
leaning against the wind. Capital inflows that lead to an appreciation of the currency reduce 
inflationary  pressures  allowing  for  an  interest  rate  cut.  This,  in  turn,  reduces  incentives  to 
capital inflows and takes pressure off the currency.  
This  phenomenon  has  been  recently  experienced  in  Chile.  In  recent  weeks,  the  peso  has 
appreciated  significantly.  At  the  same  time  the  economy  has  been  showing  a  rapid 
expansion: despite the earthquake we suffered this year growth is expected to be between 
5%  and  5.5%  this  year  and  between  5.5%  and  6.5%  next  year.  Although  in  our  latest 
Monetary Policy Report we said that the bank will keep withdrawing the significant monetary 
stimulus, without the strengthening of the currency the withdrawal would certainly be faster. 
However,  these  macro  policy  actions  may  not  be  enough,  in  particular  because  capital 
inflows may be a source of bubbles in domestic asset prices. Indeed, in emerging markets 
bubbles  normally  take  the  form  of  an  exchange  rate  appreciation.  In  this  way,  all  assets 
become overpriced, not necessarily by higher prices in domestic currency, which may also 
be happening, but by increasing the value of the currency. 
A much debated issue in industrial countries has been whether tightening monetary policy 
could help burst a bubble in asset prices. Although, in general, I think that monetary policy 
should  not  target  asset  prices,  nor  should  it  be  used  as  an  instrument  to  deal  with  asset 
prices, the problem is more acute regarding capital inflows. If capital inflows fuel a bubble in 
the  exchange  rate,  tightening  monetary  policy  will  actually  induce  more  capital  inflows. 
Paradoxically,  monetary  policy  loosening  may  help  to  stabilize  the  economy  and  lead  to a 
slowdown in the rise in asset prices.2 
Misalignments of the exchange rate, in particular in the context of massive inflows, may be 
the  prelude  of  problems,  in  the  extreme  a  currency  or  financial  meltdown.  For  this  reason 
other tools cannot be ruled out, in particular exchange rate intervention. To avoid the perils of 
introducing rigidities in the exchange rate regime, interventions should be truly exceptional 
and should not target a particular exchange rate value. Hence, the volatility of the exchange 
rate  is  not  artificially  lowered,  and  appreciation  expectations  are  not  introduced.  If  the 
currency is misaligned from fundamentals, the intervention may be successful in realigning 
the currency. If not, sterilized intervention will most likely be ineffective, and for this reason is 
important  to  have  a  strong  presumption  that  the  currency  has  moved  away  from 
fundamentals  before 
intervention  allows 
authorities  to  increase  the  international  liquidity  position  of  the  economy  so  as  to  insure 
against a future curtailment of capital inflows.  
Naturally,  a  booming  economy,  with  a  widening  current  account  deficit,  persistent 
appreciation and low inflation may need some stabilization if the expansion is deemed to be 
unsustainable. Fiscal policy could help, but unfortunately it is not always available, especially 
in  countries  with  a  weak  fiscal  history.  Another  tool,  with  weak  evidence  supporting  its 
foreign  exchange 
intervening.3 
In  addition, 
                                                 
2  For  further  discussion  on  the  use  of  monetary  policy  to  affect  asset  prices,  in  particular  in  the  context  of 
inflation targeting in open economies, see De Gregorio (2010b). 
In economies following inflation targets is important that the intervention be coherent with the inflation outlook 
to avoid undermining credibility. Intervention can also be part of unconventional policies to reach the inflation 
target when interest rates are close to the zero lower bound. 
3 
BIS Review 124/2010 
 3
effectiveness, is capital controls.4 Regardless of whether they are effective or not, they may 
hide policy distortions. For example, policymakers thinking that capital controls are effective 
at insulating the economy from capital inflows, may tighten monetary policy to slowdown the 
expansion, but instead induce further inflows that look for loopholes to avoid the controls. For 
this reason I think that a more promising avenue is to look at the impact of capital inflows on 
financial  stability.  Indeed,  many  of  the  booms  in  asset  prices  and  activity  that  come  with 
capital inflows are caused and amplified in the financial system. 
Capital inflows and financial stability 
From  the  macro  point  of  view,  I  have  emphasized  currency  risks  associated  to  capital 
inflows. A flexible exchange rate should help mitigate this risk. In addition, the development 
of  the  foreign  exchange  derivatives  market  should  allow  private  agents  to  hedge  against 
currency  risk.  In  addition,  capital  inflows  may  be  behind  the  development  of  bubbles  in 
domestic asset prices, and there are also macro tools to deal with them. 
However, there are other risks that must be considered, which have implications on macro 
prudential regulation. Note that these risks may be relevant even when net capital flows are 
limited.  Therefore,  from  the  standpoint  of  financial  stability,  gross  flows  become  relevant 
determinants of fragilities. These risks associated to capital inflows are: funding and credit 
risks. 
Regarding funding risk, large capital inflows in the form of short-term loans to local banks will 
tend to increase banks’ dependence on this external funding source, which has been shown 
to be a volatile source of funding. From the point of view of central banks, the accumulation 
of  reserves  may  help  mitigate  the  economy-wide  consequences  of  this  risk,  but  the 
soundness of the banking system must be safeguarded with the proper regulation. 
As for credit risk, large capital inflows in the form of loans to local banks and portfolio debt 
securities  may  translate  into  an  increase  in  the  credit  supply  as  local  intermediaries  and 
corporations  access  more  elastic  and  often  cheaper  sources  of  funding  (beside  currency 
risk).  This  increase  in  the  supply  of  credit  in  the  local  economy  could  fuel  a  credit  boom, 
which in turn could translate into an excessive leveraging in the economy and an increase in 
banks’ credit risk. Furthermore, screening by external lenders may be more imperfect than 
local  screening,  which  can  lead  to  over-indebtedness  of  domestic  corporations  and  to 
increase  the  credit  risk  of  the  local  intermediaries  that  have  already  lent  to  these 
corporations. 
To  address  these  risks,  prudential  regulation  is  needed.  In  this  regard,  overall  liquidity 
requirements, in particular those associated to foreign short-term funding, provision policies 
to  address  the  credit  risk  associated  with  large  capital  inflows,  and  currency  mismatch 
restrictions are key areas on which authorities should focus attention. 
To the extent that banks are the primary source of local financial intermediation, prudential 
regulation  has  the  virtue  that  it  targets  the  problem  directly  –  i.e.,  it  targets  the  financial 
intermediaries where the credit and funding risks are incubating. However, when designing 
regulation it must be considered that focusing on prudential regulation to the banking system 
can foster banking disintermediation in favor of less regulated financial intermediaries, which 
certainly  goes  against  the  spirit  of  macroprudential  measures.  Indeed,  the  global  financial 
crisis  has  taught  us  the  dangers  of  generating  a  parallel  unregulated  banking  system  and 
steps  must  be  taken  to  limit  this  risky  behavior  must  be  taken,  by  enlarging  the  scope  of 
regulation and limiting the extent of banking activities. 
                                                 
4   The existing evidence for the case of Chile shows no significant effects on inflows or the real exchange rate, 
and  limited  effects  on  composition  of  inflows  (Cowan  and  De  Gregorio,  2007).  See  Ostry  et  al.  (2010)  for 
further discussion on capital controls and conditions for them to be used. 
4 
 BIS Review 124/2010
An  important  aspect  of  this  regulation  is  whether  it  should  be  adjusted  according  to  the 
availability  of  capital  inflows,  or  whether  it  should  be  time  invariant.  Let  me  share  some 
thoughts with you on this issue. 
First of all, macro-prudential regulation should aim at reducing a risk build-up that could lead 
to episodes of systemic financial instability. It is not a counter-cyclical macroeconomic tool. 
Interest rate policy should be the main counter-cyclical tool for central banks. This being said, 
regulation should not introduce additional procyclicality into the financial system. In Chile, for 
example, provisions are done on the basis of expected losses during the life of the credit. 
This stops short of the Spanish dynamic provisioning rule, but reduces the procyclical impact 
of  regulation,  in  particular  compared  to  the  method  of  constituting  provisions  according  to 
actual losses. 
Second, although desirable in several aspects, it seems to me that financial stability (and the 
build-up of risks) is such a multidimensional concept that either hinders the possibility of rules 
based  macro-prudential  policy  or  limits  it  to  certain  aspects  (for  example,  dynamic 
provisions),  which  must  be  supplemented  with  additional  discretionary  measures.  This 
implies that central banks (or whoever is responsible for systemic stability) must either have 
the regulatory tools at their disposal, or must have the adequate channels to convey these 
risks  to  the  institutions  that  do  have  regulatory  discretion.  In  Chile,  for  example,  although 
there is a separate bank Superintendency (SBIF), the Central Bank has regulatory authority 
over several aspects that relate to systemic financial stability. For banks, these relate with 
the authorization to use derivatives, regulation regarding market and liquidity risk, and others. 
In other areas, the Central Bank also has a say in “systemic” regulation such as overall limits 
for Pension Funds. This scheme accommodates recent policy concerns, since it avoids the 
conflict of interests that arises from mixing the micro supervisor with the monetary authority, 
while  preserving  an  institution  that  provides  a  broad  look  at  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system.  This  being  said,  however,  there  is  a  need  to  continue  strengthening  coordination 
instances  with  other  regulators.  In  this  sense  I  think  that  the  establishment  of  a  Financial 
Stability Committee, very much in line with the one established here in the United States, is a 
promising avenue to take.  
“Basel III” and the Chilean banking system 
When  discussing  financial  stability  these  days  one  cannot  help  thinking  of  the  recent 
agreements  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Regulation,  which  are  a  positive  step 
forward  in  strengthening  the  banking  system.  However,  I  would  like  to  highlight  that  many 
emerging  market  economies  already  fulfill  most  of  the  requirements  agreed  upon  for  early 
2019.  This  is  an  important  factor  explaining  why,  contrary  to  many  other  experiences  with 
international  crises,  the  financial  systems  of  emerging  market  economies  were  extremely 
resilient  during  the  global  financial  crisis,  and  expansionary  monetary  policies  have  been 
very effective because of well functioning financial systems. I will illustrate these points with 
the case of Chile.  
Even  though  capital  requirements  in  the  Chilean  banking  industry  still  follow  Basel  I  (only 
credit risk-weighted assets), it is possible to infer that the new BIS capital requirements do 
not  appear  restrictive.  In  fact,  considering  estimated  capital  charges  due  to  market  and 
operational risk, Tier 1 and Total Capital indicators are considerably above the BIS minima 
for 2019 (Table 1). This capital looseness allows for coverage of the conservation buffer and 
also the countercyclical buffer. 
As for common equity, more precision is needed. In its most acid definition, common equity 
corresponds  to  “paid-in  capital”,  which  represents  approximately  65%  of  Tier  1  capital.  In 
somewhat  looser  definitions,  retained  earnings  may  be  accounted  for  as  common  equity, 
which in that case may capture as much as 70% of Tier 1 capital. Either way, implementing a 
limit on the common equity to risk-weighted assets (RWA) ratio should not represent severe 
restrictions.  Additionally,  the  Tier  1  leverage  ratio  for  the  Chilean  banking  system  is 
BIS Review 124/2010 
 5
approximately  7%,  more  than  twice  the  BIS  preliminary  suggestion.  The  healthy  capital 
condition of the industry average is reflected at the individual bank level (Figure 5). 
No liquidity indicator was specified, but the introduction of such a minimum standard as of 
2015  was  agreed  upon.  Regardless,  the  Chilean  regulatory  framework  for  bank  liquidity 
considers quantitative limits on maturity mismatches over 30- and 90-day periods in local and 
foreign  currencies,  which  should  provide  a  reasonable  starting  point  for  the  application  of 
further BIS requirements in the medium term. 
Despite a promising start, it is clear that there are still many aspects in which reform is still 
needed. Addressing the risks posed by systemically important institutions is one such area. It 
seems clear at this stage that systemic institutions should be subject to stricter supervision 
and regulation. Moreover, there is a lot of recent work on determining which institutions are 
truly “systemic.”5 What I miss, however, is more discussion on regulation that directly limits 
the size of institutions. In Chile, for example, after a severe financial crisis in 1983 with close 
to 15% fall in output, a strong banking law was enacted, which has been improved over the 
years.  There  are  several  legal  regulations  designed  to  prevent  or  reduce  the  impact  of 
financial  distress  in  large  financial  institutions.  In  this  field,  one  of  the  most  important 
measures considered relates to operations and transactions that may lead a bank to obtain a 
significant market share. These operations require authorization by the SBIF which may also 
impose  conditions  to  such  authorizations.6  For  example,  the  SBIF  may  require  that  the 
effective net worth of the bank or banks involved be more than 8% and up to 14% of their 
risk-weighted  assets;  or  demand  that  the  limit  of  the  loans  granted  by  a  bank  to  another 
financial institution be reduced to 20% of the effective net worth (section 35, banking law). 
Concluding remarks 
The  challenges  facing  emerging  market  economies  are  different  from  those  of  industrial 
countries.  While  the  latter  struggle  with  ensuring  a  sustained  recovery  from  the  Great 
Recession, the former have to manage a healthy and vigorous process of growth, which is 
not  exempt  from  tensions.  The  need  of  the  world  to  rebalance  saving-investment  across 
countries  will  have  as  counterpart  capital  flows  adjustments.  Exchange  rate  flexibility, 
avoiding serious misalignments, should help to smooth this process. 
It is tempting to think that emerging economies did not suffer the financial crisis for having 
better  regulatory  framework  than  industrial  ones.  However,  the  issue  is  somewhat  more 
complicated.  In  some  way,  emerging  markets  enjoyed  also  less  complexities  and  smaller 
sized  financial  systems.  For  the  current  level  of  development  and  the  size  of  the  financial 
system, regulations appear to have worked fine. But, the challenge is how to allow continued 
financial  development  in  the  context  of  a  solid  financial  system.  For  this  reason  it  is  very 
important  to  learn  from  mistakes  in  more  mature  markets,  and  to  participate  and  analyze 
coming changes in the global financial landscape.  
                                                 
5   See  IMF  (2010),  chapter  2,  and  references  contained  in  it,  for  a  discussion  of  balance  sheet  and  asset 
co-movement approaches to determining systemic institutions. 
6   Actually,  the  SBIF  may  deny  authorization  to  any  bank  merger,  acquisition  of  assets  of  a  bank  by  another 
banking entity, or taking control of two o more existing banks by the same person or group, or to increase 
substantially the existing control if the acquiring bank that performs said merger, acquisition or the resulting 
group  of  banks  reaches  a  significant  market  share.  In  order  to  deny  authorization,  the  SBIF  needs  prior 
approval by the Central Bank Board, issued by the majority of all Board members. 
6 
 BIS Review 124/2010
Net flows of investment funds to emerging economies
(billions of dollars accumulated in twelve moving months, weekly data)
Figure 1 
120
80
40
0
-40
-80
Equity flows
Emerging (1)
Latin America
Total equity
Asia ex-Japan 
Other emerging (2)
120
80
40
0
-40
-80
Total flows
Total
Total fixed income
Total equity
06
07
08
09
10
06
07
08
09
10
(1) Global Emerging Markets (GEM).
(2) Middle East, Emerging Europe and Africa.
Source: Emerging Portfolio Fund Research.
Figure 2 
Monetary Policy Rates in the world (1)
(percent)
 Developed economies (2)
Chile (4)
Survey emerging ec.
Emerging economies (3)
Survey developed ec.
Survey Chile
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
97
98
99
00
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
(1) The solid lines show the simple average of the reference rates of each group of countries. 
Dots are the averaged responses of analysts surveyed by Bloomberg during July 2010,
regarding expectations for September and December 2010, and March and June 2011.
(2) Includes Canada, Eurozone, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, U.K. and U.S.
(3) Includes Brazil, Colombia, China, Czech Rep., Hungary, Mexico, Poland, Peru,  
South Africa, South Korea and Turkey.
(4) Data from before the nominalization of the reference rate (August 2001),
consider actual inflation. Subsequently, they consider the effective policy rate.  
Sources: Central Bank of Chile and Bloomberg.
 BIS Review 124/2010 
 7
Figure 3 
Economic growth
(annual change, percent)
Developed economies
Chile
Emerging economies
Emerging economies
Developed economies
Chile
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
80
83
86
89
92
95
98
01
04
07
10(f) 13(f)
(f) Forecast.
Source: International Monetary Fund (WEO, April 2010).
Figure 4 
Current account balance
(percent of GDP)
Developed economies
Emerging economies
Emerging economies
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
80
83
86
89
92
95
98
01
04
07
10(f) 13(f)
(f) Forecast.
Source: International Monetary Fund (WEO, April 2010).
 15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
 BIS Review 124/2010
 8 
 Figure 5 
Capital Adequacy Distribution
Chilean Banking System - Basel II estimate
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
8%
12
26%
5
42%
4
1%
2
23%
2
9 - 10%
10 - 11%
11 - 12%
12 - 13%
> 13%
Above the bar: Percentage of total assets.
Source: SBIF, BCCh. June 2010
Total capital to RWA
Current capital standing of the Chilean banking industry 
Table 1 
  BIS Review 124/2010 
  9
References 
Cowan,  K.  and  J.  De  Gregorio  (2007),  “International  Borrowing,  Capital  Controls  and  the 
Exchange  Rate:  Lessons  from  Chile”,  in  S.  Edwards  (ed.),  Capital  Controls  and  Capital 
Flows  in  Emerging  Economies:  Policies,  Practices  and  Consequences,  NBER  and  The 
University of Chicago Press. 
De  Gregorio,  J.  (2010a),  “Tackling  the  Capital  Inflow  Challenge”,  Economic  Policy  paper 
N° 35, Central Bank of Chile. 
De  Gregorio,  J.  (2010b),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Financial  Stability:  An  Emerging  Markets 
Perspective”, International Finance, Vol. 13, N° 1, pp. 141–156. 
IMF (2010), Global Stability Report, April, International Monetary Fund, Washington DC. 
Ostry,  J.,  A.  Ghosh,  K.  Habermeier,  M.  Chamon,  M.  Qureshi  and  D.  Reinhardt,  “Capital 
Inflows: The Role of Controls”, IMF Staff Position Note, SPN/10/04. 
10 
 BIS Review 124/2010
