Duvvuri Subbarao: Economic crisis and crisis in economics – some 
reflections 
M Ct M Chidambaram Chettyar Memorial Lecture by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the 
Reserve Bank of India, at the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 27 August 2010. 
 M. Ct. M. Chidambaram 
1. 
Thank  you  for  this  kind  invitation.  It  is  a  pleasure  and  privilege  to  deliver  the 
M. Ct. M.  Chidambaram  Chettyar  Memorial  Lecture  honouring  one  of  the  most  eminent 
entrepreneurs and financiers of the early twentieth century.  
2. 
The Chettyar community of Tamil Nadu has made impressive contributions to our 
national  life.  The  stereotype  view  is  that  the  Chettyar  community  is  conservative.  But  Shri 
M. Ct. M. Chidambaram broke that stereotype. His is the story of a visionary, ahead of his 
time  who,  through  his  thought  and  action,  contributed  to  laying  the  foundations  for 
transforming India from an agrarian society to an industrializing nation.  
3.  
M Ct, as he was popularly known, was a true pioneer who did not let the restrictive 
economic environment of his time restrain his abounding spirit of enterprise. He started the 
United  India  Life  Insurance,  the  first  national  level  life  insurance  company;  ventured  into 
general  insurance  through  the  United  India  Fire  and  General  Insurance  Company, 
established  a  bank  –  the  Indian  Overseas  Bank,  and  set  up  a  large  manufacturing  unit  – 
Travancore Rayon. M Ct thought big. The LIC building on Anna Salai in Chennai that he built 
remains iconic even today never mind that taller skyscrapers have since come up. I can go 
on with the list. What is impressive about this remarkable man is that he accomplished all 
this in an era of controls and regulations, and that too in a tragically short life span of just 
46 years. That all these institutions survive to date is a tribute to M Ct’s enduring legacy.  
4. 
M  Ct  was  quite  the  Renaissance  man  who  let  his  life  and  work  be  influenced  by 
learning from across disciplines as well as from listening to a wide range of people. But as 
with any successful entrepreneur, in the end, he depended on his intuition and judgement – 
some may call it plain common sense – to determine his course of action. In that sense, M Ct 
had  unwittingly  set  a  role  model  for  policy  makers.  Good  policy  makers  should  get  all  the 
technical  inputs  and  advice,  but  ultimately  need  to  superimpose  their  judgement  on  that 
analysis  to  reach  policy  decisions.  This  is  something  that  M  Ct  mastered.  The  best  way 
perhaps to pay tribute to M Ct is to convey to you how we struggle with making judgement 
calls on top of technical analysis in order to reach policy decisions.  
5.  
For  good  economic  policy,  you  need  good  economics.  But  you  also  need  good 
judgement because no economic theory can capture the complexity and capriciousness of 
the  real  world.  And  this  is  what  I  want  to  focus  on  in  this  lecture.  In  particular,  I  want  to 
address two issues. In the first part of the lecture, I will address the question, has economics 
failed  us.  And  in  the  second  part,  I  will  try  to  convey  to  you  the  dilemmas  and  the 
complexities that policy makers confront in making judgement calls.  
The Queen at LSE  
6.  
A few months into the crisis, the Queen happened to be at the London School of 
Economics and asked a perfectly sensible question: “how come none of the economists saw 
the crisis coming”. The Queen’s question resonated with people around the world who felt 
that  they  had  been  let  down  by  economics  and  economists.  As  economists  saw  their 
profession discredited and their reputations dented, the economic crisis soon turned into a 
crisis in economics.  
BIS Review 111/2010 
 1
Crisis in economics  
7.  
This was a particularly hard landing for the profession. The years before the crisis, in 
fact, saw economics as a subject gain impressively in clout and popularity. The price stability 
and macroeconomic stability that prevailed over an extended period – the Great Moderation – 
enhanced the standing of economics and gave economists an enviable halo; the increasing 
sophistication of financial markets where risk could seemingly be measured with precision of 
up  to  five  decimal  points  gave  economics  the  clout  of  prophesy;  and  the  way  economists 
were  able  to  raise  obscure  questions  such  as  why  drug  dealers  continue  to  live  with  their 
mothers, what school teachers and sumo wrestlers have in common, and answered those 
questions with impressive insights, awed common folk. Economists were being sought out to 
pronounce on an ever growing number of issues and their opinions were being heard with 
regard and trust. And then the financial crisis came and crashed all this.  
8. 
The sharp reversal in fortunes raises two questions: what went wrong and what can 
be done about it. Both questions are complex; the first because it has too many answers and 
the second because it has too few. What I propose to do in this first part of this lecture is to 
address these two questions.  
What went wrong with economics?  
9. 
Let  me  turn  to  the  first  question.  What  went  wrong  with  economics?  I  am  not  an 
economist, only a practitioner of economics. I will, therefore, restrict myself to just the bigger 
maladies that, I think, afflict the discipline.  
With the benefit of hindsight and by wide agreement, it now seems that by far the 
10. 
most egregious fault of economics, one that led it astray, has been to project it like an exact 
science.  The  charge  is  that  economists  suffered  from  “physics  envy”  which  led  them  to 
formulate  elegant  theories  and  models  –  using  sophisticated  mathematics  with  impressive 
quantitative  finesse  –  deluding  themselves  and  the  world  at  large  that  their  models  have 
more exactitude than they actually did.  
Is economics like physics?  
11.  
parallels between economics and physics. Let me explore these parallels briefly.  
(i)  
As I started thinking about this charge, I realized that there are indeed quite a few 
theory  of 
rational  expectations  says 
The 
that  wages  and  prices  adjust 
instantaneously to new conditions because of perfect information just as Newtonian 
physics  says  that  the  gravitational  configuration  of  the  universe  will  change 
instantaneously in response to any infinitesimal change in the system, an inference 
that Einstein found troubling because it conflicted with his special theory of relativity.  
The centerpiece of Keynes’ theory is the existence of inescapable uncertainty about 
the future which implies that risk cannot be measured precisely beyond a point, and 
that  taking  uncertainty  seriously  has  profound  implications  for  how  one  applies 
economics. Look at the parallel in physics. The foundation of quantum mechanics is 
Heisenberg’s  Uncertainty  Principle  which  puts  an  irreducible  limit  on  our  ability  to 
simultaneously determine the position and momentum of a particle.  
Physicists  know  of  “singularities”,  or  black  holes  if  you  will,  where  the  laws  of 
physics  break  down.  In  economics,  the  analogy  would  be  Depression Economics. 
There is currently a fierce debate, especially in the US, about the quantum of fiscal 
stimulus and the timing of its withdrawal. Some economists, notably Krugman, have 
argued  that  the  size  of  the  stimulus  should  be  much  larger  than  what  the  models 
suggest simply because “in Depression Economics, the usual laws of economics do 
not apply”.  
(ii)  
(iii)  
2 
 BIS Review 111/2010
Why economics cannot be like physics  
12.  
Striking as these comparisons are, I am sure, you have noticed an obvious flaw in 
this line of thinking. Similarity in a few laws does not mean similarity in the basic nature of the 
academic  discipline.  The  fundamental  difference  between  physics  and  economics  is  that 
physics deals with the physical universe which is governed by immutable laws, beyond the 
pale  of  human  behaviour.  Economics,  in  contrast,  is  a  social  science  whose  laws  are 
influenced  by  human  behaviour.  Simply  put,  I  cannot  change  the  mass  of  an  electron  no 
matter how I behave but I can change the price of a derivative by my behaviour.  
13.  
The  laws  of  physics  are  universal  in  space  and  time.  The  laws  of  economics  are 
very  much  a  function  of  the  context.  Going  back  to  the  earlier  example,  the  mass  of  an 
electron does not change whether we are in the world of Newton or of Einstein. But in the 
world  of  economics,  how  firms,  households  and  governments  behave  is  altered  by  the 
reigning economic ideology of the time. To give another example, there is nothing absolute, 
for  example,  about  savings  being  equal  to  investment  or  supply  equaling  demand  as 
maintained by classical economics but there is something absolute about energy lost being 
equal to energy gained as enunciated by classical physics.  
14.  
In natural sciences, progress is a two way street. It can run from empirical findings 
to theory or the other way round. The famous Michelson-Morley experiment that found that 
the velocity of light is constant led to the theory of relativity – an example of progression from 
practice to theory. In the reverse direction, the ferocious search now under way for the Higgs 
Boson – the God particle – which has been predicted by quantum theory is an example of 
traversing  from  theory  to  practice.  In  economics,  on  the  other  hand,  where  the  human 
dimension  is  paramount,  the  progression  has  necessarily  to  be  one  way,  from  empirical 
finding to theory. There is a joke that if something works in practice, economists run to see if 
it works in theory. Actually, I don’t see the joke; that is indeed the way it should be.  
15.  
Karl  Popper,  by  far  the  most  influential  philosopher  of  science  of  the  twentieth 
century, propounded that a good theory is one that gives rise to falsifiable hypotheses. By 
this measure, Einstein’s General Theory was a good theory as it led to the hypothesis about 
the curvature of space under the force of gravity which indeed was verified by scientists from 
observations made during a solar eclipse from the West African islands of Sao Tome and 
Principe. Economics on the other hand cannot stand the scrutiny of the falsifiable hypothesis 
test since empirical results in economics are a function of the context.  
16.  
The short point is that economics cannot lay claim to the immutability, universality, 
precision and exactitude of physics. Economics is a social science and its predictive power is 
at a fundamental level influenced by human behaviour and actions. Let me now illustrate how 
real  world  behaves  in  capricious  and  unpredictable  ways  posing  complex  challenges  for 
economic prediction.  
(i)  
Take the recent financial crisis. It is not as if no one saw the pressures building up. 
There  were  a  respectable  number  of  economists  who  warned  of  the  perilous 
consequences  of  the  build-up  of  global  imbalances,  said  that  this  was  simply 
unsustainable  and  predicted  a  currency  collapse.  In  the  event,  we  did  have  the 
system imploding but not as a currency collapse but as a melt down of the financial 
system.  
Again,  there  was  widespread  apprehension  that  the  financial  crisis  would  be 
followed by a sovereign debt crisis under the weight of unprecedented government 
borrowing to finance the fiscal stimulus. We did get a sovereign debt crisis but not 
because  of  stimulus  led  debt  burden  but  because  of  fiscal  profligacy  in  some 
European  countries,  notably  Greece,  made  possible  by  the  umbrella  cover  of  a 
monetary union.  
(ii)  
BIS Review 111/2010 
 3
Economic models  
17.  
Moving on with what went wrong with economics, another flaw, actually one related 
to  “physics  envy”,  is  the  obsession  of  economists  with  models  so  much  so  that  they 
convinced themselves that if something cannot be modeled, it is not fit enough for academic 
pursuit. Indeed, with the benefit of hindsight, it is now possible to see that one of the basic 
causes  of  the  crisis  was  that  the  models  used  by  central  banks,  such  as  even  the 
sophisticated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) models, remained confined to 
the real sectors of the economy and did not capture the complexities of the financial markets. 
It is not surprising that economists missed seeing the crisis brewing in the underbelly of the 
financial sector.  
18.  
Yes, it is possible to construct beautifully precise models but only if you assume that 
rational economic agents with perfect information are operating in free markets that always 
return to equilibrium. But none of these assumptions holds true in the real world; models of 
economists  are  mere  abstractions  of  reality  that  are  useful  for  understanding  but  woefully 
inadequate  for  prediction.  That  is  why  good  economists  are  those  who  superimpose 
judgement  on  the  predictions  thrown  up  by  models,  a  subject  to  which  I  will  return  in  the 
second part of my lecture.  
19.  
Of all the economic theories that came under attack after the crisis, the one that got 
the  most  grilling  was  the  efficient  market  hypothesis  put  forward  by  Eugene  Fama  of  the 
Chicago School. Its central tenet is that the price of a financial product captures all available 
information about it. The efficient market hypothesis did away with the unrealistic assumption 
of perfect information but it assumed perfect information about risk. An obvious inference of 
the theory is that risk is perfectly measureable, and if it can be measured perfectly it makes 
eminent sense to use that measurement in economic decisions.  
20.  
Not  surprisingly,  the  efficient  market  hypothesis  spurred  furious  model  building 
based on the assumption that the distribution of risk is captured by the Gaussian bell curve. 
The spectacularly, albeit briefly, successful Black-Scholes model for option pricing too was 
based on the normal distribution of risk and ignored the possibility of extreme events.  
21.  
With the benefits of hindsight, it is now clear that the models used by governments, 
central banks and economic agents were flawed in many ways. First, the models assumed 
that  the  real  world  exhibits  stability  over  time,  and  by  extension  that  the  future  can  be 
predicted from an extrapolation of the past and present trends. Students of physics will notice 
that  this  is  akin  to  the  Newtonian  world  view  that  God  is,  in  fact,  a  clock-maker  and  the 
universe  is  nothing  more  than  clockwork.  Knowing  the  initial  conditions,  it  is  possible  to 
predict the precise configuration of the universe for any point of time into eternity.  
22.  
The second flaw was to believe that risk follows a normal distribution – a flaw that 
became evident by a series of failures, most prominently by the spectacular collapse of the 
hedge fund Long Term Capital Management (LTCM) based on the Black-Scholes model. As 
the  much  celebrated  author  Nassim  Taleb  argues,  conventional  models  used  by  financial 
economists not only didn’t capture, but even refused to acknowledge, the possibility of black 
swans – low probability, high impact events.  
23.  
The third major flaw of financial models was that instead of fitting the models to the 
real world, they tried to fit the real world to the models. In the process, they assumed away 
the models’ limitations and caveats. Convenience, and not conviction, dictated the choices 
that economists made. As the Economist magazine put it so well, economists got seduced by 
their  models,  fooling  themselves  that  what  the  models  leave  out  does  not  matter.  This 
penchant of economists to build models determined more by what they can rather than what 
they  should  is  best  illustrated  by  the  joke  that  I  am  sure  most  of  you  heard  –  about  a 
drunkard who lost his keys and was searching for them under a lamp post not because he 
lost the keys there but because that is where light was.  
4 
 BIS Review 111/2010
What can be done about it?  
24.  
I realize I have straddled economics and physics somewhat erratically to convey to 
you  what  went  wrong  with  economics.  Now  let  me  turn,  if  only  briefly,  to  the  follow  on 
question about what can be done about it.  
25.  
The first thing is for economics to give up the pretence of being an exact science 
and striving for false precision. While there is value to models for furthering understanding of 
economic  phenomena,  economists  should,  however,  be  sensitive  to  the  limitations  of  their 
models and use judgement in interpreting model results. And we clearly need to get back to 
emphasizing the importance of economists “getting their hands dirty” with empirical work.  
26.  
Then there is the crucial aspect of economic history. Much of economic thinking has 
been  handicapped  by  economists  not  having  a  sense  of  economic  history.  In  their 
painstakingly  researched  book,  “This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly”, 
Kenneth  Rogoff  and  Carmen  Reinhart  show  how  over  eight  hundred  years,  all  financial 
crises can be traced to the same fundamental causes as if we learnt nothing from one crisis 
to the next. Each time, experts have chimed that “this time is different” claiming that the old 
rules do not apply and the new situation is dissimilar to the previous one. If only training in 
economics  had  included  a  study  of  economic  history,  perhaps  we  could  have  avoided 
repeating history, never mind as a farce or as a tragedy.  
27.  
Finally,  economics,  perhaps  more  than  other  social  sciences,  has  suffered  from 
“group think”. Group think is best illustrated by the simulated game of a beauty contest where 
prizes  are  awarded  if  your  choice  matches  the  aggregate  choice  of  the  group.  Under  this 
rule, you get rewarded not for original thinking but for mastering the art of thinking like others. 
Keynes made the point a long time ago, comparing market psychology to a beauty contest: 
“It  is  not  the  case  of  choosing  those  which,  to  the  best  of  one’s  judgement,  are  really  the 
prettiest,  nor  even  those  which  average  opinion  genuinely  thinks  are  the  prettiest  …  we 
devote our intelligences to anticipating what average opinion expects the average opinion to 
be. “ Might it be the case that economics is suffering from too much inbreeding? Economists 
all read the same books, browse the same journals and use the same data because that is 
what  gets  professionally  rewarded.  And  that  inevitable  leads  to  “group  think”  and  all  the 
associated follies.  
Applying economics to real world policy  
28.  
While I have spoken about the follies of economics, I am hardly suggesting that we 
can  do  away  with  economics.  Indeed  economics  needs  to  be  pursued  as  an  academic 
discipline even more vigorously but we need to be more intelligent and aware in translating 
textbook economics to practical policy making. In applying economics to practical policy, a 
sound  economic  background  is  necessary.  Models  too  are  needed  to  capture  the 
complexities  of  the  real world.  But  these  are  not  sufficient. In  making  economic  decisions, 
practical  policy  makers  need  to  superimpose  judgement  on  the  inferences  thrown  up  by 
analysis and models. I  want to illustrate this by presenting to you the rationale behind the 
Reserve Bank’s calibrated exit from the expansionary monetary stance of the crisis and the 
policy dilemmas that we confront.  
Calibrated exit from expansionary monetary stance  
29.  
Not unsurprisingly, emerging market economies (EMEs) recovered from the global 
crisis  sooner  than  advanced  economies  –  an  outcome  attributable  in  part  to  the  relatively 
limited exposure of their banking systems to tainted assets and in part to the self-insurance 
they had built up through foreign exchange reserves.  
BIS Review 111/2010 
 5
India’s recovery  
30.  
On the recovery trail, India has been an outlier even compared to other EMEs. Our 
recovery  has  been  swifter  reinforcing  the  fact  that  the  drivers  of  our  growth  are  largely 
domestic.  We  have  been  an  outlier  on  the  inflation  front  as  well.  Even  as  most  advanced 
economies  were  flirting  with  deflation,  price  pressures  caught  up  with  us  and  headline 
inflation started inching up.  
31.  
Sensing our unique growth-inflation dynamics, the Reserve Bank began managing 
market  expectations  by  signalling  the  need  to  exit  from  the  crisis  triggered  expansionary 
stance even as the rest of the world was still struggling with crisis management. Ironically, 
we  had  to  begin  this  messaging  about  exit  as  early  as  August  2009,  when  our  headline 
inflation was still in the negative territory and some analysts were even talking about a risk of 
deflation.  
October–December 2009  
32.  
Sure enough, WPI inflation surfaced into positive territory by September 2009, and 
soon  started  increasing.  Even  as  the  reversal  owed  partly  to  the  base  effect,  inflationary 
pressures  were  also  fuelled  by  supply  shocks  arising  from  a  deficient  monsoon.  The 
challenge  for  the  Reserve  Bank  during  the  October–December  quarter  of  2009  was  to 
respond to a hardening inflation situation even as recovery was still fragile.  
33.  
The arguments for not yet reversing the policy stance were clear enough: recovery 
had yet to take firm root and also that monetary policy is not an effective tool against inflation 
emanating from supply constraints. There was an equally persuasive case to the contrary – 
of tightening the monetary stance to combat inflation. Given that monetary policy acts with a 
lag – a lag that can be as long as 12–18 months – the argument was that the Reserve Bank 
needed  to  look  ahead and  curb  incipient  inflationary  pressures.  The  Reserve  Bank,  it  was 
contended, also had to keep a watch on inflation expectations since the inflation outlook will 
be shaped by what people expect will happen to inflation as much as by the actual inflation 
itself.  
34.  
Balancing these arguments for and against reversal was the crux of the judgement 
call  that  the  Reserve  Bank  had  to  make  in  the  October  2009  policy  review.  If  we  were  to 
begin the reversal of the accommodative stance, we had to be credible. And this is where 
real life policy differs from physics. Once a central bank credibly commits to a reversal of an 
expansionary  stance,  firms  and  households  change  their  behaviour.  How  this  behaviour 
changes  also  needs  to  be  factored  in  by  the  central  bank.  In  the  event,  we  reversed  the 
expansionary stance by raising the SLR requirement to the pre-crisis level of 25 per cent of 
net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) of scheduled commercial banks. This was admittedly 
a  modest  step  but  helped  us  in  signalling  the  beginning  of  the  reversal  of  our  monetary 
stance.  
January–March 2010  
35.  
By the time of our January 2010 policy review, it was clear that we had to take more 
substantive steps towards rolling back the stimulus. Our main dilemma was that premature 
exit could derail the as yet fragile growth, but delayed exit could potentially engender inflation 
expectations.  The  task  was  about  the  precise  calibration  of  the  policy  action.  Increase  in 
policy interest rates cannot be effective if there is a large systemic liquidity. We determined 
therefore that the right sequencing would be to withdraw the excess liquidity before raising 
policy  rates.  Accordingly,  we  raised  the  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR)  by  75  basis  points  from 
5 per cent to 5.75 per cent of NDTL.  
36.  
The  growth-inflation  dynamics  changed  markedly  after  the  January  2010  policy 
review.  Economic  recovery  was  taking  firm  hold  as  evidenced  by  expanding  exports, 
improvement  in  industrial  production  and  sustained  increase  in  financing  from  banks  and 
6 
 BIS Review 111/2010
non-banks. On the other hand, there were distinct signs of the inflation process getting more 
generalized.  Information  then  available  indicated  that  the  contribution  of  non-food  to  WPI 
inflation  (excluding  food  articles  and  food  products)  which  was  zero  in  November  2009 
surged to nearly 50 per cent by February 2010. Also, year-on-year non-food manufacturing 
products inflation, with a weight of 52 per cent in the WPI basket, which was (–) 0.4 per cent 
in  November  2009  rose  sharply  to  4.5  per  cent  by  February  2010  evidencing  incipient 
demand  side  pressures.  We  determined  that  we  had  to  act  quickly  before  inflation 
expectations get further entrenched. Accordingly, in an unscheduled and mid-quarter policy 
action, we raised the policy interest rates by 25 basis points raising the reverse repo rate to 
3.5 per cent and the repo rate to 5.0 per cent.  
that 
theory 
tells  us 
Monetary 
April 2010 and beyond  
37.  
if  prices  come  under  pressure  because  of 
strengthening demand, monetary tightening has to take place. But monetary policy does not 
offer a template for when to tighten, how to tighten and how much to tighten. This remains a 
judgement call. We face this dilemma all the time but did so most acutely during the Annual 
Policy Review in April 2010. Year-on-year WPI non-food manufactured products inflation had 
moved  up  further  from  4.5  per  cent  in  February  2010  to  5.4  per  cent  in  March  2010 
evidencing clearly that demand side pressures on inflation were strengthening.  
38.  
To understand the demand side pressures in perspective, we need to go back two 
years  to  August  2008,  a  month  before  the  global  crisis  struck.  At  that  time  inflation  in  the 
country was raging well above double digits. Some of it was due to the unprecedented rise in 
global  crude  and  commodity  prices,  but  a  significant  portion  of  it  was  also  due  to  sizzling 
growth in an economy that was structurally capacity constrained across the entire spectrum – 
infrastructure, agriculture, industry and services. Then came the crisis and the monetary and 
fiscal  stimuli  in  response.  A  part  of  the  stimulus  was  aimed  at  supporting  investment,  and 
public  and  private  infrastructure  investment  did  indeed  increase,  but  much  of  the  stimulus 
ended  up  supporting  consumption.  This  helped  the  economy  weather  the  crisis  but  the 
supply  constraints  remained.  As  a  result,  when  recovery  started  and  demand  pressures 
started building up, capacity constraints started becoming increasingly evident.  
39.  
So, at the time of the April 2010 policy review, we had to balance the by now well-
known  arguments  in  managing  the  growth-inflation  dynamics.  Some  analysts  had  argued 
that  we  were  already  behind  the  curve  and  that  unless  we  tightened  substantively,  the 
economy ran the risk of a hard landing – which is to say that we were boxing ourselves into a 
corner, that delayed response would mean much sharper increase in interest rates later on 
and that will severely impair growth.  
40.  
Even  as  we  were  managing  the  macroeconomic  situation  at  home,  we  had  to  be 
mindful of global developments. The Great Recession in the advanced economies appeared 
to  have  reversed  course  by  mid-September  2009  and  some  calm  seemed  to  return  to  the 
global markets. It was widely expected that the recovery would be sluggish; but subsequent 
developments belied even these modest expectations. While recovery prospects in Europe 
remain  clouded  by  sovereign  debt  concerns,  recovery  in  US  appears  constrained  by 
consumer spending and private investment not picking up sufficiently to offset the impact of 
the waning stimulus. We had to factor in these developments too in calibrating our exit path.  
41.  
Keeping these domestic and external developments in view, in our April 2010 Policy 
review, we raised the CRR by a further 25 basis points to 6 per cent and the policy rates too 
by  25  basis  points  each.  We  followed  that  up  with  two  policy  actions  in  July  2010  further 
raising the policy interest rates.  
To summarize, as part of crisis management starting October 2008, we reduced the 
42.  
CRR  by  400  basis  points,  the  repo  rate  by  425  basis  points  and  the  reverse  repo  rate 
275 basis  points.  As  part  of  the  calibrated  exit  starting  October  2009,  we  raised  CRR  by 
100 basis points, the repo rate by 100 basis points and the reverse repo by 125 basis points. 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 7
It must be noted that on top of this, there has been some autonomous tightening of 150 basis 
points because of the tightened liquidity and the consequent shift of the operative policy rate 
from  the  bottom  of  the  LAF  corridor  (absorption  mode)  to  the  top  of  the  corridor  (injection 
mode).  
43.  
Some  critics  contend  that  the  Reserve  Bank  is  “behind  the  curve”.  Others  put  it 
differently  saying  that  we  are  yet  a  distance  away  from  the  “neutral  rates”.  This  criticism 
obviously presumes a notion of the shape of the curve or the neutral rates. This is a complex 
debate  to  pursue  in  the  Indian  context.  Technically,  the  “neutral  rate  of  interest”  is  an 
important  concept  in  monetary  policy  and  a  potentially  useful  guide  to  monetary  policy 
stance. The neutral rate is defined as a rate that is consistent with the economy’s potential 
growth  and  low  and  stable  inflation.  The  actual  policy  rate  will,  therefore,  differ  from  the 
theoretical neutral rate if the underlying parameters – actual growth and inflation – are away 
from their respective potential or target rates. The neutral rate evidently varies over time as 
the potential growth rate of the economy changes – which in turn is typically a function of the 
demographic  profile,  the  fiscal  stance  of  the  government  and  technological  changes.  In  a 
rapidly growing economy like that of India, the structural changes make the potential growth 
rate even more variable. That makes the neutral rate even more difficult to estimate and a 
less useful policy guide. 
 
Policy Rates – During and After Crisis 
September 2008–August 2010 
Crisis Management 
Calibrated Exit 
Variable 
Rates in 
September 
2008  
(before 
crisis) 
Reduction as 
part of crisis 
management
(Oct. 2008–
Sept. 2009) 
(basis 
points) 
Rates in 
September 
2009 
CRR 
Repo 
Reverse Repo 
 
9% 
9% 
6% 
400 
425 
275 
5% 
4.75% 
3.25% 
Increase as 
part of cali-
brated exit 
(Oct. 2009– 
Aug. 2010) 
(basis 
points) 
100 
100 
125 
Rates in 
August 2010 
6% 
5.75% 
4.50% 
Outlook  
44.  
What  is  the  outlook?  There  is  evidence  that  growth  is  getting  more  broad  based. 
Inflationary pressures too are easing because of improved supply position as also the impact 
of monetary tightening effected by the Reserve Bank. Going forward, the Reserve Bank will 
calibrate policy action to the evolving growth-inflation dynamics. Given the uncertainty in the 
world  and  the  lags  in  monetary  transmission,  it  is  not  possible  to  offer  more  precise 
guidance. All I can say is that our guide post is festina lente – as the Romans used to say – 
make haste slowly.  
45.  
One final point as I close this issue. The Reserve Bank has to balance between the 
objectives  of  growth,  price  stability  and  financial  stability  with  the  intersé  prioritization 
determined by the  macroeconomic context. Determining this prioritization is the judgement 
call of the Reserve Bank. People who apprehend that monetary tightening will hurt growth 
must remember that even if there is some sacrifice of output in the near-term, we are better 
off curbing inflation since inflation can be inimical to sustainable and equitable growth in the 
medium term.  
8 
 BIS Review 111/2010
Conclusion  
46.  
Let  me  now  conclude.  I  started  with  the  Queen’s  query  to  economists  about  the 
shortcomings of their trade, went on to sketch the perils of economics positioning itself as an 
exact science and argued that economic thinking has to be conditioned by human behaviour. 
I  then  explained  how,  in  economic  policy  formulation,  we  need  to  use  judgement  over  the 
results of analysis and modeling to decide among policy choices.  
47.  
Since so much of my talk has been shaped by comparing economics to physics, let 
me  also  conclude  with  a  parallel  between  the  two  disciplines.  Physics,  an  exact  science, 
explores known unknowns. Economics, a social science, deals with unknown unknowns. We 
all know that all through his life, Einstein remained skeptical about quantum mechanics. In 
particular, he could not reconcile to the probabilistic nature of the physical world implied by 
quantum physics and famously said that “God does not play dice”. Less well known perhaps 
is the retort of Neils Bohr who told Einstein, “Albert, stop telling God what he can or cannot 
do”. Economists have a much humbler remit. They cannot even tell man, let alone God, what 
he  can  or  cannot  do.  They  just  have  to  take  human  behaviour  as  given  and  pursue  their 
trade on that fundamental premise. 
BIS Review 111/2010 
 9
