Usha Thorat: Funding of deposit insurance systems 
Keynote address by Mrs Usha Thorat, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
International  Conference  organised  by  the  Deposit  Insurance  and  Credit  Guarantee 
Corporation (DICGC) with the 8th Asia Regional Committee Meeting, Goa, 18 January 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
1. 
It gives me great pleasure to be in the midst of the deposit insurers of the world. I 
have had the pleasure of meeting many of you at conferences in the past and I am delighted 
to  see  you  again  at  Goa  –  a  favourite  tourist  destination  in  India,  famous  for  its  beaches, 
churches and cuisine. I hope you find the time to enjoy what Goa has to offer in addition to 
conferring on the very relevant subject of “Funding Deposit Insurance System”. 
2. 
The theme of the Conference says it all – funding deposit insurance systems is the 
crux  of  the  matter.  The  global  financial  crisis  has  underscored  the  need  for  a  strong  and 
stable deposit insurance fund, without which, the credibility of the deposit insurance system 
can be eroded; it is also realised that a credible and transparent deposit insurance system is 
critical  for  maintaining  public  confidence  in  the  banking  system  and  thereby  for  financial 
stability.  That  the  issue  of  funding  is  so  relevant  to  the  credibility  of  the  deposit  insurance 
system is highlighted by the unprecedented decision this year by the Iceland Government to 
hold a referendum to approve or reject the terms of a state guarantee on the debts of the 
Depositors' and Investors' Guarantee Fund, in particular a loan from the governments of the 
United  Kingdom  and  the  Netherlands  to  cover  deposit  insurance  obligations  in  those 
countries. 
3. 
It is quite clear that deposit insurance is not designed to deal with systemic crisis of 
the proportions that we have witnessed and cannot be expected to be able to deal with a 
situation  of widespread  failure  of  banks.  At  the  same  time,  given  the  contagious  nature  of 
bank  failures,  it  is  necessary  that  the  deposit  insurance  funds  factor-in  the  possibility  of 
several banks failing simultaneously. In this context, I hope the conference will discuss the 
subject of how deposit insurers can determine the adequacy of the deposit insurance fund to 
be able to arrive at some agreement on the principles, if not the rules. 
Deposit insurance premium 
4. 
While  the  conventional  wisdom  has  so  far  been  on  risk  based  premium  involving 
assessment of risk of individual institutions, in the context of what we have experienced in 
the crisis, we may have to assess whether the premium based on the assessment of risk of 
individual  institutions  needs  to  be  supplemented  by  a  risk  premium  based  on  their 
contribution to systemic risk using some measure of size and complexity. 
5. 
An issue that has been widely discussed in the context of the manner of charging 
premium for deposit insurance is the mitigation of moral hazard. Core Principles for Deposit 
Insurance Systems prescribe that moral hazard should be mitigated by ensuring, inter-alia, 
that the deposit insurance system contains appropriate design features. In India, we have not 
moved over to risk based premium but moral hazard is sought to be minimised through other 
design features, such as placing limits on the amount insured, excluding certain categories of 
depositors  from  coverage  etc.  The  main  reason  for  not  moving  over  to  the  risk  based 
premium  system  is  the  assessment  of  trade  off  between  minimising  moral  hazard  and 
placing additional burden on banks that are already weak. The banking system covered by 
insurance is extremely heterogeneous – ranging from large and strong commercial banks to 
small  regional  rural  banks,  urban  cooperative  banks  serving  local  communities  and  rural 
cooperative banks. These banks serve the very important objective of financial inclusion and 
BIS Review 4/2010 
 1
meet  the  requirements  of  sectors  and  communities  not  usually  targeted  by  the  larger 
commercial banks. Amongst these there are entities that are weak and the sector is in the 
process of being strengthened. The stability and soundness of this sector is being enhanced 
by weeding out unviable banks through non-disruptive measures. Till majority of these banks 
meet  the  minimum  standard  prudential  norms,  we  may  have  to  continue  with  a  uniform 
premium system which has an element of cross subsidisation. Moral hazard is also sought to 
be  minimised  by  operating,  through  the  supervisory  mechanism,  appropriate  disincentives 
and  penalties  where  there  is  discomfort  on  account  of  governance  and  risk  management 
standards. 
6. 
Some  deposit  insurers  provide  for  refund  of  insurance  premium  when  their  target 
reserve ratios exceed a particular level1. This practice could cut both ways inasmuch as the 
insurer  may  have  to  resort  to  collection  of  extra  premium  at  the  time  of  crisis  when  the 
system is already under strain. Whether some countercyclicality aspects could be introduced 
in the premium contribution is something which could also be discussed. 
Income from investments 
7. 
The second important source of funding deposit insurance systems is income from 
investments. This income will obviously depend upon the size of the funds and the yield on 
relatively risk free investments. As such, older systems have an advantage inasmuch as they 
have  accumulated  a  sizable  level  of  corpus  over  a  period  of  time.  So  far  as  DICGC  is 
concerned, investments are permitted only in government securities. A portfolio approach of 
tracking a broad All Sovereign Bond Index is followed that which yields a reasonable rate of 
return. Only deposits mobilised by branches in India are covered by deposit insurance. In a 
systemic  crisis  situation,  where  market  liquidity  for  even  sovereign  securities  could  be 
affected,  it  may  have  to  be  considered  whether  a  collateralised  back  stop  facility  from  the 
central bank could be thought of to enable the deposit insurer to meet immediate needs. 
Recoveries 
8. 
The  third  important  source  of  funding  of  deposit  insurance  systems  is  recoveries 
from the assets of the failed banks. Principle 18 of the Core Principles for Effective Deposit 
Insurance  Systems  prescribes  that  the  deposit  insurer  should  share  in  the  proceeds  of 
recoveries  from  the  estate  of  a  failed  bank.  In  some  jurisdictions,  deposit  insurers  have 
priority  in  the  recovery  over  other  unsecured  creditors  including  larger  depositors.  In  most 
countries  the  claims  are  subrogated  to  all  depositors.  In  cases  where  the  deposit  insurer 
steps in with sizeable liquidity, there could be case for priority in recovery and in India we 
have taken this view where the State law accorded priority to other claims. Perhaps this is an 
issue which needs more examination. 
Minimising cost of bank resolution 
9. 
Another way in which deposit insurance funds can be conserved is by adopting least 
cost solutions for bank resolution. The DICGC has a pay-box mandate under the DICGC Act, 
1961. While the appointment of a liquidator or management of assets of the failed banks in 
India  is  not  handled  by  the  DICGC,  the  statute  has  assigned  a  role  to  the  Corporation  in 
resolution of troubled banks, either through a scheme of reconstruction or amalgamation with 
another bank. In such cases the Corporation is required to pay to depositors to the extent of 
shortfall  in  the  asset  coverage,  up  to  the  limits  prescribed.  Of  late  DICGC  in  close 
                                                 
1  Hong Kong (3%), Indonesia (2.5%), Russia (Stops collection of premium after RR reaches 10%). 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2010
coordination with RBI has been using this provision for dealing with the legacy problem of 
insolvent  cooperative  banks  rather  than  the  liquidation  option  in  case  there  are  other 
cooperative banks or even commercial banks willing to take over such banks. Such solutions 
have  the  potential  to  serve  as  least  cost  option  for  resolution  of  troubled  banks  in  the 
cooperative sector even within the existing legal framework. The incentive and advantage to 
the acquiring bank is transfer of branch licenses and customer base. The realisation of bad 
assets in such cases is much better than in cases under liquidation. Moreover, depositors 
having  deposits  more  than  the  insured  amount  also  get  back  a  substantial  part  of  their 
deposits. At the same time, payout by the DICGC is substantially reduced. Moral hazard is 
sought  to  be  reduced  by  restricting  such  solutions  to  the  legacy  cases  and  progressively 
bringing  cooperative  banks  on  par  with  commercial  banks  in  terms  of  minimum  prudential 
standards and supervisory rigour. 
Line of credit 
10. 
In the context of funding deposit insurance, the availability of line of credit from the 
Central Bank/Government to overcome temporary liquidity problems in times of crisis is very 
important. In several countries deposit insurers heavily rely on such lines of credit. In India 
too there is a provision for such accommodation from the Reserve Bank of India. Though this 
facility is limited to INR 50 million (equivalent to a little over US dollar 1 million), it has never 
been used by the Corporation. A collateralised funding arrangement is something that may 
be explored when it is required to deal with situations where markets have become illiquid. 
Taxation issues 
11. 
An important issue having a bearing on funding is taxation of income or surpluses 
available with the deposit insurance system. Taxation practice varies from country to country. 
In Asia region such income/surplus is exempt from tax in most of the countries, but there are 
certain countries2, including India, where tax is levied either on the premium income or on 
income from investments or the entire surplus of the deposit insurance system. In India, the 
entire  net  surplus  of  DICGC  is  subject  to  taxes.  As  a  result,  a  major  part  of  the  funds 
collected by the Corporation by way of premium is paid to the government as taxes. You may 
be  surprised  to  learn  that  DICGC  is  among  the  top  five  taxpayers  in  the  country.  Deposit 
insurance activity being a welfare activity to protect the interest of small depositors and help 
maintaining  financial  stability,  there  is  a  strong  case  for  exempting  deposit  insurance  from 
income tax. This will enable the deposit insurer to build up sufficient funds even to meet a 
situation of systemic dimensions. 
Deposit insurance for financial stability – some current issues 
12. 
The  recent  financial  crisis  has  highlighted  the  importance  of  deposit  insurance  in 
promoting financial stability. The steps taken by governments and deposit insurance systems 
all around the world have helped in restoring stability in the system but have also raised the 
issue of moral hazard, as aptly summarised by Sebastian Schich3 in his article published in 
one of the OECD Journals. Referring to the blanket guarantee extended by the Government 
in certain countries he says: 
India, Kazakhstan, Philippines & Taiwan. 
                                                 
2  
3   “Financial Crisis: Deposit Insurance and Related Financial Safety Net Aspects” (2008) by Sebastian Schich, 
Principal  Administrator,  Financial  Affairs  Division,  Directorate  of  Financial  and  Enterprise  Affairs,  OECD; 
hyperlink http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/36/48/41894959.pdf. 
BIS Review 4/2010 
 3
“While these measures did not address the root causes of the lack of confidence, 
they  were  nevertheless  helpful  in  avoiding  a  further  accelerated  loss  of 
confidence, thus buying valuable time. But they are not costless. First, like any 
guarantee, deposit insurance  coverage  gives  rise  to  moral  hazard,  especially  if 
the  coverage  is  unlimited.  Clearly,  in  the  midst  of  a  crisis,  one  should  not  be 
overly  concerned  with  moral  hazard,  as  the  immediate  task  is  to  restore 
confidence, and guarantees can be helpful in that respect. Nonetheless, to keep 
market  discipline  operational,  it  is  important  to  specify  when  the  extra  deposit 
insurance  will  end,  and  this  timeline  needs  to  be  credible.  Second,  the  co-
existence  of  different  levels  of  protection  could  give  rise  to  unfair  competitive 
advantages;  vis-à-vis  other  forms  of  savings  or  vis-à-vis  other  deposit-taking 
institutions that do not enjoy the guarantee. Third, to make a guarantee credible it 
is  important  to  specify  the  manner  in  which  it  will  be  provided.........  Looking 
ahead,  a  sharper  policy  focus  will  have  to  be  placed  on  “exit  strategies”, 
especially where unlimited guarantees have been extended. In this context, the 
fundamental question remains whether government guarantees can be a one-off 
proposition. There may be a general perception that once extended in one crisis, 
a government guarantee will always be available during crisis situations.” 
13. 
As explained above, in all cases where emergency measures have been taken to 
overcome  the  situation  arising  out  of  the  financial  crisis,  it  is  necessary  to  have  an  exit 
strategy with a credible timeframe. This is important for Asia Region also, where as many as 
five  countries4  have  temporarily  extended  blanket  guarantee  for  bank  deposits  –  most  of 
them  up  to  December  31,  2010.  The  issue  is,  however,  not  only  confined  to  blanket 
guarantees  but  much  wider,  involving  exit  from  several  fiscal  and  monetary  measures  as 
well, taken earlier on an emergency basis. 
14. 
To  conclude,  I  must  say  that  deposit  insurance  systems  constitute  an  important 
element  of  the  financial  safety  net  having  the  twin  objectives  of  protecting  the  interest  of 
small  depositors  and  promoting  financial  stability.  Adequate  funding  of  deposit  insurance 
systems is crucial to achieving these objectives. Indeed, the theme of the conference is apt 
and the agenda for discussion has been drawn-up very thoughtfully – my compliments to the 
organisers and best wishes for success of the Conference. 
Thank you. 
                                                 
4  Thailand (Up to 10.08.2011), Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore & Taiwan (All up to 31.12.2010). 
4 
 BIS Review 4/2010
