Njuguna Ndung’u: The role of financial education in financial sector 
development 
Opening remarks by Prof. Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 
Public Service Master Trainers Workshop for Financial Education, Nairobi, 12 July 2010. 
 learn about financial education in general; 
develop skills in adult learning and facilitation; 
examine the Global Financial Education Program in detail; 
acquire the necessary tools and skills to train others, and 
equip customers with the knowledge to demand services. 
Mr. David Ferrand, Director, FSD Kenya; 
Ms. Bilha Maina, Project Manager, Financial Education, FSD Kenya; 
Facilitators; 
Participants; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I am delighted and honoured to be here today to officially open this training workshop geared 
towards developing master trainers in financial education in the public sector in Kenya. 
To start with, let me extend my appreciation to FSD Kenya for inviting me to officially open 
this training workshop. I also thank Microfinance Opportunities for accepting to facilitate this 
valuable workshop. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: This training workshop aims to achieve four goals. As participants 
you will: 
 
 
 
 
 
These objectives revolve around the direction we want to  take on financial development. I 
urge each one of you to go into this programme with an open mind. The perspective of this 
training is totally different from the academic courses we have all gone through – it is a focus 
on the basics, practicality and application. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Allow me now to briefly share with you, in simple terms, the role of 
financial education in financial sector development. As we are all aware, the global financial 
sector is extremely dynamic and these dynamics feed into the domestic financial sector. The 
innovations  have  covered  financial  products,  services,  processes  and  procedures.  These 
innovations  are  only  possible  with  continuous  upscaling  of  the  financial  market  players’ 
knowledge. Similarly, innovations arise based on market demands which are driven by the 
desire of customers for a safe and efficient financial sector. The financial services providers 
would want to see their market niche increasing but not be challenged by other competitors. 
But the customers must use the financial services and demand more of those services. We 
did not know what we had missed over the years until M-PESA came to the scene. When 
consumers are financially informed they are in a position to demand quality financial services 
at fair prices. This makes it necessary for the providers to innovate products suitable for their 
customers’  needs.  In  this  regard,  the  demands  by  customers  and  innovations  by  financial 
sector  players  as  a  result  of  being  empowered  through  financial  education  drive  financial 
sector  development.  This  scenario  clearly  confirms  that  each  one  of  us  requires  financial 
education. All aspects of our lives entail financial decisions and limited financial knowledge is 
a precursor to poor savings and investment decisions. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  FSD  Kenya  and  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  in  conjunction  with 
several  other  financial  sector  players  have  undertaken  two  financial  access  surveys 
(FinAccess) in 2006 and 2009. The surveys were aimed at establishing the level of Kenya’s 
BIS Review 95/2010 
 1
population  that  utilises  formal  financial  services.  The  two  surveys  established  the  banked 
population  as  19  percent  in  2006,  It  has  increased  to  23  percent  in  2009.  I  am  sure  with 
financial education and more products in the market this proportion will increase. 
The  FinAccess  surveys  have  also  included  questions  on  financial  literacy  and  use  of 
technology  in  financial  transactions.  Following  the  release  of  the  2006  FinAccess  survey 
results, FSD Kenya brought together several financial and education sector players to form 
the  Financial  Education  Partnership  (FEP)  to  spearhead  the  development  of  a  national 
strategy  on  financial  education.  The  efforts  of  the  partnership  are  progressing  well.  In 
addition, I have been appointed as the National Champion of Financial Education in Kenya 
and  the  launch  of  four  pilot  projects  to  inform  what  modes  of  financial  education  work  in 
Kenya are important dimensions. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The Partnership’s quest to develop a national strategy for financial 
education  in  Kenya  is  mainly  informed  by  the  need  to  protect  the  consumers  of  financial 
services. The best way to protect consumers is to empower them with financial knowledge 
which  they  can  use  to  demand  quality  services  at  fair  prices.  As  the  financial  education 
strategy  is  being  developed,  the  Government  through  the  Ministries  of  Finance  and  Trade 
are  spearheading  efforts  towards  coming  up  with  a  comprehensive  financial  services 
consumer protection law. However, the law alone will not be enough, since for consumers to 
take  advantage  of  it  they  must  be  enlightened  on  their  rights  and  obligations  regarding 
financial transactions. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Let me now share with you the aspirations of the Central Bank of 
Kenya (CBK) as regards financial education. Other than its participation in the partnership, 
the  core  mandates  of  the  Bank,  which  are  price  and  financial  stability,  demand  that  we 
explain to the public all that we do to achieve these mandates. In this regard, CBK takes up 
available  opportunities  to  disseminate  financial  knowledge  to  the  public.  In  particular,  the 
success  of  the  new  developments  in  our  banking  sector  such  as  mobile  banking,  agent 
banking and credit information sharing are pegged on effective awareness and sensitisation 
of all the players. 
The  Central  Bank  has  over  the  past  few  years  increased  its  level  of  interaction  with  the 
public.  This  has  enabled  us  to  explain  our  role  in  the  economy  especially  the  ongoing 
initiatives aimed at creating a more stable and efficient financial system as well as increasing 
the level of financial access by the Kenyan public. I encourage each one of you to visit the 
Central  Bank’s  website,  which  has  been  greatly  enriched  to  enhance  dissemination  of 
information to Kenyans. 
In conclusion, Ladies and Gentlemen, I am informed that the participants in this workshop 
will be certified as master trainers in financial education. In this regard, I urge all of you to 
take  the  workshop  seriously  and  to  disseminate  the  knowledge  gained  throughout  your 
organisations  and  to  the  public  your  organisations  interact  with.  It  is  only  through 
dissemination of the knowledge that you will acquire over the next one week that the financial 
sector and the economy as a whole will benefit. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Being cognisant of the intensive training programme ahead of you, 
I shall not extend my remarks any further. I therefore take this opportunity to wish all of you 
an enjoyable and exciting workshop. 
With these few remarks, ladies and gentlemen, it is now my honour and pleasure to declare 
this training workshop officially opened. 
Thank You and God bless you all. 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2010
