Caleb M Fundanga: The role of Bank of Zambia in sensitising and 
protection of consumers regarding banking and financial services 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the 
Commemoration of the Worlds Consumer Rights Day, Lusaka, 15 March 2010. 
 The Minister of Commerce Trade and Industry, Hon Felix Mutati M.P.  
The  Permanent  Secretary,  Ministry  of  Commerce  Trade  and  Industry,  Dr  Buleti 
Nsemukila  
The Chairperson Bankers Association of Zambia, Mr Saviour Chibiya  
Representatives from Zambia Competition Commission  
Distinguished Invited Guests  
Members of the Press 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am honoured and thankful to the Ministry of Commerce, Trade and Industry for inviting me 
to  participate  on  this  very  important  day  when  we  commemorate  the  “World  Consumer 
Rights Day”. The theme for this year is certainly an interesting and important one especially 
for us in the financial sector. 
As  the  authority  that  formulates  and  implements,  monetary  and  supervisory  policies,  the 
Bank  of  Zambia  places  great  importance  on  the  welfare  of  consumers.  This  is  because 
effective implementation of monetary and supervisory policies promotes price stability as well 
as financial system stability which in turn creates a favourable investment climate necessary 
for economic growth. This entails achieving and maintaining a low inflation rate which is key 
in attaining low cost of credit as well as low levels of prices for goods and services in the 
economy. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  as  most  of  you  would  recall,  high  levels  of  inflation  and  interest 
rates  as  well  as  bank  failures  were  a  central  feature  of  the  Zambian  economy  during  the 
early 1980’s and the mid-1990s. However, since then strides have been made in achieving 
low levels of inflation and interest rates and a stable financial sector. As a result, inflation has 
fallen from 138.3 percent at the end of December 1993 to 9.9 percent in December 2009. 
The lower levels of inflation have had a direct bearing on consumers as their incomes are not 
significantly eroded. 
Furthermore, the Bank of Zambia has strengthened its supervisory framework by amending 
legislation  and  capacity  building  in  the  supervisory  process.  This  process  has  allowed  the 
Bank to ensure that only fit and proper persons are allowed to enter the financial sector in 
order to ensure that banks are run professionally and that depositors’ funds are not abused. 
In order to further cushion depositors in case of bank failures, the Bank is in the process of 
introducing  a  Deposit  Protection  Act  and  a  Deposit  Protection  Scheme.  This  will  not  only 
create a safety net for depositors but will enhance confidence in the banking sector. 
Notwithstanding these positive developments, there has been a marked increase in customer 
complaints, mostly emanating from the banks’ pricing structure, especially on commissions, 
fees  and  service  charges.  Given  the  prevailing  liberalised  economic  environment,  interest 
rates are determined by the market. Although we have seen significant improvements in the 
macroeconomic  indicators,  the  levels  of  interest  rates  still  remain  high.  This  is  a  major 
concern to the Bank of Zambia and we have continued to engage banks through the Bankers 
Association of Zambia on this issue. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is worth mentioning here that one of the challenges that banks 
continue to face is the high levels of non-performing loans due to poor credit culture amongst 
some borrowers. It is therefore important that credit worthy customers are distinguished from 
BIS Review 30/2010 
 1
high risky borrowers in the banking sector. The Bank of Zambia through the Financial Sector 
Development  Plan  has  in  this  regard  established  the  credit  reference  bureau.  The  credit 
reference bureau will enable lenders to make decision based on information specific to each 
borrower ensuring that risk assessments of potential borrowers are not affected by the habits 
of  other  borrowers.  Therefore,  the  pricing  of  risk  will  be  more  reflective  of  borrower’s 
particular circumstances. 
Further,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  has  made  it  mandatory  for  banks  and  other  financial  service 
providers  to  use  the  credit  reference  bureau  before  a  loan  is  provided  to  any  customer. 
Consequently any loans approved without passing through the Credit Reference Bureau will 
attract regulatory action. 
The  Bank  of  Zambia  also  places  great  importance  on  the  need  to  have  knowledgeable 
consumers who play a key role in creating a competitive and fair business environment. To 
this  end,  the  Bank  promotes  consumer  awareness  and  financial  literacy  by  disseminating 
information through quarterly media briefs, road shows, and attendance at annual agricultural 
shows and trade fairs. 
The Bank of Zambia also consolidates tariff guides of all deposit taking financial institutions 
and publishes this information in a form suitable to make immediate and easy comparisons. 
The purpose of this quarterly publication is to enable customers shop around in order to get 
value for money from services provided by banks and to cause banks to be competitive in 
the manner they set fees and charges. 
Further, through the activities of the Financial Sector Development Plan, the BoZ intends to 
spearhead the development of a national financial education strategy in order to galvanise 
the efforts of various stakeholders in the delivery of financial services. 
The  Bank  also  publishes  a  lot  of  information  on  the  banking  sector  and  the  economy  in 
general on its website www.boz.zm. I wish to urge all consumers who may have access to 
the internet, to make it a habit to visit the Bank of Zambia website on a regular basis. Further, 
the Bank will provide excerpts from the Banking and Financial Services Act to provide some 
highlights on some of the consumer protection provisions in the Law. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2010
