Ardian Fullani: Economy and key interest rate in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
monetary policy decision-making of the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania, Tirana, 
26 May 2010. 
 The Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania on its meeting of 26 May, 2010 reviewed and 
approved the Monetary Policy Monthly Report. Taking into account all the latest economic 
and financial development at home and their projections on the future, at the conclusion of 
discussions, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to leave the key interest 
rate unchanged, at 5.25 percent. 
 reacted 
tensely  against 
financial  markets  have 
The  improvement  of  the  world  economic  activity,  as  shown  by  the  sharp  growth  of  the 
emerging  countries’  economies  and  by  the  moderate  rise  of  the  major  part  of  developed 
countries’  economies,  has  characterised  the  early  months  of  2010.  Economic  recovery  is 
accompanied  by  the  increase  of  trade  activity,  in  the  meantime  central  banks  and  fiscal 
authorities have pursued to support the aggregate demand through easing policies. 
Notwithstanding the climbing trend of commodities prices, the inflationary pressures continue 
to be still low owing to the negative gap of production. However, the events occurring in the 
last weeks have revealed that both euro area and world economies are characterised by high 
uncertainties  as  regard  the  future.  The  economic  and  political  discussions  are  particularly 
focused on the fiscal situation. The implementation of quick and concrete measures, which 
guarantee the long-term stability of public debt, seems that shall condition considerably the 
future  development.  World 
these 
developments,  being  characterised  by  a  high  volatility  and  an  increase  of  risk  primes 
throughout the instruments variety, markets and financial agents. 
Turning  to  the  domestic  economy,  the  latest  qualitative  and  quantitative  indicators  show  a 
slow  performance  of  economy  in  the  early  months  of  2010.  The  deceleration  of  domestic 
demand is compensated by a positive and growing performance of the Albanian exports. 
The  domestic  inflationary  pressures  were  low  and  the  consumer  price  inflation  declining. 
Monetary markets revealed more calm, characterised by a dropping trend of interest rates, 
liquidity situation improvement of the banking system and a more stable performance of the 
exchange rate. However, lending to economy continues to maintain low growth paces. 
Indirect  and  prior  estimates  suggest  that  the  paces  of  private  consumption  have  been 
controlled, conditioned by restricted sources of its financing and by the higher tendency of 
consumers  regarding  savings.  The  low  level  of  capacities  utilisation  in  economy,  the  low 
paces of loan for investments and the fall of capital and intermediate goods import, signal a 
contraction  of  private  investments  even  during  the  first  three  months  of  this  year.  The 
demand  for  monetary  assets  of  private  sector  continues  to  be  low,  thus  reflecting  a 
deceleration of the economic activity. 
The annual pace of lending growth, excluding the exchange rate effect, for this sector slowed 
down onwards, at 4.8 percent in March. Business’ demand for loans persists to be the sole 
lending increase source, whereas loan to households continues to shrink in annual terms, for 
the fifth consecutive month. During this period there are transmitted also the first signals on 
an  easing  of  lending  standards  from  banks,  but  this  step  is  applied  only  on  large-sized 
business. 
Fiscal  stimuli  developed  at  more  controlled  paces  in  the  first  4-month  period  of  year, 
providing a lower contribution on the economic activity during this period. Fiscal policy has 
BIS Review 77/2010 
 1
maintained  an  encouraging  character,  but  at  a  lower  rate  relative  to  the  same  period  of 
previous year. Budget deficit amounted to ALL 5.3 billion, contracted by 47 percent in annual 
terms. The low economic activity is reflected on the low growth by about 3 percent of budged 
revenues during the first 4-month period of year. 
On the other side, budget expense recorded a reduction by about 2 percent from the rate 
recorded  in  the  previous  year.  Bank  of  Albania  continues  to  draw  the  attention  that, 
notwithstanding the short-term positive effects the fiscal stimuli may generate; the long-term 
stability of public sector should remain the main leader of fiscal policy. The lesson from the 
current problematic situation involving many European Union countries, is the indispensability 
for  consolidation  of  public  finances  and  for  that  purpose  the  implementation  of  important 
correcting measures at quickest time, is a target of strategic importance. 
Given the balancing of above stated developments, the accelerated growth of exports has 
provided a positive contribution on the total demand and on the economic growth. Exports 
climbed by 45.1 percent in annual terms, during the first quarter of 2010, whereas imports 
recorded an annual drop by about 2.3 percent. 
Accelerated  upsurge  of  exports  and  the  fall  of  imports  at  more  moderate  paces  led  to  the 
contraction by about 17.1 percent of trade deficit, pursuing the trend observed even during 
the second half of 2009. The ratio of imports covering from exports pointed to 35.4 percent, 
about 11.6 percentage points higher than in the previous year. The above stated developments 
in the foreign economy sector have established a more sustained balance of the supply and 
demand  for  foreign  currency,  thereby  providing  a  higher  stability  of  the  domestic  currency 
value during the last months of year. It is needed this momentum adopts a stability over the 
medium term, through the accelerated implementation of facilitating supporting policies. 
Economic  background  and  monetary  developments  have  established  an  environment  with 
moderate  inflationary  pressures.  Annual  Inflation  in  April  pointed  to  3.5  percent,  thereby 
recording  a  drop  of  0.4  percentage  points  relative  to  March  2010.  The  return  of  inflation 
within the target of the Bank of Albania was an expected development, forecasted previously. 
Consumer price inflation in Albania, during the last months, owes to a greater extend, to the 
increase of administered prices, the uprising trend of prices in the world conjuncture and by 
the subsequent effects of exchange rate depreciation on inflation. Given the lack of second 
round effects on inflation, these latter’s impact, as previewed, results to be a transitional one. 
Inflationary domestic pressures remain low, as showed by the core inflation performance of 
non-tradable  goods.  The  rates  of  these  important  factors  of  inflation  remain  at  1.2  and 
2.4 percent,  respectively  in  April.  This  trend  is  expected  to  be  observed  even  in  the  near 
future,  as  long  the  Albanian  economy  shall  continue  to  be  characterised  by  low  rates  of 
capacities utilisation, by a controlled expansion of monetary indicators and by the anchored 
inflationary expectations. 
Bank  of  Albania,  to  fulfil  its  target  for  inflation, has  observed  a  cautious  monetary policy, 
supplying the needed liquidity in the market, in line with economy needs. Financial markets 
are  shown  stable,  by  downward  interest  rates,  low  and  dampen  risk  primes.  Monetary 
developments  during  March  have  confirmed  the  uprising  expansion  of  monetary  supply  in 
economy, which rose by 10.2% in annual nominal term. This performance is grounded by the 
drop of currency outside banks rate and the stable growth of deposits in the banking system. 
 The  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  during  its  discussions  concluded  that 
inflationary  pressures  on  the  domestic  economy  are  expected  to  be  balanced  over  the 
medium term. 
Under  the  conditions  when  the  temporary  operation  of  pressures  on  supply  direction  is 
expected  to  be  cancelled  out,  the  non-inflationary  pressures  as  a  result  of  production 
negative gap from the demand side is estimated to set out the inflation volatility around the 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2010
Bank  of  Albania  target  regarding  inflation.  The  expectations  of  economic  agents  regarding 
inflation remain anchored over the medium term horizon. 
At  the  conclusion  of  discussion,  the  Supervisory  Council  decided  to  leave  the  key  interest 
rate unchanged, at 5.25 percent. This decision is in line with the accomplishment of inflation 
target  over  the  medium  term  period,  and  provides  at  the  same  time  the  needed  monetary 
conditions to support the sound development of economy. Looking ahead, Bank of Albania 
shall continue to observe carefully the developments in inflation and in the other indicators of 
the economic progress, by analysing the need and time span in terms of a reaction from the 
monetary policy. 
BIS Review 77/2010 
 3
