Mark Carney: The G-20’s core agenda to reduce systemic risk 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  International 
Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) meeting, Montreal, 10 June 2010. 
 this 
failure, 
the  global 
to  reshape 
financial  system 
the  G-20’s  agenda 
Introduction 
It is a pleasure to be here at this important meeting. It comes at a critical time, as we all work 
to repair a global financial system that has failed our citizens. 
Given 
is 
comprehensive and radical. The coming weeks and months will be pivotal to its success. The 
time for debate and discussion is drawing to a close. Policymakers now need to decide and 
to implement. 
Recent  tensions  in  Europe  have  underscored  this  urgency.  Market  volatility  over  the  past 
couple  of  months  has  reflected  both  macroeconomic  forces  and  heightened  regulatory 
uncertainty. A flurry of tangential proposals has sown confusion about the focus and intent of 
regulatory  reform.  Could  taxation  and  regulatory  fiat  really  address  Too-Big-to-Fail?  Are 
markets part of the problem or part of the solution?  
This  past  weekend  in  Busan,  South  Korea,  G-20  finance  ministers  and  central  bank 
governors  refocused  on  the  core  reform  agenda  of  capital,  resolution,  and  market 
infrastructure.  Later  this  month  in  Toronto,  G-20  leaders  can  be  expected  to  harden  that 
resolve. 
Today, I would like to focus on the G-20’s core agenda, whose objective is to create a more 
resilient, global financial system. I will begin  by discussing the nature of systemic risk and 
then move to the three principal strategies to mitigate it: 
increasing the resiliency of financial institutions; 
 
 
enhancing the robustness of financial markets; and 
reducing the interconnectedness between institutions and between institutions and 
 
markets. 
IOSCO  is  an  important  contributor  to  the  G-20  process.  We  share  a  common  purpose. 
Reducing  systemic  risk  is  at  the  heart  of  the  IOSCO  principles.  Your  ongoing  efforts  to 
enhance  investor  protection  and  market  integrity  will  also  serve  to  build  a  more  resilient 
financial system. 
Systemic risk 
Systemic risk is the probability that the financial system will not function as needed to support 
economic activity. Mitigating systemic risk is challenging because it requires identifying the 
essential elements of a complex, modern financial system. What is essential changes as the 
system evolves.1 In reducing some aspects of systemic risk, policy-makers will undoubtedly 
increase others. As a consequence, we will need to remain vigilant in the years that follow 
the initial burst of reform. 
                                                 
1   O. de Bandt and P. Hartmann, “Systemic risks in banking,” in Financial Crisis, Contagion and the Lender of 
(Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press,  2002). 
Illing, 
Last  Resort,  edited  by  C.  Goodhart  and  G. 
(http://www.olivierdebandt.com/publications_en.html). 
BIS Review 81/2010 
 1
financial 
institutions, 
the  robustness  of  systemically-important  markets;  and 
A fully risk-proofed system is neither attainable nor desirable. The point is not to pile up so 
much capital in our institutions that they are never heard from again, either as a source of 
instability or of growth. The challenge is to get the balance between resiliency and efficiency 
right. 
The global financial crisis exposed the fallacy of composition that strong individual financial 
institutions collectively ensure the safety and soundness of the system as a whole. Even the 
most vigilant, microprudential regulatory regime can be overwhelmed by systemic risks. As a 
consequence, policy-makers now recognise that systemic risk is the product of the resiliency 
of 
the 
interconnectedness between institutions and markets. 
At its heart, the resilience of markets and institutions is a function of solvency and liquidity.2 
As evident in the recent crisis, uncertainty about the solvency of financial institutions causes 
markets to  become illiquid, and illiquid markets can cause otherwise solvent institutions to 
become insolvent. 
However, while solvency and liquidity are related, the responsibility for each ultimately falls to 
different agents.3 
The  risk  of  insolvency  should,  fundamentally,  be  a  private  concern,  just  as  the  return  is 
appropriated by private agents. It is the job of regulation to ensure that is the case. On the 
other  hand,  liquidity  is  a  social  good,  as  it  facilitates  exchange  between  institutions.  While 
individual institutions are responsible for managing their own liquidity to buffer idiosyncratic 
shocks, and liquidity should be endogenously created by private agents in most states of the 
world, the ultimate provider of liquidity to the financial system is the lender of last resort – the 
central bank. 
But the crisis has revealed that liquidity is not just a central bank’s responsibility. It is now 
clear  that  a  robust  financial  system  requires  the  co-operation  of  all  financial  regulatory 
bodies,  since  illiquidity  can  be  triggered  by  the  insolvency  of  a  single  institution,  shoddy 
infrastructure, or poor transparency. The more successful policymakers are in ensuring that 
liquidity  generation  is  robust,  the  more  efficient  we  can  be  with  respect  to  the  amount  of 
capital required to protect against that risk.  
Against this backdrop, the G-20’s priorities should become clearer. In particular, the G-20 is 
pursuing three main strategies to reduce systemic risk: 
improving the resiliency of financial institutions; 
 
 
enhancing the robustness of financial markets; and, 
reducing the interconnectedness between institutions and between institutions and 
 
markets. 
All are necessary, as the measures are mutually reinforcing. 
Allow me to expand. 
Improving the resiliency of financial institutions 
Creating more resilient institutions requires more and better capital, improved balance sheet 
liquidity, and enhanced risk management. The crisis clearly underscored the need to better 
                                                 
2   For  example,  in  mark-to-market  accounting,  illiquidity  discounts  can  be  quickly  translated  into  accounting 
losses that can impair the reported capital position of a financial institution. 
3   J. Selody, “The Nature of Systemic Risk,” forthcoming, in Managing Risk in the Financial System, edited by 
J. R. LaBrosse, R, Olivares-Caminal and D. Singh. (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2011). 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2010
capture counterparty exposures, market risk, and a host of contingent claims. The so-called 
Basel III proposals address many of these issues.4 
The most important elements are to: 
 
Create global standards for liquidity of sufficient rigour to allow our financial firms to 
withstand future volatility in the global financial system. 
Raise substantially the quantity, quality, consistency, and transparency of the Tier 1 
capital base. It is essential that this is true loss-bearing capital, which means that it 
must be predominantly tangible common equity. 
Introduce  a leverage  ratio  as  a complement  to  the  Basel  II risk-based  framework. 
The leverage ratio should be simple to calculate and non-binding in normal states. In 
effect, it is a safety harness that is designed to protect against risks that regulators 
think are low but which, in fact, are not. 
Introduce a capital buffer above the minimum capital requirement in order to ensure 
that banks and supervisors take prompt corrective action before bank capital levels 
fall below the minimum. It would appear reasonable that this buffer should be large 
enough to absorb the losses of the last crisis. It could also vary over time so that it is 
at its maximum in periods when credit is growing rapidly and system-wide risks are 
rising,  and  reduced  in  times  of  stress  to  ensure  that  the  flow  of  credit  is  not 
undermined by regulatory constraints.5  
   While  there  will  be  some  important  innovations,  in  general,  the  final  Basel  III  capital 
proposals  will  make  the  global  system  look  more  like  Canada’s.  The  rigour  of  Canadian 
capital regulation was an important – although far from exclusive – reason why the Canadian 
system fared so well during the crisis. 
For the world as a whole, however, the changes will be substantial. Consequently, some are 
concerned  that  the  implementation  of  these  reforms  could  be  damaging  to  the  economic 
recovery. This apprehension is misplaced for several reasons. 
First, business models and behaviour will adjust to the new rules. For example, measures to 
increase the capital held against trading books will encourage redeployment of capital from 
trading towards conventional lending. 
Second, the transition timetable and grandfathering can be expected to be enlightened. The 
expressed intent of G-20 policy-makers is to get the measures right and then to phase them 
in  as  financial  conditions  improve  and  economic  recovery  is  assured,  with  the  aim  of 
implementation  by  end-2012.  We  should  not  sacrifice  our  ambition  for  these  measures  to 
speed of implementation, nor the economic recovery to an arbitrary timeline. 
Third, policy-makers are pursuing a number of ways to enhance the efficiency of the system 
by limiting the required increase in capital. These include contingent capital, countercyclical 
capital buffers to ensure that higher capital is only carried when necessary, building resilient 
financial markets, and enhancing the effectiveness of resolution mechanisms. 
Policy-makers understand the desirability of providing as much certainty as possible as soon 
as possible. At present, the definition of capital, the deductions from it, the definitions of risk-
weighted  assets,  and  the  calibration  of  both  the  minimum  requirement  and  the  buffer  all 
                                                 
4   http://www.bis.org/press/p091217.htm. 
5   Banks  should  carry  enough  capital  to  absorb  credit  losses  and  declines  in  trading  book  asset  values 
associated with changes in economic fundamentals. On the other hand, it is a waste of society’s resources to 
expect  them  to  also  carry  capital  to  cover  unrealized  losses  that  arise  simply  because  market  prices  have 
become  unhinged  from  economic  fundamentals  due  to  transitory  factors,  such  as  a  breakdown  in  market 
liquidity. 
BIS Review 81/2010 
 3
remain  to  be  finalised.  Armed  with  the  recent  impact  assessments,  governors  and 
supervisors will work quickly to make progress, consistent with the direction given by G-20 
leaders to be finished by the November Summit in Seoul. If we can move faster, we will. 
Reducing the interconnectedness between institutions and markets 
In effect, the measures I just described reduce the probability of failure of a given financial 
institution.  The  second  G-20  imperative  is  to  reduce  the  impact  of  any  failure  that  might 
occur. 
A more resilient financial system must be able to withstand the failure of any single financial 
institution. From Bear Stearns to Hypo Real Estate to Lehman Brothers, markets failed that 
test. 
Today,  after  a  series  of  extraordinary,  but  necessary,  measures  to  keep  the  system 
functioning,  we  are  awash  in  moral  hazard.  If  left  unchecked,  this  will  distort  private 
behaviour and inflate public costs. 
As  a  consequence,  there  is  a  firm  conviction  among  policy-makers  that  losses  endured  in 
future  crises  must  be  borne  by  the  institutions  themselves.  This  means  management, 
shareholders, and creditors, rather than taxpayers. 
Measures  to  expose  fully  firms  to  the  ultimate  sanction  of  the  market  will  also  reduce  the 
interconnectedness between institutions. Priorities include: 
 
All  regulators  should  institute  staged  intervention  regimes  to  catch  problems  early 
(as is the case in Canada). 
Banks themselves should develop “living wills,” or plans to unwind themselves in an 
orderly fashion if they were to fail. At a minimum, the exercise will underscore the 
shared responsibility for financial stability and improve regulators’ understanding of 
firms’ business models. 
The Basel oversight committee agreed to “reduce the systemic risk associated with 
the resolution of cross-border banks.” Closing down a  multinational institution is a 
horrifically  difficult  challenge,  but  without  progress  in  this  area,  it  is  likely  the 
efficiency of the global system will decline, perhaps significantly. 
  In the Bank’s view, less promising is a series of creative proposals to address the negative 
externalities  created  by  systemically  important  financial  institutions.  Many  of  these  require 
authorities  to  pass  judgment  on  which  institutions  should  be  considered  systemically 
important.  However,  it  is  hard  to  measure  systemic  importance,  and  making  such 
identifications  may  give  rise  to  moral  hazard.  Once  made,  would  it  be  possible  to  remove 
such a designation? We need to reduce moral hazard in the financial system, not add to it. 
As Minister Flaherty has written to his G-20 colleagues, Canada’s view is that it is essential 
that any option respect the following principles for a robust resolution regime: 
 
 
 
 
 
Proper allocation of losses to reduce moral hazard and protect taxpayers; 
Certainty and uninterrupted service of critical functions and for insured depositors; 
Preservation of franchise value of the firm; 
Credibility of regime among financial institution counterparties, ex ante; and, 
Effective coordination and cooperation among jurisdictions in the event of a cross-
border failure of an institution. 
One promising avenue is to embed contingent capital features into debt and preferred shares 
issued by financial institutions. Contingent capital is a security that converts to capital when a 
financial  institution  is  in  serious  trouble,  thereby  replenishing  the  capital  of  the  institution 
4 
 BIS Review 81/2010
without the use of taxpayer funds. Contingent conversions could be embedded in all future 
new issues of senior unsecured debt and subordinated securities to create a broader bail-in 
approach.  Its  presence  would  also  serve  as  a  useful  disciplinary  device  on  management 
since common shareholders would be incented to act prudently and avoid having their stake 
in the institution diluted away by the prospect of conversion. 
Building resilient markets 
The third strategy to mitigate systemic risk is to enhance the resiliency of financial markets 
through initiatives to improve infrastructure and enhance transparency. 
Continuously  open  financial  markets  are  essential  to  a  system  that  is  robust  to  failure. 
Keeping  markets  continuously  open  requires  policies  and  infrastructure  that  reinforce  the 
private generation of liquidity in normal times and allow for central bank support in times of 
crisis.  The  cornerstone  is  clearing  and  settlement  processes  with  risk-reducing  elements, 
particularly central clearing counterparties or “CCPs.” 
Properly risk-proofed CCPs act as firewalls against the propagation of default shocks across 
major  market  participants.  Moreover,  in  the  case  of  a  single-participant  default,  a  CCP’s 
standardized procedures can contribute to an orderly close out of that participant’s positions, 
eliminating the chance of a “fire sale” and reducing spillovers to other markets. 
For these reasons, the Bank of Canada has supported the development of a domestic CCP 
for  Canadian-dollar  repos,  which  should  be  launched  later  this  year.  The  Bank  is  working 
with  its  domestic  partners  to  develop  similar  infrastructure  for  over-the-counter  (OTC) 
derivatives markets. Current G-20 efforts to transfer trading of standardized OTC derivatives 
to clearing houses have similar benefits. 
Securities  regulators  and  central  banks  have  a  shared  interest  in  ensuring  that  the  new 
infrastructure  is  properly  risk-proofed.  IOSCO  recently  provided  helpful  guidance  for  risk-
management  practices  of  central  counterparties  that  clear  OTC  derivatives  products.6 
Central banks look forward to the results of your consultations on this issue, which should 
serve to set robust standards to ensure that CCPs for OTC derivatives meet the highest risk-
control standards. 
Systemic  risk  can  also  be  mitigated  through  better  and  more-readily  available  information. 
This reduces information asymmetry, facilitates the valuation process and, hence, supports 
market efficiency and stability. It also enhances investor protection by supporting informed 
investment  decisions  and  a  more  level  playing  field  for  investors.  This,  in  turn,  reduces 
uncertainty regarding asset values, which translates into greater market confidence; a lower 
probability of unwarranted price volatility; and a lower risk of contagion, liquidity spirals, and 
market freezes. 
Trade  repositories  are  central  to  G-20  commitments  to  enhance  the  transparency  of  OTC 
derivatives  markets.  Trade  repositories  would  reduce  systemic  risk  and  support  market 
integrity  and  investor  protection  by  reporting  such  data  as  aggregated  live  positions, 
transaction activity, aggregate settlement data, and transaction-level pricing. Greater use of 
electronic  trading  platforms  could  also  improve  price  transparency,  thereby  supporting 
market liquidity and efficiency, as well as levelling the playing field for market participants. 
The need for improved transparency extends to other systemically important markets, such 
as securitization. The nature of securitized products argues for different (and likely greater) 
disclosure  than  traditional  corporate  securities.  IOSCO  has  rightly  recognized  this  in  its 
recently  published  disclosure  principles  for  public  offerings  and  listings  of  asset-backed 
                                                
 
6   Guidance on the application of the 2004 CPSS-IOSCO Recommendations for Central Counterparties (RCCP) 
to OTC derivatives CCPs. 
BIS Review 81/2010 
 5
securities.7 How securities regulators apply these principles in their respective jurisdictions 
could have important implications for the level of systemic risk in securitization markets. 
Collaboration among prudential regulators, securities regulators, and central banks is critical. 
To achieve the full benefits of the new infrastructure, we need to work together to establish 
global  central  counterparties  and  trade  repositories,  with  appropriate  oversight  and  legal 
arrangements.  These  may  need  to  be  complemented  by  national  arrangements  in  cases 
where local access is inadequate. 
It is all related 
Just as systemic risk is the product of interrelationships within the financial system, the G-20 
reforms are mutually reinforcing. 
In  particular,  capital  requirements  should  buttress  incentives  to  process  standardised 
products  centrally.  That  is,  trading  in  standardised  products  should  be  capital-advantaged 
and limited basis risk should not result in punitive capital charges. Bespoke transactions will 
continue  to  have  their  place,  but  should  be  subject  to  higher  capital  requirements  so  that 
incentives are appropriately aligned. 
Liquidity can be enhanced by a number of strategies. More effective resolution processes will 
help ensure that markets are robust to the failure of participants, thereby promoting liquidity 
in more states of the world. Measures to develop continuously open funding markets, such 
as CCPs, should expand liquidity options, as will more effective securitization. Central bank 
liquidity facilities should reinforce continuously open markets and, potentially, securitization 
reforms. Securitization will also enhance liquidity options. 
Most fundamentally, the more successful the market infrastructure and resolution agendas 
are, the lower the overall capital requirements for banks, and the more efficient the overall 
system. 
Conclusion 
G-20 leaders have mandated a series of reforms to put the global financial system on a more 
solid footing. These changes are radical, not incremental. 
A focus on efficiently reducing systemic risk is essential. This means ensuring that individual 
financial  institutions  are  both  stronger  and  less  systemically  important,  more  options  for 
liquidity are available in all states of the world, and the sum of the reforms is self-reinforcing 
and  market-driven  to  reduce  systemic  risk.  These  solutions  are  being  developed  through 
closer collaboration between regulators and central banks. 
IOSCO’s efforts are central to this effort. I thank you for your focus on this critical agenda and 
for your attention today. 
                                                
 
7   http://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD318.pdf. 
6 
 BIS Review 81/2010
