Ernesto Gouveia Gove: Reinforcement of “South–South” cooperation 
Statement by Mr Ernesto Gouveia Gove, Governor of the Central Bank of Mozambique, at 
the business function organised by the High Commissioner of the Republic of South Africa 
on the occasion of Nelson Mandela’s Day, Maputo, 21 July 2010. 
 The  Governor  of  the  Banco  de  Moçambique,  Mr.  Ernesto  Gouveia  Gove,  defended  last 
Sunday,  July  18,  the  reinforcement  of  “south–south”  cooperation  in  order  to  minimize,  in 
future,  the  access  problems  to  international  markets  and  the  volatility  of  their  prices.  The 
Governor’s statement as regards the issue was made during the business function organized 
by  the  High  Commissioner  of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa,  in  Maputo,  on  the  occasion  of 
Nelson Mandela’s Day. 
The function, which had the presence of Mozambican and South African businessmen and 
Members  of  the  Parliament  of  that  country  responsible  for  economic  matters,  served  to 
increase synergies between the business sectors of both countries. 
–  This  meeting  occurs  in  a  moment  when  the  recovery  signs  of  the 
global  economic  activity  have  began  to  be  strong  worldwide,  after 
years  of  major  economic  and  financial  crisis,  whose  effects  in 
countries 
impact  on  external  sector, 
particularly through decline of export revenues as a result of the fall 
of international prices of almost all the exporting products – said the 
Governor.  
like  ours  had  a  strong 
In  his  point  of  view,  the  integration  process  underway  in  our  countries,  considering  the 
existing investment opportunities, can contribute to the success of the fight against poverty 
and underdevelopment.  
According  to  the  Governor,  the  Southern  Africa  needs  to  be  united  in  order  to  eliminate 
information asymmetries.  
–  We  need  to  share  our  vast  experiences  and  to  speak  about  what 
each one can do or offer to develop our countries. We need to give 
content  and  frame  to  the  process  of  regional  integration  underway, 
implementing  the  strategic  plan  that  already  exists  and  undertaking 
the  common  and  integrated  projects,  particularly  the  cross-border 
projects that can boost the regional trade – stressed the Governor.  
In  this  context,  Mr.  Ernesto  Gove  considers  that  the  SADC  member  country  authorities 
should  proceed  with  institutional  and  macroeconomic  reforms  that  allow  the  attraction  of 
more  investments  to  the  region.  It  is  also  strongly  recommended  to  deepen  the  financial 
sector  so  that  it  can  develop  a  modern  and  strong  capital  market  to  fulfill  the  existing 
financing gap in so crucial infrastructure projects of the region. 
BIS Review 106/2010 
 1
