Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Financial regulations – Asian perspectives 
Remarks by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Panel 
Session “Financial Development and Regulatory Coordination under New Circumstances”, at 
Lujiazui Forum Annual Meeting 2010, Shanghai, 26 June 2010. 
 First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  to  the  hosts  for  inviting  me  to  the 
Lujiazui Forum and especially to this panel on financial reforms. I am particularly delighted to 
be given the opportunity to discuss the pressing issue of financial reform, which will shape 
the future landscape of the global economy. In this short presentation, I would like to argue 
the following two points:  
Firstly,  the  financial  innovations  of  the  past  quarter  century  have  blurred  the  dividing  line 
between banks and non-banks. These developments have made it possible to shift risk back 
and forth between the banking system and capital markets. It has become difficult to locate 
exactly where ultimate risk lies, and the banking system has found itself so often vulnerable 
to the volatility of capital markets. The Volcker Rule and related financial reform proposals 
are  designed  to  rectify  these  problems.  Secondly,  however,  we  should  recognize  the 
significant  regional  differences  in  banks’  business  models  along  this  bank/non-bank 
spectrum.  Financial  reforms  should  thus  follow  a  carefully-timed  and  well-balanced 
approach, taking explicit account of regional and functional heterogeneity. 
Banks more like non-banks and non-banks more like banks: rationale for the Volcker 
Rule 
It may sound a bit farfetched, but the global financial crisis of the last few years might have 
been brought about partly by banks becoming more like non-banks and non-banks becoming 
more like banks. Some banks are now non-bank-like, as exemplified in the current financial 
jargon  used  to  describe  these  banks’  business  practices,  such  as  “originate  to  distribute 
model”  and  “prop  trading”,  while  some  non-banks  have  become  bank-like,  as  the  phrase 
“shadow banking system” suggests.  
The  financial  innovations  behind  these  changes  are  in  essence  welcome  developments, 
helping to improve efficiency by shifting risk among economic agents. However, they have 
made  it  increasingly  difficult  to  locate  the  whereabouts  of  ultimate  risk.  Vital  information 
regarding banks’ risk exposures has been literally “lost in transformation” in the originate-to-
distribute model and various proprietary derivative trades. We have been unable to identify 
what risks a particular bank has been exposed to, and, as a consequence, those facing the 
financial system as a whole. As we all know only too well, heightened concern over counter-
party  risks  led  to  severe  dysfunction  in  financial  markets,  particularly  after  the  collapse  of 
Lehman Brothers and the bailout of AIG in September 2008.  
The problems surfaced most acutely in the United States. Thus we have observed the bold 
attempts at regulatory overhaul in the U.S., of which the so-called Volcker Rule has become 
something of an icon. 
In my understanding, the Volcker Rule is designed to deter banks from taking excessive risk 
in capital markets, where volatility is inherently high and in which bankers do not necessarily 
have informational advantage in predicting market developments. Rather, the Volcker Rule 
urges banks to return to their traditional stronghold of commercial banking business, in which 
they  can  utilize  their  informational  advantage  based  on  long-term  relationships  with  their 
customers.  In  other  words,  the  rule  attempts  to  insulate  long-horizon  relationship  banking 
from the occasional brutality of the sometime short-horizon capital markets. In this way, we 
can prevent the possible misuse of public assistance given to banks. 
BIS Review 90/2010 
 1
The rationale for the Volcker Rule could be applied to liquidity risk management as well. That 
is, commercial banks should not rely too much on fickle wholesale funding, but should focus 
more on stable deposits based on long-term relationships with their customers.  
Asian  perspectives  of  heterogeneity:  don’t  put  carnivorous  lions  and  herbivorous 
elephants in the same cage  
Here I cannot help feeling that this rule is quite congenial to the traditional Japanese, and 
probably Asian, view of what banks are. In Japan, loans constitute roughly half of corporate 
debt  financing,  and  deposits  roughly  three  quarters  of  banks’  balance  sheets.  Long-term 
relationships are the rule, not the exception. I believe this dominant role of the banking sector 
in the financial system is more or less similar in the rest of Asia as well. It is no coincidence 
that financial systems in the Asia region have remained relatively stable during the current 
crisis: we have not suffered a serious deterioration in confidence or market dysfunction, since 
our banks have largely remained as traditional banks, and shadow banking had at most a 
limited presence.  
In order to prevent another global financial crisis of this magnitude, we truly need a thorough 
and  internationally  harmonized  overhaul  of  financial  regulations,  as  is  currently  being 
undertaken by various international regulatory bodies. However, as mentioned before, proper 
consideration  must  be  given  to  the  regional  heterogeneity  of  banks’  business  functions, 
especially  in  the  bank/non-bank  spectrum.  The  difference  is  not  arbitrary  but  reflects  real 
structural differences between regions. In particular, it would be unrealistic to always assume 
that “one size fits all”: We should not put carnivorous lions and herbivorous elephants in the 
same  cage.  We  should  also  follow  a  well-balanced  approach  that  properly  recognizes  the 
synergetic  cross-effects  of  item-by-item  regulations.  An  appropriate  criterion  should  be  the 
combined effects of all item-by-item regulations. Simply focusing on the “marginal effects” of 
individual measures may be misleading, even though they have good individual rationale. 
At the same time, we should be aware of a possible trade-off between the long-term benefits 
and short-term costs of stronger regulations. Such regulations may indeed enhance financial 
stability and economic prosperity in the long run, but the hasty implementation of stringent 
regulations may hamper a fragile recovery, such as we find ourselves in now. 
Let me stop here for further discussion. Thank you for your kind attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2010
