Linah K Mohohlo: Post-recession role of accountants in business 
Speech by Ms Linah K Mohohlo, Governor of the Bank of Botswana, to the Association of 
Certified Chartered Accountants, Gaborone, 17 September 2010. 
 I would like to begin by thanking the Country Manager of Botswana’s Association of Certified 
Chartered Accountants, Ms Gwen Sabarwal, for inviting me to be a part of the Association’s 
Gala Dinner for 2010.  
I am informed that it is the Association’s tradition on this occasion to invite a notable person 
in the community to speak on some issue of topical interest. It humbles me, therefore, that I 
have been considered worthy of the platform for  this year’s event. You will agree that this 
time round, for me, any topical issue is bound to be coloured by, and related to, the recent 
global  financial  meltdown  and  related  deepest  economic  recession  since  the  great 
depression  of  the  1930s.  The  causes  of  the  difficult  economic  episode  are  now  common 
knowledge, with sources from private and public sectors at individual and collective levels, in 
areas  of  public  policy,  corporate  strategy  and  business  operations.  In  other  words,  all 
professions,  including  accountancy,  contributed  directly  or  indirectly  to  the  economic 
meltdown.  Now,  everyone  is  looking  through  the  rear  view  mirror  while  at  the  same  time 
focussing on the road ahead.  
Before delving more on the issues, I would like to commend your Association (Ms Sabarwal) 
for the commitment to training accountants in Botswana over the years. It is encouraging to 
learn  that,  since  1990,  two  years  following  the  enactment  of  the  relevant  legislation,  the 
membership of the Association of Certified Chartered Accountants in Botswana has grown to 
more than 350, and the student in-take has continued to increase. It is also encouraging to 
observe that the more than 96 percent membership retention level you have so far achieved 
is fairly comparable internationally. This should provide confidence that you will reach your 
2010/2011 retention target of 98 percent with relative ease.  
However,  I  happen  to  know  that  there  is  a  big  deficit  in  the  supply  of  accountants  in 
Botswana. Apparently the demand in the market is about 3 000, while the supply is just over 
1 000, the lion’s share of which are expatriates. I have no doubt that your Association shares 
this  concern,  given  the  fact  that  the  shortage  of  professionals  in  accounting  and  related 
disciplines can only raise costs and, therefore, be unaffordable for many small and medium 
size enterprises. It could constrain business performance and deprive the economy generally 
of  needed  guidance  in  business  governance,  ethics,  strategy  and  planning,  with  possible 
adverse  consequences  on  sustenance  of  economic  diversification  and  a  relatively  high 
growth rate for the economy. It is my hope, therefore, that steps will be taken to redress the 
situation, and this could include deliberate public policy intervention.  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, the theme I was requested to address is Accountants 
for Business. I believe this broad theme is currently guiding your exchange of views in your 
profession  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  will  be  addressed  further  at  the  World  Congress  of 
Accountants that is tenable in Malaysia next month.  
For this evening, I have chosen to put a slant to the topic and speak on The Post-Recession 
Role of Accountants in Business. In this case, the word “business” is broadly and loosely 
intended to mean institutions (corporate or non-corporate, private or public) that are engaged 
in production of goods and/or services.  
Although the global economic recession, from which we are slowly emerging, was, by and 
large, the result of a wide-ranging systems failure, I will confine my remarks to some of the 
lapses  of  the  accounting  profession  that  contributed  to  the  economic  meltdown.  I  will  also 
highlight some lessons learned and some on-going remedial measures that should prevent a 
recurrence.  I  will  then  raise  the  issue  of  the  need  to  increase  the  supply  and  quality  of 
BIS Review 124/2010 
 1
transparency 
accountants  in  Botswana  and  urge  you  to  be  actively  engaged  in  the  area  of  accounting 
principles and reporting. This will be my main message, but at the end of my remarks, I will 
digress  only  a  little  and  share  with  you  some  issues  of  public  interest  that  fall  within  the 
purview of the mandate of the Bank, and in which accountants are undoubtedly interested.  
It is now clear that the financial crisis and economic recession were the result of cumulative 
lapses  in  good  corporate  governance,  particularly  with  respect  to 
in 
management, policy formulation and operational procedures. This includes a clear hierarchy 
of institutional structures such as boards, management and stakeholders, with well defined 
functional  responsibilities  to  ensure  accountability  in  organisations.  There  were  lapses  in 
enforcing checks and balances, prevention of conflicts of interest and adherence to fiduciary 
responsibility.  Above  all,  in  many  instances,  there  was  a  lack  of  honesty,  selflessness, 
integrity, openness, ethical conduct and responsible corporate citizenry. 
By and large, accountants and other professionals at various levels of responsibility, and in a 
good number of financial and non-financial businesses, disregarded these cardinal guiding 
principles  of  good  corporate  governance  and  conveniently  forgot  that  what  is  legal  is  not 
necessarily ethical. In the end, the financial and economic structure could not bear the weight 
of accumulated lapses; so, it collapsed.  
While all this is now water under the bridge, it has been recognised in some quarters that the 
International  Accounting  Standards  contributed  more  than  their  fair  share  to  the  financial 
crisis. It is pointed out that one new standard abandoned the traditional prudent principle of 
historical asset valuation and replaced it with a highly subjective and pro-cyclical “fair value” 
concept.  As  a  result,  brokers,  analysts  and  investment  bankers  abused  the  standard.  The 
upward movement of stock prices immediately inflated balance sheets which, in turn, further 
inflated the asset price and, when the economic downturn set in, the bubble eventually burst. 
It  was  known  that  the  paper  profits  resulting  from  inflated  asset  book  values  could  not  be 
realised; and yet banks and other non-bank institutions took inordinate debt issuance risks. 
In addition, the “fair-value” principle was not much understood by the market, and was not 
transparent. In the event, balance sheets were hardly a useful basis for decision-making by 
economic  agents.  The  far  reaching  economic  and  social  consequences  of  this  accounting 
practice are now a matter of record.  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, it has been said that war is too serious a business to 
be  left  to  the  generals  only.  Likewise,  it  is  now  widely  recognised  that  accounting  is  too 
important a profession to be left to accountants only. Indeed the United States of America 
and  the  European  Union  recently  took  measures  to  “soften”  or  dilute,  as  it  were,  the 
deleterious  effects  of  “fair-value”  accounting  practice  in  financial  institutions.  Another 
emerging change is the call for more disclosures in accounting standards with which those of 
us outside the profession are grappling, obviously with the helping hand of accountants.  
Long gone are the days when accountants confined themselves to the boring ivory tower of 
“number  crunching”  or,  as  at  times  pejoratively  referred  to,  “bean  counting”.  In  fact,  it  has 
been said that accounting has now entered a golden age; an age of the changing role of the 
accountant; an age of wide-ranging roles that include professional business advice, planning, 
reporting, identification of value drivers and risk mitigation. 
In particular, it is increasingly desirable that the International Accounting Standards should 
incorporate  disclosures  of  payments  to  governments  by  companies  in  the  extraction  of 
natural resources, especially those in the oil, gas and timber sectors. This needs to be done 
in both the public and private sectors to ensure that maximum revenue and other benefits 
accrue  to  the  societies  in  which  these  companies  operate.  More  generally,  the  accounting 
profession  has  cross-cutting  socio-economic  responsibility  in  a  variety  of  ways  including 
governance,  business  ethics,  banking  regulations  and  supervision,  as  well  as  financial 
stability.  
In  this  respect,  climate  change  and  its  effects  have  opened  up  new  horizons  in  which 
accountants can be involved in a wide range of socio-economic issues. It is my hope that 
2 
 BIS Review 124/2010
accountants  from  developing  countries  will  take  the  lead  in  putting  in  place  the  necessary 
accounting  and  reporting  standards  on  costing  and  financing  of  the  mitigation  of  adverse 
socio-economic  effects  of  climate  change.  These  were  agreed  on  at  last  year’s  United 
Nations  Climate  Change  Conference  in  Copenhagen.  You  will  agree  that  this  is  a  multi-
disciplinary area which, I believe, will involve close consultations between your profession as 
accountants and other disciplines. 
Here  at  home,  the  Financial  Reporting  Bill  that  was  passed  by  Parliament  recently,  and 
awaiting  Presidential  approval,  will  contribute  considerably  in  widening  the  scope  for  the 
responsibilities  of  the  accounting  profession.  Similarly,  when  the  Botswana  Accounting 
Oversight Authority is put in place, it should strengthen the professional accountability and 
ethical conduct of accountants.  
As  a  related  matter,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  you  will  know  that,  in  a  bid  to  circumvent  a 
possible repeat of the recent financial crisis, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
reached  a  landmark  decision  on  September  12,  2010.  This  is  known  as  Basel  III,  and  it 
translates into a more than doubling of the common equity component of capital for global 
banks, from the current 2 percent to 4.5 percent, plus a new buffer of a further 2.5 percent, to 
reach  a  floor  of  7  percent.  The  effective  implementation  of  this  new  capital  adequacy 
requirement  is  the  period  2013–2019,  and  it  is  meant  to  make  banks  resilient  to  financial 
shocks and ensure a more healthy banking sector worldwide. Any bank capital falling within 
the  buffer  zone  will  face  restrictions  on  paying  dividends  and  discretionary  bonuses.  We 
await  more  of  these  proclamations  and  transformations  going  forward  as  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision continues to be hard at work. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Basel  Committee  is  catching  up  with  Botswana’s  regulatory 
framework on this matter. It should be of interest that the Bank of Botswana has, for more 
than 10 years now, insisted that domestic banks should maintain a capital adequacy ratio of 
15 percent, which is more than double the new Basel Committee’s minimum requirement. It 
should not come as a surprise, therefore, that, throughout the financial crisis, the domestic 
banking sector remained well capitalised, sound and profitable.  
While on the subject of the domestic banking sector, let me digress a bit into an example of 
the Bank of Botswana’s accountability to stakeholders on delivery of all its mandates, which 
include  monetary  policy,  the  objective  of  which  is  to  maintain  low,  predictable  and 
sustainable level of inflation. In meeting the inflation objective the Bank absorbs the banking 
system’s excess funds by issuing Bank of Botswana Certificates, thus containing undesirable 
credit growth and determining the appropriate level of the Bank Rate. There is no doubt that 
not issuing central bank paper in the form of Bank of Botswana Certificates to absorb excess 
liquidity in the banking system would be inflationary and destabilising to the economy. And 
yet there is a view in some quarters that the cost of absorbing excess liquidity is too high, 
and banks would do the right thing if left to themselves; that somehow, the Bank is enriching 
commercial banks. The Bank of course disagrees with these views. In fact, the “leave-banks-
and-their-excess-funds-alone” view runs counter to experience world-wide. On the contrary, 
banks cannot be left to accumulate excess money and be expected to do the right thing. In 
fact, it would be the height of irresponsibility if the Bank were not to intervene in the face of 
the continuing excess liquidity that is exclusively in the banking system. Indeed accountants, 
such  as  yourselves,  would  be  concerned  about  unhealthy  balance  sheets  resulting  from, 
among others, the vagaries of what would no doubt be runaway inflation, as was the case for 
several years before BoBCs were introduced in 1991.  
With respect to the Banks’ responsibility of reigning in inflation by managing banking system 
liquidity  and  credit  expansion,  there  is  the  related  need  for  banks  to  encourage  financial 
saving. It is well known that bank lending and investment which are a basis for the country’s 
development  cannot  increase  without  attracting  a  faster  rate  of  accumulating  savings.  The 
Bank is concerned that household voluntary savings rates are low, while borrowing levels are 
high  compared  to  countries  at  a  similar  level  of  development.  Commercial  banks  must, 
BIS Review 124/2010 
 3
therefore, seriously consider developing savings products that offer attractive deposit interest 
rates,  in  their  own  long-term  interest,  rather  than  concentrating  on  short-term  gains  by 
maintaining wide spreads between lending and deposit interest rates and, at the same time, 
charging exorbitantly for the services rendered. Rest assured, this and other related matters 
are receiving the Bank’s active attention.  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, we await the next course of the meal to be served, and 
I do not want to frustrate your appetite further. This, therefore, concludes my submissions.  
Please accept my best wishes for a pleasant and relaxing evening. 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 124/2010
