Brian P Sack: Preparing for a smooth (eventual) exit 
Remarks  by  Mr  Brian  P  Sack,  Executive  Vice  President  of  Markets  Group  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  National  Association  for  Business  Economics  Policy 
Conference, Arlington, Virginia, 8 March 2010. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  speak  today.  In  my  remarks,  I  will  provide  an  update  on  the 
progress  that  the  Federal  Reserve  is  making  toward  preparing  for  a  smooth  exit  from  the 
extraordinary policy actions that were taken in response to the financial crisis.1 I should note 
up front that I will not be providing any information about the likely timing of policy tightening; 
those  decisions  will  be  made  and  communicated  by  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee 
(FOMC). Instead, I will focus my comments on the policy tools and strategy that are likely to 
be  used  whenever  that  exit  becomes  appropriate.  I  will  also  discuss  the  preparedness  of 
financial markets for the Fed’s exit, in order to assess how financial conditions may evolve as 
the exit approaches and gets under way. 
When the time comes to tighten monetary policy, the Federal Reserve will be embarking on a 
tightening  cycle  like  no  other  in  its  history.  First,  this  tightening  cycle  will  have  two  policy 
dimensions, in that the FOMC will have to decide on the path of its asset holdings in addition 
to the path of the short-term interest rate. Second, we will be using tools to drain reserves 
that are new and that will have to be implemented on a scale that the Fed has never before 
tried. And third, we will be operating in a framework of interest on reserves that has not been 
fully tested in U.S. markets. 
All of that may sound risky. However, I believe the Federal Reserve is positioned to minimize 
any risks involved. Most important, we have worked hard to ensure that we have all of the 
tools needed to exit, and FOMC members have begun to describe a strategy for using them 
that  is  cautious  along  several  dimensions.  In  addition,  if  we  communicate  effectively,  the 
markets should be clearly informed and well prepared ahead of the exit. These are the points 
that I will emphasize in more detail. 
Liquidity facilities: a success story 
When  discussing  the  Federal  Reserve’s  exit  strategy,  it  is  important  to  separate  liquidity 
facilities  from  the  stance  of  monetary  policy.  While  the  exit  from  the  accommodative 
monetary policy stance has yet to begin, the exit from liquidity facilities is nearly complete. 
Let me begin with some comments on recent developments regarding the liquidity facilities, 
and then I will move on to monetary policy. 
As  is  well  known,  the  Federal  Reserve  launched  a  number  of  liquidity  facilities  to  provide 
short-term  funding  to  the  financial  markets  during  the  crisis,  in  order  to  meet  the 
extraordinary  demand  for  liquidity  at  that  time.  Here  I  am  referring  to  those  facilities  that 
provided funding at maturities of up to three months to particular sets of firms, such as the 
primary  dealers,  money  market  mutual  funds,  commercial  paper  issuers,  and  depository 
institutions.2  Just  today,  we  conducted  the  last  operation  associated  with  those  facilities, 
                                                 
1   The  views  expressed  here  are  not  necessarily  shared  by  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  or  by  other 
members of the staff of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
In discussing these facilities, I am not including any provision of credit intended to support specific institutions, 
including those associated with the Maiden Lane LLCs. I include the Term Securities Lending Facility in with 
short-term lending facilities, even though it provided the market with Treasury securities rather than reserves, 
because it was often used to find funding for positions in less liquid securities. 
2  
BIS Review 39/2010 
 1
meaning that all of the short-term liquidity facilities that were introduced during the crisis have 
now  effectively  been  retired.  The  only  special  liquidity  program  that  remains  active  is  the 
Term  Asset-Backed  Securities  Loan  Facility,  which  I  consider  to  differ  from  the  short-term 
liquidity programs because it provides funding for up to five years. 
With the wind-down of these short-term liquidity facilities, it is a good time to look back and 
assess  their  performance.  The  bottom  line  here  is  simple:  these  programs  were  an 
unquestionable success. We have witnessed a remarkable improvement in the functioning of 
short-term credit markets and an impressive recovery in the stability of large financial firms. 
While  a  whole  range  of  government  actions  contributed  to  this  recovery,  giving  financial 
institutions greater confidence about their access to funding, and that of their counterparties, 
was most likely a crucial step toward achieving stability. 
Moreover, the exit from these facilities has been quite smooth. At their peak, these facilities 
provided  more  than  $1.5  trillion  of  credit  to  the  economy.  Today,  the  remaining  balance 
across them is around $20 billion. It is impressive that the Fed was able to remove itself from 
such a large amount of credit extension without creating any significant problems for financial 
markets or institutions. That success largely reflects the effective design of those programs, 
as most were structured to provide credit under terms that would be less and less appealing 
as  markets  renormalized.  This  design  worked  incredibly  well,  as  activity  in  most  of  the 
facilities  gradually  declined  to  near  zero,  allowing  the  Fed  to  simply  turn  them  off  with  no 
market disruption. 
The success of these facilities should be judged by the outcomes they produced for financial 
market functioning, and not by the financial returns they generated on the Federal Reserve’s 
books. However, there are several reasons why the Fed might be expected to profit from this 
type of lending under most circumstances. First, the Fed is providing funds in response to an 
extreme move in the price of liquidity – that is, it is in effect buying a cheap asset. Second, 
the  programs  themselves,  if  successful  at  returning  market  functioning,  would  help  the 
performance of the Fed’s loans to be sound. And third, the lending under these facilities has 
to be adequately secured. 
Asset holdings: a policy lever 
While  the  exit  from  the  liquidity  facilities  has  been  successful,  the  exit  from  the 
accommodative  stance  of  monetary  policy  involves  a  different  set  of  challenges.  Many  of 
these  challenges  arise  from  the  Federal  Reserve’s  outright  holdings  of  Treasury  debt, 
agency  debt  and  agency  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS),  which  together  represent  the 
overwhelming share of the Fed’s balance sheet today. Indeed, as a result of our large-scale 
asset  purchase  programs,  these  asset  holdings  now  account  for  $2.0  trillion  of  the  Fed’s 
$2.3 trillion balance sheet. 
The Federal Reserve is approaching the scheduled end of its large-scale asset purchases. 
We  have  bought  $169  billion  of  agency  debt  to  date,  nearly  fulfilling  our  plan  to  purchase 
“about  $175  billion”.  For  MBS,  we  have  only  about  $30  billion  of  purchases  remaining  to 
reach  our  $1.25  trillion  target.  In  addition,  we  completed  $300  billion  of  purchases  of 
Treasury securities late last year. Looking across these programs, we have now purchased 
$1.69 trillion of assets, bringing us 98 percent of the way through our scheduled purchases. 
To get to this point, the Trading Desk at the New York Fed has so far conducted 126 discrete 
operations to purchase Treasury and agency debt, and has managed 292 trading days on 
which either it or its investment managers have acquired MBS. 
My view is that the purchase programs have helped to hold down longer-term interest rates, 
thereby supporting economic activity. With the conclusion of the programs approaching, the 
Desk has been tapering the pace of its purchases of agency debt and MBS. However, even 
as the pace of our purchases has slowed, longer-term interest rates have remained low, and 
MBS  spreads  over  Treasury  yields  have  remained  tight.  This  pattern  suggests  that  the 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2010
effects of the purchases have been primarily associated with the stock of the Fed’s holdings 
rather than with the flow of its purchases. In that case, the market effects of the purchase 
program will only slowly unwind as the balance sheet shrinks gradually over time.3 
In my previous speech back in December, I discussed in detail the channels through which 
these market effects may arise. By removing large amounts of duration and prepayment risk 
from the market, the Fed’s asset purchases reduced the volume of risk that the market had 
to hold, which lowered the risk premia on those assets. Put differently, the purchases bid up 
the prices of those assets and hence lowered their yields. The lower levels of yields would be 
expected  to  boost  other  asset  prices  as  investors  substitute  into  alternative  asset  classes. 
These patterns describe what researchers often refer to as portfolio balance effects. 
Such effects are important to consider, because they have implications for monetary policy. If 
the Fed’s holdings of assets have produced lower long-term interest rates, the FOMC has to 
carefully  take  into  consideration  how  it  will  manage  the  size  of  its  balance  sheet  going 
forward. In particular, a rapid and substantial reduction in our holdings of assets would likely 
push  up  long-term  interest  rates  that  is,  it  would  put  upward  pressure  on  those  rates  by 
unwinding the portfolio balance effect. That increase in long rates would, in turn, weigh on 
other asset prices, reversing the positive effects that had been associated with the expansion 
of the Fed’s balance sheet. 
Under  this  view,  the  size  of  the  Fed’s  asset  holdings  becomes  a  relevant  policy  lever. 
Accordingly,  this  will  be  the  first  tightening  cycle  for  which  there  are  two  broad  policy 
decisions in play, as the FOMC will have to set out not only the path of the short-term interest 
rate, but also the path of its asset holdings. The decisions on these two variables will have to 
be  made  in  conjunction  with  one  another  to  produce  the  desired  outcome  for  economic 
activity and inflation. 
These considerations leave open a range of outcomes for how the two instruments will be 
used. In his February 10 testimony, Chairman Bernanke described a possible approach for 
managing the size of the balance sheet. In particular, he indicated that he does not currently 
anticipate that the Fed will sell any of its asset holdings until the economic recovery is more 
firmly  established  and  policy  tightening  has  gotten  underway.  Until  that  time,  the  portfolio 
would  shrink  only  through  asset  redemptions.  Chairman  Bernanke  noted  that  the  Fed’s 
holdings  of  agency  debt  and  MBS  are  being  allowed  to  roll  off  the  balance  sheet,  without 
reinvestment, as those securities mature or are prepaid, and that the FOMC may choose to 
redeem some of its holdings of Treasury securities in the future, as well. 
With this approach, the FOMC would be shrinking its balance sheet in a gradual and passive 
manner. That, in my view, is a crucial message for the markets. It should limit any reversal of 
the portfolio balance effects described earlier, effectively putting reductions in asset holdings 
in the background for now as a policy instrument. As long as this approach is maintained, it 
would leave the adjustment of short-term interest rates as the more active policy instrument – 
the  one  that  would  carry  the  bulk  of  the  work  in  tightening  financial  conditions  when 
appropriate. 
This approach is cautious in several dimensions. First, a decision to shrink the balance sheet 
more  aggressively  could  be  disruptive  to  market  functioning.  Second,  a  more  aggressive 
approach would risk an immediate and substantial rise in longer-term yields that, at this time, 
would be counterproductive for achieving the FOMC’s objectives. Third, the effects of swings 
in  the  balance  sheet  on  the  economy  are  difficult  to  calibrate  and  subject  to  considerable 
uncertainty,  given  our  limited  history  with  this  policy  tool.  And  fourth,  policymakers  do  not 
need to use this tool to tighten financial conditions. They can tighten financial conditions as 
                                                 
3   An alternative explanation is that the large-scale asset purchases have had no effect and that the low levels of 
rates  and  spreads  simply  reflect  other  factors.  However,  I  believe  the  evidence  indicates  that  the  asset 
purchases have contributed to the low level of longer-term rates. 
BIS Review 39/2010 
 3
much as needed by raising short-term interest rates, offsetting any lingering portfolio balance 
effects arising from the still-elevated portfolio. 
Even under this cautious strategy of relying only on redemptions, the Federal Reserve could 
achieve a considerable decline in the size of its balance sheet over time. From now to the 
end of 2011, we project that more than $200 billion of the agency debt and MBS held by the 
Federal Reserve will mature or be prepaid, though the actual total will depend on the path of 
long-term interest rates and the prepayment behavior of mortgage holders. Thus, the Fed’s 
asset holdings would shrink meaningfully if the FOMC maintains its current strategy of not 
reinvesting  those  proceeds.  In  addition,  about  $140  billion  of  Treasury  securities  mature 
between now and the end of 2011, giving the FOMC scope to reduce its asset holdings even 
further if it chooses to not replace some of those maturing securities. 
While the passive strategy of relying on redemptions may be appropriate for now, it might not 
be sufficient over the longer-term. One problem is that relying only on redemptions would still 
leave  some  MBS  holdings  on  our  balance  sheet  for  several  decades.  As  indicated  in  the 
minutes from the January meeting, the FOMC intends to return to a Treasuries-only portfolio 
over time. This consideration could motivate the FOMC to sell its agency debt and mortgage-
backed securities at some point, once the economic recovery has progressed sufficiently. 
Draining tools: control of short-term rates 
Under the strategies just described, the Fed’s asset holdings are likely to still be elevated at 
the time that the FOMC wants to raise short-term interest rates. That creates a challenge for 
controlling those rates, because of the large amounts of reserves that were created from the 
Fed’s purchases of those assets. It is therefore important for the Fed to determine the way in 
which it will raise short-term interest rates in an environment with so much liquidity – a topic 
that I will now cover. 
The primary vehicle for making adjustments to short-term interest rates in that environment is 
the  ability  to  pay  interest  on  reserves.  We  would  expect  changes  in  the  interest  rate  on 
reserves to have a significant influence on other short-term interest rates. However, in order 
to  ensure  our  ability  to  influence  those  other  short-term  interest  rates,  we  have  been 
developing two tools that can be used to reduce the large amount of excess reserves in the 
banking  system  –  term  deposits  with  banks  and  reverse  repurchase  agreements  (reverse 
repos) with a broader universe of financial institutions. Let me first provide an update on the 
progress we have made in developing these tools. 
On  term  deposits,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  received  public  comments  on  the  proposed 
structure of the facility that was published in December, and we are working toward its final 
form. As described in the recent Monetary Policy Report, the Federal Reserve expects to be 
able  to  conduct  test  transactions  in  the  spring  and  to  have  the  facility  fully  ready,  shortly 
thereafter, to conduct transactions when needed. 
On reverse repos, we have already successfully run small-scale operations using Treasury 
and  agency  debt  as  collateral  with  primary  dealers.  However,  that  leaves  two  significant 
steps  still  to  take  in  preparing  the  tool.  One  is  developing  the  capacity  to  use  our  MBS 
holdings as collateral. Work in that area is nearly complete, and we will likely conduct some 
small-scale operations with MBS collateral in a month or so to exercise that capability. The 
other  step  is  expanding  the  set  of  counterparties  that  we  use  for  such  operations.  Earlier 
today, we published criteria for money market mutual funds to become eligible to participate 
in  reverse  repo  operations,  which  was  a  first  and  important  step  in  that  direction.  We  are 
currently  working  with  other  types  of  firms  to  assess  their  potential  participation  in  the 
program,  as  well.  Our  expectation  is  to  have  arrangements  in  place  and  to  be  ready  to 
transact  with  some  non-dealer  firms  by  the  end  of  the  second  quarter.  This  expansion  of 
counterparties is important for boosting the capacity of the program. 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2010
The bottom line is that the preparation of both facilities is advancing very effectively. Looking 
across the two programs, we will have established the capacity to drain a significant portion 
of excess reserves by the second half of the year. Of course, achieving this capacity does 
not say anything about how and when the FOMC will decide to actually drain reserves. 
The actual timing and size of draining operations, and their relation to changes in the interest 
rate paid on reserves, will depend on how market and economic conditions evolve. Chairman 
Bernanke discussed one possible sequence in his February 10 testimony. He suggested that 
operations to drain reserves could be run on a limited basis well ahead of policy tightening, in 
order to give market participants time to become familiar with them, and then could be scaled 
up to more significant volume as we approach the time for policy tightening. 
Removing a portion of the excess reserves from the system ahead of increasing the rate paid 
on  reserves  is  a  cautious  approach,  as  it  should  improve  the  Fed’s  control  of  short-term 
interest rates when it comes time to tighten monetary policy.4 To be sure, even at today’s 
reserve  levels,  we  would  expect  the  interest  rate  paid  on  excess  reserves  to  exert 
considerable  pull  on  other  short-term  interest  rates  such  as  the  federal  funds  rate  or  repo 
rates. However, we are unsure of the exact relationship between these rates and believe that 
it  is  likely  to  be  tighter  when  the  banking  system  is  not  as  saturated  with  liquidity  as  it  is 
today. Thus, it may be prudent to remove some portion of excess reserves before raising the 
interest rate on reserves. 
Note  that  the  policy  tightening  in  this  scenario  will  still  likely  be  taking  place  in  an 
environment  of  large  excess  reserve  balances,  and  the  main  workhorse  of  the  tightening 
cycle will still be the interest paid on reserves. However, the draining tools can be used to 
best ensure the success of that framework. 
Market conditions: at risk on exit? 
Finally,  let  me  turn  to  conditions  in  financial  markets  and  discuss  whether  there  may  be 
vulnerabilities related to the Fed’s exit from the current monetary policy stance. I think there 
are two potential areas of concern. 
The  first  potential  concern  is  that  the  exit  strategy  could  simply  cause  confusion  among 
market participants, prompting volatility in asset prices. As noted earlier, this tightening cycle, 
when  it  arrives,  will  be  more  complicated  than  past  cycles,  as  there  will  be  more  decision 
points  facing  policymakers.  With  more  decision  points  come  more  opportunities  for  the 
markets  to  be  confused  by  our  actions.  The  recent  changes  to  the  discount  rate  and  the 
Treasury’s  Supplementary  Financing  Program  balances  highlight  this  concern,  as  the 
amount of attention that those actions received was outsized relative to their significance for 
the economy or for the path of short-term interest rates. 
The  burden  is  on  the  Fed  to  mitigate  this  risk  by  communicating  clearly  about  its  policy 
intentions and the purpose of any operational moves it might take. In this regard, the forward-
looking policy language that the FOMC is currently using in its statement is important. I would 
argue that this language contains much more direct and valuable information about the likely 
path  of  the short-term  interest  rate  target  than  does  any  decision  about  draining  reserves. 
Indeed, it will be difficult for market participants to make precise inferences about the timing 
of  increases  in  the  target  interest  rate  from  the  patterns  of  reserve  draining  alone,  in  part 
                                                 
4   Some  have  discussed  whether  the  draining  of  excess  reserves  has  effects  on  the  economy  beyond  the 
implications for short-term interest rates. In my view, it would be surprising if there were significant effects on 
the real economy or inflation associated with substituting one short-term, liquid, risk-free asset (reverse repos 
or term deposits with the Fed) for another (reserves), except for the degree to which that substitution affects 
the Fed’s control of overnight interest rates. 
BIS Review 39/2010 
 5
because the FOMC has not specified the path of reserves it intends to achieve before raising 
interest rates. 
The second potential concern that some may have is whether the markets have adequately 
priced  in  the  exit  strategy.  However,  a  few  considerations  should  limit  this  concern.  Most 
important, the current configuration of yields and asset prices incorporates expectations that 
short-term  interest  rates  will  begin  to  rise  around  the  end  of  this  year.  Thus,  the  markets 
seem prepared for the risks toward tighter policy. Moreover, looking out to longer maturities, 
the shape of the Treasury yield curve appears to incorporate not only expectations of policy 
tightening,  but  a  decent-sized  term  premium  on  longer-term  securities.  Indeed,  the  term 
premium is well above the levels observed over most of the past several years, even though 
inflation is likely to be low and upside inflation risks are limited. This should help to diminish 
the chances of a sizable upward shift in yields. 
A related issue is whether the current levels of risky asset prices will prove robust in a rising 
rate environment. This may be a particular concern among those who argue that the current 
low  policy  rate  environment  has  fueled  an  unsustainable  rise  in  asset  prices  beyond  their 
fundamental values. However, this is not clearly the case on a broad basis. Obviously, risky 
asset  prices  have  undergone  a  historic  rise  from  their  trough  in  early  2009.  But  this  rise 
began from an extreme starting point, one in which asset prices were being depressed by the 
baseline  forecast  of  a  deep  recession,  by  the  prospect  of  further  downside  risks  to  the 
economy, and by very elevated risk premiums. 
As the economy stabilized, asset prices benefitted from both the improving economic outlook 
and a significant renormalization of risk premiums – a pattern that was a desired outcome 
from  the  stance  of  monetary  policy.  Moreover,  we  do  not  see  definitive  signs  that  risk 
premiums  have  broadly  become  too  low  at  this  point.  To  be  sure,  a  number  of  significant 
risks  remain  in  the  economic  outlook,  and  those  translate  into  financial  market  risks. 
Eventually, though, we expect to reach a period of sustained, above-trend growth to absorb 
the  substantial  slack  in  place,  which  is  an  environment  that  should  be  quite  supportive  of 
risky  asset  prices.  Policy  tightening  will  presumably  occur  as  that  happens,  limiting  the 
downside risk to markets associated with policy actions. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  the  exit  from  the  various  liquidity  facilities  that  the  Federal  Reserve 
implemented has been very successful, as the up-front design of those facilities reduced the 
need  to  actively  manage  the  end  of  those  programs.  However,  the  exit  from  the  current 
stance  of  monetary  policy  is  quite  different,  in  that  it  will  have  to  be  actively  managed  to 
ensure a smooth exit. 
I began the speech by noting that we face an extraordinary challenge with this exit, given the 
historic  steps  that  have  been  taken  with  the  Fed’s  balance  sheet.  This  challenge,  which 
involves  operating  in  uncharted  territory  along  several  dimensions,  will  inherently  involve 
some  uncertainties  and  risks.  However,  as  I  hope  is  clear  from  my  remarks,  the  Federal 
Reserve’s efforts to date should minimize those risks. Indeed, I believe the Fed’s efforts have 
been prudent along a number of dimensions. 
As a first step, we have been careful to make sure we have an adequate set of tools. To that 
end,  we  have  developed  multiple  tools  that  can  be  used  for  draining  reserves,  in  order  to 
ensure our capability to do so. Moreover, we have been testing those tools and will continue 
to take steps to ensure that we and the markets are prepared to use them in more significant 
volumes  when  needed.  Developing  the  tools  is  not  enough,  though.  As  a  second  step, 
policymakers will need to formulate a strategy for using them in an appropriate manner to 
avoid any undesired outcomes for financial markets and the economy. 
The  FOMC  is  actively  engaged  in  determining  that  strategy,  as  indicated  in  the  FOMC 
minutes from the January meeting. The strategy to be employed has not been fully decided, 
6 
 BIS Review 39/2010
but  recent  speeches  by  FOMC  members  and  the  recent  FOMC  minutes  have  begun  to 
convey  some  of  the  possibilities.  Many  of  the  potential  steps  described  seem  to  guard 
against the risks involved. For example, reducing the size of the Fed’s balance sheet through 
redemptions for now will produce a gradual adjustment that will be easier for the markets to 
digest. In addition, steps taken to drain reserves ahead of policy tightening may best ensure 
the success of interest on reserves at influencing other short-term interest rates. 
Overall, an approach along these lines should help to ensure a smooth exit from the current 
accommodative  stance  of  monetary  policy.  Moreover,  if  the  Fed’s  intentions  are  well 
communicated to the financial market participants, they too should be fully prepared and in 
the best possible shape for navigating this exit. 
BIS Review 39/2010 
 7
