European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement  
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
8 April 2010. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by Commissioner Rehn. 
Based  on  its  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to 
leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged. The current rates remain appropriate. Taking 
into account all the information and analyses that have become available since our meeting 
on  4 March  2010,  price  developments  are  expected  to  remain  moderate  over  the  policy-
relevant horizon. The latest information has also confirmed that the economic recovery in the 
euro area continued in the early months of 2010. Overall, the Governing Council expects the 
euro area economy to expand at a moderate pace in 2010, in an environment of uncertainty, 
with  the  growth  pattern  possibly  being  uneven  owing  to  a  number  of  special  factors.  The 
outcome of the monetary analysis confirms the assessment of low inflationary pressures over 
the medium term. All in all, we expect price stability to be maintained over the medium term, 
thereby  supporting  the  purchasing  power  of  euro  area  households.  Inflation  expectations 
remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the  Governing  Council’s  aim  of  keeping  inflation  rates 
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. We will continue to monitor very closely all 
developments over the period ahead.  
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Benefiting from the ongoing recovery in the world economy, the significant macroeconomic 
stimulus  provided  and  the  measures  adopted  to  restore  the  functioning  of  the  banking 
system, the euro area economy grew by 0.4% in the third quarter of 2009, after a period of 
sharp decline, while in the fourth quarter real GDP was flat, according to Eurostat’s second 
release. Available indicators, in particular further positive information from business surveys, 
suggest that the economic recovery in the euro area continued in the early months of 2010, 
although  it  may  have  been  affected  by  a  number  of  special  factors,  including  adverse 
weather conditions. As a consequence, euro area real GDP growth is likely to have remained 
uneven around the turn of the year, making it advisable to look through the quarterly volatility 
and to compare growth developments on a half-yearly basis. Looking ahead, the Governing 
Council expects real GDP growth to continue to expand at a moderate pace in 2010, owing 
to the ongoing process of balance sheet adjustment in various sectors and the expectation 
that  low  capacity  utilisation  is  likely  to  dampen  investment  and  that  consumption  is  being 
hampered by weak labour market prospects. 
The Governing Council continues to view the risks to this outlook as broadly balanced, in an 
environment  of  uncertainty.  On  the  upside,  the  global  economy  and  foreign  trade  may 
recover  more  strongly  than  projected  and  confidence  may  improve  more  than  expected. 
Furthermore,  there  may  be  greater  than  anticipated  effects  stemming  from  the  extensive 
macroeconomic  stimulus  being  provided  and  from  other  policy  measures  taken.  On  the 
downside, concerns remain relating to renewed tensions in some financial market segments, 
a  stronger  or  more  protracted  than  expected  negative  feedback  loop  between  the  real 
economy and the financial sector, renewed increases in oil and other commodity prices, and 
the  intensification  of  protectionist  pressures,  as  well  as  the  possibility  of  a  disorderly 
correction of global imbalances. 
With regard to price developments, euro area annual HICP inflation was 1.5% in March 2010, 
according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, after 0.9% in February. While no breakdown of overall 
BIS Review 43/2010 
 1
HICP developments is available yet, this higher than expected outcome may be related in 
particular  to  the  energy  component  as  well  as  food  prices,  possibly  partly  as  a  result  of 
weather conditions. Inflation is expected to remain moderate over the policy-relevant horizon. 
In line with a slow recovery in domestic and foreign demand, overall price, cost and wage 
developments  are  expected  to  stay  subdued.  Inflation  expectations  over  the  medium  to 
longer  term  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the  Governing  Council’s  aim  of  keeping 
inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
Risks  to  this  outlook  remain  broadly  balanced.  They  relate,  in  particular,  to  further 
developments  in  economic  activity  and  the  evolution  of  commodity  prices.  Furthermore, 
increases  in  indirect  taxation  and  administered  prices  may  be  greater  than  currently 
expected, owing to the need for fiscal consolidation in the coming years.  
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  M3  was  –0.4%  in  February. 
Annual growth in loans to the private sector also remained weak, at –0.4%, despite a positive 
flow  in  the  month.  Overall,  the  latest  data  continue  to  support  the  assessment  that  the 
underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion  is  moderate  and  that,  in  the  medium  term,  the 
inflationary  pressures  associated  with  monetary  developments  are  low.  The  growth  of  M3 
and loans is likely to remain weak also in the coming months. 
The continued steep yield curve fosters the allocation of funds into longer-term deposits and 
securities outside M3 and implies that actual M3 growth is weaker than the underlying pace 
of  monetary  expansion.  At  the  same  time,  the  narrow  spreads  between  the  interest  rates 
paid  on  different  M3  instruments  imply  low  opportunity  costs  of  holding  funds  in  the  most 
liquid components included in M1, which continued to grow at a robust annual rate of 10.9% 
in February. However, the monthly flows in the components of M3 were generally small in 
February, suggesting that the strong impact of the prevailing interest rate constellation may 
be progressively waning. 
The  negative  annual  growth  of  bank  loans  to  the  private  sector  continues  to  conceal 
countervailing  developments:  positive,  strengthening  annual  growth  in  loans  to  households 
on the one hand, and negative annual growth in loans to non-financial corporations on the 
other hand. At the same time, the flow of loans to firms in February was positive for the first 
time since August 2009 and halted the decline in the annual growth rate. Such positive short-
term developments need to be assessed with caution, owing to the volatility in monthly data. 
In  addition,  it  is  a  normal  feature  of  the  business  cycle  that  loans  to  non-financial 
corporations remain weak for some time after economic activity has picked up. 
The reduction in the size of banks’ overall balance sheets appears to have come to a halt in 
the  early  months  of  2010.  However,  the  challenge  remains  for  them  to  manage  possible 
further  adjustments  while  at  the  same  time  ensuring  the  availability  of  credit  to  the  non-
financial  sector.  To  address  this  challenge,  banks  should  use  the  improved  funding 
conditions  to  strengthen  their  capital  bases  further,  and,  where  necessary,  take  full 
advantage of government support measures for recapitalisation. 
To sum up, the current key ECB interest rates remain appropriate. Taking into account all the 
information and analyses that have become available since our meeting on 4 March 2010, 
price developments are expected to remain moderate over the policy-relevant horizon. The 
latest information has also confirmed that the economic recovery in the euro area continued 
in the early months of 2010. Overall, the Governing Council expects the euro area economy 
to  expand  at  a  moderate  pace  in  2010,  in  an  environment  of  uncertainty,  with  the  growth 
pattern possibly being uneven owing to a number of special factors. A cross-check of the 
outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the  monetary  analysis  confirms  the 
assessment of low inflationary pressures over the medium term. All in all, we expect price 
stability to be maintained over the medium term, thereby supporting the purchasing power of 
euro  area  households.  Inflation  expectations  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the 
Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term. We will continue to monitor very closely all developments over the period ahead.  
2 
 BIS Review 43/2010
As regards fiscal policies, it is now essential that governments reduce budget imbalances 
and correct excessive deficits by the agreed deadlines. In a number of euro area countries, 
fiscal consolidation will start this year and in all others corrective measures will need to be in 
place by 2011 at the latest. Fiscal consolidation will need to exceed substantially the annual 
structural  adjustment  of  0.5%  of  GDP  set  as  a  minimum  requirement  by  the  Stability  and 
Growth  Pact,  and  there  is  a  need  to  fully  define  and  implement  credible  fiscal  adjustment 
strategies.  This  requires  determined  efforts,  notably  on  the  part  of  countries  with  high 
government deficit and debt-to-GDP ratios, not least in view of the expected rising budgetary 
costs  associated  with  an  ageing  population.  A  strong  focus  on  expenditure  reforms  is 
needed. The Governing Council welcomes the statement on Greece made by the Heads of 
State and Government of the euro area countries on 25 March. We fully support the intention 
to  strengthen  surveillance  of  economic  and  budgetary  risks  and  the  instruments  for  their 
prevention as well as the excessive deficit procedure. We also welcome the decision to work 
on a robust crisis resolution framework. Progress in these fields should aim to support the 
sustainability of public finances and promote the smooth functioning of EMU.  
Regarding structural reforms, the agreements reached at the European Council on 25 and 
26 March on the Europe 2020 strategy should help to reinforce job creation, competitiveness 
and  sustainable  growth.  To  this  end,  policies  should  now  focus  on  increasing  competition, 
while  sectoral  support  schemes  implemented  during  the  crisis  should  be  phased  out.  In 
labour  markets,  sufficient  wage  flexibility  and  a  reinforcement  of  incentives  to  work  are 
required,  in  order  to  avoid  higher  structural  unemployment  over  the  coming  years.  In  the 
same  vein,  an  appropriate  restructuring  of  the  banking  sector  remains  essential.  Sound 
balance sheets, effective risk management and transparent, robust business models are key 
to  strengthening  banks’  resilience  to  shocks  and  to  ensuring  adequate  access  to  finance, 
thereby laying the foundations for sustainable growth and financial stability. 
Regarding  our  collateral  framework,  the  Governing  Council  has  decided  to  keep  the 
minimum  credit  threshold  for  marketable  and  non-marketable  assets  in  the  Eurosystem 
collateral  framework  at  investment-grade  level  (i.e.  BBB–/Baa3)  beyond  the  end  of  2010, 
except in the case of asset-backed securities (ABSs). In addition, the Governing Council has 
decided to apply, as of 1 January 2011, a schedule of graduated valuation haircuts to the 
assets rated in the BBB+ to BBB– range (or equivalent). This graduated haircut schedule will 
replace  the  uniform  haircut  add-on  of  5%  that  is  currently  applied  to  these  assets.  The 
detailed haircut schedule will be based on a number of parameters which are specified in the 
press release to be published after today’s press conference.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 43/2010 
 3
