Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Lessons of the crisis – ethics, markets, democracy 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at Unione Cristiana Imprenditori Dirigenti (UCID), Milan, 13 May 2010. 
 The events of recent weeks, particularly the Greek crisis, show that the period of economic 
and financial instability which began almost three years ago is not over yet. The first phase of 
that  instability,  starting  in  August  2007,  occurred  mainly  on  the  financial  markets,  ranging 
from  the  money  markets  to  the  stock  markets.  With  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in 
September  2008,  the  crisis  spread  to  the  real  economy,  causing  trade,  consumption  and 
investment to fall worldwide. The economic policy authorities have tackled the recession with 
massive  injections  of  funds  to  support  the  economy.  Public  deficits  have  risen  to 
unprecedented levels, driving up the debts of all the industrialised countries: the International 
Monetary Fund has described the current situation as a “wartime debt, without a war”. We 
have moved into the third phase of the crisis in which the financial markets have begun to 
question the sustainability of economic policies, in particular as regards public finances and, 
consequently, the sustainability of the economic recovery itself.  
This  third  phase  of  the  crisis  has  hit  Europe  first.  Financial  markets  consider,  rightly  or 
wrongly (in my view more the latter, but I won’t dwell on that point) that in countries where 
there is a perfect overlap between the monetary and fiscal authorities the risk of insolvency is 
limited because the central bank can print money and create inflation to reduce the burden of 
public  debt.  However,  the  euro  area,  which  cannot  monetise  its  debt,  has  to  tackle  the 
problem  immediately  and  ensure  that  each  country  is  solvent  without  a  monetary 
contribution. If the euro area is able to overcome the current difficulties and restore its public 
finances in time, it will exit from this “public” phase of the crisis before others.  
The crisis, in its later stages, has revealed a number of common issues to which, it seems to 
me, insufficient thought has been given, and even less action taken. 
At  our  last  meeting,  in  October  2008,  shortly  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  I 
examined the problems facing modern democracies in making decisions that require citizens 
to make short-term sacrifices for long-term gains. Lehman Brothers was left to go bankrupt, 
with devastating effects on the global economy because the US Congress – under pressure 
from voters a few weeks before the election – refused to provide the US administration with 
the funds necessary for the rescue. That refusal, which was also confirmed during the vote 
on the Troubled Asset Relief Program, a few days after the failure of Lehman, even though 
the markets were already falling, fully reflected the deep feelings of American taxpayers who 
did not want to pay out of their own pockets to save a financial institution that had hitherto 
enriched its shareholders and managers beyond measure. The common sentiment was that 
it  was  not  “right”  to  save  Lehman;  those  who  had  made  mistakes  had  to  pay.  Those 
taxpayers and their representatives in Congress and the administration did not think that the 
failure of Lehman would infect the global financial system and endanger their own savings. 
That short-sightedness cost much more than it would have cost to save Lehman. 
It was not however the first time that the American people reacted that way. In 1995, at the 
time of the Mexican crisis, the US Congress refused to disburse funds to support the IMF’s 
USD  50  billion  programme.  The  US  administration  found  in  the  labyrinth  of  the  budget  a 
foreign exchange stabilisation fund that did not require Congressional approval to use on that 
occasion. The facts have shown that without that intervention Mexico would have been hit by 
a severe crisis which would also have overwhelmed the United States. Although just a few – 
with  the  benefit  of  hindsight  –  have  considered  the  administration’s  decision  wrong, 
Congress subsequently adopted a budgetary control act to prevent that budget item being re-
used without the consent of Congress. 
BIS Review 66/2010 
 1
The most recent phase of the crisis has shown Europe to have the same problems as the 
US.  Taxpayers  in  some  European  countries  have  opposed  the  aid  package  for  Greece,  a 
country guilty of having fiddled its accounts, without thinking that bankruptcy would have led 
to  a  crisis  with  even  more  serious  consequences  for  those  taxpayers.  Finally,  despite  the 
difficulties, Europe was able to reach a decision. The respective countries have approved the 
aid  package  for  Greece.  The  approval  has  however  taken  time  and  involved  debates  and 
discussions – processes that are fully justified, indeed essential, in a democracy – and yet 
they have fuelled uncertainty about the final outcome and thus prompted market participants 
to quickly liquidate their investments in Greek securities. This resulted in an increase in the 
budget deficit and the need for an even larger support package. There is no doubt that the 
total  cost  of  funding  to  Greece  would  have  been  lower  if  decisions  had  been  taken  more 
quickly, for example, immediately after the agreement between the European heads of state 
and  government  on  11  February,  when  they  promised  support  to  Greece  provided  it  took 
measures to cut its deficit by 4% of gross domestic product. Indeed, Greece took the steps 
required  in  less  than  a  week,  but  in  the  meantime  in  some  other  countries  the  popular 
consensus in favour of the support measures was weakening. Only the signs of a general 
crisis across the euro area would justify their contribution. For this reason, assistance from 
the  IMF  was  requested,  attesting  to  the  global  nature  of  the  crisis  and  the  support.  At  the 
same time, the elections in some countries have delayed the IMF’s intervention in order to 
avoid having to decide on support for Greece in an election period. 
It  seems  that  the  people,  their  democratically  elected  representatives,  and  institutions 
operating in that context, sometimes need to “see” the crisis approaching in order to realise 
the dangers and take the decisions necessary to tackle them. This is particularly the case in 
societies which are based on economic stability, such as Germany, and which are not used 
to managing crises, especially those of a financial kind. In the global world in which financial 
markets move rapidly, there is a risk that the reaction times are too slow and that people may 
sense a crisis looming when in fact it has already hit. To prevent such a risk we need great 
leadership by those who govern, and we need institutions to convince people to look beyond 
the  short  term  and  take  account  of  the  impending  crisis.  Alternatively,  automatic  defence 
mechanisms are needed which permit a rapid addressing of problems before a crisis breaks 
out. 
In the euro area, mechanisms have to be created to respond more quickly to the financial 
needs of states, even with emergency measures, or to supply funds to support those facing 
speculative attacks that threaten to undermine the very solidity of the states. It is unclear to 
me how these mechanisms can be shaped in a way that is compatible with our democracies, 
which in particular require parliamentary scrutiny of taxpayers’ money. But it is clear to me 
that without these mechanisms our democracies risk getting hurt and being unable to deal 
with crises that can undermine their foundations, as shown by the speculative attacks against 
the sovereign debt of the industrialised countries.  
We need not only to reflect on these issues but also to find concrete solutions – rapidly.  
Let  me  turn  now  another  problem,  which  has  arisen  from  the  ongoing  financial  crisis,  a 
problem  which,  I  think,  has  so  far  received  scant  attention.  It  concerns  the  functioning  of 
financial markets.  
The crisis has forged a broad consensus: financial markets are not always efficient. They do 
not always use the available information in such a way as to correctly value the assets that 
are  exchanged  between  financial  market  participants.  Recent  experience  has  shown  that 
there  is  a  natural  tendency  to  underestimate  risk  when  markets  are  euphoric  and  to 
overestimate  risk  during  crises.  These  behaviours  are  derived  from  the  incentive  that  the 
market participants have to maximize the return on capital employed, on their own account or 
on behalf of their clients. There is now a large body of literature that explains why, even with 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2010
rational agents, markets cannot be efficient at the aggregate level, and in particular give rise 
to speculative bubbles. 1 
The reforms of the financial system that are currently under discussion in the various bodies 
that report to the G20, like the Basel Committee, the Financial Stability Board and the IMF 
are intended to establish or strengthen existing rules that reduce pro-cyclical behaviour, for 
example,  through  the  banks’  capital  requirements,  accounting  rules,  the  mechanisms  that 
determine managers’ remuneration, the specific constraints on major financial institutions. 
The effectiveness of the new rules and of the supervisory authorities that will implement them 
will  depend  on  their  ability  to  affect  the  incentives  of  individual  market  participants  and 
financial  institutions.  Some  have  expressed  misgivings  about  it,  because  it  is  difficult  to 
change  the  incentives  of  financial  market  participants.  Some  people  think  that  crises  are 
inevitable in advanced financial systems. As Alan Greenspan, the former Chairman of the US 
Federal Reserve, remarked: “The crisis will happen again but it will be different. Crises are all 
different,  but  they  have  one  fundamental  source.  That  is  the  unquenchable  capability  of 
human  beings  when  confronted  with  long  periods  of  prosperity  to  presume  that  it  will 
continue.”2 In other words, financial crises are part and parcel of our society. 
The question is whether human nature can and wants to change in order to prevent crises 
like  the  present  one  from  recurring.  On  the  one  hand,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  current 
experience will push the financial community to exercise greater caution in future, especially 
in risk assessment. On the other hand, the incentives to resort to behaviours like those that 
preceded the crisis are so ingrained as to constitute an obstacle to change. In particular, it is 
difficult for an individual market participant to act in an anti-cyclical way, that is, to go against 
market  trends,  if  the  valuation  parameters  are  based  on  the  average  trend  of  the  market. 
During  favourable  market  phases,  for  example,  a  less  pro-cyclical,  i.e.  more  conservative, 
behaviour  than  the  average  generally  leads  to  lower  yields  compared  with  that  of  other 
market participants. Since, for an outside observer, it is very difficult to see if this is the result 
of  greater  prudence  or  of  lesser  ability,  that  observer  will  tend  to  favour  the  latter 
interpretation.  Those  who  act  in  a  less  pro-cyclical  way  thus  risk  being  marginalised,  and 
exiting from the market, since they are considered less competent. 
The pro-cyclicality of market participants arises because, as Keynes brilliantly explained over 
70  years  ago,  winning  strategies  are  those  that  manage  to  anticipate  market  trends,  even 
though those trends are disconnected from the real economy for some time. An individual 
market participant behaves like someone in a beauty contest who has to bet on who will win 
the contest, and that depends on his ability to understand the preferences of others rather 
than on his aesthetic senses.  
One  point  on  which  there  has  so  far  been  less  reflection  concerns  the  incentives  for 
individual  market  participants,  not  only  in  trying  to  predict  the  behaviours  of  others  but  in 
trying to influence them. To go back to Keynes’ analogy, if some market participants manage 
to  communicate  to  others  how  they  would  vote  in  the  beauty  contest,  they  can  create  a 
critical mass which others would join, thereby steering the vote in the desired direction.  
These behaviours constitute in some cases violations of specific market rules, which can be 
penalised,  or  violations  of  ethical  rules,  which  tend  to  relate  to  codes  of  conduct  or  self-
regulation. 
We know that markets will function effectively if they are competitive, that is, if every market 
participant takes a position according to the information available and if that participant does 
                                                 
1   Abreu, D. and M. Brunnermeier, (2003) “Bubbles and Crashes”, Econometrica, Vol. 71, no.1, 173–204. 
2  
Interview with the BBC on 10 September 2009. 
BIS Review 66/2010 
 3
not  try  to  influence  others.  A  key  aspect  of  the  difference  between  theory  and  practice  on 
which I would like to focus is the dissemination of information among market participants.3 
Markets are competitive if each participant is large enough not to be able to change prices 
unilaterally. Collusion between market participants to try to steer prices in a certain direction 
are prohibited, and are monitored by supervisory and anti-trust bodies. However, it is very 
difficult  to  detect  collusive  positions  in  financial  markets,  for  two  reasons.  The  first  is  that 
these  markets  are  moving  non-stop  and  so  it  is  not  easy  to  prove  that  there  has  been 
collusion on investment strategies. The second reason is that any similarities may result not 
only  from  ex  ante  agreements  between  market  participants  but  also  from  herd  behaviour, 
which is typical of a market where neither ideas nor investment strategies can be patented. If 
a  market  participant  manages  to  act  as  a  herd  leader,  and  to  influence  the  behaviour  of 
others, it can gain an information advantage and influence the markets, which become less 
competitive and more prone to instability.  
A financial market participant can act as a herd leader if it can convince others that it has 
superior  information  and  greater  capacity  for  analysis  so  as  to  obtain  better  returns  on  its 
investments. A herd leader can thus influence, through communications either with the public 
or  with  some  market  participants,  the  behaviour  of  others  and  point  the  way  for  the  herd. 
Indeed, major banks and financial institutions, and now hedge funds, publish or disseminate 
rapidly  via  e-mail  their  analysts’  views,  particularly  regarding  the  assessment  of  specific 
companies or countries, and in some cases reciprocal assessments too, e.g. between banks. 
These  assessments  also  contain  recommendations  to  sell  or  buy  shares  or  bonds  or 
currencies. In theory, the published analyses are independent. They should not be linked to 
the  investment  strategy  of  the  institution.  Indeed,  financial  institutions  say  that  their 
investment strategies are independent of their analysts’ opinions, and may be based on other 
information. If the herd leader wants to continue playing this role it must keep some of the 
available information to itself. Whether the opposite is true is unclear, that is, if the analysts’ 
opinion  which  is  widely  publicised  is  independent  of  the  investment  strategy  followed  by 
traders of the same institution. It is surely not the case for investment funds or hedge funds, 
which do not even say if Chinese walls exist between their research and operational arms.4 
In  recent  years  the  use  of  market  information  for  “promotional”  purposes  has  grown 
considerably. In the mass media, i.e. newspapers and television, the opinions of the analysts 
of the major banks are often sought. Since information is scarce and should have a monetary 
value for a financial market participant, one may wonder why it is made available to all free of 
charge.  One  hypothesis  is  that  this  contributes  to  the  market  participant’s  reputation, 
attracting  new  clients.  But  clients  should  prefer  insider  information,  the  information  that 
others do not have. The alternative, more credible, hypothesis is that with their considerable 
presence in the media market participants seek to steer the entire market, i.e. acting as herd 
leader. 
Let’s  look  at  an  aspect  that  interests  me  particularly:  monetary  policy.  The  opinions 
expressed by analysts on monetary policy decisions often concern not only the impact of a 
given  decision  on  the  markets,  but  the  substance  of  the  decision,  namely  whether  it  is 
appropriate or not. The parameters according to which the analyst expresses his/her views 
are  however  not  transparent.  It  is  unclear,  in  fact,  if  the  analyst  is  expressing  an  opinion 
based on an objective function which is the same as that of the monetary authority – price 
stability  in  the  ECB’s  case  –  or  based  on  his/her  specific  interest,  particularly  his/her 
                                                 
3   See, for example, Bolton, P., Freixas, X., Shapiro, J. (2007), “Conflicts of interest, information provision, and 
competition in the financial services industry”, Journal of Financial Economics, 85, pp. 297–330; Benabou, R. 
and G. Laroque (1992) “Using Privileged Information to Manipulate Markets: Insiders, Gurus, and Credibility”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, pp. 921–948. 
4   For an overview, see, for example, Mehran, H. and R. Stulz (2007), “The Economics of Conflicts of Interest in 
Financial Institutions”, Journal of Financial Economics, 85, 267–296. 
4 
 BIS Review 66/2010
investment  choices.  One  might  ask,  for  example,  if  a  decision  to  increase  interest  rates 
would  be  judged  right  or  wrong  by  a  financial  market  participant  based  on  the  outlook  for 
inflation – or based on the speculative position that the market participant itself has taken. 
What, then, should we think of the views that are expressed even before the central bank 
takes  its  decision?  What  are  the  criteria  when  a  financial  market  participant  expresses  an 
opinion  on  what  the  central  bank  should  do?  Do  the  criteria  depend  on  the  speculative 
positions it has taken or on other, more general criteria?  
I’ll take a concrete example, which is not related to the decision on interest rates but on the 
collateral  the  central  bank  accepts  in  exchange  for  funding  provided  to  the  market.  On 
Monday 3 May the European Central Bank decided to no longer follow the rating agencies 
when assessing the sovereign debt of a country that has an adjustment programme with the 
IMF and the European Union – a programme which the ECB has judged positively. It was a 
logical decision for several reasons. 
First, while for a company or a bank the rating agencies’ analyses may include information in 
addition to what the central banks have, it is less clear as regards the countries, especially 
those  in  the  euro  area,  whose  macroeconomic  and  budget  figures  are  well  known.  The 
agencies – there are only three of them – have recently lost their credibility, contributing, with 
significant  conflicts  of  interest,  to  the  overvaluation  of  the  creditworthiness  of  asset-back 
securities,  particularly  the  sub-prime  mortgages  that  caused  the  financial  crisis.5  However, 
the recent downward revisions of sovereign credit ratings raise many doubts. Some of these 
revisions were not based on macroeconomic data or new budgets, but on the assessments 
given  by  the  market  for  sovereign  bonds  and  the  possibility  of  contagion.  In  this  way  the 
agencies have not given an independent assessment, but  one linked to market’s reaction. 
One might even ask if they have in some cases an interest in pushing the market in the same 
direction that it has already moved in, contributing to the pro-cyclicality and the phenomena 
of distorting prices. For example, an agency reduced its rating for Greece just after the first 
deficit adjustment measures by over 4% of gross domestic product, indicating that, although 
the measures taken were adequate, the adjustment depended on the reaction of the market. 
Another agency reduced its rating for Greece three days before the agreement with the IMF 
was concluded, without knowing the contents of the adjustment programme. 
Given that these behaviours are not always clear, it would have been a mistake for the ECB 
to  continue  to  depend  on  the  judgements  of  rating  agencies.  Having  helped  to  draft  the 
programme, the ECB – along with the IMF and the European Commission – is better able to 
assess the risk posed by Greece than the rating agencies. 
The opinion of some analysts on the ECB’s decision was negative. Their thesis is that the 
ECB  risks  losing  credibility  and  embarking  on  too  lax  a  path.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that 
those same analysts had previously regarded the ECB policy as being too strict. Why this 
sudden  change  of  opinion?  Reading  carefully  what  these  analysts  had  written  before  the 
ECB’s decision, one notes that many had considered the support programme for Greece as 
inappropriate, and saw a restructuring as inevitable. In other words, they had recommended 
selling Greek securities and the ECB’s decision to maintain the eligibility of such securities 
went clearly against their interests. So it’s no surprise that their response was negative. 
The media are often unaware of these conflicts of interest and report the opinions of financial 
institutions without clearly stating that they have probably taken speculative positions in one 
direction or another. This approach may undermine the credibility of the media.  
The  same  applies  to  the  views  of  many  professional  commentators,  and  even  academics, 
who  are  consultants  to  the  financial  institutions  from  which  they  get  information  and  with 
which they interact. It is rare to see in a footnote that Professor So-and-So – who evidently 
                                                 
5   Benmelech E. and J. Dlugosz (2009) “The Credit Rating Crisis”, NBER Macro Annual 2009, 161–207. 
BIS Review 66/2010 
 5
does not write for academic purposes, but to influence the opinions of specialist readers – is 
connected in some way with financial institutions, particularly through consultancy contracts. 
I  was  very  surprised  in  the  days  before  the  completion  of  the  adjustment  programme  for 
Greece to read articles by distinguished professors, many of them consultants to investment 
banks  and  –  coincidentally  –  with  very  similar  opinions  to  those  expressed  by  the  same 
banks, but without any reference being made to the relationship in the articles. I’m not asking 
for opinions to be censored, but at least there should be transparency and disclosure of any 
conflicts of interest, then readers are in the picture.  
Doubts  are  raised  even  by  some  decisions  to  publish  opinions  that  all  go  in  the  same 
direction  right  in  the  middle  of  periods  of  great  turbulence,  as  was  the  case  with  Greece. 
These opinions, often with limited analytical content, were repeating the same mantra: the 
adjustment demanded of Greece requires too great a sacrifice, so there is only one solution: 
insolvency or the restructuring of Greek debt. Nobody had made clear what kind of sacrifice 
the insolvency of a state involved. Nobody had explained the impact on the financial system, 
contagion to other countries, and if that sacrifice was greater or lesser for the people than the 
alternative hypothesis. There was talk of a limited default, as if such a concept existed and 
had been tried out. Ridiculous comparisons have been made with Argentina. 
Another aspect that is surprising to read in the media is the lack of precision on some news, 
especially when they are false and obviously put into circulation to create uncertainty. Let me 
offer another example related to the recent crisis in Greece. On 4 May the Greek government 
announced  that  it  had  hired  a  French  investment  bank,  Lazard,  for  advice  on  its  debt 
management. In the early hours of that day, the rumour spread in the markets that Lazard 
had  been  hired  to  restructure  Greek  debt.  It  was  officially  denied  by  both  the  Greek 
government  and  Lazard.  It  was  also  absurd  because  Greece  had  just  received  a  financial 
support  programme  that  explicitly  excluded  restructuring.  Despite  the  denial,  a  leading 
financial newspaper ran the headline the following day “Athens calls in the default specialist”. 
And while sensationalist headlines are a commonplace vice, unmerited for sensitive topics, 
the content of the article did nothing to dispel the doubts: since Lazard has long-standing and 
undisputed expertise in the default field, suspicion was justified. The reasoning is absurd and 
raises doubts in other areas. 
The payment of funds by the financial community to politicians, generally in order to obtain 
favourable  treatment  from  the  legislature  for  financial  institutions,  is  well  known.  These 
payments  are  declared  to  some  extent.  It  is  estimated  that  the  US  financial  sector  spent 
more than USD 5 billion between 1998 and 2008 funding lobbying activities to Congress and 
the US administration.6 Less is known about the payments made to other influential sectors 
of our society, such as the media, opinion makers and academics.  
This  is  a  subject  on  which  our  advanced  societies  do  not  have  enough  information  and, 
above all, on which they have not reflected enough. In the light of what I said at the outset, 
we  should  not  underestimate  the  risk  that  the  consensus  needed  in  our  democracies  to 
effectively address financial crises may be distorted in favour of special interests. The ethical 
question  relating  in  particular  to  the  operation  of  markets  and  the  use  that  is  made  of 
information does not concern only individuals but has a broader dimension that touches on 
the functioning of our democracies. 
In  other  words,  it  is  in  the  general  interest  that  the  euro  area  countries  adopt  appropriate 
fiscal  policies,  reflecting  not  only  the  development  of  their  economies  but  also  the 
sustainability  of  public  debts.  However,  it  may  be  in  the  interest  of  some  financial  market 
participants  for  some  states  with  budgetary  difficulties  not  to  pay  back  their  debts  and 
therefore fail, regardless of the impact this will have on the citizens of that country and those 
                                                 
6   Essential  Information  and  Consumer  Education  Foundation,  “Sold  Out:  How  Wall  Street  and  Washington 
Betrayed America”, March 2009 (www.wallstreetwatch.org). 
6 
 BIS Review 66/2010
of neighbouring countries. It is in their interest if they have taken speculative positions in this 
regard and therefore can gain from the bankruptcy of a state. And since the probability of 
bankruptcy depends in part on the democratic process in the country itself, and on the other 
countries that may help the one in difficulty, it may be useful for financial market participants 
who bet on the failure of countries to use part of their future earnings to convince people that 
there is no other way possible, that an “orderly” failure that puts public finances back on track 
is  better.  The  more  people  who  are  convinced  of  it  (“As  Greece  is  going  to  fail,  help  is 
useless”),  the  more  likely  becomes  the  outcome  desired  by  financial  market  participants, 
although it is not in the general interest. 
These issues raise ethical and moral questions that have been widely discussed, but from a 
limited  point  of  view.  The  appeal  to  ethics  and  individual  morality  is  an  important  starting 
point to correct the distortions that I mentioned above. But it’s not enough. The experience of 
recent  years  has  shown  that  self-regulation  and  self-discipline  do  not  suffice  to  prevent 
market  distortions.  This  stems  from  the  fact  that  the  measure  of  individual  performance, 
which  is  the  economic  result,  can  be  appropriate  in  a  theoretical  context  of  perfect  and 
complete information, particularly about how that result was obtained. Financial markets are, 
however, characterised by information asymmetries that make it very difficult to identify the 
source of profit, especially if it has been achieved thanks to the ability of the individual market 
participant (known in the jargon as alpha) or due to the risk it has taken and that may be 
improperly  measured,  precisely  because  of  the  informational  asymmetries  in  the  financial 
services  available  to  the  client.  Other  financial  market  participants  and  supervisory 
authorities  are  not  always  able  to  adequately  identify  the  relative  contribution  of  the  two 
factors and therefore to punish unethical behaviour.7 
However, not all unethical behaviour which shows a conflict of interest is directly punishable. 
In some cases it is considered that the reputational loss of the market participant who fails to 
live up to ethical principles is a sufficient incentive to ensure fairness. But if the gain more 
than compensates for the loss of reputation, the incentive to continue to violate the ethical 
principle  remains,  perhaps  in  a  more  effective  manner.  If  the  unethical  practices  make  it 
possible to obtain higher returns, those who do not follow them are likely to be penalised. In 
other words, those who comply with the dictates of ethics may not perform economically so 
well as those who do not, and so may find themselves out of the market.8 
Self-regulation works if everyone respects the rules and if that compliance is easy to monitor. 
Since  the  financial  market  information  asymmetries  make  it  very  difficult  to  distinguish 
between those who observe the rules and those who don’t, the individual appeal to ethical 
principles is not enough. It can even penalise those who respect them, pushing them out of 
the market.  
Ethical issues are therefore to be addressed in general terms and must concern all markets 
and participants. That’s not easy, considering the global scope of the financial markets. 
Finally,  I  would  like  very  briefly  to  summarise  some  lessons  from  the  crisis,  which  call  for 
greater reflection.  
1. 
By  intervening  to  support  the  economy  and  financial  system,  the  economic  policy 
authorities have avoided a depression, but they have postponed the problem, which 
is beginning to become weighty. 
                                                 
7   See, for example, A. Ashcraft and T. Schuermann, “The Seven Deadly Frictions of Subprime Mortgage Credit 
Securitization,”  The  Investment  Professional,  Fall  2008,  pp.  2–11.  The  authors  offer  an  analysis  of  the 
information frictions in securitisation. 
8   See, for example, I. Walter, “Reputational Risk and Conflicts of Interest in Banking and Finance: The Evidence 
So Far,” December 2006, mimeo, NYU. 
BIS Review 66/2010 
 7
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
The  timing  of  the  adjustment  may  have  to  be  shorter  than  that  of  the  economic 
policy  authorities,  especially  if  financial  markets  are  not  convinced  of  their 
determination.  
The  financial  market  consists  of  two  types  of  market  participant:  those  who  are 
afraid of uncertainty and those who gain from it, and from the uncertainty about the 
position  of  a  country’s  finances.  The  latter  may  have  an  incentive  to  feed  this 
uncertainty.  
Financial  markets  are  pervaded  by  a  myriad  of  conflicts  of  interest,  particularly 
concerning the use being made of information. 
These  conflicts  of  interest  may  have  an  impact  on  the  media  and  the  academic 
world.  
Democratic systems have difficulty coping with financial crises effectively because of 
the  conflicts  that  such  crises  produce  between  short-term  individual  interests  and 
collective long-term interests.  
Financial  markets  and  the  conflicts  of  interest  that  pervade  them  can  infect  our 
democracies and weaken their foundations. 
The global dimension of the markets makes it difficult to identify specific solutions to 
these problems. 
In  conclusion,  the  financial  markets  are  the  “brains”  of  the  economy.  It  cannot  do  without 
them, but if the brains do not work well, the rest of the body is at risk. 
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 66/2010
