Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Strengthening financial inclusion and social 
protection 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  57th  Annual  National  Convention  and  Corporate 
Meeting of the Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines (RBAP), Manila, 31 May 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen of the Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines, fellow advocates 
of the rural banking sector, special guests, good morning! 
I  am  happy  to  be  here  at  the  57th  Annual  National  Convention  of  the  Rural  Bankers 
Association  of  the  Philippines,  for  several  reasons.  First,  it  is  always  good  to  meet  rural 
bankers  from  different  parts  of  the  country  to  learn  about  operating  conditions  in  our  local 
communities,  as  well  as  the  opportunities  new  government  policies  present.  To  us  at  the 
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, this signifies a continuing commitment on your part to provide 
responsive  banking  services  by  investing  time  and  effort  to  understand  and  adapt  to  an 
environment that is constantly shifting and changing. For this, we salute all the officers and 
members of the RBAP who have taken the time to participate in this annual convention. Let 
us give all the RBAP members here today a well-deserved round of applause. 
Second, your conference theme “Towards Greater Financial Inclusion and Social Protection” 
communicates very clearly that once again the RBAP and the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas 
are on the same page, insofar as our quantitative and qualitative aspirations are concerned. 
Indeed, bank programs to grow the business should be balanced with efforts to educate and 
protect bank customers. As responsible bankers, this win-win strategy is the way to go and 
grow. For this, I commend RBAP  under the leadership of President Joseph Omar Andaya 
and the members of your board of directors. Palakpakan po natin sila! 
Ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  rural  banking  sector.  You  are  the  natural  front  liners  in  our 
national program to broaden and deepen the reach of responsible and empowering financial 
services to local communities. 
Aside from your proximity to the clients in the countryside, your deep understanding of their 
needs makes you effective catalysts for financial inclusion and social protection. 
In addition, rural banks as a sector continue to hold the lion’s share of the banking industry’s 
network  in  the  countryside.  For  instance,  while  the  ongoing  consolidation  in  the  banking 
sector reduced the number of rural banks by 4% – from 658 in 2008 to 631 in 2009 – the 
branching network showed a significant 45% increase – from 1,362 to 1,974 branches. 
Equally  important,  rural  banks  continue  to  expand  their  non-traditional  service  delivery 
channels.  Between  2008  and  2009,  the  number  of  rural  banks  with  Automatic  Teller 
Machines  –  or  ATMs  –  increased  from  113  to  119  while  rural  banks  providing  electronic 
banking services moved up from 47 to 52. 
Through rural banks, therefore, we expect that more unserved and underserved Filipinos will 
gain  access  to  responsible  and  dependable  financial  services.  It  can  be  a  simple  savings 
account, a time deposit, an efficient way to pay bills, an insurance product, a microfinance 
loan, or even just a safe channel to send and receive money. 
After  getting  clients  through  your  doors,  it  is  important  that  in  words  and  in  deeds  your 
customers are assured that their trust in you and your bank is well-deserved. 
The challenge therefore is to ensure that the Filipino’s confidence in the banking system and 
in rural banks in particular continues to grow and strengthen. 
BIS Review 75/2010 
 1
What are the magnitudes involved in working on financial inclusion? Well, rough estimates 
indicate  that  at  the  most,  only  one-third  of  our  households  have  bank  accounts.  In  other 
words,  at  least  two  out  of  every  three  households  in  the  Philippines  do  not  maintain  bank 
accounts. This means an untapped market of about 11 million households! 
Some sceptics maintain that many households have no means to maintain bank accounts. 
That may be true; but we maintain that there are millions more households that can open and 
maintain  bank  accounts  given  enough  information,  attention,  incentive,  and  protection.  In 
fact, these new customers could very well boost the profitability of rural banks. There is also 
the  added  potential  of  engaging  both  new  and  existing  customers  to  have  multiple 
transactions with your bank to further deepen their financial inclusion. 
Ladies and gentlemen. “Financial Inclusion” became a global buzzword with the launching in 
2005  of  the  United  Nations  International  Year  of  Microcredit.  Since  then,  the  resounding 
success of microfinance proved, beyond any doubt, that an activity once seen as marginal or 
even charitable could in fact be undertaken in a sound, sustainable and profitable manner. 
This  success  catalyzed  the  push  to  look  beyond  microfinance  and  find  ways  to  further 
expand the reach and scope of financial services. 
The concept gained further traction in light of the recent global financial and economic crisis. 
There is now a growing acceptance in global debates that the crisis reinforced the adverse 
effects  of  financial  exclusion,  resulting  in  increased  burden  for  those  segments  of  the 
population  that  are  already  vulnerable.  Thus,  influential  bodies  such  as  the  Group  of 
20 major economies more popularly known as G20 have incorporated financial inclusion in 
their agendas. In fact, the recent G20 Leaders Meeting resulted in the creation of a Financial 
Inclusion Experts Group to work on broadening access to a full range of financial services as 
a strategy to provide the foundation for sustainable growth worldwide. 
Here in our country, we have been putting policies and programs in  place to provide both 
financial inclusion and social protection. In fact, you will be pleased to know that the Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas is one of the first central banks in the world to have an office dedicated to 
the pursuit of financial inclusion. 
As a result, we now have policies that empower strong and capable banks to have a wider 
scope and scale of operations to make them effective and meaningful providers of financial 
services to more Filipinos. 
In 2006, for instance, the Bangko Sentral issued Circular 522 authorizing rural banks to offer 
FCDUs  or  Foreign  Currency  Deposit  Unit  accounts  so  that  you  can  take  a  strategic  and 
active  role  in  the  growing  remittance  business  that  has  since  grown  into  a  17 billion-dollar 
industry. 
In  2007,  the  Bangko  Sentral  authorized  rural  banks  to  make  equity  investments  in  ATM 
networks  through  Circular 563  and  engage  in  limited  trust  activities  under  Circular 583.  In 
2008,  qualified  rural  banks  were  even  allowed  to  participate  in  select  derivatives  activities 
under Circular 594. 
In  2009,  the  Bangko  Sentral  issued  Circular  649  or  the  electronic  money  circular  which 
provides  the  regulatory  framework  for  the  fast-growing  electronic  money  business,  where 
rural banks play a central role. With a wider network of cash in/out agents, you will be able to 
leverage your existing offices and deliver your financial services to an even broader market 
with potentially greater efficiency and lower costs. 
So  far  this  year,  we  have  issued  new  regulations  that  significantly  broaden  business 
opportunities for rural and cooperative banks. In the first two months, we approved Circulars 
678 and 680 covering Housing Microfinance and the Micro-Agri Loan Product under which 
banks  are  able  to  manage  their  microfinance  operations  better,  with  a  more  diversified 
portfolio and lower risk of business loans applied to agriculture or housing. 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2010
To further expedite the provision of these services, just two weeks ago, the Monetary Board 
approved the RBAP-MABS housing microfinance program. Through this approval, the RBAP 
will take a leadership role in the qualification or screening process of participating banks that 
wish to offer housing microfinance. This develops a strong sense of product ownership and 
makes the process more efficient. 
Also  this  year,  we  issued  Circular  683  authorizing  rural  banks  to  market,  sell  and  service 
micro  insurance  products,  subject  to  certain  prudential  rules  and  regulations.  This  enables 
rural  banks  to  deliver  a  full  range  of  financial  services  needed  by  your  clients,  which  may 
include  protection  against  injury,  loss  of  property,  and  other  contingent  events.  This  is  a 
groundbreaking policy that places rural banks on the same footing as universal banks which 
previously held this business. 
The Bangko Sentral has also issued this year Circular 685 covering the rules and regulations 
in  recognizing  Microfinance  Institutional  Rating  Agencies.  This  is  important  as  the  use  of 
objective,  credible,  and  competent  third-party  ratings  of  microfinance  institutions  enhances 
transparency  and  possible  inflow  of  resources  into  the  industry.  Altogether,  this  should 
facilitate  the  further  growth  and  development  of  microfinance  in  the  Philippines  which  has 
proven to be an effective medium for liberating millions of Filipinos from poverty. 
Ladies and gentlemen of the RBAP, all these policies are in place and the opportunities this 
brings  are  well  within  your  reach.  All  you  need  to  do  is  to  continue  to  strengthen  your 
institutions  by  aligning  governance  practices  with  global  standards,  strengthening  your 
capital positions, putting in place a proactive risk management system, improving business 
operations and following industry best practices. 
I also wish to say that the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas remains responsive to issues raised 
by RBAP, including those pertaining to the implementation of certain policies. 
Take  for  instance  Circular  No.  688  issued  only  last  week  –  May  26  to  be  exact  – 
implementing the Revised Risk Based Capital Adequacy Framework for Stand-alone Thrift, 
Rural  and  Cooperative  Banks  or  the  so-called  Basel  1.5  framework.  Unlike  the  full 
Basel 2 framework  for  universal  and  commercial  banks  and  their  subsidiary  banks  and  
quasi-banks,  the  Basel  1.5  framework  involves  only  a  few  key  changes  on  the  existing 
framework under Circular No. 280 dated March 29, 2001, as amended. 
The main changes include the increase in risk weight from 0% to 100% for foreign currency 
denominated exposures to the Philippine National Government and the Bangko Sentral. The 
increase  in  risk  weight  shall  be  phased-in  over  a  three  year  period:  that  is,  1/3  of  the 
applicable risk weight shall be applied by January 2, 2012; 2/3 by January 1, 2013; and the 
full risk weight by January 1, 2014. 
Another major change is the increase in risk weight for Real and Other Properties Acquired 
exposures from 100% to 150%, which shall also be applied gradually for three years: 115% 
risk  weight  shall  be  applied  by  January  1,  2012;  130%  by  January  1,  2013;  and  150%  by 
January 1, 2014. 
This  revision  is  consistent  with  the  BSP’s  thrust  of  reducing  the  level  of  non-performing 
assets of banks to strengthen the overall asset quality of the banking system. Another new 
feature in the revised framework is the capital requirement for operational risk which is based 
on 12% of the average positive gross income of the bank for the past three years. 
The new guidelines also require important items to be disclosed in the Annual Reports and 
the Quarterly Published Balanced Sheet to enhance market discipline and transparency. The 
Bangko Sentral has considered delaying the effectivity of this new Circular to 1 January 2012 
to give concerned banks ample time to adjust to this new capital adequacy framework. And 
to make the transition more manageable, the implementation is on a staggered basis. 
Ladies and gentlemen of the rural banking sector. It is important that you see these circulars 
not as mere issues of compliance undertaken to satisfy the regulator; rather, it is our hope 
BIS Review 75/2010 
 3
that there is a clear understanding and appreciation on your part that these measures are 
crucial to your growth and viability as a business. Ultimately this will benefit your customers 
in terms of stronger social protection and your shareholders in terms of better returns. 
As it is, the rural banking sector as a whole is already on the right track, as far as operational 
bottom  line  is  concerned.  I  base  this  on  2009  consolidated  figures.  In  fact,  even  with  the 
global financial crisis and isolated closures of some banks, consolidated return on equity of 
the  rural  banking  sector  in  2009  reached  12.12  centavos  for  every  one  peso  equity 
investment,  even  better  than  the  commercial  banking  sector  which  posted  an  aggregate 
ROE of 11.38 centavos per peso of equity. 
Total assets of the rural banking sector also continued to expand, rising from P146 billion in 
2008  to  P157.4  Billion in  2009.  Yearend  2009  figures  also  showed  that  rural  banks’ gross 
total loan portfolio was more than P98 Billion, while deposits stood at over P105 Billion. 
By  any  measure,  these  are  respectable  figures  posted  at  a  time  when  the  global  financial 
crisis triggered the most serious world recession since World War II. Ladies and gentlemen, 
let us celebrate the accomplishments of the rural banking sector with a well-deserved round 
of applause! 
To the Bangko Sentral, all these represent concrete evidence that our rural banks are indeed 
ready to take on a more strategic and competitive place in the Philippine financial system. 
We are confident therefore that in cooperation with our rural banks through the leadership of 
RBAP we can work toward greater financial inclusion and social protection for Filipinos. 
Mabuhay ang RBAP! Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! 
I wish you all a successful convention. Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat! 
4 
 BIS Review 75/2010
