Norman T L Chan: Responding to the financial crisis – financial reform 
impacts and regulatory regime changes 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Norman  T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority, at the Asian Financial Forum 2010, Policy dialogue: “Responding to the financial 
crisis  –  financial  reform  impacts  and  regulatory  regime  changes”,  Hong  Kong,  20  January 
2010. 
 1. 
“It has often been said that history, especially financial crisis, tends to repeat itself. 
Notwithstanding the disturbingly frequent occurrence of seemingly similar financial crises, I 
am inclined to believe that history does not repeat itself because, upon close scrutiny, no two 
crises are exactly the same. It may be more correct to say that mistakes will be punished by 
the market. If people do not learn from their mistakes, then the market will continue to repeat 
its punishment. The only difference between the major financial crises is that the punishment 
is getting more and more severe, if not violent.”  
2. 
“Going  forward,  I  can  see  two  possible  ways  to  learn  more  about  the  financial 
markets. One is to learn from past mistakes and do something now. The second is to wait 
until the next disaster strikes and try to do something there and then. Given what we have 
experienced in the last two years, it is my hope that the international community will see the 
wisdom of not waiting for the next crisis to learn how we can make the international financial 
system a more robust and safe one for all of us.” 
3. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I made the above remarks over 10 years ago, in June 1999. 
It was ten months after the Asian Financial Crisis hit Hong Kong, which was then followed by 
the turbulence of the global financial system as a result of the abrupt collapse of the LTCM. It 
was rather unfortunate that the fear I expressed in 1999 has come true ten years later. The 
international community has failed to learn the lessons from the Asian Financial Crisis and 
the LTCM debacle and to make the financial system more robust and safer. As a result, we 
have  been  punished,  and  punished  very,  very  severely.  The  latest  Financial  Tsunami, 
dubbed as “Once in a Century”, has demonstrated that somehow all the key safety valves 
and  gatekeepers  have  failed  functioning  properly  to  prevent  excessive  leverage  and  risk-
taking  within  the  financial  system,  leading  to  very  heavy  fiscal  and  social  costs  in  the 
subsequent bail-outs.  
4. 
Now  the  international  community,  led  by  G20,  is  trying  very  hard  to  draw  lessons 
from this latest financial crisis. I sense that there is a very strong resolve to do something this 
time  round.  There  is  at  present  a  long  list  of  reform  agenda  items  being  debated 
internationally:  these  include  strengthening  financial  institutions  by  requiring  them  to  hold 
more  capital  and  liquidity;  changing  compensation  practices  to  discourage  excessive  risk 
taking by bankers and reforming regulatory structures to ensure more effective supervision, 
especially of large and complex firms that have systemic implications.  
It is therefore very timely today that we have five very distinguished speakers joining 
5. 
this Panel to share with us their insights into this complex and important question of how we 
should go about reforming the international financial architecture and regulatory regimes in 
different jurisdictions. They are, by order of their appearance in the programme: 
(i) 
(ii) 
Mr Rintaro Tamaki, Vice Minister of Finance for International Affairs of Japan; 
Dr Jong-Goo Yi, Standing Commissioner of the Financial Services Commission of 
Korea; 
The Honourable Chris Bowen, Minister for Financial Services of Australia; 
(iii) 
BIS Review 7/2010 
 1
(iv) 
The Honourable Mr Ahmad Husni Hanadzlah, Minister of Finance Two of Malaysia; 
and 
Professor KC Chan, Secretary for Financial Services and the Treasury, HKSAR. 
(v) 
I understand from the organiser that we will invite Professor Chan to speak first as he may 
need  to  leave  earlier  for  the  Legislative  Council  meeting.  The  order  of  other  speakers  will 
follow the programme. Professor Chan, please. 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2010
