Ardian Fullani: Recent economic developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
monetary policy decision-making of the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania, Tirana, 
24 March 2010. 
 The Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania, in its meeting of 24 March 2010, analyzed 
and adopted the Monetary Policy Monthly Report. Given the latest economic and monetary 
developments  at  home,  their  projections  in  future  and  after  assessing  the  balance  of 
expected  risks,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  conclusion  of 
discussions decided to leave the key interest rate unchanged, at 5.25%. 
After the heavy shock incurred over 2008 and during the first six months of 2009, the world 
economy  has  entered  into  a  recovery  stage  of  the  economic  activity,  stimulated  by  the 
expansionist  monetary  and  fiscal  policy.  The  main  central  banks  continued  to  follow  an 
easing  monetary  polices  with  the  purpose  to  sustain  lending  market  and  to  guarantee  the 
economic  stability  growth.  The  end  of  economic  recession  is  accompanied  by  the 
invigoration  of  inflationary  pressures,  thus  reflecting  both  statistical  impact  related  to  the 
performance of basic commodity prices, as well the demand growth in the world economy. 
The  performance  of  financial  markets  was  stable  and  the  main  indicators  of  risk  are 
stabilized at lower rates. Notwithstanding, the attention of financial markets is dominated by 
the  increase  of  uncertainty  in  terms  of  fiscal  stability  of  some  euro  area  countries.  This  is 
reflected on the increase of Government securities yields of these countries, as well as on 
the enhanced sensitivity of investors against fiscal developments. 
The economic activity is assessed to have recorded a progressive slowdown of the growth 
pace, these last six months. The latest indicators of real economy, as sales’ indicators, the 
monetary and confidence indicators, signal further hampering of the economic growth during 
the fourth quarter of year 2009 and in the early months of 2010. The stoppage of investments 
from the major part of businesses, the low exploitation of capacities, the decrease of capital 
goods’ import, and the low increase of loans for investments, reveal a slower performance of 
private  investments  even  in  the  early  months  of  this  year.  On  the  other  hand,  the  more 
moderated  growth  paces  of  employment  and  wages,  the  shrinking  of  consumer  loans,  the 
weak  performance  of  retail  sales,  as  well  as  the  indices  on  the  increase  of  consumers’ 
preferences for savings, show a hampering even of the current and expected consumer in 
the short-term period. 
External sector of economy has manifested positive signals during January, characterized by 
an  exports’  growth  of  30  %  and  a  tightening  of  trade  deficit  by  13%.  This  welcomed 
development remains however insufficient to direct the Albanian economy on the path of the 
persistent economic growth. 
The high fiscal incentive transmitted over the first three quarters of 2009, has affected the 
increase of public debt at 59.5 percent of GDP. The upsurge of current and capital expenses 
over  this  period,  financed  by  the  expansion  of  the  state  deficit  and  the  growth  of  public 
borrowing, affected considerably the economic activity, however in a short-term. Through the 
twice cuts of the key interest rate and the ongoing injection of liquidity, the monetary policy of 
the Bank of Albania manifested also a simulating character over 2009 and during the early 
months of 2010. The monetary conditions at home, under the presence of the exchange rate 
depreciation  during  this  period,  have  progressively  provided  ground  to  the  aggregate 
demand. However, monetary conditions have been and continue to remain in line with the 
medium term and long term stability of prices at home, serving also to the well functioning of 
financial markets and to the maintenance of financial systems stability. 
BIS Review 50/2010 
 1
In terms of the respond to the easing monetary policy and to the decrease of risk primes in 
economy, monetary indicators show improvement signs during the two first months of 2010. 
A decreasing trend of currency outside banks is materialized and a correspondent growth of 
deposits in the system. The resulted improvement  of liquidity indicators of banking system 
and the reduction of the demand for funds of public sector are followed by the decrease of 
Government securities yields. The exchange rate also appears relatively stabilized, reflecting 
a slight correction of foreign trade indicators and of the country current deficit during the last 
two quarters. This correction has also affected the establishment of more steady balances of 
the demand and supply for foreign currency in this period. 
Notwithstanding these encouraging developments, lending activity at home remains far from 
its potentiality, responding to the lower demand for banking loans and the tightened lending 
conditions as applied from banks. Lending to private sector marked an annual growth of 4% 
in real terms, providing an annual growth of 7.8 percent of monetary supply in January. 
All  denominated  credit  continues  to  rule  the  lending  activity,  which  mainly  covers  the 
businesses’ needs for circulating capital. January 2010 embodied a particularity, that is the 
improved state of the banking system assets denominated in foreign currency, has started to 
be  mirrored  on  the  growth  of  credit  denominated  in  foreign  currency.  Notwithstanding,  the 
stable increase of lending should be assisted by the re-activation of the demand for loans 
and the parallel easing of lending conditions as applied from the banking system. Bank of 
Albania  deems  that  banking  system  should  reveal  more  visionary  in  assessing  potential 
sectors  of  economic  growth  and  to  take  a  more  active  role  in  encouraging  the  economic 
activity. 
Annual inflation in February 2010 pointed to 4.4%, exceeding by 0.4 percentage points the 
upper limit of the Bank of Albania target’s tolerance. The annual average inflation pointed to 
2.6%.  The  recent  developments  of  inflation  have  reflected  the  statistical  impact  of  the 
comparison to a relatively low prices base in 2009, the more full transmission of exchange 
rate  depreciation  on  consumer  prices  and  the  administrative  increase  of  energy,  since 
January 2010. 
The later factor provided an effect of about 0.5 percentage points on inflation level, being the 
main reason of exceeding the level of 4%. On the other side, the increasing tendency of food 
goods  inflation  is  owed  to  the  global  conjuncture  of  goods  prices,  which  is  revealing  a 
gradual monthly increase since the half of 2009. 
Our  analysis  recommends  that  the  increasing  trend  of  inflation  owes  mainly  to  supplying 
factors, which are estimated to manifest an uneven nature and a short-term action in time. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  expected  these  developments,  being  factorised  on  our  projections 
regarding inflation and communicated timely and in terms of transparency to the public. In 
medium  term  period,  the  growth  under  potential  of  the  Albanian  economy  owing  to  the 
slowdown  of  the  domestic  and  external  demand,  shall  establish  an  environment  of  low 
inflationary pressures, which are expected to balance the pressures deriving from the supply 
direction.  This  assessment  is  also  supported  by  the  sustained  developments  and  at  low 
historic  rates  of  the  long-term  component  of  non-tradable  goods  inflation,  as  the  most 
directed  transmission  of  inflationary  pressures  generated  from  the  internal  demand  in 
economy. 
The rates of both key inflation and of the non-tradable goods in February pointed to 1.1 and 
2.3%, respectively. 
Throughout  the  discussions  on  the  current  and  expected  economic  developments,  the 
Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania concluded that the inflationary pressures balance 
in medium term horizon is in line with the Bank of Albania inflation target, notwithstanding the 
latest  tendencies  of  consumer  prices’  inflation.  The  assessments  regarding  the  demand 
slowdown and the increase of negative production gap, the more controlled development of 
exchange  rate  and,  the  equilibrated  expectations  of  economic  agents  about  inflation,  are 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2010
factors  which  shall  condition  the  development  of  inflation  within  the  target  of  the  Bank  of 
Albania. 
At the conclusion of discussions, the Supervisory Council decided to leave the key interest 
rate  unchanged,  at  5.25  percent.  This  decision  guarantees  the  appropriate  monetary 
conditions on the preservation of the medium term inflation target. Bank of Albania, regarding 
the future, remains ready to operate in line with the real and expected performance of the 
economic indicators. In particular, its decision shall factorise the maintaining of inflationary 
expectations being anchored around the objective of the Bank of Albania regarding inflation, 
stability  of  financial  system  at  home,  in  terms  of  maintaining  and  further  consolidating  the 
macroeconomic balances. 
In this view, Bank of Albania assesses that the recent correcting tendencies of the balance of 
payment  indicators  are  encouraging  developments  for  the  long-terms  sustainability  of  the 
country financial indicators. On the other hand, Bank of Albania deems that this sustainability 
would  be  assisted  by  the  application  of  a  cautious  fiscal  policy,  which  should  already 
factorize the long terms soundness of fiscal parameters in its decision-making process. 
BIS Review 50/2010 
 3
