José De Gregorio: Macroeconomics, policymaking and the crisis 
Keynote speech by Mr José De Gregorio, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, at the Bank 
of  Finland  and  Bank  of  Italy  Conference  on  Challenges  of  the  Global  Crisis  to 
Macroeconomic  Theory  and  International  Finance,  in  honour  of  Pentti  Kouri,  Helsinki, 
11 June 2010. 
 I am grateful for useful discussions and comments from Mariana García and Pablo García. 
It is an honor to participate in this tribute to Pentti Kouri. I did not have the pleasure to be 
close to him, but I not only know well who he was and his work, but we also share some 
things in common. We both study at MIT and did international finance. We were very close to 
Rudi Dornbusch. There is a group of economists from all over the world, Chile and Finland 
for example, which had the privilege to work close to him, as students or as colleagues, and 
to enjoy his unconditional friendship and intellectual influence. In this conference there are a 
few of this fortunate group. 
Kouri  and  Dornbusch  had  pathbreaking  work  explaining  exchange  rate  fluctuations  as 
movements  of  asset  prices.  Kouri’s  papers  were  always  an  important  reference  in  our 
course’s  work.  By  the  time  I  was  student,  late  80s,  reading  Kouri’s  papers,  he  was  a 
successful investor living in Connecticut. I remember a couple of times when Rudi told me 
that he would visit this great friend, economist and successful investor to get some funds for 
the department. He succeeded, proof of which is that the department now has the Pentti J.K. 
Kouri Career Development Associate Professor of Economics. 
Today,  rather  than  attempting  to  elaborate  on  Kouri’s  contribution,  I  think  this  is  a  good 
opportunity  to  address  some  issues  on  the  state  of  macroeconomics  and  policymaking, 
which  is  the  purpose  of  the  conference,  and  are  two  aspects  to  which  Rudi  and  Pentti 
contributed a lot. If they were here with us today, their deep insights and provocative ideas, 
regardless of whether we agreed with them or not, would certainly make us think. 
Changes in the world economy, macroeconomics, and policymaking 
More than 30 years after Kouri’s influential work, the world has changed dramatically, and so 
have economic theory and policymaking, especially in emerging market economies. There is 
a  growing  role  of  markets  in  the  determination  of  prices,  in  particular  interest  rates  and 
exchange rates. There is much greater trade and financial integration, which is a source of 
greater interdependence cross economies, but is also a source of much greater opportunities 
for  developing  countries.  Finally,  financial  markets  are  much  more  sophisticated,  which  is 
also a source of vulnerabilities and opportunities. 
There  has  been  also  a  profound  evolution  of  macroeconomics.  Developments,  such  as 
rational  expectations  and  dynamic 
the  views  on  what 
macroeconomic policies could achieve. They were also the basis for the discussion of rules 
versus discretion, and the general preference for the conduct of policies under flexible rules, 
or constrained discretion. 
The  possibility  of  expectational  inefficiencies  has  also  become  an  important  insight  for 
policies. Contagion, self-fulfilling prophecies, coordination failures and multiple equilibria, are 
just  some  of  the  phenomena  from  which  market  inefficiencies  arise,  and  there  are  many 
examples in the real world. However, one has to be careful when the failure of bad policies is 
attributed to phenomena outside the control of authorities. Many crises that some may want 
to classify as bad-expectational equilibria are simply the result of bad policies. Indeed, there 
is  no  crisis  that  has  struck  a  country  without  an  associated  fundamental  problem.  What 
inconsistency,  changed 
BIS Review 84/2010 
 1
expectational inefficiencies do is that they amplify the probability of occurrence and the cost 
of crises. 
Other  important  development  has  been  the  understanding  of  policymaking,  in  particular 
monetary  policy,  as  a  rule  rather  than  changes  in  policy  variables  without  reason.  Thus, 
rather than thinking of changes in the policy variables, it is more realistic to think of changes 
in  the  determinants  of  policies.  Finally,  we  have  learned  that  credibility  is  central  for  the 
effectiveness of policies. 
All these developments have also led to changes in the way monetary policy is conducted. 
However,  an  important  caveat  has  to  be  made.  There  is  a  two-way  relationship  between 
theory and policy developments. It would be presumptuous to argue that theory has changed 
policies.  Indeed,  the  development  of  inflation  targeting  came  before  it  was  seriously 
discussed in academic circles. New Zealand implemented its inflation targeting regime in the 
early 1990s, before the main analytical developments took place. Along the same line, the 
Taylor rule was, obviously, used before John Taylor estimated it. 
Regardless causality, monetary policy and central banking have changed significantly. The 
movement toward granting central bank independence around the world has been a positive 
one. Of course, this comes with the challenge for central bankers to demonstrate that this is 
really a good thing, something that certainly has been questioned in some countries during 
the recent crisis.  
Although central banks were created to address problems in the banking sector, over time, 
their objectives moved to more general aspects such as economic development or growth. 
Then,  since  the  1980s,  and  with  the  success  of  the  Great  Moderation,  central  banks 
increasingly,  and  rightly  so,  focused  on  price  stability.  Unfortunately,  financial  stability, 
another issue at the core of central banking, was overlooked. 
Monetary policy has abandoned money supply and exchange rates as nominal anchors, to 
target  directly  inflation  and  anchoring  nominal  variables  via  inflationary  expectations.  To 
reinforce credibility and to gain legitimacy, communication has become central to the conduct 
of  monetary  policy.  Many  challenges  remain;  in  particular  how  to  incorporate  the  financial 
stability goal into policy making, but the evolution of policy making has been enormous, in 
particular for emerging economies. 
However, progress in economics has not been completely successful, and many challenges 
remain to make economic analysis more helpful to guide policies, and that is the issue I want 
to discuss next.1 
On models and theory 
Macroeconomics  has  increasingly  moved  towards  models  more  rigorously  specified,  with 
sound micro-foundations, with all general equilibrium interactions, and explicit informational 
constraints.  However,  there  will  always  be  tensions  between  rigor,  realism  and  flexibility. 
There are many tradeoffs.  
The costs of these tradeoffs are often subtle. The tendency to base models on ever more 
rigorous grounds, although a logical trend, has undesired effects. The incentives for younger 
academics – the very ones who are supposed to push the borders of knowledge, and who 
must  publish  or  perish –  limit  their  capabilities  for  innovation.  The  required  rigor  ends  up 
necessarily threatening realism. Nobody expects a model to explain all the complexities of 
the  real  world,  but  the  problem  is  that  it  can  overlook  elements  that  are  crucial  to 
understanding and preventing economic disasters like the one we faced some years ago. It 
                                                 
1  For further discussion on these issues, see De Gregorio (2009). 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2010
may  be  more  rewarding  from  an  academic  standpoint  to  write  an  equilibrium  model 
explaining  some  particular  phenomenon,  than  trying  to  formulate  a  model  that  properly 
represents  all  the  distortions  of  said  phenomenon.  It  is  harder  and  less  rewarding  for  an 
academic to formulate distortions – of which the real world has plenty – than to use elegant 
general  equilibrium  competitive  models  to  explain  important  stylized  facts  with  a  minimum 
number of new ingredients. Only a handful of academics are able to think rigorously out of 
the box, and Kouri was one of them. 
Complexity also jeopardizes the capacity to move from scientific research to economic policy 
proposals.  For  academic  ideas  to  be  useful  in  economic  policy  making,  they  must  be 
persuasive. Perhaps that was the virtue of the IS-LM model that was used for many years in 
macroeconomic policy discussions, or of Solow’s growth model that to this day remains the 
cornerstone of economic growth analysis. Fortunately, this is not a time where prescriptions 
are  taken  by  policymakers  without  scrutiny  –  and  are  later  labeled  as  orthodox  –  and 
therefore, the capacity to intuitively explain a result is essential. Models are only a part of the 
reality  that  allows  us  to  organize  our  ideas  before  diagnosing  and  prescribing.  The 
arguments’  logic  and  a  good  deal  of  judgment  are  also  critical  when  it  comes  to  making 
economic policy decisions. 
Indeed, the current crisis has revealed that models have a limited ability to deal with all the 
complexities  of  the  real  world.  Even  current  state-of-the-art  DSGE  models,  used  in  many 
central  banks,  have  been  unable  to  consider  in  a  manageable  and  explicit  way  all  the 
intricacies associated with financial markets’ distortions and imperfect arbitrage, let alone the 
existence of default and credit losses.  
This  brings  me  to  the  theory  of  finance.  If  there  ever  was  one  discipline  that  should  have 
anticipated the vulnerabilities that were building up in financial markets, it was finance. Had 
the  origin  of 
the  problem  would  have  been 
macroeconomics, but the origin was financial.2 The origin of the crisis was closely related to 
financial innovation and the creation of instruments that should have diversified risks. Most of 
financial innovation was used to circumvent regulation, allowing credit expansion with a weak 
capital  base.  Low  interest  rates,  search  for  yields  and  a  monetary  policy  that  promised  to 
rescue  after  severe  falls  in  asset  prices  prompted  the  creation  of  a  housing  bubble. 
Enormous  efforts  were  made  to  price  many  extremely  complex  financial  instruments,  but 
even  those  efforts  failed  to  build  valuation  models  that  realistically  considered  the 
instruments’ insolvency probabilities. No evidence is necessary to assert that these methods 
failed because of an extreme event that struck everything. These failures were exacerbated 
by severe liquidity shortages and widespread panic in the markets. 
It is paradoxical that while asset price theories, and their application to the real world, are 
based on the existence of full arbitrage (consider, for example, the CAPM), corporate finance 
theories are essentially dominated by information asymmetries and are plagued by frictions 
from principal-agent problems. This dichotomy will have to be corrected over time to ensure 
that more realistic models of how financial markets work become available, models which will 
shed more light on economic policy recommendations. 
the  problem  been 
inflationary, 
then 
On crisis prevention and management 
A  pervasive  question  for  the  past  and  current  crises  is  whether  they  could  have  been 
anticipated. On the one hand, it is tautological to say that crises are unpredictable, or else 
                                                 
2 
It is out of the scope of this presentation to discuss the role of monetary policy in causing the crisis. As I have 
argued elsewhere (De Gregorio, 2010), the cause of the crisis was mainly financial fragility, while lax monetary 
policy  played  only  a  secondary  role.  Many  countries,  such  as  Chile  or  Canada,  for  example,  had  very 
expansionary policy before the crisis, and did not suffer a financial collapse. 
BIS Review 84/2010 
 3
they would never occur. History is plagued with crises. Moreover, crises have become more 
frequent  in  recent  decades  as  compared  with  the  Bretton-Woods  period,  although  their 
severity  and  duration  have  not  changed  significantly  (Bordo  et  al.,  2001).  Crises  must  be 
avoided,  but  the  only  way  to  make  sure  they  do  not  happen  is  to  eliminate  financial 
innovation and development altogether, which we know is not a good prescription. Therefore, 
crises will still occur, and the role of policies is not to be the cause of them, but to increase 
resilience of financial systems and minimize their cost.3 Of course, all these elements were 
absent in the global financial crisis and for this reason we need to devote more thinking to 
reforms. 
Although  crises  will  continue  to  happen,  we  must  not  conclude  that  since  crises  are 
unavoidable,  there  is  nothing  we  can  do  about  them.  Instead,  the  proper  way  to  act  is  to 
strengthen  the  financial  system  and  macroeconomic  policies,  in  order  to  minimize  their 
probability of occurrence and their consequences, and to set up a proper crisis-management 
strategy once they hit.  
As in the case of natural disasters, or accidents, the fact that crises will continue to happen 
does  not  mean  that  we  must  allow  no  regulation  of  economic  activities  (such  as  building 
codes,  or  driving  standards).  Countries  with  better  building  codes  are  better  at  facing 
earthquakes.  In  the  case  of  financial  crises,  it  is  reasonable  to  improve  regulatory 
mechanisms, particularly to allow financial innovation while keeping vulnerability at bay.  
Meanwhile,  it  is  necessary  to  continue  devoting  efforts  to  the  detection  of  early  alerts, 
although unambiguous indicators are impossible to find. But there are symptoms of fragility, 
very  common  in  emerging  economies.  High  and  persistent  current-account  deficits, 
misaligned  exchange  rates,  currency  mismatches  in  the  financial  and  corporate  sectors, 
excessive increases in the prices of assets and credit, all signal a potential problem, although 
they do not necessarily result in a crisis. Therefore, a look at the indicators is not enough; it is 
important to put them together to detect fragilities. This is precisely what we try to do in our 
financial stability reports, which allow us to gain an overall vision of vulnerabilities, although, 
once again, it does not provide a final verdict.  
Final remarks 
The world has gone through the worst crisis since the Great Depression. The initial shock on 
the global economy did not differ much from the one that hit in the 1930s. There were many 
similarities  between  the  Great  Depression  and  the  Great  Recession.  Worth  noting  are  the 
initial fall in manufacturing output and trade, the collapse of stock prices and credit, and the 
increase  in  bond  spreads  (see  Eichengreen  and  O’Rourke,  2010).  These  remarkable 
similarities in the first months of the crisis were alarming. The questioning of the profession 
was also worrisome. 
However, the subsequent evolution of the global economy was quite different from that of the 
Great  Depression,  and  it  was  certainly  the  result  of  good  macroeconomic  management. 
There was a failure in crisis prevention, but the policy response has been good so far. More 
remarkable  has  been  the  response  of  emerging  market  economies.  In  particular,  Latin 
America,  a  region  that  historically  magnified  the  global  cycle,  this  time  will  perform  better 
than the world economy’s average. 
The world has still many macroeconomic problems to solve before we can declare victory. 
Indeed the same policies that averted a collapse require careful review to avoid planting the 
seeds for the next crisis. 
                                                 
3  On  this  issue,  Rancière  et  al.  (2008)  find  that  “countries  that  have  experienced  occasional  financial  crises 
have on average grown faster than countries with stable financial systems”. 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2010
First, there is a need to think seriously about moral hazard. It is true that during the crisis this 
was  a  second  order  problem.  But,  in  the  gestation  of  asset  price  bubbles  there  was  the 
commitment that if and when the bubble burst, the Fed would take care of the mess. This is 
exactly  the  same  as  the  build  up  of  currency  mismatches  in  emerging  markets  when 
authorities  promise  to  ensure  exchange  rate  stability.  In  addition,  we  have  witnessed  a 
messy bail out of banks, and more recently, and more worrisome, bail out of countries with 
weak public finances. 
The  issue  of  sustainability  has  become  very  relevant,  in  particular  on  the  fiscal  sphere. 
Economies  cannot  live  forever  beyond  their  means,  and  a  serious  effort  of  fiscal 
consolidation must be made, in particular in fragile industrial economies. It is ironic that after 
going  through  a  very  complex  financial  crisis,  we  are  now  worried  about  a  very  traditional 
crisis,  caused  by  fiscal  imbalances  in  the  context  of  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime,  with 
potentially serious financial ramifications. The type of crisis that was analyzed and modeled 
in  international  finance  at  the  most  intellectually  prolific  time  of  Pentti  Kouri.  He  would 
certainly have a lot to say about this. 
References 
Bordo,  M.,  B.  Eichengreen,  D.  Klingebiel  and  M.S.  Martinez-Peria  (2001),  “Is  the  Crisis 
Problem Growing More Severe?” Economic Policy 16(32): 51–82. 
De  Gregorio,  J.  (2009),  “La  Macroeconomía,  los  Economistas  y  la  Crisis”,  Cuadernos  de 
Economía,  Latin  American  Journal  of  Economics  46(134):  149–159.  English  version, 
Economic Policy Paper No. 33, Central Bank of Chile. 
De  Gregorio,  J.  (2010),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Financial  Stability:  An  Emerging  Markets 
Perspective”, International Finance 13(1): 141–156.  
Eichengreen, B. and K.H. O’Rourke (2010), “A Tale of Two Depressions: What do the New 
Data Tell Us”, in http://www.voxeu.org. 
Rancière, R., A. Tornell and F. Westermann (2008), “Systemic Crises and Growth”, Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 123(1): 359–406. 
BIS Review 84/2010 
 5
