Ardian Fullani: Economy and key interest rate in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
the  Monetary  Policy  Decision-Making  of  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania, 
Tirana, 28 July 2010. 
 In its meeting of 28 July 2010, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania analyzed 
and  approved  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  of  the  second  quarter  of  2010.  After 
scrutinizing  the  latest  economic  and  financial  developments  at  home,  the  future 
outlook  and  the  expected  risk  balances,  at  the  end  of  discussions,  the  Supervisory 
Council of the Bank of Albania decided to cut the key interest rate by 0.25 percentage 
points. Following this decision, the interest rate on the repurchase agreements of one-
week maturity term is 5%.  
 lower risk premia,  
improved liquidity figures,  
downward interest rates, and  
relative exchange rate tranquillity.  
Economic and monetary developments of the first two quarters of 2010 were by and large in 
line  with  Bank  of  Albania’s  forecasts.  Economic  activity  posted  positive  growth  though  at 
decelerated rates.  
The inflationary pressures have been downward and the external balances of the Albanian 
economy  have  recovered.  The  financial  markets  were  provided  a  breathing  space  and 
featured: 
 
 
 
 
The upcoming period is expected to feature similar characteristics.  
The performance of the Albanian economy may be considered as positive, particularly when 
put  in  the  context  of  the  developments  in  global  economy  and  the  regional  countries,  and 
considering the challenges faced over this period. The latter represented a tough test for the 
sustainability of the Albanian economy, both at a macro and micro level, and in terms of the 
institutional and political capacities of economic management.  
However, when viewed elaborately, economic and monetary developments in the first half of 
the present year provide numerous shadings for their interpretation. The Albanian economy 
still  suffers  the  low  domestic  demand  and  activity  financing-related  concerns.  Economic 
growth and economic development are not balanced yet for all the sectors of the economy. 
They have mainly relied on foreign demand rather than domestic demand and they attest to 
a more dynamic performance of industry and services and slower performance of agriculture 
and construction.  
In addition, economic growth has been coupled with slower labour market and employment 
figures,  hence  increasing  the  non-utilized  human  and  capital  capacities  of  the  Albanian 
economy. On the other hand, economic performance has confirmed the importance that the 
preservation  of  macroeconomic  balances  has  to  our  country’s  stable  and  long-term 
development, as well as the need for the contribution of all economic players to guaranteeing 
them.  
 
BIS Review 104/2010 
 1
These  messages,  which  constitute  the  main  topics  of  this  quarterly  report,  will  be  further 
elaborated below. 
 The  global  context  that  outlined  Albania’s  economic  development  over  this  period  has 
recovered, however the financial markets and investor sentiment remain highly volatile.  
Global economy continued to recover in the second quarter of 2010, being largely driven by 
the rapid economic growth in emerging economies and the fiscal and monetary stimulus in 
advanced economies. The euro area is showing signs of stable growth but our main trading 
partners,  Italy  and  Greece,  are  performing  less  positively.  Despite  the  higher  demand,  the 
worldwide negative output gap has yielded low inflationary pressures, which are expected to 
persist in the medium run as well.  
However, this positive setting is still incomplete as long as unemployment remains high in the 
majority  of  countries.  Public  debt  figures  are  weighed  down  further  by  the  fiscal  burden 
contracted as a result of the high-cost government measures undertaken over the last two 
years to fuel the economy, while the fiscal room has narrowed down substantially.  
Concerns over fiscal sustainability, particularly in some euro area countries, have been also 
reflected  in  the  performance  of  financial  markets,  which  featured  higher  risk  premia  and 
elevated profit margins.  
Against  this  global  background,  official  statistics  show  that  the  Albanian  economy  has 
experienced a rebound in growth. Following the decline of GDP in the last quarter of 2009 
and the weak economic activity in the early months of 2010, the available data on the real 
and monetary sector suggest that the Albanian economy posted positive growth rates in the 
first half of the present year.  
According to INSTAT’s preliminary data, GDP grew 2% y-o-y in the first quarter of 2010.  
The growth in foreign demand was reflected positively in the performance of industry, which 
grew 27.5% for this period.  
On the other hand, the slower domestic demand was manifested in moderate growth rates of 
services and progressive contraction in the construction sector.  
The more positive performance of GDP in the first quarter of 2010 finds more support in the 
qualitative data. The Economic Tendency Indicator particularly increased 4.6 points versus 
the previous quarter, though remaining well below its long-term average.  
Along with other indirect indicators, like credit growth trend and the higher pace of budget 
revenue,  business  and  consumer  expectations  for  the  second  quarter  of  the  present  year 
suggest that economic growth posted similar rates to the first quarter.  
In absence of timely data on the performance of demand components, our analyses based 
on  quantitative  and  qualitative  indirect  indicators  suggest  that  domestic  demand  has  been 
affected by the decelerated consumption and decline in investments, as well as by the lower 
fiscal sector’s contribution.  
On the other hand, the higher foreign demand and the improved terms of trade have been 
reflected in considerably higher exports and their elevated contribution to aggregate demand.  
Consumer spending was contained in the first half of 2010.  
 
 
 
 
The decline in consumer loans and remittances, 
the lower increase of wages, 
the lower growth in the imports of consumer goods,  
the low consumer confidence, and  
2 
 BIS Review 104/2010
the higher household savings trend  
 
attest to lower growth rates of private consumption over the course of this period.  
The latter was affected by:  
 
 
 
the slower growth rate of disposable income,  
the restrained financial resources,  
a  more  conservative  consumer  behaviour  against  a  background  of  elevated 
uncertainties over the future, and  
the slower employment figures. 
the growth of business demand for investment loans, and  
the increase of imports of intermediate and capital goods  
 
Private  investments  were  downward  in  the  first  half  of  2010;  however  their  negative 
contribution was lower than in the second half the previous year.  
This  performance  owes  to  a  large  extent  to  the  low  capacity  utilization  in  economy.  In 
addition, the banks’ tight lending terms have discouraged the demand for loans.  
However, the latest developments, like:  
 
 
provide  positive  signals  for  the  possible  recovery  of  this  demand  component.  The  public 
sector continued to contribute positively to the growth of aggregate demand in the first half 
of  2010.  The  government  ran  an  expansionary  fiscal  policy,  but  rather  more  moderately 
relative to the previous year.  
Budget deficit, albeit narrowed 36% y-o-y, was pronouncedly higher than the projection.  
Budget  expenditure  is  4%  lower  than  in  the  first  half  of  2009.  The  annual  growth  rates  of 
current expenditure slowed down to 7.1%, whilst public investments declined 33.5%.  
Against a background of slow economic performance, fiscal revenue grew at low historical 
rates, 3.3%.  
The Bank of Albania considers that the downward revision of budget deficit and public 
expenditure as a positive and required step.  
 
 
 
 
are some of the key elements that enabled the further easing of the Bank of Albania’s 
monetary policy, hence preventing a plausible sterilization of our actions related to the 
interest rate.  
However, in order to maintain appropriate parameters of deficit and public debt figures, fiscal 
consolidation  should  progress  beyond  the  actions  undertaken  in  the  short  run.  Fiscal 
sustainability needs to be addressed in the future through the adoption of a clear fiscal rule 
that should serve as a guide to and determinant of fiscal policy behaviour in the medium run 
and beyond. 
The growth of foreign demand and the more favourable exchange rate position fuelled our 
exports,  which  grew  62%  in  the  first  five  months  of  2010.  In  parallel,  the  weak  domestic 
demand  has  led  to  a  low  annual  increase  of  imports,  hence  causing  the  balance  of  trade 
deficit to narrow 16.2%.  
Guaranteeing fiscal sustainability,  
lowering the risk premia associated with it,  
shoring up public confidence, and  
providing room for greater private sector access to financial markets  
BIS Review 104/2010 
 3
Consequently, net exports provided a more positive contribution to aggregate demand. They 
also  led  to  the  continuous  correction  of  the  current  account  deficit,  hence  stabilizing  the 
national  currency  further.  The  downward  correction  of  the  current  account  deficit  by 
2.7 percentage  points  of  GDP  provides  an  encouraging  signal  for  the  sustainability  of 
Albania’s  external  position.  However,  net  financial  inflows  into  the  capital  and  financial 
account  reduced  62.9%  y-o-y  in  the  first  quarter  of  2010.  In  addition,  remittances,  which 
make up a major source of trade deficit financing, are down 6.7% y-o-y.  
Both  these  concerns  re-accentuate  the  fact  that  the  external  position  of  the  Albanian 
economy remains a structural weakness that calls for further correction.  
Foreign  direct  investments,  which  grew  25.8%  in  the  first  quarter  of  2010,  represent  the 
safest  source  of  current  account  deficit  financing.  They  need  to  be  further  boosted  with 
attractive policies for foreign investors and structural reforms in the Albanian economy.  
Annual inflation marked 3.2% in June. The slowdown in annual inflation, which commenced 
in  March  this  year,  was  triggered  by  the  low  demand-side  pressures,  the  lower  prices  in 
agricultural products and a more stable exchange rate.  
Against  a  background  of  non-utilized  capacities  in  the  labour  and  capital  markets,  the  low 
core inflation rates attest to the low inflationary pressures balance.  
The  contracted  demand  will  determine  the  downward  inflation  pressures  in  the  coming 
period, whilst the performance of monetary indicators shows weak inflationary pressures of a 
monetary nature.  
As  expected,  supply-side  shocks  on  consumer  prices  were  transitory  and  did  not  affect 
economic agents’ expectations of inflation, which remain well-anchored around the Bank of 
Albania’s target. Price stability has been achieved as a result of an adequate monetary policy 
decision-making, though amid substantial uncertainty over the future prospects and absence 
of  timely  statistical  data.  Over  the  stated  period  of  time,  our  monetary  policy  was 
stimulating,  maintaining  low  interest  rates  and  injecting  the  required  liquidity  and  at  well-
suited  maturity  terms,  in  order  to  boost  activity  in  the  financial  markets  and  lending  to  the 
economy.  
In response to this policy, the interest rates in the interbank market were stable, reflecting 
largely the stable liquidity position in the system, while long-term interest rates maintained a 
downward trend as a result of lower risk premia. In the primary market, Government security 
yields of all maturity terms continued to decline in the second quarter. In addition, this period 
featured  further  growth  of  banking  system  deposits  and  their  time-related  shift  to  time 
deposits.  Once  household  savings  placed  in  the  system  increased,  the  interest  rates  on 
deposits showed a downward tendency.  
On  the  other  hand,  private  sector  credit  continues  to  post  low  growth  rates  despite  the 
improved liquidity figures and the lower activity financing costs. The annual growth of private 
sector credit averaged 9% in the second quarter of 2010.  
The credit market continues to feature volatile interest rates and tight lending conditions.  
However, the latest months’ developments show positive signals, particularly in terms of the 
rather higher credit growth rates, its greater orientation towards supporting investments and 
the recovery of foreign currency lending to economic units that enjoy natural hedge against 
exchange rate risk.  
The Bank of Albania has been promoting this performance and will continue to do so, and 
encourages  the  banking  system  and  borrowers  to  work  harder  in  finding  effective  forms, 
instruments and practices that fuel credit.  
Today’s decision-making of the Bank of Albania reflects a comprehensive analysis of: 
 4 
 BIS Review 104/2010
 the  economic  and  financial  developments  that  have  been  characterizing  the 
Albanian economy in the latest months, 
the developments in the region and broader,  
the balance of risks, and  
future forecast and expectations. 
 
 
 
The  Bank  of  Albania  believes  that  the  banking  system  will  transmit  this  decision  to  the 
economy  timely  and  at  the  right  intensity.  The  growth  in  deposits,  the  banking  system’s 
liquidity  position  and  the  downward  Government  demand  provide  real  room  for  greater 
orientation of funds to private sector lending.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  will  also  pay  due  attention  to  foreign  currency  intermediation  by  the 
banking  system.  The  performance  of  foreign  currency-denominated  deposits  and  a  wide 
array of other developments provide a safe ground for their channelling into the economy at 
a lower cost. This will be followed up closely in the remaining of 2010 and beyond.  
The Bank of Albania considers that the monetary conditions and the demand-supply 
ratios  in  the  major  markets  are  well-suited  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  medium 
run. Our monetary policy will continue to be prudent in view of meeting the inflation 
target and maintaining macroeconomic stability. 
BIS Review 104/2010 
 5
