Guy Debelle: The state of the mortgage market 
Address  by  Mr  Guy  Debelle,  Assistant  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  at  the 
Mortgage Innovation Conference, Sydney, 30 March 2010. 
 I thank Michael Davies, Dan Fabbro, Megan Garner and Jennifer Pitman for their help in preparing this talk. 
Thank you for the opportunity to address this forum. Today, I intend to talk about the past, 
present and future of the mortgage market in Australia. It is useful to recount some of the 
history of the mortgage market to put the current state of the market in to better context and 
provide a basis for thinking about how the market might evolve in the period ahead.  
History 
In the 1960s and early 1970s, the Australian financial system was heavily regulated.1 There 
was a number of wide-ranging controls including:  
 
The interest rates that banks could charge on their loans and pay on their deposits 
were controlled.  
Banks were subject to reserve ratios and liquidity ratios.  
There were directives on the overall quantity of loans banks should make, as well as 
moral suasion on who they should lend to.  
Institutions were specialised – trading banks lent to businesses, savings banks held 
large  quantities  of  Government  debt  and  lent  to  households  (almost  entirely  for 
housing), and finance companies lent for more risky property loans and consumer 
credit.  
  These  regulatory  controls  on  the  banks  reduced  their  capacity  to  adjust  to  changing 
conditions and imposed a cost disadvantage on them. As a result they lost market share to 
the  unregulated  financial  sector,  primarily  building  societies.  The  banks’  share  of  total 
financial  intermediary  assets  declined  from  nearly  90 per cent  in  the  early  1950s  to 
70 per cent in 1970. The banks’ share of housing credit was just below 60 per cent in 1976 
with much of the rest of the mortgage market being provided by credit unions and building 
societies.  Finance  companies,  which  were  generally  associated  with  the  banks,  often 
provided  top-up  funding  to  bank  mortgages  but  were  not  a  particularly  large  share  of  the 
overall market.  
                                                 
1   This  draws  on  Battellino  R  (2007),  “Australia’s  Experience  with  Financial  Deregulation”,  Address  to  China 
Australia Governance Program, 16 July, Melbourne. 
BIS Review 39/2010 
 1
Graph 1 
 Financial deregulation in Australia began slowly in the 1970s, before accelerating sharply in 
the early 1980s. It affected the quantity of credit provided, the pricing and the structure of the 
mortgage market (Graph 1).  
The  main  developments  were  the  reduction  of  the  prescribed  assets  ratio  which  was  the 
minimum  share  of  total  assets  that  savings  banks  were  required  to  invest  in  Government 
debt. As this was gradually reduced from 70 per cent to 40 per cent between 1963 and 1978, 
savings banks could correspondingly increase the share of housing lending in their assets.  
On the pricing front, the interest rate ceiling on large housing loans was removed in the early 
1970s and then in April 1986, the interest rate ceiling on all new housing loans, 13½ per cent 
at the time, was removed. (Existing loans remained subject to the 13½ per cent cap until they 
were discharged.)  
In  terms  of  the  structure  of  the  market,  the  distinction  between  savings  banks  and  trading 
banks  was  removed  in  1989.  Prior  to  that,  in  the  mid  1980s,  15 foreign  banks  were  given 
licences  to  operate  in  the  Australian  market.  However,  the  foreign  banks,  in  the  main, 
focussed on lending to businesses rather than lending to households, in large part because 
they did not have a branch network which would enable them to compete effectively against 
the  local  banks.  Further  financial  innovation  which  would  have  facilitated  their  ability  to 
compete without a branch network was still nearly a decade away.  
The  major  change  in  market  structure  was  that  a  number  of  building  societies  and  credit 
unions  converted  to  banks  through  the  1980s  and  early  1990s.  Becoming  a  bank  allowed 
these institutions a greater capacity to expand their capital base.  
More generally, in the first few years after deregulation, business lending grew much more 
quickly than housing lending. Between January 1985 and December 1988 business lending 
grew at an average annual pace of 30 per cent, while housing lending grew by 22 per cent.2 
As  a  result,  the  share  of  business  loans  in  banks’  total  lending  rose  from  54 per cent  to 
62 per cent over this period.  
                                                 
2   These are nominal growth rates. Inflation during this period averaged 8 per cent. 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2010
  However, in the early 1990s, a number of factors contributed to the banking system shifting 
its focus from lending to business towards housing:  
 
First,  the  banks  suffered  large  losses  on  their  business  loan  portfolios  during  the 
early 1990s recession. In contrast, the losses on their housing loans were relatively 
mild, notwithstanding the fact that the unemployment rate rose to about 11 per cent 
and mortgage rates reached as high as 17 per cent.  
Second,  demand  for  credit  from  the  corporate  sector  declined  as  the  sector 
underwent a period of deleveraging.  
Third, the introduction of the (first) Basel Capital Accord saw a change in the risk 
weighting  in  favour  of  housing  assets.  In  August  1988,  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia (which was then the banking sector regulator) issued guidelines for a risk-
based measurement of banks’ capital adequacy, broadly consistent with the Basel 
proposals. Prior to this, Australia used a capital-to-total assets ratio for measuring 
the capital adequacy of banks, which gave banks an incentive to invest in riskier, but 
higher  yielding  assets.3  Under  the  new  risk-based  approach,  housing  loans  were 
given a risk weight of 50 per cent, whereas business and personal loans had a risk 
weight  of  100 per cent.  Banks  were  required  to  satisfy  the  new  capital  adequacy 
requirements by 1992, but as early as 1990 they had taken steps to increase their 
capital bases to the required levels.  
As a result of these factors, between 1991 and 1995 the share of business loans in banks’ 
total lending fell by 15 percentage points to 48 per cent, while the share of housing lending 
rose by 16 percentage points to 46 per cent. Since then, this trend has continued, reinforced 
by the continuing strong performance of housing loans and, in terms of demand for credit, 
the  shift  downwards  in  the  nominal  interest  rate  structure  as  the  low  inflation  environment 
was achieved and maintained. Currently, the share of housing loans in banks’ total lending 
stands at 58 per cent, while the share of business lending is about 35 per cent.  
Rise of the wholesale lenders 
The  next  development  which  had  a  material  effect  on  the  structure  and  pricing  of  the 
mortgage market was the rise of the wholesale lenders.  
As  nominal  interest  rates  came  down  in  the  early  1990s,  mortgage  rates  declined  more 
slowly  such  that  the  spreads  on  banks’  housing  loans  increased.  In  1993,  the  spread 
between the variable mortgage rate and the cash rate was about 430 basis points (Graph 2). 
The  reduction  in  inflation  and  nominal  interest  rates  eroded  the  banks’  funding  advantage 
obtained from interest-free deposits. These factors, together with the lower level of money 
market rates (and their increased stability), provided the opportunity for wholesale lenders to 
enter  the  market.  These  new  institutions  competed  aggressively  for  market  share  by 
undercutting  banks’  mortgage  rates  and  by  introducing  new  mortgage  products  such  as 
home  equity  loans,  interest  only  loans  and  low  documentation  loans  (see  below).  The 
wholesale lenders’ share of housing loan approvals rose quickly from 2 per cent in 1993 to 
8 per cent in 1996 (Graph 3). The banks responded to this increased competition by reducing 
their spreads, such that by 1997, the spread over the cash rate on their indicator housing 
rates had decreased to about 175 basis points.  
The ability of the wholesale lenders to compete effectively was considerably enhanced by the 
growth of the residential mortgage backed securities (RMBS) market. This provided a source 
                                                 
3   See: Lewis MK and RH Wallace (eds) (1997), The Australian Financial System: Evolution, Policy and Practice, 
Addison  Wesley  Longman,  Melbourne;  RBA  (1988),  “Supervision  of  Capital  Adequacy  of  Banks”,  Bulletin, 
February, pp 14–26; RBA (1998), “Capital Adequacy of Banks”, Bulletin, September, pp 11–16. 
BIS Review 39/2010 
 3
of  funds  to  these  lenders  which  did  not  have  the  deposit  base  of  the  financial  institutions. 
These lenders had no balance sheet, little capital and no branch structure and hence were 
low cost operations with a large degree of flexibility.  
In subsequent years, the regional banks, along with credit unions and building societies, also 
made  significant  use  of  securitisation  as  a  relatively  cheap  source  of  funding.  The  major 
banks also issued RMBS to diversify their funding base but it was never a large part of their 
funding.  
Graph 2 
 Graph 3 
  4 
 BIS Review 39/2010
In  a  further  response  to  the  competition  from  the  wholesale  lenders,  in  the  early  2000s, 
banks  began  increasing  the  discount  offered  on  the  standard  mortgage  rate  to  new 
borrowers. This enabled banks to slow the repricing of their loan books because only new or 
refinancing  borrowers  benefited  from  the  discounts,  whereas  changes  to  their  standard 
variable  rate  immediately  flowed  through  to  all  borrowers.  Initially  banks  did  not  publicise 
these discounts, but since the mid 2000s, they have been quite open about them, and now 
the vast majority of new borrowers pay an interest rate that is below the standard variable 
rate.  The  discount  has  grown  over  time  and  has  spread  to  most  borrowers.  Currently  the 
average borrower is receiving a discount of around 60 basis points on the standard variable 
rate. This discounting saw the spread between the cash rate and the actual mortgage rate 
paid narrow further over the decade to 2007.  
As I mentioned earlier, the foreign banks focussed primarily on the corporate market when 
they first began business in the mid 1980s, but from the beginning of this decade, they have 
increased  their  focus  on  retail  banking,  including  housing  lending.  Their  share  of  housing 
loan  approvals  increased  from  about  1 per cent  in  2000  to  a  peak  of  about  15 per cent  in 
2008 (Graph 4). Two related factors have contributed to the foreign banks’ increased market 
share.  First,  starting  off  with  a  small  portfolio  of  mortgages  meant  that  the  foreign-owned 
banks were able to advertise lower interest rates without adversely affecting the profitability 
of a large stock of loans to existing customers. Second, the wider acceptance on the part of 
customers  of  applying  for  loans  over  the  internet  and  the  use  of  the  broker  network  has 
increased  the  ability  of  these  banks  to  reach  new  borrowers  without  establishing  a  costly 
branch network.4 During late 2008 and 2009 however, the foreign banks’ market share fell 
significantly, in large part because of the reduction in lending by Bank-West.  
Graph 4 
 More  generally,  the  emergence  of  mortgage  brokers,  who  act  as  intermediaries  between 
lenders and borrowers and make it easier for borrowers to compare the costs and features of 
different  loans,  has  contributed  to  the  increase  in  competition  between  lenders  in  the 
Australian mortgage market. Mortgage brokers’ share of total mortgage settlements is about 
one-third of all loans.  
                                                 
4   See RBA (2007), “Box C: Foreign-Owned Banks in Australia”, Financial Stability Review, March, pp 47–49. 
BIS Review 39/2010 
 5
Product innovation 
Through the late 1990s and first half of the 2000s, there was considerable product innovation 
in  the  Australian  mortgage  market.  Lenders  sought  to  cater  for  a  wider  range  of  potential 
borrowers and found new ways to assess their borrowing capacity. Some of this innovation 
has resulted in an easing in lending standards and an increase in risk for both borrowers and 
lenders,  but  its  overwhelming  effect  has  been  to  widen  the  range  of  households  who  can 
access  finance.5  Moreover,  when  the  lending  was  more  risky,  lenders  charged  a  larger 
spread on these loans to take account of the greater risk and required lower loan to valuation 
ratios (LVRs) for these loans.  
Lenders introduced home-equity loans, redraw facilities and reverse mortgages, all of which 
allowed households to borrow against the equity they have built up in their homes. Lenders 
also  introduced  interest-only  loans  and  shared-equity  loans,  which  made  it  easier  for 
households, particularly first home buyers, to purchase their home.  
Loan products that better meet the needs of certain types of borrowers, such as those with 
irregular income streams or those who do not meet the standard lending criteria, were also 
introduced.  Low-doc  loans,  for  which  borrowers  self-certify  their  income  in  the  application 
process,  accounted  for  about  10 per cent  of  newly  approved  housing  loans  in  2006, 
compared with less than ½ per cent in 2000 (Table 1).  
There  was  also  an  increase  in  non-conforming  loans  for  borrowers  who  do  not  meet  the 
standard lending criteria of mainstream lenders. These borrowers typically have poor credit 
or  payment  histories.  In  2006,  non-conforming  loans  comprised  2 per cent  of  new  loan 
approvals, compared with less than ½ per cent in 2000.  
Table 1 
Housing loans 
 Lending standards and arrears 
Fortunately,  lending  standards  in  Australia  did  not  loosen  as  much  as  in  some  offshore 
markets.  There  was  very  little  sub-prime  lending  of  the  form  more  common  in  the  United 
States  for  example,  where  loans  were  provided  to  those  with  poor  credit  histories.  The 
non-conforming  loan  market,  which  was  the  closest  equivalent  in  Australia,  never  reached 
more than 2 per cent of new loans, and is currently less than 1 per cent of loans outstanding. 
Only  a  few  fringe  institutions  were  involved  in  the  market.  There  are  almost  no  non-
conforming loans being issued at the moment, with the providers of such loans having exited 
or gone into extended hibernation.  
                                                 
5   See APRA (Australian Prudential Regulation Authority) and RBA (2007), “Joint RBA-APRA submission to the 
Inquiry  into  Home  Lending  Practices  and  Processes”,  August,  and  RBA  (2008),  “RBA  Submission  to  the 
Inquiry into Competition in the Banking and Non-Banking Sectors”, 10 July. 
6 
 BIS Review 39/2010
Consistent with this, and the stronger underlying economic conditions in Australia, the share 
of non-performing housing loans in Australia has remained very low (Graph 5). In December 
2009,  the  share  was  0.6 per cent  in  Australia,  much  the  same  as  it  was  15  years  ago. 
Compared with other countries, this is only a little above the 0.4 per cent in Canada and well 
below the 2½–3 per cent in the UK and Spain and 8 per cent in the US.  
Graph 5 
 Looking  at  the  Australian  data  in  more  detail,  the  proportion  of  banks’  on-balance  sheet 
housing loans that were in arrears or impaired in December 2009 was 0.6 per cent. This is 
up from the very low levels in 2002–2003, but still low in absolute terms. The arrears rate has 
tended to be relatively stable in recent months.  
Australian residential mortgage backed securities have continued to perform very well. This 
is  reflected  in  data  from  a  lenders’  mortgage  insurance  provider  and  the  RMBS  market, 
which  show  that  annual  losses  on  insured  prime  housing  loans  averaged  4 basis  points 
between 1980 and 2010, with the highest loss in any one year being 10 basis points.6 As a 
result, even the holders of lower rated tranches of RMBS have not suffered any losses, as 
the insurance, together with the subordination embodied in the RMBS, has provided a more 
than adequate buffer.  
The effect of the financial crisis 
The  financial  crisis  has  had  a  material  affect  on  pricing  and  structure  in  the  Australian 
mortgage  market  but  has  not  had  a  particularly  marked  impact  on  the  quantity  of  housing 
credit provided.  
                                                 
6   RBA  (2006),  “The  Performance  of  Australian  Residential  Mortgage-Backed  Securities”,  Financial  Stability 
Review, March, pp 63–68. 
BIS Review 39/2010 
 7
Beginning  around  the  middle  of  2007,  there  was  a  widespread  reappraisal  of  the  risks 
associated with investing in structured credit products. Securitisation started to suffer severe 
brand  damage  as  primarily  US  RMBS  incurred  significant  credit  problems  as  delinquency 
rates  began  to  rise.7  Initially,  the  problems  were  most  evident  in  the  sub-prime  mortgage 
market,  but  they  later  spread  to  prime  mortgages  in  the  US  as  well.  Combined  with  the 
decline in house prices, these delinquency rates have led to large losses for investors in US 
RMBS.  
The Australian RMBS market was significantly affected, even though (as already discussed) 
lending standards were much better in Australia, and the RMBS continued to perform well. 
Issuance dried up markedly (Graph 6). Most of the issuance during late 2008 and the first 
half of 2009 was purchased by the Australian Government through the Australian Office of 
Financial  Management.  Offshore  SIVs,  which  had  been  large  buyers  of  Australian  RMBS 
prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  were  forced  to  liquidate  their  portfolios  as  they  were  no  longer 
able to fund themselves. These sales into the secondary market drove spreads from about 
15 basis points (over the bank bill swap rate) pre-crisis to a peak of over 400 basis points in 
early 2009. This very wide secondary market spreads also deterred new issuance.  
Graph 6 
 The  crisis  also  had  a  material  effect  on  the  funding  costs  of  all  providers  in  the  mortgage 
market.  In  addition  to  the  effect  on  RMBS  funding  described  above,  wholesale  (and 
particularly recently) retail funding costs have risen relative to the cash rate.8  
In  response  to  the  rise  in  funding  costs,  all  institutions  have  raised  their  mortgage  rates 
relative to the cash rate. Interestingly, while the standard variable rate has been increased, 
there is little sign of any reduction in the discounts offered on new loans. The average rate on 
variable  rate  housing  loans  has  increased  by  around  110 basis  points  relative  to  the  cash 
rate  since  mid  2007  (Graph 7).9  This  increase,  relative  to  the  cash  rate,  is  below  the 
                                                 
7   See  Debelle  G  (2009),  “Whither  Securitisation?”,  speech  given  to  the  Australian  Securitisation  Conference 
2009, Sydney 18 November. 
8   See Brown A, M Davies, D Fabbro and T Hanrick (2010), “Recent Developments in Banks’ Funding Costs and 
Lending Rates”, RBA Bulletin, March Quarter, pp 35–44. 
9   The average rates on all outstanding housing loans has increased by around 145 basis points over this period, 
as rates on the major banks’ new 3- and 5-year fixed-rate housing loans have risen by 170–180 basis points 
8 
 BIS Review 39/2010
estimated  130  to  140 basis  point  rise  in  banks’  overall  funding  costs  over  this  period.  In 
contrast, banks’ business and personal loans have increased by even more relative to the 
cash rate and by more than the rise in funding costs.  
Because the funding costs of the smaller participants have tended to rise by more, their profit 
margins have been squeezed more and in some cases, their capacity to provide new loans 
has  also  been  curtailed.  Some  participants  have  been  able  to  remain  competitive  and 
profitable  only  by  cross-subsidising  their  new  issuance  using  the  large  spread  they  are 
earning on their back book of mortgages. These mortgages were funded pre-crisis, so that 
the subsequent upward repricing of the whole mortgage book has resulted in the older loans 
now earning a wide margin.  
Graph 7 
 The  pressure  on  funding  during  the  crisis,  together  with  the  near  closure  of  the  RMBS 
market,  changed  the  competitive  dynamics  in  the  mortgage  market.  The  market  share  of 
wholesale  lenders  (who  relied  almost  exclusively  on  securitisation)  fell  from  about 
13 per cent in mid 2007 to about 2 per cent by early 2009. Several of the larger wholesale 
lenders  were  acquired  by  the  major  banks  (CBA  bought  into  Aussie  and  Aussie  bought 
Wizard;  Westpac  bought  RAMS  distribution  business;  NAB  bought  Challenger’s  mortgage 
business). The share of housing loan approvals by smaller banks, credit unions and building 
societies  also  declined,  though  not  as  sharply.  The  major  banks’  combined  market  share 
rose from 60 per cent to over 80 per cent over this period.  
Nevertheless, housing finance has been readily available throughout the crisis period, with 
housing credit growing at about 8 per cent a year. The larger banks have filled the gap left by 
the decline of the wholesale lenders, so that there has not been a material constraint on the 
quantity of housing credit available in Australia throughout the crisis.  
There has, however, been some tightening in lending standards, with several banks reducing 
their  maximum  LVRs  on  prime,  full-doc  loans  for  new  borrowers  from  95–97 per  cent  to 
                                                                                                                                                      
relative to equivalent maturity swap rates (and by more relative to the cash rate because of the current slope 
of the yield curve). 
BIS Review 39/2010 
 9
about  90 per cent  during  2009.  Banks  have  also  raised  their  interest  rate  buffers  and 
increased  their  “genuine  savings”  requirements.  Low-doc  and  non-conforming  loans  have 
become much harder to obtain. This has seen a decline in the share of new owner-occupier 
housing loans with a LVR above 90 per cent, from a peak of 27 per cent in the March quarter 
2009 to 17 per cent by the end of the year. The share of low-doc loans has declined to about 
7 per cent.  
There has been a decrease in the shares of new investor loans that are being written with 
higher  loan-to-valuation  ratios  (LVRs)  or  lower  documentation  standards.  There  has  also 
been a decline in the share of interest-only loans, though it is still the case that close to half 
of  all  new  investor  housing  borrowers  are  opting  to  not  make  any  principal  repayments, 
reflecting the tax advantages of this funding strategy.  
The future 
Looking forward, the competitive state of the current market is reflected in the fact that home 
lending  rates  have  not  risen  by  as  much  as  funding  costs.  Moreover,  the  outlook  for  the 
smaller  lenders  has  improved  since  mid  2009.  The  securitisation  market  is  starting  to 
recover,  with  the  volume  of  issuance  to  non-AOFM  investors  picking  up  and  secondary 
market spreads decreasing.  
Securitisation is once again becoming a more viable funding source for lenders, with spreads 
on newly issued RMBS – around 130 to 135 basis points over one-month bank bills for non-
AOFM supported deals – a little below our estimated break-even spread of around 160 basis 
points.  However,  our  estimate  of  the  break-even  spread,  and  hence  the  profitability  of  the 
issue,  does  not  take  into  account  different  degrees  of  subordination  across  issues.  To  the 
extent  that  that  the  degree  of  subordination  required  by  investors  is  greater  than  it  was 
previously, the overall profitability of the issue will be lower. This is because a greater share 
of  the  security  is  retained  on  the  book  of  the  issuer,  or  sold  at  a  higher  cost  to  another 
investor,  reducing  the  return  from  the  deal.  (However,  this  effect  on  overall  profitability  is 
much smaller than the increase in spreads since the crisis.)  
The cost of long-term and short-term wholesale funding has also decreased since mid 2009, 
though the cost of deposits remains high. Consistent with this, the smaller lenders’ market 
shares have risen slightly over recent months, though they are unlikely to return to pre-crisis 
levels  any  time  soon.  The  pre-crisis  level  of  RMBS  activity,  which  these  institutions  relied 
more heavily on, was supported by demand from offshore SIVs which is no longer there. But 
as the major banks have increased their lending rates to recoup increased funding costs, and 
as  funding  costs  for  securitisation  have  fallen,  the  smaller  participants  have  become 
increasingly more competitive.  
While interest rates on mortgages have increased relative to the cash rate, the Reserve Bank 
is able to take account of those changes in its policy deliberations. The cash rate determined 
by the Reserve Bank is still the major determinant of the interest rate structure in Australia, 
including that of mortgage rates.  
With  the  securitisation  market  showing  greater  vitality  in  recent  months,  the  housing  loan 
market remains contestable. Any widening in margins is likely to attract new competitors into 
the market. Already, the improvement in securitisation has encouraged some of the smaller 
lenders back into the market and encouraged some brokers to again look to increase their 
own mortgage lending.  
With these developments, the provision of mortgage credit in Australia is likely to continue to 
be adequate in a competitive marketplace. 
10 
 BIS Review 39/2010
