Mark Carney: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report update 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 21 January 2010.  
 Good  Morning.  Paul  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  today  to  discuss  the  January 
Monetary Policy Report, which we published this morning. 
• 
The global economic recovery is underway. Economic and financial developments 
have been slightly more favourable than we projected in October, and the outlook 
for global economic growth through 2010 and 2011 is somewhat stronger. 
Although the recession in Canada was severe, with real GDP contracting for three 
consecutive quarters, the magnitude of the downturn was more modest than in other 
major advanced economies. In particular, domestic demand held up much better in 
Canada  than  elsewhere,  reflecting  the  soundness  of  Canada’s  banking  system, 
relatively healthy household and corporate balance sheets, and the speed and scale 
of monetary policy actions. 
Economic growth in Canada resumed in the third quarter of 2009 and is expected to 
have  picked  up  further  in  the  fourth  quarter.  Nevertheless,  considerable  excess 
supply remains, and the Bank judges that the economy was operating about 3 ¼ per 
cent below its production capacity in the fourth quarter of 2009. 
In Canada, the recovery is expected to evolve largely as anticipated in October, with 
the economy returning to full capacity in the third quarter of 2011. This recovery is 
still  expected  to  be  more  subdued  than  usual.  The  main  factors  supporting  the 
Canadian recovery are: monetary and fiscal policy support, increased confidence, a 
firming global economy, and higher terms of trade.  
At  the  same  time,  the  persistent  strength  of  the  Canadian  dollar  and  the  low 
absolute  level  of  U.S.  demand  continue  to  act  as  significant  drags  on  economic 
activity.  
For the year as a whole, the Canadian economy contracted by an estimated 2.5 per 
cent in 2009. It is projected to grow by 2.9 per cent in 2010 and 3.5 per cent in 2011. 
As  a  result of  year-over-year  increases  in  energy  prices,  total  CPI  inflation  turned 
positive in the fourth quarter of 2009, as had been anticipated.  
In  spite  of  the  large  amount  of  excess  supply  in  the  economy,  the  core  rate  of 
inflation has been slightly stronger than expected in recent months. This stickiness 
of  core  inflation  is  likely  related  to  the  fact  that  wage  growth  had  remained  high 
relative to the underlying trend in productivity.  
The core rate of inflation is projected to increase gradually, returning to 2 per cent in 
the third quarter of 2011. Total CPI inflation is projected to follow a very similar path 
and return to the 2 per cent target also in Q3 of next year.  
The  main  upside  risks  to  inflation  are  associated  with  the  possibility  of  a  stronger 
than-  anticipated  global  recovery  and  of  Canadian  domestic  demand  that  is  more 
robust and has more momentum than projected.  
On  the  downside,  there  is  the  risk  that  persistent  strength  of  the  Canadian  dollar 
could  act  as  a  significant  further  drag  on  growth  and  put  additional  downward 
pressure  on  inflation.  Another  important  downside  risk  is  that  the  global  recovery 
could be even more protracted than projected.  
          BIS Review 6/2010 
 1
  On Tuesday, the Bank reaffirmed its conditional commitment to maintain its target 
for the overnight rate at the effective lower bound of 1/4 per cent until the end of 
June 2010 in order to achieve the inflation target.  
The  Bank  retains  considerable  flexibility  in  its  conduct  of  monetary  policy  at  low 
interest rates, consistent with the framework outlined in the April 2009 MPR.  
With that, Paul and I would be pleased to take your questions.  
2 
 BIS Review 6/2010
