Thomas M Hoenig: The high cost of exceptionally low rates 
Speech by Mr Thomas M Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, at 
the  Bartlesville  Federal  Reserve  Forum,  hosted  by  Bartlesville  Chamber  of  Commerce, 
Bartlesville, Oklahoma, 3 June 2010. 
 The  views  expressed  by  the  author  are  his  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System, its governors, officers or representatives. 
I appreciate the opportunity to join you here today. Bartlesville plays an especially important 
role in the history of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. After Congress passed the 
Federal Reserve Act nearly a century ago, a special committee was appointed to determine 
where the nation’s 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks would be located and what regions 
those  banks  would  serve.  When  that  committee  met  in  Kansas  City  to  discuss  business 
relationships in the central United States, Frank Phillips was among those who attended and 
spoke  in  favor  of  locating  our  Bank  in  Kansas  City  and  having  it  serve  Oklahoma.  The 
support from Mr. Phillips and others from Oklahoma was absolutely critical to the eventual 
decisions  that  established  the  Bank  in  Kansas  City  and  included  Oklahoma  in  the  Tenth 
Federal  Reserve  District  that  we  serve.  A  few  years  after  our  founding,  we  opened  our 
Oklahoma City Branch. This morning, the community and business leaders who serve on the 
Branch’s  Board  of  Directors  –  including  Bartlesville’s  own  K.  Vasudevan  –  met  here  in 
Bartlesville, which seems especially appropriate. 
This is not the only connection between the Federal Reserve’s founding and Oklahoma. The 
Senate  sponsor  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  was  one  of  Oklahoma’s  first  senators,  Robert 
Owen. Senator Owen, like Mr. Phillips, recognized the importance of having the central bank 
of the United States tied directly to America’s Main Streets and not isolated in Washington or 
on Wall Street. That structure is at least as important today as it was a century ago. It is my 
hope  that,  after  much  debate,  the  regulatory  reform  legislation  now  under  discussion  in 
Washington will affirm in its final version the importance of these regional responsibilities. 
It  is  our  job  as  the  regional  headquarters  of  the  nation’s  central  bank  to  serve  as  the  link 
between our communities and national policy deliberations. Although these policy issues are 
always important to our nation, today we find ourselves at a unique and difficult point. We are 
attempting to support an economic recovery, but in doing so, also avoid fostering the next 
crisis.  It  is  this  challenge  that  I  would  like  to  spend  the  next  few  minutes  discussing  and 
sharing with you my views. 
Economic outlook 
At this point, the U.S. economy appears on the path to recovery. Subject to the risks I will 
discuss a bit later, the general outlook is good. GDP grew at nearly a 4 percent pace in the 
second half of last year, after bottoming out last summer. I anticipate growth will be slower 
this year, coming in between 3 and 3½ percent. 
What is perhaps most encouraging now is the changing composition of growth that we are 
seeing.  Last  fall,  a  good  portion  of  the  GDP  growth  could  be  traced  to  temporary  factors 
related to fiscal stimulus and inventory adjustments by firms that had scaled back during the 
worst  of  the  recession.  At  that  time,  there  was  considerable  uncertainty  about  what  might 
happen once these temporary factors subsided. However, more recent data suggest that the 
recovery  is  more  broad-based  and  self-sustaining,  and  perhaps  even  stronger  than 
anticipated. 
Consumer spending, which makes up more than 70 percent of GDP, has been expanding at 
a solid pace. While consumers have been cautious about big-ticket purchases, we’re starting 
BIS Review 88/2010 
 1
to  see  some  signs  that  this  is  changing  as  consumer  confidence  improves.  Manufacturing 
activity continues its sharp rebound, and nonmanufacturing activity has been expanding as 
well. With businesses seeing a recovery in demand, business purchases of equipment and 
software have been robust. 
Jobs,  of  course,  remain  a  critical  issue.  Improvements  in  labor  markets  boost  household 
income prospects and enables Americans to take care of themselves and their families and 
to save for their future. So of course jobs are a crucial component in the transition to self-
sustaining growth. We are now seeing clear signs that the process of job creation is taking 
hold.  Payrolls  have  risen  in  each  of  the  first  four  months  of  this  year.  In  April,  payrolls 
increased  by  a  strong  290,000.  The  recent  uptick  in  the  unemployment  rate  from  9.7  to 
9.9 percent  actually  reflects  an  improved  outlook,  as  workers  who  dropped  out  of  the  job 
market are gaining confidence and beginning to reenter the workforce. Solid job gains in the 
months ahead will translate into a downward trajectory for the unemployment rate later this 
year and into next year. 
Nevertheless, while the economy is improving, recovery in certain sectors will be prolonged. 
Notably,  the  construction  industry  has  yet  to  convincingly  turn  the  corner.  The  residential 
housing market received a boost from federal homebuyer tax credits last fall and again this 
spring, but given the overhang of unsold homes, building activity will remain subdued through 
most  of  this  year  or  longer.  Nonresidential  construction  will  likely  continue  to  contract  this 
year,  due  to  high  vacancy  rates  in  that  sector.  These  are  important  negatives  but  by 
themselves should not derail the recovery. 
Looking at the economy more broadly, inflation has drifted lower in recent months, which is 
typical following a recession. While energy prices have kept consumer price inflation around 
2 percent, inflation in non-food and non-energy prices – which is core inflation – has been 
running at rates of around 1 percent. These inflation rates are likely to continue for the next 
year or so. However, as the economic recovery continues or picks up momentum, I expect 
inflation to drift higher. 
As  for  risks  to  this  outlook,  there  are  several.  The  fluid  situation  in  Greece  and  Europe 
reminds  us  to  be  wary.  The  European  debt  problems  have  increased  uncertainty  and  a 
renewed aversion to risks, and are causing investors to flee riskier assets such as stocks and 
junk  bonds  for  safer  assets  such  as  U.S.  Treasury  debt.  These  shifts  will  have  a  modest 
negative net effect on U.S. economic growth in the near term. As an aside, I would note this 
episode illustrates the longer run danger of running persistent budget deficits – a situation 
that we must soon address in the United States. 
Monetary policy 
It is within the context of this outlook and its longer run implications that the Federal Open 
Market Committee must balance its objectives of supporting short-run economic growth and 
long-run stable growth and low inflation. It also is within the context of this outlook and these 
objectives that policy must be normalized, as reflected in the level of real interest rates and 
the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s combined balance sheet.  
Achieving  such  multiple  objectives  requires  deft  handling.  But  most  certainly,  the  first  step 
toward a more normal policy is to move policy rates off zero, back toward neutral.  
In saying this, I have no illusions about the challenges of moving away from zero. But in my 
judgment,  the  process  should  begin  sooner  to  avoid  the  danger  of  having  to  over 
compensate later, as so often happens in policy. 
I would begin the normalization of policy by outlining for the public a two-step process: 
First,  the  Federal  Reserve  would  continue  to  unwind  its  extraordinary  policy  actions 
implemented  as  a  response  to  the  financial  turmoil  that  began  in  the  fall  of  2008.  The 
market’s need for these facilities has eased and we have closed most of them, returning the 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2010
discount window to more normal operations. As part of this first step, the FOMC would also 
eliminate its commitment to maintaining “exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for 
an extended period.” 
Second,  with  these  steps  taken,  with  the  improvements  in  market  conditions  and  liquidity, 
and with an improving outlook, the FOMC would be prepared to raise the funds rate target to 
1 percent  by  the  end  of  summer.  This  would  continue  the  current  highly  accommodative 
policy, but would move nominal rates away from zero and real rates to a less negative level. 
We would then pause, maintaining the funds rate at 1 percent while we assess the economic 
outlook and emerging financial conditions. This would provide time to judge whether and to 
what degree further policy adjustments are warranted to assure long-run financial equilibrium 
and stability. 
Based on the current outlook consensus, it seems reasonable that the economy would be 
well-positioned  to  accept  this  modest  increase in  the  funds  rate.  As  a  reminder,  the  funds 
rate target remained between 1 and 2 percent even after the intensification of the crisis in the 
fall of 2008. It was reduced to its current target range of zero to ¼ percent in mid-December 
2008. Relative to the depths of the crisis, conditions today are much improved from where 
we  were  18  months  ago.  Financial  stress  is  clearly  reduced  and  a  sustainable  economic 
recovery appears under way. It is also important to emphasize that the 1 percent fed funds 
rate  target,  coupled  with  the  Federal  Reserve’s  large  balance  sheet,  provides  an 
extraordinarily accommodative monetary policy environment and one that would ensure the 
economy’s continued progress in the recovery. 
Setting  out  such  a  plan  would  be  a  more  orderly  move  toward  unwinding  the  earlier 
extraordinary actions and would serve to reduce the likelihood of a buildup of new financial 
imbalances. 
Let me turn now to the subsequent steps that might be taken to more fully restore policy to a 
long-run  equilibrium  policy  level.  Given  the  relatively  modest  expected  trajectory  of  growth 
and inflation, these added moves will involve some quarters to complete. But the direction 
should  be  firmly  established  now  with  the  timing  dependent  on  the  performance  of  a 
combination  of  financial,  inflation  and  growth  variables.  Experience  tells  me  that  a  clear 
commitment  now  to  such  action  would  mitigate  the  likely  need  to  later  tighten  beyond  our 
estimate of neutral that so often comes with delay. More specifically, these next steps involve 
raising the funds rate from 1 to above 3 percent reasonably quickly as we gain confidence 
that GDP and employment are on a steady path toward potential. The final steps would take 
rates to between 3.5 and 4.5 percent as economic growth approaches long-run potential. 
If we are to achieve a steady rate environment, it is also important that the Federal Reserve’s 
balance sheet be restored to its pre-crisis size and composition. Obviously this requires the 
careful  process  of  selling  the  Federal  Reserve’s  $1.3  trillion  portfolio  of  mortgage-backed 
securities. Various approaches to this can be identified but most agree that it should be done 
with the process or time horizon clearly set out for all to see. I also would suggest it begin at 
least  when  the  fed  funds  rate  rises  above  1  percent  or  sooner  if  conditions  provide  the 
opportunity. 
Monetary policy and unemployment 
Finally,  I  want  to  spend  a  few  minutes  suggesting  why  it  is  important  to  move  the  federal 
funds rate off of zero even though the unemployment rate remains above 9 percent. It has 
been argued, with some supporting evidence, that the Federal Reserve’s commitment to very 
low interest rates in 2003 and 2004 was too low for too long and contributed to the housing 
and credit boom and subsequent busts. 
Between August 2002 and January 2005 – two-and-a-half years – the federal funds rate was 
below the rate of core inflation. Such low interest rates encourage borrowing and a buildup of 
BIS Review 88/2010 
 3
debt,  sometimes  in  ways  we  do  not  fully  appreciate  until  much  later  with  the  benefit  of 
hindsight. In addition, low interest rates – especially with a commitment to keep them low – 
led banks and investors to feel “safe” in the search for yield, which involves investing in less-
liquid  and  more  risky  assets.  In  addition,  financial  institutions  often  search  for  yield  by 
increasing  the  amount  of  assets  supported  by  each  dollar  of  net  worth  –  leverage.  For 
example, leverage at securities broker dealers rose dramatically. After averaging just 13-1/4 
between 1970 and 2000, leverage climbed to a high of 40 in the third quarter of 2007 – the 
start of the financial crisis. 
It was after a period of too-low interest rates, too much credit, too much leverage that the 
collapse  of  the  housing  bubble,  the  rapid  deleveraging  and  the  ensuing  financial  crisis 
occurred. And it was after these events that unemployment rose to more than 10 percent and 
the United States lost 8.4 million jobs. In 2010, we have only gained back 573,000 jobs. 
In  another  period,  the  mid-1970s  and  early  1980s,  low  interest  rates  also  triggered  an 
extreme swing in the economic cycle. The real fed funds rate was kept negative for a span of 
nearly  three  years,  from  November  1974  to  September  1977.  The  low  interest  rate 
environment  led  initially  to  a  drop  in  the  unemployment  rate.  But  rising  inflation  and  asset 
bubbles eventually dictated a restrictive monetary policy implemented by Fed Chairman Paul 
Volcker and his FOMC colleagues. In the end, the nation paid a high price for the low rates of 
the 1970s, when unemployment reached 10.8 percent in the recession of the early 1980s. 
In the drive to achieve price stability and stable growth, monetary policy is a powerful tool. 
Certainly lowering interest rates is the appropriate monetary policy response to the onset of 
an economic recession and rising unemployment. But it is also a blunt instrument that has a 
wide  set  of  intended  but  also  unintended  consequences  that  can  and  have  worsened 
economic  outcomes  including  misallocation  of  precious  resources,  inflation  and  long-term 
unemployment. That is why we want to return to a sustainable long-term equilibrium policy 
rate, starting soon. 
The  economy  is  improving  and  policy  should  reflect  that  fact,  carefully  but  confidently. 
Although  we  find  ourselves  in  a  unique  environment,  history  offers  us  some  important 
lessons.  If  we  do  not  learn  from  past  mistakes,  we  will  find  ourselves  repeating  them  yet 
again. 
4 
 BIS Review 88/2010
