Jean-Claude Trichet: The great financial crisis – lessons for financial 
stability and monetary policy 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at 
the Colloquium in honour of Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central 
Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 20 May 2010. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 Introduction 
The subject of this colloquium – “the great financial crisis”– could be no other since Lucas 
Papademos’ tenure will be remembered for the immense challenges for financial stability and 
monetary policy that have arisen since the trigger of the subprime crisis in 2007. 
Lucas played a key role at both the global and European levels in tackling these challenges. 
He  was  among  those  who  were  prescient  about  the  considerable  build-up  of  risks  in  the 
years  before  the  crisis.  He  placed  significant  efforts  in  developing  and  adapting  financial 
stability  analysis  to  the  fundamental  and  far-reaching  changes  in  the  financial  system  we 
have witnessed in the past decade, particularly as a result of increasing financial integration 
and innovation. When the crisis unfolded, Lucas was one of the foremost policy-makers in 
devising the actions required to stabilise the financial system. He also played a substantial 
part  in  setting  the  ground  for  regulatory  reform,  namely  through  his  participation  in  the 
Financial  Stability  Forum,  later  Board,  and  in  several  European  and  Eurosystem  fora,  a 
number of which he chaired himself. 
I  am  therefore  delighted  that  we  were  able  to  organise  this  colloquium  with  such  a  set  of 
distinguished  speakers,  all  of  which  have  their  exceptional  professional  standing  deeply 
associated with the financial crisis, either as policy-makers, crisis managers, academics or 
proponents of regulatory initiatives. 
My introductory remarks this afternoon are organised around the title of this colloquium. My 
aim is to review policies in the last few years and draw some policy conclusions. I will first 
touch  upon  some  of  the  lessons  for  financial  stability,  where  Lucas’s  contribution  was 
especially important, as responsible for the financial stability function, and then turn to the 
experience with monetary policy. 
Lessons for financial stability 
The financial crisis erupted in August 2007, when off-balance sheet vehicles that had been 
set up by banks to manage portfolios of complex structured credit securities ran into funding 
liquidity problems. Although initially a liquidity squeeze, concerns about counterparty credit 
risks quickly spread as uncertainties intensified about the nature and extent of exposures of 
banks  to  what  we  now  call  “toxic  assets”.  And,  as  we  know,  these  escalating  tensions 
culminated  in  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008,  an  event  which 
triggered an unprecedented surge of volatility across mature-economy financial markets and 
a broad-based decline of asset prices. With this, an adverse feedback between the condition 
of  the  financial  system  and  real  economic  performance  was  unleashed,  contributing  to  a 
sharp economic slowdown across the developed economies. Now we are observing renewed 
tensions, as the costs of supporting financial sectors, fiscal stimulus and automatic stabilisers 
brought the focus to public finances across many countries both within and outside the euro 
area. 
BIS Review 70/2010 
 1
With hindsight, the financial crisis has reminded us that the seeds of financial instability are 
often  the  same:  balance  sheet  mismatches,  high  leverage  (on  or  off  balance  sheets)  and 
very rapid growth of financial institutions. Essentially all of these elements were at play in one 
form or another in this episode. Now what are the lessons for financial stability monitoring 
and assessment frameworks as implemented by the responsible authorities? 
A first observation I would like to make in this respect is, that we, as other central banks, had 
been  drawing  attention  in  our  semi-annual  Financial  Stability  Review,  which  Lucas  was 
overseeing for many years, to the risks that were building up. For at least two years before 
the  turmoil  began,  we  issued  clear  warnings  about  vulnerabilities  that  were  building  up  on 
account  of  an  increasingly  aggressive  hunt  for  yield  which  was  underpinning  significant 
under-pricing  of  risks  across  a  variety  of  asset  classes,  not  only  credit  derivatives.  And,  I 
should also say that, the same warnings were communicated by several other central banks. 
A  second  observation  is  that  in  parallel  with  our  financial  stability  assessments,  we  also 
repeatedly warned euro area governments of the risks of not consolidating fiscal positions in 
accordance with the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
Although  in  many  respects  the  crisis  that  unfolded  in  2007  and  2008  can  be  seen  as  the 
direct  result  of  vulnerabilities  and  imbalances  which  had  been  growing  steadily  and  which 
had  been  identified  fairly  early-on,  they  combined  in  such  ways  that  few  would  have 
anticipated  their  potential  severity  for  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system.  This 
notwithstanding, we and other major central banks reacted swiftly to mitigate the stresses in 
the functioning of money and other affected markets. 
Against this background, to build a safer financial system it is of paramount importance that 
the responsible authorities enhance their financial sector surveillance while at the same time 
financial institutions play a decisive role by enhancing their risk management practices. A key 
challenge for policy-makers will be to design appropriate responses to enhance the stability of 
the  financial  system  –  including  improving  the  detection  and  understanding  of  risks  and 
vulnerabilities and translating these into concrete risk warnings and policy recommendations – 
without imposing restrictions that would unnecessarily hamper financial innovation and reduce 
the efficiency of the system. Many improvements, including the new Basel II Capital Accord, 
were  already  under  way  when  the  crisis  erupted,  and  they  address  several  of  the 
weaknesses that have been identified. However, the ferocity of the financial turmoil and its 
fall-out which spread well beyond the financial sector call for more far-reaching reforms in the 
area of macro-prudential supervision. 
In this context, a key initiative is the proposal for the establishment of a European Systemic 
Risk Board (ESRB), which will be supported analytically and logistically by the ECB and for 
which Lucas has already initiated a lot of groundwork. 
The  ESRB  will  be  an  independent  body  responsible  for  conducting  macro-prudential 
oversight of the EU’s financial system as a whole. Once the legislative process is completed, 
the  creation  of  this  new  European  policy  function  will  fill  a  significant  gap  in  the  ability  to 
detect,  assess  and  ultimately  contain  the  build-up  of  risks.  In  particular,  the  ESRB  will  be 
tasked to collect information relevant for systemic risk from across the EU. This should help 
overcome  the  significant  information  gaps  which  have  hindered  a  comprehensive  risk 
surveillance  thus  far,  for  instance  with  regard  to  the  interlinkages  among  the  major  cross-
border financial institutions. 
The  ESRB  should  be  seen  as  the  component  of  a  global  framework  of  macro-prudential 
oversight.  This  should  support  its  effectiveness  by  also  allowing  it  to  contribute  to  the 
assessment  and  containment  of  global  risks,  which  in  turn  may  also  contribute  to  the 
mitigation  of  risks  in  Europe.  The  Financial  Stability  Board,  the  IMF,  as  well  as  national 
authorities,  are  all  actively  engaged  in  the  development  of  a  comprehensive  framework  of 
macro-prudential  supervision,  which  also  takes  into  account  the  risks  arising  from 
systemically important financial institutions. The crisis demonstrated that only internationally 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2010
coordinated initiatives are truly effective in addressing risks and vulnerabilities in the closely 
integrated financial system. 
Lessons for monetary policy 
With regard to monetary policy, in many respects recent events have served to confirm the 
approach  adopted  by  the  ECB  since  the  outset  of  Monetary  Union  in  1999.  Most 
fundamentally,  the  primacy  of  price  stability  as  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  has  been 
confirmed.  Indeed,  at  times  of  financial  stress,  the  credible  maintenance  of  price  stability 
becomes  even  more  important.  Were  the  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  to  weaken, 
financial market tensions would intensify further and corrective measures would prove less 
effective. Moreover, our recent experience of financial crisis – with its roots in the evolution of 
bank  balance  sheets,  and  thus  monetary  and  credit  developments  –  has  vindicated  in  my 
view the importance attached by the Governing Council to a close and regular monitoring of 
the monetary data. 
In the design of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy, it was always foreseen that the close 
monitoring  of  monetary  developments  would  provide  a  framework  for  policy  makers  to 
consider  asset  price  developments  and  potential  misalignments.  Responding  to  monetary 
and credit dynamics as part of a comprehensive assessment of the risks to price stability in 
the medium term implies that interest rate decisions will tend to “lean against” accumulating 
financial  imbalances  and  asset  price  misalignments.  Recent  research  provides  a  vastly 
enriched framework for conducting such monitoring in a systematic fashion, and offers a real 
possibility that asset price disequilibria and associated financial distress may be identified at 
an early enough stage for corrective measures to be taken by the policy authorities. Further 
development  of  this  framework  promises  to  support  financial  and  macroeconomic  stability, 
within an overall strategy focused on achievement of our primary objective: price stability. 
Such  considerations,  in  concert  with  the  development  of  a  new  framework  for  macro-
prudential oversight, should permit to reduce the frequency, duration and economic impact of 
financial crises. These are themes that will be discussed in depth in the course of today’s 
colloquium. We  have  to  make  sure  that  the  global  financial  system, as  well  as continental 
and national ones, are made much more resilient. Yet, it would be unrealistic to believe that 
financial  crises  can  be  eliminated.  Recent  experience  has  also  demonstrated  the  need  for 
central  banks  to  be  timely  and  agile  in  managing  financial  crises  without  ever  –  in  any 
circumstances – losing their sense of the medium to long-term orientation to price stability. 
As regards the ECB, in the face of financial crisis, monetary policy was eased significantly 
through  conventional  means  in  late  2008  and  early  2009,  with  key  interest  rates  being 
reduced significantly. 
Moreover, non-standard measures, in the form of the ECB’s enhanced credit support were 
introduced.  These  aimed  at  maintaining  an  efficient  transmission  of  monetary  policy  by 
supporting market functioning. Such measures were instrumental in the maintenance of price 
stability, since, in the face of downside risks to price stability, they ensured that the easing of 
the monetary policy stance was transmitted into a broader easing of financing conditions. In 
particular, the ECB expanded scope for central bank intermediation of transactions between 
banks, thereby offering an alternative to the malfunctioning private inter-bank money market. 
At  the  same  time,  the  measures  supported  financial  stability  objectives  by  containing  and 
mitigating the systemic consequences of liquidity tensions in the money market. 
To conclude, let me say a few words on the recent decisions of the Governing Council taken 
on 9 May and announced on 10 May. As I already said publicly, I will sum up in five points 
the Governing Council’s position. 
1.  
The  ECB  is  fiercely  independent  and  takes  all  its  decisions  independently  of 
governments, social partners and pressure groups of any nature. 
BIS Review 70/2010 
 3
2.  
3.  
4.  
5.  
We  are  inflexibly  attached  to  price  stability,  our  primary  mandate.  Our  successful 
track record since the inception of the euro is remarkable. 
Our present monetary policy stance is appropriate. Our decisions taken on 9 May 
have confirmed it. We are not engaging in any form of “quantitative easing”. 
The “Securities Markets Programme” is designed to ensure an effective functioning 
of 
to  resolve  a 
malfunctioning of some segments of the euro area debt securities markets. 
The  liquidity  provided  through  this  programme  is  withdrawn  in  its  entirety  through 
tenders of term deposits. 
transmission  mechanism  by  helping 
the  monetary  policy 
Conclusion 
I would like to end my remarks by acknowledging the outstanding contribution that Lucas has 
made to the conduct of monetary policy and the safeguarding of financial stability in these 
demanding and historic times, as I have just described. I cannot stress enough the important 
role he has played at the ECB, as well as in Europe and globally, to successfully ensure the 
sound pursuance of these essential policies, ultimately for the benefit and well-being of the 
societies and citizens which we serve. We are all very grateful to Lucas. 
4 
 BIS Review 70/2010
