Thomas Jordan: The Swiss banking sector and the next steps in 
resolving the “too big to fail” issue 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the 
Swiss National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Geneva, 17 June 2010. 
 Introduction 
A year ago, the financial system was still in an extremely fragile state. Crisis management 
was  at  the  centre  of  our  efforts.  Yet  even  then,  we  were  emphasising  the  urgent  need  to 
alleviate the “too big to fail” issue. Much has happened since that time. The financial sector, 
hit hard by the crisis, has recovered considerably, and on a national and international level, 
politicians, supervisory authorities and central banks are working intensively to ease the “too 
big to fail” issue. The goal is clear: in future, the public and the taxpayer should not have to 
shoulder the responsibility for rescuing banks. 
Based on our latest Financial Stability Report, I would like to review first the situation in the 
banking sector, and second, the next steps in resolving the “too big to fail” issue. 
Conditions in the Swiss banking sector 
Conditions in the Swiss banking sector have improved. Following a catastrophic 2008, the 
situation at UBS stabilised over the course of last year. With regard to Credit Suisse, it is now 
even  possible  to  speak  of  a  return  to  normal.  Large-scale  support  measures  deployed  by 
governments and central banks played an essential role in ensuring that the global economy, 
the financial markets and thus also the banks recovered sooner and more vigorously than 
had been anticipated a year ago. For the banking sector alone, the major industrial nations 
committed  funds  amounting  to  almost  20%  of  gross  domestic  product.  As  a  result  of  the 
different  measures  to  support  the  economy  and  the  banking  sector,  there  has  been  a 
considerable  rise  in  the  indebtedness  of  many  countries,  and  also,  in  some  countries,  in 
sovereign credit risk. 
The  international  big  banks  –  including  the  Swiss  big  banks  –  benefited  substantially  from 
these support measures, and were able to increase their profitability in 2009. At the same 
time,  the  Swiss  big  banks  reduced  their  balance  sheets  by  approximately  a  quarter. 
Compared  to  the  previous  year,  their  capital  situation  improved  substantially.  Their  risk-
weighted  capital  ratios,  in  particular,  have  increased  markedly,  and  are  high  also  by 
international  standards.  This  is  a  very  positive  development.  However,  it  should  not  be 
allowed to conceal the fact that the leverage of both big banks is still high – both per se and 
when  compared  with  banks  in  other  countries.  The  big  banks  are  still  a  long  way  from 
meeting  the  leverage  target  that  will  apply  in  Switzerland  from  2013.  With  this  in  mind,  a 
further  strengthening  of  the  capital  situation  and  –  in  conjunction  with  this  –  a  further 
realignment of the business model in order to achieve sustainable profitability, are still central 
challenges facing the big banks. 
The profitability and the capital situation of the banks with a domestic business focus – the 
cantonal,  regional  and  Raiffeisen  banks  –  were  significantly  higher  in  2009  than  the  long-
term average. The dip in GDP from mid-2008 to mid-2009 has so far barely had any effect on 
these banks, with the result that the provisioning requirement for credit risk continued at a 
low level in 2009. Nevertheless, in our estimation, the position of these bank categories is 
less  comfortable  than  may  appear  at  first  glance.  First  of  all,  the  capital  situation  of  the 
Raiffeisen banks and the state-guaranteed cantonal banks needs to be put into perspective: 
the Raiffeisen banks can count the additional funding obligation required of members in the 
BIS Review 85/2010 
 1
cooperative  as  capital  until  the  end  of  2011,  and  the  cantonal  banks  are  entitled  to  a 
reduction  in  required  capital  due  to  the  state  guarantee.  In  the  absence  of  these 
concessions, the capital ratios – particularly for the Raiffeisen banks – would be markedly 
lower. Second, according to our assessment, the risk exposure of the domestically focused 
banks is higher now than it was in 2009. For one thing, the interest rate risk of cantonal and 
Raiffeisen banks is at historically high levels. For another, the sharp increase in loan volumes 
– especially for mortgages – against a backdrop of persistent economic uncertainty and the 
substantial rise in real estate prices points to higher credit risk. In addition, for first mortgages 
on residential properties, banks are required to have less capital backing under Basel II than 
they did under Basel I – before 2007 (i.e. under Basel I), a mortgage had to be backed with 
4.0%  capital;  since  then  (i.e.  under  Basel  II),  that  figure  is  only  2.8%.  This  not  only  gives 
banks  an  incentive  to  grant  more  mortgages,  but  also  enables  them  to  reduce  the  capital 
buffer used to absorb loan losses.  
In view of the increased interest rate and credit risk, we urge the domestically focused banks 
to be prudent. They must be prepared for interest rates to rise. Besides the direct effect on 
the interest rate margin, particular attention also needs to be given to the indirect effect of an 
interest rate increase, namely that if loans are granted without sufficient attention being paid 
to borrowers’ financial situations, a rise in the interest rate will inevitably result in higher loan 
losses.  As  I  have  mentioned,  the  domestically  focused  banks  are  well  capitalised  by 
historical standards. But in view of the risks and uncertainty, they will also need to maintain a 
large capital buffer. 
The  jump  in  domestic  mortgage  lending  and  in  property  prices  in  an  environment  of 
historically low interest rates prompted us in the first quarter of this year to conduct a survey 
among  the  major  banks  in  the  Swiss  mortgage  industry.  We  must  not  forget  the  lessons 
learned from previous crises. The property bubble of the 1990s, with its dire consequences 
for the Swiss banking sector, but also the most recent example – the sub-prime crisis – serve 
to remind us that adverse developments in the mortgage market can threaten the stability of 
the  banking  system,  and  are  thus  deserving  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank’s  (SNB)  fullest 
attention. The results of the survey give no cause to sound the all-clear. These may show 
that there was no relaxation of internal lending standards by the banks between 2005 and 
2009,  but  for  banks  with  a  significant  overall  market  share  these  standards  lack 
conservatism.  More  than  a  few  banks,  for  instance,  are  determining  the  affordability  of  a 
mortgage loan based on an interest rate which is at a historically low level. In addition, based 
on  statements  made  by  survey  participants,  in  practice,  deviations  from  internal  lending 
standards  occur  frequently:  banks  with  a  market  share  of  almost  25%  reported  such 
“exceptions  to  policy”  for  more  than  20%  of  new  mortgage  loans  granted  in  2009. 
Furthermore, the banks provided only incomplete data on their actual lending practices. This 
could  be  a  sign  that  some  banks  are  inadequately  informed  of  the  risks  in  their  mortgage 
portfolios.  
The SNB is treating this issue as a high priority, and will continue to monitor the mortgage 
market carefully. We will analyse the risks in greater detail – in close cooperation with FINMA 
and the banks themselves – and examine whether there is a need for action. In any case, 
caution should be exercised in lending. When assessing affordability, it must be taken into 
account that interest rates are, by historical standards, exceptionally low. It is essential that 
loan-to-value ratios be set conservatively, especially for regions and property types that have 
seen prices rise sharply in recent years.  
Outlook 
We expect the global economy to continue recovering this year. This recovery, however, is 
fragile,  for  it  has  until  now  been  based  largely  on  the  support  measures  deployed  by 
governments  and  central  banks.  Uncertainty  is  still  at  an  above-average  level.  Downside 
risks have gone up again in recent months due to the financing difficulties faced by some 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2010
European  countries.  Urgently  needed  cost-cutting  measures  and  rising  risk  premia  could 
jeopardise the recovery and trigger another lengthy period of higher credit default rates, and 
even renewed turbulence on the financial markets. A development of this kind would present 
the  Swiss  banking  sector  with  a  serious  challenge:  besides  an  economic  slowdown  and  a 
slump  in  the  financial  markets,  a  further  destabilising  influence  could  be  the  spread  of 
problems throughout the global banking system. Thus indirect risks pose a serious threat to 
Swiss  banks,  even  if  direct  risks  –  measured  by  the  direct  claims  on  those  countries 
particularly affected until now – are moderate. In this climate, it seems inappropriate to us 
that banks increase their appetite for risk. 
Reforming the regulatory framework / “too big to fail” 
A year ago, we emphasised the urgency of alleviating the “too big to fail” issue. Where do we 
stand today? Allow me to state clearly right now: the “too big to fail” issue will not resolve 
itself. Last year, the big banks significantly reduced their balance sheets – a move explicitly 
welcomed by the SNB. The “too big to be rescued” issue has thus also receded somewhat. 
However,  there  has  been  hardly  any  alleviation  of  the  “too  big  to  fail”  issue.  Big  bank 
liabilities, which at the end of 2008 were still almost six times Swiss GDP, were reduced by 
the end of 2009 to just over four times GDP. Nevertheless, the big banks’ share of markets 
relevant to the Swiss economy – and hence their systemic importance – remains just as high 
as before: the big banks grant a third of domestic loans and hold a third of domestic deposits. 
In  other  words,  Switzerland  is  still vulnerable,  and  the  need  for  action  remains  great.  This 
opinion is shared by the commission of experts appointed by the Federal Council on “Limiting 
the  economic  risks  posed  by  large  companies”,  of  which  I  am  Vice  Chairman.  It  is  the 
commission’s  assessment  that  in  their  current  form  and  size,  the  big  banks  are  clearly 
systemically important. 
The commission of experts published its interim report at the end of April. The “too big to fail” 
issue  is  to  be  addressed  through  a  package  of  key  measures  encompassing  special 
requirements  for  systemically  important  banks  in  the  areas  of  capital,  liquidity  and 
organisational structure. These key measures are compatible with the approach discussed 
by the Financial Stability Board. Besides those proposed by the commission of experts, other 
measures being considered at the international level include the breaking-up of big banks, 
the  prohibition  of  certain  activities such  as  proprietary  trading,  and  the  taxation  of  balance 
sheets and transactions. 
The SNB fully supports the proposals put forward by the commission of experts to date. The 
overall  direction  is  correct.  What  is  important  now  are  the  details  of  the  measures.  Our 
position is clear. It is essential that capital requirements be significantly increased and that 
they rise in line with the degree of systemic importance of a bank. This is the only way to 
ensure that the banks internalise the risks which, until now, they have been able to pass on 
to  the  general  public,  to  some  extent.  Moreover,  progressive  capital  requirements  should 
create  an  incentive  for  banks  to  reduce  their  systemic  importance,  with  its  associated  risk 
potential.  
Allow  me  to  point  out  that  the  tightening  of  capital  regulations  and  the  introduction  of  a 
leverage  ratio  that  occurred  at  the  end  of  2008  were  not  aimed  at  reducing  the  systemic 
importance  of  the  big  banks  to  an  acceptable  level.  These  measures  were  much  more  a 
response to regulatory shortcomings revealed by the recent crisis, which were insufficiently 
conservative backing of risk with capital (particularly in the trading book) and the lack of a 
countercyclical  component  in  capital  requirements.  As  regards  more  stringent  liquidity 
requirements  for  systemically  important  banks,  specific  measures  have  already  been 
implemented.  The  liquidity  requirements  have  been  thoroughly  revised  by  FINMA  and  the 
SNB in collaboration with the big banks, and will come into effect at the end of this month. 
The  final  key  measure,  which  is  aimed  at  organisational  structure,  is  also  important.  The 
organisation and legal structure of systemically important banks must be adapted to ensure 
BIS Review 85/2010 
 3
that an orderly liquidation is possible should it become necessary. In particular, it must be 
possible for systemically important functions to be maintained without the bank as a whole 
having  to  be  rescued.  Clearly,  this  is  not  easy  to  achieve.  The  implementation  of  this 
measure must take into account the challenges posed by the considerable complexity and 
cross-border activities of the big banks. It must be credible and robust – both operationally 
and legally. An unworkable approach in this area could have fatal consequences in the next 
crisis.  
The SNB will continue pushing hard for a genuine alleviation of the “too big to fail” issue. We 
are  confident  that  the  banks  in  the  commission  of  experts  will  continue  to  cooperate 
constructively on achieving a solution. We are aware that, for the big banks, the regulatory 
measures being discussed are associated with costs. However, first of all, these costs are 
primarily  a  reflection  of  the  fact  that  a  subsidy  in  the  form  of  a  de  facto  “too  big  to  fail” 
guarantee will be reduced. Yet since the cost to the taxpayer is reduced to the same extent, 
this  does  not  constitute  a  cost  to  the  economy  as  a  whole.  And  second,  alternative 
measures,  such  as  the  prohibition  of  business  activities,  would  be  associated  with 
considerably higher costs for the banks. In addition, we are convinced that, in the long term, 
the big banks will also benefit from more stringent regulatory requirements. The most recent 
crisis  showed  that  a  stable  financial  system  is  a  basic  prerequisite  for  the  long-term 
competitiveness of our financial centre. This is particularly true of  wealth management, an 
important line of business for Swiss banks. Consequently, an appropriate solution to the “too 
big  to  fail”  issue  in  Switzerland  could  strengthen  our  banking  system  in  the  long  term  and 
ensure that it is well placed strategically. 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2010
