Alan Bollard: The crisis and monetary policy – what we learned and 
where we are going 
Address  by  Dr  Alan  Bollard,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the 
Canterbury Employers’ Chamber of Commerce, Christchurch, 29 January 2010. 
 Background paper by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor, and Mr Felix Delbruck, Economics Department, Reserve Bank 
of New Zealand. 
Introduction 
1. 
Inflation targeting is a monetary policy framework that was developed in response to the high 
inflation  and  macroeconomic  instability  of  the  1970s  and  1980s.  Twenty  years  ago,  New 
Zealand was the first country to formally adopt key elements of this approach – such as an 
explicit inflation target and various accountability and monitoring structures – in the Reserve 
Bank Act 1989. The framework has been durable, even as we’ve continued to learn how the 
economy works and continued to adapt and refine the way we do monetary policy. 
The past two decades have included one of the longest periods of growth that New Zealand 
has  seen  in  decades,  as  well  as  droughts,  migration  shocks,  terms  of  trade  changes,  an 
Asian crisis, a dot-com boom and bust, and, most recently, the worst global economic and 
financial  crisis  seen  in  generations.  This  speech  looks  back  over  those  two  decades  of 
inflation  targeting  to  see  what  lessons  we  can  draw  from  these  experiences,  as  well  as 
outlining some of the challenges ahead.  
Assessing two decades of learning 
2. 
The framework we put in place in 1989 and refined in the following two decades has now 
been adopted in its main features by over 20 countries. In looking back, I will focus on the 
New Zealand experience, but the main conclusions I draw are not unique to New Zealand. I 
will  argue  that  inflation  targeting  has  done  well  on  the  price  stability  front,  and  has  given 
central  banks  a  lot  of  flexibility  in  helping  steer  the  economy  through  turbulent  waters. 
However, in itself, it has not guaranteed balanced growth or macroeconomic stability. Other 
factors matter: neutral fiscal policies, monetary settings in the major global economies, and a 
stable  financial  system.  It  is  in  the  interplay  of  the  financial  system  and  macroeconomic 
stability that most learning will need to be done in the coming years. 
Price stability has been broadly achieved  
In terms of what it was directly designed to achieve, namely price stability, inflation targeting 
has  been  a  success.  Consider  the  range  of  conditions  under  which  inflation  has  been 
contained  within  a  fairly  narrow  range.  These  include  an  early  period  of  restructuring,  a 
“benign” period of rising global integration and rapid growth in information technology, where 
energy prices were low and the costs of a wide range of manufactured goods were falling 
rapidly;  a  challenging  period  of  sharply  rising  commodity  and  asset  prices  in  the  past  few 
years; and the extreme ructions of the global financial crisis. This can be seen from figure 1, 
which shows New Zealand CPI inflation since 1980, as well as a survey measure of 2-year 
ahead inflation expectations. In particular, while inflation expectations crept up in the boom 
years,  and  fell  back  sharply  in  late  2008  as  the  financial  crisis  hit,  they  have  remained 
well-anchored across that time period. 
New Zealand inflation and surveyed inflation expectations 
Figure 1 
Source: Statistics NZ, RBNZ 
 Inflation targeting has supported, but not guaranteed, macroeconomic stability  
In  taming  inflation  expectations,  the  inflation  targeting  framework  has  removed  a  major 
source of economic volatility. It has also allowed for active macroeconomic stabilisation in a 
broader  sense.  Most  notably,  once  the  global  financial  crisis  hit,  we  were  able  to  respond 
with significant policy easing swiftly, cutting the OCR by more than 5 percentage points and 
providing banks with emergency liquidity at rates consistent with the OCR, at a time when 
the international wholesale funding markets were severely impaired. We were able to provide 
this  degree  of  support  because  the  inflation  targeting  framework  allowed  for  a  flexible 
response, and inflation expectations were well anchored.  
However,  the  extent  of  the  financial  crisis  makes  it  clear  that  inflation  targeting  monetary 
policy has not been sufficient to guarantee comprehensive macroeconomic stability. Recall 
the  decade  or  so  from  the  second  half  of  the  1990s  to  the  late  2000s  that  many 
commentators  called  the  “Great  Moderation”  or  the  “Goldilocks”  economy,  when  many 
economies experienced an extraordinarily long stretch of unbroken strong growth. Even then, 
we continued to see large movements in commodity prices, house prices, interest rates, and 
exchange  rates.  There  were  also  significant  shifts  in  the  composition  of  growth,  from  the 
traded to the non-traded sector, and big increases in household and external indebtedness. 
Some of these changes were structural, such as the rise in the global demand for agricultural 
and other commodities from the late 1990s onward, or the surge in migration to New Zealand 
in the early 2000s. Some of the price movements were beneficial in helping the New Zealand 
economy  adjust  to  those  changing  conditions.  But  we  also  saw  growing  economic 
imbalances, and the commodity and asset price rises in the years leading up to the financial 
crisis were among the hardest challenges faced by central banks over the past 20 years.  
From 2004 to 2008, international oil prices quadrupled in US dollar terms. What was the best 
way  to  respond  to  this  development?  Should  we  continue  to  let  the  direct  inflation 
consequences  of  the  shock  pass  through  (as  we  would  do  with  a  more  temporary  price 
shock),  or  should  we  try  to  offset  them  with  higher  policy  rates?  This  was  a  very  delicate 
balancing  act,  made  more  difficult  by  uncertainty  around  what  level  of  oil  prices  was 
ultimately sustainable. In the event, we monitored a wide range of indicators, including “core” 
2 
 
BIS Review 10/2010
inflation  measures  and  inflation  expectations.  Despite  significant  rises  in  short-term  CPI 
forecasts, these underlying inflation trends remained relatively stable, so that we were largely 
able to “look through” the oil price spike and set policy appropriately for a changing growth 
outlook in 2008.  
The  rise  in  house  prices  posed  an  even  greater  challenge.  When  any  asset  price  rises 
sharply in the context of subdued overall inflation, monetary policy needs to decide whether 
to  raise  interest  rates  now  –  even  though  inflation  pressures  are  subdued  –  to  prevent 
potential  asset  bubbles  that  might  have  deleterious  consequences  later.  In  New  Zealand, 
while we do not “target” house prices, we have been able to identify a clear link between the 
housing market and broader household spending, and have therefore always monitored the 
housing  market  as  an  important  indicator  for  the  inflation  outlook.  However,  in  an 
environment  of  low  perceived  risk, willing  capital  markets, and  widespread  expectations  of 
capital gains, short-term interest rates turned out to have only limited leverage over housing 
activity.  The  difficulty  was  exacerbated  by  a  tax  system  which  favoured  investment  in 
housing,  and  by  expansionary  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies  in  the  major  global 
economies which fuelled a global carry trade. Thus the NZ dollar appreciated while mortgage 
rates remained relatively low until quite late in the piece (figure 2).  
Figure 2 
OCR and effective mortgage rate  
Source: RBNZ 
 The grass is not always greener 
For all the difficulties we faced, as we look back, we can see that alternative monetary policy 
frameworks would not have provided the flexibility that we had to navigate these waters, and 
may  in  fact  have  made  it  harder  to  maintain  price  stability  while  avoiding  unnecessary 
volatility in the wider economy. This is particularly clear if we think about policy approaches 
that target the exchange rate in one way or another. 
Consider an ANZAC dollar. The NZ dollar has fallen by over 10 percent against the AU dollar 
since 2006, a period in which Australia experienced an unprecedented minerals boom and 
very  strong  growth.  If  our  currency  had  been  pegged  to  the  AU  dollar,  New  Zealand’s 
exchange  rate  to  the  rest  of  the  world  would  have  been  higher,  interest  rates  would  have 
risen  three  times  already,  and  our  recession  would  probably  have  been  deeper.  The 
argument  is  even  stronger  for  other  currencies,  such  as  the  US  dollar.  Australia  and  New 
Zealand are not the same, but we are far more similar to each other than to Europe or the 
US. If our currency had been pegged to the US dollar over the past decade, interest rates 
would  have  been  lower  for  longer  in  2003  and  2004,  exacerbating  the  housing  boom 
(figure 3).  Some  of  the  challenges  of  a  currency  union  can  now  be  seen  in  Euro  area 
economies such as Ireland, Greece and Spain, where monetary policy settings have been 
unable to lean against unsustainable domestic booms, or against the deep recessions that 
followed.  
Figure 3 
Policy interest rates in NZ, the US, and Australia 
Source: Bloomberg 
Figure 4 
GDP growth in Euro area economies 
Source: DataStream 
4 
 
  BIS Review 10/2010
Singapore’s  monetary  policy  regime  is  sometimes  pointed  to  as  an  alternative  to  inflation 
targeting that has maintained stability in the currency while achieving a track record of low 
and  stable  inflation.  Over  the  past  two  years,  of  course,  this  has  not  been  the  case,  with 
inflation approaching 8 percent in 2008 and prices falling in 2009. Over a longer period, it 
does  appear  that  Singapore  has  generally  managed  to  guide  its  exchange  rate  to  keep 
inflation  stable.  But  a  range  of  special  factors  made  this  possible  –  Singapore’s 
extraordinarily  high  trade  ratio,  its  large  stock  of  domestic  savings  and  foreign  exchange 
reserves,  and  a  range  of  supplementary  stabilisation  instruments  and  capital  controls.  In 
particular,  in  New  Zealand,  with  its  much  larger  non-traded  sector,  a  Singaporean  regime 
might potentially have required greater swings in the exchange rate than we actually saw to 
achieve similar inflation outcomes. 
Global policies, the tax system and financial stability also matter 
A  lesson  from  this  period  is  that  while  monetary  policy  can  always  achieve  price  stability, 
whether this occurs in the context of balanced growth also depends on other factors. As the 
housing boom has shown, these factors include global policy settings and the structure of the 
tax system.  
Looking back over two years of crisis, perhaps the key lesson is that financial stability cannot 
be ignored when thinking about macroeconomic stability and the conduct of monetary policy. 
We’ve been reminded that financial system developments have the potential to complicate 
monetary policy enormously, and that stable prices do not guarantee a sound and efficient 
financial system – well-functioning financial markets and soundly managed institutions which 
make decisions based on a long-term outlook for earnings. In some economies such as the 
US, financial system dysfunction during the crisis rendered the standard monetary policy tool 
partially or wholly ineffective as spreads blew out and policy rates hit the zero lower bound. 
We,  too,  have  had  to  take  into  account  movements  in  financial  market  spreads and  credit 
rationing  in  our  policy  deliberations  over  the  past  year,  to  an  extent  we  would  not  have 
envisaged a decade ago. And the crisis has shown what enormous macroeconomic damage 
can  result  if  financial  market  participants  do  not  adequately  price  and  manage  financial 
system risks.  
Stabilising the economy in the future 
3. 
Inflation targeting has proven to be a monetary policy framework that combines the discipline 
of focus that is needed to ensure a stable level of prices, with an operational flexibility that 
enables the economy to better cope with a wide range of shocks. But as we have seen, it 
has  not  eliminated  economic  imbalances  or  liberated  central  banks  from  difficult  tradeoffs. 
Can we do better, and can those tradeoffs be made easier in future?  
We know that the difficulty of our job ahead will in part depend on policy choices made by the 
major  global  players  as  they  exit  from  current  stimulatory  policy  settings.  As  the  world 
emerges from recession, central bankers around the world are weighing the need to provide 
ongoing  support  for  a  very  fragile  recovery  against  the  need  to  be  ready  for  more  normal 
conditions. This will be yet another delicate balancing act, made more complex in economies 
like  the  US  by  the  need  to  unwind  “quantitative  easing”,  and  other  unconventional  policy 
support measures. At the same time, choices will need to be made about when to withdraw 
fiscal stimulus. Unlike the synchronised policy easing that we saw in late 2008, the removal 
of  stimulus  will  occur  at  different  times  in  different  parts  of  the  world,  reflecting  different 
recovery  paths.  Australia  has  already  embarked  on  the  exit  road,  the  United  States  and 
Europe are still at the door.  
How  deftly  this  process  of  normalisation  is  handled  will  be  crucial  to  whether  the  global 
economy  recovers  in  a  balanced  way,  and  how  stable  recovery  is  likely  to  be  in 
New Zealand. If US monetary policy settings remain too easy for too long, and if exchange 
rates in China and the big surplus economies remain low even in the face of a dramatically 
improved economic outlook, we will risk facing conditions similar to those during the years 
leading up to the crisis: abundant global liquidity searching for returns in the wrong places, 
feeding  unsustainable  asset  booms  and  growing  economic  imbalances.  Against  this  is  the 
risk  of  a  slower,  more  fragile  recovery.  It  will  be  some  years  before  we  can  judge  how 
appropriate this normalisation has been. 
The difficulty of our job will also depend on the wider domestic policy context. In particular, 
achieving both low inflation and balanced growth is considerably easier in an environment of 
fiscal discipline, and where the tax system is neutral with respect to households’ and firms’ 
investment decisions. In this respect, a failure to gradually remove the recent fiscal stimulus 
would put added pressure on monetary policy over the coming period. We are also hopeful 
that the recently released report of the Tax Working Group will lead to a more efficient and 
even-handed tax system. Tax policy is complex and needs to meet multiple objectives. Our 
concerns are to minimise tax-fuelled property investment and consumption that might detract 
from more balanced savings and growth.  
Another important part of the domestic policy context is our financial policy framework. A lot 
of work is being done in this space internationally. Central banks, financial regulatory bodies, 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the Financial Stability Board are working 
out ways to strengthen and improve the prudential supervision of financial institutions. This 
includes  raising  the  quantity  and  quality  of  minimum  capital  buffers  held  by  banks,  and 
improving  the  resilience  of  banks  to  liquidity  shocks.  It  includes  measures  to  make  banks 
easier to restructure and unwind should they become insolvent. Financial regulators are also 
working on designing a “macro-prudential” architecture for bank regulation. This essentially 
means  taking  into  account  the  impact  of  individual  banks  on  the  riskiness  of  the  financial 
system as  a whole. For example, a large systemically important bank needs larger capital 
buffers than a smaller player. Similarly, larger buffers may need to be built up in boom times, 
when banks are more vulnerable to a systemic downturn. 
In New Zealand, the financial system is a lot simpler than in other parts of the OECD, and 
has not seen the same types of excesses. Nevertheless we have taken steps to make our 
banks  more  resilient  to  financial  system  shocks.  In  implementing  the  Basel  II  capital 
framework,  we  have  ensured  that  banks’  assessment  of  risk  is  based  on  a  “through-the-
cycle” approach rather than just on the period of recent growth. We have also put in place a 
new prudential liquidity policy for banks which is intended to make the system less vulnerable 
to a drying up of international funding markets, such as we saw in late 2008 and early 2009.  
Can  prudential  instruments  such  as  minimum  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  also  help 
monetary policy? This depends on the link between those instruments and bank funding and 
lending, and also between bank lending and the behaviour of housing and other asset prices. 
In the case of housing, the link between mortgage lending and market prices is fairly clear. 
What  is  less  clear  is  the  extent  to  which  the  instruments  themselves  may  constrain  bank 
lending and housing demand in an emerging boom.  
At this stage, we believe that the new liquidity policy and in particular the Core Funding Ratio 
could usefully contribute to the monetary policy task by limiting the banks’ ability to fuel credit 
growth using cheap and plentiful short-term wholesale funding during boom periods, as was 
the case from 2003 to 2007. In this respect, the Core Funding Ratio could potentially act as 
an automatic stabiliser and reduce the required hikes in the OCR during economic upturns. 
The  role  for  a  macro-oriented  minimum  capital  requirement  in  promoting  macro-financial 
stability (as opposed to individual bank resilience), and also assisting monetary policy, is less 
clear.  The  relationship  between  capital  requirements  and  loan  pricing  is  highly  uncertain, 
particularly as the large lenders in New Zealand (as elsewhere) target capital holdings well in 
excess of current regulatory minima.  
At best, these instruments could supplement the role of the OCR, but will not fundamentally 
alter it. Ideally, they would change the mix of monetary conditions and take some pressure 
6 
 
BIS Review 10/2010
off the exchange rate. Overall monetary conditions would still need to be set appropriately to 
keep inflation stable.  
We must also be realistic about the learning that still needs to be done in the macro-financial 
area.  Central  banks  do  not  yet  understand  enough  about  the  properties  of  prudential 
instruments to use them as an adjustable policy lever, and doing so could raise coordination 
issues between monetary policy and prudential policy decisions. More broadly, economists 
have a relatively good understanding of inflation and the real economy, but the unknowns are 
much greater when we try to model macro-financial variables. We still have much to learn 
about  how  price  stability  and  financial  stability  outcomes  move  together,  about  the 
relationship of CPI and asset price inflation, and about the interplay of credit and economic 
activity.  
As a small, flexible and full-service central bank, the Reserve Bank is in a good position to be 
at the forefront of progress in integrated macro-financial policy design. We have joint price 
and financial stability objectives and joint powers to achieve these objectives. Our prudential 
supervision, financial market and payments system functions provide us with useful skills and 
information to draw on. But we need to be cautious about what we claim to understand and 
what we can influence. 
Conclusions 
4. 
The  inflation  targeting  framework  has  performed  its  primary  task  reasonably  well  over  two 
decades,  achieving  price  stability  through  both  good  and  bad  times.  While  it  has  been  in 
place,  inflation  expectations  have  remained  anchored,  and  it  has  proven  flexible  in 
responding to rapidly changing economic conditions. Major alternatives that dilute the focus 
on  medium-term  inflation  and  target  other  macroeconomic  outcomes  would  risk  reducing 
confidence in the future level of prices and would have led to worse overall outcomes at key 
points over the past 20 years.  
Nevertheless, price stability alone is not sufficient to ensure a stable and balanced economy. 
For that to work best, we need to maintain a flexible approach to monetary policy. But we 
also  need  a  conducive  global  financial  environment,  and  support  from  other  domestic 
economic and financial policies that have a bearing on asset markets and financial leverage. 
We need to be realistic. The world is not ours to influence, and it is unlikely to offer us perfect 
conditions. But in New Zealand, we will be seeking less distortion from future tax policy, and 
an increased macro-orientation of prudential policy.  
