Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Towards the next phase of growth for 
Islamic banking and finance – a new paradigm for Asia and the Middle East 
Opening  remarks  by  HE  Rasheed  Mohammed  Al  Maraj,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Bahrain, at the 1st Annual World Islamic Banking Conference: Asia Summit 2010, Singapore, 
14 June 2010. 
 Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:  
I should like to thank His Excellency Minister Lim for his kind words of introduction and His 
Excellency Heng Swee Keat, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore for 
his kind invitation to participate in this landmark event. 
The World Islamic Banking Conference has become an established part of the calendar in 
Bahrain. Last year’s conference was the 16th to be held in the Kingdom. 2009 also saw the 
WIBC  broaden  its  scope  with  its  first  European  Summit  which  was  held  in  London.  The 
present  Summit,  the  first  of  its  kind  to  be  held  in  Asia,  is  evidence  of  the  growing 
geographical scope of Islamic finance which has emerged from being a niche industry to one 
that has moved into the financial mainstream. 
The choice of Singapore as the host for the WIBC’s first Asian Summit marks a further step 
in  the  globalization  of  Islamic  finance.  Singapore’s  historical  role  as  a  bridge  in  the  trade 
routes linking Arabia, South Asia and South East Asia make it an appropriate venue for such 
a Summit. Moreover, with its strong infrastructure and reputation for sound and transparent 
regulation I am sure Singapore will have an increasingly important role to play in the future 
development of Islamic finance. 
The theme of this Session is the Next Phase of Growth for Islamic Banking and Finance. The 
current phase has certainly been very impressive. From its beginnings a little over 30 years 
ago,  Islamic  finance  has  grown  to  become  an  industry  –  according  to  some  estimates  – 
which amounts to one trillion dollars in assets. Retail banking has been a particularly strong 
driver of the industry’s growth. Interest in Islamic finance has spread from the Middle East 
and  South  East  Asia  to  Europe,  Russia,  the  Central  Asian  Republics,  China,  and  Africa. 
Islamic finance is now a genuinely global phenomenon. 
In  Bahrain  we  have  seen  a  similar  pattern  of  strong  growth.  Since  first  licensing  Bahrain 
Islamic Bank in 1978 the sector has grown dramatically. By the year 2000 the assets of the 
Islamic banks had reached two billion dollars. Last year they stood at 26 billion dollars. The 
market share of Islamic banks has increased from 1.8 percent of total banking assets to over 
11  percent  in  the  same  period.  The  story  of  the  Shari’a  compliant  insurance  and  asset 
management sectors has been a similar one of strong growth. 
The question that the industry now needs to consider is how to ensure that this strong growth 
can continue into the future. 
Although  there  has  been  a  great  upsurge  in  interest  in  Islamic  finance  since  the  global 
financial crisis erupted over two years ago, there is no room for complacency in the industry. 
Both to ensure that it can continue to grow strongly in the future, and that it can avoid the 
sorts of reputational damage that the conventional industry suffered as a result of the crisis, 
the  Islamic  financial  industry  needs  to  examine  its  foundations  very  carefully.  The 
foundations must be strong enough to ensure that they can support the much larger industry 
that now rests upon them. 
Three issues in particular stand out. The first concerns achieving certainty in Islamic financial 
contracts. Second, the industry’s ability to manage risks needs to be enhanced. Third, the 
regulatory framework needs to keep pace with the rapid growth of the industry, and also to 
BIS Review 84/2010 
 1
reflect the lessons learned from the global financial crisis. Let me address each of these in 
turn. 
The  certainty  of  Islamic  financial  contracts  has  two  dimensions.  The  first,  and  the  best 
known, is a fact that we are still some way from developing standard documentation which is 
recognised  as  Shari’a  compliant  by  scholars  from  different  jurisdictions  and  from  different 
schools  of  Islamic  jurisprudence.  As  long  as  there  is  a  risk  that  a  contract  which  is 
recognised as Shari’a compliant by some scholars will not be recognised as such by others, 
there exists a lack of legal certainty in the industry. 
It might be argued that this lack of certainty has not inhibited the industry’s growth to-date. 
Nonetheless it makes it much harder for Islamic financial institutions to operate on a cross-
border basis. The result has been that Islamic financial institutions have had a predominantly 
domestic  focus  and  have  not  been  able  to  achieve  the  scale  economies  that  might  make 
them viable competitors to conventional institutions which do enjoy these benefits. The lack 
of  economies  of  scale  also  increases  the  costs  of  Islamic  financial  products  and  thus 
ultimately the cost to the consumer. 
The International Islamic Financial Market (IIFFM), which is based in Bahrain, has been at 
the forefront of attempts to develop standardised Islamic financial contracts. Working closely 
with  the  International  Swaps  and  Derivatives  Association,  the  IIFM  has  recently  drafted  a 
Tahawwut  master  agreement  which  provides  standardised  documentation  for  Islamic 
derivatives.  The  master  agreement  was  endorsed  by  the  IIFM  Board  of  Shari’a  Scholars 
which includes some of the industry’s most prominent and widely respected scholars. 
While  the  IIFM  documentation  brings  a  more  rigorous  and  robust  architecture  to  the 
development of Islamic derivatives, it should be seen as merely the beginning of the process. 
Much  more  work  will  be  required  to  ensure  that  standardised  contracts  for  other  Islamic 
financial products can be developed which have the support of the great majority of Shari’a 
scholars. 
Within  the  past  12  months,  a  new  dimension  to  the  legal  uncertainty  of  Islamic  financial 
contracts has arisen. Since the global financial crisis began, we have seen the first defaults 
on  Sukuk.  These  defaults  have  raised  a  number  of  difficult  legal  questions  which  are 
currently before the courts. In particular, they raise questions about the rights of the Sukuk 
holders in the event of a default by the issuer and in particular whether they have a claim on 
the underlying asset. It is important that these cases are resolved rapidly and that they create 
clear  precedents  and  mechanisms  for  handling  defaults  in  future  as  otherwise  the  lack  of 
legal certainty will act as a drag on the development of the Sukuk market. 
The  second  set  of  issues  relate  to  risk  management.  This  has  a  number  of  different 
dimensions, but two in particular are worth highlighting. The first relates to liquidity risk. The 
conventional  financial  industry  received  a  wake-up  call  during  the  crisis  concerning  the 
importance of understanding, monitoring and controlling liquidity risks. The Islamic financial 
industry  must  recognise  that  it  too  needs  good  liquidity  risk  management.  How  Islamic 
financial institutions can manage their liquidity risk given the relative absence of short-term 
money market instruments has been a problem for the industry for some time. However, the 
events of recent years should give a greater sense of urgency to resolving these problems 
and we need to redouble our efforts to find a solution. 
A second area of risk management to which Islamic institutions need to give some attention 
is  the  problem  of  limiting  the  concentration  of  risk  in  particular  economic  sectors  or  asset 
types.  The  industry’s  preference  for  a  real  asset  to  back  financial  transactions  has, 
unfortunately,  resulted  in  a  relatively  high  concentration  of  risk  in  real  estate.  As  a  result, 
many  Islamic  financial  institutions  have  asset  portfolios  which  are  concentrated  on  this 
potentially  very  volatile  sector.  The  performance  of  real  estate  markets  in  North  America, 
Europe, and in certain parts of the Middle East in recent years have highlighted the risks of 
excessive  concentrations  of  lending  to  this  sector.  It  is  important  that  in  future  the  Islamic 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2010
financial industry should find ways of diversifying its risks and of reducing its reliance on real 
estate backed assets. 
Finally, on the subject of regulation, it is important that we fully incorporate the lessons of the 
global  financial  crisis  into  regulatory  frameworks  that  apply  to  Islamic  financial  institutions. 
Although some people in the industry believe that it escaped relatively unscathed from the 
global financial crisis, and therefore has nothing to learn from the recent experience of the 
conventional industry, I do not share this point of view. 
Although the Islamic financial industry was relatively insulated from the first round effects of 
the crisis because it did not invest in “toxic” structured financial products, it has not been able 
to  avoid  the  second  round  effects.  These  have  included  sharply  reduced  liquidity  in  all 
markets,  and  the  effect  of  the  global  economic  downturn  on  the  credit-worthiness  of  all 
borrowers, including those who are customers of Islamic financial institutions. The principles 
of  sound  finance  –  do  not  concentrate  risk,  do  not  rely  on  collateral  with  unrealistic  
valuations – apply equally to Islamic institutions as to conventional ones. 
The current prudential framework that applies to Islamic financial institutions is based closely 
on that developed for conventional ones. Although adjustments have been made to reflect 
the special nature of Islamic financial institutions, the basic framework is similar to that of the 
Basel  II  Capital  Adequacy  Standards  and  other  prudential  rules  that  the  Basel  Committee 
has developed over the years. In consequence, as the international standard setting bodies 
develop new prudential standards that reflect the lessons of the crisis we need to be ready to 
revise the prudential framework for Islamic financial institutions accordingly. We will need to 
adapt the new capital adequacy and liquidity standards for conventional institutions to reflect 
the specific circumstances of the Islamic financial industry. 
In conclusion, it should be clear that there is a great deal of work to be done to ensure that 
the  foundations  of  the  Islamic  financial  industry  are  sufficiently  strong  to  support  the  very 
much bigger structure that now stands upon them. Even so, I strongly believe that if we can 
ensure that the foundations are sufficiently robust, the Islamic financial industry has a great 
and profitable future ahead of it. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 84/2010 
 3
