Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Today’s risks, tomorrow’s claims 
Keynote address by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia,  at  the  International  Claims  Convention  2010  “Today’s  risks,  tomorrow’s  claims”, 
Kuala Lumpur, 19 April 2010. 
 First  of  all,  I  congratulate  the  Malaysian  Insurance  Institute,  the  Australasian  Institute  of 
Chartered Loss Adjusters and the Association of Malaysian Loss Adjusters for their excellent 
efforts  in  jointly  organizing  this  convention,  themed  “Today’s  Risks,  Tomorrow’s  Claims”.  I 
understand  that  this  is  the  leading  insurance  claims  event  with  an  exciting  programme  for 
insurers,  loss  adjusters,  risk  managers,  claims  industry  specialists,  suppliers  and  industry 
associations.  The  Convention  provides  a  platform  for  the  relevant  parties  involved  in 
insurance claims to examine and deliberate on the growing challenges in insurance claims 
with a view to formulate anti-fraud best practices in the insurance industry.  
The  global  insurance  industry  as  a  whole  remained  resilient  despite  the  deepening  of  the 
global  financial  crisis  in  2009  that  is  expected  to  potentially  lead  to  more  insurance  fraud 
cases.  Whilst  the  decline  in  the  financial  markets  has  put  significant  pressure  on  insurers’ 
investment portfolios, the aggregate financial position of insurers remained strong to weather 
the  crisis.  The  financial  sector  in  Malaysia,  following  a  decade  of  financial  reforms  that 
include strengthening the regulatory and supervisory framework, and building the domestic 
financial infrastructure, is now bolstered by high capitalization levels, sound asset quality and 
sustained profitability. As a result, it was well-positioned to weather the deterioration of the 
external environment. 
The structured development of the insurance industry over the years in particular, spurred on 
by  various  capacity  building  initiatives,  had  yielded  positive  outcomes  contributing  to 
continued growth. The performance of the insurance industry is expected to improve in 2010 
on the back of the economic recovery and increasing awareness on the role of insurance as 
a  protection  and  financial  planning  tool.  Improvements  in  the  employment  market,  rising 
disposable income and revival in economic activities will generate spins-off to the insurance 
sector  and  create  greater  demand  for  insurance  products.  Nevertheless,  the  operating 
environment for the insurance industry in 2010 is expected to remain challenging. Despite 
the optimism on the economic and financial conditions as the financial markets continue to 
stabilize in early 2010, the low-yield investment environment will continue to pose near-term 
challenges for insurers. In the past, investment earnings had predominantly been relied upon 
to  offset  any  setback  in  insurers’  underwriting  performance  but  such  expectations  may  be 
altered in the near-term. The financial crisis is a clear reminder for insurers to return to basics 
and focus on its core function of sound business underwriting. 
The increasing intensity of climate change has heightened the vulnerability of the world at 
large  to  natural  disasters  and  extreme  weather  conditions.  Tsunamis,  volcanic  ash  and 
earthquakes, not previously known to strike in generally thought “safe” zones have actually 
occurred. Similarly, earthquakes and hurricanes have become more intense causing multi-
billion  dollar  losses  to  the  affected  economies.  Disaster  risk  reduction  and  disaster 
management has thus become a focus of Governments to effectively reduce financial and 
economic  losses.  In  an  industry  that  is  exposed  to  risks  both  natural  and  man-made,  this 
Convention’s theme of “Today’s Risks, Tomorrow’s Claims” is highly relevant especially with 
regards to the challenges of insurance claims. There are three pertinent challenges that I can 
think of this morning. Let me briefly share my thoughts on these challenges with you. 
Firstly,  the  critical  role  of  insurers  in  the  various  aspects  of  the  claims  management  value 
chain,  that  is,  claims  intimidation,  fraud  detection  and  prevention,  claim  assessment  and 
settlement,  and  complaint  resolution  are  areas  requiring  close  monitoring  by  insurers  and, 
BIS Review 53/2010 
 1
where necessary, timely intervention to detect and prevent leakages. Insurers have to assess 
their vulnerability and address the risk of fraud efficiently to reinforce a positive image of the 
industry to the public. Customers must be kept informed of the progress of their claims and be 
given clear explanation when a claim is rejected or not settled in full. Any delay or perceived 
delay in claims processing, particularly for claimants in urgent need of compensation, may be 
misconstrued as a deliberate attempt to delay claims settlement resulting in bad publicity and ill 
repute  for  the  insurance  industry.  Each  insurer’s  claims  management  philosophy  should 
therefore  set  out  the  broad  principles  for  providing  high  quality  service  standards.  This 
corporate claims philosophy should be documented and communicated to all staff for adoption 
as a common corporate value that is perceptible to the public. 
Secondly,  the  challenge  of  detecting  and  preventing  insurance  fraud,  which  is  a  crime 
against all segments of society and not a victimless crime as perceived by many. Due to the 
long  supply  chain  and  participation  of  numerous  stakeholders,  especially  in  the  general 
sector, insurance fraud is easily committed and is a major source of leakage for the industry, 
thereby  hiking  up  claims  costs.  Insurance  fraudsters  are  also  adept  at  hiding  behind  the 
protective  shield  of  jurisdictional  boundaries.  In  this  regard,  the  insurance  industry  can 
leverage on the work of the US based International Association of Insurance Fraud Agencies 
Inc., which plays an important role in tracking down the insurance fraudsters. 
In order to mitigate insurance fraud in the industry, an effective claims information system is 
critical to enable early detection of fraud. The infrastructure of such a system must support 
the free exchange of information in a timely manner with access provided on an enterprise-
wide scale for business intelligence function to facilitate the management and analysis of raw 
data and the reporting of trends according to specific parameters. The reports would assist 
insurers  and  loss  adjusters  in  detecting  and  preventing  insurance  fraud  and  effectively 
minimize leakages. 
Thirdly, the challenge is in ensuring the health of the entire claims management value chain. 
The complex nature of claims requires multiple parties with different skill sets and expertise as 
well  as  efficiency  in  service  delivery  in  order  for  the  claimant  to  receive  fair  compensation 
expediently. Misconceptions, suspicions and unnecessary disputes must be minimized for the 
benefit  of  all  parties.  This  can  be  achieved  by  greater  collaboration  between  parties  in  the 
claims  management  chain,  beginning  with  the  loss  adjuster  in  the  field  to  the  insurer 
processing the claims. An online electronic platform that supports the integration and alignment 
of all the different claim processes should include mobile work units that allow loss adjusters to 
capture and transmit information directly in the field. This platform can be an avenue for the 
free  exchange  of  information  in  a  timely  manner,  thereby  increasing  transparency  to  an 
otherwise convoluted process. Such sharing of information is to the mutual benefit of all who 
are involved in ensuring a high level of integrity throughout the insurance industry. 
In  addition,  insurers  and  loss  adjusters  should  also  focus  on  attracting  and  retaining 
experienced talent that can be the first line of protection against fraudulent behavior. Loss 
adjusters  play  a  significant  role  as  independent  intermediaries  in  facilitating  a  fair  and 
reasonable compensation for the insured. Due to their investigative capacity, loss adjusters 
are  also  in  the  best  position  to  assist  insurers  in  detecting  and  preventing  fraud,  thus 
contributing significantly to the efficacy of the claims process as a whole. 
In  conclusion,  allow  me  to  reiterate  the  importance  of  the  effective  participation  of  all 
stakeholders  involved  in  each  stage  of  claims  management  to  ensure  high  claims  service 
standards and fair treatment of customers. Both insurers and loss adjusters must play their 
respective  roles  in  value-adding  to  the  claims  management  process  for  the  effective 
functioning and positive image of the insurance industry in the long term. 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2010
