 Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with the Financial Times 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  the 
Financial Times, conducted by Messrs Lionel Barber and Ralph Atkins on 8 September 2010 
and published on 10 September 2010. 
 Financial Times: After the events of the past few years, are you confident that the euro can 
survive, and if so, why? 
Jean-Claude Trichet: Yes, I am confident, of course! You know how much scepticism there 
was in the run-up to the setting-up of the euro. The best way to measure how much has been 
done is to conduct a thought experiment and place ourselves at the beginning of 1998 or, 
perhaps even more boldly, in 1994, and imagine hearing somebody say the euro would be 
launched on time in January 1999, that it would start with 11 countries, that very rapidly there 
would be 16 countries. And that after 11 ½ years, for these 16 countries and more than 330m 
people,  not  only  would  the  stability  of  the  euro  be  in  line  with  our  definition  of  price 
stability – below but close to 2 per cent – but that the level of price stability would be better 
than that obtained in the previous 50 years by major currencies before the euro. Over the 
11 ½ years, euro area inflation has averaged 1.97 per cent. 
That  would  certainly  have  been  considered  much  too  bold,  much  too  optimistic,  perhaps 
totally unrealistic – but that is what we’ve been doing. So “yes, sir”, the euro is there. The 
euro area faces a lot of challenges, as is the case for all major advanced economies. All their 
central banks have a lot of challenges today, and this is no time for complacency for any of 
us, but the success of the euro, measured as I just suggested, is obvious. 
Financial Times: What would you describe as the main challenges facing the euro today? 
Jean-Claude Trichet: I would say that we have all the challenges of major central banks in 
the advanced world. There is the challenge of coping, in terms of our own responsibility, with 
the “turbulent episode” in which we find ourselves since three years. We have to cope with 
the  challenge  of  globalisation.  We  have  to  cope  with  the  challenges  of  science  and 
technology,  which  is  developing  so  rapidly  that  it  creates  for  the  central  bankers  a  lot  of 
additional challenges, in particular in terms of assessing correctly productivity and the impact 
of IT on the financial sector. Population ageing is also a big challenge for all central banks.  
We  have  two  other  challenges  that  other  major  central  banks  do  not  have.  One  is  the 
deepening and overall implementation of the single market with a single currency, which has 
been  Europe’s  ambition  since  the  very  beginning.  We  are  the  only  central  bank  which  is 
transforming, by virtue of its own activity, the economy under its jurisdiction.  
The second challenge is enlargement. We were 11 countries at the beginning. Next January 
we  will  be  17,  with  Estonia  joining.  This  highlights  the  challenge  of  permanently 
strengthening and deepening the governance of the euro area, with new economies coming 
in. 
Financial Times: Before we talk about governance, let me ask you some specific questions 
about the crisis management measures. How are you going to reduce the dependence of the 
likes of Greece, Portugal, Spain, Ireland on extra liquidity provided by the ECB? 
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  As  you  know,  the  European  economy  relies  very  much  in  terms  of 
financing on commercial banks. So it’s not surprising that our own “non-standard measures” 
concentrate much more on bank refinancing than on intervening in markets, in comparison 
with  the  Fed.  As  markets  gradually  stabilise,  our  non-standard  measures,  which  are  fully 
consistent  with  our  mandate  and,  by  construction,  temporary  in  nature,  will  continue  to  be 
BIS Review 115/2010 
 1
 progressively phased out. So we are accompanying the market as it progressively goes back 
to normal. But, as I said already, it is a process which takes time.  
Financial  Times:  Do  you  have  in  mind,  though,  a  need  to  phase  out  “non-standard” 
refinancing and do you have a sort of time horizon for this?  
Jean-Claude Trichet: We of course have to consider all those measures as transitory. They 
are there to cope with a situation which is abnormal – to help correct those markets that are 
dysfunctional  and  thereby  help  restore  a  more  normal  transmission  mechanism  for  our 
monetary policy. 
We have eliminated one-year liquidity, and we have also phased out six-months liquidity. The 
decisions we took last week take precisely into account, through three fine tuning operations 
in the last quarter, this progressive phasing out and its impact on liquidity.  
Financial Times: Where do you think we are in this crisis? It’s a difficult question. I mean, if 
I’d asked Roosevelt in 1935 he would have had a hard time answering the question too… 
Jean-Claude Trichet: I guess so, yes. I would say that the correct response is that we are in 
a situation where central banks in particular, and also other authorities, have to remain alert 
and have to know that we are in an uncertain universe. We always have to be prepared for 
new  challenges  that  can  not  necessarily  be  foreseen  and  that  might  be  in  some  respect 
unpredictable. We have permanently to be in a state which I call credible alertness.  
Financial Times: How close did the euro area come to disaster in May? 
Jean-Claude Trichet: No, I don’t think that the euro area was close to disaster at all – seen 
from  inside.  I  know  how  Europe  functions.  I  know  how  the  constellation  of  authorities 
functions,  at  the  level  of  the  various  nations  and  at  the  level  of  the  European  institutions,. 
Seen from the outside, I would say that it’s always difficult for external observers to judge 
and analyse correctly the capacity of Europe to face up to exceptional difficulties. There is no 
other model to which we can refer – either in history or in a fully fledged political federation 
such as the US, and certainly not in comparison with centralised states such as Japan or the 
UK. But I’m always confident. In May we had additional proof of the capacity of Europe to 
cope with new challenges.  
Financial Times: Can you explain why [in May] the ECB changed its mind on government 
bond purchases? There was a lot of criticism in Germany especially. 
Jean-Claude Trichet: When I talk of “credible alertness” I really mean it. When we decided 
on 9 August 2007 that it was appropriate to embark in an unlimited supply of liquidity in our 
own money market, and we supplied 95 billion euros for 24 hours, that was not a decision 
that was in the textbooks. We were criticised a little bit at the time, and then, after a while, it 
was recognised that this decision had been wise and lucid. 
So  in  May  this  year  I  would  say  that  we  were  in  a  situation  where  it  was  considered 
appropriate by the governing council of the ECB to take the decision, as I said earlier, to help 
restore a more normal functioning of our own monetary policy transmission mechanism. We 
had  previously  purchased  covered  bonds  and  we  had  not  excluded  intervening  in  other 
markets.  
Financial Times: What lessons do you draw in terms of euro governance from this crisis to 
date?  
Jean-Claude Trichet: First of all, we are on the record as having always asked for full and 
decisive implementation of the governance measures that already exist. We combated very 
fiercely the position of the heads of government of the three major countries in the euro area 
when  they  wanted  to  weaken  formidably  the  stability  and  growth  pact,  back  in  2004  and 
2005. It was a very, very fierce battle. They wanted to really unravel the pact. 
What I would sum up as our position today is very simple. We call for “a quantum leap” in the 
reinforcement of fiscal surveillance, with, in particular, what I would call the reversal of the 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2010
 burden of the proof. We have called for the “quasi-automaticity” of procedures and sanctions. 
We  have  called  for  a  reinforced  independent  way  of  assessing  the  fiscal  situation  and  we 
have  also  called  for  a  quantum  leap  as  regard  the  surveillance  of  competitiveness  and 
imbalances  in  euro  area  member  countries.  And,  finally,  we  have  called  for  decisive 
measures to enhance the quality of statistics.  
As regards the methodology, we consider that a change of the treaty would be appropriate, 
but  we  accept  that  this  would  involve  a  long  or  very  long  procedure  at  the  level  of  27  EU 
countries. That’s why we have called for the maximum use of secondary legislation as a first 
step, to exploit all the possibilities that secondary legislation can offer to go in the direction of 
the necessary goals. That’s the idea.  
Financial Times: And what about temporary suspension of membership or even expulsion 
of a member that is systematically breaching this...? 
Jean-Claude Trichet: No, I don’t call for expelling members, but a temporary suspension of 
voting rights is something that should be explored.  
Financial Times: In retrospect, shouldn’t Europe have undertaken bank stress test earlier? 
Jean-Claude Trichet: I think so. The ECB and the Bank of England were very much in favour 
of  this  stress  test.  Of  course,  we  have  a  very  complex  institutional  environment,  involving 
cooperation in real time among 27 EU capitals. It was really essential to have this exercise 
undertaken on a unified basis, simultaneously. You know that we particularly welcomed the 
detailed publication of the results for the 91 banks involved.  
Financial Times: Are you worried about deflation in Europe? 
Jean-Claude Trichet: No, I do not see the materialisation of a risk of deflation, or either of 
inflation,  at  present.  We  went  through  the  heat  of  the  crisis  without  any  materialisation  of 
deflationary risks. Our successful and solid anchoring of inflation expectations has protected 
us,  I  trust,  very  well  against  the  materialisation  of  inflation  risks  –  but  also  against  the 
materialisation of deflation risks.  
Financial Times: And what about deflation in the United States, is that different? 
Jean-Claude Trichet: I fully rely upon the analysis of the Federal Reserve. 
Financial  Times:  But  how  serious  do  you  think  is  the  present  weakness  of  the  American 
economy? 
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  I  would  say,  again,  that  I  rely  very  much  upon  the  Fed’s  analysis, 
which I have to say over the crisis has been wise and pertinent. There was a level of hype at 
certain moments, when we were getting out of the crisis, which perhaps did not fully reflect 
the situation of the real economy. And now there is a mood which seems to me too negative. 
That’s my own personal feeling.  
Financial  Times:  Let’s  talk  about  the  pace  of  financial  reform,  regulation.  Why  were  the 
reforms as proposed under Basel III watered down?  
Jean-Claude Trichet:  I  do  not  want  to  prejudge  in  any  respect  the upcoming  meeting  we 
have on this issue. I will only say that we need the same rules at the global level, a level 
playing  field  globally.  And  now  at  the  global  level  we  have  the  full  participation  of  the 
emerging world, which, by the way, is one of the major structural transformations of global 
governance  over  the  last  three  years.  The  G20  has  substituted  for  the  G7  as  the  premier 
forum  for  international  economic  cooperation.  We  have  also  profoundly  transformed  the 
global governance of central bank cooperation with full ownership by the central banks from 
emerging  economies.  That  is  something  which  I  would  call  a  “silent  revolution”  in  global 
governance.  
One thing is certain – and I’m sure that all my colleagues share this view: We cannot again in 
the  next  years  be  put  in  a  situation  where  the  financial  sector  is  about  to  collapse  in  the 
BIS Review 115/2010 
 3
 advanced economies and at the global level, or a situation in which it is necessary on both 
sides of the Atlantic, for taxpayers to put approximately 27 per cent of GDP on the table to 
stabilise  the  system  and  avoid  a  major  global  depression.  We  cannot  do  that  twice.  The 
people in our democracies would not accept that.  
This is not, of course, to say that the 27 per cent of GDP was spent or lost, but that was the 
level of additional taxpayer risk that had to be put on the table, on both sides of the Atlantic. 
Financial Times: You said, when we saw you in December 2008, that the airbags had been 
taken  out  of  the  financial  system.  This  was  just  after  Lehman  collapsed.  Do  you  think  the 
airbags are now being put back in the system ? 
Jean-Claude Trichet: I would say it remains a good metaphor for what we are trying to work 
out, by consensus, among the G20 countries. 
Financial  Times:  You’ve  done  a  number  of  jobs  which  have  been  at  the  heart  of  the 
construction of the euro, and you’ve just been through the worst financial crisis in 60 years, 
where as you say, the financial system almost collapsed. What do you think are the qualities 
that a central banker needs today? 
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  It  seems  to  me  that  in  periods  that  are  marked  by  turbulence, 
unexpected  events,  a  high  level  of  uncertainty  –  and  I’m  afraid  that  a  large  part  of  the 
reasons for this are structural – central banks are the institutions that have a  mandate for 
price  stability,  a  sense  of  direction,  a  stake  in  overall  stability  in  a  medium  and  long  term 
perspective.  They  are  independent.  They  can  be  precisely  those  anchors  of  stability  that  I 
would say an economy and society need even more in times that are very demanding and 
very turbulent. That would perhaps be the best way to sum up the responsibility of central 
banks. 
Financial  Times:  Are  you  concerned,  in  the  wake  of  this  crisis  that  there’s  been  any 
weakening of support for the concept of central bank independence?  
Jean-Claude Trichet: If I take a global perspective, it seems to me that one of the lessons 
that has been drawn from the crisis, or taken into account, is that the concept of independent 
central banks having a stake in stability, and a medium to long term perspective, has been 
recognised as the right concept.  
Financial Times: Very soon, you’re going to be chairing the new European Systemic Risk 
Board, which will take an EU view, so you will actually be including the United Kingdom in 
your work, your daily outlook, I suppose. To what extent do you think the UK should fear or 
embrace this process?  
Jean-Claude Trichet: I expect that the cooperation with the UK authorities, particularly with 
the Bank of England, and for me personally with its governor, will be extraordinarily close. It’s 
a job at the level of the EU 27 where you will need a very close cooperation between Mervyn 
King and all of us, and I expect that this is the way we are all looking at it. 
4 
 BIS Review 115/2010
