Caleb M Fundanga: Importance of entrepreneurship in Zambia’s 
economy 
Opening remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the Prize-
Giving  Ceremony  for  Intermarket  Banking  Corporation  VentureComp  2010  Business  Plan 
Competition, Lusaka, 28 July 2010. 
  Mr Ackim Sinkala, Acting Managing Director – Intermarket Banking 
Corporation Zambia Limited and Intermarket Securities Limited; 
Mrs Beatrice Nkanza, General Manager Lusaka Stock Exchange; 
Dr. Maurice Jangulo, Board Chairman Zambezi Airlines; 
Dr. Patrick Nkanza, Director General TEVETA; 
Officials from the Ministry of Science, Technology and Vocational Training; 
Chief Executive Officers of Financial Institutions and Companies Present; 
Distinguished Invited Guests; 
Members of the Press; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It is my honour and privilege to officiate at this Prize Giving Ceremony of the VentureComp 
2010, K100 Million Business Plan Competition. I was honoured at the beginning of this year 
to have been given the opportunity to launch this Competition. I did not hesitate to accept the 
invitation  to  officiate  at  this  event  as  the  subject  of  entrepreneurship  and  the  deserved 
recognition of the entrepreneurial efforts of young men and women is very close to my heart. 
Distinguished  Guests,  let  me  from  the  onset  take  this  opportunity  to  commend  the 
sponsors of this competition, Intermarket Banking Corporation Zambia Limited, Intermarket 
Securities Limited, and their partners, Lusaka Stock exchange (LuSE), Zambezi Airlines and 
TEVETA for coming up with this excellent and important initiative. It is gratifying to note that 
applications  were  invited  from  all  eligible  students  in  various  higher  institutions  of  learning 
around  the  country.  I  have  also  been  informed  that  although  only  four  teams  have  been 
shortlisted,  the  response  from  the  young  entrepreneurs  was  overwhelming  with  about 
75 total applications received. I am certain that the winning team will be worthy winners of 
the K100 Million Business Loan Sponsorship prize. 
Further, I have been reliably informed that the competition will become an annual event and 
prize money will be increased in future years, which indeed is commendable. I am certain 
that the award will provide a great incentive to our young men and women to be innovative 
and develop business ideas. The initiative will also improve the level of entrepreneurship in 
the country which is lacking at the moment. Mr Chairman I once again applaud you and your 
co-sponsors for this long term commitment to this award programme. 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, allow me at this moment to highlight the importance 
of entrepreneurship in our economy. Entrepreneurship involves developing innovative ideas, 
taking risk and managing the business in a sound manner. In these turbulent times and with 
an increasingly competitive global market, it is vital for a country like ours to have a good 
entrepreneurial  base  which  should  contribute  to  wealth  creation  and  to  the  country’s 
economic  development.  The  need  for  more  Zambians  to  own  successful  businesses  and 
compliment foreign investments in our country cannot be over-emphasised. It is imperative 
that  a  lot  more  local  businesses  engage  in  economic  sectors  like  mining,  manufacturing, 
construction  and  tourism  in  order  to  effectively  contribute  to  the  country’s  economic 
development.  This  can  only  be  possible  through  innovation  and  risk  taking  by  indigenous 
companies with the potential to grow and succeed not only in Zambia but also in international 
markets. 
BIS Review 103/2010 
 1
Low levels of employment; 
Social exclusion; 
Low levels of competitive products and services in the economy; and 
Urbanisation and rural poverty. 
Moreover, entrepreneurship can play a central role in assisting our country meet the various 
challenges that it faces today. For instance, entrepreneurship can assist in addressing the 
challenges arising from: 
 
 
 
 
In order to minimize the adverse effects that arise from these challenges, there is a need to 
both sustain a high level of entrepreneurial activity in general and to maximise the number of 
new  businesses  that  are  innovative,  and  that  aspire  to,  and  are  capable  of  achieving 
significant  growth.  However,  if  we  are  to  build  a  much  greater  number  of  competitive  and 
innovative  businesses  in  Zambia,  then  we  will  need  to  see  many  new  businesses  being 
created now and in the years ahead. We need to ensure that the culture of entrepreneurship 
becomes embedded in all our people at a very young age. The education and training sector 
will play a critical role both in developing entrepreneurial mindsets and in equipping future 
entrepreneurs with the skills necessary to successfully position new enterprises and manage 
their development and growth. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is a fact that a thriving entrepreneurial culture has the potential to 
make a substantial contribution to our economic and social development and to achieving a 
balanced  economic  growth.  The  key  therefore,  is  for  businesses  to  be  innovative  and 
competitive  at  all  times.  To  achieve  this  we  need  to  develop  outstanding  young  men  and 
women  who  can  be  leaders  in  their  fields  and  who  are  ambitious  with  a  mindset  to  be 
successful and to compete at the highest level. 
Mr Chairman, I have no doubt that awards like yours can be hugely influential in fuelling the 
entrepreneurial  urge  and  in  inspiring  youths  to  emulate  the  achievements  of  those  whose 
enterprising  dreams  will  be  rewarded  this  evening.  The  award  will  also  be  key  in  raising 
public  awareness  on  the  need  for  continuous  innovation  among  our  youths.  As  you  are 
aware, the engine of the fast growing economies such as China and India is the innovation 
and  creativity  of  the  young  entrepreneurs  in  those  economies.  It  is  incumbent  upon  us 
therefore to also encourage our youths to take up their rightful place and contribute to the 
country’s development. 
Furthermore, banks and Financial Institutions in Zambia have in the past lamented the low 
levels of banking and economic knowledge among graduates from tertiary institutions as well 
as  the  borrowing  public  in  general.  It  is  therefore  gratifying  to  note  that  this  evening,  we 
celebrate  and  showcase  the  depth  of  the  entrepreneurial  talent  that  is  flourishing  in  our 
schools of higher learning. It is also heartening to see these young men and women putting 
up high quality business proposals of a diverse range of projects. This speaks well for the 
inventiveness of our learning institutions and is a very welcome development indeed. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, this initiative represents a major milestone in developing linkages 
between  the  industry  and  tertiary  institutions  which  is  key  in  bridging  the  gap  between 
expectations of employers and those of the labour force. It is also testimony that we have 
financial institutions and business entities that are willing and committed to promoting private 
entrepreneurship among young people in our country at the level of start-up businesses. 
Once  again,  I  commend  the  sponsors  and  their  partners  for  this  important  initiative.  I  am 
certain that your efforts will go a long way in contributing to the building of an entrepreneurial 
society  in  Zambia.  This  is  a  task  not  only  for  you  but  for  everybody.  I  wish  to  urge  in 
particular,  the  education  system  in  Zambia  to  enhance  their  efforts  in  promoting  positive 
attitudes towards entrepreneurship in the institutions of higher learning. I further call on the 
media  to  play  its  rightful  role  in  educating  the  masses  and  the  youth  in  particular  on  the 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2010
importance of entrepreneurship and indeed to  give more coverage to  Zambians who have 
succeeded in entrepreneurship in order for our youths to be motivated. 
I  also  wish  to  urge  other  banks  and  financial  institutions  to  emulate  Intermarket  Banking 
Corporation to develop such well meaning initiatives for this is indeed good Corporate Social 
Responsibility. I am sure that there are a number of entrepreneurs all over Zambia who are 
in dire need of that seed capital as well as the initial push to realize their dreams. I have in 
mind here the very innovative entrepreneurs in Mutendere, Kalingalinga, Garden Compound, 
Mandevu and several other industrial clusters in our country who are trying to do their best 
but lack the necessary support in form of finance and education. 
As I conclude, I wish all the teams that have been shortlisted tonight continued success in 
future. Unfortunately, there can be only one winner of the overall award but each nominee is 
already a winner and should feel proud of their nomination and deserving of recognition and 
our congratulations. I hope that all of you whether you win the award or not will develop your 
businesses ideas into a reality in future. To the winners, I heartily congratulate you and urge 
you to make the best use of the K100 Million Prize. Being the first winners of this competition 
also  carries  with  it  the  responsibility  for  you  to  implement  your  business  plan  successfully 
and set a high standard for subsequent winners in the years to come. 
I thank you for your attention! 
BIS Review 103/2010 
 3
