Axel A Weber: Banking regulation 
Keynote speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
9th Munich Economic Summit, Munich, 30 April 2010. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The  financial  crisis,  though  in  its  third  year  now,  still  presents  us  with  a  great  many 
challenges.  Nevertheless,  while  the  number  of  challenges  has  not  decreased,  their  nature 
has  changed.  With  the  stabilisation  of  markets  and  the  onset  of  recovery,  the  focus  has 
shifted from managing the current crisis to preventing future crises. And a cornerstone of this 
attempt to create a more stable financial system is the reform of banking regulation. As the 
field of banking regulation is highly complex and involves a host of technical details, I will limit 
myself to a brief overview of the current state of the reform process, highlighting some critical 
points.  However,  I  am  sure  that  the  ensuing  panel  discussion  will  provide  us  with  an 
opportunity to elaborate on some of the more technical details. 
Micro- and macroprudential aspects of regulation 
2. 
Any attempt to create a more stable financial system should begin with the individual bank – 
that is, on the microprudential level of regulation. The relevant regulatory framework on this 
level are the Basel II rules, which have been implemented by a large number of countries. As 
the crisis revealed some shortcomings of the Basel II framework, the G20 commissioned the 
Financial Stability Board to work towards a reform of the current rules. A first set of relevant 
measures was published in the summer of 2009 as a direct reaction to the subprime crisis. 
Among  others,  these  measures  include  stricter  capital  requirements  for  market  risk  and 
securitisation  as  well  as  heightened  risk  management  requirements.  Additional  proposals 
were  put  forward  in  December  2009.  Aiming  at  enhancing  the  resilience  of  the  banking 
sector,  major  elements  of  these  proposals  include  a  new  liquidity  standard  as  well  as  a 
revised definition of capital. In the course of the current year, the relevant measures will be 
calibrated on the basis of a comprehensive impact study and be finalised by the end of 2010. 
Although the envisaged reforms will strengthen the existing rules, they will not change their 
underlying  principles.  In  essence,  the  Basel  II  framework  seeks  to  limit  banks’  risk-taking 
behaviour  by  making  it  more  expensive  and  thus  less  attractive.  Against  this  backdrop, 
recent proposals to prohibit certain risky activities altogether pursue a more radical course. 
One  fundamental  problem  of  such  an  approach  is  that  the  complete  prohibition  of  certain 
activities is a very far-reaching market intervention, especially since these activities do not 
necessarily have zero economic value-added. Contrary to the Basel II approach, the penalty 
imposed on risky activities would become infinite. Thus, given the inherent trade-off between 
the  efficiency  costs  of  intervention  and  its  benefits,  a  reformed  Basel  II  framework  might 
provide a more balanced solution. This is also the case with regard to the introduction of an 
additional tax for the banking sector. Even though such a tax could be useful in recouping 
some of the costs of the crisis, it is an inferior instrument in terms of internalising the effects 
of risky activities on financial stability. Hence, the reform of the Basel II framework is rightly 
given preference by regulators and should be implemented with priority by policymakers. 
Regardless  of  its  actual  design,  the  general  objective  of  regulation  on  the  microprudential 
level is to have a first line of defence by reducing the likelihood of individual bank failures. 
However,  given  our  globalised  and  interconnected  world  and  the  interdependence  of 
financial  institutions  and  markets,  even  the  failure  of  a  single  institution  might  lead  to 
systemic  disruptions.  Thus,  it  is  necessary  to  complement  a  strengthened  microprudential 
BIS Review 59/2010 
 1
regulation  with  a  macroprudential  stance  which  as  a  second  line  of  defence  takes  into 
account the stability of the financial system as a whole. One major aspect of macroprudential 
regulation would be the treatment of systemically important financial institutions. Although the 
revised  Basel  II  framework  is  part  of  a  solution  to  this  problem,  broader  reforms  are 
necessary.  These  might  include  capital  surcharges  for  systemically  important  institutions, 
better resolution regimes as well as a stronger market infrastructure. 
Regarding the reform process itself, we have to bear in mind that the decisions we are about 
to  make  will  shape  the  global  financial  system  for  years  to  come.  Thus,  accuracy  is  more 
important than speed, and we have to be careful not to implement oversimplistic solutions. 
Regarding the required complexity of regulatory measures, potential interactions have to be 
taken into account, as otherwise the danger of unintended consequences will grow. At the 
same  time,  the  cumulative  effect  of  new  measures  has  to  be  considered,  which  makes 
thorough impact assessments of the intended consequences necessary. We are, of course, 
aware  of  the  fact  that  a  slow  pace  of  reform  increases  regulatory  uncertainty  for  market 
participants. But up to now, policy development has proceeded according to agreed and very 
ambitious timelines, reducing the uncertainty as far as possible.  
International cooperation and harmonisation 
3. 
Another  factor  that  increases  the  complexity  of  the  reform  process  is  the  need  for 
international  cooperation  in  order  to  move  to  a  regulatory  level  playing-field.  Due  to  the 
ongoing  process  of  globalisation  and  the  emergence  of  internationally  active  banks, 
international harmonisation of regulation has become essential in safeguarding the stability 
of the financial system. The general case for a stronger harmonisation of regulation could be 
made  by  imagining  a  globalised  and  interconnected  world  where  national  rules  prevail.  In 
such an environment, internationally organised banks could easily avoid national regulations 
by  shifting  business  activities  across  borders.  Via  this  process  of  regulatory  arbitrage  they 
would be able to comply only with the lowest standards and thus endanger the stability of the 
financial system. At the same time, this behaviour would put those banks at a disadvantage 
which are not internationally organised. A level playing-field as the basis for fair competition 
would  not  exist.  Furthermore,  nationally  fragmented  regulatory  frameworks  would  hamper 
cooperation between home and host supervisors of international banks and thus lower the 
effectiveness of regulation. Hence, attempts to put the reform of regulatory frameworks on an 
international  footing  are  fully  warranted,  even  though  this  adds  an  additional  layer  of 
complexity to the process. 
4. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The financial crisis has taught us three very broad lessons. We have to strengthen regulation 
on  the  microprudential  level,  complement  it  with  macroprudential  supervision  and  ensure 
international  harmonisation  and  cooperation.  Although  we  have  already  come  a  good 
distance,  we  have  to  sustain  the  political  will  to  stay  the  course.  As  we  are  now hopefully 
entering better times, there is a certain danger that some major issues on the reform agenda 
might  fall  prey  to  dwindling  commitment  and  political  interests.  However,  this  must  not  be 
allowed  to  happen,  as  only  a  coordinated  and  harmonised  effort  will  enable  us  to  ensure 
financial stability and thus pave the way for steady and sustainable global development. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2010
