Stefan Ingves: The importance of being savvy – lessons on European 
crisis management 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Fundación Rafael 
del Pino, Madrid, 15 April 2010.  
 Crisis management is messy, time-consuming and costly.  
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  this  renowned  institute.  My  talk  today  will  focus  on  crisis 
management. I have seen enough crises to be able to draw a conclusion or two from them. I 
learned  my  first  lessons  from  the  Swedish  banking  crisis  of  the  early  1990s.  After  this  I 
worked at the IMF, assisting in crisis resolutions in many parts of the world. During my time 
at the IMF, I also benefitted from discussions with a Spanish colleague of mine – Aristóbulo 
de Juan. His experiences from dealing with the Spanish banking crisis of the 1980s, working 
at the resolution authority – Fondo de Garantía de Depósitos – proved a valuable source of 
knowledge and inspiration.  
As  you  all  know,  the  IMF  is located  in  Washington.  And  working  there, you  not  only  learn 
about  crisis  management,  but  you  also  pick  up  a  few  local  habits.  For  instance, 
Washingtonians  like  to  use  the  word  “savvy”  –  it  sort  of  means  being  a  bit  cunning  and 
perceptive. On reflection, being savvy pretty much sums up how you should behave when 
handling a crisis.  
Lately, a lot of attention has been given to preventing the  crisis we have just experienced 
from  repeating  itself.  Given  the  huge  bills  we,  as  taxpayers,  are  facing,  that  is  very 
understandable.  I  welcome  the  ongoing  discussion  and  many  of  the  regulatory  tools  and 
changes that are being introduced. But while many of these new preventive tools – such as 
heightened capital requirements and liquidity regulation – will strengthen the resilience of the 
financial system, we can never completely eradicate the risk of a financial crisis.  
Also, over time, people either tend to forget or to put too much faith in some new remedy. 
This  time,  sophisticated  risk  management  techniques  and  new  models  of  financial 
intermediation fostered complacency among investors and regulators. Everyone seemed to 
believe that history would not repeat itself. But it always does. Regardless of the preventive 
measures we introduce, crises will reoccur.  
And when they do, you need to act effectively and swiftly with the regulatory framework you 
have at hand. Today, I am going to focus on what I see as the core principles of effective 
crisis  management.  I  am  going  to  give  you  some  examples  of  what  I  see  as  good  crisis 
management, but I will also show the detrimental outcome that may result when these core 
principles are violated. In addition, I will also touch upon how regulation may facilitate – but 
sometimes also hinder – the application of these crisis management principles.  
One of the lessons I have learnt is that resolving a financial crisis takes time. It is a messy 
process and it costs a lot of money. Therefore, to handle a crisis effectively and minimise its 
detrimental effects on the overall economy, you need to stick to three basic principles: firstly, 
cooperate;  secondly,  act  swiftly;  and  thirdly,  be  economically  savvy.  This  holds  true 
regardless of what caused the crisis, and regardless of the solution. Let me explain to you in 
more detail, starting with the first principle.  
Principle 1: Cooperate  
Without  cooperation  between  central  banks,  supervisory  authorities  and  finance  ministries, 
there  is  no  such  thing  as  effective  crisis  management.  There  are  several  examples  of 
BIS Review 50/2010 
 1
situations  in  which  inadequate  or  failed  cooperation  has  resulted  in  a  deepened  and 
prolonged crisis.  
In fact, we recently experienced such a cooperation failure in my country, with the situation 
concerning Swedish banks operating in the Baltic countries. We, at the central bank, saw the 
build up of risk as problematic and believed that remedial measures should be applied. We 
also  pointed  to  these  problems  in  our  Financial  Stability  Report.  In  retrospect,  we  should 
have been clearer, especially regarding the potential consequences of these problems. But 
more  importantly,  we  failed  to  reach  agreement  on  this  with  the  authorities  in  the  Baltic 
countries  and  with  our  own  Swedish  supervisory  authority  (as  you  may  know,  we  have  a 
separate supervisory authority – in contrast to Spain, where supervision is undertaken under 
the umbrella of the central bank). I am not pointing a finger at any particular authority in any 
particular country – let me be clear about that. But I firmly believe that if we had cooperated 
better,  our  countries  would  probably  not  have  been  as  severely  affected  by  the  global 
repercussions of the credit crunch.  
To  avoid  this  kind  of  cooperation  failure,  you  need  a  clear  division  of  roles  and 
responsibilities. You need to share information and coordinate your actions. And to manage 
a crisis effectively, you need to be prepared. This requires planning ahead. By establishing, 
in  normal  times,  what  is  usually  referred  to  as  a  Domestic  Standing  Group  –  bringing 
together the supervisory authority, the central bank, the finance ministry and perhaps certain 
other  relevant  authorities  –  you  can  enhance  preparedness  by  developing  suitable  crisis 
management  tools  and  routines.  Creating  recovery  and  resolution  plans  together  with  the 
banks  is  another  productive  approach.  By  conducting  crisis  simulation  exercises,  you  can 
also test these tools and plans on various possible crisis scenarios.  
However,  as  banking  is  becoming  increasingly  internationalised,  merely  cooperating  within 
your  own  country  will  not  be  enough.  Cooperation  must  also  be  extended  across borders. 
This  is  particularly  true  for  countries  whose  banking  sectors  have  a  high  degree  of  cross-
border activities. Spain and Sweden share this characteristic, despite the fact that banks in 
our countries run their cross-border activities in very different ways.  
But cooperating across borders is difficult. There are all sorts of reasons for this. To mention 
a few, legal barriers, political pressure or even language and habits may all prevent fruitful 
exchanges between countries from taking place. During my years at the IMF, I have seen 
this pattern repeat itself – and it is not a pretty sight.  
In  Europe,  we  face  a  particular  and  somewhat  peculiar  cooperation  problem.  This  is 
sometimes described as the trilemma of banking supervision. A trilemma is similar to a trade-
off,  and  means  that  you  want  to  pursue  three  objectives  but  you  can  only  achieve  two  of 
them.  One  needs  to  be  given  up.  The  three  objectives  in  this  context  include,  first  of  all, 
effective  banking  supervision  and  crisis  management,  secondly,  national  sovereignty  of 
supervision and crisis management; and, finally, an integrated European market and all the 
benefits coming from more competition.  
In the EU, we have chosen the latter two – economic integration and national sovereignty of 
supervision and crisis management. This national sovereignty is manifested in what is known 
as the home country principle, meaning that the supervisory authority in the country where a 
bank is domiciled takes complete responsibility for the supervision of its branches abroad. 
This  home  country  principle  is  combined  with  economic  integration  and  allowing  banks  to 
establish  operations  across  Europe.  In  choosing  these  two  objectives,  the  third  objective 
 – effective supervision and crisis management – has been forsaken.  
This  is  clearly  manifested  in  Europe’s  current  approach  towards  supervising  banks  and 
managing crises. Economic integration and the EU’s pursuit of a single market for financial 
services  have  meant  that  some  banks  have  expanded  beyond  the  means  of  their  home 
countries. In addition, this expansion has also fostered the development of complex banking 
structures  and,  in  some  cases,  unsustainable  business  models.  The  Icelandic  banks  are 
illustrative  examples  in  this  respect,  attracting  depositors’  money  from  the  UK  and  the 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2010
finance  ministries  of 
the  supervision  authorities,  central  banks  and 
Netherlands and investing these funds in high yield structured products overseas. When their 
balance sheets had grown to around ten times the size of the Icelandic economy, it was quite 
clear for anyone to see that, if turmoil broke out, managing the situation was not going to be 
easy. But to be fair, it was difficult to anticipate the perfect storm in advance. Another lesson 
from this – and the strenuous and protracted negotiations between Icelandic and, primarily, 
British politicians that followed – is the need for establishing deposit guarantee schemes that 
are built up before a crisis occurs.  
The  international  expansion  of  banks  and  the  home  country  principle  have  also  had  other 
effects on crisis management. Authorities have simply not kept up with developments in the 
banking system. Contingency arrangements between home and host countries are not highly 
developed and neither are there any concrete suggestions for how to share the costs of a 
crisis.  While  we  have  achieved  economic  integration  and  maintained  national  sovereignty, 
we have renounced effective supervision and crisis management.  
But national sovereignty does not mean that our hands are tied. The remedy is quite simple, 
at  least  on  paper:  we  need  better  and  more  extensive  cooperation  between  supervisory 
authorities, central banks and finance ministries in Europe. This is the only feasible option. 
But how does one accomplish this, in practice? In fact, we have already taken the first steps. 
In  2008, 
the  
European Union signed a Memorandum of Understanding aimed at improving cross-border 
cooperation.  
This European memorandum encourages Member States with common banking groups to 
enhance  crisis  preparedness  by  developing  permanent  cooperation  structures.  These 
cooperation  structures,  or  so-called  Cross-Border  Stability  Groups,  should  include  a  clear 
division  of  roles  and  responsibilities  between  the  authorities  and  ministries.  They  should 
share  information;  discuss  potential  problems  and  solutions;  and  establish  procedures  on 
how to coordinate actions in a crisis. Over the longer term, such cooperation may also make 
it clear to the authorities involved that legal and regulatory harmonisation is a good thing.  
That looks good on paper. But the proof of the pudding is in the eating. Despite the fact that 
all EU Member States signed this memorandum almost two years ago, cooperation between 
authorities  in  different  European  countries  remains  limited.  For  instance,  as  far  as  I  know, 
only one Cross-Border Stability Group is presently being established. I am quite proud of the 
fact that the Swedish finance ministry, the supervisory authority and the Riksbank – together 
with the other authorities and ministries in the Nordic and Baltic countries – are among the 
signatories.  This  Nordic-Baltic  stability  group  has  a  clear  governance  arrangement  and  a 
comprehensive  list  of  responsibilities.  This  certainly  enhances  our  preparedness  for 
managing a crisis in any of our common international banking groups. And this will hopefully 
help  us  to  avoid  the  type  of  situation  I  described  earlier,  when  we  failed  to  take  remedial 
action to prevent the build up of risk in Swedish banks operating in the Baltic countries.  
But our Nordic-Baltic Cross-Border Stability Group was not built in a day. We have, in fact, 
held productive exchanges between our countries for years. One milestone was the Nordic-
Baltic crisis management exercise we ran in 2007. We based this exercise on the scenario of 
a major crisis in a cross-border Nordic bank. By trying to handle an imaginary crisis using 
actual  banks,  and  applying  the  institutional  and  regulatory  structures  of  the  different 
countries,  we  learnt  many  lessons  on  how  to  overcome  stumbling  blocks  and  clarify  the 
distribution of roles and responsibilities.  
So what I am trying to say is that establishing a well-functioning cooperation structure takes 
time. So for those countries that have not done so, I recommend an immediate start. And do 
not be dissuaded by the fact that it is time-consuming. It is this process – leading to closer 
cooperation – that builds trust between the authorities involved. And when it comes to crisis 
management, this trust is the glue that holds everything together.  
Had  we  had  better  cooperation  and  a  reasonable  level  of  trust  between  the  authorities 
concerned, I am convinced that many of the recent European cross-border banking failures 
BIS Review 50/2010 
 3
would have been handled very differently. For instance, in the Fortis case, I doubt that Dutch 
and Belgian ministries would have broken up the bank along national borders, in an instant 
probably  destroying  vast  economic  value.  The  Icelandic  case  could  also  have  turned  out 
differently,  had  there  been  better  cooperation  with  British  and  Dutch  authorities.  With 
frequent  interaction  with  its  foreign  counterparts,  the  inertia  of  the  Icelandic  supervisory 
authority would have been unlikely. I could continue providing examples, but the point is that, 
in most cases, the outcome would have been very different – and far better. 
For whatever reasons authorities and ministries have not cooperated across borders, there is 
no excuse  anymore. We need better coordination. And setting up a Cross-Border Stability 
Group is an important step in the right direction.  
But, despite all its virtues, cooperation does not always work. Legal barriers, political motives 
and  cultural  clashes  may  all  inhibit  willingness  to  cooperate.  I  therefore  believe  the  new 
European  supervisory  structure  –  currently  being  considered  by  the  Council  and  the 
Parliament  –  is  an  important  step  in  the  right  direction.  Among  other  things,  this  new 
structure  will  include  formal  European  Supervisory  Authorities.  These  authorities  will  be 
equipped with a number of tools to use when cooperation fails: they will be able to mediate 
when supervisory authorities do not agree on supervision and remedies; they will be able to 
take action when national supervisory authorities neglect community law, and so on. In short, 
the European Supervisory Authorities will provide supervisory authorities with the means to 
question other Member States’ supervisory practices and prudential decisions. Imagine what 
that could have meant for the UK, the Netherlands and Iceland in the Icesave case.  
Of course, this new European supervisory structure means loosening up national sovereignty 
of supervision. But if we want more effective supervision and crisis management, it is either 
that or forsaking economic integration. And given the benefits the single market offers, I do 
believe you would agree with me that forsaking economic integration is not an option.  
Principle 2: Act swiftly  
The  new  European  supervisory  structure  is  also  relevant  for  crisis  management  in  other 
ways. Apart from establishing European Supervisory Authorities, it also includes setting up a 
European  Systemic  Risk  Board.  The  role  of  this  risk  board  is  to  monitor  the  more  macro-
oriented aspects of the financial system, seeking to identify the build-up of risks in the system 
as a whole – so-called systemic risk. The buzz-word is “macroprudential” supervision. And 
when  such  systemic  risks  are  identified,  the  risk  board  delivers  risk  warnings  and 
recommendations to the authorities in the country or region in question. For instance, a good 
set of first recommendations from the systemic risk board would be to urge certain European 
countries,  including  my  own,  to  consider  loan-to-value  ratios  and  restrictions  on  foreign 
exchange lending.  
Listening  to  such  warnings  may  prevent  a  crisis  from  occurring.  But  even  if  a  crisis  is 
inevitable, being warned in advance will enable you to limit the detrimental effects of a crisis 
by starting remedial action early and taking action fast. And that is vital, because for banks, 
sunshine  turns  to  rain  quickly.  Banks  typically  operate  with  so  much  leverage  on  their 
balance sheets that even a relatively small loss can wipe out much or all of their capital in 
almost  an  instant.  This  means  that  a  bank  that  has  a  high  and  very  satisfactory  level  of 
capital in one quarter can become insolvent in the next! We have a recent Nordic example of 
this – Capinordic. This Danish bank – with a branch in Sweden – stood at 33 percent capital 
adequacy  in  the  third  quarter  of  2009.  The  next  quarter,  that  capital  had  vanished.  Credit 
losses consumed it all.  
When  a  situation  like  this  emerges,  confidence  tends  to  deteriorate  fast.  And  when 
confidence leaves, funding follows. Capinordic was a minor bank and its problems had few 
repercussions in the financial system. But when a larger bank is in trouble, confidence in the 
entire  system  may  evaporate.  When  that  happens,  contagion  is  already  at  work.  Liquidity 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2010
dries up. Banks and investors will be forced to sell, depressing asset prices, which triggers 
further sales. A systemic crisis is in full swing.  
So, when the first alarming signs appear that something is wrong, markets will be watching. If 
you want to maintain confidence, you simply do not have the luxury of time. But even if you 
cannot hinder a crisis, addressing it as early as possible and with determination can at least 
limit its effects. So my second principle of effective crisis management can be summed up as 
acting swiftly.  
While this principle is easy to support, crisis management in practice is often characterised 
by the opposite: taking too little action, too late. Essentially, there are two main reasons for 
supervisory and other authorities to neglect taking sufficient action in time – they lack either 
the willingness to act or the ability to act – sometimes both.  
There are many reasons for supervisory and other authorities to not want to act. Pressure 
from  the  industry  and  politicians  is  one  of  the  first  that  springs  to  mind.  Sometimes 
 – consciously or unconsciously – supervisory and other authorities also want to let banks 
gamble  on  turning  themselves  around.  And  banks  and  their  shareholders  are  often  more 
than willing to play along – they face a one way bet as they approach the brink of failure. But 
in  the  end,  the  longer  you  wait,  the  harder  you  fall.  For  that  reason,  I  don’t  have  a  high 
opinion of regulatory forbearance or other excuses for supervisory inaction.  
Ability  to  act  may  also  be  constrained.  First  and  foremost,  the  ability  to  act  is,  of  course, 
dependent upon the tools available. This partly concerns the tools enabling supervisory or 
other authorities to step in early to handle a crisis in an individual bank. But it is also valid 
outside  crisis  management  –  this  is  also  a  matter  of  the  tools  that  authorities  can  use  to 
address and counter systemic risks. Unfortunately, I think most European countries currently 
lack an appropriate set of tools in both these respects.  
But even with the best toolbox imaginable, you also need timely information of high quality to 
exercise judgement and act vigorously. Having an accounting system that recognises losses 
early and fully is a prerequisite. Not all would agree with me on that. Some believe that not 
recognizing losses or delaying their recognition is better. To me, that is more like closing your 
eyes  and  hoping  the  problem  disappears.  Normally,  it  does  not.  And  when  you open  your 
eyes again, the problem will probably have grown even larger.  
Principle 3: Be economically savvy  
When it is too late to prevent the crisis, you are left with two principal options for each failing 
bank. The first one is rather uncomplicated – you let the bank fail and wind it down using 
ordinary  bankruptcy  procedures.  But  while  this  option  is  uncomplicated,  its  consequences 
may not be – if you let a bank fail, you run the risk of unsettling the financial system.  
The second option – intervening to save the bank in part or as a whole – takes a little more 
cunning. But let me be very clear about one thing – banks are not saved because they in 
themselves  deserve  to  be  saved.  On  the  contrary,  their  managers  and  shareholders  have 
usually played a decisive role in getting the bank into trouble in the first place. Some banks 
are  saved  because  they  are  necessary  for  the  real  economy  to  operate.  Actually, 
governments do not save banks, but rather the functions that banks provide to society.  
But you can never be entirely sure in advance how the financial system (and ultimately the 
real  economy)  will  be  affected  by  a  bank  failure.  In  other  words,  knowing  which  banks  to 
save and which ones to let go is complicated. You need to weight the costs of unsettling the 
financial  system  in  relation  to  the  costs  of  saving  the  bank.  This  is  not  an  easy  task.  But 
despite the substantial uncertainty, you can be sure of one thing – whether you let a large 
bank  fail  or  rescue  it,  either  way  you  will  incur  substantial  costs  and  I  am  not  only  talking 
about financial costs but also about social dislocations!  
BIS Review 50/2010 
 5
However, deciding to save a bank does not imply being spendthrift. On the contrary, being 
economically  savvy  is  my  third  –  and  perhaps  most  important  –  principle  of  crisis 
management.  So  how  does  that  principle  manifest  itself  in  practical  actions?  Thankfully, 
history offers us a number of both good and bad examples from which several useful lessons 
can be drawn.  
The first lesson is to perform a thorough due diligence to clarify the extent of the problem in 
the  troubled  bank.  But,  in  line  with  my  previous  principle,  ideally  you  need  to  do  this  fast. 
Once you have a firm grasp of the bank’s difficulties, its time to carefully assess your support 
options. This assessment will, of course, include direct costs, but indirect consequences for 
the financial markets and the overall economy should also be taken into account.  
The second lesson is to opt for the least-cost solution. This may sound obvious, but many 
examples show that the lesson is not always heeded by decision-makers. In some cases, a 
least-cost solution means a state guarantee against losses on assets or a funding guarantee. 
But  when  that  does  not  suffice,  brokering  a  private  solution  –  such  as  a  takeover  from 
another,  sounder  bank  –  is  another  option.  This  usually  also  includes  some  elements  of 
guarantee in order to sweeten the deal for the acquiring bank. But guarantees may skew the 
incentive, so you need to tread carefully. Such skewed incentives are, in fact, good examples 
of the indirect costs you need to weigh in your assessment of alternative solutions.  
If neither of these solutions is possible, you are simply left with one single option – injecting 
capital  into  the  bank.  Textbooks  in  economics  typically  describe  the  functioning  of  central 
banks as lenders of last resort. A paraphrase can be used to describe the role of states in 
banking crises – states have had to become owners of last resort.  
But  before  the  money  goes  in,  make  sure  that  the  bank’s  managers  go  out.  You  simply 
cannot rely on the same people who jeopardised the bank in the first place. It is also a signal 
to the markets that things are about to change in the way that the bank is run. Of course, the 
bank should continue to be run on purely market-based terms, even though the state may 
become a major, or even the only, shareholder.  
Another  thing  you  must  ensure,  before  you  join  the  ranks  of  investors,  is  that  the  bank’s 
assets are conservatively valued.  Otherwise, you risk overpaying and instantly transferring 
taxpayers’ money into the hands of existing shareholders. Diluting the owners’ share of the 
bank – or, in some cases, even taking over the bank completely – also ensures an equitable 
upside for the taxpayers over time. And this is important, as capital injection does not mean 
permanent ownership. The idea, of course, is to exit the bank as soon as this is possible in 
an economically justifiable manner.  
A  good  restructuring  plan  turns  the  odds  of  such  an  exit  in  your  favour.  That  is  the  third 
lesson.  Profit  maximisation  should  be  the  guiding  principle  in  this  restructuring  process. 
Maximising profits, in turn, hinges on banking skills. So make sure the restructured bank is 
run  by  the  most  skilled  professional  bankers  you  can  find!  In  some  cases,  to  return  to 
profitability  and  prosperity,  the  restructured  bank  will  need  to  get  rid  of  its  most  troubled 
assets. In the Swedish crisis of the 1990s, this was achieved by splitting the most troubled 
banks into a good part that we sold, and a bad part that we wound down and sold separately. 
If  you  opt  for  this  solution,  make  sure  that  an  independent  asset  management  company, 
staffed with people with the right experience in handling troubled assets, runs the bad bank.  
Profit  maximisation  also  implies  ensuring  that  the  restructured  bank  is  out  of  the  reach  of 
political influence. This is important for two reasons. Depositors and lenders of the bank may 
exert influence on politicians to run the bank in a manner that is favourable to them. This may 
of course compromise profit maximization. Also, public servants are typically not trained to 
manage banks. But apart from lacking the specific skills, there is also an obvious risk that 
running  a  bank  will  interfere  with  the  regular  operations  of  the  public  authorities,  although 
these are probably not regular at all during a banking crisis.  
6 
 BIS Review 50/2010
If you get these things right, you may secure that upside that I just mentioned. And you may 
recoup  some  (or  perhaps  even  all)  of  the  costs  of  the  banking  crisis.  For  instance,  in  the 
Swedish  banking  crisis  of  the  1990s,  the  government  capital  injections  into  the  distressed 
banks rendered healthy profits for the taxpayers when (some of) that equity was eventually 
sold. Also, the independent asset management company managed to limit the losses on the 
troubled  assets  they  took  over  from  the  Swedish  banks.  Something  similar  seems  to  be 
occurring right now in the UK. The British also applied the good bank-bad bank model in the 
restructuring of Northern Rock. While the good part of that bank is still in the red, the bad part 
looks likely to return to making a profit already this year!  
So even though it is very difficult to assess all the direct and indirect effects of one particular 
solution in relation to another, those examples at least indicate that you can achieve better 
outcomes by acting economically savvy.  
But  following  the  principle  of  being  economically  savvy  is  important  not  only  because 
recklessly spending taxpayers’ money is irresponsible. It also serves other functions. One is 
combating  moral  hazard.  Some  people  see  the  injection  of  state  money  as  undue 
intervention,  and  look  on  it  as  a  sign  that  you  are  abandoning  the  mechanism  of  private 
markets.  Quite  frankly,  it  signifies the  opposite.  To  preserve  the  discipline  in  markets,  it  is 
important that shareholders and creditors are not allowed to walk away from a failure without 
suffering economic damage.  
So, did investors and creditors suffer their fair share of the losses during the recent crisis? 
Unfortunately, my answer is “no”. In many of the recent banking failures around the world, 
incumbent shareholders have maintained their ownership stakes or even remained in control 
of the bank. Creditors have enjoyed explicit or implicit guarantees. Thereby, public authorities 
have allowed moral hazard to prevail and a deficit of market discipline to arise in the banks. 
This problem must be addressed. And this is also what much of today’s debate is all about.  
One  tool  that  could  facilitate  this  is  contingent  capital  –  or  dilution  of  ownership  through 
contractually  enforced  debt-to-equity  conversions  when  a  bank  runs  into  trouble.  Such 
contingent  capital  can  buy  time  or  even  reduce  the  need  for  governmental  injections.  No 
wonder this idea is currently being contemplated by banking regulators across the globe. The 
difficulty lies, however, in finding trigger mechanisms and other features that would cover a 
multitude of distressed situations while, at the same time, being difficult to game. Also, it is 
hard to see how contingent capital solutions would work for mutual banks and other forms of 
cooperatives, as these banks do not have common shares.  
So,  while  contingent  capital  may  reduce  moral  hazard  and,  in  some  situations,  maintain  a 
bank as a going concern, it is not a silver bullet. Some banks will fail in spite of their equity 
being  propped  up  by  the  conversion  of  debt  instruments.  So  there  will  still  be  a  need  for 
economically savvy behaviour by public authorities.  
But  when  push  comes  to  shove,  such  behaviour  is  very  difficult  to  accomplish  in  practice. 
The main reason is that, in most jurisdictions, there are still significant shortcomings in the 
framework for the public management of banks in distress. Many governments are left with a 
general bankruptcy law as their only tool. For mutual banks and other forms of cooperatives, 
the  toolbox  is  even  more  limited.  Legal  constraints  also  make  it  problematic  to  deal  with 
banks in the so-called twilight zone – banks that breach the regulatory capital requirements 
but still remain legally solvent. Without specific and effective bank resolution schemes, it is 
often difficult to handle the distressed banks in an efficient manner, without simultaneously 
violating the legal rights of shareholders.  
Even so, the crisis seems to have been a wake-up call for many regulators. For instance, in 
the aftermath of Northern Rock and other examples, the UK introduced a special resolution 
regime that facilitates a swift and efficient state takeover of banks.  
BIS Review 50/2010 
 7
Less messy, less time-consuming and less costly crisis management.  
Unfortunately,  most  European  countries  do  not  yet  benefit  from  having  comprehensive 
resolution regimes. Establishing them is a lengthy process, so I urge countries without such 
schemes to act now. It is also important to take the opportunity and act while there is political 
will, in the immediate but very short wake of a financial crisis. In the Swedish crisis of the 
early 1990s, we clearly saw the need for a special regime for handling banks in distress. But 
it took us ten years to come up with a credible legislative proposal. And, by then, banks had 
returned to prosperity and the political window of opportunity had closed. Needless to say, 
Sweden still lacks a comprehensive special resolution regime for banks.  
So, for those countries that have not already done so, it is high time to consider introducing 
new laws that enable a more effective handling of troubled banks. In order to facilitate the 
handling  of  failing  cross-border  banks,  we  must  also  ensure  that  the  crisis  management 
framework is sufficiently harmonised across jurisdictions.  
By the time the next financial crisis hits us – which it will, sooner or later – such a framework 
will, hopefully, allow us to cooperate better and to act swiftly and with economic savvy. And 
that will be necessary to make crisis management less messy, less time-consuming and less 
costly. 
8 
 BIS Review 50/2010
