Njuguna Ndung’u: The agent banking model 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch of 
Ecobank Kenya’s Rapid Transfer Product, Nairobi, 17 June 2010. 
 Mr. Peter Kanyago, Chairman, Ecobank Kenya; 
Mr. Anthony Okpanachi, Managing Director of Ecobank Kenya; 
Board Members; 
Management and staff; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  am  delighted  to  have  been  invited  to  the  launch  of  the  new  Rapid  Transfer  Product  by 
Ecobank. I am informed that this new product will provide Ecobank customers with a fast, 
convenient,  reliable  and  secure  way  to  transfer  funds  at  all  Ecobank  branches  across 
27 African countries, making Ecobank a truly “Pan African Bank”. Allow me at this juncture to 
commend the Board, Management and Staff of Ecobank Kenya for the introduction of this 
new  product  that  will  not  only  enhance  customer  service  but  also  boost  trade  across  the 
African continent. The launch of Rapid Transfer Product is indeed another milestone for the 
banking industry and demonstrates Ecobank’s commitment to financial innovation. 
It is noteworthy that since Ecobank Kenya’s entry into the Kenyan market in June 2008, the 
bank  has  grown  its  branch  network  from  9  to  the  current  20  branches  including  the  Head 
Office.  This  indeed  shows  the  level  of  confidence  that  the  Board  and  the  Management  of 
Ecobank have in the Kenyan Market. 
Despite the various local and global turbulences experienced over the past two years, the 
banking sector continues to exhibit resilience and has remained strong. The impressive 2009 
end year performance has been largely supported by growth in deposits, injection of capital, 
retention of profits and also declining costs of doing business supported by technology. 
During the period ended April 2010, the sector’s assets stood at Kshs.1.5 trillion, with gross 
loans and advances at Kshs.799.5 billion. Deposits increased to Kshs.1.1 trillion supported 
mainly  by  branch  expansion,  receipts  from  exports  and  remittances  from  abroad.  At  the 
same  time,  the  banking  sector  registered  a  pre-tax  profit  of  ksks19.5  billion,  in  the  four 
months to April 2010 compared to Shs 48 billion in the twelve months of 2009. The sector is 
therefore likely to achieve better results this year compared to the previous year. 
Despite  the  impressive  performance  by  banks,  customers  continue  to  shoulder  the  heavy 
burden  of  high  transactional  costs.  This  historical  burden  has  to  be  dislodged  now.  In  an 
effort to bring down the cost of offering financial services to the Kenyan public, Central Bank 
together with other stakeholders have put in place a business model aimed at broadening 
financial inclusion to the majority of Kenyans at a lower cost – The Agent Banking Model. It 
is  envisaged  that  this  model  will  enable  banks  to  leverage  on  additional  cost  effective 
distribution  channels  to  offer  financial  services.  To  achieve  this,  the  Banking  Act  was 
amended through the Finance Act, 2009, to permit banks to contract third parties to provide 
certain banking services on their behalf. The guidelines to facilitate the rolling out of agency 
model were issued by the Central bank and took effect from May this year. 
Second,  the  cost  of  screening  and  monitoring  existing  and  potential  borrowers  will  decline 
with the introduction of Credit Reference Bureaus. This is the time to use this screening and 
monitoring  technology  to  reach  the  SME  in  need  of  support  to  invest  and  expand.  The 
Budget proposals in the Finance Bill 2010 have come up with a wonderful proposal on SME 
to enhance this. 
BIS Review 86/2010 
 1
The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  has  since  September  2009  been  implementing 
decisions aimed at signaling to the market the need to expand credit to the private sector at 
affordable interest rates. This has been achieved by way of lowering Central Bank Rate and 
Cash Ratio requirements. I am happy to note that the MPC decisions have started to bear 
fruit as evidenced by lowering of base rate by a number of major banks in Kenya, with the 
lowest base rate currently standing at 10%. We have room to do more, commensurate with 
returns  on  investment  that  banks  screen  and monitor.  Finally,  let  me  reiterate  that  Central 
Bank  and  indeed  the  Government  of  Kenya  will  continue  to  pursue  policies  that  create 
conducive  environment  to  allow  the  growth  of  the  financial  sector  by  encouraging  the 
provision of banking services to majority of the unbanked Kenyan population and to support 
the real sector of the economy. We want to encourage Pan African Banks like Ecobank to 
have foot prints in Kenya to broaden the financial services platform. 
With these few remarks ladies and gentlemen, it is now my honour and pleasure to declare 
the Rapid Money Transfer Product officially launched.  
Thank you and God bless you all. 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2010
