Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: What has the financial crisis taught us? The global 
dimension and international policy cooperation 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the 21st Century Forum 2010, Beijing, 7 September 2010. 
 Abstract 
A  striking  feature  of  the  crisis  is  the  synchronised  manner  in  which  shocks  have  been 
transmitted  across  market  segments  and  countries.  And  a  key  lesson  of  the  crisis  is  that 
keeping  an  economy  in  order  does  not  necessarily  insulate  it  from  external  shocks.  An 
excessive  focus  on  the  domestic  economy  may  exacerbate  global  economic  and  financial 
imbalances,  ultimately  making  future  global  crises  more  likely  and  more  severe.  The  key 
challenge faced by global policy-makers is to make the system safer and avert future crises. 
A  new  paradigm  for  international  cooperation  is  thus  required  from  global  policy-makers  
– one in which longer-term objectives, such as sustainable growth, are fully internalised. The 
speech also highlights the importance of peer-reviewed mechanisms and strong surveillance 
in this context. 
Introduction1 
It is a great pleasure to share with you some thoughts about the financial crisis, which will be 
the focus of my talk today. If I had to pick a striking feature of the crisis from which we can 
draw  lessons  for  the  future,  I  would  choose  the  term  “contagion”.  It’s  contagion  that  has 
made  this  crisis  truly  global.  The  synchronised  manner  in  which  shocks  have  been 
transmitted across market segments and countries is perhaps what distinguishes this crisis 
from previous ones. The growing interconnectedness of the world economy has enabled the 
crisis to spread above and beyond what would be warranted by fundamentals and to attain a 
truly global dimension. 
To  me,  a  key  message  for  all  of  us  from  the  crisis  is  that  keeping  an  economy  in  order, 
keeping one’s own house in order, so to speak, does not necessarily insulate it from external 
shocks.  Moreover,  an  excessive  focus  on  the  domestic  economy  may  actually  exacerbate 
global economic and financial imbalances, ultimately making future global crises more likely 
and more severe. The key challenge faced by global policy-makers is to make the system 
safer and avert future crises. No country is immune to them. 
Strengthening  international  cooperation  in  the  global  economic  and  financial  sphere  is 
crucial. Policy-makers have been paying lip-service to international cooperation for years. It 
is  a  policy  prescription  that  is  commonly  stated  but  –  let’s  admit  it  –  rarely  defined,  and 
therein  lies  the  problem.  To  some,  the  upper  bound  of  international  cooperation  is 
determined by the advice to put your house in order. Understood in this way, international 
cooperation  is  an  exercise  in  which  the  national  authorities  are  solely  responsible  for 
identifying  and  solving  problems,  albeit  in  a  process  which  is  monitored  by  other  parties. 
Advocates of such a form of cooperation – if we can call it that – tend to cite its advantages: 
they claim, for instance, that national authorities “know best” or that full sovereignty and the 
absence of finger-pointing increases the chances of achieving cooperative outcomes. 
                                                 
1  
I wish to thank Marcel Fratzscher, Marco Lo Duca and Francisco Ramón-Ballester for their contributions to 
this speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
BIS Review 114/2010 
 1
Moreover, the “put your house in order” approach to international cooperation neatly provides 
both  the  recipe  for  corrective  action  as  well  as  the  blueprint  for  the  sustainability  of  the 
system:  if  each  party  managed  to  keep  its  own  house  in  order  –  the  theory  goes  –  policy 
failures  would  not  occur,  negative  spillovers  would  be  contained,  and  crises  would  not 
happen.  
In this talk today, I would like to explain why a system of international cooperation built on the 
“put  your  house  in  order”  concept  is  insufficient  to  achieve  global  economic  and  financial 
stability.  
I  will  outline  the  global  roots  of  the  crisis,  and  in  particular  how  a  lack  of  coordination  of 
international  policies  was  inspired  precisely  by  the  “put  your  house  in  order”  approach  to 
international cooperation. Insufficient cooperation was evident in a number of areas. There 
were, for instance, supervisory and regulatory inconsistencies involving systemic players as 
well as a lacklustre policy response to global imbalances. I will also review how the gaps in 
the system in turn helped the crisis to spread globally across segments and countries. 
All of this suggests that maintaining the pre-crisis mode of cooperation – i.e. the one which 
did not anticipate and keep at bay the trouble we got into – cannot be a sustainable recipe for 
the recovery. I will argue that a new paradigm for international cooperation is required from 
global policy-makers − one in which longer-term objectives, such as sustainable growth, are 
fully internalised in a time-consistent manner. I will conclude by pointing to the importance of 
peer-reviewed  mechanisms  and  strong  surveillance  in  this  context,  and  also  draw  on  the 
European experience to this end.  
The global roots of the crisis 
1.  
In its most basic form, the crisis demonstrated the lack of cooperation at various levels:  
Inconsistent rulebook 
Before  the  crisis,  the  system  displayed  an  interesting  dichotomy,  with  finance  being 
increasingly global while supervision and regulation largely remaining national in scope and 
only  loosely  coordinated  internationally.  The  fact  that  rules  and  regulations  differed  for 
systemic  players  in  areas  such  as  bank  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  or  accounting 
standards was not thought to be a problem as long as the applicable “rulebook” was clear in 
each  jurisdiction.  This  was  consistent  with  the  “put  your  house  in  order”  premise  for 
international  cooperation.  Few  observers  at  the  time  paid  attention  to  the  apparent 
contradictions  inherent  in  the  system,  but  in  hindsight  the  shortcomings  resulting  from  this 
arrangement  are  all  too  evident.  Diverging  rules  and  regulations  encouraged  regulatory 
arbitrage by financial institutions. More broadly, the system was not equipped to cope with 
the  international  nature  of  the  crisis.  For  example,  the  absence  of  a  clear  cross-border 
banking  resolution  framework  in  Europe  conditioned  the  authorities’  initial  response  to  the 
crisis in this field, which was initially hesitant and “national” in character. The absence of a 
common  rulebook  for  global  financial  systems  exacerbated  other  weaknesses  in  the  “put 
your  house  in  order”  category,  including  poor  risk  management  by  institutions  and  a 
generalised underestimation of risk, leading to an overextended financial sector. 
Global imbalances and negative externalities 
Excessive global imbalances2 had a major role in creating the fragilities that led to the crisis. 
Policies inspired by the “put your house in order” philosophy were the main determinants of 
                                                 
2   Obstfeld and Rogoff, “Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis: Products of Common Causes”, 
http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~obstfeld/santabarbara.pdf 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2010
global imbalances because they lacked medium-term orientation and global coordination. In 
other  words,  these  policies  were  excessively  short-term  and  did  not  fully  account  for  the 
knock-on effects (or negative externalities) on each other.  
The years prior to 2007 were characterised by low financial market volatility and risk premia 
across market segments and low yields across the maturity spectrum. In this environment, 
banks and other investors engaged in a “search for yield” spurring financial innovation. The 
pace of financial innovation exceeded the supervisors’ and market participants’ capacity to 
solve a number of valuation, risk management and incentive issues. The result was a highly 
opaque system of credit risk distribution. 
The low-yield environment therefore played a key role in the accumulation of fragilities that 
led to the crisis. Its core macroeconomic precondition was a global glut in net savings as well 
as  liquidity,  coupled  with  a  lack  of  safe  financial  assets  at  global  level.  The  savings  and 
liquidity glut was largely the outcome of policies that reinforced or insufficiently countered the 
effects of savings-investments and current account configurations.  
Part of the responsibility for the creation of global imbalances lay with those countries that 
underestimated the risks of high consumer indebtedness and large current account deficits. 
However, export-led growth strategies pursued by several systemically important emerging 
market economies, including China, also contributed substantially to the build-up of fragilities 
at  global  level.  These  strategies,  intentionally  or  not,  led  to  persistent  interventions  in  the 
foreign  exchange  market  on  a  unilateral  basis  and  the  accumulation  of  large  external 
reserves reinvested in the borrowing countries. In the short term, the  strategies generated 
growth in these economies; however they had several negative effects, both at domestic and 
at  global  level.  Domestically,  they  led  to  forms  of  financial  underdevelopment  that  had 
negative consequences on capital allocation and income distribution. At global level, export-
led growth strategies made it easy for the US to incur large and increasing current account 
deficits and to delay the necessary adjustments. They also gave rise to an accumulation of 
dollar-denominated assets which could not be reinvested in emerging market economies due 
to  their  financial  underdevelopment  in  the  form  of  a  shortage  of  safe  financial  assets. 
Moreover, the build-up of these assets resulted in a de facto taxation of consumption and a 
subsidy  for  inefficient  investment,  which  in  turn  prevented  an  efficient  inter-temporal 
smoothing of consumption and a rebalancing of growth towards domestic demand. 
All of these factors contributed to the compression of yields across the maturity spectrum. 
According  to  the  average  estimates  of  a  pool  of  studies,  central  bank  purchases  of  US 
Treasuries alone lowered US long-term interest rates by around 70 basis points, with some 
studies estimating an impact of up to 200 basis points. 
Weak surveillance mechanisms 
Surveillance mechanisms with “put your house in order” at their heart proved to be weak in 
the run-up to the crisis. The IMF recognised that a surveillance framework centred around 
“put  your  house  in  order”  was  insufficient  to  meet  the  demands  of  the  world  economy  in 
2007,  when  it  updated  its  Decision  on  Bilateral  Surveillance  over  Members’  Policies  and 
placed the concept of external stability (the country-level counterpart to international stability) 
at its heart. The Decision also reaffirmed that Fund surveillance should focus on promoting 
countries’  external  stability  and  examining  whether  a  country’s  exchange  rate,  fiscal, 
monetary  and  financial  sector  policies  are consistent  with  this  objective.  Unfortunately,  the 
IMF’s  2007  Surveillance  Decision  was  never  implemented  as  originally  devised,  largely 
because  of  some  countries’  resistance  to  having  their  exchange  rates  labelled  as 
“fundamentally misaligned”. The revised surveillance guidelines have shied away from this 
label in an effort to reduce stigma and thereby increase the traction of Fund surveillance with 
policy-makers. I will come back to this and other Fund efforts to modernise surveillance at 
the end of my talk.  
BIS Review 114/2010 
 3
the  euro  area.  The  problems  associated  with 
Weaknesses  in  surveillance  before  the  crisis  were  not  only  apparent  in  multilateral 
institutions but also in regional peer-reviewed mechanisms, such as the ones underpinning 
the  economic  governance  of 
the 
implementation of the EU’s Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) and the statistical deficiencies 
which undermined confidence in Greece have been the salient examples in this regard. I will 
also come back at a later stage to the policy efforts undertaken by European authorities to 
deal with these shortcomings. 
Not all the pre-crisis surveillance failings can be attributed to the inadequate identification of 
risks. Even when the policy prescription was correct, implementation was lagging. In 2006, 
the  IMF  organised  a  series  of  discussions  with  systemic  players  in  order  to  devise  a 
concerted solution to the problem of global imbalances. This initiative was an important step 
forward in itself, as it was a clear recognition that the system was not self-sustaining and that 
policy externalities on peers could be significant. However, the policy response by the parties 
involved in the IMF’s multilateral consultation process on global imbalances was lacklustre.  
The global transmission of the crisis  
2.  
The  level  of  interconnectedness in  the  world  economy  means  that  policies inspired  by  the 
“put  your  house  in  order”  philosophy  cannot  insulate  an  individual  economy  from  external 
shocks.  In  this  context,  the  role  for  international  policies  is  twofold.  First,  international 
cooperation  can  restore  market  confidence  –  the  lack  of  which  is  an  important  source  of 
contagion. Second, adopting a new regime of international cooperation to avert a new crisis 
would also benefit domestic financial and economic stability. 
Channels of contagion 
The crisis was severe; it developed very rapidly and had a global impact. After the collapse 
of  Lehman,  the  shock  caused  substantive  real  costs  almost  everywhere.  China,  too,  was 
affected:  exports  fell  considerably  and  took  13  months  to  reach  their  pre-crisis  (October 
2008) level again. That is why I consider global contagion one of the most striking features of 
the crisis.  
By using the word contagion, I want to emphasise that the crisis spread across countries in a 
way that went beyond what the traditional linkages, such as trade, or vulnerabilities implied 
by domestic fundamentals, would suggest.  
The way the crisis spread indicates the existence of an interconnectedness which enables 
the  fast  transmission  of  both  positive  and  negative  shocks  across  economies  through 
multiple channels. I would emphasise the role of “confidence contagion”, in transmitting the 
crisis across the globe. After the collapse of Lehman, the steady worsening of the economic 
and  financial  environment  in  the  shape  of  negative  events  that  exceeded  the  most 
pessimistic  expectations  resulted  in  a  situation  of  unprecedented  “Knightian  uncertainty”. 
This shows how the failure of a systemic market player, such as a major financial institution 
or  a  sovereign,  can  make  it  an  extremely  complex  task  to  map  and  quantify  risks  and  to 
identify credible scenarios. The way the crisis unfolded shows that such a situation can lead 
to multiple market failures. 
First,  when  uncertainty  and  risk  aversion  increase,  international  liquidity  can  dry  up  and 
investors can unwind in a disorderly way their positions with adverse consequences at global 
level. 
After the failure of Lehman, uncertainty about the solvency of counterparties led to a run on 
US  money  market  funds.  As  a  consequence,  a  global  shortage  of  US  dollars  emerged, 
affecting banks in emerging market economies as well. 
Dysfunctional  money  markets  and  uncertainty  about  their  own  cash  needs  led  banks  to 
aggressively  seek  liquidity  by  unwinding  their  positions  in  several  market  segments. 
4 
 BIS Review 114/2010
Furthermore, in an attempt to strengthen their capital bases in the view of adverse market 
conditions and potential losses, banks became more risk-averse and sold off risky assets, 
amplifying the initial shock. The resulting disorderly unwinding of the positions of international 
leveraged  investors  resulted  in  a  sell-off  of  emerging  market  asset  classes  and  a  sharp 
depreciation in the currencies of these economies. Gross capital inflows went into  reverse 
and  financing  conditions  were  tightened,  reducing  liquidity  across  market  segments  and 
raising bond yields in both international and local currencies. 
Second,  uncertainty  can  also  have  other  important  real  negative  effects.  Some  studies 
highlight  the  role  of  uncertainty  in  business  cycle  fluctuations.  For  example,  it  has  been 
shown  that  the  collapse  of  stock  prices  in  October  1929  generated  temporary  uncertainty 
about  future  income,  which  led  consumers  to  forgo  purchases  of  durable  goods3. 
Additionally,  theoretical  and  empirical  studies  show  that  major  uncertainty  shocks  have  a 
large  real  impact  on  the  US  economy,  bringing  about  a  substantial  drop  and  rebound  in 
output  and  employment.  This  occurs  because  higher  uncertainty  causes  firms  to  suspend 
their  investment  and  hiring.  In  turn,  this  affects  consumer  confidence  and  spending. 
Productivity growth also falls because this pause in activity freezes reallocation across units4. 
We saw how this mechanism can work after the collapse of Lehman in September 2008. The 
high level of uncertainty froze investment and consumer spending in advanced economies. 
In this context, trade was hit very hard, due to a composition effect, as it mainly comprises 
durable goods5. The mounting expectations of a global slowdown caused a rapid decline of 
commodity prices which impacted heavily on commodity exporters. 
European experience: the Greek crisis, contagion and the role of European 
cooperation 
The shock to market confidence generated by the Greek downgrade has parallels with the 
Lehman collapse in September 2008. Also in that case, contagion caused tensions across 
markets and countries. This reinforces the idea that policies inspired by the “put your house 
in order” philosophy are not enough to insulate a domestic economy from external shocks. 
The  Greek  credit  rating  downgrade  last  April  took  place  in  a  weak  environment,  with 
international investors extremely sensitive to negative events. Confidence contagion spread 
the shock across the region. Financial tensions quickly propagated across market segments 
in  Europe.  Contagion  from  sovereign  risk  moved  to  the  banking  system  as  the  market 
focused on the exposures of European banks to troubled euro area governments. The loss of 
confidence  in  the  banking  system  led  to  new  strains  in  money  markets.  Furthermore,  the 
shock spread across the globe through a network of leveraged international investors who 
moved to safe havens as soon as the business climate deteriorated. 
On  the  eve  of  the  first  weekend  in  May  financial  markets  were  on  the  verge  of  a  global 
contagion  risk,  with  systemic  implications.  Correlation  and  volatility  indicators  increased  to 
levels above those reached right after Lehman Brothers’ failure. 
In this context, the recent experience in Europe may illustrate how successful international 
cooperation  can  calm  markets  and  halt  contagion.  To  restore  market  confidence,  the  EU 
Member  States  agreed  to  establish  a  comprehensive  package  of  measures,  consisting 
mainly of three elements. First, it was agreed to speed up structural reforms and accelerate 
fiscal  consolidation,  especially  in  countries  experiencing  the  strongest  market  pressures. 
                                                 
3   Romer (1990), “The Great Crash and the Onset of the Great Depression”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 
Vol. 105, No. 3 (Aug., 1990), pp. 597–624. 
4   Bloom (2009), “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks”, Econometrica, Vol. 77, No. 3 (May, 2009), 623–685. 
5   Brincongne,  Fontagné,  Gaulier,  Taglioni  and  Vicard,  “Firms  and  the  Global  Crisis:  French  Exports  in  the 
Turmoil”, Document de Travail n. 265, December 2009. 
BIS Review 114/2010 
 5
Second,  the  ECOFIN  Council  adopted  a  regulation  setting  up  the  European  Financial 
Stabilisation  Mechanism  (EFSM),  which  allows  the  European  Commission  to  raise  up  to 
€60 billion for lending to troubled EU Member States. Third, euro area countries established 
the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF)  to  provide  loans  of  up  to  a  total  of 
€440 billion to euro area countries in difficulty, subject to strong policy conditionality in the 
context of joint euro area-IMF programmes. On 15 June, the EFSF agreement entered into 
force and on 4 August the Facility was activated. The IMF is also expected to contribute by 
providing  financing  amounting  to  at  least  half  as  much  the  euro  area  contribution  to  each 
programme.  
Both the EFSM and EFSF financial assistance will be subject to strong policy conditionality 
and  take  place  in  the  context  of  joint  EU-IMF  programmes.  These  policy  actions  and  the 
recent  bank  stress  tests  have  succeeded  in  reducing  market  tensions  and  restoring 
confidence. I believe these policies were successful mainly because of the unprecedented 
and exemplary coordination at European level. 
The way forward: exiting from the crisis through cooperation  
3.  
The main lesson from the crisis is that global problems demand global solutions. We cannot 
get  out  of  the  crisis  simply  by  maintaining  the  “put  your  house  in  order”  approach  to 
international cooperation; it should be dealt with in a coordinated fashion. In this context, I 
would like to emphasise the following: 
Need for a consistent rulebook  
It  is  clear  that  the  global  financial  system  cannot  continue  to  effectively  function  under 
nationally based regulatory environments. This is why the work being conducted under the 
auspices of the G20 process on global principles for rules and regulations of various financial 
activities  is  important.  For  example,  progress  is  being  made  by  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking Supervision (BCBS) towards a new regime for bank capital and liquidity standards, 
with the broad aim being to raise both the quantity and quality of capital, to be implemented 
by  end-2012.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  has  devised  a  number  of  standards  for 
sound compensation practices, and is cooperating with other relevant bodies to establish a 
single global accounting standard. Discussions under the G20 aegis are also ongoing in a 
number of other areas, including the expansion of the perimeter of regulation and supervision 
(e.g. hedge funds, credit rating agencies, over-the-counter derivatives), and the treatment of 
systemically  important  financial  institutions,  including  ways  for  the  financial  sector  to 
contribute  to  the  costs  associated  with  government  interventions.  It  is  essential  that  these 
global  initiatives  are  brought  to  a  successful  conclusion  so  as  to  ensure  a  comprehensive 
and level playing field for all parties.  
In parallel, work is also under way to strengthen the existing framework for cooperation on 
financial  regulation  and  supervision  in  Europe.  Micro-prudential  supervision  is  set  to  be 
reinforced with the creation of a European System of Financial Supervisors, including three 
new  European  Supervisory  Agencies  in  banking,  insurance,  and  securities.  At  the  macro-
prudential  level,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  is  soon  to  be  established  to 
conduct oversight of the EU financial system in order to prevent or mitigate systemic risks.  
Importance of strong surveillance 
In  a  global  economy  marked  by  increasing  interconnectedness,  the  potential  for  negative 
cross-border  spillovers  is  high,  implying  that  the  need  to  appropriately  factor  in  negative 
externalities arising from policy choices is greater. This is why strong surveillance is essential 
in  the  system.  The  IMF  has  recently  made  several  proposals  in  order  to  modernise 
surveillance,  including  producing  spillover  reports  and  adopting  a  multilateral  surveillance 
decision.  Fund  staff  have  put  forward  these  instruments  in  order  to  fill  the  existing  “policy 
6 
 BIS Review 114/2010
gap”  in  the  Fund’s  bilateral  surveillance.  The  gap  means  that  member  countries  are  not 
required  to  change  their  domestic  policies  as  long  as  these  are  consistent  with  domestic 
stability, despite of their negative externalities for others. But policies cannot be judged only 
on  the  basis  of  countries’  best  short-term  interests,  for  if  they  undermine  stability  in  other 
countries, they might ultimately have negative repercussions at home. These initiatives are 
welcome insofar as they go in the same direction and entail a more accountable system with 
an appropriate factoring-in of negative externalities. 
The  Fund’s  efforts  to  modernise  its  surveillance  practices  is  welcome.  Adopting  a 
“multilateral perspective” towards bilateral surveillance which systematically analyses inward 
and  outward  spillovers is  one  of  the  “surveillance  priorities”6  identified by  the  Fund  for  the 
2008–2011 period. Other surveillance areas targeted for improvement include the analysis of 
exchange rates and external stability risks, risk assessment, and financial sector surveillance 
and real-financial linkages.  
As far as Europe is concerned, the ECB has recently put forward a number of proposals7 [7] 
to  reinforce  the  economic  governance  of  the  euro  area.  These  include:  i)  strengthening 
surveillance  over  budgetary  policies  and  more  effective  prevention/correction  of  excessive 
deficits  and  debts,  inter  alia  through  the  quasi-automaticity  of  excessive  deficit  procedures 
and sanctions; ii) an improved framework for competitiveness surveillance and the correction 
of economic imbalances; and iii) the design of an appropriate euro area framework for crisis 
management.  These  proposals  will  be  taken  up  by  the  taskforce  chaired  by  European 
Council President Van Rompuy which is looking at economic governance in the European 
Union. The taskforce is expected to report to ministers by October 2010.  
The recent experience in the euro area also shows that surveillance cannot be “outsourced” 
or delegated to markets. Markets can be very erratic and move in a discontinuous fashion. 
The  trends  in  euro  area  bond  markets  before,  during,  and  after  the  crisis  suggest  that 
markets tend to undervalue risk in “good times” and overvalue it in “bad times”. This is why 
market  surveillance  can  usefully  complement,  but  not  replace,  enhanced  surveillance  by 
policy-makers themselves. 
Peer-reviewed frameworks as a way to achieve longer-term objectives  
In the aftermath of the crisis, peer-reviewed frameworks could help to steer policy-makers’ 
choices  away  from  objectives  which  may  appear  beneficial  in  the  short  term  but  are 
ultimately  unsustainable  in  the  long  term.  In  this  context,  the  Mutual  Assessment  Process 
(MAP) for sustainable growth launched by the G20 is promising, as some weaknesses are 
better seen “from the outside”.  
In  addition,  peer-reviewed  frameworks  can  also  help  countries  to  pool  strengths  and 
resources so as to better tackle common vulnerabilities, as European cooperation to solve 
the Greek crisis clearly demonstrated.  
A new paradigm for international cooperation 
A successful exit from the crisis requires not only an enhanced role for policy cooperation but 
also  a  new  paradigm.  For  example,  even  if  regulation  and  supervision  are  consistently 
strengthened at global level, the persistence of international imbalances (if left unaddressed) 
will continue to render the system vulnerable to crises. Policy-makers thus need to recognise 
the fact that the interconnected nature of today’s world economy requires a different way of 
                                                 
6   See https://www.imf.org/external/np/pdr/surv/2008/index.htm 
7   See “Reinforcing Economic Governance in the Euro Area”, 
http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/reinforcingeconomicgovernanceintheeuroareaen.pdf 
BIS Review 114/2010 
 7
addressing  policies  as  well  as  a  stronger  role  for  cooperation.  A  system  in  which  some 
policy-makers accept a degree of “intrusion” into their policies as a quid pro quo for intruding 
into the policies of others, with externalities being internalised in domestic policy-making for 
the greater public good of global economic and financial stability. 
Conclusions 
4.  
Let me conclude with some general observations on international policy cooperation. There 
is often a divide between theory and practice when discussing this issue. In theory, it is not 
difficult  to  demonstrate  that  international  cooperation,  by  which  countries  internalise  the 
external impact of their actions, and that of the others, before taking decisions, and subject 
themselves  to  international  agreements,  produces  Pareto  superior  solutions.  In  practice, 
however,  national  policy-makers  rarely  subject  their  policies  to  international  considerations 
and tend to take decisions purely with domestic interests in mind. Global problems require 
global  and  coordinated  responses  but,  as  the  saying  goes,  “All  politics  is  local”  and  thus 
decisions  are  often  taken  in  a  partial  equilibrium  context.  How  can  we  reconcile  this 
dilemma? 
One way is to learn from experience. The recent crisis is largely a result of policy decisions 
which were taken without giving due consideration to the broader international environment 
and  which  frequently  had  very  short-term  objectives.  There  was  no  shortage  of  warnings. 
The multilateral consultation process, which involved five large economies in the context of 
the IMF in 2006–08 – in which both China and the euro area participated – pointed to the risk 
produced by growing imbalances and tried to focus the attention of policy-makers on longer-
term  policies  necessary  for  achieving  sustainable  and  balanced  growth.  However,  little 
attention was given to these recommendations because there was no sense of urgency. The 
respective economies were still growing and there were no signs of crisis. The same applies 
today: as the world is gradually recovering from the crisis, the focus seems to have turned 
again  towards  very  short-term  targets  related  to  growth  and  employment,  but  with  little 
consideration  paid  to  sustainability.  There  is  a  risk  that  the  mistakes  of  the  past  will  be 
quickly forgotten or even ignored as soon as conditions improve.  
Those who do not learn from past errors are condemned to repeat them. 
The alternative is to strengthen surveillance procedures and rule-based mechanisms which 
oblige  policy-makers  to  pay  more  attention  to  external  conditions  and  to  medium-term 
objectives. This is the avenue we are following in the European Union. Stronger procedures 
to avoid nominal divergences within the euro area are currently being devised and a more 
rules-based  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  in  the  process  of  being 
agreed by the Member States, in particular within the euro area. Stronger cooperation should 
not replace sound domestic policies, but these are easier to implement and to explain to the 
public if they are framed in a broader context.  
No crisis should be wasted – it is often said. We have to recognise the problems of the past, 
learn from them, and also be ready to implement changes in the way policies are carried out. 
This is important both at European and at global level, where much remains to be done to 
strengthen the procedures and institutions that form the basis for cooperation.  
I thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 114/2010
  BIS Review 114/2010 
   9
