Njuguna Ndung’u: Consolidating economic integration in Africa 
Remarks  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
9th Meeting of the Association of African Central Banks (AACB) Eastern Africa Sub-region, 
Nairobi, 14 July 2010. 
 Hon. Uhuru Kenyatta, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance of the Republic 
of Kenya; 
Fellow Central Bank Governors of the Eastern Africa Sub-region;  
The Executive Secretary General of the AACB; 
Chief Executives of Regulatory Authorities in Kenya; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  for  Finance,  allow  me  to  thank  you  most 
sincerely  for  finding  time  from  your  busy  schedule  to  grace  this  important  meeting  in  the 
calendar  of  Central  Banks  in  the  Eastern  Africa  Region.  Your  presence  here  today 
demonstrates the serious commitment of the Government of Kenya to monetary and financial 
integration  in  the  Continent  as  we  strive  to  become  a  regional  financial  hub  in  line  with 
Kenya’s  Vision  2030.  For  instance,  just  this  month,  we  witnessed  the  launching  of  the 
implementation of the East African Common Market. 
May I also extend a hand of welcome to my fellow Governors from the Eastern Africa sub-
region present here today. I heartily thank you for finding time to be in Nairobi. This is indeed 
a very great honour to the Central Bank of Kenya and our country. I also warmly welcome 
the Executive Secretary of the AACB whose presence and contributions in the deliberations 
we look forward to. 
We  also  appreciate  the  presence  of  the  Chief  Executives  of  other  Financial  Sector 
Regulatory  Authorities  in  Kenya,  whose  presence  here  today  signifies  the  all  important 
synergy required between the different regulators in the process of financial integration. 
Hon. Minister, the Abuja Treaty envisaged the integration of the African Continent through, 
among others, the strengthening of the sub-regional groupings and harmonization of national 
policies for the eventual evolvement of a monetary union in the continent. 
In  line  with  this,  the  Assembly  of  Governors  in  the  Continent  have  been  implementing  the 
African  Monetary  Cooperation  Programme  (AMCP)  since  they  adopted  it  on  September  4, 
2002 in Algiers. The objective of this program is to put in place a common single currency 
and a common single central bank at continental level by 2021, at the end of a successful 
convergence  process,  in  accordance  with  the  African  leaders’  vision  of  consolidating 
economic integration in Africa. 
Commendable progress in the implementation of the AMCP by the Eastern Africa sub-region 
has  been  made.  Most  of  our  active  members  have  been  meeting  a  number  of  the 
macroeconomic  convergence  targets,  as  we  continue  harmonization  and  co-ordination  of 
macroeconomic and monetary policies. We recently embarked on Stage III (year 2009–2012) 
of  the  programme,  whose  successful  implementation  and  assessment  of  macroeconomic 
performance  will  form  a  basis  for  the  establishment  of  a  Continent  wide  common  Central 
Bank. 
In  addition  Hon.  Minister,  the  assembly  of  Governors  are  working  on  a  common  strategy 
with regard to the establishment of the African Central Bank (ACB) as well as advising on the 
formation of both the African Investment Bank (AIB) and the African Monetary Fund (AMF). 
The realization of these institutions will bring us closer to a Continent wide monetary union. 
BIS Review 96/2010 
 1
Hon. Minister and Fellow Governors, benefits of integration have been evident across the 
globe, including securing access to larger markets, enhancing trade flows and in the process 
attracting  the  much  needed  foreign  direct  investments,  lowering  trade  costs  among 
neighbours,  leveraging  or  locking  in  domestic  reforms,  increasing  bargaining  power  and 
political cohesion among others. Notwithstanding these benefits, regional groupings in Africa 
have tended to give less emphasis to monetary integration. Under the AMCP, the Eastern 
Africa  sub-region  Central  Banks  evaluate  each  other  annually  to  ensure  convergence  in 
policies as we pursue further monetary integration. 
This meeting, Hon. Minister, will therefore consider the progress on the implementation of 
the  African  Monetary  Co-operation  Programme  (AMCP)  by  the  Eastern  Africa  sub-region 
countries in 2009; consider macroeconomic performance against the AMCP targets and the 
status of execution of the decisions of the 8th meeting of Governors of the sub-region held in 
Moroni, Comoros. 
My fellow Central Bank Governors, Ladies and Gentlemen, with these few remarks it is 
now  my  humble  duty  to  invite  the  Hon.  Deputy  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  for  Finance  to 
address and officially open this meeting. 
Welcome Hon. Minister. 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2010
