Ardian Fullani: Review of the Albanian economy in 2009 and outlook for 
2010 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
monetary policy decision-making of the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania, Tirana, 
24 February 2010. 
 In its meeting of February 24, 2010, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania analyzed 
and  approved  the  Monetary  Policy  Monthly  Report.  After  being  introduced  to  the  latest 
economic  and  financial  developments  at  home,  to  their  projections  for  the  future  and  the 
expected balance of risks, at the end of discussions, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of 
Albania decided to keep the key interest rate unchanged at 5.25 percent. 
 The performance of global economy attests to the ongoing improvement of economic activity. 
The majority of advanced and emerging economies experienced economic growth over the 
course of the second half of 2009.  
The growth in global trade activity, the undisturbed financial markets’ developments and the 
improved confidence indices reflect and bring about more optimistic future expectations. In 
particular,  the  financial  system  stability  and  the  progressive  improvement  of  its  balance 
sheets are promising signs for greater support to the economic activity. The improved global 
economy  was  coupled  with  upward  inflation  rate  trends,  owing  mainly  to  the  recovery  of 
demand and higher primary commodity prices.  
However,  the  low  capacity  utilization  at  global  level  is  projected  to  rein  in  the  inflationary 
pressures in the medium run. The frail economic growth over 2010 will be at the forefront of 
policymakers’  agenda.  Moreover,  it  will  condition  the  preservation  of  monetary  and  fiscal 
incentives during this period, albeit at more moderate rates.  
As far as the Albanian economy is concerned, the latest available information suggests that 
domestic demand contracted further in the last quarter of 2009.  
Private  investments  contracted  over  the  course  of  the  year  2009,  owing  to  the  slower 
domestic  and  foreign  demand,  the  low  capacity  utilization,  the  deteriorated  business 
confidence and the tight lending conditions. In addition, consumer confidence indices, retail 
sales and consumer goods’ imports signal the further slowdown of private consumption in the 
last quarter of 2009. This slowdown reflects a more moderate increase of available income, 
lower support by the banking system for consumer and mortgage loans and increased public 
uncertainty  over  the  future.  Consumer  expectations  for  the  future  suggest  that  the 
contribution  of  private  consumption  to  economic  growth  will  be  low  over  the  next  two 
quarters. Economic activity at home has been sustained by high fiscal stimulus during 2009; 
however,  budget  projections  suggest  that  the  fiscal  stimulus  will  fall  off  in  2010.  Foreign 
demand posted positive performance for the last quarter of 2009, featuring lower trade deficit 
during this period. However, given its relatively small share of the GDP, the impact of this 
correction to the economic growth of 2010 is projected to be moderate.  
Annual inflation marked 3.6 percent in January while average annual inflation rate increased 
to 2.4 percent. The annual increase in consumer prices was in line with the Bank of Albania’s 
target for inflation in January, standing at the upper limit of the tolerance band. The upward 
inflation trend in January owes mainly to the higher food prices following the latter’s rise in 
the global markets and the lagged effect of the exchange rate depreciation. The contribution 
of  other  consumer  price  basket  items  to  inflation,  albeit  upward,  was  still  low.  The  latest 
BIS Review 25/2010 
 1
energy  price  rise  effect  on  February’s  inflation  is  expected  to  contribute  by 
0.5 percentage points to the annual inflation rate.  
The Bank of Albania assesses that the performance of the Albanian economy has yielded 
balanced  inflationary  pressures.  This  is  also  confirmed  by  the  performance  of  core  and 
non-traded  inflation,  whose  rates  marked  1.4  and  1.7  percent,  respectively,  in  January. 
These trends suggest that the inflationary pressures exerted by domestic demand are weak, 
while the increase of inflation over the last months owes mainly to supply-side factors.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  considers  that  these  factors  will  only  affect  temporarily  and  their 
pressures  on  inflation  are  expected  to  gradually  dampen  in  2010.  The  same  performance 
seems  to  be  also  expected  by  the  main  economic  agents,  whose  inflation  expectations 
remain anchored close to the Bank of Albania’s target.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  been  pursuing  a  prudent  monetary  policy  over  this  period.  The 
increase of monetary stimulus in economy, without prejudice to macroeconomic stability and 
keeping  the  economic  agents’  expectations  stable,  was  the  major  focus  of  our  policy.  Our 
decisions  have  in  particular  aimed  at  providing  adequate  monetary  conditions  for  the 
observance  of  the  inflation  target  in  the  medium  run  and  smoothing  out  the  Albanian 
economy’s  way  to  more  stable  economic  and  financial  balances.  This  philosophy  will 
continue to guide our decision-making in the period to follow. 
The latest data on Albania’s external position cover only foreign trade. The analysis attests to 
the  annual  narrowing  of  trade  deficit  by  about  17  percent  in  December.  In  annual  terms, 
exports  of  goods  increased  27  percent,  while  imports  declined  10  percent.  The  relative 
coverage ratio of imports with exports increased to 23 percent. Despite this performance, the 
external position of the Albanian economy remains a concern as long as it is characterized 
by  a  high  current  account  deficit.  The  shift  of  deficit  to  more  stable  levels  will  be  at  the 
forefront of the country’s economic policies in the medium and long run.  
As  we  have  continuously  stated,  fiscal  policy  was  counter-cyclical  throughout  2009, 
underpinning the trend that began in 2007–2008. Budget deficit amounted to ALL 79.9 billion 
in  2009,  reflecting  at  the  same  time  the  accelerated  increase  of  budget  expenditure  and 
slowdown  of  fiscal  revenues.  Budget  expenditure  increased  8  percent  in  2009,  while 
revenues grew only 2.7 percent, in part owing to the gradual contraction of economic activity.  
The Bank of Albania considers that fiscal policy should prioritize the measures required to 
guarantee  the  sustainability  of  public  debt.  The  increase  of  the  latter  during  2009  and  the 
higher sensitivity of the financial markets to this indicator, call for the reliable commitment of 
fiscal  policy  with  respect  to  its  long-term  sustainability.  Therefore  it  is  crucial  to  reach  the 
projected fiscal balance through the conditioning of the fiscal expenditure carried out by the 
budget  revenues’  collection  rates.  On  the  one  hand,  this  policy  implies  a  smaller  fiscal 
stimulus for 2010, but on the other it will lower the risk premiums in economy and provide 
more  room  for  borrowing  in  the  domestic  financial  markets  of  the  private  sector  of  the 
economy.  
The  latest  monetary  developments  attest  to  the  low  growth  of  broad  money  and  lower 
banking  intermediation  in  lending  to  the  public  and  private  sector.  However,  the  banking 
system’s  liquidity  indicators  seem  to  have  become  more  stable.  In  annual  nominal  terms, 
money  growth  was  7  percent,  similar  to  November’s  growth  rate.  Deposits  grew  for  the 
second consecutive month, owing to a large extent to the increase of time deposits.  
Relative to the previous year, private sector lending grew 11 percent in nominal terms. In real 
terms, it grew by only 4 percent. The growth of lending owes mainly to the higher lending to 
business for liquidity purposes. By contrast, household loans continued to contract in annual 
terms.  Despite  the  improved  lending  activity  in  December,  its  annual  growth  rate  remains 
low.  The  slow  lending  performance  owes  to  the  high  risk  premiums  materialized  in  tight 
lending conditions, and to the economic agents’ uncertainty for the future, materialized in low 
demand for private sector credit.  
2 
 BIS Review 25/2010
The exchange rate depreciated further in January, albeit at lower paces than in the previous 
month.  In  nominal  effective  annual  terms,  it  depreciated  8  percent  in  January.  Monthly 
developments attest to the slight depreciation of the ALL vis-à-vis the Euro and the USD. The 
Bank  of  Albania  considers  that  the  balance  of  factors  affecting  the  exchange  rate  seems 
more stable for 2010. 
The Bank of Albania continued to inject the required liquidity in January in order to buttress 
its interest rate cut move and the relaxation of monetary conditions in October 2009. These 
injections were followed by the decline of interest rates in the interbank market, the decline of 
the Government T-bill yields and the downward ALL loans and deposits’ interest rates.  
The interbank market attested to the further increase of trading volumes signalling the efforts 
for a more effective liquidity management by the banking system.  
The recovery of lending will substantially condition the performance of the Albanian economy 
over the following period. Its recovery will push the demand for borrowing by the economic 
agents and at the same time will provide more favourable lending conditions by the banking 
sector.  The  Bank  of  Albania  has  taken  the  proper  measures  in  this  regard,  supplying  the 
banking  system  with  appropriate  liquidity  and  taking  the  necessary  measures  to  lower  the 
borrowing  cost.  However,  it  expects  a  more  complete  reflection  of  these  measures  by  the 
banking system. We believe that, without prejudice to the best and prudent lending practices, 
there is room for a more encouraging behaviour of the banking system in terms of boosting 
consumption and private investments in economy.  
 After discussing the current and expected economic performance, the Supervisory Council of 
the Bank of Albania concluded that the inflationary pressures will mount in the short term; 
however they are expected to quickly fall in the medium term.  
The  slower  money  growth,  the  low  domestic  demand,  the  moderate  growth  rates  of 
economic  activity,  the  low  capacity  utilization  by  businesses  and  the  stable  inflation 
expectations  will  balance  the  pressures  exerted  by  the  exchange  rate  and  higher 
administered and foreign prices.  
The Bank of Albania has been carefully monitoring the economic and financial situation in the 
regional countries and their expected performance in the future. The possible implications for 
the Albanian economy through the trade and financial channels remain at the focus of our 
analysis.  
Considering  the  economic  situation  and  political  realities  in  the  Euro  area’s  economy,  we 
conclude  that  the  transmission  of  these  concerns  to  other  economies  will  be  contained. 
the  Albanian  economy  enjoys 
Moreover, 
firm 
macroeconomic balances, sufficient to cope with all potential shocks over our economy.  
In conclusion, the Supervisory Council decided to keep the key interest rate unchanged at 
5.25 percent. This decision helps to maintain and consolidate the macroeconomic balances 
further,  considering  macroeconomic  stability  key  precondition  for  a  stable  and  long-term 
growth.  It  also  serves  to  anchor  the  inflation  expectations  and  guarantee  the  adequate 
monetary support to the economy at this stage of development.  
The Bank of Albania remains committed to act in concordance with the actual and expected 
performance of economic indicators. The shift of the inflationary risk balance downward, the 
strengthening  of  financial  stability  and  inflation  expectations  in  economy  will  be  carefully 
considered in the future decision-making of the Bank of Albania. 
the  Bank  of  Albania  believes 
that 
BIS Review 25/2010 
 3
