Heng Swee Keat: Financial developments in Singapore  
Opening remarks by  Mr Heng Swee Keat, Managing Director of the Monetary  Authority of 
Singapore, at the press conference on the Monetary Authority of Singapore’s Annual Report 
2009/10, Singapore, 29 July 2010. 
 Strong recovery from the recession 
1.  
The Singapore economy has recovered strongly from the recession. Five quarters 
since GDP reached a trough, Singapore’s output has exceeded its pre-crisis peak by 13.3%. 
The rapid climb from the trough can be traced to several inter-related factors. In particular, 
the  domestic  economy  had  been  lifted  by  the  cyclical  upturn  in  global  trade  and  financial 
market  conditions  since  early  2009,  supported  by  inventory  restocking  and  unprecedented 
policy stimuli in the major economies. Given its openness and competitiveness, Singapore 
was  in  an  especially  strong  position  to  benefit  from  these  global  forces  through  our 
externally-oriented  sectors.  In  addition,  investments  made  in  the  earlier  years  were 
completed in time to tap onto the global upturn. These investments introduced new activities 
in Singapore’s economic landscape, including high-end manufacturing and tourism services, 
and strengthened the competitiveness of our existing industries. 
2.  
Global  markets  also  recovered  strongly  after  March  as  the  financial  system 
stabilised  and  investor  confidence  recovered.  Taking  into  account  translation  effects 
stemming from the stronger Singapore dollar, interest and dividend income, as well as gains 
in  the  valuation  of  assets,  MAS  recorded  a  net  profit  of  $10.12  billion  during  the  financial 
year. 
3.  
Looking  forward,  considerable  risks  remain  in  the  global  economy  and  the  global 
financial system. Singapore’s financial system has, by and large, weathered the crisis well. 
However, we must not be complacent and we need to prepare ourselves to respond to any 
future challenges. There are three areas which MAS has been working on and which we will 
continue to focus on in the coming year: first, sustaining macroeconomic stability in the post-
crisis period; second, strengthening the financial system; and third, maintaining the growth of 
Singapore’s financial services sector. 
Sustaining macroeconomic stability in the post-crisis period 
4.  
The strong pace of growth seen in the first half of this year is not expected to be 
sustained. Growth is likely to have peaked at the middle of this year, and will moderate to a 
more sustainable rate, as external demand slows after the post-crisis bounce from stimulus 
measures  and  inventory  effects  wane  worldwide.  For  2010  as  a  whole,  the  Singapore 
economy is expected to expand by 13 to 15%. 
5. 
After two quarters in negative territory, headline inflation turned positive in Q1 this 
year and reached 3.1% in Q2. For the rest of the year, headline CPI inflation is expected to 
rise, reflecting higher car and commodity prices on a year-ago basis. However, the outlook 
for underlying price pressures remains largely unchanged from MAS’ monetary policy review 
in April. Despite stronger-than-expected GDP growth, the pass-through of domestic business 
costs to retail prices due to tightening factor markets is expected to be moderate, alongside 
the slowing in the economy. In part, domestic wage growth and other business costs could 
be  temporarily  tempered  by  the  initial  cyclical  productivity  uptick  in  some  capital  intensive 
sectors  of  the  economy.  For  the  year  as  a  whole,  headline  CPI  inflation  is  projected  to 
average  between  2.5%  and  3.5%.  MAS  underlying  inflation,  which  excludes  the  cost  of 
accommodation and private road transport, will come in at around 2%. 
BIS Review 103/2010 
 1
When Singapore entered the recession in 2008, monetary policy, followed by fiscal 
6. 
policy,  was  eased  to  provide  support  to  the  domestic  economy.  As  economic  activity 
recovered swiftly in 2009, macroeconomic policy settings were recalibrated to levels which 
were  conducive  to  sustainable  growth  and  medium-term  price  stability.  In  a  pre-emptive 
move, MAS tightened monetary policy in April 2010 by re-centring the S$NEER policy band 
upwards and restoring its modest and gradual appreciation path. 
7. 
Looking  ahead,  the  outlook  of  the  industrialised  economies  remains  uncertain. 
However, there is sufficient momentum from the Asian economies and domestic industries 
that will continue to support Singapore’s economic activity at a high level for the rest of the 
year.  While  CPI  inflation  is  expected  to  pick  up  towards  the  latter  part  of  the  year,  it  has 
evolved  broadly  as  anticipated  during  the  April  review.  At  this  stage,  we  assess  that  the 
current monetary policy stance of a modest and gradual appreciation of the S$NEER policy 
band remains appropriate. 
Strengthening the financial system 
8. 
Singapore’s  financial  system  remained  resilient  during  the  global  crisis.  In 
maintaining the soundness of the financial system in Singapore, MAS’ approach is centred 
on establishing sensible rules appropriate to our circumstances, strengthening prudential and 
market conduct supervision, and working in partnership with the industry to develop a shared 
ownership of supervisory outcomes. 
9. 
This  approach  has  served  us  well.  As  global  reforms  reshape  the  financial 
landscape, we will continue to strengthen our supervisory and regulatory regimes and market 
infrastructure,  consistent  with  new  international  standards  and  best  practices.  As  we  have 
done in the past, we will calibrate these changes to take into account our environment and 
regulatory objectives. 
10. 
MAS  is  supportive  of  global  reform  efforts  to  strengthen  capital  and  liquidity 
frameworks. We have always considered capital adequacy and effectiveness of a bank’s risk 
management  and  capital  planning  processes  as  important  parts  of  overall  prudential 
management of banks. As a member of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, we 
participated  actively  in  international  discussions  that  helped  shape  the  broad  agreement 
reached earlier this week on the main design elements of the new capital and liquidity reform 
package. Other design details such as calibration, and phase-in arrangements as well as the 
framework for regulatory buffers will be determined later in the year. We would like to see a 
set of final proposals that can be implemented globally in a meaningful manner to promote 
the long term stability of the banking system. There should be a judicious balance between 
limiting  banks’  activities  that  are  incongruent  to  their  role  as  an  intermediary  of  financial 
flows, and allowing them to perform their role in facilitating economic activity and sustaining 
the  recovery.  MAS  will  continue  to  be  actively  involved  at  these  discussions  to  shape  the 
proposals. 
11. 
Our Singapore banks start from relatively strong capital and liquidity positions. They 
are generally well-capitalised and have in practice maintained capital ratios much higher than 
our minimum requirements. As such, on a relative basis, we do not expect the proposals to 
affect them in a significant manner. Nevertheless, the global reforms will set new norms for 
the banking sector and the Singapore banks would have to take these into consideration in 
their capital and liquidity plans moving forward. 
12. 
I  mentioned  last  year  that  MAS  will  be  reviewing  the  Corporate  Governance 
Regulations  and  Guidelines  for  locally-incorporated  banks  and  significant  life  insurers.  We 
have  since  issued  a  public  consultation  paper  setting  out  proposed  enhancements  to  the 
Corporate  Governance  Framework  for  these  financial  institutions.  The  main  thrusts  of  the 
proposals  emphasise  the  need  for  directors  to have  the  relevant  skills and  commitment  to 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2010
oversee  the  operations  of  the  financial  institutions,  and  the  important  role  of  independent 
directors on the Board. MAS will issue our response to the public consultation shortly. 
13. 
On market conduct, MAS has issued two consultation papers on the sale of listed 
and unlisted investment products, to strengthen safeguards for retail customers and enhance 
MAS’  regulatory  powers.  We  will  be  issuing  our  response  to  the  feedback  received  in 
2H2010.  Proposals  which  do  not  require  legislative  amendments  will be  implemented  first. 
Financial  institutions  will  be  expected  to  adopt  the  remaining  proposals  even  before 
legislative implementation as good practice in conducting business with their customers. 
14. 
MAS also issued the Guidelines on Fair Dealing last year. The Guidelines stress the 
responsibilities  of  the  Board  and  Senior  Management  of  financial  institutions  to  set  the 
corporate culture and direction to deliver fair dealing outcomes to customers. Over the last 
year, MAS has written to CEOs and Boards of major financial institutions to emphasise our 
expectations.  We  have  noted  increasing  awareness  among  financial  institutions  of  the 
importance of dealing fairly with customers. Going forward, MAS will continue to engage the 
Board and Senior Management of financial institutions, and assess their implementation of 
the  Guidelines  through  off-site  and  on-site  supervision.  Financial  institutions  are  also 
expected to conduct their own mystery shopping, while MAS’ mystery shopping exercise will 
serve as an independent check and benchmark practices across financial institutions. 
15. 
In  strengthening  our  regulatory  and  supervisory  regimes,  MAS  will  continue  to 
maintain  our  balanced  and  consultative  approach.  We  remain  focused  on  achieving  good 
regulatory  outcomes  that  are  appropriate  to  Singapore  and  seek  to  promote  sustainable 
development of the financial sector. 
16. 
Besides financial regulations, MAS is taking steps to strengthen the robustness of 
interbank  funding  markets.  The  financial  crisis  revealed  the  need  to  enhance  banks’ 
management of liquidity. As the banking system grows, demand for high quality, liquid assets 
will grow. To address this, MAS will do two things. 
17.  
First, we will increase the availability of liquid securities to banks by issuing short-
term MAS bills as part of money market operations. Currently, we use three instruments in 
our money market operations – foreign exchange swaps, borrowings and repos. MAS Bills 
will be our fourth instrument. These bills are negotiable, so banks needing liquidity can sell 
them or pledge them as collateral in interbank repo markets as well as the MAS Standing 
Facility. This will facilitate banks in managing their liquidity. 
18. 
We expect to commence issuing MAS Bills in 2Q 2011. To prevent overlapping with 
SGS  T-bills,  MAS  bills  will  have  tenors  of  up  to  3  months.  We  will  phase  MAS  Bills  in 
gradually, with up to S$20 billion initially, and then build up from there. 
19. 
facility for banks. 
20. 
Last  year,  I  announced  that  we  would  accept  AAA-rated  Singapore  dollar  debt 
securities  issued  by  supranationals,  sovereigns  and  sovereign-guaranteed  companies.  We 
also admitted these securities as Tier 2 liquid assets under Notice 613 with the same haircut 
as Singapore Government Securities. With immediate effect, we will extend the list of issuers 
to AAA-rated and zero risk-weighted public sector entities. 
21. 
I  also  announced  last  year  that  we  have  established  a  cross-border  collateral 
arrangement  with  De  Nederlandsche  Bank.  This  year,  we  have  established  such 
arrangements  with  the  Banque  de  France,  Bundesbank  and  Bank  of  England.  These 
arrangements  will  allow  banks  in  Singapore  to  pledge  Euro  and  Sterling  cash  and  eligible 
government securities, custodised with these central banks, as collateral when they access 
the MAS Standing Facility. 
22. 
These measures will help to broaden the availability and diversity of regulatory and 
liquid assets for banks and allow international banks greater flexibility to tap on their global 
Second, we will continue to enhance the Standing Facility, which is the key liquidity 
BIS Review 103/2010 
 3
sources  of  liquidity,  while  maintaining  the  high  quality  of  eligible  collateral  of  the  Standing 
Facility. 
Maintaining the growth of Singapore’s financial services sector 
23.  
Let me now turn to the performance of our financial sector. The sector has staged a 
strong rebound as global financial conditions improved. In the first quarter of this year, the 
financial sector grew by 3.5%, its fourth straight quarter of expansion. More recent data such 
as  bank  lending  suggests  that  the  financial  sector  continued  to  expand  in  Q2.  Meanwhile, 
hiring in the financial sector has picked up from 4,000 in Q4 2009 to 5,500 in Q1 this year. 
The 5,500 financial sector jobs created accounted for 15% of total job creation in Q1 2010. 
The recovery in the financial sector is broad based – banking intermediation, trading 
24.  
and asset management activities have all rebounded. In particular, financial assets managed 
by  the  Singapore  asset  management  industry  reached  a  new  high  in  2009.  Total  assets 
managed grew by 40% to reach S$1.2 trillion (US$861 billion), exceeding the pre-crisis peak 
in  2007.  Average  daily  trading  volume  of  foreign  exchange  (FX)  and  FX  derivatives  have 
recovered  to  US$290  billion  in  April  2010,  an  increase  of  11%  from  six  months  ago  in 
October 2009 and near pre-crisis levels. We are also today one of Asia’s leading commodity 
derivatives trading centres. 
25.  
The financial sector’s strong recovery is, in part, due to our strong fundamentals, as 
well  as  action  taken  by  the  industry.  We  will  continue  to  take  steps  to  ensure  that  the 
financial industry remains vibrant. One key lesson from this financial crisis is that we need to 
strengthen the nexus between the financial system and the real economy, to ensure efficient 
intermediation of capital to support growth and development. 
26.  
The Singapore Exchange (SGX) implemented a series of measures to facilitate fund 
raising  by  listed  companies  in  the  midst  of  difficult  external  market  conditions.  Earlier  this 
year, MAS and SGX introduced a concurrent review process for initial public offerings (IPOs) 
and  a  reduction  in  public  exposure  period  for  prospectus  review  from  14  days  to  7  days. 
These  steps  to  shorten  the  time-to-market  would  make  Singapore  a  more  attractive  listing 
destination. 
27.  
To  give  investors  a  broader  range  of  investment  products,  MAS  will  continue  to 
enhance  individual  investors’  access  to  debt  capital  markets,  building  on  initiatives 
undertaken  earlier  for  Singapore  Government  Securities.  We  worked  with  the  industry  to 
develop  infrastructure  for  individual  investors  to  participate  in  auctions  of  Singapore 
Government  Securities  and  Treasury  Bills  via  the  ATMs  of  local  banks,  and  to  custodise 
these  investments  together  with  their  equity  investments  in  the  Central  Depository.  To 
promote secondary market trading for individual investors, MAS and SGX will work towards 
having an SGS trading platform by the first quarter of next year.  
28.  
To promote bilateral trade and investment between Singapore and China, MAS and 
the People’s Bank of China announced the establishment of a S$30 billion currency swap 
arrangement  last  week.  We  are  working  with  our  Chinese  counterparts  and  banks  to 
operationalise the swap line, and will announce details in due course. 
29. 
The  completion  of  the  Marina  Bay  Financial  Centre  is  timely  as  it  provides  the 
physical infrastructure for financial institutions as they gear up to take part in the next phase 
of  Asia’s  economic  development.  The  industry  has  also  continued  to  invest  in  talent  even 
during  the  crisis,  hiring  over  800  graduates  under  the  Finance  Graduate  Immersion 
Programme  (FGIP)  and  the  Finance  Graduate  Leadership  Programme  (FGLP).  We  will 
continue to work with the industry to invest in the development of talent and in deepening 
research. 
4 
 BIS Review 103/2010
Conclusion 
30. 
Let  me  now  conclude.  While  Singapore  has  made  a  strong  recovery  from  the 
recession,  considerable  risks  and  policy  challenges  remain  in  the  global  economy  and 
financial  markets.  MAS  will  continue  to  be  vigilant  and  take  appropriate  steps  to  maintain 
medium-term  price  stability  and  enhance  the  resilience  of  our  financial  system.  In 
strengthening our regulatory and supervisory regimes, we will do this in a manner which is 
consistent with international standards and best practices, but at the same time, sensitive to 
our environment and needs. Riding on Asia’s growth, we will also continue to build on our 
strong fundamentals to provide for sustainable growth in the financial sector. 
31.  Thank you. 
BIS Review 103/2010 
 5
