Svein Gjedrem: Prospects for the Norwegian economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at 
Sparebank 1 SR-Bank Stavanger, Stavanger, 26 March 2010. 
The  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  speech  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on 
24 March and Monetary Policy Report 1/10. 
 The most acute phase of the global economic crisis appears to have passed. Output growth 
has resumed in most parts of the world and the recovery has been strongest in emerging 
market economies in Asia.  
The crisis has given rise to new imbalances that will dampen the recovery. 
Fiscal  deficits  are  substantial  in  many  countries  and  government  debt  is  rising  rapidly. 
Deficits have increased markedly because of reduced tax revenues and stimulus measures 
to underpin activity, but also due to government support measures for banks. The interest 
rates at which governments borrow reflect to a large extent their financial position. Reducing 
government debt in the US and many European countries will probably take several years. 
Fiscal  tightening  is  expected  to  commence  among  our  main  trading  partners  as  from  next 
year, with the exception of Sweden. This will curb growth in overall demand for goods and 
services. 
Even  with  substantial  tax  cuts,  strong  growth  in  public  spending  and  low  interest  rates, 
unemployment  has  risen  considerably  in  both  the  US  and  Europe.  In  many  countries, 
unemployment has grown by 3–4 percentage points. There is a risk that unemployment will 
become entrenched, perhaps particularly in Europe.  
It appears that the upturn in advanced economies will only be moderate. The economies of 
many  countries  will  continue  to  be  marked  by  considerable  spare  output  capacity.  Spare 
capacity and high unemployment will contribute to low inflation among trading partners in the 
coming years.  
Oil prices are just below USD 80 per barrel. Our projections are based on an oil price in line 
futures  prices.  Futures  prices  indicate  that  oil  prices  will  rise  ahead.  Emerging  market 
economies  are  making  a  growing  contribution  to  global  oil  demand.  These  economies  are 
expected  to  continue  to  record  solid  growth.  In  addition,  OPEC  is  steadily  gaining  market 
power  because  growth  in  oil  supply  from  non-OPEC  countries  is  gradually  stagnating.  Oil 
prices may nevertheless edge down if the recovery in the world economy loses momentum, 
particularly  since  OECD  oil  stocks  are  still  at  elevated  levels  and  OPEC  spare  production 
capacity is relatively high. Gas prices are under pressure owing to increased availability of 
shale gas in the US, a higher supply of LNG and low demand in Europe. 
Futures  prices  indicate some  rise  in  other  commodity  prices.  Metal  prices  have  risen  as  a 
result of improved global growth prospects, but they are still somewhat lower than in summer 
2008.  
Key rates are close to zero in many countries. A number of central banks have signalled that 
key  rates  will  be  kept  low  for  an  extended  period,  and  key  rate  expectations  abroad  fell 
through autumn and winter. Market participants do not anticipate a rise in key rates in the 
US, the euro area and the UK until the end of 2010. 
The interest rate differential between Norway and trading partners has increased. The krone 
exchange  rate  has  remained  fairly  stable  through  winter,  although  it  is  somewhat  stronger 
than projected in October. The krone is expected to remain at about the current level to the 
end of the third quarter and then gradually depreciate somewhat thereafter. 
BIS Review 38/2010 
 1
Growth in the Norwegian economy came to a halt in autumn 2008, and Norway entered a 
downturn in early 2009. The decline appears to have ended in the second quarter of 2009. 
Capacity  utilisation  is  lower  than  normal,  but  the  downturn  seems  to  be  relatively  mild. 
Activity has been underpinned by substantial interest rate cuts combined with higher public 
spending and high oil investment.  
Fiscal policy was very expansionary in 2009. Petroleum revenue spending increased sharply, 
and by close to 3 per cent of mainland GDP. Revenue spending will rise further this year. 
Our  projections  are  based  on  information  from  the  final  budget  and  the  projections  in  the 
National Budget for 2010. In line with this, the level of the structural, non-oil budget deficit is 
maintained at this level to the end of the projection period.  
According to the fiscal rule, the fiscal deficit should be reduced to about 4 per cent of the 
capital  in  the  Government  Pension  Fund  Global  (GPFG)  when  the  economy  resumes  a 
normal level of activity. If economic developments are broadly in line with projections, a fiscal 
stance in line with the fiscal rule could result in a lower interest rate and a weaker krone than 
projected. 
The Government has estimated that the annual return on the fund will be around 4 per cent 
over time. The average real return since the management of the fund began is now 2.7 per 
cent,  up  from  just  1  per  cent  a  year  ago.  The  figure  reflects  the  recent  recovery  from  the 
sharpest deterioration in capital markets since World War II. With an unchanged risk profile, 
the average return will most probably move back towards 4 per cent after a period. 
The  investment  strategy  of  the  fund  is  built  on  its  long-term  investment  horizon  and 
substantial size. In 2009, we benefited from the long-term investment horizon. The return on 
the fund was 25.6 per cent in 2009, which is the highest return ever recorded. The fund’s 
long-term  investment  horizon  enabled  it  to  buy  equities  and  maintain  its  positions  in 
corporate  bonds  when  other  investors  were  forced  to  sell  assets  at  low  prices  during  the 
financial crisis.  
In June 2007, the Ministry of Finance decided to increase the allocation to equities from 40 to 
60  per  cent.  This  was  achieved  over  the  two  following  years  when  equities  for  more  than 
NOK 1 trillion were purchased. The long period of phasing in purchases was profitable as the 
fund  was  able  to  exploit  falling  equity  prices  during  the  financial  crisis.  The  fund’s  global 
equity holdings doubled in the same period.  
Petroleum  investment  has  increased  substantially  in  recent  years.  Investment  increased 
between 2008 and 2009 in spite of postponements and cancellations of a number of projects 
after  the  financial  crisis  unfolded  in  autumn  2008.  This  reflects  that  investment  projects  in 
2009  were  to  a  large  extent  determined  by  contracts  that  were  concluded  prior  to  the 
financial crisis. Petroleum investment still showed a substantial decline through 2009. 
The volume of petroleum investment is expected to drop further this year and next, followed 
by  a  pick-up  in  2012  and  2013.  The  investment  decline  this  year  and  next  reflects 
postponements of projects and the near completion of large investment projects.  
Exports have picked up after world trade showed a faster and somewhat stronger increase 
than  expected.  Export  companies  in  our  regional  network  report  that  new  orders  have 
increased and that production is expected to rise over the next six months. A further increase 
in world trade will contribute to underpinning growth in exports.  
Measured by relative labour costs, Norwegian labour has never been as costly as it is now. 
As  a  result,  the  Norwegian  export  industry  may  lose  market  shares  ahead.  There  are  no 
prospects of another rise in export prices as sharp as in the 2000s, when Norway’s terms of 
trade improved considerably. 
Norges Bank raised the key policy rate on two occasions by a total of 0.50 percentage point 
in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2009.  The  feed-through  to  bank  lending  rates  has  so  far  been 
somewhat smaller. The average private lending rate increased by 0.09 percentage point from 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2010
the third to the fourth quarter, but the December interest rate increase will probably only feed 
through in 2010. Weighted mortgage lending rates have increased by a quarter percentage 
point since the key rate was raised for the first time in October. 
The fall in business investment seems to be nearing an end. Information from the regional 
network  indicates  that  investment  in  private  services  will  pick  up  this  year.  Manufacturing 
enterprises in the regional network report that investment will fall between 2009 and 2010. 
Corporate  credit  growth  is  still  on  the  decline,  but  Norges  Bank’s  fourth-quarter  survey  of 
bank  lending  showed  that  banks  have  eased  credit  standards  for  the  corporate  sector. 
Commercial building starts have picked up slightly since summer.  
Housing  investment  fell  sharply  between  2007  and  2009.  Turnover  of  new  homes  has 
increased and house prices have risen markedly. Housing  starts are expected to increase 
ahead. Household credit growth has been stable in recent months. 
Growth in private consumption increased through 2009 and growth is expected to continue. 
In spite of a lower interest rate level, the household saving ratio increased to a record-high 
level  in  2009.  This  probably  reflected  high  household  debt  levels  with  a  need  for  some 
households to consolidate, and a large degree of uncertainty owing to prospects of higher 
unemployment and a fall in the value of housing wealth. At the same time, household real 
disposable income increased. Almost half the increase is attributable to a lower interest rate 
level.  
Debt burdens are still high, but the stabilisation of employment at a relatively low level has 
contributed to  reducing  uncertainty.  The  interest  rate  level  remains  low.  In  addition,  house 
prices have increased. The saving ratio is therefore expected to fall, and growth in private 
consumption is projected at 5 per cent in 2010.  
Reports from Norges Bank’s regional network in February suggested that output growth will 
remain  relatively  weak  in  the  coming  quarters,  but  with  wide  variations  across  industries. 
Suppliers  to  the  offshore  sector  expect  activity  to  continue  to  shrink.  The  building  and 
construction  industry  also  expects  a  further  fall  in  output,  while  reports  from  household 
suppliers and exporters suggest and increase in output ahead. 
There are still few regional network enterprises reporting that capacity constraints will make it 
difficult  to  accommodate  higher  demand.  Since  autumn  2009,  it  seems  that  capacity 
utilisation has increase somewhat in coastal regions from the southwest to the north. Many of 
the industries that are faring well are located in these regions, such as fish farming, fisheries, 
parts of the metal industry and suppliers of operating services to the oil sector.  
Employment stopped falling in the fourth quarter of 2009. Total mainland employment had 
then declined by about 30 000 since autumn 2008. The fall in employment has been smaller 
than the decline in output might imply. Productivity has fallen markedly. During the downturn, 
the  number  of  hours  worked  has  decreased  somewhat  more  than  the  number  employed. 
According to the Bank’s regional network, reduced use of overtime hours, partial lay-offs and 
reduced  working  hours  among  part-timers  have  resulted  in  lower  average  working  hours. 
Moreover, increased sickness absence has made a contribution. Output growth is expected 
to  increase  gradually  through  2010,  while  growth  in  the  number  of  hours  worked  shows  a 
relatively small increase. As a result, employment will gradually become more consistent with 
the level of output, and productivity will rise further through 2010. Compared with previous 
downturns, productivity growth remains weak.  
Owing to a fall in labour force participation, labour force figures were lower at the end of 2009 
than at the beginning of the year in spite of underlying growth in the working-age population. 
Some  people  exit  the  labour  force  or  choose  not  to  enter  the  labour  force  when  labour 
demand falls. Unemployment continued to rise in the latter half of 2009, but at a far slower 
pace than earlier in the downturn. Registered unemployment is projected to remain at about 
today’s  level  to  the  end  of  the  year.  The  Technical  Reporting  Committee  on  Income 
BIS Review 38/2010 
 3
Settlements estimates annual wage growth at 4.1 per cent in 2009. We expect wage growth 
to show a further decline in 2010.  
The  uncertainty  facing  exposed  industries  is  still  considerable  and  wage  growth  among 
trading partners is low. A reserve of foreign labour and persons who have temporarily exited 
the labour force, and who may rapidly return, is probably pulling down wage growth. Wage 
earners’ share of income in the mainland economy is at a high level, after rising from 62 per 
cent in 2005 to 65 per cent in 2009. On the other hand, unemployment will probably level off 
at  a  lower  level  than  in  previous  downturns,  and  in  some  sectors  of  the  economy 
unemployment  is  still  low.  Wage  growth  is  expected  to  move  up  towards  the  end  of  the 
projection period.  
The operational target of monetary policy is low and stable inflation with annual consumer 
price  inflation  of  close  to  2.5  per  cent  over  time.  Over  the  past  10  years,  inflation  has  on 
average  been  somewhat  below,  but  close  to  2.5  per  cent.  From  2003  consumer  price 
inflation  was  consistently  somewhat  lower  than  the  target  and  monetary  policy  was  then 
oriented towards bringing up inflation. In 2007 and 2008, inflation edged up and exceeded 
the target somewhat. The key policy rate was gradually raised to a more normal level. When 
the outlook for the Norwegian economy abruptly changed in autumn 2008, inflation was close 
to target and inflation expectations were firmly anchored. The key policy rate was reduced 
from autumn 2008 to summer 2009 to prevent inflation from falling too far below target and to 
mitigate the effects of the global downturn on the Norwegian economy. The interest reduction 
brought the real interest rate down to a level far below normal. At the same time, households 
and firms could remain confident that the expansionary monetary stance would not contribute 
to price and wage spirals in the longer term.  
In Norway, various measures of underlying inflation have been close to 2.5 per cent in recent 
months.  Lower  wage  growth,  reduced  capacity  utilisation  and  low  global  inflation  have 
counterbalanced  the  effects  of  higher  energy  prices  and  the  krone  depreciation  in  autumn 
2008.  Consumer  price  inflation  is  expected  to  fall  to  somewhat  below  2  per  cent  in  2010 
following the krone appreciation over the past year.  
The interest rate is set with a view to stabilising inflation close to 2.5 per cent over time and 
bringing  capacity  utilisation  gradually  back  to  a  normal  level.  Growth  in  the  Norwegian 
economy  is  expected  to  gradually  pick  up  through  the  remainder  of  this  year  and  next. 
Capacity utilisation is expected to be close to a normal level in 2011 and to reach this level in 
the  course  of  2012.  In  our  projections,  inflation  gradually  moves  up  towards  2.5  per  cent 
around the end of the projection period as capacity utilisation reaches a normal level and the 
effects  of  the  krone  appreciation  unwind.  Wage  growth  shows  a  gradual  increase.  The 
projections are based on a gradual rise in productivity. Improved productivity will ease cost 
pressures  for  firms.  The  projections  are  also  based  on  increased  scope  for  firms  to 
strengthen profitability by raising prices.  
Activity in the Norwegian economy picked up towards the end of 2009. The interest rate was 
raised  by  0.50  percentage  point  towards  the  end  of  the  year  with  a  view  to  maintaining 
inflation  at  2.5  per  cent  over  time.  New  information  suggests  that  the  recovery  in  the 
Norwegian economy is continuing, but that capacity utilisation is probably somewhat lower 
than  anticipated  in  autumn  2009.  Combined  with  lower  interest  rates  abroad,  a  stronger 
krone and lower wage growth suggest that the interest rate forecast should be revised down 
somewhat in relation to the October Report.  
Interest rates in Norway are low. The effect on private consumption of the substantial interest 
rate cuts in 2008 and 2009 has probably not been exhausted and high consumption growth 
is  expected  to  continue  in  2010.  House  prices  have  risen.  The  new  guidelines  for  prudent 
residential mortgage lending issued by Finanstilsynet (the Financial Supervisory Authority of 
Norway)  may  curb  household  debt  accumulation.  Over  time,  household  borrowing  may 
nevertheless increase considerably and saving may fall. The aim of guarding against the risk 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2010
of  future  imbalances,  which  may  disturb  activity  and  inflation  somewhat  further  ahead, 
suggests that the interest rate should be gradually brought closer to a more normal level.  
On  the  other  hand,  a  marked  interest  rate  increase  in  Norway  and  a  wider  interest  rate 
differential between Norway and other countries may entail a risk of a considerably stronger-
than-projected krone, resulting in inflation that is too low. This will make it difficult to bring 
inflation up to target within a reasonable time horizon. A strong krone may also lead to lower 
activity  in  exposed  industries  and  thereby  lower  capacity  utilisation  in  the  Norwegian 
economy. This suggests that the interest rate should not be raised too rapidly.  
Monetary policy cannot fine-tune developments in the economy, but it can mitigate the most 
severe effects when the economy is exposed to shocks. Overall, the outlook and the balance 
of risks suggest that the key rate should be gradually increased ahead, although somewhat 
later than we envisaged in October 2009. 
On 24 March, the Executive Board decided that the key policy rate should be in the interval 
1½–2½ per cent in the period to the publication of the next Report on 23 June 2010 unless 
the  Norwegian  economy  is  exposed  to  new  major  shocks.  The  interest  rate  was  kept 
unchanged  at  this  meeting.  This  is  based  on  the  assessment  that  inflation  and  capacity 
utilisation may for a period be slightly lower than previously projected and that the interest 
rate should be increased somewhat later than expected in autumn 2009.  
Thank you for your attention 
BIS Review 38/2010 
 5
   6 
   BIS Review 38/2010
  BIS Review 38/2010 
   7
  8 
   BIS Review 38/2010
  BIS Review 38/2010 
   9
  10 
   BIS Review 38/2010
  BIS Review 38/2010 
   11
  12 
   BIS Review 38/2010
  BIS Review 38/2010 
   13
  14 
   BIS Review 38/2010
  BIS Review 38/2010 
   15
  16 
   BIS Review 38/2010
  BIS Review 38/2010 
   17
 18 
   BIS Review 38/2010
