Yves Mersch: The financial crisis – challenges and new ideas 
Speech  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg,  at  the 
Luxembourg School of Finance, Luxembourg, 28 January 2010. 
 I am very pleased to be here tonight and wish to thank the Luxembourg School of Finance 
for  providing  me  with  this  opportunity  to  speak  on  the  recent  financial  crisis,  the  policy 
response, and the challenges ahead. 
The run-up to the crisis was driven by animal spirits, which encouraged excessive risk-taking 
by  investors  and  a  significant  increase  in  financial  sector  leverage.  Asset  price  declines 
triggered  an  unexpected  departure  from  the  normal  functioning  of  the  financial  system, 
plunging  agents 
into  unquantifiable  “Knightian”  uncertainty.  This  unleashed  panic, 
characterised by a “flight to safety” and fire sales of financial assets that amplified the crisis. 
The risk to systemic stability required intervention by the authorities that was unprecedented 
both in its extent and in its form. 
It is important to recall that we have very limited knowledge of many aspects of the crisis. All 
financial crises share certain phases of market behaviour, but they are all different. In recent 
years  some  warnings  highlighted  existing  imbalances  and  vulnerabilities,  but  nobody 
predicted the timing and nature of such a sudden break in market behaviour. As the crisis 
unfolded, authorities had to take policy decisions rapidly although their effects had become 
uncertain, as normal market functioning could no longer be expected. 
What was most surprising in the recent crisis was the role played by liquidity. In retrospect, it 
is  easy  to  conclude  that  it  should  have  been  monitored  more  closely  and  that  pro-cyclical 
behaviour  needed  to  be  mitigated  more  effectively.  However,  these  suggestions  only 
represent  “preventative  care”.  The  implementation  of  such  measures  could  reduce  the 
likelihood,  or  at  least  the  extent,  of  future  crises.  Once  a  crisis  hits,  it  is  too  late  for 
“preventative care” and the authorities have to implement “emergency interventions”. These 
carry significant costs for the taxpayer, so it is natural to ask how the private sector can help 
share this burden. 
In my remarks, I will begin with the recent past, reviewing the crisis and the policy responses 
of both central banks and governments. Then I will turn to the lessons of the crisis and the 
challenges both in the immediate future and at a longer horizon. I wish to focus on the need 
to reform the current financial architecture. This process is already underway at the global 
level  as  the  April  meeting  of  the  G20  endorsed  Financial  Stability  Board  proposals  in  this 
domain.  One  important  objective  is  to  re-align  incentives  in  the  financial  sector  from  an 
excessive  focus  on  short-term  profits  towards  more  “socially  useful”  activities  that  include 
reducing  systemic  risk  and  encouraging  the  creation  of  long-term  wealth.  Finally,  I  will 
comment on some “new ideas” that may contribute to this aim. 
The policy response to the crisis 
1. 
In  the  financial  crisis,  monetary  authorities  intervened  to  address  liquidity  issues  and 
government  authorities  intervened  to  address  solvency  concerns.  These  complementary 
roles were clearly established long ago. However, it is generally agreed that the recent crisis 
somewhat blurred this distinction in practice. As a central banker, I will begin by reviewing 
the response of the monetary authorities. 
Central bank policy response 
1.1 
The financial crisis initially appeared in August 2007 as a sudden shortage of liquidity in the 
money  market.  Traditionally,  central  banks  monitor  the  functioning  of  this  market  very 
carefully, because it is here that monetary policy is implemented through regular refinancing 
BIS Review 13/2010 
 1
operations.  This  is  why  the  Eurosystem  was  the  first  to  respond  with  massive  liquidity 
injections. 
The decline of asset prices reduced the value of complex structured finance products, which 
were widely disseminated across the banking sector. It suddenly became difficult to find a 
buyer for these instruments. As trading volumes collapsed, it also became difficult to value 
these assets accurately because prices were no longer observed on the market. Uncertainty 
increased dramatically and banks began to view each other with suspicion as they realised 
that individual exposures were not transparent. 
As  the  inter-bank  market  dried  up,  banks  found  themselves  hoarding  cash  to  rebuild  their 
liquidity buffers. This induced them to tighten credit standards, posing the risk that they might 
cut back loans to firms and households, transmitting the financial crisis to the real economy. 
In  mid-September  2008  the  collapse  of  a  major  financial  player  set  off  a  global  financial 
panic.  Given  the  severe  downturn  in  the  euro  area  economy  and  receding  inflationary 
pressures,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  responded  by  rapidly 
lowering  interest  rates  to  1%,  a  historical  low  for  the  euro  area  countries  in  the  post-war 
period. 
In  addition  to  standard  monetary  policy  measures,  the  Eurosystem  introduced  a  policy  of 
“enhanced credit support” intended to limit the role of liquidity in the propagation of the crisis, 
to maintain the transmission of interest rate decisions, and to enhance the flow of credit to 
the real economy. 
These extraordinary measures lead to a doubling of the central bank balance sheet in the 
euro area and an even greater expansion in the US. In effect, the money market ceased to 
exist  and  the  central  bank  took  over  its  intermediation  role.  This  emergency  intervention 
contributed to a broad-based improvement in financial markets and a return to a more normal 
functioning  of  the  money  market.  According  to  the  most  recent  figures,  the  Eurosystem’s 
balance sheet has already shrunk by 11% from its peak in December 2008, while in the US it 
has  remained  stable.  Overall,  central  banks  appear  to  have  successfully  performed  their 
function as “lender-of-last-resort”. 
Government policy response 
1.2 
Turning  to  the  government  policy  response,  this  took  three  forms:  (i)  the  fiscal  stimulus, 
(ii) asset support and (iii) capital injections and guarantees. 
In  October  2008  the  intensification of  the  financial  crisis  began  to  affect  the  real  economy 
and the need for a fiscal stimulus became apparent. In April 2009 the G20 summit in London 
signed a global plan for recovery and reform. Although justified by the extent of the crisis and 
varied  in  extent  across  countries,  this  fiscal  stimulus  caused  a  substantial  deterioration  of 
public deficits and debt-to-GDP ratios. 
In  addition  to  asset  support,  governments  also  intervened  on  the  liabilities  side  of  bank 
balance  sheets,  with  direct  capital  injections  and  with  state  guarantees.  Since  these 
measures  are  the  subject  of  tonight’s  conference,  I  will  discuss  them  in  more  detail  in  the 
second part of my speech. 
For now, let me just recall that so far euro area governments have committed 26% of GDP to 
supporting the financial sector (although the sum actually drawn is only about 10% of GDP). 
This support was necessary, not for the banks’ sake, but for the sake of the central role they 
play in the market economy. This is particularly true in the euro area, where banks are firms’ 
main source of external funding, as opposed to other economies whose financial system is 
sometimes  considered  more  “market  based”.  These  differences  across  economies  also 
determined different policy responses. The US and the UK initially focussed on asset support 
that  was  intended  to  return  markets  to  proper  functioning.  Eventually,  they  turned  to  their 
second line of defence, with direct capital injections to support the banks. In the euro area, 
BIS Review 13/2010 
 2
this order was reversed, with authorities more focussed on the banking sector and turning to 
asset support as a second line of defence.  
Preparing for the future 
2. 
Having described the recent policy response to the crisis, I turn now to the challenges that 
remain for the future. 
I  will  divide  my  remarks  in  three  parts.  First,  the  immediate  challenge  is  to  implement  exit 
strategies  from  the  current  extraordinary  monetary  and  fiscal  measures.  Second,  a  longer 
term challenge is to design and implement financial reform that effectively mitigates systemic 
risk. Finally, I will discuss some new ideas advanced within this process of reform. 
Immediate challenge: monetary and fiscal exit strategies 
2.1 
First, let me consider the exit strategy from current extraordinary monetary measures. As I 
mentioned before, there are signs of substantial improvement both in financial markets and 
in the real economy. These suggest that the Eurosystem extraordinary liquidity measures are 
not  all  needed  to  the  same  extent  as  in  the  past.  However,  unwinding  of  enhanced  credit 
support  must  be  both  timely  and  gradual.  It  must  be  timely  because  there  are  risks 
associated  with  acting  either  too  early  or  too  late  and  it  must  be  gradual  because  the 
situation is only improving progressively. The process of withdrawal is facilitated by the fact 
that  many  of  the  non-standard  measures  were  designed  to  phase  out  naturally  over  time 
unless renewed by explicit policy decisions. For other measures, the situation has improved 
sufficiently for Governing Council to initiate the gradual process of withdrawal. 
The  cornerstone  of  the  exit  strategy  is  the  ECB  primary  objective  of  price  stability  in  the 
medium term. This has guided the introduction of enhanced credit support and will govern 
the  process  of  withdrawal.  As  with  the  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  exit  strategy  cannot 
precommit  Governing  Council  to  a  given  timing  or  sequence  of  actions.  These  must  be 
decided with reference to changing economic and financial circumstances. 
Now I wish to briefly address the exit strategy from the current fiscal stimulus. In addition to 
government measures supporting the financial sector, the extraordinary fiscal stimulus and 
the so-called automatic stabilisers have substantially deteriorated public finances during the 
current  economic  crisis.  According to  autumn  2009  forecast  of  the  European  Commission, 
the deficit ratio in the euro area should reach 6.9% of GDP in 2010, while government debt is 
expected to reach 84% of GDP in 2010. These significant fiscal imbalances undermine public 
confidence in the sustainability of public finances, which may place an additional burden on 
monetary policy in maintaining price stability. 
As  stressed  by  the  ECB  Governing  Council,  national  governments  must  abide  with  the 
EcoFin  Council  agreement  to  communicate  timely,  ambitious  and  credible  fiscal  exit 
strategies as soon as possible. The fiscal consolidation process should be transparent and 
should be guided by the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP). Current government 
commitments to start consolidation in 2011 at the latest represent a minimum requirement for 
all  euro  area  countries.  Furthermore,  given  the  future  challenges  raised  by  ageing 
populations,  fiscal  consolidation  efforts  should  provide  a  strong  focus  on  expenditure 
reforms. Developing and communicating fiscal exit strategies is an urgent policy priority. 
Financial reform process to mitigate systemic risk 
2.2 
Beyond  the  immediate  challenges,  I  wish  to  focus  on  the  ongoing  programme  of  wide-
ranging  financial  reform.  The  objective  of  this  process  is  to  counter  systemic  risk  and 
enhance the future resilience of the financial system. 
The recent crisis provided us with three important lessons that could guide this process of 
financial reform 
BIS Review 13/2010 
 3
joint 
  failures 
the  risk  of 
First,  systemic  risk  needs  to  be  monitored  by  an  operational  macro-prudential 
framework, extending the perimeter of regulation and mitigating the pro-cyclicality of 
the financial system 
Second,  incentives  need  to  be  aligned  on  creating  long-term  value  and  not  short-
term profits 
Third, cooperation in surveillance and oversight needs to be improved 
• 
Let me expand on the first lesson, the need for an operational macro-prudential framework. 
The analysis and control of systemic risk was a key missing ingredient in the run-up to the 
crisis. The problem is that although banks may seem resilient when considered individually, 
the  banking  system  as  a  whole  may  still  be  vulnerable.  This  paradox  can  be  explained 
through the two key dimensions of the macro-prudential framework. First, the cross-sectional 
dimension  focuses  on 
that  reflects  similar  exposures  or 
interconnectedness. Second, the time dimension focuses on interactions within the financial 
system, as well as feedback between the financial system and the real economy. These links 
account for the pro-cyclical behaviour of the financial system, which can aggravate systemic 
risk by amplifying the effects of the business cycle. 
The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  has  already  agreed  on  a  set  of  proposals 
aimed  at  improving  the  resilience  of  the  system.  These  focus  on  raising  the  quality  and 
quantity  of  bank  capital  in  order  to  better  absorb  future  shocks.  They  also  suggest 
introducing a bank leverage ratio, although this will have different effects in the US and the 
EU unless there is convergence in accounting standards. More generally, there is agreement 
on the need to require banks to build-up countercyclical buffers in good times that can be 
drawn down during bad times. In addition, the Basel Committee and the CEBS (Committee 
of European Banking Supervisors) are developing new standards for liquidity. The European 
Union has also enhanced its macro-prudential framework by creating the European Systemic 
Risk Board, with responsibility for issuing early warnings and recommendations. 
The second lesson was that incentives need to be aligned on creating long-term value rather 
than short-term profits. 
The final lesson of the crisis was that it clearly revealed the need to improve cooperation in 
surveillance  and  oversight.  This  requires  better  links  between  the  two  pillars  of  financial 
supervision:  the  micro  approach,  which  focuses  on  individual  institutions,  and  the  macro 
approach, which focuses on systemic risk. 
New ideas to prepare for the future 
2.3 
I  have  described  the  immediate  challenges  linked  to  exit  strategies  and  the  longer-term 
process  of  financial  reform  that  is  already  underway.  Let  me  now  comment  on  some  new 
ideas advanced in the wake of the crisis to prepare for the future. 
In  a  Financial  Times  column  entitled  “how  to  save  banks  without  using  taxpayers’  money” 
Professors  Wolff  and  Vermaelen  describe  a 
instrument  called  Contingent 
Convertibles  (also  known  as  CoCo  bonds).  In  the  recent  crisis,  these  could  have  helped 
distressed institutions to convert debt to equity, reducing the need for capital injections from 
the  state.  The  advantage  of  Contingent  Convertibles  is  that  they  would  not  require  a 
negotiated decision by the firm or an intervention by the authorities, but would convert debt to 
equity automatically when the value of equity falls below a level specified in advance. The 
process  appears  to  be  transparent,  predictable  and  dictated  by  market  developments. 
Professors Wolff and Vermaelen add a twist by providing the original shareholders with a call 
option to buy back the converted debt. This serves to smooth the conversion process and 
avoids  an  incentive  problem  that  can  create  so-called  “death  spirals.”  I  expect  Professor 
Vermaelen, who will speak next, will provide more details. 
financial 
BIS Review 13/2010 
 4
Turning  to  other  “new  ideas,”  the  “Tobin”  tax  on  financial  transactions  reappeared  in  the 
recent policy debate to finance the cost of future bailouts. This is an old idea dressed up in 
new  clothes.  The  Tobin  Tax  appears  to  be  a  solution  in  search  of  a  problem,  as  it  has 
already been suggested to finance developing countries, offset the cost of global warming, 
prepare for population ageing, etc. Even in the present case, a transaction tax would still not 
address the underlying problem. In fact, it may actually aggravate it, acting as an additional 
source of moral hazard. By raising costs, this tax could actually encourage higher risk taking, 
preparing the ground for the next systemic crisis. 
The Jackson Hole Conferences in 2008 and 2009, in which I participated, presented several 
additional  “new  ideas”  in  this  context.  Most  recently  the  discussion  focussed  on  Ricardo 
Caballero’s  analysis  of  the  “surprising”  nature  of  the  recent  crisis.  He  stressed  that  the 
“surprise”  was  not  the  decline  in  property  prices,  but  the  repercussions  this  had  in  the 
financial  sector.  The  unexpected  departure  from  the  normal  functioning  of  the  financial 
system plunged agents into unquantifiable uncertainty. This unleashed panic, characterised 
by a “flight to safety” and fire asset sales that amplified the crisis. At this point, the role of the 
authorities is to fight the panic, which involves providing some form of insurance. In the 2008 
Conference,  Anil  Kashyap  and  his  co-authors  suggested  that  capital  insurance  could  be 
provided by the private sector, while in 2009 Caballero argued that only the state can insure 
against systemic risk. 
Necessarily, any insurance arrangement is contingent, so it may share some of the features 
of  Contingent  Convertible  bonds.  However,  if  all  banks  were  required  to  contribute  to  a 
common insurance pool, the risk coverage would be spread more broadly than if the scheme 
is limited to the “too-big-to-fail” banks. Caballero proposed Tradable Insurance Credits (TICs) 
that institutions could attach to individual assets or liabilities on their balance sheets. Since 
TICs could be traded between banks, they would allow insurance coverage to flow to where 
it is needed in a crisis, without the authorities needing to specify in advance the nature of the 
contingent event to be covered. Banks that find themselves less exposed in a crisis could 
choose to sell their insurance to distressed banks at a premium, a reward for prudence that 
most insurance schemes do not offer. 
I  find  some  of  these  features  attractive,  but  any  insurance  scheme  is  also  subject  to 
important limitations. Private insurance schemes require freezing huge amounts of resources 
to cover the insurance promises. The failure of some mono-line insurers in the recent crisis 
indicates that private sector resources can turn out to be  insufficient, aggravating financial 
instability. On the other hand, public sector insurance schemes jeopardise the sustainability 
of  public  finances  as  they  transfer  the  risks  to  the  taxpayer  and  distort  incentives  as 
mentioned above. 
Conclusion 
3. 
Let me conclude. 
Financial crises are an inevitable part of the business cycle. It would be misguided to expect 
to  eliminate  them  completely.  However,  we  do  have  a  responsibility  to  learn  from  them  in 
order to reduce the inefficiencies in the financial system and improve its resilience in future 
episodes of turbulence. 
I wish to stress that there is no “silver bullet” solution just as there was no single error behind 
the financial crisis. If we are to improve on the current situation, there are many changes that 
need to be implemented. 
Some critics have argued that the response of governments and central banks raised moral 
hazard problems that sow the seeds of the next crisis. However, it is important to recognise 
that  moral  hazard  also  appears  within  the  crisis.  This  was  spread  over  many  months, 
allowing agents to adapt their short-term behaviour to authorities’ decision whether or not to 
BIS Review 13/2010 
 5
intervene. The policy response had to simultaneously stabilise the short-term situation while 
accounting for long-term costs. 
Today it is generally accepted that the extraordinary policy measures taken were necessary 
to prevent a collapse of the financial system with even worse economic consequences. Let 
us  hope  that  the  ongoing  process  of  financial  reform  will  enhance  the  resilience  of  the 
financial  system,  reducing  the  need  for  extraordinary  interventions  in  the  future  and  their 
associated costs.  
BIS Review 13/2010 
 6
