Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Risk management in the banking industry 
in Uganda 
Remarks by Prof Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the 
Banking Industry Stakeholders’ Roundtable Forum, Kampala, 24 March 2010. 
 Introduction 
In  the  past  decade,  rapid  innovations  in  the  banking  sector  and  the  internationalization  of 
financial flows have changed the face of banking almost beyond recognition. The changed 
environment  in  which  banks  find  themselves  today  presents  major  opportunities  for  banks 
but also entails complex and variable risks which challenge the traditional approach to bank 
risk  management.  The  situation  is  exacerbated  by  technological  advancement  and 
deregulation which have come with new arrays of banking risks. Traditional banking practice 
based  on  deposits  and  the  granting  of  loans  is  today  only  one  part  of  a  typical  bank’s 
business and in the developed countries is often the least profitable1. Whilst these changes 
are  necessary  to  satisfy  customers’  sophisticated  needs,  they  have  come  with  increased 
risks in the banking industry. What needs to be done is for banks to improve their financial 
risk management capabilities in order to survive.  
Risk appetite  
While there are increasing incidences of frauds in the banking industry, it is important to note 
that fraud is a derivative risk. Fraud occurs because either gaps exist in the organization’s 
internal  controls  or  the  mechanism  of  monitoring  such  controls  is  compromised.  In  this 
regard, as bankers, we must revisit our appetite of taking on high risks in anticipation of high 
returns.  Prudential  balance  between  the  risks  and  potential  returns  to  shareholders  and 
safety  to  our  depositors’  funds  should  always  guide  banks  in  the  conduct  of  banking 
business. However, this does not preclude action by the authority on other external factors 
like provision of an adequate legal framework and a national identification system.  
The role of Bank of Uganda in risk management in financial institutions  
As Bank of Uganda we have, on a continuous basis, issued risk management guidelines to 
the  Supervised  Financial  Institutions  (SFIs).  The  latest  revised  guidelines  were  issued  in 
February  2010.  At  the  centre  of  these  guidelines  is  the  importance  of  good  “corporate 
governance” which stresses the role of the board of directors in setting the tone at the top. 
Corporate  governance  requires  directors  to  play  a  significant  rather  than  peripheral  role  in 
risk  management  in  banks.  In  order  to  discharge  this  function  the  board  must  possess  a 
reasonable  knowledge  of  the  risks  specific  to  the  entire  spectrum  of  the  bank’s  activities. 
Additionally,  the  Bank  of  Uganda  is  increasing  its  oversight  surveillance  capacity  through 
new  methodologies  of  risk  based  supervision.  There  are  periodic  off-site  and  on-site 
examinations  of  banks’  performance  based  on  internationally  accepted  benchmarks.  In 
addition, the Bank of Uganda in its effort to mitigate risks in the banking sector introduced the 
Credit Reference Bureau (CRB) and we would like to request that all SFIs ensure that their 
borrowers register as this will create a database for managing some of the banking risks.  
                                                 
1   Hennie Van Greuning: Analyzing banking risk – a framework for assessing corporate governance and financial 
risk management. 
BIS Review 46/2010 
 1
Way forward  
Given  the  challenges  faced  by  the  banking  sector  with  respect  to  frauds,  the  measures 
envisaged to improve the risk management systems and maintain a strong vibrant financial 
sector could be twofold; those that can be done within the banking industry and its players, 
and those that can be initiated from outside the banking sector. 
Internally,  the  banking  sector  players  should  rethink  the  strategy  of  elevating  the  level  of 
scrutiny  on  their  employees  or  what  has  become  known  as  “Know  Your  Employee”  or 
KYE. Available statistics indicate that most of the bank frauds are internally perpetrated by 
employees who exploit weaknesses / lapses within the organization. The electronic era has 
made life better for banks in the area of transaction processing and timely delivery of value 
but has also introduced new types of risks and exposures. Information systems that have an 
element  of  cyber  or  internet  connection  may  potentially  be  open  to  the  whole  world  and 
computer  hackers  have  often  used  this  route  to  cause  financial  loss  to  some  financial 
institutions  around  the  world.  Additionally,  Banks  should  enhance  risk  profiling  of  their 
customers.  They  should  go  beyond  the  traditional  “Know  Your  Customer”  (KYC)  to 
Enhanced  Customer  Due  Diligence  (ECDD).  Banks  should  be  prepared  to  invest  in  the 
training of their employees so as to accumulate adequate human capital for managing those 
risks  associated  with  the  changing  banking  environment.  Most  importantly,  banks  much 
exhibit high standards of good corporate governance. 
Externally,  the  dearth  of  punitive  legislation  has  been  sighted  as  one  of  the  major  factors 
promoting frauds. As long as fraudsters know that even when sentenced, their illicit assets 
remain  intact,  they  will  continue  in  this  business.  Enactment  of  laws  like  the  Anti-Money 
Laundering  Bill  that  provides  for  the  seizure  of  such  assets  may  serve  as  a  deterrent.  To 
facilitate  faster  administration  of  justice,  the  Government  could  create  specialized  financial 
investigative  sections  of  police.  The  Government  should  revive  its  project  of  establishing 
common  infrastructure  like  the  National  Identification  Card  to  facilitate  identification  of 
customers. 
I thank you very much for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2010
