Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The ECB’s actions during the recent crisis 
and the policy elements needed for a sound recovery 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the conference on “How can the EU and China contribute to a sound and 
sustainable global economic recovery?” at the Shanghai Expo, Shanghai, 3 July 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am greatly honoured to speak here today at the World Expo 2010 in Shanghai, the first one 
in China. Two days ago I had the chance to visit the Expo myself and I am truly fascinated by 
the window to the world and its perfect organisation. I am told that the emblem of the Expo is 
inspired by the Chinese character for “world”,  and that there is a popular saying in China, 
which goes: “The world is wonderful, if you don’t see it, you don’t know” (shijie zhen qimiao, 
bu  kan  bu  zhidao).  I  think  this  saying  describes  not  only  the  atmosphere  at  the  Shanghai 
Expo quite well, but also China’s general attitude towards today’s globalised world. And one 
could  turn  it  around  and  say:  “If  you  have  not  seen  China,  you  can  not  imagine  how 
wonderful it is” – and I have no doubt that it will one day become a major global financial 
centre as well.  
The financial crisis has hit the global economy and has led to losses of income and costs to 
the  system  around  the  globe.  Today,  we  are  focusing  on  how  the  EU  and  China  can 
contribute to a sound and sustainable global economic recovery, which is in the interest of all 
of us. We are here to discuss the policies needed to address the financial instabilities that we 
were faced with and we need to discuss the policies that will steer our economies back to a 
sustainable long term growth path.  
Let me give you my key message in this regard right up front: I believe that the recovery in 
Europe is well on track and that we have the right policies in place to ensure the return to the 
levels of growth we have seen prior to the crisis.  
In my speech today, I will take the opportunity to discuss how the European Central Bank 
(ECB) has responded to the adverse effects of the financial crisis since 2007 and how this 
has not only prevented worse outcomes but has also contributed in the current environment 
to setting the stage for a sound recovery in Europe. Indeed, also on the basis of low interest 
rates  all  along  the  money  market  yield  curve,  providing  attractive  financing  conditions,  the 
economy is expanding and we see a positive growth outlook. 
I will also outline which policies – in my view – are needed for the recovery to be sustainable 
with the prospect of long term growth. First, structural reform policies to strengthen overall 
growth prospects. Second, a financial market sector reform (which is well on track), Third, 
fiscal consolidation (which is also well on track) and fourth, the continuous concentration of 
monetary policy to be  directed at medium term  price stability as this is the necessary and 
crucial contribution of monetary policy to fostering sustainable economic growth, job creation 
and financial stability.  
Price stability and financial stability are indispensable elements shaping the outlook for global 
growth. A third element is sound public finances. But before addressing these issues, let me 
give you some ideas on what the ECB has done during the crisis. 
The ECB’s actions during the crisis 
Recent years have been most challenging across the globe. What started as tensions in the 
money  market  in  August  2007  quickly  spread  around  the  globe,  leading  to  severe 
repercussions across economies and markets.  
BIS Review 93/2010 
 1
After  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008,  we  saw  a  sharp  fall  in  global 
activity. In the fourth quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009, global trade volumes fell 
by  18  percent.  This  development  was  also  felt  here  in  China,  where  year-on-year  GDP 
growth decelerated to 6.2% in the first quarter of 2009 from 9.1% in the third quarter of 2008 
and trade values decreased by 33% from September 2008 to March 2009. In the euro area, 
real GDP fell by altogether almost 4.5 percent and unemployment rose by 1.4 percentage 
points  in  just  six  months.  At  the  same  time,  extra-euro  area  export  volumes  of  goods 
decreased by 18.0% and import volumes by 12.8%.  
The ECB acted quickly and decisively in response to the crisis. We reduced our key interest 
rates to unprecedented low levels. The interest rate at the main refinancing operations was 
lowered  by  325  basis  points  to  1.0%  between  October  2008  and  May  2009,  i.e.  within  a 
period  of  only  seven  months.  And,  we  have  left  it  unchanged  since  then.  In  addition,  we 
introduced  a  series  of  non-standard  measures  to  support  credit  provision  by  banks  to  the 
euro area economy. 
Our non-standard measures were designed to sustain financing conditions and credit flows 
above  and  beyond  what  could  be  achieved  through  reductions  in  key  ECB  interest  rates 
alone. These measures, which we refer to as “enhanced credit support”, included essentially 
five elements: We lengthened the maximum maturity of refinancing operations, we extended 
the eligible collateral list, we provided liquidity in foreign currencies, we initiated a covered 
bond purchase programme, and, above all, we provided unlimited liquidity in all refinancing 
operations at a fixed rate. 
The  enhanced  credit  support  led  to  a  considerable  improvement  in  market  liquidity  and 
helped  to  alleviate  funding  risks.  As  a  result  of  our  actions,  money  market  interest  rates, 
money market spreads and interest rates on bank loans declined significantly. 
In early May of this year, we were confronted with renewed market tensions. These tensions 
arose  in  some  segments  of  the  euro  area  debt  securities  markets.  Again,  after  carefully 
considering  the  situation,  we  decided  to  act,  since  the  tensions  were  hampering  the 
monetary policy transmission mechanism. We launched the Securities Markets Programme 
to  ensure  depth  and  liquidity  in  those  market  segments  which  are  dysfunctional.  The 
objective  of  this  programme  is  to  address  the  malfunctioning  of  securities  markets  and  to 
ensure  the  proper  transmission  of  monetary  policy  impulses  to  the  wider  economy  and, 
ultimately, to the general price level. 
Overall,  all  the  non-standard  measures  we  have  taken  have  been  consistent  with  our 
mandate to deliver price stability for the euro area as a whole. From the very beginning, we 
have made clear that those measures are, by construction, temporary in nature. In fact, the 
Governing Council remains firmly committed to its price stability objective. This is credible for 
financial  market  participants  and  the  public,  as  reflected  in  inflation  expectations  that  are 
firmly anchored at levels in line with the aim of the ECB’s Governing Council to keep inflation 
rates below, but close to 2% over the medium term. 
Elements needed for a sound economic recovery 
The ECB measures were indispensable to support the functioning of the euro area banking 
sector and to prevent worse outcomes during the crisis. But with our contribution to attractive 
financing conditions and the smooth functioning of money and credit markets, the ECB has 
also contributed to bringing the euro area economy on the recovery track.  
Indeed,  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  is  well  on  track.  After  a  period  of  sharp 
decline,  euro  area  economic  activity  has  been  expanding  since  mid-2009.  Business  and 
consumer confidence indicators have been trending upwards over the last quarters and the 
June  2010  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections  –  but  also  those  of  other 
organizations – see a further rebound in GDP growth to take place in 2010 and 2011.  
2 
 BIS Review 93/2010
This notwithstanding and taking a longer term perspective, I believe that more is needed for 
this recovery to be solid, sustainable and long lasting. So let me outline which policies – in 
my view – are needed to achieve good prospects of long term growth with at the same time 
ensuring both, price stability and financial stability. In the following, I will mention four policy 
elements.  First,  the  strengthening  of  growth  prospects  through  structural  reforms.  Second, 
fiscal  consolidation  aiming  at  sustainable  fiscal  positions.  Third,  monetary  policy  geared 
towards price stability and finally a comprehensive reform of the financial sector.  
First,  strengthening  growth  prospects.  Structural  reforms  leading  to  higher  growth  and 
employment are crucial to support a sustainable recovery.  
We  know  very  well  that  structural  reforms  pay  off.  For  instance,  measures  which  increase 
competition  in  the  consumer  markets  can  curtail  monopoly  rents  and  lead  to  higher 
employment and output. The introduction of the Single Market, for instance, has – according 
to estimates of decreased monopoly rents by a quarter.1 Studies have also found that this 
may  have  increased  potential  output  in  the  range  of  5–10  percent.2  Also  labour  market 
reforms, such as for instance an adjustment of the unemployment benefit replacement ratio 
by 5 percentage points has been estimated to give rise to 1.5% more output and 1.7% more 
employment over a period of 5 years.3  
Therefore,  policies  to  enhance  competition  and  innovation  are  needed  to  speed  up 
restructuring  and  investment  and  to  create  new  business  opportunities.  Increased  labour 
market  flexibility,  but  also  investments  in  education  and  research  are  required  to  create 
employment  opportunities  and  enhance  competitiveness.  Restructuring  of  the  banking 
sector, aiming at solid business models, better risk management and increased transparency 
will be key. 
In this respect, the European Commission has recently put forward its Europe 2020 strategy. 
The  aim  of  this  strategy  is  to  deliver  higher  levels  of  employment,  productivity  and  social 
cohesion.  Europe  can  come  out  stronger  from  the  crisis,  if  it  seizes  this  opportunity  to 
implement the reforms that are necessary. 
Second, fiscal sustainability. Sound public finances are the basis for an economy to prosper 
and to develop in a sustainable way. This is particularly important in a monetary union, such 
as the euro area, where sixteen individual countries have a common monetary policy.  
A number of euro area governments have adopted fiscal consolidation measures and set out 
ambitious  fiscal  targets.  On  7  June,  the  euro  area  finance  ministers  agreed  on  the  spring 
2010 orientations for fiscal policies in euro area countries. We welcome the commitment to 
take  additional  measures,  where  needed,  in  order  to  ensure  the  achievement  of  the 
budgetary targets for 2010 and beyond.  
Will these consolidation efforts have a negative impact on growth? In the short run, the effect 
will very much depend on the economic outlook and to what extent public demand will be 
replaced  by  private  demand.  Our  current  estimates  foresee  some  dampening  impact  on 
growth, but not a very significant one, depending on the fiscal instrument that is used. In the 
long  run,  however,  the  benefits  of  fiscal  consolidation  prevail.  An  illustrative  analysis  of  
multi-year  fiscal  consolidation  programmes  conducted  by  our  experts  which  we  have 
published  in  the  July  edition  of  our  Monthly  Bulletin  suggests  that  the  long-term  economic 
                                                 
1   H.  Badinger,  2007,  Has  the  EU’s  Single  Market  Programme  Fostered  Competition?  Testing  for  a  Decrease  in  Mark-up 
Ratios in EU Industries, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 69(4), pp. 497–519. 
2   W. Roeger, J. Varga, J. in’t Veld, 2008: Structural Reforms in the EU: A Simulation-based Analysis using the QUEST Model 
with  Endogenous  Growth,  European  Commission  Economic  Papers  No.  351;  T.  Bayoumi,  D.  Laxton,  P.  Pesenti,  2004: 
Benefits and Spillovers of Greater Competition in Europe: A Macroeconomic Assessment, European Central Bank Working 
Paper No. 341. 
3   See sources from Footnote 2. 
BIS Review 93/2010 
 3
gains of restoring sound fiscal positions in the euro area outweigh by far the short-run costs. 
According to model simulations, long-run benefits of a permanent reduction in the euro area 
debt-to-GDP ratio over the years from 90% to 60% are generally in the range of 0.4–2.2% of 
initial steady-state real GDP.4 
Therefore, cohesive action at a European level is essential. Each country needs to live up to 
its  responsibilities,  and  European  governments  need  to  work  together.  This  goes  hand  in 
hand  with  the  conclusions  of  the  G20  meeting  in  Toronto  last  weekend,  where  the 
G20 economies committed to fiscal plans that will at least halve deficits by 2013 and stabilize 
or reduce government debt-to-GDP ratios by 2016. This should support a sound, longer-term 
economic recovery on a global level.  
Third, price stability, which is our primary objective. As I have mentioned, we have used both 
standard and non-standard, temporary monetary policy measures during the crisis period to 
ensure price stability.  
We remain firmly committed to price stability over the medium to longer term. We have done 
so in the past – with average annual inflation in the euro area over the past 11 years since 
the inception of the euro of only 1.98% – and we will do so in future.  
This is also seen by financial market participants. In particular, inflation expectations in the 
euro  area  have  remained  well-anchored  in  line  with  the  Governing  Council’s  definition  of 
price stability, also throughout the financial crisis. This can be seen in different indicators, for 
example  in  the  Survey  of  Professional  Forecasters,  where  inflation  five  years  ahead  is 
continuously expected to stand either at 1.9% or 2.0% since the beginning of 2002. 
Thus, the ECB is credible in the delivery of price stability. This credibility is not only key in the 
implementation  of  monetary  policy,  but  it  is  the  necessary  and  central  contribution  that 
monetary policy makes to fostering sustainable economic growth, job creation and financial 
stability.  
Fourth, financial stability. It is important to step up efforts to ensure financial stability. In many 
respects, the recent crisis can be seen as the direct result of vulnerabilities and imbalances 
in the financial system. We have all felt the negative effects that the financial crisis had on 
economies around the globe. 
To build a safer financial system, the responsible authorities need to enhance their financial 
sector  surveillance,  both  at  a  micro-prudential  and  macro-prudential  level.  Financial 
institutions  also  play  a  decisive  role,  as  they  have  to  improve  their  risk  management 
practices.  A  key  challenge  for  policy-makers  will  be  to  design  appropriate  responses  to 
enhance  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  without  imposing  restrictions  that  would 
unnecessarily hamper financial innovation and reduce the efficiency of the system.  
At the micro-prudential level, several initiatives are now underway to create more effective 
supervisory regulation, taking into account the lessons learnt from the crisis. The proposals 
of  the  Basel  Committee  –  known  as  “Basel  III”  –  aim  at  enhancing  capital  and  liquidity 
regulation  to  improve  loss  absorption,  mitigate  procyclicality  and  increase  the  resilience 
against shocks. These measures – when phased in gradually with the economy recovering – 
contribute to long term economic growth, not least by preventing such high costs of a crisis 
we are currently experiencing.  
If  there  is  one  uncontested  lesson  from  the  crisis  it  is  that  systemic  risks  were  largely 
underestimated and, therefore, make the development of a comprehensive macroprudential 
supervision absolutely essential.  
                                                 
4   ECB Monthly Bulletin, July 2010. 
4 
 BIS Review 93/2010
An effective macro-prudential framework aims at delivering a thorough analysis of systemic 
risks, as well as the formulation of appropriate policies to address such risks identifying, in a 
timely  fashion,  the  emergence  and  build  up  of  critical  vulnerabilities,  and  deciding  on 
effective (pre-emptive) intervention. 
Central banks have a very important role in this regard. At the European level, a new body 
will  be  set  up:  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB),  which  will  be  an  independent 
body responsible for conducting macro-prudential oversight of the EU’s financial system as a 
whole and which will be supported analytically and logistically by the ECB.  
The  ESRB  should  be  seen  as  a  component  of  a  global  framework  of  macro-prudential 
oversight, also allowing it to contribute to the assessment and containment of global risks. In 
this sense, systemic risk surveillance and preventing those risks from materializing will be a 
key contribution to sustainable long term growth prospects.  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude.  
The global crisis of the last years has shown that policymakers around the globe have acted 
successfully.  Confidence  has  come  back.  With  our  policy  actions,  we  at  the  ECB  have 
supported credit flows to the economy and thus dampened the negative effects of the crisis 
to  the  extent  possible.  Looking  ahead,  we  now  need  to  draw  lessons  from  the  crisis  and 
focus on the elements that ensure that the global recovery is sound and sustainable.  
For  this,  I  believe  four  elements  are  essential.  These  are  strengthening  growth  prospects, 
fiscal sustainability, price stability and financial stability. 
For price stability and financial stability, central banks play a key role. They will shape the 
global  recovery  by  maintaining  price  stability  and  safeguarding  financial  stability.  Price 
stability  is  the  central  contribution  that  monetary  policy  makes  to  economic  growth,  to  job 
creation and to financial stability.  
Financial stability, in turn, will be a major focus of policy-makers in the aftermath of the crisis. 
Central banks have specific tasks and responsibilities in this domain. For example, the ECB 
will contribute to the ESRB to conduct macro-prudential oversight at a European level. 
Of course, central banks cannot act alone. Actions are required to address all conditions and 
challenges  to  spur  long  term  economic  growth.  We  all  have  to  work  together.  National 
governments, regulators and supervisors, and the private sector and financial industry have 
to  proceed  with  the  difficult,  but  vital,  measures  required  to  ensure  a  sound  basis  for 
economic growth.  
With China being one of the most important trading partners for the euro area and vice versa, 
recovery in the euro area and China is in our mutual interest. I am confident that we are on a 
good track. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 93/2010 
 5
