Emsley Tromp: ICT as a driver of growth in the Caribbean – policies to 
improve the Caribbean’s competitiveness in a knowledge-based 
economy 
Speech  by  Dr  Emsley  Tromp,  President  of  the  Bank  of  the  Netherlands  Antilles,  on  the 
occasion  of 
the  26th  Annual  Caribbean  Association  of  National 
Telecommunications  Organizations  (CANTO)  conference  and  trade  exhibition,  Curaçao, 
11 July 2010. 
the  opening  of 
 Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, good evening, 
Allow  me  to  welcome  all  the  representatives  of  the  Caribbean  Association  of  National 
Telecommunications Organizations – CANTO – to the island of Curaçao. Developments in the 
telecommunications sector are not only important for the individual organizations operating in 
the  industry,  but  they  also  are  crucial  for  our  national  and  regional  economies.  Therefore,  I 
would  like  to  congratulate  CANTO  and  the  United  Telecommunication  Services  –  UTS  –  in 
particular, for organizing this annual conference.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the theme of this conference, “Embracing technology for economic 
success” is very timely. Today more than ever, technology, and specifically, information and 
communications  technology,  or  ICT,  is  considered  one  of  the  main  factors  contributing  to 
economic  recovery  and  sustained  growth.  ICT  has  become  an  essential  element  of  the 
infrastructure underpinning competitive economies.  
In today’s world, the ability to create, distribute, and exploit knowledge is a major source of 
competitive advantage, wealth creation, and improvements in the quality of life. Information 
and communications technology is the foundation of this knowledge-based world because it 
allows economies to acquire and share ideas, expertise, services, and technologies locally, 
regionally, and across the world. Furthermore, ICT stimulates innovation as it encourages the 
creation and development of new ideas, products, and services. Finally, increased use of ICT 
stimulates productivity growth.  
In fact, investment in ICT can spur gains in productivity in three ways. (1) Investment in ICT 
contributes 
labor  productivity. 
(2) Technological  progress  may  contribute  to  faster  multifactor  productivity  growth  in  the 
ICT-producing industry. (3) Finally, but perhaps most important, greater use of ICT outside 
the  ICT  industry  helps  firms,  public  and  private  institutions  to  increase  efficiency,  develop 
new products and services and, hence, it increases multifactor productivity growth. 
Ladies and gentlemen, as the world economy is recovering from one of the worst economic 
crises in decades, ICT is bound to play an increasingly prominent role in enabling economic 
growth. As you may know, following the escalation of the international financial crisis in 2008, 
global  output  contracted  significantly  in  2009.  Output  dropped  sharply  in  the  major 
industrialized economies and slowed down in the emerging economies. The Caribbean was 
not exempted from the global economic downturn. Most economies in the region contracted 
in 2009. The economic downturn in the region is primarily attributable to a decline in foreign 
demand  that  affected  the  main  export  industries,  including  tourism,  financial  &  business 
services, and manufacturing. Fortunately, the world economy is showing signs of recovery 
and the IMF projects a global GDP growth for 2010. Output in our region is also expected to 
rise. For 2010, the IMF projects an average real GDP growth of 1.5% for the Caribbean.  
Countries are taking several measures to foster a sustained economic recovery. In general, 
the policy agenda includes fiscal measures to cut budget deficits and reduce public debt. In 
addition,  the  reform  of  the  financial  sector  is  considered  high  priority  in  most  countries, 
especially the advanced economies. Furthermore, countries are taking measures to improve 
to  overall  capital  deepening,  helping 
increase 
to 
BIS Review 98/2010 
 1
the efficiency of labor and product markets. Given ICT’s important contribution to efficiency 
and productivity, several countries have included measures and stimulus packages to foster 
the creation and diffusion of ICT in their policy agenda. For example, the European Union 
has presented the Digital Agenda for Europe that includes measures to improve the speed of 
internet connections and to stimulate ICT research and innovation. In the United States, the 
government  has  increased  its  investment  spending  on  ICT,  including  investments  in 
broadband  technology,  electronic  medical  records,  and  new  computers  for  schools  and 
libraries in order to make the country more competitive while creating more jobs.  
In the case of the Caribbean, the development and diffusion of ICT has become crucial to 
competing effectively in the global world. In the Caribbean, the services industry is the main 
pillar of economic growth, and ICT plays a crucial role in a services-oriented economy. For 
example,  destinations,  accommodations,  and  attractions  can  be  marketed  efficiently  in  the 
tourism  industry  by  using  ICT.  Furthermore,  in  higher  value-added  industries  such  as 
financial & business services, ICT makes it easier to access market and management data, 
share information, and build trading partnerships. In the area of logistics, ICT can improve 
efficiency  by  reducing  delivery  times  and  coordinating  stock  levels  through  improved 
monitoring of supply and demand, which in turn enhances customer service. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  over  the  past  several  years  we  have  seen  significant  economic 
progress in the Caribbean region. Nevertheless, our average growth rate lags behind that of 
advanced  and  emerging  economies.  According  to  a  recently  published  study  by  the  Inter-
American  Development  Bank,  the  main  reason  why  Latin  American  and  Caribbean 
economies  have  underperformed  vis-à-vis  advanced  and  emerging  economies  in  terms  of 
economic growth is low productivity growth. In fact, since 1970, productivity in our region has 
consistently lagged behind the rest of the world. What is more worrisome is that the services 
industry, in particular, has performed poorly in terms of productivity growth, dragging down 
aggregate productivity in the region.  
One  of  the  main  reasons  way  productivity  growth  has  been  low  in  our  region  is  that 
investments  have  been  concentrated  in  traditional,  low  productivity  sectors  such  as 
agriculture.  In  addition,  high  investments  were  made  in  maturing  sectors,  particularly  the 
tourism  sector,  where  productivity  improvements  are  more  difficult  to  realize.  Instead  of 
focusing on the traditional industries, investments must be made in those sectors that can 
increase productivity and, hence, boost economic growth in the region. Needless to say, the 
policy  agenda  should  include  measures  to  stimulate  innovation  and  diffusion  of  ICT  in  the 
business sector, particularly the high value-added services industries.  
Several factors affect a firm’s decision to invest in and use ICT. First is the availability of a 
state-of-the-art  ICT  infrastructure.  For  example,  these  days,  the  availability  of  adequate 
bandwidth  with  access  to  the  international  information  superhighway  is  crucial.  A  second 
factor affecting firms’ investment decisions related to ICT is the direct costs of ICT, including 
the costs of ICT equipment, telecommunication, or installing an e-commerce system. Lower 
costs  will  lead  to  more  technology  investment  and  diffusion  of  ICT.  The  availability  of 
qualified personnel also affects a firm’s decision to invest in new technologies and use ICT. A 
third important factor is the amount of risk and uncertainty related to the implementation of 
ICT. For example, firms will be more inclined to do business online if the infrastructure for 
online payments, delivery, and guarantees is secure. Finally, firms are more likely to invest in 
ICT  in  a  competitive  environment  as  a  way  to  improve  performance  and  survive  than  in  a 
sheltered environment.  
Ladies and gentlemen, a quick assessment of the ICT environment in the Caribbean reveals 
that  one  of  our  main  weaknesses  is  the  availability  and  affordability  of  state-of-the-art  ICT 
services. Although significant ICT investments have taken place over the past decade, the 
availability  of  business-oriented  technologies  differs  considerably  among  countries  in  the 
region since not all countries have equal access to the international backbone infrastructure. 
2 
 BIS Review 98/2010
regulation, 
through  adequate 
For example, limited access to the fiber optic submarine systems results in higher prices for 
bandwidth capacity.  
In the cases in which state-of-the-art services are provided, customers are charged relatively 
high  prices.  For  example,  according  to  a  recent  study  by  CARICOM,  Caribbean  countries 
charge far more than developed countries for broadband internet access. The high cost of 
ICT  services  is  related  to  the  lack  of  economies  of  scale  in  the  Caribbean  due  to  our 
countries’  small  size.  As  a  consequence,  competition  in  the  telecommunication  industry  in 
the Caribbean is limited. More often than not, only one single operator has the licenses to 
use  the  international  backbone  infrastructure  and/or  is  the  owner  of  the  domestic 
infrastructure. Hence, other operators have no access or limited access to international and 
domestic infrastructure, which results in limited and even unfair competition. 
From  an  economist’s  point  of  view,  the  availability  and  affordability  of  ICT  services  in  the 
Caribbean  can  be  improved  with  increased  competition  in  the  telecommunication  industry. 
Therefore,  governments  should  ensure 
fair  and 
nondiscriminatory  access  to  the  domestic  ICT  infrastructure.  All  players  within  the  sector 
should  be  able  to  develop  and  offer  services  through  the  domestic  and  international 
backbone infrastructure. In cases where competition is limited or not possible, the regulator 
must ensure that conditions exist for users to obtain the bandwidth capacity they need under 
nondiscriminatory, transparent conditions and at cost-based prices. 
Another  weakness  in  the  ICT  environment  in  the  Caribbean  is  our  legal  and  regulatory 
framework.  The  legal  enforcement  of  electronic  documents,  electronic  transactions,  and 
digital signature is essential because it reduces the risks of doing online business. Measures 
to  fight  internet  crime  should  be  included  in  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  as  these 
increase  a  country’s  reputation  as  a  safe  environment  for  e-business.  Regulation  of 
intellectual  property  and  privacy  related  to  the  use  of  the  internet  also  affects  a  firm’s 
decision to develop and provide new e-business activities and, hence, should be included in 
the legal and regulatory framework.  
Currently,  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  in  the  region  can  be  characterized  as 
fragmented  and  antiquated,  lacking  focus  and  flexibility.  Several  reports  by  international 
institutions, including the World Bank and CARICOM, have emphasized the importance of a 
regional  approach  for  the  development  of  a  legal  and  regulatory  framework  for  Caribbean 
countries. This regional approach should encompass the harmonization of e-legislation and 
e-regulation among the countries in the region. The Caribbean framework should be in line 
with international best practices. Moreover, the framework should be flexible to adapt to new 
ICT  developments.  Because  changes  happen  very  rapidly  in  this  dynamic  environment, 
regulators  need  to  monitor  ICT  developments  continuously  and  adjust  the  framework  if 
necessary.  
A main advantage of regional cooperation in the area of ICT is that it will help maximize the 
use  of  scarce  expertise  with  regard  to  drafting  legislation  and  implementing  regulation  of 
e-business. Furthermore, the ICT reform process could evolve more rapidly if countries only 
had to focus on facilitating and implementing the legislative and regulatory framework instead 
of drafting country-specific legislation.  
Ladies and gentlemen, another area that has to be addressed to increase productivity is the 
availability of a skilled workforce. A competent and skilled workforce is essential for countries 
to  succeed  in  a  knowledge-based  economy.  Today,  the  labor  market  demands  more  and 
more well-trained and qualified workers.  
Caribbean  countries  have  recognized  the  importance  of  ICT  in  the  vocational  curriculum. 
Governments,  the  private  sector,  and  nongovernmental  organizations  are  engaged  in 
expanding ICT coverage in the education system. Therefore, schools are increasingly being 
equipped with computers and internet access. Nevertheless, despite much effort, the access 
to ICT equipment is still insufficient. Furthermore, in most cases, the vocational curriculum is 
BIS Review 98/2010 
 3
increase 
for  countries 
to  maintain  and 
focused  on  providing  basic  technology  skills  instead  of  integrating  ICT  into  the  learning 
processes to develop critical thinking and higher value skills. 
Therefore,  I  believe  that  public-private  partnership  efforts  to  expand  ICT  coverage  in  the 
vocational curriculum should be further expanded. Besides providing the ICT infrastructure, 
teachers should be trained to better incorporate ICT tools in the learning experience. At the 
university  level,  through  special  programs  and  incentives,  public-private  partnerships  could 
stimulate internships in the ICT sector and academic research on ICT-related topics. 
Because the knowledge-based economy and the ICT environment are very dynamic, lifelong 
learning  has  become  a  necessity 
their 
competitiveness.  After  formal  education,  workers  need  continuous  training  to  maintain  the 
skills needed in their work. Lifelong learning should be a joint responsibility of workers and 
their employers. The government could provide special incentive schemes, for example, tax 
schemes,  to  make  lifelong  learning  and  training  more  attractive  for  the  worker  and  the 
employer.  
Regional  cooperation  is  also  recommended  to  improve  the  quality  of  the  labor  market,  in 
particular  in  the  area  of  ICT.  For  example,  Caribbean  countries  could  cooperate  in  the 
development and provision of ICT training for teachers. In addition, universities in the region 
could  join  efforts  in  academic  research  on  ICT-related  topics.  And  finally,  Caribbean 
countries  could  share  experiences  and  best  practices  with  respect  to  lifelong  learning  and 
training schemes for workers.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I have just dealt with several aspects of firms’ decision to invest in 
ICT  that  need  to  be  improved  in  the  region.  Besides  these  sector-specific  factors,  I  would 
also  like  to  emphasize  the  importance  of  an  enabling  investment  climate.  An  enabling 
investment  climate  includes  a  flexible  labor  market,  low  administrative  barriers,  and  easy 
access to capital. Furthermore, barriers to market entry and exit are relatively low, and the 
costs of doing business are competitive. Such an investment climate will not only encourage 
firms to invest in ICT hardware and applications but will also encourage ICT innovation. In 
other words, in an attractive investment climate, firms will be more inclined to develop new 
ICT products and services.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I wish to conclude my address by underscoring the importance of ICT 
as a driver of growth in the knowledge-based economy. Today more than ever, ICT plays a 
crucial  role  in  countries’  ability  to  recover  from  the  recent  economic  downturn.  In  the 
Caribbean,  ICT  could  boost  economic  growth.  However,  we  have  to  address  certain 
institutional and economic weaknesses in order to improve our competitiveness and to make 
our  economies  more  attractive  for  ICT  investments.  In  this  regard,  regional  cooperation  is 
essential.  Therefore,  I  applaud  CANTO’s  initiative  in  organizing  an  annual  conference  to 
discuss  important  topics  and  developments  in  the  ICT  industry  and  to  develop  regional 
programs to improve our ICT competitiveness. I wish you all fruitful meetings and a pleasant 
stay in Curacao. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 98/2010
