Duvvuri Subbarao: Currency wars, rural development, rising house 
prices and the deepening of capital markets 
Interview with Mr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, published on 
ft.com/beyondbrics on 18 November 2010. 
Currency wars and capital flows 
 Rupee strength 
beyondbrics reader: Why is the RBI opposed to rupee appreciation? With billions of people, 
an increase in purchasing power enabled by a strong rupee could do wonders, rather than 
surrendering to handful of export industries. Since poverty is a serious problem in India, don’t 
you think a stronger rupee could help them?  
Duvvuri Subbarao: RBI is not opposed to appreciation or depreciation of the rupee. What 
RBI  is  typically  concerned  about  is  volatile  movements  in  the  exchange  rate.  Both  large 
depreciation  and  appreciation  could  have  significant  costs,  particularly  in  terms  of  inflation 
(with  depreciation)  and  loss  of  external  competitiveness  (with  appreciation).  This  is  all  the 
more so if appreciation, as in recent times, is due to volatile capital flows. 
The  argument  that  a  stronger  currency  has  an  anti-poverty  impact  by  softening  inflation  is 
quite  persuasive.  However,  the  beneficial  impact  depends  on  the  extent  [to  which]  the 
exchange  rate  [passes]  through  to  prices.  Empirical  research  shows  that,  in  the  Indian 
context, the pass through is quite low – in the range of 0.4–0.9 per cent. 
Our  exchange  rate  policy  is  not  guided  by  a  target  or  a  band.  Our  policy  has  been  to 
intervene  in  the  market  only  to  manage  excessive  volatility  and  prevent  disruptions  to  the 
macroeconomic situation. 
QE2’s impact on India 
beyondbrics reader: How will the new US round of quantitative easing (QE2) affect India? 
Would  you  welcome  it  as  a  good  source  of  cheap  money  to  finance  the  infrastructure 
investments that India badly needs? 
DS: India needs to raise its investment by a quantum step if it has to realize its aspiration of a 
double  digit  growth.  We  certainly  need  to  augment  our  domestic  resources  with  foreign 
savings.  For  obvious  reasons,  we  have  a  preference  for  long-term  funds  over  short-term 
funds, for equity over debt and for FDI over portfolio flows. 
Experience shows that capital flows into EMEs [emerging market economies] are influenced 
by pull factors and push factors. The typical pull factors are the promising growth prospects, 
the declining trend rates of inflation and improved governance in EMEs. The push factors are 
the  abundant  liquidity  in  the  global  system  and  the  interest  rate  differential  between  the 
advanced economies and the EMEs. It is the push factors which trigger volatile capital flows. 
A  possibly  unintended  consequence  of  the  new  round  of  quantitative  easing  could  be  an 
added  impetus  to  the  push  factor  –  increased  volatile  capital  flows  into  India,  just  as  into 
other  EMEs,  in  pursuit  of  higher  returns  which  come  at  an  acceptable  risk.  Our  current 
account deficit, both in absolute terms and as a proportion of GDP, is expected to be wider 
this year than it was last year. To that extent, we can absorb larger capital flows. 
Nevertheless,  we  have  concerns  about  the  deficit  being  financed  by  volatile  capital  flows. 
Should  capital  flows  exceed  our  ability  to  absorb  by  a  wide  margin,  we  will  calibrate  our 
capital control instruments to manage the flows just as we did in the past. 
BIS Review 159/2010 
 1
Our  infrastructure  investment  needs  are  huge.  Foreign  investment  certainly  helps.  The 
concern though is that infrastructure, by its very nature, needs long term finance, and volatile 
flows  chasing  short-term  returns  do  not  meet  the  need.  In  order  to  support  infrastructure 
investment, we have made, and are making, efforts to deepen the corporate bond market. 
We had also enhanced the limits for FII investment in corporate bonds. 
Foreign exchange reserves 
beyondbrics reader: Should India continue to accumulate USD and follow US interest rate 
policies?  In  the  name  of  earning  export  dollars,  maybe  we  are  selling  our  resources  and 
services for a currency of diminishing value. 
DS:  To  deal  with  sudden  stops  and  reversals  of  capital  flows,  a  certain  level  of  foreign 
exchange  reserves  is  necessary.  However,  India  does  not  have  a  policy  of  actively 
accumulating  reserves  as  a  measure  of  self-insurance.  Any  accumulation  of  reserves  is 
partly an incidental byproduct of our exchange rate policy which is to check undue volatility in 
the 
the  underlying 
macroeconomic  fundamentals.  Incidentally,  the  increase  in  our  reserves  also  reflects 
valuation changes. 
In this context, it is also important to note that our foreign exchange reserves comprise not 
just dollars but also other hard currencies such as the euro and the sterling pound [and] also 
gold. 
foreign  exchange  market  so 
the  exchange  rate  reflects 
that 
Managing volatile capital flows 
beyondbrics  reader:  What  is  the  RBI’s  view  on  taming  the  disparity  between  speculative 
capital  inflow  (”FII”)  and  real  investment  (”FDI”)?  To  me  the  Indian  markets  are  looking 
volatile  and  this  could  have  serious  ramifications  on  the  rupee  as  well  as  domestic  asset 
prices should the fund flow reverse (which is easy in FII)? Are there any steps planned to 
balance this? 
DS: It is true that FII flows are volatile and could pose policy challenges during both surges 
and sudden stops. But it is also difficult to identify, especially in real time, the permanent and 
temporary components in the capital flows. 
Our approach to managing capital flows, therefore, is calibrated to respond to both domestic 
and global developments. We are quite agnostic towards the several available options. We 
deploy both quantity and price instruments as well as end use restrictions. 
Our FDI policy is fairly liberal. Foreign investment in a vast majority of sectors is approved 
under  an  automatic  route.  In  fact,  government  approval  is  required  for  foreign  investment 
only in a few select sectors. FII investments, on the other hand, are allowed both in the debt 
and equity markets. We have typically used control levers on the debt side. 
An  important  factor  in  managing  capital  flows  is  the  absorptive  capacity  of  the  economy. 
Despite large FII inflows in recent months, the rupee has not appreciated much because of 
our widened current account deficit. Nevertheless, we are carefully monitoring the size and 
nature of flows and will take measures as and when needed. 
Rural growth and capital reform 
Development and entrepreneurship 
beyondbrics  reader:  What  can  the  RBI  do  on  its  part  to  engender  development  in  rural 
India?  How  can  the  RBI  encourage  entrepreneurship  there  so  that  we  can  reduce 
urbanization and decentralize India’s growth story? 
2 
 BIS Review 159/2010
DS:  From  the  very  beginning,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  in  the  forefront  of  pioneering 
development  initiatives.  In  the  1970s,  we  introduced  the  priority  sector  lending  scheme 
mandating  banks  to  direct  a  minimum  proportion  of  their  overall  lending  to  sectors  with  a 
large welfare impact such as agriculture, medium and small sized business and exports. We 
introduced  the  Lead  Bank  Scheme  (LBS)  after  the  banks  were  nationalized  in  1969–70 
thereby assigning banks a monitorable obligation for local development particularly in rural 
areas.  Our  aim  all  along  has  been  to  encourage  banks  to  have  a  positive  bias  towards 
agriculture, employment generation consistent with their business models and comparative 
advantage. 
Large sections of the population and certain regions, however, still remain outside the formal 
banking  structure.  Our  main  focus  today  is  on  financial  inclusion  as  it  is  a  necessary 
condition  for  sustaining  equitable  growth.  There  are  few,  if  any,  instances  of  an  economy 
transiting from an agrarian system to a post-industrial modern society without broad-based 
financial inclusion. 
We all know from personal experience that economic opportunity is strongly intertwined with 
financial  access.  Such  access  is  especially  powerful  for  the  poor  as  it  provides  them 
opportunities  to  build  savings,  make  investments  and  avail  credit.  Importantly,  access  to 
financial services also helps the poor insure themselves against income shocks and equips 
them to meet emergencies such as illness, death in the family or loss of employment. 
In order to further financial inclusion, the Government and the Reserve Bank are pursuing 
several initiatives. The Finance Minister, in his last budget, announced that every village in 
the country with over 2,000 people must have access to banking services by March 2012. 
We have asked every domestic commercial bank – public and private sector – to prepare its 
own Financial Inclusion Plan (FIP) and have it approved by its Board. 
Our aim in this respect is two-fold. One, each bank should have ownership of its FIP. Two, 
we want each bank to build on its comparative advantage. We want banks to be innovative 
and  entrepreneurial  and  try  out  their  own  models  and  experiments  consistent  with  their 
business models. 
Even as the brick and mortar branch presence will expand, there will be a big emphasis on 
branchless  banking  based  on  the  business  correspondent  (BC)  model  and  leveraging  on 
technology.  In  order  to  facilitate  this,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  also  enlarged  the  types  of 
entities that can be engaged as BCs. 
Third,  the  Government  of  India  has  set-up  two  funds  –  the  Financial  Inclusion  Fund  for 
meeting  the  costs  of  developmental  and  promotional  interventions  towards  financial 
inclusion, and the Financial Inclusion Technology Fund for meeting the costs of technology 
adoption. Each of these funds is worth Rupees 50bn. 
I  must  stress  is  that  financial  inclusion  is  not  just  a  public  good;  it  is  also  a  merit  good.  It 
empowers poor people in diverse ways. If there is to be “inclusive growth”, financial inclusion 
is the next big idea, as it promotes growth and equity. 
Capital account convertibility 
beyondbrics  reader:  What  is  your  view  in  respect  of  the  timetable  and  progress  towards 
fuller capital account convertibility, which determines the ease with which investments can be 
moved into and out of India? 
DS:  Our  goal  has  been,  and  remains,  to  traverse  towards  capital  convertibility  along  a 
gradual path – the path itself being recalibrated on a dynamic basis in response to domestic 
and global developments. Capital account liberalisation also has to keep pace with reforms in 
other sectors. 
The second Tarapore Committee provided a roadmap for fuller capital account convertibility 
(and included) fulfilment of certain pre-conditions such as fiscal consolidation, lower inflation 
BIS Review 159/2010 
 3
and a stronger financial system. Our approach to capital account liberalization has been what 
the  Romans  say,  festina  lente  –  make  haste  slowly.  Our  forward  movement  has  been 
calibrated by the macroeconomic conditions, the state of financial sector development, the 
risk management capabilities of financial institutions, the depth of the financial markets and 
global developments. In certain respects, we have moved ahead of the Tarapore Committee 
recommendations. Illustratively, non-resident foreign corporates and foreign institutions enjoy 
currency convertibility going farther than the Tarapore recommendations. 
Currency union in south Asia 
beyondbrics reader: Viewed from an economic standpoint (beyond any existing diplomatic 
rifts) would a common currency with Pakistan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, be useful to India?  
Duvvuri Subbarao: From an economic point of view, a common currency should certainly 
be  beneficial  for  regional  trade  and  be  cost  effective  too.  However,  for  benefits  to  accrue, 
intra-regional trade has not only to be large but has to constitute a significant proportion of 
each  country’s  global  trade.  This  is  not  the  case  presently.  We  are  nevertheless  actively 
exploring regional financial arrangement (RFA) options like the Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI). 
Economic co-operation among SAARC nations is based on our shared aspiration for growth 
and  poverty  alleviation.  The  Asian  Clearing  Union  (ACU)  settlement  arrangement  between 
the  member  central  banks,  which  facilitates  regional  trade,  is  also  an  example  of 
co-operation. 
House prices, markets and banks 
Rising house prices 
beyondbrics reader: Why does a house in India cost more than three to four times what it 
used to cost in 2003–04? Did any significant changes in affordability happen in the last seven 
years ... ? What do you say to people like me for whom a mortgage now looks out of reach, 
especially with inflation now in double digits? 
Duvvuri Subbarao:  It  is  true  that  the  cost  of  a  house  is  higher  now  than  it  was  in  2003–
2004. House price indices suggest that prices in Chennai, Mumbai, Delhi and Kolkata have 
more  than  doubled  since  2007.  This  is  also  the  case  in  some  of  the  non-metro  cities  like 
Bhopal  and  Lucknow.  But  this  price  increase  has  happened  in  pockets  and  cannot  be 
generalized to the all-India level. 
The increased price level of houses in India is a function of many factors – growth from a 
very low base for housing, better access to financing and some speculative build up. As per 
the Wholesale Price Index, the general price level of all commodities has gone up by about 
45 per  cent  since  2003–04.  House  prices  have  risen  faster  than  this.  Some  factors  that 
explain this are increased raw material costs, rising incomes and hence a demand for better 
quality housing, urbanisation in the face of limited land availability and improved access to 
institutional financing. 
In the Reserve Bank, we are sensitive to the financial stability implications of rapid build up in 
house  prices.  We  have  had  quite  a  credible  record  of  preemptive  regulatory  tightening  to 
prevent  unnatural  asset  price  build  up.  In  our  latest  policy  statement  on  November  2,  we 
capped the loan to value ratio (LTV) at 80 per cent, increased the risk weight for residential 
housing  loans  of  Rs.  7.5m  and  above  to  125  per  cent,  and  increased  the  standard  asset 
provisioning by commercial banks for housing loans with teaser rates from 0.4 to 2 per cent. 
4 
 BIS Review 159/2010
Deepening capital markets 
beyondbrics  reader:  Are  there  plans  to  create  deep  liquid  markets  for  fixed  income, 
commodity and currency trading so banks can hedge their risks? 
DS:  The  Reserve  Bank  regulates  the  government  securities  (G-Sec),  money,  credit  and 
currency markets and their derivatives. The commodities market is outside its domain. 
Facilitating  the  emergence  of  a  robust  market  is  an  evolutionary  process.  The  markets  in 
India  have  already  witnessed  far  reaching  developments.  We  already  have  an  active 
government  securities  market  where  primary  issuance  is  at  market-determined  rates  and 
there  is  reasonable  trading  across  the  yield  curve.  The  government  securities  market  also 
has  sound  infrastructure  for  trading  and  settlement  as  well  as  for  dissemination  of  trade 
information.  For  hedging  interest  rate  risk,  we  have  exchange  traded  interest  rate  futures 
(IRF) and a liquid and vibrant interest rate swaps (IRS) market. 
The  foreign  exchange  market  in  India  is  deep  and  liquid  and  is  expanding  rapidly.  The 
market facilitates conventional risk management instruments such as forwards, swaps and 
options and also a few structured products in options to enable economic agents to manage 
their  exposure  to  the  Indian  rupee.  We  have  also  introduced  currency  futures  and  options 
which enable both hedging and view-taking. While basically the OTC market is based on an 
underlying exposure with enough flexibility for risk management, there are products on the 
exchanges available for hedging or for purely view taking. 
In the Reserve Bank, we continuously explore the scope for introduction of new products with 
a  view  to  enhancing  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  markets  without  compromising  financial 
stability. 
beyondbrics reader: Does the RBI plan to increase the scope of the corporate bond market 
in India? 
DS: The development of the corporate bond market is one of the focus areas for the RBI as 
we recognize [it is critical] for the development of the financial system. At the current stage, it 
is  true  that  the  market  is  not  active.  The  following  are  some  of  our  recent  initiatives  to 
develop the market: 
Putting  through  a  robust  settlement  mechanism  including  Delivery-versus-Payment  (DVP) 
and a flexible settlement period. 
Disseminating price information to the market on real time basis for improving transparency 
and facilitating efficient price discovery. 
Introducing repos in corporate bonds to enhance liquidity in the secondary market. 
With  a  view  to  widening  the  market,  the  limit  for  investment  by  FIIs  [foreign  institutional 
investors] has been further enhanced recently to $20bn. Though the market is yet to become 
robust,  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  secondary  market  volume  in  corporate  bonds  has 
grown  nearly  four-fold  between  2007–08  and  2009–10.  We  are  also  in  the  process  of 
introducing credit default swaps. 
Banking 
beyondbrics  reader:  Where  do  you  see  the  banking  sector  in  India  in  10-20  years  from 
now? 
DS:  Though  the  Indian  economy  is  bank-centric,  the  penetration  of  the  banking  system  is 
smaller than in many countries including some of the Asian countries. The credit to GDP ratio 
is just about 55 per cent. 
In 20 years time, I would envisage the following scenario. The credit-GDP ratio will go well 
beyond 100 per cent. Indian banks will have penetrated the entire country and have covered 
every  household  with  a  functional  bank  account.  By  “functional”  what  I  mean  is  that  the 
BIS Review 159/2010 
 5
access  of  low  income  households  extends  beyond  just  savings  and  remittances  to  other 
services such as credit and micro insurance. 
Indian banks will have come up with some world-beating business models and innovations to 
make financial inclusion meaningful and also an effective business model. 
Banks will have adopted and adapted the best of world technologies so as to provide real 
time or near real time data/information which would enable them to have sophisticated risk 
management capability and, the ability to handle much more sophisticated products to meet 
the risk management needs of the real economy. 
I expect the underwriting standards to improve significantly with the setting up of strong credit 
information bureaus which will considerably reduce the information asymmetries. Banks will 
also be much more efficient due to substantial increase in productivity both of human capital 
as well as due to leveraging of technology and, therefore, able to operate on thinner margins 
and at lower cost to borrowers. 
In terms of architecture, I foresee the emergence of four to five large banks having strong 
international presence with a larger number of smaller domestic banks having all-India reach. 
I  also  foresee  a  stronger  presence  of  foreign  banks.  The  more  sophisticated  risk 
management and superior technology that foreign banks bring in will diffuse to Indian banks 
and bring our banking system close to the global best practices. 
Rural cooperatives, Regional Rural Banks and urban cooperative banks would be stronger 
with higher standards of corporate governance and stronger balance sheets. They will be an 
important vehicle for financial inclusion. 
Mortgages 
beyondbrics reader: Do you see Indian banks offering a true fixed rate mortgage that can 
be easily refinanced by the consumer? 
DS: The Reserve Bank has not issued any specific regulatory guideline to banks with regard 
to  fixed  rate  mortgages.  Banks  are free  to  design  products,  fix  interest  rates  on  them  and 
offer them to customers after getting them approved by their boards. 
6 
 BIS Review 159/2010
