Deepak Mohanty: Perspectives on inflation in India 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Bankers Club, Chennai, 28 September 2010. 
 The assistance provided by Dr O P Mall, Dr Abhiman Das and Shri Binod B Bhoi is acknowledged. 
I  thank  the  Bankers  Club,  Chennai  and  Shri  T.M.Bhasin,  Chairman  &  Managing  Director, 
Indian Bank for providing me this opportunity to speak before you. As you know, the Reserve 
Bank released its first Mid-Quarter Review of Monetary Policy for 2010–11 on September 16, 
2010 raising policy interest rates for the fifth time since March 2010. The Reserve Bank is 
concerned over the unacceptably high inflation rate. In the meanwhile, the Government has 
also released the new series on the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) changing the base year 
from 1993–94 to 2004–05.  
Against this background, I propose to speak on inflation. I will focus on three issues. First, I 
will place before you some salient features of the new series of WPI. Second, I will give a 
snapshot  of  our  history  of  inflation  from  1952–53.  Third,  I  will  give  a  brief  analysis  of  the 
determinants of inflation. I will conclude with some observations on the nature of monetary 
policy response in the past and in the current phase of inflation.  
New series on WPI inflation 
I. 
As  you  know,  the  Reserve  Bank  looks  at  various  indices  and  indicators  of  inflation.  WPI 
inflation is taken as the headline inflation in India. The Reserve Bank’s policy articulation and 
inflation  projection  are  in  terms  of  WPI.  Hence  the  new  series  on  WPI  is  of  particular 
importance.  
BIS Review 127/2010 
  1
Considering the data for the past five years, 2005–06 to 2009–10, it is seen that there is not 
much difference in average inflation rate between the new series and the old series which is 
about 5.5 per cent (Table 1). 
This similarity, however, masks a number of significant changes in the new series. First, the 
basic feature of any price index updation is to adequately capture the current structure of the 
economy,  consistent  with  the  consumption  pattern  and  the  price  trends  at  a  disaggregate 
level.  In  terms  of  change  in  the  relative  weight  of  major  commodity  groups,  the  share  of 
primary articles has gone down by 1.9 percentage points, which has been compensated by 
increase in the share of fuel group by about 0.7 percentage point and manufactured products 
by 1.2 percentage points. There has been a reduction in weightage of primary food articles 
and manufactured food products by 2.6 percentage points in the new series to 24.3 per cent 
from about 26.9 per cent in the old series. Second, notwithstanding a significant reduction in 
weightage,  the  food  inflation  in  the  new  series  is  higher  than  in  the  old  series.  This  is 
because of change in the consumption basket in favour of protein-rich items such as egg, 
meat and fish where price rise has been high apart from milk and pulses. Third, the non-food 
manufactured  products  inflation  is  lower  in  the  new  series  than  in  the  old  series.  This  is 
because of a substantial overhauling of the basket with the introduction of a number of new 
items.  For  example,  the  new  series  has  417  new  commodities  of  which  406  are  new 
manufactured products (Chart 1). Fourth, the new series has wider coverage. For example, 
the number of price quotation has increased from 1918 in the old series to 5482 in the new 
series. The new series, therefore, is better representative of overall commodity price inflation.  
 
 Long-term inflation trend  
II. 
The  WPI  series  is  available  from  the  year  1952–53  onwards  though  the  base  year  has 
undergone revisions from time to time. The monthly year-on-year inflation for the 56 years 
from 1953–54 to 2009–10 is plotted in Chart 2. A visual impression of Chart 2 suggests the 
following. First, inflation was quite volatile in the initial three decades of the 1950s, 1960s and 
1970s. But the volatility has reduced in the subsequent decades even with occasional spikes 
in inflation. Second, since the high inflationary phase of the mid-1990s, the inflation rate has 
moderated.  It  has  remarkable  stability  coinciding  with  great  moderation  globally  except  for 
the  recent  two  brief  episodes  of  double  digit  inflation  each  persisting  about  5  months  in 
June–October 2008 and then during March–June 2010.  
2 
 BIS Review 127/2010
  
Going by the current experience of 5–6 months of double digit inflation as high, one can trace 
9 such episodes in the last 56 years. Out of these 9 episodes, double digit inflation lasting 
beyond  a  year  occurred  on  5  occasions.  The  most  prolonged  one  lasted  for  30  months 
during October 1972 to March 1975. The last such high inflation was in the mid-1990s which 
lasted 15 months between March 1994 and May 1995. The Reserve Bank responded to the 
phases of high inflation through available policy instruments (Table 2 and Chart 3). 
 
 
   BIS Review 127/2010 
 3
 4 
  BIS Review 127/2010
 BIS Review 127/2010 
  5
Notwithstanding these episodes of double digit inflation, it is important to recognize that India 
has been a moderate inflation country and the average inflation has come down over the last 
15  years.  For  the  56  years  period from  1953–54  to  2009–10,  the  monthly  annual average 
inflation is around 6.7 per cent. There has particularly been a perceptible drop in the average 
WPI inflation to about 5.1 per cent in the last decade during 2001–02 to 2009–10.  
Determinants of inflation  
III. 
There  are  factors,  both  from  the  supply  side  and  the  demand  side,  which  explain  the 
behavior of inflation. But a common thread runs through the periods of high inflation. These 
typically  include  any  one  or  combination  of  the  following:  (i)  war,  (ii)  drought,  and 
(iii) commodity price shocks, particularly oil prices. Supply shocks accompanied by demand 
pressures  such  as  high  fiscal  deficit  reflected  in  high  money  supply  growth  further 
accentuated inflationary pressures.  
In a long-term framework, the inflation rate can be hypothesized to evolve around a trend. 
The underlying trend can be considered as the core which is largely influenced by demand 
conditions.  However,  for  developing  countries  like  India,  medium-term  supply  response 
corresponding to the changes in demand conditions is important to the determination of the 
trend. For example, in our case we have seen a sharp reduction in trend inflation during the 
2000s  on  improved  supply  response  following  wide-ranging  economic  reforms  and 
liberalization  initiated  in  the  1990s  in  the  real  and  financial  sectors.  Emphasis  on  fiscal 
consolidation,  discontinuation  of  the  practice  of  automatic  monetization  of  fiscal  deficit, 
market  determined  exchange  rate  system  and  greater  reliance  on  price  signals  vastly 
improved  the  underlying  macroeconomic  framework.  These  had  a  positive  impact  on  our 
macroeconomic  preferences,  including  a  clear  drop  in  the  long-term  inflation  trend  and  a 
decline in the volatility of inflation with a step-up in economic growth (Chart 4). 
The fluctuations around the trend are determined more by the severity of supply shocks and 
the  nature  of  policy  responses.  One  of  the  recurrent  supply  shocks  influencing  inflation 
conditions in India emanates from the agricultural sector due to drought conditions (Chart 5). 
Food inflation, which has always been a major source of fluctuation in the headline inflation, 
has a significant negative correlation (–) 0.5 with 2-year average growth in agricultural GDP.  
 
6 
  BIS Review 127/2010
  
 
If  the  supply  shock  is  prolonged  and  monetary  policy  remains  accommodative  for  an 
extended  time  period,  supply  induced  inflation  tends  to  get  generalised.  This  is  a  lesson 
learnt in macroeconomics following the oil price shock of the early 1970s which triggered a 
world-wide  inflation.  Hence,  policy  authorities  were  wiser  in  handling  subsequent  supply 
shocks  by  not  extending  policy  accommodation  beyond  a  point.  Fiscal  deficit  was  a  major 
factor in the determination of inflation in the 1980s. With fiscal consolidation after the mid-
1990s,  monetary  growth  became  more  commensurate  with  the  overall  economic  growth 
contributing to reduction in inflation (Chart 6).  
 
 
 BIS Review 127/2010 
  7
Against  this  background,  let  me  now  turn  to  a  simple  but  more  formal  assessment  of  the 
determinants  of  long-term  inflation  which  can  be  considered  as  output  and  money  supply. 
Since agricultural GDP is frequently interrupted by weather conditions, non-agricultural GDP 
and money supply can be considered as the more relevant variables in the determination of 
the inflation trend. Empirical exercise based on annual data for the 57 year period, 1952–53 
to  2009–10,  shows  that  there  is  a  co-integrating  long-term  equilibrium  relationship  among 
inflation, non-agricultural GDP and money supply.1 
From this exercise, the following inference can be drawn. First, non-agricultural GDP has a 
highly  significant  and  negative  relationship  with  inflation,  which  implies  that  an  increase  in 
non-agricultural GDP representing improved supply condition will decrease inflation. Second, 
money supply has a highly significant and positive relationship with inflation. One per cent 
increase in money supply in absence of any increase in non-agricultural GDP could lead to 
0.9 per cent increase in inflation. Third, alongside increase in money supply by one percent, 
if  non-agricultural  GDP  also  increases  by  one  per  cent  it  will  have  a  dampening  effect  on 
inflation. But still inflation could go up by 0.15 per cent in the long-run. Fourth, deviation from 
the  long-run  equilibrium  is  statistically  significant  and  the  adjustment  towards  the  long-run 
equilibrium is faster through changes in the non-agricultural GDP.2 Fifth, there is a two way 
causal relationship between money supply and prices.3 
Notwithstanding this relationship, inflation has strayed from its long-term path from time to 
time. The upward spikes in inflation from its trend are explained by significant supply shocks. 
Generally, high inflation periods were coincident with episodes of oil price surge and drought 
conditions. This can be seen from the plot of residual from the long-term equation (Chart 7).  
 
 
                                                  
1  
In WPI = 6.15–0.75* In Non-Agri-GDP + 0.90* In M3 * Significant at 1% 
Corresponding  error  correction  (EC)  model  including  crude  oil  price  and  rainfall  as  exogenous  variables  is 
estimated as: WPI-inflation = –0.038*EC + 0.766*growth in money supply(–1) + 0.063*growth in crude oil price 
+ 0.139* deficit in rainfall. * Significant at 10% 
2   The  error  correction  term  is  negative  and  the  speed  of  adjustment  coefficient  for  non-agricultural  GDP  is 
significant at 1% and that of WPI at 5% with negative signs. 
3   This  implies  that  in  the  short-run  changes  in  price  cause  changes  in  money  supply  which,  in  turn,  causes 
changes in prices. 
8 
 BIS Review 127/2010
This pattern is more pronounced when plotted against the actual inflation rates (Chart 8). 
 
 
 Conclusions 
the  new  series, 
the  underlying  economic  structure.  As  per 
IV. 
The above discussion leads to the following major conclusions. First, the new series of WPI 
inflation marks a major change in terms of scope and coverage of commodities and is more 
representative  of 
the 
manufactured products inflation is lower than what was seen on the basis of the old series. 
The food price inflation, on the other hand, is higher than what was seen on the basis of the 
old  series.  The  high  level  of  food  prices  is  indeed  a  matter  of  concern  as  the  prices  of 
protein-based  items,  which  have  a  higher  share  in  the  consumption  basket,  are  showing 
larger increases. Moreover, there is continuing shortage of food items such as pulses and 
edible  oils.  If  the  supply  response  doesn’t  improve,  there  is  a  risk  that  food  price  inflation 
could acquire a structural character.  
Second, historical data show that India is a moderate inflation country. But there have been 
phases  of  sharp  spikes  in  inflation  emanating  from  war,  drought  and  commodity  price 
shocks.  Supply  shocks  when  accompanied  by  demand  pressures  further  amplified 
inflationary pressures. But the inflation rate has reverted to its trend following policy response 
and improved supply conditions. In the periods of high inflation, monetary policy responded 
with a combination of available policy instruments through changes in policy interest rates, 
cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR),  statutory  liquidity  ratio  (SLR),  and  in  the  earlier  regime  through 
increased in administered interest rates and credit control.  
Third,  the  volatility  as  well  as  incidence  and  duration  of  double  digit  inflation  has  reduced 
over time. Inflation control since the mid-1990s has been particularly successful which can 
be attributed to wide ranging reforms which have improved the macro-policy framework and 
eased supply constraints.  
Fourth, the long-run inflation trend is determined by non-agricultural GDP and money supply. 
Increase in money supply unaccompanied by a commensurate increase in non-agricultural 
GDP is potentially inflationary.  
Finally,  with  the  reduction  in  average  inflation  and  inflation  volatility,  since  the  mid-1990s, 
tolerance for high inflation has come down. The moderation of inflation trend has had several 
BIS Review 127/2010 
 9
beneficial effects in terms of lower nominal interest rate and high GDP growth rate. Given the 
remarkable stability in the inflation rate since the mid-1990s, it is important to persevere with 
appropriate policy responses so that the high inflation seen in the recent months does not get 
entrenched. Even if the trigger for inflation is from supply side, its persistence necessitates 
monetary policy responses to bring the inflation rate back to its trend and anchor inflationary 
expectations. 
10 
 BIS Review 127/2010
