Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Bankers’ code of conduct 
Remarks by Prof Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the 
launch of the Uganda Bankers Association Code of Conduct, Kampala, 2 December 2010. 
 The Chairman, Uganda Bankers Association  
Executives of Commercial Banks  
The Executive Director, Uganda Bankers Association  
Management and Staff of the Association  
Distinguished Guests in your respective capacities  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
It is a great honor and pleasure to be with you tonight, to witness the launch of the Code of 
Conduct  for  the  Uganda  Bankers  Association.  I  congratulate  the  Uganda  Bankers’ 
Association  on  this  important  milestone  and  for  the  commendable  job  of  fostering  good 
governance and international best practices in the banking industry. The Code of Conduct 
will  greatly  contribute  to  the  enhancement  of  public  confidence  in  the  banking  sector.  The 
Code of Conduct will undoubtedly contribute to overall integrity and security of the banking 
sector and help to further nurture the already conducive working relationships between the 
various banks and their customers. 
As you are aware, the Code of Conduct is drawn up to guide all member banks of the UBA in 
their  relationship  with  their  customers  with  regards  to  the  services  they  offer.  Through 
adherence  by  member  banks  to  the  requirements  and  principles  of  the  Code  of  Conduct, 
immense benefits will go to customers through better and standardized services.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Code  of  Conduct  also  aims  at  promoting  and  maintaining  high 
standards  of  professional  and  moral  behavior  within  the  banking  sector.  It  is  imperative, 
therefore, that on a continuous basis, you encourage your staff to familiarise themselves with 
the Code of Conduct and to ensure that they adhere to its principles in all aspects of their work.  
For  purposes  of  promoting  transparency,  I  urge  you  to  ensure  that  customers  are  kept 
abreast  with  the  terms  and  conditions  governing  your  respective  banking  services  as  they 
change from time to time. This will ensure that customers are adequately equipped to make 
informed decisions on which services to subscribe to at any given time.  
On  the  part  of  the  Central  Bank,  we  are  in  the  process  of  issuing  Consumer  Protection 
Guidelines,  which  we  have  shared  with  banks.  It  is  my  sincere  hope  that  the  Code  of 
Conduct and the Consumer Protection Guidelines complement each other in promoting best 
practices in satisfying customer demands.  
The  issue  of  safeguarding  customers’  confidentiality  cannot  be  over-emphasized.  In  this 
respect  therefore,  I  urge  you  to  observe  your  duty  of  strict  confidentiality  with  regards  to 
customer  information.  Furthermore,  I  encourage  you  to  continue  to  review  periodically  the 
Code of Conduct to ensure that it remains relevant to the ever changing environment within 
the  industry.  This  review  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the  dynamic  nature  of  the  banking 
industry  does  not  outrun  its  core  basic  values  and  principles  in  order  to  maintain  public 
confidence. 
Finally, allow me to once again congratulate you members of Uganda Bankers Association 
for this achievement.  
With  these  few  remarks  it  is  now  my  pleasure  and  honour  to  launch  the  Uganda  Bankers 
Association, Code of Conduct.  
I thank you.  
BIS Review 162/2010 
 1
