Ardian Fullani: The Albanian economy and the banking sector in 2010 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  reception  of  the 
Albanian  Association  of  Banks,  with  bankers  and  representatives  of  banks  operating  in 
Albania, Tirana, 17 December 2010. 
 Dear bank executive managers, 
Dear participants, 
It is always a pleasure to meet once the year-end approaches to make a summary of events 
that characterized the Albanian economy and the banking sector over the course of 2010.  
The Albanian economy is forecast to grow in 2010 slightly higher than in 2009. Industry and 
services provided the largest contribution to the positive economic growth, yielding as well a 
relative improvement in the balance of payments’ current account. Lek’s exchange rate was 
more stable compared with the preceding year, whilst consumer prices fluctuated within the 
Bank of Albania’s target of 3%.  
Fiscal policy engaged in a process of fiscal consolidation during the present year, which we 
consider as critical in order to preserve the budget deficit and domestic debt levels and keep 
the level of interest payments in check.  
Developments in the financial system attest to the full recovery of public confidence in the 
banking system. As at end of the third quarter of 2010, total banking sector assets accounted 
for 81.7% of GDP, up 12.2% y-o-y versus merely 0.9% in the same period in 2009.  
Deposit  growth  and  higher  capital  account  provided  the  major  positive  contribution  to  the 
expansion of banking sector activity. Deposits have grown by 18% y-o-y, out of which more 
than  2/3  of  this  figure  represents  foreign  currency-denominated  deposit  growth.  Banking 
sector treasury and interbank operations declined versus the same period in 2009. Liabilities 
to non-residents have dropped by 32% y-o-y.  
Concerning the composition of banking sector assets, we note that lending has grown by 8% 
on a yearly basis. The annual growth rate of lending has been constantly downward in the 
last couple of years. Banking sector and interbank operations have grown by about 25% on a 
yearly basis.  
Banking sector investments in non-resident assets increased by 53% y-o-y. Net profit was 
positive  and  substantially  higher  than  in  the  same  period  in  2009.  Return  on  Assets  and 
Equity  stood  at  0.6%  and  6%,  respectively.  Capitalization  and  liquidity  figures  were  at 
adequate  levels.  Capital  adequacy  ratio  was  estimated  at  15.7%,  while  liquid  assets 
accounted for 28.9% of total assets. As part of the regular stress-test analyses conducted by 
the  Bank  of  Albania,  in  the  context  of  a  more  comprehensive  risk  evaluation,  the  banking 
sector results stable.  
Let me now elaborate on some issues I find critically important for the future.  
The banking sector weathered the hard liquidity situation in year-end 2008 and early 2009 
successfully. Following that period, public deposits in banks have grown at stable rates and 
liquidity has improved markedly. However, lending has contracted pronouncedly, initially as a 
result of the higher credit risk and later, due to the fall of business and consumer demand for 
loans.  
Therefore, the free funds were invested in non-resident assets against a background of lower 
return  on  investment  in  the  global  market.  The  deteriorated  loan  quality,  the  obligation  to 
increase the reserve funds and the lower average rate of return were followed by the decline 
in the banking sector net profit.  
BIS Review 174/2010 
 1
For  some  banks,  this  situation  needs  careful  monitoring  by  the  governing  structures  and 
shareholders  in  order  to  identify  those  operations  that  would  improve  the  expenditure  and 
income structure and maintain its capitalization levels.  
With  regard  to  lending,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  continuously  called  for  greater  banking 
sector commitment in this regard. This has not been a rhetorical-like request considering that 
we  have  taken  all  the  necessary  actions  to  meet  the  banking  sector  needs  with  ample 
liquidity and we have cut the key interest rate several times. These measures, coupled with 
lower Government borrowing, have provided room for lower interest rates on ALL lending.  
Nonetheless,  their  decrease  still  seems  insufficient  to  push  credit  demand  higher.  Loan 
quality remains a challenge both for ALL and foreign currency-denominated loans. Against 
this  setting,  it  is  essential  that  banks  do  not  only  create  in  a  prompt  and  rigorous  fashion 
reserve funds according to the regulatory requirements, but they should also complete and 
improve  the  procedures  and  human  and  financial  capacities  that  enable  following-up 
insolvent borrowers. Complete acknowledgement of loan quality-related concerns and the full 
commitment of governing structures and shareholders allow for its more rapid and ultimate 
handling.  
Otherwise, the banking sector’s capacity to intermediate more effectively would be impaired 
for a longer time. Banks need to be determined to follow collateral execution procedures for 
insolvent borrowers. On the other hand, court decisions and particularly the actions of bailiff 
officers should be prompt and effective. I take this opportunity to appeal to the authorities to 
prioritize these actions.  
If  legal  procedures  need  to  be  complemented  and  improved  further  in  order  to  enhance 
efficiency,  the  banking  industry  should  make  the  necessary  proposals  in  a  prompt  fashion 
and the public authorities should commit to considering them.  
Lastly,  I  want  to  elaborate  on  two  other  issues.  The  first  relates  to  governance  and 
accountability in banking operations and the second to the improvement of capacities for the 
identification, evaluation and management of risks.  
These two issues have continuously been part of our regular communication as they rest on 
the  cornerstone  of  a  safe  and  successful  banking  activity,  public  confidence  on  which 
remains unwavering.  
Concerning  governance,  last  year  I  constantly  highlighted  the  need  for  professionalism, 
commitment, responsibility, farsightedness and accountability to be reflected not only by you 
but they should also be embodied in your staff.  
To make this happen, policies and rules for defining strategies for the development, concrete 
decision-making, control of particular activities and their reporting to the institution and the 
public  need  to  be  continuously  completed  and  improved.  Internal  control  systems  are  the 
ones to determine the institution’s capacity to operate safely. They are indispensable to avoid 
any room that may be used for abusive actions that would impair the institution. I therefore 
request that you take the necessary measures in terms of financial, human and technological 
capacities in order to ensure the safety of each banking operation.  
In  pursuing  its  supervisory  function,  the  Bank  of  Albania  will  have  this  matter  under  close 
focus and I assure you that any decision that may have hampered the safety of the activity 
will be handled with utmost stringency by the law. In a broader context, banking activity, in 
addition to operational risks, is faced with other financial-related risks.  
We  will  therefore  increase  the  regulatory  requirements  for  banks  to  be  engaged  in  an 
integrated  process  of  risk  evaluation  and  management  proportionate  to  the  level  of 
development and sophistication. In a more practical approach, this implies that banks should 
have specific functional structures that monitor risks in the main activity areas and endeavour 
to anticipate their possible evolution and impact on banks’ activity. These structures must be 
2 
 BIS Review 174/2010
in place in the largest banks and their products should be an integral part of the decision-
making process.  
Dear participants,  
We  are  leaving  behind  a  challenging  year  but  other  numerous  challenges  will  follow  for 
banking activity. They provide us the opportunity to put our vision into practice, in order to 
ensure a stable banking activity as a precondition for conducting an efficient intermediation 
activity with remarkable contribution to economic development at home.  
Weathering  the  challenges  requires  courage  and  professionalism.  In  addition,  banking 
institutions  should  provide  an  environment  where  accountable  and  professional  human 
capacities  are  in  the  service  of  the  public  and  the  institution.  I  am  confident  that  you  will 
prioritize the foregoing matters in 2011.  
I wish you success in your work and many wishes for the New Year!  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 174/2010 
 3
