Nils Bernstein: Challenges ahead for the Danish economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Danish Bankers Association, Copenhagen, 6 December 2010. 
 The world economy is slowly emerging from the crisis. Global developments are diverse, with 
strong  growth  in  the  Asian  emerging  economies  and  parts  of  South  America  and  slower 
growth  in  the  old  industrialised  countries.  It  remains  uncertain  to  which  extent  private 
consumption  in  the  USA  and  Europe  will  take  over  when  the  government  stimulus 
programmes expire and the necessary fiscal consolidation starts. High rates of unemployment 
and uncertainty about the future will dampen private consumption. Investment will gradually 
begin to fuel the economy again, while the contribution from stock rebuilding will fade away.  
In  Germany  and  Sweden  –  Denmark’s  two  largest  export  markets  –  growth  has  been 
surprisingly  positive  so  far.  For  Denmark,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  expects  growth  in  the 
coming  year  to  be  just  under  2  per  cent,  driven  by  moderate  increases  in  private 
consumption, business investments and exports. 
The  outlook  is  still  subject  to  considerable  uncertainty.  The  economy  is  presumably  more 
likely to underperform than to exceed expectations.  
The developments on the Korean Peninsula remind us how strongly we can be influenced by 
uncontrollable events far from our part of the world.  
In Europe we have recently witnessed at close hand what the consequences can be when 
markets  lose  confidence  in  the  ability  of  sovereign  states  to  manage  their  own  debt 
problems.  First  it  was  Iceland,  then  Latvia,  then  Greece  and  now  Ireland.  Where  will  it  all 
end? 
Fortunately, Europe has so far been willing and able to lend a hand in collaboration with the 
IMF. But if confidence is to be restored, the member states in question must make drastic 
cuts in public-sector wages, pensions, etc. while also raising taxes substantially. This goes 
hand in hand with social unrest and loss of international reputation.  
Denmark is also facing a number of fiscal challenges. They are not as severe as in many 
other countries, but nevertheless they must be addressed in time so that they do not grow. 
The  economic  recovery  plan  deals  with  the  period  until  2015,  but  after  that  adverse 
demographics will increase the government deficit for many years – unless action is taken. 
If we in Denmark are to avoid government debt growing to unmanageable proportions in the 
long term, we will need to increase taxes, adding to the already heavy tax burden, and put a 
much tighter rein on public spending than ever before. In addition, we need labour market 
reforms to boost the supply of labour substantially. The sooner we start implementing such 
reforms, the better. This will give us more room for manoeuvre.  
Danmarks  Nationalbank  eagerly  awaits  the  forthcoming  plan  that  will  chart  Denmark’s 
economic policy course until 2020. Confidence in the Danish economy will be strengthened, 
if broad agreement can at least be reached on the scope of the challenge. 
 The  financial  system  is  recovering.  If  the  Danish  economy  develops  in  line  with  our 
expectations,  the  banks  will  generally  be  resilient  to  the  coming  losses.  But  in  view  of 
uncertainty  concerning  the  economic  outlook  ,  several  banks  would  be  wise  to  build  up 
further buffers. 
 BIS Review 166/2010 
 1
Now that the Danish banks are emerging from the crisis, it is also time to consider how we 
can prepare ourselves better for future financial crises.  
At the end of September the general government guarantee covering the banks’ unsecured 
creditors expired. Happily for us all, this took place without major problems. But the sector is 
not yet standing on its own two feet. The government has injected kr. 46 billion in subordinated 
capital  and  given  guarantee  commitments  for  a  further  kr.  364  billion.  As  these  schemes 
expire, they must be replaced by market-based solutions. At the same time, the banks must 
prepare for tighter regulation and supervision in future.  
The  challenge  is  to  ensure  a  robust  financial  system  that  can  survive  without  government 
assistance next time a crisis occurs. 
Credit will be more expensive and harder to come by. Banks, companies and households will 
all have to accept a higher equity share when operating a business or purchasing a home. 
This is not a purely Danish challenge. Many international forums are working hard to define 
common  standards  for  the  financial  system  to  make  it  more  robust  and  self-contained. 
However, the future international standards may not be sufficient to ensure a robust and self-
contained  Danish  financial  system  in  due  time.  Or  perhaps  they  will  not  take  Danish 
experience into account to a sufficient degree. 
Let me mention a few areas that will be important to consider in a Danish context. 
The Basel Committee’s proposals for new liquidity rules and the status of mortgage bonds 
when calculating the new liquidity buffer have for good reason been prominent in the Danish 
debate. Efforts are still underway to amend key elements of the rules. But I think the sector 
will have to face the fact that self issued bonds cannot be included in the calculations.  
And after all, if you want a sound liquidity buffer, it does actually make sense that the value of 
this buffer is – as far as possible – independent of your own situation. 
The  stable  financing  requirement  has  been  postponed  until  2018.  The  debate  on  the 
consequences  for  adjustable-rate  loans  has  died  down.  On  several  occasions,  Danmarks 
Nationalbank  has  expressed  its  concern  about  the  refinancing  risk  on  these  very  popular 
loans. The idea behind the stable financing requirement has indeed been to reduce this type 
of  refinancing  risk.  Although  the  proposal  has  been  postponed,  this  risk  is  very  real  in 
Denmark.  Some  banks  spread  out  their  auctions  over  the  year,  while  others  have, 
unfortunately,  not  come  that  far  with  existing  loans.  Spreading  out  the  auctions  is  a  good 
principle, but not sufficient to solve the basic problem. A solution needs to be found before 
2018. 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  evolved  differently  from  country  to  country.  But  there  have 
been common traits – such as property market developments. Rapidly rising property prices, 
very  strong  housing  and  property  investments  and  high  lending  growth  for  financing  such 
investments  have  all  contributed  to  the  financial  crisis.  That  has  also  been  the  case  in 
Denmark. 
The Danish banks that have succumbed to the crisis or have been close to the brink have all 
been characterised by very high lending growth and an almost aggressive exposure to the 
property sector. These factors contributed heavily to the build-up of systemic risk in the years 
leading up to the crisis.  
The  Basel  Committee  has  proposed  that  the  financial  institutions  not  only  hold  an  extra 
capital buffer on a permanent basis, but also hold a countercyclical capital buffer. In good 
times, when lending growth is high, restrictions may be imposed on disbursement of dividend 
if the accumulated reserves are insufficient. This will dampen strong cyclical upswings. When 
the tide turns, the additional reserves are released.  
It  is  still  uncertain  whether  this  model  will  be  sufficient  to  address  the  role  of  the  property 
market and its financing in relation to financial stability in Denmark. Several countries have 
2 
 BIS Review 166/2010
tightened  or  are  thinking  of  tightening  the  conditions  for  mortgaging  real  property  or  the 
capital  requirements  imposed  on  the  lender.  Such  instruments  come  in  many  shapes  and 
can be linked to cyclical developments. 
It will be a challenge to develop efficient economic instruments in a world with free flows of 
capital  –  not  least  within  the  EU.  This  openness  is  a  great  advantage  to  Denmark,  but  as 
Danmarks Nationalbank sees it, we need to consider whether we can introduce instruments 
in this area that will support financial stability. Preferably such instruments should be a kind 
of automatic stabilisers. If not – they should be available to the Danish Financial Supervisory 
Authority and Danmarks Nationalbank. 
 The  financial  crisis  led  to  a  very  important  piece  of  legislation  in  Denmark.  The  general 
government  guarantee  has  been  replaced  by  a  winding-up  scheme  for  banks  –  known  as 
Bank  Rescue  Package  III  –  that  provides  for  orderly  winding-up  of  banks  that  cannot 
continue as going concerns under their existing ownership. From society’s point of view it is, 
as  I  have  previously  underscored,  not  important  whether  the  individual  bank  survives,  but 
whether  sound  activities  can  continue  without  interruption.  People  must  be  able  to  access 
their accounts, use their debit cards, pay their bills on time, etc. Unfortunately, the current 
legislation does not make it mandatory for banks to join the scheme, but merely to decide at 
a general meeting whether they want to join the scheme now. If they say no, this generates 
uncertainty as to whether they will join if the need arises. 
During its recent visit, the IMF took a positive approach to the Danish winding-up scheme 
and  recommended  that  banks  which  do  not  join  beforehand  are  subjected  to  additional 
capital requirements. I hope we find a voluntary solution, and today I will merely encourage 
banks to join the scheme at their forthcoming general meetings. 
With  this  well-intentioned  advice  I  would  like  to  express  my  appreciation  to  the  Danish 
Bankers Association and its members for our cooperation over the past year. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 166/2010 
 3
