Ryuzo Miyao: Economic activity and prices in Japan and monetary policy 
Summary of a speech by Mr Ryuzo Miyao, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, 
at a meeting with business leaders, Tokushima, 22 September 2010. 
I.  
Economic activity and prices  
 Overview  
A.  
First, I will talk about the current situation of the Japanese economy. At present, an issue of 
concern is the possible negative impact of instability in foreign exchange and stock markets 
on corporate profits and business and consumer confidence. In this environment, there has 
been a slowing of exports to East Asian and other emerging economies that have driven the 
recovery from the sharp decline after the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. Private consumption, 
meanwhile, remains relatively firm, supported by the extremely hot summer this year and a 
last-minute  increase  in  demand  for  durable  consumer  goods  ahead  of  the  expiration  of 
government subsidies. On the whole, Japan’s economy shows further signs of a moderate 
recovery.  
Developments in overseas economies  
B.  
Let me now look at developments in those overseas economies that are influencing Japan’s 
export-driven  recovery.  Among  the  emerging  economies,  the  Chinese  economy  has  been 
boosted by fixed asset investment – comprising business fixed and real estate investments – 
as  well  as  private  consumption,  as  a  result  of  major  stimulus  measures  to  the  value  of 
4 trillion renminbi. Since the rapid growth accelerated speculative investment in real estate, 
making  it  difficult  for  middle-class  citizens  to  buy  housing,  the  authorities  implemented  a 
series  of  measures,  including  window  guidance,  to  restrain  the  increase  in  real  estate 
transactions.  Subsequently,  real  estate  investment  slowed  down  and  production  and  fixed 
investment in sectors related to construction decelerated. Still, the rate of economic growth 
remains high. With respect to those neighboring Asian nations whose economies have been 
spurred by exports to China, although the rate of expansion is showing signs of deceleration, 
growth remains high with domestic demand still robust.  
With regard to economic activity in the euro area, production has expanded due to increasing 
exports  to  emerging  economies,  although  the  growth  differs  by  country.  For  example,  in 
Germany its strong recovery has been the main driving force, with real GDP for the April–
June quarter of 2010 having grown at an annualized 9 percent from the previous quarter. By 
contrast,  Greece,  which  is  saddled  with  the  burden  of  fiscal  consolidation,  has  recorded 
negative growth; and Spain, with its burst housing bubble, has not been able to find a way 
out of a low growth predicament. For the euro area as a whole, domestic demand, such as 
business fixed investment, is weak and the pace of economic recovery remains moderate. 
Moreover, with the slowing pace of growth in emerging economies, particularly in China, the 
growth rate of the euro area may slow down starting with exports, which have been the main 
engine driving recovery.  
Taking a look at recent developments in the U.S. economy, production has recovered due to 
both an increase in exports reflecting a weaker dollar and inventory rebuilding, although the 
household  sector  is  under  pressure  from  excessive  debt  and  a  delay  in  recovery  in 
employment.  Consumption  and  business  fixed  investment  have  experienced  moderate 
recovery,  reflecting  a  sharp  improvement  in  the  business  performance  of  firms  that  have 
undergone  restructuring  and  the  effects  of  fiscal  measures  to  stimulate  the  economy.  At 
present, however, the pace of recovery is decelerating as the effects of stimulus measures 
wane.  
BIS Review 162/2010 
 1
Regarding the outlook for overseas economies in the near future, it is expected that the pace 
of  growth  in  emerging  economies,  particularly  in  China,  will  continue  slowing,  while  the 
moderate pace of recovery in the U.S. economy will probably continue, due to slower growth 
in  exports  to  emerging  economies  and  weakening  of  the  effects  of  economic  stimulus 
measures. Starting in 2011, the growth rate of emerging economies is expected to pick up, 
which will help the U.S. and European economies resume a path of moderate recovery.  
Recently,  however,  I  have  become  increasingly  concerned  about  downside  risks,  mainly 
because the risk is rising that the U.S. economy may experience a protracted period of low 
growth. In the GDP data released in July, the growth rate of private consumption was revised 
sharply  downward,  revealing  that  the  real  value  had  yet  to  regain  the  pre-Lehman  shock 
level. Furthermore, the personal saving rate was revised substantially upward, marking the 
highest  level  in  the  past  20  years,  excluding  periods  of  temporary  increases  (Chart  1). 
Meanwhile,  housing  investment,  which  had  been  recovering  moderately,  has  resumed  a 
sharp slide since the expiry of tax credits for homebuyers at the end of April, while monthly 
home sales have been at historically low levels. In the area of employment, the increase in 
the  number  of  private-sector  employees  in  the  April–June  quarter  of  2010  has  slowed  to 
around 70,000 per month, while the growth in household income has been very slow. Initial 
claims for unemployment insurance have been at a high level of around 500,000 per week. 
These  economic  indicators  suggest  that  the  U.S.  household  sector  has  become  extremely 
cautious about spending, reflecting the strong repayment pressure on those who purchased 
homes during the housing bubble, while the unemployed are having a hard time finding jobs. 
In this environment, the corporate sector cannot be confident of future economic expansion. 
This has made firms reluctant to increase employment or fixed investment even though their 
profits  are  increasing.  This  is  why  the  risk  is  increasing  that  a  recovery  in  household 
consumption will be delayed.  
In  addition,  changes  may  be  taking  place  in  areas  that  once  were  considered  the  main 
advantages of the U.S. economy. For example, while labor productivity may not attract a lot 
of attention, I keep a close watch on its data. Labor productivity is calculated by dividing real 
quarterly GDP by hours worked by the total number of employees. The data reflect growth in 
technological progress and increases in capital stock, and indicate a nation’s potential growth 
capability (Chart 2). During 2009, labor productivity in the United States rose sharply to the 
level of 2000 to 2005, the years of the “productivity growth explosion,” as a result of drastic 
corporate  restructuring  by  means  of  personnel  cuts  in  response  to  the  economic  crisis 
following  the  Lehman  shock.  Productivity  growth,  however,  had  been  lackluster  during  the 
prosperous  period  of  2005  to  2008,  and  slipped  into  negative  territory  in  the  April–June 
quarter  of  2010.  It  has  been  said  that  the  strength  of  the  U.S.  economy  lies  in  its  high 
productivity backed by its ability to generate technological innovation. Over the past several 
years, however, excluding a short period in 2009, longer-term growth potential has tended to 
be sluggish. Thus, in the middle of August, the yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasuries declined 
to  around  2.5  percent,  probably  due  to  the  decrease  in  the  expected  economic  growth 
accompanied by lower inflation over the longer term, rather than expectations of a temporary 
economic slowdown (Chart 3).  
The current situation of Japan’s economy  
C.  
Based  on  my  views  that  I  have  just  described  regarding  overseas  economies  and 
accompanying risk factors, I will now turn to the current state of Japan’s economy. Market 
participants are accelerating their yen-buying activity to avert risks, reflecting concern about 
the outlook for the U.S. economy as well as fiscal and economic conditions in Europe, while 
stock prices remain weak despite the favorable outlook for corporate profits, partly due to the 
appreciation of the yen (Chart 4). The negative effects of Japan’s current market conditions 
warrant  attention  since,  if  they  continue,  they  would  have  a  significant  negative  impact  on 
corporate  profits,  as  well  as  business  and  consumer  confidence.  At  present,  however,  the 
mechanism for Japan’s self-sustaining economic recovery remains intact.  
2 
 BIS Review 162/2010
Looking at recent developments in economic activity in more detail, exports continue to be on 
an  uptrend,  although  there  has  been  a  deceleration  in  those  to  East  Asian  and  other 
emerging economies that had supported Japan’s high export growth. Meanwhile, production 
has  been  increasing  as  a  trend,  although  the  pace  of  increase  has  been  decelerating 
gradually when the effects of the distortion in seasonal adjustments are taken into account. 
Among domestic demand components, business fixed investment is showing signs of picking 
up,  given  the  favorable  business  performance.  According  to  the  Financial  Statements 
Statistics  of  Corporations  by  Industry,  Quarterly,  business  fixed  investment  started  to 
increase  in  the  April–June  quarter  of  2010,  after  having  declined  throughout  the  January–
March  quarter.  Private  consumption  has  been  generally  picking  up,  as  shown  by  (1)  an 
increase in consumer spending on such items as beverages and air conditioners due to this 
year’s extremely hot summer, and (2) a significant increase in car sales in August, reflecting 
a  last-minute  increase  in  demand  ahead  of  the  termination  of  government  subsidies  for 
purchasers  of  environment-friendly  cars.  At  the  same  time,  housing  investment  has  been 
leveling  out:  the  number  of  housing  starts  increased  for  two  consecutive  months,  and  the 
contract  rate  on  newly  built  condominiums  in  the  Tokyo  metropolitan  area  remains  above 
70 percent. There are signs that employment and income are improving, although the ratio of 
job offers to applicants remains low and the unemployment rate is relatively high. That said, 
household  income  has  been  improving  moderately,  reflecting  the  year-on-year  rise  in 
summer bonus payments.  
In assessing the trend in the consumer price index (CPI), it is necessary to exclude fresh food, 
the prices of which tend to be volatile, as well as the effects of subsidies for high school tuition, 
which are a one-off downside factor and part of the government’s economic stimulus measures 
to reduce the cost of high-school education. The CPI, excluding these two factors, has recently 
been hovering around minus 0.6 percent. It declined significantly in summer last year, but it 
now appears to be recovering. The year-on-year rate of decline has been narrowing mildly, and 
this trend is likely to continue, reflecting the narrowing negative output gap.  
Regarding  the  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy,  movements  toward  a  self-sustained  recovery 
are expected to continue. While the pace of improvement is likely to slow temporarily, partly 
due  to  a  temporary  slowdown  of  overseas  economies  and  the  waning  effects  of  various 
demand-boosting policy measures, exports are likely to increase, reflecting the high growth 
in  emerging  economies  such  as  in  China,  while  business  fixed  investment  and  private 
consumption are expected to recover as corporate profits increase.  
As noted earlier, a downside risk that might necessitate revision of the above outlook is the 
growing  possibility  that  the  U.S.  economy  will  see  protracted  low  growth.  Were  this  to 
happen,  the  outlook  for  the  world  economy  would  have  to  be  revised  downward.  The 
resulting decrease in exports would adversely affect Japan’s economy and probably lead to 
increased  risk  aversion,  thereby  discouraging  business  fixed  investment,  new  businesses, 
and household consumption. The deteriorating business and consumer sentiment could lead 
to prolonged sluggish economic activity.  
Despite the manifest downside risks outlined above, the emerging economies have shown 
impressive growth. It is true that, for the present, the economies of some Asian economies 
appear to be decelerating, mainly because of China’s economic slowdown. Yet this means 
that  the  risk  is  declining  that  an  overheating  economy  might  hurt  sustainable  economic 
growth. This might be compared to “speed control,” conducted for a limited period to ensure 
a higher rate of growth over the long term. If this were the case, it would be an upside risk for 
Japan’s  economic  outlook,  given  that  Japan  is  strengthening  its  ties  with  other  Asian 
countries. An upswing in these countries could partly offset the negative effects even if the 
U.S. economy experiences a period of low growth.  
BIS Review 162/2010 
 3
Effects of foreign exchange markets on Japan’s economy  
D. 
Next,  in  order  to  understand  the  effects  foreign  exchange  markets  have  on  Japan’s 
economy, let me put the activities of foreign exchange markets in context. When prices of 
goods are stable or falling in a given country, the value of that nation’s currency is stable or 
rising and, other things being equal, the value of this particular currency should rise against 
other  currencies.  This  is  the  basic  idea  of  “purchasing  power  parity.”  So,  if  we  look  at  the 
purchasing power parity of the yen against the U.S. dollar (the ratio between prices in Japan 
and the United States), we see that the yen has been appreciating fairly consistently against 
the dollar, reflecting the weakness in Japanese prices relative to those in the United States 
since the introduction of a floating exchange rate regime in 1973 – even though the actual 
dollar/yen exchange rate is determined by a number of factors in addition to prices (Chart 5).  
Needless  to  say,  a  yen  that  is  strong  against  the  U.S.  dollar  curtails  the  profits  of  export-
oriented firms, many of which are experiencing adverse business pressure that is affecting 
stock prices. As a result, the Bank of Japan is closely monitoring the impact of the strong yen 
and weak stock prices on the Japanese economy. Conversely, the appreciation of the yen 
pushes up profits of import-oriented firms and serves as a tailwind for those firms considering 
expanding operations by acquiring overseas firms. However, it should be remembered that a 
balanced view is important when discussing the effects of a strong yen.  
I will now give you an example of just such a balanced view. Trade statistics show that the 
weight  of  U.S.  dollars  used  as  settlement  currency  for  exports  declined  slightly  from 
52.4 percent in the second half of 2000 to 48.6 percent in the first half of 2010, while that 
used  for  imports  remained  largely  unchanged  at  slightly  above  70  percent  (Chart  6). 
However, looking at the value of dollar-denominated trade settlements, one can see that net 
imports have increased sharply. This is because trade with the United States, a large buyer 
of Japanese exports, is decreasing, while exports to and imports from rapidly growing Asian 
countries  are  growing  and  imports  from  the  Middle  East  are  increasing  sharply.  This 
expansion in net imports, in dollar terms, indicates the possibility that Japan’s settlement and 
trade structure now is less vulnerable than before to the negative effects of a strong yen.  
II.  
Monetary policy  
Recent conduct of monetary policy  
A.  
Japan’s  economy  shows  further  signs  of  a  moderate  recovery,  with  exports  increasing,  
albeit at a slower pace, and demand components such as private consumption and business 
fixed  investment  generally  picking  up.  However,  amid  heightened  uncertainty  about  the 
future especially for the U.S. economy, foreign exchange and stock markets have recently 
been  unstable.  Accordingly,  the  Bank  held  an  unscheduled  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  on 
August 30, 2010 and decided to introduce a six-month term in the fixed-rate funds-supplying 
operation  against  pooled  collateral  and  start  providing  additional  funds  amounting  to 
approximately  10 trillion  yen  with  a  six-month  term.  The  Bank  believes  that  the  monetary 
easing measure, together with the government’s efforts, will be effective in further ensuring 
Japan’s economic recovery.  
Downside risks to Japan’s economy, however, still require close monitoring amid the growing 
uncertainty  about  the  future,  especially  for  the  U.S.  economy.  The  Bank  recognizes  that 
Japan’s  economy  faces  the  critical  challenge  of  overcoming  deflation  and  returning  to  a 
sustainable growth path with price stability. With such recognition, the Bank has been striving 
to pursue powerful monetary easing. The Bank will continue to carefully examine the outlook 
for economic activity and prices and, if judged necessary, will take policy action in a timely 
and appropriate manner.  
4 
 BIS Review 162/2010
B.  
Fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening of the foundations for 
economic growth  
The  strong  easing  measure  discussed  so  far  is  designed  to  work  on  short-term  
cyclical economic activity, but it is important that Japan maintain and enhance its medium- to 
long-term  economic  growth  potential.  Recognizing  this,  the  Bank  sought  a  way  of 
contributing  to  such  a  task  as  the  central  bank,  and  in  June  2010  introduced  the  fund-
provisioning  measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth,  with 
loans  totaling  3  trillion  yen.  This  measure  has  the  same  characteristics  as  other  fund-
provisioning  measures,  in  that  it  supplies  funds  against  eligible  collateral  submitted  to  the 
Bank, but it differs in that the maximum duration of loans is four years and loans are provided 
to each counterparty based on the counterparty’s actual amount of lending and investment 
carried out as part of the plan to strengthen the foundations for economic growth submitted 
to the Bank.  
The  fund-provisioning  measure  does  not  aim  to  fully  fund  the  foundations  for  economic 
growth, but to act as a catalyst for financial institutions to make efforts toward strengthening 
the foundations for economic growth. The first new loan disbursement was carried out at the 
end  of  August  2010,  involving  more  than  460 billion  yen  provided  to  47  borrower financial 
institutions, ranging from major banks to shinkin banks, that span a wide range of business 
areas  and  regions.  Records  of  individual  investment  or  lending  by  these  institutions 
submitted  to  the  Bank,  making  them  eligible  to  receive  funds  from  the  Bank’s  first  loan 
disbursement, show that investment and lending were conducted in broad areas: investment 
or  lending  in  “environment  and  energy  business”  was  particularly  prominent,  followed  by 
investment  or  lending  in  “development  and  upgrading  of  social  infrastructure,”  “medical, 
nursing care- and other health-related business,” “business in the content creation industry,” 
and “disaster prevention business.” The results of the first new loan disbursement also show 
that loans were made for long-term investment or lending, and this meets the objective of the 
measure:  the  distribution  of  individual  investment  or  lending  by  duration  reveals  that  more 
than 80 percent of the investment or lending is designed to be carried out over a period of 
more  than  four  years,  with  an  average  investment  or  lending  term  of  8.2  years.  The  new 
measure, intended to act as a catalyst for financial institutions, has gotten off to a relatively 
smooth start.  
As  pointed  out  with  regard  to  the  U.S.  economy,  expectations  for  economic  growth  and 
expanded  productivity  have  played  an  important  role  in  achieving  sustainable  economic 
growth. In other words, without prospects for increases in income and demand, firms remain 
cautious  about  investing  and  households  remain  cautious  about  increasing  consumption. 
The  Bank  recognizes  that  Japan’s  economy  faces  the  critical  challenge  of  overcoming 
deflation  and  returning  to  a  sustainable  growth  path  with  price  stability,  and  that 
strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth  implies  improving  productivity  through 
innovation and structural changes.  
Improved  productivity  may  give  the  impression  that  an  increased  supply  of  goods  and 
services would widen the output gap – that is, the differential between supply and demand – 
and  make  it  more  difficult  to  overcome  deflation.  However,  as  many  here  will  know, 
innovation  and  the  application  of  technology  often  generate  new  high-value-added  goods 
and services, thereby creating new demand. For example, the development of light emitting 
diodes (LEDs) – which have been produced in large quantities here in Tokushima Prefecture 
as  light  sources  –  has  created  new  demand  for  products  such  as  liquid  crystal  display 
televisions,  fluorescent-type  LED  lamps  for  the  home,  and  LED  lighting  for  use  on  fishing 
vessels.  Improved  productivity  thus  means  creating  higher-value-added  goods  by  making 
use  of  increased  efficiency  in  labor  and  capital.  As  a  scholar,  even  before  I  became  a 
member  of  the  Bank’s  Policy  Board,  I  have  been  very  much  interested  in  the  effects  of 
productivity on the economy. Using data available on Japan to conduct empirical studies, I 
found  that  improved  productivity,  while  increasing  supply,  results  in  a  major  increase  in 
demand and narrows the output gap.  
BIS Review 162/2010 
 5
Bearing  in  mind  the  future  for  Japan’s  economy,  it  is  vital  to  create  an  environment  that 
enables firms – from a medium- to long-term perspective – to show their “animal spirits” and 
willingness to meet challenges head on in order to achieve both greater competitiveness that 
could  lead  to  higher  productivity  and  create  new  value  added.  As  I  have  said,  the  Bank’s 
fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic growth is a 
catalyst for financial institutions, while its measures to enhance monetary easing – including 
the new market operation introduced in August – have helped the private sector achieve the 
same objective. 
Chart 1 
6 
  BIS Review 162/2010
Chart 2 
Chart 3 
  7
BIS Review 162/2010 
 Chart 4 
 8 
 BIS Review 162/2010
Chart 5 
BIS Review 162/2010 
  9
Chart 6 
 10 
  BIS Review 162/2010
