Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The POS interconnection – giving better 
banking services together 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  launching  of  the  point  of  sale  interconnection,  Manila, 
27 October 2010.  
 The officers and staff of the country’s three biggest ATM networks, fellow bankers, special 
guests, good morning! 
I am very pleased to witness the launching of this much-anticipated project: the point of sale 
(POS) interconnection of Bancnet, Expressnet and Megalink. This is another milestone in the 
Philippine financial system as it is certain to open gateways for further expansion of financial 
services in the country through a convenient, secure and reliable channel. 
For  this,  let  us  commend  the  leadership  of  our  three  networks:  Expressnet  led  by  its 
Chairman Aurelio Montinola III, Bancnet led by its Chairman Ricardo Chua, and Megalink led 
by its President Benjamin Castillo. Let us give them a well-deserved round of applause!  
Indeed, the POS system in the Philippines has come a long way from its initial introduction 
by the Bank of the Philippine Islands in 1987, followed by Megalink in 1993 and Bancnet in 
1994.  Today,  we  have  over  37,000  POS  terminals  serving  around  30  million  ATM 
cardholders in malls, restaurants, hotels and even small specialty shops. In other words, your 
market covers roughly one-third of our country’s population of about 92 million!  
The  cooperative  efforts  that  have  led  the  three  biggest  ATM  networks  in  the  country  to 
institutionalize  the  interconnectivity  of  their  respective  POS  systems  are  therefore  a  most 
welcome development. This should lead to even improved efficiencies and better services, 
while enabling customer payments in a faster but simpler manner.  
We  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  knew  it  was  just  a  matter  of  time  before  this  project  became  a 
reality.  After  all,  the  three  ATM  networks  already  worked  together  in  2006  to  achieve  full 
interconnection  of  their  ATM  services  to  provide  more  accessible  and  efficient  services  at 
much lower costs to the banking public.  
This  time  around,  the  interconnection  of  the  POS  systems  of  the  ATM  consortia  should 
increase the touch points for client interface and enhance the value of your services to your 
customers.  The  value  proposition  for  retailers  is  likewise  enhanced.  With  this  POS 
interconnection,  retailers  will  no  longer  have  to  deploy  multiple  card-accepting  devices, 
thereby simplifying operations and minimizing costs. Ultimately, millions of Filipinos will enjoy 
the convenience, efficiency and lower costs of transactions from your POS interconnection.  
We at the Bangko Sentral also welcome this initiative because it presents enormous potential 
for  creating  a  truly  inclusive  financial  system  where  strong  and  vibrant  institutions  provide 
efficient financial services to more people including the underbanked and those who remain 
unbanked or unserved by our financial system.  
Crucial  in  developing  this  system  is  the  creation  of  a  network  of  access  points  where 
customers  can  conduct  their  transactions  through  a  multi-channel  approach  for  customer 
interface. This is where an interconnected POS system can play an important role.  
Since POS terminals entail relatively minimal investment, are easier to deploy and are less 
costly to maintain, it is likely that more and more financial institutions will be inclined to adopt 
this technology as a channel for their services.  
The growth in electronic or e-money business is another area that may fortify the role of POS 
systems  further.  Bangko  Sentral’s  Circular  649  which  set  the  regulatory  framework  for 
BIS Review 145/2010 
 1
e-money and e-money issuers promotes innovations in fund transfer mechanisms and paves 
the way for a competitive growth in the industry. Under this framework, authorized e-money 
issuers  can  build  a  network  of  cash  in/cash  out  agents  that  can  serve  as  gateway  for  the 
previously unbanked to access financial services. 
Financial institutions can create linkages and leverage this vast network of agents to deliver 
financial  services  to  a  broader  market  using  the  e-money  platform  facilitated  by  either  a 
mobile phone or a POS terminal. We have seen promising results so far. I understand that 
the next phase of development for the system is to allow fund transfers, another welcome 
innovation. 
As of March 2010, for instance, we have monitored 7.4 million e-money transactions valued 
at  roughly  11.3  billion  pesos  using  ATM  and  POS  channels.  Once  this  POS  network 
interconnection  is  fully  developed,  therefore,  it  will  provide  even  more  efficient  and  cost-
effective ways to serve the many bankable yet unbanked Filipinos.  
Nevertheless,  it  is  prudent  to  remember  that  while  technology  presents  us  with  many 
opportunities,  we  must  also  remain  vigilant  of  its  attendant  challenges  and  risks.  System 
downtimes,  breach  of  consumer  information  confidentiality,  unclear  charges  and  fees  are 
among the issues that can erode public confidence in the POS system.  
We  therefore  enjoin  our  ATM  consortia,  as  well  as  other  financial  institutions,  to  adopt 
appropriate measures and controls to mitigate such risks. One of your priorities should be an 
information  campaign  to  ensure  that  customers  are  properly  informed  on  how  they  can 
perform POS transactions safely and securely, as well as the possible risks involved.  
Customers must also be informed about all applicable fees associated with the use of other 
networks’  POS  terminals,  in  accordance  with  existing  BSP  regulations  on  e-money  and 
consumer protection. 
On  our  part,  we  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  will  continue  to  create  a  policy  and  regulatory 
environment that will enable innovations to flourish while ensuring that appropriate controls 
and safeguards are in place.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  Changes  in  our  financial  landscape  and  innovations  in  technology 
represent both challenge and opportunity for all of us. I believe however that if we remain 
united by our common goal to provide better service to Filipino consumers, we will find the 
way forward. 
While we have our respective roles to play, we should find ultimate convergence in working 
for a better, stronger, and more inclusive banking system; a banking system that supports 
balanced and sustainable growth for our country and our people. 
And  so,  once  again,  I  congratulate  Bancnet,  Expressnet  and  Megalink  for  proving,  once 
again, that public service is alive and well in the banking sector.  
Mabuhay! Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat! 
2 
 BIS Review 145/2010
