Vítor Constâncio: Catching-up strategies after the crisis 
Keynote lecture by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Conference on European Economic Integration (CEEI) 2010, Vienna, 15 November 2010.  
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be here today to share some thoughts with you on the challenges to 
the  process  of  European  economic  integration  in  the  aftermath  of  the  global  turmoil.  The 
financial crisis has exposed widely-held views on large domestic and external imbalances as 
having  several  shortcomings,  which  has  led  to  an  overall  reassessment  of  the  associated 
risks.  
With  regard  to  the  process  of  European  economic  integration,  the  financial  crisis  has 
undermined the staunch belief in a “development model”, whereby low income countries in 
central, eastern and south-eastern Europe (CESEE) could achieve rapid growth simply by: 
(i) engaging  in  market-oriented  reforms;  (ii)  liberalising  trade;  (iii)  having  access  to  foreign 
capital markets via debt flows and foreign direct investment (FDI); and (iv) allowing the entry 
of foreign banks. The associated growing imbalances were judged as temporary phenomena 
associated with the catching-up process.  
I will argue today that this development model should not be abandoned, but refined, as the 
push towards market reform has engendered significant benefits. However, the global crisis 
has  shown  that  economic  convergence  in  Europe  should  not  be  viewed  as  an  automatic 
process. In fact, stability-oriented policies and careful risk management should accompany 
and support convergence efforts. With this in mind, I will focus on the following three aspects, 
which highlight the role of policy in ensuring a sustainable development model:  
1. 
A review of the growth experienced in CESEE countries in order to determine if any 
general lessons can be drawn.  
The  role  of  the  foreign  banking  sector  in  CESEE  countries,  which  despite  having 
been  beneficial  overall  for  the  catching-up  process,  may  have  contributed  to 
increasing domestic imbalances in some countries.  
The  establishment  of  a  new  macro-prudential  and  regulatory  framework  in  the 
European Union (EU). 
2. 
3. 
The experience of growth in the CESEE region 
1.  
Before the global financial crisis erupted, the CESEE region was experiencing an economic 
boom, with rapid GDP growth that could be attributed to domestic and international factors.  
The widespread and enduring process of convergence of living standards and prices towards 
euro area levels prompted considerable optimism about the future. Market-oriented reforms 
were  a  key  feature  of  the  development  model  that  was  followed  in  almost  all  EU  CESEE 
countries from the mid-1990s, spurring productivity gains and access to foreign technology 
and  capital.  However,  in  most  non-EU  countries  in  the  region,  typically  the  catching-up 
process  gained  speed  only  later.  There  was  mounting  evidence  of  a  link  between  these 
market reforms and long-term growth.1 
                                                 
1   See Falcetti et al. (2005). 
BIS Review 151/2010 
 1
However, developments in the region were not homogenous: over time a growing number of 
countries  showed  increasingly  visible  signs  of  vulnerability.  In  particular,  over  the  past 
decade several countries recorded a deterioration in their current account deficits and price 
competitiveness  indicators.  To  a  large  extent,  these  developments  were  viewed  as  having 
been  predicted  by  economic  theory  and  were  thus  often  downplayed.  The  explanations 
generally advanced to explain these developments were as follows:  
 
capital is expected to flow “downhill” to countries where the rate of return is higher. 
From  an  inter-temporal  perspective  this  appears  to  be  a  reasonable  argument. 
Tapping foreign savings and accumulating external debt allows a country to finance 
investment,  smooth  consumption,  import  technological  know-how  and  expand  the 
ability  of  the  export  sector  to  penetrate  foreign  markets.  The  trade  deficit  is 
eventually  expected  to  turn  into  a  surplus  as  exports  rise  and  imports  of  capital 
goods decline, leading to a gradual stabilisation and eventually to a fall in external 
debt;  
based on economic theory, a country is expected to experience real exchange rate 
appreciation during the catching-up phase. This point is typically expressed in terms 
of the Balassa-Samuelson effect or equilibrium exchange rate analysis, suggesting 
that prices may converge to euro area levels if fundamentals improve. This benign 
assessment was also reinforced by pointing to rising export market shares, which 
was seen as evidence that overall competitiveness might even have improved.  
 While these and similar arguments had their appeal, in a sub-set of countries, inflation and 
current  account  imbalances  reached  such  high  levels  that  an  orderly  self-adjustment 
mechanism  seemed  increasingly  unlikely.  Nevertheless,  access  to  international  capital 
markets continued without disruption and the cost of external financing remained low, thus 
contributing to rapid credit growth. The risk of economic overheating was also fuelled by low 
or,  in  some  cases,  negative  real  interest  rates.  It  was  particularly  challenging  to  deal  with 
these  phenomena  in  countries  that  had  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes,  given  the  lack  of  an 
autonomous monetary policy.  
On  the  eve  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  different  countries  had  accumulated  different 
degrees of external and internal imbalances. Taken as a whole, most of the CESEE region 
was  characterised  by  a  sizeable  contribution  of  private  consumption  to  growth  and  an 
increasingly negative contribution of net exports.2 The underlying causes of the shift from the 
tradable  sector  to  the  domestic  sector  were  rather  country-specific.  In  some  cases,  it  was 
related to foreign funding, through bank lending or FDI, while in others, the main underlying 
factor was domestic, in the form of rising government spending or a domestic credit boom. 
As a result of both external and domestic forces, in some countries the situation appeared 
out of control: inflation even surged to double digit levels, wages increased far above gains in 
labour productivity and there were remarkable increases in asset prices, notably in housing 
markets. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  global  financial  crisis,  which  has  made  it  clear  that  the  risks 
associated with growing imbalances such as those described above cannot be neglected. In 
fact,  after  some  initial  resilience,  the  CESEE  region  was  affected  by  the  crisis  particularly 
strongly, even though it was not directly exposed to US markets. 
As access to international capital markets was impaired, countries that were most in need of 
external financing experienced larger welfare losses. A number of economies in central and 
eastern  Europe  were  affected  less  seriously,  but  recessionary  forces  were  stronger  in  the 
Baltics  and  south-eastern  Europe,  suggesting  that  it  was  the  countries  with  the  larger 
imbalances  that  were  typically  most  affected.  In  countries  with  fixed  exchange  rates  with 
                                                 
2   See Gardo and Martin (2010). 
2 
 BIS Review 151/2010
limited room for manoeuvre through monetary  policy, the adjustment process proved even 
more  challenging.  In  the  absence  of  nominal  exchange  rate  flexibility,  prices  and,  in 
particular, wages eventually had to be adjusted downward amid rapidly rising unemployment.  
Looking  back  at  what  has  happened  since  the  crisis  hit  the  region,  it  can  be  seen  that  a 
considerable stabilisation effort has taken place. National and, in some cases, international 
responses  prevented  the  crisis  from  having  a  more  disruptive  impact,  as  the  prevailing 
exchange  rate  regimes  were  preserved  and  the  banking  sector  showed  considerable 
resilience. Indirectly, unlimited liquidity provision by the ECB to banks established in the euro 
area  helped  to  secure  funding  to  the  region.  The  policy  response  to  the  crisis  also  varied 
significantly depending on the scope for manoeuvre on both the fiscal and monetary front. 
Fiscal policies have been tightened in some cases, financial conditions have stabilised and 
there are now clear signs of a recovery in economic activity in most countries.  
However,  the  impact  of  the  global  crisis  and  the  years  of  exuberance  proved  very  costly, 
leading to a general sharp contraction in national output and a corresponding steep rise in 
unemployment. Moreover, the ongoing de-leveraging process, the need to repair household 
and  corporate  balance  sheets,  tighter  bank  credit  standards,  as  well  as  rising  long-term 
unemployment could all slow the pace of the catching-up process in many CESEE countries 
in  the  coming  years.  In  the  most  severe  cases,  the  process  of  unwinding  of  external 
vulnerabilities is still underway.  
Although the crisis has not undone the progress achieved on convergence over the past two 
decades and past reforms have helped the stabilisation effort, important lessons should be 
learned.  The  good  parts  of  the  development  model  pursued  so  far  should  be  retained. 
Countries in the region should not lose their appetite for structural reform and progress on 
enhancing labour market flexibility, improving the business environment and preserving free 
access  to  trade  and  financial  markets.  There  is  still  a  fundamental  need  to  increase 
productivity,  promote  innovation,  as  well  as  raise  capital  and  labour  participation.  At  the 
same time, the crisis has clearly revealed that the catching-up process must go hand-in-hand 
with macro and financial-oriented policies, while specific challenges remain for countries that 
maintain hard pegs, which require adequate support measures.  
The role of the foreign banking sector in CESEE countries 
2.  
Let me now turn more specifically to the “parent bank” model in CESEE. At a broader level, it 
is  still  controversial  whether  international  financial  integration  and  foreign  banks  have  an 
unambiguously positive effect on economies that are in the process of catching up.3 
On the one hand, it is argued that the presence of foreign banks in the region has ensured 
the  availability  of  credit  to  the  real  economy  and  improved  the  efficiency  of  financial 
intermediation process. In addition, the lending activities of foreign banks appear to be more 
resilient  to  local  shocks  than  those  of  domestic  banks.4  It  has  also  been  found  that  the 
region’s resilience to capital outflows is related to a high level of financial integration and the 
presence of foreign banks.5 
On the other hand, other observers have argued that financial stress originating in EU parent 
banks may have been transmitted to the CESEE region during the early stages of the crisis.6 
                                                 
3   See Agénor (2003). 
4   See ECB (2010) and De Haas and van Lelyveld (2010). 
5   See Herrmann and Mihaljek (2010). 
6   See Popov and Udell (2010). 
BIS Review 151/2010 
 3
Some  also hold  the  view  that  parent  banks  from  western  Europe  were  fuelling  local  credit 
booms and encouraged the use of unhedged foreign currency borrowing.7 
As the crisis erupted, region-specific arrangements made CESEE countries more resilient to 
the risk of sudden stops in capital inflows: under the umbrella of the International Monetary 
Fund, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the EU, the European 
Bank  Coordination  Initiative  –  also  known  as  the  “Vienna  Initiative”  –  enabled  a  dialogue 
between parent banks, home and host supervisors, and relevant governments. This initiative, 
in which the ECB participated as an observer, ensured that parent banks kept their exposure 
to CESEE countries with large imbalances. Together with a strong commitment on the part of 
home governments backing parent banks and thus indirectly the CESEE region, the Vienna 
Initiative helped to maintain confidence in the banking sectors across the region. I should like 
to take advantage of this occasion to congratulate those of you who were actively involved in 
this  initiative.  In  addition,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  the  fact  that  the  Vienna  Initiative  has 
become  a  vehicle  for  public-private  sector  coordination,  which  could  serve  as  a  promising 
model for overcoming the problems associated with collective action. 
However,  from  a  policy  perspective,  a  number  of  challenges  lie  ahead.  In  particular,  it  is 
important  to  assess  the  extent  to  which  parent  banks  may  have  contributed  indirectly  to 
financial stability risks via lending in foreign currency.8 Lending in foreign currencies to the 
non-financial  private  sector  is  not  an  entirely  new  phenomenon  in  Europe,  and  in  most 
countries of the region such activities account for a significant proportion of the total lending 
by banks. In some countries, lending in foreign currencies has led to a substantial build-up of 
currency  mismatches  on  private  sector  balance  sheets.  The  increasing  share  of  foreign 
currency  in  total  lending  in  countries  in  the  CESEE  region,  in  particular  euro-denominated 
lending, but also loans denominated in Swiss francs and Japanese yen, was accompanied 
by  a  strong  expansion  in  overall  credit  amid  strong  inflows  of  foreign  capital  attracted  by 
expectations of dynamic economic convergence. 
Let me briefly elaborate on the implications of high dependence on foreign currency lending. 
At the turn of 2008–2009, all countries with flexible exchange rate regimes experienced rapid 
depreciations of their currencies vis-à-vis the euro. This inflated the local currency value of 
foreign  currency  loans,  and  thus  weighed  on  private  sector  balance  sheets.  However,  low 
market interest rates on foreign currency loans mitigated, to some extent, the increase in the 
debt-servicing  burden  of  borrowers.  In  an  environment  of  rising  interest  rates  on  foreign 
currency  loans,  this  could  have  affected  a  significant  proportion  of  the  private  sector  and 
could have posed a systemic financial stability risk in countries where foreign currency loans 
accounted for a large share of total domestic lending. In addition, the major role played by 
foreign currency lending has posed some challenges for the conduct of monetary policy. In 
particular,  the  existence  of  a  large  stock  of  loans  denominated  in  foreign  currency  has 
weakened the ability of monetary policy to influence the economy through the interest rate 
channel. Furthermore, central banks might have become hesitant to alter their policy stances 
in the light of the possible adverse implications for financial stability stemming, for example, 
from a downward pressure on the exchange rate.  
A  number  of  countries  in  the  region  have  made  attempts  to  address  the  risks  related  to 
rapidly  expanding  foreign  currency  lending  to  unhedged  borrowers.  As  standard  policies 
aimed  at  decreasing  interest  rate  differentials  and  developing  domestic  funding  markets 
might  take  too  long  to  achieve  this  goal,  some  countries  in  the  region  have  introduced 
different  monetary  policy,  regulatory  and  administrative  measures9  to  address  the  risks 
                                                 
7   See EBRD (2009). 
8   See, for example Brown, Kirschenmann and Ongena (2010). 
9   Examples  of  these  are:  (i)  a  differentiation  between  minimum  reserve  requirements  on  bank  liabilities  in 
domestic  and  foreign  currency;  (ii)  higher  risk  weights  and  provisioning  rates  on  loans  in  foreign  currency; 
4 
 BIS Review 151/2010
stemming from increased foreign currency lending. Practical experience with these measures 
reveals  that  their  effectiveness  has  been  somewhat  limited  for  a  variety  of  reasons.  In 
particular, persistently wide differentials between interest rates on loans in domestic currency 
and  those  in  foreign  currency  have  fostered  demand  for  foreign  currency  loans,  while 
shortages  of  domestic  savings  denominated  in  local  currency  together  with  intense  bank 
competition  underpinned  their  supply.10  In  fact,  as  parent  bank  financing  continued  to  be 
mainly denominated in foreign currency, local subsidiaries avoided currency mismatches on 
their own balance sheets by lending in foreign currency. In addition, when domestic lending 
in  foreign  currency  was  made  more  costly,  it  was  circumvented  by  cross-border  lending. 
Recently,  authorities  in  some  European  countries  (e.g.  Austria  and  Hungary)  introduced 
stricter measures to limit further increase in foreign currency lending to domestic households. 
These measures are mostly of an administrative nature and set limits on customer eligibility 
to  obtain  a  loan  in  foreign  currency.  However,  these  measures  do  not  preclude  domestic 
customers  in  these  countries  from  obtaining  foreign  currency  loans  directly  from  banks 
domiciled in other countries.  
It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  issue  of  foreign  currency  lending  requires  a  supranational 
approach – at least at the EU level. More generally, in order to make the financial system 
less prone to crises and ensure long-term sustainable growth, we are setting a broader policy 
agenda  for  the  EU  as  a  whole  by  means  of  Basel  III  and  the  creation  of  a  new  macro-
prudential supervisor in the EU.  
Basel III and macro-prudential policy in the EU 
3.  
During  the  recent  crisis  several  gaps  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for 
financial institutions were revealed. It became apparent that the quality and quantity of the 
capital  base  of  many  financial  institutions  were  insufficient  to  withstand  severe  shocks.  In 
addition, the abundant liquidity that characterised the financial system in the years preceding 
the crisis suddenly disappeared, exposing several institutions to liquidity shortages. To avoid 
a complete financial meltdown, governments provided an unprecedented amount of financial 
support and central banks had to significantly increase their provision of liquidity during the 
initial stages of the crisis.  
These  events  led  to  many  different  policy  responses,  resulting  in  a  major  overhaul  of  the 
regulatory and supervisory framework. Under the aegis of the G20, a tremendous amount of 
work has been done by the Financial Stability Board and the Basel Committee to reform the 
regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  in  order  to  address  the  core  causes  of  the  crisis.  A 
major component of this reform was the revision of the Basel II framework with the aim of 
strengthening  the  capital  base  of  banks  and  introducing  stricter  liquidity  risk  requirements 
and an absolute leverage ratio.  
The revision of micro prudential regulation – Basel III 
The recent agreement reached on the Basel III framework and its full endorsement by the 
Group of Central Bank Governors and Heads of Supervision is an important piece of work 
that delivers on global financial reform and constitutes a cornerstone of the new regulatory 
system.  
The five main elements of the new framework are as follows.  
                                                                                                                                                      
(iii) restrictions on loan-to-value and payment-to-income ratios; and (iv) tighter eligibility criteria for borrowers 
to obtain a loan in foreign currency. 
10   See, for example, Luca, Petrova (2008) and Rosenberg, Tirpak (2009). 
BIS Review 151/2010 
 5
First, under the new definition of regulatory capital, both the quality and consistency of the 
capital  base  will  be  improved.  This  will  help  to ensure  that sufficient  high  quality  capital  is 
available  when  it  is  most  needed,  namely  at  times  of  stress.  Particular  emphasis  will  be 
placed on the core elements of Tier 1 capital. Tier 2 capital elements will be simplified, and 
existing  Tier  3  capital  will  be  abolished.  Enhanced  disclosure  requirements  will  further 
improve  the  transparency  of  the  capital  structure  of  banks.  Overall,  I  am  confident  that 
stricter  conditions  for  what  should  count  as  regulatory  capital  will  contribute  to  restoring 
confidence  in  the  ability  of  banks  to  weather  future  periods  of  stress.  This  in  itself  will 
substantially  reduce  the  probability  of  future  banking  crises,  thus  improving  long-term 
economic and social welfare. 
Second, the introduction of counter-cyclical capital buffers should protect the banking sector 
from  periods  of  excessive  credit  growth.  As  witnessed  during  the  crisis,  the  build-up  of 
excessive  credit  levels  in  an  economic  upturn  is  often  followed  by  large  losses  on  this 
outstanding credit when economic conditions deteriorate. These losses may in turn have a 
destabilising  effect  on  the  banking  sector.  The  buffering  mechanism  consists  of  two 
elements. First, a capital conservation buffer range – equal to 2.5% of risk-weighted assets 
and  made  up  of  Tier  1  common  equity  –  would  be  established  above  the  minimum.  The 
second  element,  currently  under  development,  consists  of  the  possible  extension  of  the 
buffer  range  up  to  an  additional  2.5%  in  periods  of  excessive  credit  growth  (known  as  a 
“counter-cyclical  buffer”).  An  important  additional  benefit  of  this  measure  would  be  that  it 
might mitigate the credit cycle. 
As a complementary measure to improving the quality and quantity of the capital base, the 
third element of the framework consist of the strengthening of the risk coverage of the capital 
framework by revising the prudential rules on securitisation and trading book activities, and 
by putting forward proposals for the revision of the counterparty credit risk framework. This 
would  imply  higher  risk  weights  and  thus  result  in  higher  capital  requirements  for  these 
activities. 
Fourth, the planned introduction of a non-risk based leverage ratio should serve as a credible 
supplementary measure to the risk-based requirements to contain the build-up of excessive 
leverage and address model risks associated with the risk-based capital framework. 
Last,  but  not  least,  since  it  constitutes  a  building  block  in  the  new  framework,  is  the 
development  of  a  liquidity  risk  framework  aimed  at  improving  banks’  resilience  to  liquidity 
shocks. The liquidity risk framework consists of two main measures: a short-term measure 
(Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio)  establishing  a  minimum  level  of  high  quality  liquid  assets  to 
withstand  severe  stress  over  a  one  month  period  and  a  long-term  measure  (Net  Stable 
Funding  Ratio)  designed  to  ensure  that  the  maturity  structure  of  assets  and  liabilities  are 
better matched, requiring banks to fund long-term assets with more stable types of liability. 
Work is underway on the important details and precise calibration of these ratios. 
All of these new measures, which will be introduced over the agreed transition period, should 
not  have  any  unduly  severe  implications  for  the  national  banking  system  and  will  thus 
support the nascent economic recovery.  
Further work ahead 
Although  the  agreement  on  Basel  III  constitutes  a  robust  conceptual  framework,  much 
remains  to  be  done.  Aside  from  the  ongoing  work  concerning  the  introduction  of  counter-
cyclical buffers, more work also needs to be carried out on other important elements of the 
framework.  
In this respect, the potential implications of the leverage ratio and the liquidity risk framework 
still need to be assessed. An observation period has therefore been agreed upon in order to 
carefully monitor the potential implications for certain banking sectors, business models and 
6 
 BIS Review 151/2010
the real economy. Full  use of the observation period should be made  to identify any such 
implications and to prevent the new measures from having any unintended consequences.  
Furthermore,  since  the  leverage  ratio  is  largely  based  on  accounting  information,  the 
accounting standard-setters  should strengthen  their  efforts  to  eliminate existing  accounting 
differences. This is essential in order to ensure a level playing field.  
Work is also still underway on ensuring the loss-absorbency of all regulatory capital at the 
point of non-viability. The Basel Committee has also decided at the level of Governors and 
Heads of Supervision that systemically important financial institutions will be required to have 
a higher loss absorbency capacity than the other institutions that are subject to Basel III. To 
achieve this, banks would be permitted to use new instruments such as “contingent capital” 
(coco) or bail-in bonds, which raises some issues. First, on a general level it is necessary to 
assess whether these instruments can really provide a feasible funding alternative and foster 
a  robust  investor  response.  If  this  is  deemed  the  case,  the  precise  features  of  these 
instruments  will  need  to  be  determined.  Key  design  features  include  the  event  that  would 
trigger the conversion of the instrument, as well as the conversion price and ratio.  
I should like to stress that a strengthened regulatory framework is necessary, but consistent 
implementation and application of Basel III at the global level is of the essence to ensure a 
level playing field and to avoid regulatory arbitrage causing any disruption in the future. In 
this  respect,  I  would  like  to  underline  the  importance  of  adhering  to  the  agreed  transition 
period,  which  was  based  on  the  outcome  of  the  impact  assessments  and  country-specific 
considerations. In order not to compromise the economic recovery, any market pressure to 
accelerate the implementation of Basel III would be detrimental to the overall objective of the 
regulatory reform package.  
Potential impact of Basel III 
Allow me to say a few words on the potential impact of the Basel III framework on banks. It is 
expected that banks engaged in different business activities will be affected differently. The 
consensus  view  among  market  participants  seems  to  be  that  the  new  stricter  capital 
requirements will have a bigger impact on universal banks, mainly as a result of the limits 
imposed  on  the  recognition  of  minority  interest  and  the  application  of  most  regulatory 
adjustments to and deductions from common equity Tier 1 capital. As a consequence, banks 
that have significant holdings in other financial institutions and insurance companies will most 
probably  have  to  adjust  to  the  new  rules  either  by  strengthening  their  capital  base  or  by 
revising  their  business  activities.  In  this  context,  given  the  sizeable  share  of  large, 
internationally  active  universal  banks  in  the  region,  the  potential  impacts  of  the  new 
measures on the financial systems and economies in CESEE have to be carefully explored 
and assessed.  
The new macro-prudential framework – ESRB 
In parallel with the revision of the micro-prudential framework, extensive work is being carried 
out  at  the  regional,  country  and  global  levels  on  developing  consistent  macro-prudential 
policy frameworks. The financial crisis has illustrated the importance of having an effective 
macro-prudential oversight function to safeguard financial stability by proposing timely policy 
responses. Macro-prudential oversight taking a system-wide perspective should complement 
micro-prudential  supervision,  allowing  the  relevant  authorities  to  assess  and  address 
potential systemic risks. 
The  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  has  been  entrusted  with  responsibility  for 
macro-prudential  oversight  at  the  EU  level,  alongside  other  initiatives  at  the  national  and 
international levels in this field. Under the new legislation, the ECB has been entrusted with 
providing  the  ESRB  with  a  Secretariat,  as  well  as  logistical,  administrative  and  analytical 
BIS Review 151/2010 
 7
support. Similar frameworks were also created in the United States and the United Kingdom 
with the close involvement of their respective central banks.  
The  macro-prudential  oversight  function  of  the  ESRB  is  aimed  at  linking  systemic  risk 
analysis with appropriate policy responses to address potential risks identified as material. It 
therefore comprises both an analytical and a policy component. The analytical part focuses 
on  identifying,  measuring  and  assessing  the  impact  of  potentially  systemic  risks, while  the 
policy part entails the calibration of policy instruments that could be implemented to address 
the identified risks or mitigate their consequences. 
More specifically, the first task of the ESRB will be to identify systemic risks. This will require 
a broad and deep information basis, aided by a wide range of tools to process the relevant 
data. Important ingredients for the analysis include market intelligence, rigorous monitoring of 
financial stability indicators and financial market and economic developments at large. It is 
important  at  this  initial  stage  to  cast  the  net  as  wide  as  possible  to  ensure  that  no  risk  is 
overlooked. This type of analysis could be supported by early warning models and indicators 
based  on  current  data  on  financial  or  macro  variables  in  order  to  identify  early  on  where 
imbalances may be building up.  
Its second task will be to assess the severity of the risks identified and to evaluate the ability 
of the financial system to absorb shocks. In this context, macro stress-testing models can be 
used to assess the resilience of the financial system, as can contagion and spillover analysis 
to evaluate propagation mechanisms and their potential impact on the financial sector or the 
real economy. 
Finally, the ESRB will use the outcome of the risk assessment for possible risk warnings or 
policy recommendations, which will need to be concrete and well targeted. 
The ESRB will be in a good position to perform all of these tasks and to address in a timely 
fashion  potential  systemic  risks,  such  as  those  related  to  the  rapid  expansion  in  foreign 
currency  lending  to  unhedged  borrowers  in  the  CESEE  region.  Addressing  the problem  at 
the EU level will allow different measures to be implemented on a consolidated basis, thus 
addressing  all  of  the  relevant  financial  sector  players  active  in  the  region,  ensuring  that 
macro-prudential policy across the EU is consistent and minimising cross-border and cross-
sectoral policy circumvention. 
In short, the establishment of the ESRB will introduce a new policy function at the EU level 
with  great  potential  for  enhancing  the  ability  of  European  and  national  authorities  to 
safeguard the stability of the EU financial system as a whole. It is recognised that the design 
and  implementation  of  this  new  EU  macro-prudential  policy  function  pose  a  considerable 
challenge. However, with the necessary preparations, which are currently underway in close 
cooperation with all involved parties, the ESRB is assured a smooth start in 2011.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  the  crisis  has  revealed  that  the 
catching-up  process  in  CESEE  countries  must  go  hand-in-hand  with  prudent  macro  and 
financial  sector  policies,  and  this  lesson  also  applies  to  all  countries  in  the  EU.  The 
achievement of high rates of growth cannot be detached from stability-oriented policies and 
careful risk management. To this end, policy-makers will be engaged in the task of designing 
coherent policy frameworks for some years to come. 
References 
Agénor, P.-R. (2003), “Benefits and Costs of International Financial Integration: Theory and 
Facts” in The World Economy, Vol. 26(8), pp. 1089–1118. 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (2010a),  “An  assessment  of  the  long-term 
economic impact of stronger capital and liquidity requirements”. 
8 
 BIS Review 151/2010
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010b), “Assessing the macroeconomic impact of 
the transition to stronger capital and liquidity requirements”. 
Brown, M., Kirschenmann, K. and Ongena, S. (2010), “Foreign Currency Loans – Demand or 
Supply Driven?”, CEPR Discussion Paper, No 7952. 
De  Haas,  R.  and  van  Lelyveld,  I.  (2010),  “Internal  Capital  Markets  and  Lending  by 
Multinational Bank Subsidiaries”, Journal of Financial Intermediation, 19, pp. 1–25. 
ECB (2010), “Financial stability challenges in EU candidate countries – Financial systems in 
the aftermath of the global crisis”, Occasional Paper Series, No 115, ECB. 
Falcetti,  E.,  Lysenko,  T.  and  Sanfey,  P.  (2005),  “Reforms  and  growth  in  transition: 
re-examining the evidence”, Working Paper Series, No 90, EBRD. 
Gardó S. and Martin, R. (2010), “The impact of the global economic and financial crisis on 
central,  eastern  and  south-eastern  Europe  –  a  stock-taking  exercise”,  Occasional  Paper 
Series, No 114, ECB. 
Herrmann,  S.  and  Mihaljek,  D.  (2010),  Determinants  of  Cross-Border  Bank  Flows  to 
Emerging  Markets  –  New  Empirical  Evidence  on  the  Spread  of  Financial  Crisis,  Working 
Paper Series, No 315, BIS. 
Luca,  A  and  Petrova,  I.  (2008),  “What  drives  credit  dollarization  in  transition  economies?” 
Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 32, pp. 858–869. 
Popov,  A.  and  Udell,  E.F.  (2010),  “Cross-border  lending  and  the  transmission  of  financial 
distress during the crisis of 2007–2008”, Working Paper Series, No 1203, ECB.  
Rosenberg, Ch. and Tirpák, M. (2009), “Determinants of foreign currency borrowing in the 
new  Member  States  of  the  EU”,  Czech  Journal  of  Economics  and  Finance,  Vol.  59(3), 
pp. 216–228. 
BIS Review 151/2010 
 9
