Lim Hng Kiang: Challenges, opportunities and getting it right 
Speech by Mr Lim Hng Kiang, Minister for Trade and Industry and Deputy Chairman of the 
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  Singapore  Institute  of  Directors,  Directors’ 
conference 2010, Singapore, 15 November 2010. 
 Mr John Lim, Chairman of the Singapore Institute of Directors 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  join  you  this  morning  for  the  inaugural  Directors’  Conference 
I would like to compliment SID for its initiative and efforts in bringing together directors 
Introduction 
1.  
organised by the SID. 
2.  
and experts from diverse backgrounds for this conference. 
As you know, the SID was established in the aftermath of the Asian Financial Crisis 
3.  
in 1997 to raise standards of corporate governance. In the aftermath of yet another financial 
crisis, it is timely for us to review and consider how Singapore can continue to improve its 
corporate governance standards. 
4.  
The  recently  released  Asian  Corporate  Governance  Association-CLSA  survey  on 
corporate governance ranked Singapore as having the best corporate governance practices 
in Asia. Despite ranking first in the survey, the report highlighted that there is still much to be 
done. 
Getting it right from Singapore’s perspective 
5.  
The  theme  of  today’s  event  is  “Challenges,  Opportunities  and  Getting  It  Right”. 
Getting the corporate governance framework and practices right in Singapore is not a luxury 
but  a  necessity  for  our  competitiveness.  While  Singapore  has  recovered  strongly  from  the 
global financial crisis, the outlook remains uncertain. Well-trained directors can be firm hands 
in steering companies through pitfalls which may appear. In such an uncertain environment, 
it will be critical to reinforce the confidence of stakeholders in how our companies are run. 
This will require both the government and the private sector to play our part. 
6.   On the regulators’ end, we will continue to make sensible rules that are practical and 
outcome  focused.  We  will  also  continue  to  keep  our  rules  up  to  date.  The  Corporate 
Governance  Council,  established  by  MAS,  is  reviewing  the  Singapore  Code  of  Corporate 
Governance and will submit its recommendations to MAS. On its part, the private sector must 
nurture a pool of well-trained and ethical directors. 
7.  
Being  a  director  will  become  increasingly  demanding.  Companies’  operations  are 
getting  more  international,  and  the  markets  for  raising  capital  becoming  more  complex. 
Expectations of directors by stakeholders are also growing. 
8.  
Directors are now exposed to substantial legal and reputational risk if they do not, or 
are perceived not to have, discharged their fiduciary duties for the company. For example, 
directors of BP have been sued by shareholders over the costs associated with the oil spill in 
the Gulf of Mexico. Directors of AIG were also sued for not adequately monitoring the firm’s 
exposure to the subprime mortgage market. 
BIS Review 164/2010 
 1
Directors  should  not  become  defensive  or  legalistic  in  face  of  these  challenges. 
9.  
Instead, they need to equip themselves with the appropriate skills and knowledge, to enable 
them to ask the right questions and make the right decisions. Apart from experience, training 
is one important way to equip our directors. 
Current levels of directors’ training 
10.  
Companies  here  are  gaining  awareness  of  the  importance  of  having  well-trained 
directors,  and  proactively  providing  training  for  them.  Last  year,  SID  and  the  Singapore 
Exchange, or “SGX”, published the “Singapore Board of Directors Survey”. According to the 
survey,  the  proportion  of  companies  providing  relevant  training  to  non-executive  directors 
increased from 25% in 2005 to 41% in 2008. But the survey also showed an increase in the 
number of directors who received no training. This is a trend that SID should address early. 
11.  
I  understand  that  SID  and  SGX  are  currently  conducting  another  similar  survey. 
Hopefully,  this  survey  will  show  more  companies  providing  training  for  their  directors  and 
more directors attending such structured training. 
Areas for focus 
12.  
Next, allow me to outline some areas where directors can focus their training efforts 
on. The SID and SGX survey highlighted that risk management was the most important area 
for further training. Directors have a responsibility to manage the risks of a company. Their 
involvement  in  risk  management  extends  from  heading  off  cases  of  egregious  fraud,  to 
ensuring that management does not take on excessive risk. 
13.  
Directors  also  need  to  stay  abreast  of  the  latest  developments  in  regulations  and 
best practices. To this effect, companies should put in place continuing training programmes 
for their directors. 
14.  
MAS  has  recognised  the  importance  of  this  by  proposing  new  provisions  on 
“continuous  development”  in  the  Corporate  Governance  Regulations  and  Guidelines  for 
locally-incorporated banks and significant life insurers. 
15.  
The  proposed  provisions  require  the  boards  of  such  companies  to  establish  a 
continuing  development  programme  for  all  directors,  and  a  framework  to  identify  relevant 
skills for such directors. Nominating Committees should assess at least once a year, whether 
directors lack any skills to perform their roles. 
16.  
Besides getting the right training, directors must set the right tone for the company’s 
culture.  Core  values  like  honesty,  integrity  and  fairness  which  underpin  good  governance 
must prevail among management and the company as a whole. The best company directors 
stand out with their commercial acumen as well as their strong ethical fibre. 
Where SID can play a part 
17.  
SID  can  play  an  important  part  in  promoting  the  professional  development  of 
directors  by  providing  thought  leadership,  building  a  platform  for  sharing  of  best  practices, 
and enhancing training standards for directors. In fact, SID has been doing this for the past 
years, including collaborating with the Singapore Management University to launch a formal 
certification program for directors. 
18.  
SID has also been increasing its outreach both within and outside Singapore. These 
include: training workshops for China-based directors of Singapore-listed companies, as well 
as  courses  for  our  small  and  medium  sized  enterprises  and  private  companies  who  are 
looking  to  list  on  the  stock  market.  An  example  is  the  Risk  Management  &  Corporate 
Governance Programme, conducted with SPRING Singapore. 
2 
 BIS Review 164/2010
SID can do much more in this respect. SID should be sensitive to the current needs 
19.  
of directors and fine-tune the content of its courses accordingly. In addition, SID can better 
engage  experienced  directors,  and tap  on  their  expertise  through  putting  together  relevant 
case studies. 
Conclusion 
20.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  with  increasing  expectations  on  directors,  companies  will 
come to place a premium on well-trained, ethical directors who look out for the interests of all 
stakeholders,  and  are  not  rubber  stamps  for  management  decisions.  This  presents  an 
opportunity to directors who are proficient and professional. 
It is in companies’ and directors’ best interests to “Get it Right” by having effective 
21.  
and committed directors who pursue good corporate governance practices, as this will result 
in a premium for shareholders. Grooming such directors will help to encourage new ideas, 
better practices and encourage leadership renewal for company boards. 
22.  
On  this  note,  I  would  like  to  end  by  thanking  SID  for  its  efforts  in  the  area  of 
corporate  governance.  I  hope  that  the  discussions  arising  from  this  conference  will  help 
directors gain a better understanding of how they can carry out their duties more effectively. 
23.  
Thank you and have a pleasant day ahead. 
BIS Review 164/2010 
 3
