Philipp M Hildebrand: Monetary policy challenges – Swiss exports in a 
globalised world 
Speech by Mr Philipp M Hildebrand, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the Swiss Mission to the European Union, Brussels, 23 November 2010. 
 I would like to thank Caroline Schmidt and Rita Kobel Rohr for their valuable support in drafting this speech.  
Introduction 
1. 
I am pleased and honored to speak to you today at the Swiss Mission to the EU. Thank you 
for the invitation and the warm welcome.  
In  the  past  few  decades,  globalisation  has  had  a  deep  impact  on  the  world  economy. 
Whether the world has indeed become “flat”, as Tom Friedman put it, remains to be seen. 
Certainly,  the  notion  of  a  “global  village”,  in  which  all  aspects  of  life  are  ever  more 
interconnected, is an apt description of our world today.  
One of the areas most affected by globalisation is the world economy, which has become 
highly integrated. This is due not only to technological innovation, but also to the fact that 
countries  have  deliberately  opened  up  their  economies;  a  phenomenon  witnessed  around 
the globe in recent decades. The results – greater trade and financial flows – have brought 
many  countries  enormous  prosperity.  This  applies  to  the  EU  and  it  certainly  applies  to 
Switzerland with its small home market.  
However,  the  most  recent  financial  and  economic  crisis  has  clearly  demonstrated  that  the 
growing  integration  of  the  world  economy  also  entails  a  number  of  risks.  The  international 
integration of finance and production flows made it possible for the sub-prime crisis in the US 
real estate market to spread so quickly to so many countries. The global extent of the crisis 
called  for  rapid  and  coordinated  intervention.  And  that  is  exactly  what  happened  – 
governments and central banks around the world joined together and took decisive action. 
The extent of this cooperation was unprecedented in both scale and scope. It prevented a 
worst-case outcome. Nonetheless, the world economy experienced the most severe financial 
and economic crisis since the 1930s.  
What was impressive about the crisis was the speed and force with which it spread not only 
through financial markets, but also impacted world trade. In just three quarters, world trade 
contracted by 15%. This was by far the most significant decline since World War Two.1 The 
slump was particularly pronounced in the goods trade.2  
As  a  small  open  economy,  Switzerland  could  not  escape  this  historical  collapse  in  world 
trade. Exports and, in particular, goods exports were hit hard. However, compared with other 
industrialised  countries  –  especially  Germany  –  the  decline  was  less  pronounced.  What’s 
                                                 
1   Cf. WTO (2010): World trade 2009, prospects for 2010. 
2   Cf.  Richard  Baldwin  (2010):  The  great  trade  collapse:  What  caused  it  and  what  does  it  mean?  Baldwin 
attributes the severe and synchronous slump in goods exports to two main factors: first, the uncertainty that 
was  triggered  simultaneously  around  the  world  by  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers;  second,  the  strong 
internationalisation  of  the  value  chain.  The  former  led  to  a  concurrent  drop  in  demand,  particularly  for 
consumer durables, while the latter resulted in the goods trade volume reacting disproportionately to changes 
in production. This is because a product can cross national borders several times during the manufacturing 
process. Demand for services remained relatively robust, however,  with  the exception  of financial services. 
Cf. also Ingo Borchert and Aaditya Mattoo (2010): Services trade – the collapse that wasn’t. 
BIS Review 157/2010 
 1
more, the recovery observed since mid-last year has been comparatively brisk. As a result, 
by mid-2010, Swiss goods exports had recouped almost two-thirds of the losses suffered.  
The Swiss National Bank’s decisive action undoubtedly contributed to the fact that the Swiss 
economy as a whole emerged from the crisis relatively unscathed. The SNB didn’t hesitate to 
lower  interest  rates  decisively  and  –  like  other  central  banks  –  to  employ  unconventional 
monetary  policy  measures  when  required  by  the  legal  mandate,  once  the  room  for 
manoeuvre using the traditional interest rate instrument had been exhausted. In particular, 
we  created  additional  liquidity  through  the  purchase  of  foreign  currency.  In  doing  so,  we 
resisted  extreme  exchange  rate  developments  that  could  have  initiated  a  deflationary 
dynamic and would have had devastating consequences for the Swiss economy.  
As the economic recovery took hold, the deflationary risks diminished, notwithstanding the 
appreciation of the Swiss franc. Over the past few years,  my Governing Board colleagues 
and I have repeatedly emphasised that the SNB does not pursue an exchange rate target, 
but consistently bases its monetary policy on its legal mandate. This mandate stipulates that 
the  Swiss  National  Bank  is  required  to  ensure  price  stability,  while  taking  due  account  of 
economic developments. 
The dreaded scenario of a deflationary dynamic could thus be avoided so far. Nonetheless, 
the appreciation of the Swiss franc that ensued obviously impaired the price competitiveness 
of  Swiss  exporters.  However,  the  exchange  rate  is  only  one  factor  to  affect  exports.  This 
raises the question as to which other factors were potentially beneficial for the development 
of Swiss goods exports in the most recent crisis.3 To answer this question, I would now like 
to take a closer look at the structure and developments of Swiss goods exports in the last 
20 years.  I  will  concentrate  on  three  factors  in  particular,  namely  the  geographical,  the 
sectoral and the qualitative dimensions of the Swiss export industry.  
2. 
Swiss exports: developments and an international comparison  
The geographical dimension  
2.1 
Geographically speaking, Switzerland’s export structure has become increasingly diversified 
over  the  last  two  decades.  Even  though  the  EU  –  with  an  export  share  of  over  60%  – 
remains its most important trading partner by far,4 there are other more dynamic regions that 
– measured by their contributions to export growth – are becoming increasingly important for 
Swiss foreign trade.  
This  is  particularly  true  for  China.  Since  2001  alone,  when  it  joined  the  World  Trade 
Organization,  the  value  of  Swiss  exports  to  China  has  increased  more  than  threefold.  But 
also exports to Brazil, Russia and India have grown at an above-average rate.5 Countries of 
the Middle East, whose earnings have soared in recent years as a result of high oil prices, 
are also becoming increasingly important markets for Switzerland. And finally, the share of 
exports to Central and Eastern Europe has also increased, though only slightly. Overall, the 
share of Swiss goods exports to developing and emerging economies has risen from around 
                                                 
3   The other fundamental determinant of exports besides the real exchange rate is foreign demand. Yet, how 
changes  in  foreign  demand  and  the  exchange  rate  ultimately  translate  into  changes  in  demand  for  Swiss 
products  also  depends  on  other,  more  structural  factors.  These  will  be  discussed  in  the  remainder  of  this 
speech. 
In terms of imports, the EU is even more important for Switzerland, with a share of almost 80%. Consequently, 
Switzerland runs a trade deficit with the EU. 
4  
5   Last year around 7% of Swiss goods exports went to the BRIC countries. 
2 
 BIS Review 157/2010
14%  to  over  21%  in  the  last  20  years.6  This  shows  just  how  well  Swiss  companies  – 
including small and medium-sized enterprises – have diversified their markets in the past few 
years. 
But the pie is only so big and the total is always 100%. This means that the share of exports 
to industrialised countries has inevitably decreased. In particular, Switzerland’s dependence 
y, France and 
on the European market has declined. Especially countries such as German
the United Kingdom have lost some of their relevance as export destinations.  
Switzerland  is  not  alone  in  experiencing  a  shift  in  its  market  share  in  favour  of  emerging 
he 
economies. This is merely a reflection of the growing significance of these countries for t
global economy.7 Accordingly, many EU countries have witnessed similar developments.  
There are, however, two very divergent developments responsible for this aggregate
both of which proved highly beneficial for Switzerland in dealing with the latest crisis.  
While many European countries intensified their trade relations with the emerging economies 
of Eastern Europe as part of the EU’s expansion eastwards (cf. chart 1a), Swiss exporters 
focused more on the Asian market (cf. chart 1b). As a result, Switzerland’s share of exports 
  last 
to  emerging  Asia  –  not including  the  four  tiger economies  –  practically  doubled  in the
20 years, and recently amounted to around 6%, compared to around 4.5% for the EU.8 
 trend; 
 Chart 1a 
Chart 1b  
Sources: IMF Direction of Trade Statistics (DOTS)9, Federal Customs Administration (FCA).  
  This divergence in the regional focus becomes even more apparent when Asia is viewed as 
a whole. This is because Switzerland maintains far closer trade ties with Asia’s industrialised 
countries than the EU does, particularly with the four Asian tiger economies of Hong Kong, 
 
                                                
6   The USD value of goods exports to developing and emerging economies (excluding the tiger economies of 
Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan) has grown by an average of 7.5% since 1990, i.e. it has 
quadrupled.  Goods  exports  to  industrialised  counties  increased  by  4.7%  annually  during  the  same  period, 
representing an increase by a factor of only 2.5. 
7   From 1990 to 2008, the GDP of developing and emerging economies rose by an average of almost 8% (China 
alone grew by more than 10%). The GDP of the EU15, by contrast, rose by just 1.9% on average (US: 2.7%). 
8   The USD value of Swiss goods exports to emerging Asia (excluding the tiger economies) has grown by an 
average of 9.1% since 1990 (since 2000: 18%). The corresponding growth rates for Germany amounted to 
11.4% (since 2000: 17.8%), and for the EU, 9.6% (since 2000: 13.6%). 
Including intra-EU trade. 
9  
BIS Review 157/2010 
 3
Singapore,  South  Korea  and  Taiwan.  Overall,  Switzerland’s  share  of  exports  to  Asia, 
including Japan, came to 15% last year – more than twice the EU average.10 
Furthermore, Switzerland is one of the few European countries – alongside Ireland, Sweden 
and  Finland  –  to  run  a  trade  surplus  with  Asia.11  This  goes  to  show  just  how  competitive 
Swiss industry really is in these markets.  
This  positive  outcome  is  due  in  part  to  Switzerland’s  exceptional  trade  performance  with 
China, with the result that Switzerland is one of the few industrialised countries that have not 
generated  a  deficit  in  its  goods  trade  with  China  in  recent  years.12  This  confirms  just  how 
important the Asian market is as an export destination for the Swiss economy. And judging 
by Asia’s strong growth prospects, it is likely that it will become even more important in the 
future. 
The  regional  diversification  of  Swiss  goods  exports  towards  Asia  turned  out  to  be  a 
considerable advantage in the recent crisis. Given that the global economic recovery first 
took  hold  in  Asia  –  thanks  in  part  to  the  many  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  stimulus 
packages – Switzerland was able to reap the benefits of the fast-paced recovery. During 
the upturn, which began in mid-2009, more than one-third of the growth of Switzerland’s 
goods  exports  was  attributable  to  the  increasing  demand  in  Asia  –  even  though,  as 
mentioned above, exports to this region still account for only around 15% of the country’s 
total goods exports.  
The changing composition of goods exports  
2.2 
It  isn’t  just  the  regional  focus  of  Swiss  exports  that  has  changed  but  also  the  product 
composition. This brings me to the second factor which promoted the development of Swiss 
goods exports in the recent crisis.  
Although  exports  in  most  product  categories  over  the  last  20  years  have  increased  in 
absolute  terms;  in  relative  terms,  we  have  seen  a  clear  shift  from  exports  of  production-
related  goods  to  exports  of  consumer  goods.  In  the  last  two  decades,  the  proportion  of 
consumer goods has practically doubled and now amounts to more than 50% (cf. chart 2).13 
With this high share, Switzerland far outstrips other industrialised countries. 
                                                 
10   When comparing the share of exports to Asian countries with the German economy – which also registered a 
significant rise – the equivalent figure for Switzerland is still roughly 50% higher. 
11   In the case of Switzerland, the surplus is significant even in quantitative terms. Averaged over the last few 
years, the surplus in Switzerland’s goods trade with Asia accounted for just over 2% of Swiss GDP, and this 
trend is on the increase. 
12   The picture is similar for Switzerland’s trade with the BRIC countries. Switzerland’s trade surplus with China is 
also a reflection of the comparatively small share of imports from China. Busch (2010) attributes this to the 
fact  that,  because  of  Switzerland’s  specialisation  in  pharmaceuticals  and  precision  instruments,  the  Swiss 
industry can find only relatively few relevant intermediate products in China. Cf. Christian Busch (2010), Die 
Struktur des Schweizer Aussenhandels mit China – eine vergleichende Analyse. 
13   The shift from capital goods to consumer goods is a general trend in Switzerland’s export activity across all 
trading partners. 
4 
 BIS Review 157/2010
Chart 2  
Source: FCA. 
 Aside  from  Switzerland’s  classic  exports  –  such  as  watches,  cheese  and  chocolate  – 
newcomers  include  Nespresso  coffee  capsules  and  Red  Bull  drinks.  However,  exports  of 
pharmaceutical products make up the largest slice of the pie by far. In the last year, these 
accounted for roughly one-third of Switzerland’s total goods exports, and this looks set to rise 
even further.  
In  an  international  comparison,  Switzerland  stands  out  it  with  its  high  proportion  of 
pharmaceutical  exports.  And  even  though  Germany  is  still  the  biggest  exporter  of 
pharmaceuticals  in  absolute  terms,  their  share  of  Germany’s  total  exports  is  considerably 
lower. This also applies to other important exporters of pharmaceuticals – such as Belgium, 
the US and the UK. Ireland is the only other country with a similarly large share of exports in 
pharmaceuticals.  
Why is this significant? Over the course of a business cycle, demand for consumer goods – 
and  particularly  for  non-durables  like  pharmaceuticals  –  fluctuates  to  a  lesser  degree  than 
demand for capital goods. This is reflected in the trade volume for the relevant goods.  
In  the  most  recent  crisis,  not  all  types  of  goods  were  affected  to  the  same  extent  by  the 
slump in demand. In the wake of the collapse of Lehman Brothers, consumers and investors 
around the world postponed their plans to purchase major acquisitions, such as machinery or 
cars. This in turn led to a correspondingly sharp drop in demand for durable goods. This was 
also  the  case  in  Switzerland.  Accordingly,  trade  in  machinery,  metals  and  textiles  were 
particularly hard hit during the crisis.14 
Meanwhile,  demand  for  non-durable  consumer  goods  –  and  this  includes  pharmaceutical 
products  –  remained  relatively  stable.  As  you  can  imagine,  there  were  probably  very  few 
patients  who  restricted  their  medical  treatment  due  to  the  recession.  As  a  result, 
                                                 
14   However, it was precisely these industries which had, in the preceding years, already become considerably 
less significant for Switzerland’s goods exports. 
BIS Review 157/2010 
 5
Switzerland’s large share in exports of pharmaceuticals had a stabilising effect and helped 
avoid an even greater drop in Swiss goods exports.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  in  addition  to  the  diversification  towards  Asia,  the  longer  term 
structural  change  in  the  composition  of  Swiss  goods  exports  thus  also  proved  beneficial 
during the crisis.  
Quality matters  
2.3 
The third aspect I wish to address today is the quality of Swiss goods exports. As a rule, the 
“Made in Switzerland” hallmark is used to denote excellence. But do Swiss exports actually 
deliver high quality?  
Quality is not easily measured. Given the lack of alternatives, economists generally express 
the quality of goods in terms of “unit values”. Literally speaking, this represents the average 
price  per  unit  of  weight,  for  instance  per  kilogram.  I,  too,  will  use  this  unit  of  measure. 
However,  this  unit  makes  more  sense  if  groups  of  similar  products  are  examined.  In  the 
aggregate figure for Swiss goods exports, the price per kilo of Rolex can be found alongside 
the  price  per  kilo  of  Tamiflu  or  per  kilo  of  a  regional  train.  This  makes  an  international 
comparison problematic. Thus, in addition to using unit values for aggregate exports, I will 
also include unit values for individual sectors.  
Unsurprisingly, there are major differences between the sectoral unit values for Switzerland. 
Last year, watch exports had the highest unit value, at around EUR 7,000 per kilo. This was 
followed – by quite a considerable margin – by pharmaceuticals, at roughly EUR 320 per kilo. 
Exports  of  precision  instruments  were  also  somewhat  above-average,  at  around  EUR 150 
per kilo.15 
Where  does  Switzerland  stand  by  international  standards?  Compared  with  many  other 
European  countries,  the  unit  value  of  Swiss  goods  exports  is  very  high.  The  only  other 
country with a similarly high unit value for its exports is Ireland.16  
When looking across sectors, it is evident that a considerable part of Switzerland’s quality 
advantage  can  be  attributed  to  watch  exports.  Averaged  over  the  last  ten  years,  their  unit 
value  was  almost  40  times  higher  than  in  the  EU  (cf.  chart  3).  But  there  are  also  several 
other sectors where Switzerland has a higher unit value than the EU, for example precision 
instruments.  This  is  a  sector  where  Switzerland  also  has  a  comparative  advantage;  partly 
due to historical factors, but also to continuous innovation. But even for exports of processed 
metal  goods  and  machinery  does  Switzerland  have  higher  export  unit  values  than,  for 
instance, the EU. 
                                                 
15   Looking  at  developments  over  the  last  20  years,  it  is  primarily  the  prices  of  watch  exports  that  have  risen 
considerably. 
16   Ireland also exports a lot of chemical and pharmaceutical products. Besides, the unit values of its exports of 
electronic products are also very high. 
6 
 BIS Review 157/2010
Chart 3  
Source: Eurostat. 
 Overall,  the  results  from  a  unit  value  analysis  support  the  assessment  that  Switzerland  is 
specialised in  the  production  of  high  quality  products.  This  is in  line  with  previous  studies. 
These show that Swiss export products largely compete on quality, rather than on price.17 
Given the level of know-how in Switzerland, this ought to be the case in the future as well, 
assuming that Swiss products can continue to fulfil the ever-growing demands on quality.  
To  what  extent  could  this  have  had  a  positive  influence  on  the  way  in  which  exports 
developed  in  the  most  recent  crisis?  For  the  short  term,  at  least,  it  can  be  assumed  that 
higher  quality  products  are  more  difficult  to  substitute  than  relatively  homogenous  goods. 
This  applies  not  only  to  pharmaceuticals,  but  also  to  highly  specialised  products  such  as 
precision instruments. 
And  this  was  indeed  the  case  during  the  most  recent  crisis  –  Swiss  exports  of  precision 
instruments  receded  only  slightly,  and  have  since  risen  to  such  an  extent  that  they  now 
already exceed their pre-crisis level. Even the watchmaking industry – which, as a producer 
of luxury goods, suffered a massive drop in demand during the crisis – has seen a strong 
recovery in the last year thanks to the global turnaround. Accordingly, exports of watches are 
now only slightly below their pre-crisis level.  
Conclusion  
3. 
In closing, let me recap. The geographical orientation, the focus on products less sensitive to 
the business cycle, and the specialisation in top quality goods are the three factors likely to 
have mitigated the negative impact of the most recent financial and economic crisis on Swiss 
exports.  
On the whole, the Swiss export industry seems to be well positioned to compete successfully 
on a global level. Such a conclusion is reassuring, because major challenges still lie ahead.  
                                                 
17   For example, Credit Suisse (2006): Quality – The Export Industry’s Only Chance? 
BIS Review 157/2010 
 7
For  instance,  Switzerland’s  increased  focus  on  the  Asian  market  also  has  its  risks.  A 
significant slowdown in Asia’s economic recovery – particularly in China – would undoubtedly 
impair  Swiss  export  prospects.  Needless  to  say,  however,  a  renewed  downturn  in  Europe  
– still Switzerland’s most important trading partner by far – would impact Swiss exports to a 
far greater extent.  
Furthermore,  current  exchange  rate  developments  pose  a  major  challenge  for  Swiss 
exporters.  Since  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  Swiss  franc  has  appreciated  in  real 
terms  by  around  15%.18  This  appreciation  puts  up  the  price  of  Swiss  exports  abroad  or 
narrows the margins for Swiss exporters – or a combination of both. This will be reflected 
sooner or later in the export figures. Indeed, in recent months, the recovery of Swiss goods 
exports has slowed markedly; although this is also related to a slowdown in global economic 
momentum.  
The financial crisis and financial market concerns regarding the public finances of a number 
of  industrialised  countries  have  increased  demand  for  the  Swiss  franc  as  a  safe  haven 
currency. The stability of the euro area is therefore an important factor influencing the Swiss 
franc and the Swiss economy as a whole. EU citizens clearly have a vested interest in the 
stability  of  the  euro.  The  same  is  very  much  true  for  the  citizens  of  Switzerland.  I  am 
confident  that  the  EU  will  ultimately  succeed  in  once  again  deeply  anchoring  a  culture  of 
economic  and  financial  stability.  Earlier  this  year,  European  politicians  and  policymakers 
began  to  take  decisive  action  to  that  end.  As  we  all  know,  crucial  challenges  lie  ahead. 
These call for determination, courage and perseverance – not only from policy makers, but 
also – and most importantly – from the citizens of the EU. I am confident that the EU and the 
euro area will overcome these challenges. In the past, Europe has always emerged stronger 
from periods of difficulty. Jean Monnet already recognised this in 1976, when he wrote in his 
memoirs:  
“Europe will be forged in crises and it will be the sum of the solutions adopted for 
those crises.”19 
As far as Switzerland is concerned, I am optimistic that it, too, will overcome the formidable 
challenges it faces. As with most countries, Switzerland benefited greatly from globalisation 
and from opening up its economy. Thanks to its flexibility and creativity, the Swiss economy 
is well placed to remain internationally competitive. But the Swiss people must recognise that 
the world does not stand still. In order to preserve and enhance our high standard of living, 
we  must  remain  extremely  flexible  in  every  respect.  This  is  where  the  real  economy,  in 
particular,  faces  a  challenge:  ongoing  innovation  and  qualified  human  capital  are  of  the 
utmost  importance  in  a  high-wage  country  such  as  Switzerland.  Both  of  these  factors  will 
enable our companies to continue to bring successful new products onto the world market, 
many of which we aren’t even able to imagine today.  
Monetary policy can generate neither innovation nor growth. Nonetheless, the Swiss National 
Bank’s conduct of monetary policy is relevant for Switzerland as a business location. After 
all,  the  innovative  capabilities  of  a  country  also  rely  on  a  favourable  and  stable  business 
environment. The SNB remains firmly focused on maintaining price stability; a task, which is 
consistent  neither  with  deflation  nor  with  inflation.  As  we  have  demonstrated,  the 
Swiss National  Bank  is  prepared,  in  a  crisis  situation,  to  take  exceptionally  far-reaching 
measures to fulfil its mandate. In doing so, the SNB is making its contribution to a favourable 
and stable business environment and, ultimately, to a continuously prosperous economy. 
                                                
 
18   The extent of the real appreciation of the Swiss franc varies depending on the country sample, the deflator 
and the weighting method. In terms of the real exchange rate indices calculated by the SNB and the BIS using 
the CPI deflator, the Swiss franc has appreciated between 14% and 15% in real terms since the collapse of 
Lehman  Brothers.  The  SNB’s  export-weighted  exchange  rate  vis-à-vis  40  trading  partners  shows  an 
appreciation of 14%. 
19   Cf. Jean Monnet (1976): Memoires. 
8 
 BIS Review 157/2010
