Loi M Bakani: Economic overview and future developments in Papua 
New Guinea 
Statement  by  Mr  Loi  M  Bakani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  at  the 
2010 Annual  Meetings  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  the  World  Bank  Group, 
Washington DC, 8 October 2010. 
 Mr. Chairman, Colleague Governors, President of the World Bank Group, Managing Director 
of the International Monetary Fund, Ladies and Gentlemen, it is my pleasure to address this 
2010  Annual  Board  of  Governors  Meeting.  On  behalf  of  the  Government  of  Papua  New 
Guinea  I  would  like  to  extend  our  appreciation  to  the  Bank  and  the  Fund  for  the  ongoing 
effort  and  initiatives  to  improve  our  living  standards  and  global  financial  systems.  We  look 
forward to a fruitful round of discussions here in Washington DC.  
Governors and colleagues, the prospects for global growth continue to be impacted by the 
aftermath of the financial crisis. I reiterate the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) outlook on 
the world economy with an anticipated growth of 4½ per cent in 2010. Whilst the growth is 
heading  in  the  right  direction  we  must  acknowledge  that  growth  remains  sluggish  by  past 
standards.  At  the  same  time  downside  risks  remain,  due  to  rising  concern  over  sovereign 
debt and fiscal imbalances that could trigger a repeat of the financial and economic crisis. 
The  downside  risks  underscore  the  need  for  ongoing  cooperation  and  commitments  from 
mutual partners to develop policies and governance mechanisms to address the challenges 
and  secure  global  prosperity.  At  the  global  level,  we  should  support  policies  that  address 
structural  imbalances  over  the  medium  term  including  supportive  monetary  conditions, 
accelerating financial sector reform, and rebalancing global demand.  
Papua New Guinea, as a small open economy, was able to navigate the negative impact of 
the global financial crisis and grew by 5½ percent in 2009. In 2010, growth prospects remain 
positive as the economy enters its fourth year of economic expansion. The combination of a 
stable  exchange  rate  and  moderate  interest  rates  is  encouraging  businesses  expansion. 
Employment is strong, foreign exchange reserve level is high and Government debt is at a 
sustainable level. 
The solid performance of the Papua New Guinea economy reflects increased investor and 
consumer confidence following a period of macroeconomic and political stability. The country 
has  also  benefited  from  a  number  of  important  economic  and  structural  reforms  the 
Government has undertaken in recent years to complement its macroeconomic policies and 
management. 
At  the  same  time,  competition  has  improved  the  delivery  of  telecommunication  services 
throughout the country.  This is one of our success stories of the past few years.  Services 
such as electronic banking and payment of some utility charges have taken advantage of the 
impressive take-up by the population of the mobile telephone services.  
Papua New Guinea is benefiting from high commodity prices for its major exports and from 
inflows  of  capital  investments  related  to  the  PNG  LNG  project.  As  a  result,  the  country’s 
balance of payments has shown an overall surplus of K526 million up to June 2010, and the 
level of gross foreign exchange reserves at the end of June 2010 was US$2,580.5 million, 
sufficient for 10.9 months of total import cover.  
Inflation  however  remains  a  concern  due  to  increased  domestic  demand.  The  annual 
headline inflation was 6.2 percent in June 2010 and is expected to be around 7.0 percent by 
end  of  2010.  Price  pressures  are  expected  to  come  from  domestic  demand  related  to  the 
PNG LNG project and Government spending. In coherence, the Central Bank continued to 
take  a  cautious  approach  to  Monetary  Policy.  The  country’s  stable  macro  economic 
BIS Review 165/2010 
 1
conditions  coupled  with  the  slow  pace  of  economic  recovery  in  the  global  economy  has 
enabled the Central Bank to maintain its Kina Facility Rate at 7.0 percent for the last nine (9) 
months of 2010. 
Our financial system remains resilient, well capitalized with adequate levels of liquidity, low 
level  of  non-performing  loans  and  are  highly  profitable.  In  2009,  the  Central  Bank 
commenced  work  on  the  National  Payments  project  to  promote  a  cost  effective  and  an 
efficient national and international payment system. In 2010, the Central Bank commenced 
work in partnership with the World Bank and UNDP to undertake a Financial Literacy Survey 
during  2011,  which  will  lead  to  specific  intervention  programs  aimed  at  extending  financial 
services to the unbanked and underserved segment of the population. This will compliment 
the  growth  of  microfinance  services  in  making  a  positive  contribution  to  providing  banking 
services to our rural population.  
On the fiscal front, the Government recorded a small deficit of K36.3 million (0.2 per cent of 
GDP) in 2009 compared to the fiscal deficit of K478.5 million, (2.2 per cent of GDP) in 2008. 
In its Mid Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook (MYEFO) Report released on 31 July 2010, the 
Government projects a revenue surplus of K533.3 million for 2010. This surplus is expected 
to  be  spent  through  a  Supplementary  Budget  later  on  in  the  year  to  meet  financial 
commitments to the development partners and landowners of the PNG LNG project. 
The Government remains committed to growing and building our economy, and the private 
sector  investment  is  an  integral  part  of  our  economic  development  plans.  The  country  will 
continue to pursue structural reforms to encourage investments and remove impediments to 
doing business and investment, thereby promoting a competitive and dynamic private sector. 
These are fundamental to reducing poverty, generating income and employment to improve 
our  living  standards.  The  Government  will  also  continue  to  invest  in  priority  infrastructure 
projects,  improve  services  to  districts,  priority  areas  of  education,  health  and  justice,  and 
ensure its debt level is sustained.  
Development  prospects  however  continue  to  remain  a  challenge  for  Papua  New  Guinea. 
Significant  improvements  are  still  required  in  the  provision  of  education,  health,  justice 
services and transport infrastructure. There is a great need to raise the efficiency of service 
delivery and implementation capacity of Government institutions throughout the country. The 
Government  acknowledges  these  limitations  and  has  formulated  a  20-year  long  term 
development blueprint for the country, the Papua New Guinea Development Strategic Plan, 
2010–2030 which underpins the new Medium Term Development Strategy and complements 
the  existing  Medium-Term  Fiscal  Strategy  and  the  Medium-Term  Debt  Strategy.  These 
initiatives  provide  a  coherent  medium  term  policy  framework  that  sets  out  our  goals  and 
future plans, to achieve the aspirations of our people reflected in the Government’s Vision 
2050. 
Looking ahead, the country still faces potential risks to its growth outlook. The risks include 
down-turn  in  the  global  economy  that  could  hurt  our  exports,  increase  inflation  pressure 
arising from domestic demand pressure related to the PNG LNG project and managing the 
impact of this project on the economy. 
The significant foreign exchange inflows expected from the PNG LNG project will add to the 
already high liquidity levels in our banking system. This is one of our greatest challenges in 
the pursuit and maintenance of price and macroeconomic stability. Thus there is a need for 
adherence  to  the  Government’s  Medium  Term  Fiscal  Strategy  framework  to  ensure  that 
Government expenditure is kept under control and does not fuel instability. 
As a way forward, the Government has decided on the establishment of a Sovereign Wealth 
Fund (SWF) which will manage revenues flowing from the PNG LNG project. The goal is to 
find  a  balance  between  macroeconomic  development  and  stability,  improvement  in  the 
welfare of the broader population and the need for effective transparency and accountability 
in utilizing the revenues from the PNG LNG project. 
2 
 BIS Review 165/2010
We acknowledge the involvement of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund in 
Papua New Guinea. We are grateful for the continued assistance provided by the Bank, the 
Fund  and  our  development  partners  in  terms  of  technical  assistance,  funding  and  advice. 
Working together, we can ensure our efforts complement each other and are directed in the 
most effective way for the benefit of our people.  
To end, I would like to express my country’s sincere gratitude to the management and staff of 
the World Bank and the Fund for their continuous support in Papua New Guinea. 
BIS Review 165/2010 
 3
