Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: The crisis and financial markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  Annual 
Financial  Conference  of  the  Asociación  de  Mercados  Financieros,  Madrid,  13 December 
2010. 
 Good  afternoon,  and  my  thanks  to  the  Asociación  de  Mercados  Financieros  for  their  kind 
invitation to participate in this lunch colloquium. 
Since the Great Depression last century, the world has not seen a financial crisis as deep as 
the present one. And, like then, many years of intense study and a sufficient time perspective 
will  probably  be  needed  to  accurately  assess  the  factors  that  caused  the  crisis  and  the 
mechanisms contributing to its spread. In particular, there is still much to be learned of the 
relationship between the development of the crisis and the behaviour of financial markets. 
Nonetheless, I shall take this opportunity today to offer some brief reflections on the conduct 
of markets during the crisis, with a perspective that in no way claims to be all-encompassing 
since I shall concern myself exclusively with its impact on the Spanish economy. 
To this end I’ll discuss two clearly differentiated episodes of the financial crisis of the past 
three years: the first, which we might call the “banking crisis”, affected Spain less than other 
countries; and the second, associated with the rapid deterioration of public finances in the 
euro area, has had significant effects on our country. 
The outbreak of the first phase of the crisis dates back over three years, when a European 
bank  suspended  redemptions  of  funds  invested  in  US  mortgage  loans.  It  soon  became 
apparent that the source of these problems lay in US subprime mortgages and in the spread 
of the associated risk via the “originate to distribute” model. Banks were hit hardest. Major 
financial institutions collapsed not only in the countries where the problems originated, but 
also in many others whose banks invested their savings in products generated by the more 
indebted economies. By contrast, the Spanish banking system had not originated or invested 
in  this  type  of  product,  thanks  largely  to  the  relatively  conservative  approach  behind  our 
regulation and supervision. Consequently, although our banks were obviously not immune to 
some of the effects of the crisis, such as the deterioration in the economic situation or the 
consequences of the collapse in confidence on the workings of wholesale funding markets, 
the direct effect on the Spanish banking system was relatively minor.  
During  the  long  expansion  prior  to  the  crisis,  there  was  a  constant  increase  in  the 
indebtedness of the Spanish economy, similar to that in other countries which, with the crisis, 
saw their banking systems collapse. Some analysts drew parallels with the events in these 
countries and warned that similar problems could arise in Spain. But this has not been the 
case.  True,  during  the  expansionary  phase,  private-sector  debt  grew  at  very  high  rates, 
although it should be clarified that the growth in asset prices – unwarranted by fundamentals 
– was less than in other countries. Yet during these three years the Spanish banking system 
has proven reasonably resilient; only two small entities had to be taken under central bank 
control, and the volume of public aid made available was very small compared with the public 
resources earmarked to this end in other countries. 
The explanation for this different outcome in apparently similar situations must be sought in 
the quality of banking regulation and supervision, and in the retail banking-based business 
model of banks in Spain. 
What  happened  was  that  the  countries  which  saw  their  banking  systems  collapse  were 
largely those which, in the preceding years, had most vigorously defended the benefits of a 
“hands-off” government approach to the functioning of the financial sector. This was quite the 
opposite  of  the  approach  of  the  Banco  de  España,  a  central  bank  that  took  to  heart  the 
lessons of the serious banking crises of the 1980s and early 1990s in Spain. 
BIS Review 171/2010 
 1
Until  the  crisis  erupted,  the  prevailing  doctrine  had  advocated  light-handed  regulation, 
considering  both  our  supervisory  approach  and  our  banking  system’s  business  model, 
centred  on  traditional  banking  activities,  as  outmoded.  But  in  the  wake  of  the  crisis,  the 
pendulum has swung. Now the predominant approach in financial regulation has gone to the 
other  extreme.  Testifying  to  this  is  the  work  programme  in  place  in  the  main  international 
agencies and fora, such as the G20, the Financial Stability Board and the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision.  
Intense work is under way to introduce major changes into the international regulatory and 
supervisory  framework  so  as  to  prevent  similar  crises  from  recurring  and  to  improve  the 
financial  system’s  resilience  moving  forward.  Such  changes  include  most  notably  the  new 
rules known as Basel III, which alter the regulation of the banking sector at the international 
level in several fundamental respects: banks will be required to have more and better-quality 
capital; explicit requirements will be made in respect of liquidity risk; and measures will be 
taken to mitigate the procyclical behaviour of financial activity. Further, the FSB is working on 
the treatment of systemic banks, i.e. those considered too important to fail due to their size, 
the  level  of  complexity  of  their  operations  or  their  interconnectedness  with  other  financial 
system  participants.  In  future,  these  banks  will  have  to  meet  greater  regulatory  and 
supervisory demands, which will need to be adapted to the type of activity, complexity and 
structure of each bank. Headway has been made and is being made in many other areas, 
such as remuneration in the financial sector, the regulation of rating agencies, etc. 
Generally speaking, Spain has much to learn from other countries about economic policies. 
The clearest and most pressing example, in light of the economic and social consequences 
of  the  burgeoning  number  of  jobless  Spaniards,  is  the  employment  and  labour  market 
policies of those countries which, even at the height of crises, keep unemployment rates low. 
However, within the realm of financial regulation and supervision policies, the opposite is the 
case: our supervisory arrangements are being closely studied for reforms in other countries. 
The  ingenious  idea  of  Governor  Rojo  and  his  team  to  set  in  place  a  countercyclical 
mechanism  in  order  to  try  and  soften  credit  growth  or  at  least  mitigate  the  adverse 
consequences  of  its  cyclical  behaviour  on  the  banking  system  was  a  forerunner  of  the 
countercyclical capital buffers envisaged in the Basel III Accord. The constraints on complex 
products and the obligation to consolidate are further examples of rules or guidelines that are 
characteristic of Spanish banking supervision and regulation and which fully coincide with the 
direction in which global financial system reform is advancing. 
Spain’s  approach  to  restructuring  its  banking  sector  has  demonstrable  advantages.  The 
process  has  been  undertaken  using  the  FROB  (Fund  for  the  Orderly  Restructuring  of  the 
Banking Sector), which was set up following Parliamentary approval over 18 months ago and 
has  since  overseen  numerous  integration  processes  between  savings  banks  that  have 
reduced  their  number  from  45  to  17.  The  design  of  the  FROB  was  based  around  a  two-
pronged  approach.  First,  it  was  geared  to  supporting  banks  which,  while  viable,  required 
restructuring to ensure their ability to resume a path of sustainable profitability, by reinforcing 
their  solvency  with  public  funds.  Significantly,  in  certain  countries  where  the  need  for  a 
similar  instrument  has  been  acknowledged,  this  has  not  yet  been  created.  Second,  the 
FROB involved giving the Banco de España wide-ranging powers to swiftly and effectively 
take control and resolve the problems of those banks that are not viable.  
Rounding off the remit of the FROB has been the approval of the reform of the legal regime 
for  savings  banks.  To  date,  the  limitations  inherent  in  their  legal  status  had  prevented 
savings banks from reinforcing their core capital, except through the capitalisation of profits. 
The reform opens the way for savings banks to tap private capital by enabling them to issue 
core  equity  instruments,  it  provides  for  improvements  in  their  management  and  it  subjects 
them to greater market discipline.  
Restructuring was considered on the basis of two criteria that have proven to be most useful. 
The first is the requirement that those banks applying for public aid should reduce capacity. 
2 
 BIS Review 171/2010
During the expansion, our banking system became excessively big in parallel with the growth 
of  the  construction  sector.  If  aid  had  not  been  conditional  upon  the  presentation  of  a 
capacity-adjustment  programme,  the  profit  and  loss  accounts  of  all  banks  would  have 
continued to perform poorly, not only in conjunctural terms but also structurally. And as you 
know,  the  profit  and  loss  account  is  the  first  line  of  defence  when  it  comes  to  averting 
banking crises. 
Another  criterion  that  has  proven  most  useful  relates  to  the  substantial  amount  (up  to 
€99 billion) authorised by Parliament to meet the recapitalisation needs that may arise during 
the crisis, but to contain in turn the budgetary impact of the restructuring process. The more 
than €10 billion that are to be lent to Spanish banks are no doubt a considerable sum. But it 
is  actually  a  very  small  amount  when  compared  with  the  outlay  in  other  countries,  which 
reacted  by  pumping  towering  amounts  of  public  funds  into  private  banks,  leading  to  most 
serious increases in public debt that in some cases have ultimately caused problems for the 
country  concerned.  Where  necessary,  there  are  more  than  sufficient  backstops  to  meet 
recapitalisation needs, but it is absurd to inject public funds unnecessarily. 
Let’s now turn to the role of financial markets in the second phase of the financial crisis, the 
so-called  “sovereign  debt  crisis”,  which  erupted  very  recently,  in  spring  this  year.  The 
behaviour of the sovereign bonds markets could be analysed from the standpoint of market 
failures or in how they are regulated. While this is an interesting perspective, proposals for 
reform on any major scale have not yet been set in train, unlike with banking regulation. The 
crisis has disclosed numerous shortcomings in the functioning of markets, and one frequent 
criticism is that these same markets influence the public policy agenda. But the fact of the 
matter  is  that  hardly  any  far-reaching  reforms  such  as  those  being  drawn  up  for  credit 
markets  have  been  proposed.  Those  interested  in  this  viewpoint  should  read  the  latest 
speech by Fernando Restoy, the vice-chairman of the CNMV (Spanish National Securities 
Market Commission). In it he suggests certain areas in which the regulation of these markets 
could be improved. 
I’m going to adopt a less ambitious approach, focusing on describing market behaviour from 
the standpoint of a country such as ours, which in recent months has had to tackle a lack of 
investor confidence. 
What have we learned from the behaviour of the debt markets in this second phase of the 
crisis?  Perhaps  one  of  the  key  lessons  is  that  markets  are  capable  of  identifying  certain 
structural problems which, for whatever reason, may affect an economy’s solvency. And this 
is why markets can offer us economic policy pointers, of interest not only to them but also to 
us. Restoring health to public finances, reforms to boost growth and reduce unemployment, 
the  restructuring  of  our  banking  systems  so  they  are  positioned  to  promote  growth  when 
credit demand picks up, etc. are all pieces of advice of benefit to us and which are worth 
following.  
Admittedly, some may say, markets issue warnings. But they usually do so belatedly. And 
this is true. Turning to Spain’s case, there was a more than 10-year-long boom during which 
credit hit double-digit growth rates and the current account, which was practically in balance 
in 1996, began to run a systematically and continuously widening deficit. Over this period the 
markets were not exactly profuse in giving signals about the imbalances that were building 
up. The markets, like Spaniards, thought the Spanish economy was doing fine. We should 
acknowledge, as Raghuram Rajan does when talking about the US economy, that this delay 
in realising the actual problems was shared by all agents in the economy. But that does not 
mean that, although they are late, the messages from markets do not merit being heard and 
given due assessment. If we think that investors’ evaluation of problems is reasonable, then 
the most recommendable response is to follow their advice. 
We’ve also learned that the markets may not only err when they are late offering their advice, 
but  that  their  judgments  may  also  be  mistaken.  Frequently,  their  information  is  diffuse  or 
insufficient,  and  investors’  view  of  different  economies  is  shaped  in  an  overly  simplistic 
BIS Review 171/2010 
 3
fashion. What we’ve seen, when this is the case, is that criticising their ignorance is of little 
use  in  practical  terms.  The  proper  response  is  to  provide  them  with  the  most  and  best 
information possible. Generally, when investors have the right information, they incorporate it 
appropriately into their judgments.  
In all modesty, I think an example of an appropriate response to an incorrect diagnosis by the 
markets  was  our  decision  last  summer  to  perform  stress  tests  on  all  listed  Spanish  banks 
and savings banks. The markets’ doubts at that time about the Spanish system’s capacity to 
digest  the  real  estate  problem  were  unfounded.  But  once  we  reacted,  transparently,  the 
uncertainty  dispelled,  banks  and  savings  banks  were  once  again  able  to  raise  funds  on 
markets and the recourse by our banks to ECB financing dropped dramatically. 
In this same vein of lessons learned, we’ve recently seen that the markets, in addition to not 
being infallible, also sometimes forget. The latest instance of this are the doubts that have 
emerged again about the Spanish banking system. The stress tests were performed at the 
end of July, and as you may well suppose, the value of Spanish banks’ real estate assets 
cannot  have  varied  significantly  in  three  months.  Nothing  has  changed  substantially  in 
respect of the other assumptions made, and yet the markets appear to have forgotten this 
because they have adopted a line of logic that has it that if Ireland had a real estate problem 
and has serious banking problems, something similar might happen in Spain. This suspicion 
has  been  strengthened  by  the  fact  that  Irish  banks  also  passed  the  stress  tests.  In  this 
respect,  it  should  be  underscored  that  the  stress  tests  performed  in  Spain  were  more 
exhaustive  and  offered  more  detailed  information.  While  in  Ireland  only  two  banks 
participated in the tests, in Spain all listed banks and savings banks took part and information 
was provided on the exposure to risks, real estate risk in particular, with a notably greater 
degree of detail and transparency than in other countries. 
But what is to be done when markets forget or investors’ doubts resurface? Once again in 
these cases, the medicine should be more transparency. This is why, in late November, we 
took  the  initiative  of  explaining  again  the  situation  and  we  once  more  laid  bare  Spanish 
banks,  and  savings  banks  in  particular.  We  have  asked  banks  to  explain  in  detail  their 
situation  to  the  market.  In  particular,  the  Banco  de  España  has  given  instructions  to  the 
related  banking  associations  to  ensure  that  institutions  disclose  standardised  additional 
information  on  a  quarterly  basis  to  the  market  on  their  exposure  to  the  real  estate 
development and construction sector, detailing the percentages of doubtful loans, the related 
collateral and the provisions set aside to withstand their potential impairment. They also have 
to  give  details  of  their  retail  mortgage  portfolio,  including  the  related  LTV  ratios  and  the 
percentages of doubtful assets. Finally, they must assess their market funding needs and the 
short-,  medium-  and  long-term  strategies  they  have  implemented.  All  this  is  necessary 
because  when  reality  is  perceived  as  being  worse  than  it  actually  is,  the  best  possible 
response is to explain it in the finest detail. 
A further lesson drawn from the conduct of markets is that they do not like uncertainty. As top 
film  scriptwriters  know,  filmgoers  are  happiest  when  they  can  predict  a  little  bit  of  what’s 
going  to  happen.  Music  composers  also  know  this.  The  more  unpredictable  a  film  or  a 
musical composition is, the more unsatisfied viewers and listeners are. In this debt crisis, in 
addition  to  the  responsibility  of  the  countries  subjected  to  market  mistrust,  the  lack  of 
coordination among European Union leaders has also played a key role. In the public eye, 
the  latter  have  aired  substantial  differences  and  have  sometimes  done  so  at  the  worst 
possible  time  in  the  crisis,  thereby  contributing  to  compounding  the  problems.  I  recall  a 
journalist interviewing an analyst in a US TV programme some weeks back. The analysts set 
about discussing how Europe’s sovereign debt problems were the main source of instability 
at  present  worldwide.  The  journalists  asked  him  how  it  was  possible  that,  among  the 
markets’ reasons for nervousness, he had not even mentioned the North Korean bombing 
incident the previous day. And the analyst replied: “Look, markets like predictable. And the 
North Korean government is much more predictable than European politicians”.  
4 
 BIS Review 171/2010
What  I  have  said  about  European  Union  institutions  can  also  be  extended  to  institutions 
within individual countries, where it is not only important what the central government says or 
does,  but  also  what  the  regional  governments,  the  opposition  and,  generally,  all  relevant 
economic  agents  do  or  say.  And  that’s  something  else  we’ve  learned  about  markets:  they 
see us from afar and don’t distinguish what we distinguish within. Specifically, in our case, 
they do not always draw a distinction between regional and central governments, or between 
the government and the opposition. What they see is, simply, Spain. 
Taking these lessons on market behaviour to heart is very important for all countries, but all 
the more so in a country such as Spain which, owing to the systematic and growing build-up 
of current account deficits since 1996, has had to resort to external financing. Accordingly, it 
is vital to transmit confidence to those who finance us. 
We’re  now  moving  in  the  right  direction.  In  the  space  of  three  years  we’ve  moved  from  a 
current account deficit of around 10% of GDP to one below 5% this year. And in the case of 
the budget deficit, we’ll see a decline from over 11% last  year to 6%  next  year.  Once the 
adjustment is over, the Spanish economy will once again outgrow the biggest economies in 
the  euro  area,  as  foreseen  by  most  international  institutions.  Yet  we  should  not  be 
complacent, but carry on pushing structural reforms through. 
You’ll  have  noted  that  the  markets  behave  like  people:  sometimes  they  give  reasonable 
advice,  sometimes  they  do  so  late,  sometimes  they  make  mistakes,  and  sometimes  they 
have  a  short  memory.  And  they  waver  between  greed  and  fear,  depending  on  whether 
they’re preoccupied with returns or with risk. We’re now witnessing a “flight from risk”. But 
you’ll  no  doubt  recall  the  frenzied  “search  for  yield”  on  financial  markets  worldwide  in  the 
decade prior to the crisis.  
Should  we  always  heed 
It’s  highly 
recommendable  to  do  so  when  their  messages  are  sensible  ones.  And  frequently,  albeit 
belatedly, they demand we do what benefits us. But they also make mistakes occasionally 
and,  in  those  cases,  there’s  no  sense  in  our getting  worked  up  and calling  them  ignorant. 
That serves no purpose. The right response is to offer them the most information possible 
and to explain to them our reasoning. This is how to convince somebody, and it is how we 
should react to the markets. Indeed, the markets are no more than people. That is why when 
I’m asked how we should react to them, my usual advice is to treat them like the people they 
ultimately are. 
Thank you. 
the  markets?  Not  necessarily. 
the  advice  of 
BIS Review 171/2010 
 5
