Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Regulatory perspectives – strengthening 
industry foundations to sustain growth in a challenging climate 
Keynote  address  by  His  Excellency  Rasheed  Mohammed  Al  Maraj,  Governor  of  the  
Central  Bank  of  Bahrain,  at  the  17th  World  Islamic  Banking  Conference,  Manama, 
23 November 2010. 
 Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen:   
“Salaam Alaikum” 
It is a pleasure to welcome you once more to the World Islamic Banking Conference. Over 
the years the Conference has become firmly established as a landmark event not only in the 
calendar of Bahrain, but also in that of the global Islamic financial services industry. I would 
like  to  congratulate  the  organisers  for  once  again  having  assembled  such  a  strong  list  of 
speakers at this year’s event. 
A special word of thanks is due to the many distinguished speakers who will be appearing 
during the Conference, as their contributions are vital to the success. No less important are 
the  contributions  made  by  the  sponsors,  who  have  again  been  generous  in  their  support 
notwithstanding the challenging economic circumstances of the past year. Collectively, your 
contributions are the reasons for the great success of the WIBC. 
Our  topic  for  this  year’s  Inaugural  Session  is  that  of  strengthening  industry  foundations  to 
sustain  growth  in  a  challenging  climate.  This  is  an  immensely  important  topic,  and  one  to 
which I have devoted a number of my recent speeches. As I have said in those speeches the 
aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis  presents  the  Islamic  financial  industry  with  both  an 
opportunity and a challenge. 
The opportunity is clear: according to reliable estimates, the industry now amounts to over 
one trillion US dollars, and some consultants estimate that it could double in size within a 
decade. However, as the warnings on investment products remind us, past performance is 
not  necessarily  a  guide  to  the  future.  As  the  Islamic  financial  industry  grows,  it  becomes 
more important than ever to ensure that it rests on secure foundations. Fundamental to this 
must be a re-evaluation of business models and strategies to ensure that they remain viable 
in the new, post-crisis financial environment. 
It  is  worth  recalling  the  quite  exceptional  returns  that  some  Shari’a-compliant  financial 
institutions  managed  to  achieve  in  the  decade  prior  to  the  financial  crisis.  Assets  doubled 
almost every two years, while net income doubled every year. Some institutions were able to 
earn  a  return  on  equity  of  more  than  30  percent  and  in  some  cases  even  more  than 
40 percent.  They  were  also  able  to  earn  an  average  return  on  assets  approaching 
10 percent. 
Islamic  financial  institutions  were  not  alone  in  posting  exceptional  returns  pre-crisis.  The 
years between 2000 and 2007 were, by any standards, extraordinary ones for the financial 
industry  as  a  whole.  Most  financial  institutions  achieved  returns  on  equity  and  on  assets 
which far exceeded the average in the preceding decades. As we now know, in the case of 
conventional institutions, these exceptional rates of return could only be achieved by taking 
high risks. 
Excessive  risk-taking  was  encouraged  by  an  environment  of  cheap  and  plentiful  liquidity, 
which meant that conventional financial institutions could massively increase their leverage. 
For  example,  just  prior  to  the  crisis,  one  of  the  big  banks  was  operating  with  only  seven 
dollars of capital for every 93 dollars of debt. Overall, the ratio of capital to total assets in 
conventional  banks  fell  by  almost  half  in  the  ten  years  after  1997.  Much  bigger  balance 
sheets  were  being  supported  by  the  same  amount  of  capital.  The  effect  of  this  increased 
BIS Review 164/2010 
 1
leverage was, of course, to boost the return on equity for conventional banks. For example, 
the return on equity for UK banks rose from 18 percent in 2001 to almost 30 percent in 2006. 
Not  only  did  the  conventional  banks  raise  their  leverage,  but  they  also  held  fewer  liquid 
assets. Beginning in the early 2000s, conventional banks’ holdings of cash and other highly 
liquid  instruments  fell  sharply  and  did  not  begin  to  recover  until  the  financial  crisis  forced 
them to pay more attention to liquidity management. Conventional banks shifted from holding 
liquid,  but  comparatively  low  return,  financial  instruments  into  higher  yielding  financial 
instruments which were, inevitably, much less liquid. Instead of holding government bills and 
bonds,  they  instead  invested  in  higher  return  assets  such  as  CDOs  and  other  structured 
financial products. They may have assumed that there would be a ready market  for these 
types  of  instrument  in  the  event  that  they  needed  to  obtain  extra  liquidity,  but  as  we  now 
know that assumption was wrong. 
The risks of shifting into less liquid financial assets were made worse by the way in which 
those  assets  were  funded.  Conventional  financial  institutions  increasingly  relied  on  their 
access to short-term interbank markets to fund relatively long-term assets. As a result, the 
average  maturity  on  the  liabilities  side  of  the  balance  sheet  was  shortened,  just  as  the 
average maturity on the assets side of the balance sheet was being lengthened. Borrowing 
short  to  lend  long  is,  of  course,  fundamental  to  the  business  of  banking.  Even  so,  there 
comes a point at which the degree of maturity mismatching is no longer prudent, and we saw 
with  conventional  financial  institutions  that  the  boundary  between  prudent  and  imprudent 
business conduct had been crossed. 
By now I am sure you will be asking what relevance do these comments on the conventional 
industry have for Shari’a-compliant institutions. My answer is: a great deal. 
If we examine carefully the trends in Islamic banking in the years prior to the crisis, we can 
see that there are important similarities between the practices of Islamic financial institutions 
and those of conventional ones. This should not be surprising because high returns require 
high risks, and the high returns achieved by Islamic banks could only be generated by taking 
on a corresponding degree of risk. 
It  is  not  difficult  to  see  the  parallels  between  conventional  and  Islamic  finance  during  the 
years  prior  to  the  crisis.  Just  like  conventional  institutions,  Islamic  financial  institutions 
increasingly  funded  long-term  assets  with  short-term  funding.  Although  the  assets  and 
liabilities were structured in a Shari’a-compliant manner, the degree of maturity mismatching 
was just as great as practiced by conventional institutions. In some cases, for example where 
the asset involved a long-term development project, the degree of maturity mismatching was 
significantly greater than that practiced by conventional financial institutions. 
Islamic financial institutions did not invest in CDOs or other structured financial products, and 
thus  were  saved  from  exposure  to  the  “toxic”  debt  that  triggered  the  financial  crisis. 
Nonetheless, the assets in which they did invest were just as illiquid as structured financial 
products, and in the past two years have been just as difficult for them to sell. 
Thirdly, like their conventional peers, Islamic financial institutions also greatly increased their 
leverage. They did so in a Shari’a-compliant manner, but balance sheets expanded on the 
back  of  static  capital  levels,  just  as  they  had  done  in  conventional  banks.  Despite  the 
extraordinary returns earned during the period of rapid expansion, capital was not retained in 
the institution but was distributed to shareholders in the form of dividends and to staff in the 
form of bonuses. 
Although the parallels between conventional finance and Islamic finance in the years prior to 
the crisis are not total, there are enough of them to suggest that many of the lessons are the 
same. 
Conventional banks are being forced by market pressures and by regulators to rethink the 
business models that they developed in the years prior to the crisis. Regulators are forcing 
them to pay more attention to leverage and the need for high quality liquid assets. Market 
2 
 BIS Review 164/2010
pressures are also forcing these banks to become less ambitious in their growth strategies 
and to concentrate on their core businesses of deposit-taking and lending. 
The need for the reinvention of the business model of Islamic financial institutions is just as 
great.  For  about  12  months  after  the  crisis  first  reached  this  region,  there  was  an 
understandable tendency to believe that it would be just a temporary interruption to a story of 
strong growth. Many believed that after a short period of adjustment the abundant liquidity 
conditions and the easy access to credit that Islamic financial institutions had enjoyed in the 
years prior to the crisis would quickly return. The funding would be obtained to complete the 
major projects and end-investors would again open their cheque books. 
As  the  dust  begins  to  settle  on  the  global  financial  crisis  it  should  now  be  clear  this 
assumption  of  a  temporary  blip  can  no  longer  be  sustained.  It  is  no  longer  wise  to  base 
business models on the hope that the era of cheap and plentiful liquidity will soon return. The 
industry and regulators need to recognise that the crisis has produced a fundamental change 
in the global financial system. One clear result has been to make participants in the global 
financial markets much more cautious and risk-averse. There now seem little doubt that the 
days of cheap and abundant liquidity will not return for a very long time. 
Inevitably this means that the business models of many Islamic financial institutions will need 
to be rethought. They will need to build a more broadly-based franchise than in the past. It is 
very likely that there will be less scope in future for smaller niche players that provide only a 
limited  range  of  services.  Instead,  Islamic  financial  institutions  need  to  build  diversified 
sources  of  revenue,  relying  not  only  on  placement  and  performance  fees,  but  also  on  the 
steady  stream  of  income  generated  by  such  an  unglamorous  but  essential  activities  as 
advisory  services,  asset  management,  and  providing  financial  services  to  retail  clients. 
Diversification  of  the  industry  will  need  to  go  hand  in  hand  with  its  consolidation.  Larger, 
more  broadly-based  financial  institutions  will  be  key  to  the  emergence  of  an  industry  with 
more sustainable business models. 
As  a  regulator,  there  are  a  number  of  things  that  we  can  do  to  encourage  this  process. 
Increasing  the  attention  that  we  give  to  the  sustainability  of  business  models  in  our 
supervisory assessments is one of them. New regulatory requirements, modeled on the new 
Basel III framework, will place greater limitations on the use of leverage as well as requiring 
more attention to be paid to the way that illiquid assets are funded. Finally, new accounting 
standards may bring back onto the balance sheet of financial institutions assets which have 
previously been treated as having been securitized. 
While regulatory changes might create the conditions for the reinvention of business models, 
ultimately  this  is  an  issue  that  the  shareholders  and  management  of  Islamic  financial 
institutions  will  need  to  address.  By  now  it  should  be  clear  that  there  can  be  no  return  to 
“business as usual” and that financial institutions will only survive in future if they succeed in 
developing  a  more  sustainable  business  model  that  does  not  rely  on  high  leverage  and 
excessive  maturity  mismatching.  Developing  those  new  business  models  will  be  a  great 
challenge for the industry, but one that I am confident it will be able to confront. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 164/2010 
 3
