Louis Kasekende: Citation for outstanding leadership 
Citation  by  Dr  Louis  Kasekende,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the  farewell 
party for the 2010 retired staff, Kampala, 17 December 2010. 
 Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile has led the Bank of Uganda for almost 10 years. It has 
been a decade of remarkable achievements; achievements which were made possible both 
by the Governor’s strategic leadership of the Bank and by his ability to inspire and motivate 
its staff. His stewardship of the Bank has been notable, not just because it has embodied the 
highest standards of professional expertise, but also because he has never shied away from 
taking difficult decisions or of speaking the truth about economic realities, however unpopular 
this may have been in some quarters.  
The Bank of Uganda’s core mandates are to deliver macroeconomic stability and to regulate 
the  banking  system.  In  terms  of  both  objectives,  the  Bank  has  been  very  successful.  The 
Bank’s monetary policy has faced many challenges during the course of the last 10 years: 
from  the  difficulties  of  sterilising  large  aid  inflows  in  the  first  half  of  the  decade;  from  the 
supply  side  shocks  to  international  fuel  prices  and  food  prices  which  pushed  up  inflation 
temporarily in 2008 and 2009; and then from the consequences of the global financial crisis 
for  the  balance  of  payments  and  aggregate  demand.  Under  Prof.  Tumusiime-Mutebile’s 
leadership,  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy  was  able  to  steer  the  economy  through  the 
turbulence  created  by  the  external  shocks  and  keep  it  on  an  even  keel.  In  particular,  the 
Bank has delivered low inflation; the primary policy objective of its monetary policy. Headline 
inflation  over  the  course  of  the  last  decade  has  averaged  only  6.5  percent  per  annum.  In 
turn,  price  stability  has  enabled  the  economy  to  attract  increasing  amounts  of  private 
investment and grow rapidly at an average of 7.4 percent per annum in real terms over the 
course of the decade. Sound macroeconomic management ensured that our economy was 
able to withstand the external shocks from the global economic crisis and avoid recession.  
Prof. Tumusiime-Mutebile’s leadership of the Bank of Uganda in its role as banking regulator 
has been equally successful. He assumed the stewardship of the Bank at a time when parts 
of  the  banking  system  in  Uganda  were  experiencing  distress.  Several  banks  had  failed 
towards the end of the 1990s, and the largest bank, Uganda Commercial Bank, was under 
the  statutory  management  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda  as  a  result  of  its  insolvency.  The 
Governor’s  decision  to  resolve  Uganda  Commercial  Bank  by  selling  it  to  a  reputable 
international  bank,  in  the  teeth  of  widespread  scepticism  and  in  some  cases  outright 
opposition, proved to be one of the most prescient ever taken in the history of banking in this 
country.  UCB  was  sold  to  Stanbic  Bank,  a  sale  which  preserved  the  nationwide  branch 
network of UCB, and protected its deposits. Since acquiring UCB, Stanbic has been in the 
forefront of the dynamic expansion of the Ugandan banking system which has occurred in 
the 2000s, which has included very rapid growth of bank lending to the private sector.  
The Governor also spearheaded major legislative reforms to financial regulation which were 
essential  to  strengthen  the  legal  framework  governing  the  financial  sector  in  Uganda.  The 
2003 Micro-finance Deposit Taking Act brought, for the first time in Uganda, deposit taking 
microfinance institutions under the regulatory aegis of the Bank of Uganda. In the following 
year,  the  Financial  Institutions  Act  was  enacted,  which  upgraded  banking  legislation  in 
Uganda and incorporated important elements of international best practise, such as prompt 
corrective  action  provisions  for  resolving  distressed  banks.  The  success  of  financial 
regulation  in  Uganda  over  the  last  decade  is  indisputable.  Despite  the  shocks  emanating 
from the global financial crisis, Uganda’s banking system has remained in a markedly robust 
financial condition, with average capital adequacy levels comfortably in excess of statutory 
minimum levels, low levels of non performing loans and impressive profitability.  
BIS Review 174/2010 
 1
Prof. Tumusiime-Mutebile was recently appointed to a third five year term as Governor. The 
Bank will face new challenges in the years ahead. The emergence of Uganda as a “frontier 
market” will make effective financial regulation, including macro-prudential regulation, even 
more  critical  to  the  stability  of  our  economy.  We  must  upgrade  our  monetary  policy 
framework to embrace inflation targeting. And we must prepare the Bank for the transition to 
East African monetary union. We should not be afraid of these challenges, for we are led by 
a Governor of unique vision, courage and wisdom.  
Mr.  Governor,  please  accept  this  plaque  from  the  Board  and  staff  of  Bank  of  Uganda  in 
recognition of your exemplary stewardship of this institution. You can count on our support. 
We wish success in your new term.  
2 
 BIS Review 174/2010
