Vítor Constâncio: Regulation and supervision of financial services in 
Europe – reforms and results 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
13th Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 16 November 2010. 
 financial  systems  and 
I  am  pleased  to  take  part  in  this  conference,  today,  dedicated  to  risk  management  and  to 
open this first session on regulatory and supervisory reform in Europe. 
The  concept  of  systemic  risk  underlies  the  changes  in  the  regulatory  framework  and 
supervisory  architecture  in  the  EU  and,  to  a  large  extent,  around  the  globe.  The  financial 
crisis has shown how the materialisation of systemic risks can have devastating effects for 
the financial sector and the broader economy. This has underscored the need to strengthen 
macro-prudential  oversight  of 
to  strengthen  micro-prudential 
supervision  of  individual  institutions.  The  need  for  enhancements  in  risk  management 
systems  of  financial  market  participants  at  large  has  also  been  highlighted.  Therefore,  the 
need for a better understanding of the concept and measurement of systemic risk, on both 
the private and regulatory sector sides, and how to limit it or mitigate its damaging effects, is 
at the core of the new regulatory and supervisory framework we will discuss today. 
In my remarks, I will touch upon these issues, with a focus on macro-prudential oversight and 
policy  and  on  the  soon-to-be-established  European  Systemic  Risk  Board,  which  will  be 
responsible  for  this  function  at  the  EU  level.  I  will  start  by  reflecting  on  the  new  macro-
prudential  oversight  framework  for  the  EU.  I  will  move  on  to  the  ECB’s  role  in  macro-
prudential  analysis  at  the  EU-wide  level,  with  a  view  to  providing  analytical  support  in  the 
ESRB’s  decision-making  process.  I  will  then  discuss  the  information  basis  for  risk 
identification  and  risk  assessment,  and  focus  on  the  interaction  with  the  European 
Supervisory Authorities, or ESAs, and with the financial industry in this process. Finally, I will 
recall  the  regulatory  and  micro-prudential  dimension,  as  well  as  the  contribution  of  the 
financial industry in the move towards a more stable financial system.  
The new EU framework for macro-prudential oversight 
1. 
The financial crisis has revealed a substantial policy gap between financial stability oversight 
and targeted policy responses to mitigate risks considered to be potentially systemic. This 
deficit  calls  for  the  strengthening  of  the  macro-prudential  approach  to  regulation  and 
supervision at the national and international level. 
The role of central banks in this process has emerged as critical, mostly on account of their 
responsibility  in  safeguarding  financial  stability,  their  analytical  capability  in  the  analysis  of 
risk  from  a  system-wide  perspective  and  their  proximity  to  financial  markets  and  market 
participants. Testimony to this is the institutional response around the globe. In the United 
Kingdom,  the  Bank  of  England  has  seen  its  responsibilities  in  both  the  macro  and  micro-
prudential fields enhanced. In the United States, the Federal Reserve System became the 
principal  macro-prudential  supervisor  with  competencies  in  prudential  policy  design  and 
implementation, emerging with a more prominent role. The European Systemic Risk Board, 
chaired  by  the  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  will  become  operational  in 
January 2011 and will be responsible for macro-prudential oversight in the EU. The ECB will 
provide analytical support to inform ESRB deliberations and also its Secretariat.  
More broadly, in a number of EU countries and elsewhere around the world, even if changes 
to  the  institutional  set-up  have  not  been  launched,  a  redefinition  of  macro-prudential 
strategies  is  underway.  A  common  element  of  these  strategies  is  the  closer  cooperation 
between micro and macro-prudential supervision – irrespective of whether this is conducted 
BIS Review 152/2010 
 1
by the same or different authorities – with a view to better assess interdependencies across 
individual institutions and between the financial sectors and the real economy.  
This  feature  is  also  critical  for  the  EU-wide  macro-prudential  framework,  where  close 
interaction between the ESRB and the three new ESAs for the securities markets, banking 
and  insurance  sectors  is  of  the  utmost  importance.  This  interaction  has  to  be  continuous, 
starting  with  the  formation  of  a  comprehensive  and  detailed  information  base  for  the 
screening of risks and comprising the discussion of risk assessments from macro and micro-
prudential  perspectives  and  the  design  of  policy  responses,  should  the  identified  risks  be 
considered of a systemic nature.  
The ECB’s analytical support to the ESRB 
2. 
Let me now turn to the ongoing preparatory work at the ECB on the analytical front to inform 
discussions within the ESRB and to support its deliberations.  
The  focus  of  the  analysis  is  clearly  on  the  systemic  dimension  of  risk  factors  and  their 
interconnectedness.  Treating  aggregated  risk  as  endogenous  clearly  differs  from  the  risk 
analysis approach carried out from a micro-prudential perspective or by financial institutions 
individually, where aggregate risk, stemming from other financial institutions’ actions and the 
overall environment, is perceived as exogenous.  
To support the risk identification process at an EU-wide level, the risk surveillance that we 
plan to undertake – in the same fashion as done, for instance, at the ECB in the context of 
the preparation of our Financial Stability Review – needs to have a wide reach, monitoring 
markets,  financial  institutions  and  the  economy  at  large,  so  as  to  ensure  that  no  risk  is 
overlooked. Several analytical tools and models are being developed for this type of analysis, 
including  early  warning  models  and  financial  stability  indicators  that  use  the  information 
content  of  available  financial  and  macroeconomic  data  to  identify,  early  on,  where 
imbalances  may  be  building  up.  Important  variables  to  monitor  in  this  context  are,  for 
example, measures of bank leverage, balance-sheet growth, maturity mismatches, property 
price  changes,  private  sector  leverage  and  current  account  deficits.  Contemporaneous 
financial  stability  indicators,  capturing  the  state  of  system  stability  and  forward-looking 
indicators revealing the market perception of the probability of an adverse systemic event in 
the  period  ahead  (e.g.  calculated  on  the  basis  of  credit-default  swap  spreads)  are  also 
important risk surveillance tools.  
The risk identification process would support the design of risk scenarios and the discussion 
of possible triggers that could lead to their crystallisation, supported by current and projected 
macroeconomic and financial variables. 
Once a set of risks has been identified as potentially systemic, the second leg in the analysis 
is the assessment of the severity of those risks, as well as an evaluation of the ability of the 
financial system to absorb their impact. This step will form the basis for risk prioritisation and 
inform the  ESRB in its decision on a possible need to issue a risk warning. It is therefore 
most  closely  associated  with  the  policy  action,  and  for  this  reason,  a  well-developed 
analytical framework is needed that allows us to quantify both the likelihood and the severity 
of  a  specific  risk  in  order  to  support  the  ESRB’s  decisions.  Clearly,  there  is  widespread 
awareness that the analytical framework, no matter its level of sophistication, cannot replace 
the  expert  knowledge  and  judgment  of  the  ESRB’s  members.  However,  a  consistent 
analytical framework and rigour in the analysis would provide valuable input to the Board’s 
discussions and back deliberations on risk warnings and policy recommendations. 
Analytical tools to assess the severity of identified risks and overall resilience of the financial 
system clearly include macro stress-testing models.  
An  EU-wide  stress-testing  exercise,  prepared  and  conducted  by  the  CEBS  and  national 
supervisory authorities, in close cooperation with the ECB, was completed in July this year. 
2 
 BIS Review 152/2010
The  exercise  included  adverse  scenarios  that  reflected  severe  assumptions,  especially  in 
relation to sovereign risk and growth paths. Such adverse scenarios, although not very likely 
to materialise in practice, are useful components of the assessment of the resilience of the 
financial system.  
Besides  this  type  of  bottom-up  stress-tests  –  which  are  based  on  the  work  conducted  by 
individual financial institutions according to the guidance by authorities on stress scenarios – 
we  need  to  also  conduct  top-down  macro  stress-tests conducted  by  the  authorities  on  the 
basis of all the available information. Such top-down macro stress-tests should be conducted 
with the view to complement and cross-check the results of bottom-up tests and assess, in 
particular,  how  the  identified  risks  should  be  prioritised  –  a  task  which  has  been  formally 
entrusted to the ESRB.  
Challenges  are  substantial,  but  progress  is  being  made  with  a  view  to  constructing  robust 
models to cover and replicate interlinkages within the financial sector and ascertaining how 
they  may  be  activated  and  play  out  under  conditions  of  stress.  This  reflects  not  only  the 
structural features of financial institutions – namely, which institutions are heavily exposed to 
each other and under which conditions such exposures can impair their viability, with ripple 
effects  through  the  system  –  but  also  the  interrelationships  among  the  risk  factors  at  the 
starting point of the analysis. In a real world situation, more than one risk factor tends to crop 
up at any one time, for example, at present, weak macroeconomic conditions and financial 
sector fragilities. But modelling a combination of several risk factors poses some challenges, 
both in terms of data and modelling complexities. For instance, we need to use models that 
allow  us  to  identify  the  impact  of  each  risk  factor  in  isolation  (e.g.  to  support  a  risk 
prioritisation  view),  while  also  being  able  to  account  for  the  overall  effects  of  risks  in 
combination. 
Databases with the necessary information on individual financial institutions also need to be 
developed to allow the implementation of the top-down macro stress-tests. 
Furthermore, macro stress-testing models, being the workhorse of systemic risk assessment, 
tend to provide an evaluation of the severity of the risks that is confined to the banking or 
financial sectors. This applies even to models that allow for a certain degree of interaction 
between financial institutions, and between these and the real economy. Risk assessments 
should  also  incorporate,  to  the  extent  possible,  a  view  on  the  potential  magnitude  of  risks 
which could spread via plausible propagation channels. Contagion and spillover models can 
be  of  use  in  this  context,  for  example,  in  the  analysis  to  evaluate  the  impact  of  specific 
failures  within  the  financial  system  or  in  the  assessment  of  the  transmission  of  instability 
across sectors in the economy.  
These  are  very  ambitious  goals  requiring  substantial  analytical  investment  in  the  areas  of 
macro-prudential  analysis  and  research.  In  preparing  its  support  to  the  ESRB,  the  ECB  is 
making  efforts  to  respond  to  various  elements  in  this  vast  list  of  analytical  requests, 
alongside  other  members  of  the  ESRB  and  a  number  of  national  and  international  bodies 
with competences in the macro-prudential.  
Information base  
3. 
Now, while challenges remain on the analytical side, it goes without saying that the reliability 
and quality of the output of these models crucially depends on the quality of the data input. 
This  applies  to  all  models,  including  those  regularly  run  at  your  institutions  which  provide 
inputs to daily or longer-term strategic decisions. In the same vein, of paramount importance 
for the identification of risks is a comprehensive, high-quality information base.  
At the global level, the G20 and the Financial Stability Board are engaged in considerable 
efforts, to which the ECB is contributing, in order to reduce the data gaps identified in the 
aftermath of the crisis. In this vein, an important element of the ECB’s preparatory work to 
support  the  ESRB  consists  of  expanding  and  enhancing  macroeconomic  and  financial 
BIS Review 152/2010 
 3
statistical  databases  for  macro-prudential  purposes  at  the  level  of  the  EU.  In  this  respect, 
close  collaboration  with  the  national  authorities  and  the  future  ESAs  is  ongoing  so  as  to 
ensure the ability to perform risk-focused analyses with adequate detail and scope in terms 
of, for example, country granularity, financial sector coverage and data frequency.  
The private sector is also contributing, and could contribute more, to enhance the quality of 
the  information  base  on  which  macro-prudential  analysis  will  be  based  by  continuing  to 
enhance the transparency and granularity of individual reporting. This applies, in particular, 
to  the  large,  complex  and  interconnected  institutions  on  which  a  substantial  part  of  the 
macro-prudential  analysis  is  likely  to  be  centred,  as  these  institutions  tend  to  contribute 
significantly to the level of risk of the overall system. The combination of better firm-level and 
macro-financial statistical information would also likely contribute to inform risk management 
decisions, as well as to enhance firms’ own stress testing frameworks. 
But not all information needed is of a quantitative nature. A well-functioning macro-prudential 
framework  needs  the  support  of  market  participants,  also  in  qualitative  terms,  as  rigorous 
monitoring of systemic risks will require continuous market intelligence. Contact with market 
participants  will  be  essential  for  detecting  important  trends,  such  as  growing  financial 
imbalances,  convergence  of  business  models,  similarities  in  investment  strategies  and 
innovations  in  financial  instruments.  Information  gathered  via  market  intelligence  could,  for 
example, be valuable in capturing market developments and perceptions not yet apparent in 
the most recent data and complement more quantitative-based surveillance work. It will also 
allow combining accounting-based information on the banking and financial sectors at large 
with  firms’  risk  management  views  and  their  perception  of  the  main  risks  further  down  the 
road.  As  such,  in  setting  up  an  effective  EU-wide  risk  surveillance  process,  importance  is 
being given to the establishment of a structured dialogue with the financial industry focused 
on  financial  vulnerabilities  at  the  system-wide  level.  It  could  take  place  on  a  regular  basis 
both among high-level representatives and at the working level.  
4. 
Towards a more stable financial system 
This brings me to the last part of my remarks today. 
The move towards a more stable financial system has been set in motion on a number of 
different fronts. I mentioned the enhancement of macro-prudential analysis and policy with a 
view to identify, in a timely manner, risks of a systemic nature and to respond with warnings 
or targeted policy measures to address them. This was at the centre of my talk, since this is 
where the ESRB will play an important role in safeguarding financial system stability at the 
EU-wide level. 
Another  dimension  that  will  be  at  the  core  of  this  conference  today  are  the  prudential 
measures  to  increase  the  resilience  of  the  banking  sector  over  the  coming  years  so  as  to 
increase  firms’  ability  to  withstand  shocks  and  to  reduce  the  overall  vulnerability  of  the 
system. These include measures of both a micro-prudential and a macro-prudential nature, 
forming a comprehensive package of capital reforms and the new global liquidity standard. 
Banks loss-absorbing capacity will be reinforced by regulatory capital consisting of common 
equity  and 
the 
countercyclical  buffer,  addressing  macro-prudential  risk  in  a  time-varying  fashion.  Market 
risk, counterparty credit risk and securitisation risk rules have also been revised to ensure 
that risks are adequately captured. To limit model risk and the build-up of excessive leverage 
on  and  off  the  balance  sheet,  a  non-risk  based  measure  –  the  leverage  ratio  –  has  been 
introduced.  On  the  liquidity  framework,  two  key  ratios  have  been  put  in  place  to  enhance 
liquidity  buffers  in  short  and  longer-term  horizons,  with  the  aim  of  reducing  funding 
vulnerabilities and increase overall resilience to liquidity drains.  
Here,  we  should  bear  in  mind  that,  to  a  large  extent,  underlying  the  new  regulatory 
framework  is  a  better  understanding  of  the  concept  and  measurement  of  systemic  risk, 
the  capital  conservation  buffer  and 
two  capital  buffers: 
including 
4 
 BIS Review 152/2010
financial  market 
for  over-the-counter 
infrastructure,  such  as 
reflected  in  relatively  simple  and  operational  measures  to  address  it.  The  aim  is  to  have 
better  regulation  as  a  result  of  the  combination  of  micro-prudential  and  macro-prudential 
perspectives, rather than more regulation per se.  
Without pretending to be exhaustive, let me just refer to private sector initiatives which will 
also contribute to the overall soundness of the financial system. These comprise initiatives in 
the  area  of 
the  establishment  of  central 
counterparties 
(OTC)  derivatives  clearance.  Sound  market 
infrastructures  with  appropriate  risk  management  frameworks  should  mitigate  counterparty 
risk and contribute to restoring trust in the financial system in the years ahead.  
The role of the financial sector in constructing a more stable financial system is also critical 
with respect to disclosure. More disclosure in firms’ financial reporting and better quality of 
publicly available firm-level data should enable a better assessment of counterparty risk and 
for  contagion  via  direct  and  indirect  channels.  For  macro-prudential  analysis,  enhanced 
disclosure will allow a better understanding and measurement of where systemic risk might 
be  via  the  construction  of  more  accurate  indicators  of  aggregate  leverage,  correlation  and 
concentration of exposures to specific asset classes and of a firm’s level of interconnectedness, 
for  example.  Furthermore,  for  financial  market  players,  better  quality  of  information  on  a 
counterparty’s financial condition should also contribute to enhancing in-house stress testing 
and  strengthen  firms’  risk  management  systems.  This  could  enable  financial  institutions  to 
improve their forward-looking capacity in decision-making, resulting in them taking corrective 
measures with sufficient lead time and being more resilient to market tensions should they 
arise. 
Concluding remarks  
The financial sector has an important stake in a stable financial system and therefore in a 
well-functioning  macro-prudential  oversight  and  policy  framework.  In  my  remarks  today,  I 
have referred to the main areas in which the ECB and the central banking community are 
investing in order to operationalise the new macro-prudential oversight function entrusted to 
the ESRB.  
In  this  process,  the  industry  needs  to  be  closely  involved  in  risk  detection  and  overall 
surveillance  work,  as  information  and  insights  from  market  participants  will  be  essential 
inputs. We also expect the industry to pay close attention to the macro-prudential views that 
are  communicated  by  the  ESRB,  among  others,  stemming  from  regular  systemic  risk 
assessments. Although each institution may not, per se, be able to create disruptive market 
conditions  –  at  least  in  normal  times  –  as  the  financial  crisis  has  shown,  the  collective 
positions of the financial industry can have severe implications for financial stability, possibly 
with  repercussions  in  the  broad  economy.  In  this  regard,  we  will  send  messages  to  the 
industry that we trust will be heeded. 
Efforts are also underway to ensure close cooperation between central banks, supervisory 
authorities  and  the  ESAs  so  that  risk  assessments  combine  micro  and  macro-prudential 
perspectives  and  are  of  high  quality  and  rigour.  This  should  act  as  an  important  crisis 
prevention tool, also enabling the ESRB and the ESAs to respond in a timely fashion with 
policy measures aimed at addressing specific risks should this be deemed necessary. We 
are  determined  to  make  the  new  framework  work  in  an  efficient  way  to  ensure  financial 
stability in the European Union. 
BIS Review 152/2010 
 5
