Ivan Iskrov: Reflections on the past year 
Speech  by  Mr  Ivan  Iskrov,  Governor  of  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank,  to  the  Association  of 
Banks in Bulgaria on the occasion of the Banker’s Day, Sofia, 6 December 2010. 
 in  over  a  decade.  As  regards 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It’s a great pleasure to be here this evening with you all, on 6th December, Saint Nicholas 
Day, and celebrate our professional holiday. Over the last eight years I and my colleagues 
from  the  BNB  Governing  Council,  regardless  of  our  numerous  engagements,  have  not 
missed  a  single  occasion  to  be  with  you  and  celebrate  this  great  day.  By  this  gesture  we 
show  our  respect  for  and  acknowledgement  of  the  job  well  done  by  you  in  favour  of  the 
national economy. Commercial banks are not merely some of the many capitalist businesses 
focused on profit making for their shareholders. The banking system is a major part of the 
infrastructure of any market economy; it is its circulatory system. Without our daily committed 
work, our state would not be able to function properly. 
By tradition today we have the chance to pause and reflect on the past year and to share our 
hopes that in the year to come we would again successfully meet the new challenges. I have 
no doubts about that because we all have proved that we are capable of turning trials into 
useful experience, and experience into a means of completing the mission that society has 
assigned to us. 
The economic crisis, continuing into 2010, only confirmed these expectations of mine. Banks 
not only did not become the reason for deepening the problems in our economy, but they 
were also the main pillar of stability and driver for overcoming the problems. The Bulgarian 
banking  system  continued  to  be  a  paragon  of  stability  and  predictability  in  the  face  of  the 
unprecedented  slowdown 
the  blatantly  provocative 
“projections” of some domestic and foreign “analysts”, just a few days ago I reminded you of 
their  fantasies  in  a  sort  of  a  chart  of  “unfulfilled  black  predictions”  about  the  Bulgarian 
banking system. The coming year 2011 is a year of elections. We at the Central Bank are 
well aware that it could be possible for some of the local candidates for glory – the eternal 
candidates to come back on the big political scene – to actively try and “sell fear” during the 
elections year 2011. So watch out! 
The  situation  is  very  complicated,  and  yet  the  banking  sector  stays  flexible  and  efficient; 
while the number of non-performing loans is on the increase, the system goes on generating 
current  profits.  Despite  the  deteriorated  quality  of  loan  portfolios,  Bulgarian  banks  did 
manage  to  keep  considerable  capital  buffers,  given  the  provisions  of  over  BGN  4.5  billion 
allocated only by October. Is there any other country among the 27 EU member-states, apart 
from  Bulgaria,  that  in  these  circumstances  could  be  proud  of  the  remarkable  18%  capital 
adequacy and total liquidity ratio of nearly 22%? 
Once again I would like to point out that these outcomes are not accidental and do not come 
out  of  the  blue.  All  that  we  have  achieved  so far  is  a  result  of  both  the  long-standing  and 
consistent efforts made by the Bulgarian National Bank for creating cushions and maintaining 
the stability of the system, and of the common sense and efforts of each and every one of 
you. Thank you very much for this! 
The  crisis  could  not  make  us  turn  away  from  the  strategic  tasks  facing  us,  i.e.  to  be 
competitive, to provide the services needed by individuals and businesses, to be innovative 
and stand in the lead among the EU member-states so as to meet the demands of the future. 
In  one  of  the  most  rapidly  developing  areas  –  payment  systems,  Bulgaria  marked  a 
significant progress in 2010. The merger of the two most important operators BORICA and 
BANKSERVICE  is  accomplished.  On  1  February,  we  launched  into  operation  the  national 
BIS Review 169/2010 
 1
component  of  TARGET2  (TARGET2-BNB).  The  connection  of  the  national  banking 
community to TARGET2 is an important step in our integration into the euro area payment 
system,  providing  to  the  participating  banks  an  opportunity  to  execute  real-time  euro-
denominated transfers at an exceptionally low price. In parallel with launching TARGET2 and 
the developments in the large payments area, we had the system for processing customers’ 
payment in euro – BISERA7-EUR – started from 1 February. The system processes euro-
denominated payments in line with SEPA standards. With the implementation of TARGET2 
and  BISERA7,  banks  and  their  customers  have  at  their  disposal  a  reliable  and  secure 
infrastructure for processing small and large payments in euro. This is a proper opportunity to 
invite  any  of  you  who,  for  one  reason  or  another,  have  not  yet  availed  of  the  advantages 
entailed in joining these two systems to do so. 
The most direct and broadest everyday contact of the general public with the banking system 
is  through  the  banknote  and  coin  related  services  provided  to  individuals  and  businesses. 
This year’s great event in this area was the commencement of operations of the BNB Cash 
Centre  in  Sofia.  Our  Cash  Centre  is  one  of  the  state-of-the-art  facilities  for  storage  and 
processing of banknotes and coins within the European System of Central Banks, meeting 
the  highest  requirements  to  security  and  convenience  of  the  serviced  banks  and  CIT 
companies. Through it the BNB has also met its obligations with regard to currency distribution 
and  destruction  of  unfit  currency.  In  its  newly  opened  cash  centre  the  BNB  continues  to 
provide to its customers standard currency-related services. However, this is the proper time 
to share with you that more and more often we receive at the BNB complaints by citizens that 
banks  have  refused  to  exchange  damaged  Bulgarian  banknotes  or  that  customers  have 
received  such  banknotes  in  ATM  cash  withdrawal  transactions.  This  necessitates  the 
conclusion  that  banks  do  not  strictly  observe  the  BNB  requirements  to  the  quality  of 
banknotes and coins. We expect from all the banks to pursue the necessary measures on 
their part for the full implementation of BNB Ordinance No. 18. The Cash Services Company 
is  already  operating  full-scale  providing  high-quality  cheap  and  very  competitive  services. 
Those of you who have not yet fully availed of them are definitely losing. 
As I believe any one of you will agree, the BNB’s supervisory policy can hardly be described 
as “regulatory comfort”, as our unjustified critics have recently tried to define it. The Bulgarian 
banking system is one of the most strictly and conservatively regulated ones within the whole 
European Union. 
The  consistent  anti-cyclical  policy  pursued  by  the  BNB  has  initially  stimulated  the 
accumulation of capital resources and a liquidity potential for successfully facing the crisis, 
and  later  on  (since  2008)  has  implemented  a  number  of  measures  aimed  at  supporting 
liquidity  and  easing  lending.  In  2010,  our  supervision  proceeded  with  the  “fine  tuning”  of 
regulations  and  with  the  BNB’s  very  careful  approach  to  processes  underway  in  credit 
institutions. In the coming year, we will continue with the phased-in implementation of all new 
requirements  and  recommendations  of  the  EU  acquis  and  of  the  Committee  of  European 
Banking  Supervisors,  taking  into  consideration  the  best  practices.  The  adoption  of  a  new 
ordinance on the principles of formation of remuneration in banks, which would recognize the 
risks taken by them, is forthcoming within days. 
Last  but  not  least,  on  a  day  like  this  we  should  also  speak  up  our  concerns.  The  crisis, 
besides all else, evoked negative public attitudes in relation to banks. Although not a lev of 
Bulgarian  taxpayers  has  been  spent  to  bail  out  banks  and  it  would  be  unfair  to  place  the 
Bulgarian  banks  next  to  those  that  continue  to  receive  capital  support  from  many 
governments and central banks, we should be aware of such attitudes. A short list runs like 
this: 
“… banks are the ones to blame for the crisis; besides they do not show commitment to the 
problems of businesses during these hard times”; 
“… interest rates and taxes in Bulgaria are high”; 
“… banks enjoy regulatory comfort,” etc, etc. 
2 
 BIS Review 169/2010
Have we got sufficient evidence to expect that such attitudes will dissipate any time soon? 
And what is our response? 
There is more than just one side to this problem, because the majority of the population lacks 
a  basic  financial  knowledge.  Others  are  not  responsible  enough  in  managing  their  own 
money. I agree with you when you feel indignation at the lack of objectivity in much of the 
criticism against commercial banks. But we can’t change people. The important thing is to do 
anything we possibly can to give our clients the maximum correctness. You could step in and 
play  an  important  role  by  streamlining  your  business  practices  with  regard  to  servicing 
clients. “He who works, makes mistakes” Mistakes however should be owned and rectified in 
a prompt manner. Our analyses show that in the vast majority of instances the signals and 
complaints received at the BNB theoretically could have been resolved then and there, at the 
branches and divisions of your banks, as these did not need to get as far as the head offices 
and executive directors of the institutions. 
I would like to emphasize that the BNB had stated its position about the relations between 
commercial  banks  and  their  customers  long  before  this  became  a  hot  topic  in  the  media. 
Allow me to conclude my speech in literally the same words, which I used to speak to you 
here exactly 4 years ago (back then, in 2006, banking was on the upswing and nobody was 
talking about crises or difficulties in repaying loans): 
“…it is in the interest of both consumers and the banking industry to establish between the 
two  sides  of  the  process  long-term  relations  based  on  transparency  of  financial  services 
pricing, and on the strict observance of obligations by both parties.” 
In conclusion, allow me, on behalf of the BNB Governing Council and on my own behalf, to 
congratulate everyone of you on the occasion of our professional holiday, the Banker’s Day – 
6 of December! I wish you a successful 2011 year and much health to your families as well 
as to the balance sheets of the banks you are running! 
Happy Banker’s Day, dear colleagues! 
BIS Review 169/2010 
 3
