Masaaki Shirakawa: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Nagoya, 29 November 2010. 
 Introduction 
I am honored to have the opportunity today to speak and to exchange views with business 
leaders from the Chubu region. I take this opportunity to express my deep gratitude for your 
cooperation with the Bank of Japan’s Nagoya Branch. 
As the Chubu region is one of the largest exporting bases of Japan, we at the Bank, myself 
included,  always  listen  with  great  interest  to  the  Nagoya  branch  manager’s  report  at  the 
branch managers’ meeting held every three month. I am glad to be able today to hear your 
views directly. However, before we exchange views, I would first like to talk about economic 
and  financial  developments  at  home  and  abroad,  and  then  discuss  the  Bank’s  conduct  of 
monetary policy. 
Developments in overseas economies 
I.  
I will start with developments in overseas economies. 
Overseas economies, which had plunged in the wake of the failure of Lehman Brothers in 
autumn 2008, leveled out around spring 2009 and picked up sharply from the second half of 
2009.  The  pace  of  growth  in  overseas  economies  subsequently  slowed  somewhat  as  the 
inventory restocking carried out in the early phase of economic recovery ran its course and 
the  demand-boosting  effects  of  fiscal  policy  measures  started  to  wane.  However, 
international  organizations  project  that  the  recovery  trend  itself  will  not  be  interrupted  and 
that from 2011 growth in overseas economies as a whole will start to accelerate again, led by 
emerging  economies  that  will  continue  to  record  high  growth,  particularly  in  domestic 
demand. The Bank shares this view. Specifically, the International Monetary Fund forecasts 
that  the  growth  rate  of  the  global  economy  will  be  4.2  percent  in  2011  and  4.5  percent  in 
2012. Those figures surpass the average of the ten years preceding the financial crisis, when 
the global economy recorded high growth (Chart 1).  
It should be noted that there are some uncertainties regarding the future outlook. The first 
uncertainty concerns the possible consequences of balance-sheet adjustments in advanced 
economies. In the United States and European advanced economies, the process of dealing 
with  excessive  household  debt,  excess  production  capacity  in  the  corporate  sector,  and 
impaired assets in the financial sector, that is, the process of repairing and adjusting balance 
sheets,  is  continuing.  During  this,  households  and  firms  give  priority  to  debt  payment  and 
have  to  restrain  spending.  Financial  institutions’  proactive  lending  capacity  is  prone  to 
decline.  In  these  circumstances,  the  virtuous  cycle  of  growth  in  production,  income,  and 
spending  will  not  operate  properly.  Therefore,  until  balance-sheet  adjustments  are 
completed, it is likely that growth in advanced economies will be constrained and that they 
will  remain  prone  to  weakness.  The  second  uncertainty  concerns  whether  emerging 
economies, which continue to grow at high rates, will be able to make a soft landing onto a 
sustainable  growth  path.  At  present,  many  emerging  economies  have  been  shifting  away 
from accommodative monetary policies. While these moves will put downward pressure on 
emerging  economies  in  the  short  run,  if  implemented  appropriately,  they  could  provide  a 
boon to the global economy in that they restrain economic overheating and help achieving 
more sustainable growth. 
Additionally, a third uncertainty that can be pointed out is that the large difference in the pace 
of economic recovery between advanced and emerging economies further complicates the 
BIS Review 160/2010 
 1
mechanism of the emergence and spread of possible risks. The United States and European 
advanced  economies  are  continuing  to  conduct  very  accommodative  monetary  policies. 
While the resulting decline in interest rates has helped to support the domestic economies, it 
has also given rise to capital flows from advanced to emerging economies in search of higher 
returns.  The  most  fundamental  reason  for  such  capital  flows  is  emerging  economies’  high 
growth, but monetary easing in advanced economies also plays a role. Regarding the large-
scale monetary easing decided by the Federal Reserve (Fed) in early November, emerging 
economies have expressed heightened concern and anxiety about the possible overheating 
of their economies due to the acceleration of capital inflows and about the possible reversal 
of capital flows as a result of a policy change in Advanced economies in the future. Should 
one or more emerging economies experience a rise and subsequent burst of a bubble, this 
would not only have a large impact on the emerging economies concerned but also affect the 
global economy as a whole, including advanced economies.  
On  the  other  hand,  though,  there  are  also  various  discussions  going  on  concerning  the 
management of exchange rate regimes in emerging economies. There is a possibility that if 
an  emerging  economy’s  exchange  rate  regime  lacks  sufficient  flexibility  and  its  foreign 
exchange rate is held too low relative to economic fundamentals, this could, together with the 
effects of capital inflows from advanced economies, provide excessive stimulus to economic 
activity  in  that  emerging  economy,  generating  economic  and  financial  excesses  and, 
eventually,  a  correction  of  such  excesses.  These  discussions  on  emerging  economies’ 
foreign exchange rates remind me of developments in Japan’s economy following the Nixon 
shock and the Plaza Accord as well as various discussions occasionally held in Japan.  
Policy authorities in each country need to act appropriately taking the above developments in 
the global economy into account. In this context, I would like to emphasize the following two 
points.  The  first  is  that  the  first  responsibility  of  policy  authorities  in  each  country  is  the 
stability of their own economy, and this holds true in any era. Second, however, the way to 
fulfill  this  responsibility  has  changed  with  the  advance  in  economic  and  financial 
globalization.  I  feel  that  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  and  foreign  exchange  policies,  it  has 
become  increasingly  necessary  to  be  aware  of  the  global  mechanisms  of  how  one’s  own 
policies and actions affect the world economy and international financial markets and of how 
these  in  turn  affect  one’s  own  economy.  In  this  context,  I  think  that  Japan  –  through  the 
experiences  and  lessons  it  holds,  such  as  with  regard  to  balance  sheet  adjustments, 
quantitative  easing,  and  the  conduct  of  policy  following  the  Plaza  Accord,  which  are  all 
relevant  to  the  various  problems  facing  advanced  and  emerging  economies  today  –  can 
actively participate in discussions and contribute to global economic stability. 
Developments in foreign exchange markets 
II.  
While  bearing  in  mind  the  developments  in  overseas  economies,  I  will  next  touch  upon 
developments  in  foreign  exchange  markets.  Since  summer  2010,  the  U.S.  dollar  has 
depreciated  to  the  lowest  level  since  the  1970s  in  terms  of  the  trade-weighted  nominal 
effective  exchange  rate,  due  mainly  to  market  uncertainty  about  the  future  of  the  U.S. 
economy and associated market expectations of monetary easing (Chart 2). The yen at one 
time appreciated to near 80 yen against the dollar. However, following the Fed’s decision of 
additional monetary easing in early November, the yen has depreciated somewhat against 
the dollar. Meanwhile, with regard to exchange rates vis-à-vis Asian currencies, the yen has 
been following more or less the same trend against the Chinese renminbi as against the U.S. 
dollar,  reflecting  China’s  foreign  exchange  rate  policy.  Against  the  Korean  won,  the  yen 
appreciated around spring 2010, but has been more or less unchanged since then (Chart 3). 
In the short run, the appreciation of the yen depresses the revenue and profits of exporting 
firms, but the effects differ for each currency depending on the structure of trade and are not 
uniform. For example, Japan and Korea have recently been in heightened competition in the 
global market for many final goods such as electronic appliances and automobiles. For this 
2 
 BIS Review 160/2010
reason,  the  relative  value  of  the  currencies  greatly  affects  the  competitiveness  of  each 
country’s exports. On the other hand, looking at the trade relationship between Japan and 
China,  the  two  countries  play  much  more  complementary  roles  in  the  international  supply 
chain,  meaning  that  exchange  rate  effects  differ.  These  issues  are  also  highlighted  in  the 
reports from the Bank’s branches across Japan and the Bank, taking them into account, in 
detail examines foreign exchange rate developments and their effects with great interest.  
It should also be noted that, the appreciation of the yen, from a longer-term perspective, has 
the positive effect of bringing about an improvement of the terms of trade through a decline in 
import prices, that is, it leads to an increase in Japan’s overall real income. The Bank also 
pays attention to how developments in the foreign exchange market affect Japan’s economy 
from such a long-term perspective and how firms respond.  
Developments in Japan’s economy 
III.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  developments  in  economic  conditions  in  Japan.  What  I  mean  by 
economic  conditions  here  are  short-term  developments  in  economic  activity  measured  by 
indicators such  as  those  related  to  GDP,  corporate  profits,  and  employment.  On  the  other 
hand, I assume that business leaders such as yourselves probably associate with the term 
economic conditions developments that reflect more structural or longer-term factors in your 
region  or  industry.  Keeping  this  subtle  difference  in  mind,  let  me  first  talk  about  economic 
conditions in terms of short-term developments in economic activity.  
Japan’s economy has been improving on the back of the increase in exports and production 
brought  about  by  the  recovery  in  overseas  economies  and  due  to  the  effects  of  policy 
measures  targeting  durable  consumer  goods,  but  it  seems  that  the  recovery  has  been 
pausing  since  early  autumn.  Exports  have  recently  been  more  or  less  flat  mainly  due  to 
inventory adjustments in IT-related goods and the slowdown in overseas economies. As for 
private  consumption,  demand  for  cars  has  suffered  a  reverse  following  the  last-minute 
increase in demand for energy-efficient cars ahead of the expiration of subsidies. In these 
circumstances,  the  increase  in  production  has  come  to  a  pause.  As  for  the  outlook,  it  is 
projected that the pace of economic improvement will continue to be slow for the time being, 
mainly due to the slowdown in overseas economies and the waning effects of various policy 
measures, as well as the effects of the earlier appreciation of the yen. However, once we 
enter fiscal 2011, Japan’s economy is expected to return to a moderate recovery path, based 
on  the  following  developments.  Exports  are  projected  to  regain  momentum  as  inventory 
adjustments in IT-related goods progress and growth in the U.S. economy, where additional 
policy  measures  were  implemented,  and  in  emerging  economies,  which  are  expected  to 
recover  from  the  slight  adjustment  phase  caused  mainly  by  the  shift  from  accommodative 
monetary  policy,  accelerates  again.  Firms’  sense  of  excessive  capital  stock  and  labor  is 
expected to dissipate gradually with the improvement in corporate profits, and spending by 
firms  and  households  is  projected  to  become  active.  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to 
continue  growing  in  fiscal  2012,  and  at  a  pace  that  exceeds  that  in  fiscal  2011,  as  the 
transmission mechanism by which increased exports and production feed through to income 
and spending gains in strength (Chart 4). 
Next, I would like to talk about price developments. The consumer price index (CPI) in Japan 
registered a substantial decline of 2.4 percent in summer 2009, but since then the year-on-
year pace of decline has been slowing steadily. The year-on-year rate of decline in the CPI 
for  October  slowed  to  0.1  percent  if  the  effects  of  subsidies  for  high  school  tuition  are 
excluded.  With  regard  to  the  outlook,  as  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  will 
gradually improve, the year-on-year change in the CPI is projected to enter positive territory 
in fiscal 2011 and thereafter rise through fiscal 2012 (Chart 5).  
Of  course,  the  outlook  presented  here  is  subject  to  substantial  uncertainty,  since  the 
economy changes continuously. Above all, as I will explain later, Japan’s economy faces the 
structural problem of a decline in the economic growth trend. In this situation, the Bank will 
BIS Review 160/2010 
 3
carefully examine whether Japan’s economy is making steady progress toward a sustainable 
growth  path  with  price  stability  while  paying  attention  to  the  various  risk  factors  regarding 
overseas economies highlighted earlier. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
IV.  
Let me next explain the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. 
In  early  October,  the  Bank,  with  a  view  to  further  enhancing  monetary  easing,  decided  to 
implement  comprehensive  monetary  easing,  the  so-called  comprehensive  easing,  which 
bundles together the following three measures (Chart 6). First, the Bank changed the target 
for  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  from  “around  0.1  percent”  to  “around  0  to 
0.1 percent,”  thereby  further  clarifying  its  adoption  of  a  virtually  zero  interest  rate  policy. 
Second, the Bank clearly stated that it would continue the virtually zero interest rate policy 
until  it  judged  that  price  stability  was  in  sight,  provided  that  no  problems  such  as  the 
accumulation of financial imbalances arise. Third, the Bank established an Asset Purchase 
Program  that  aims  at  purchasing  various  financial  assets,  such  as  government  securities, 
commercial paper (CP) and corporate bonds, as well as exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and 
Japanese  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs).  The  total  size  of  the  Program,  including 
the existing fixed-rate operation, was set to about 35 trillion yen (Chart 7).  
These measures have the effect of supporting economic recovery through various channels. 
The first channel is that the recent monetary easing measures, by lowering funding costs for 
firms and households, will aid private sector economic activity from the financial side. Fed 
Chairman  Bernanke,  regarding  the  recently-decided  additional  monetary  easing  through 
large-scale  purchases  of  longer-term  Treasury  securities,  stated  that  the  use  of  the  term 
quantitative easing  to  refer  to  the  policy  was  inappropriate,  explaining  that  the  aim  was  to 
achieve more accommodative financial conditions by lowering interest rates on securities of 
longer  maturities.  The  Bank’s  comprehensive  easing  is  motivated  by  the  same  purpose  in 
that  it  aims  at  achieving  accommodative  financial  conditions  through  a  decline  in  interest 
rates. Moreover, as part of comprehensive easing, the Bank decided to purchase risk assets 
such as ETFs and J-REITs, which is an extremely extraordinary step for a central bank. It is 
expected  that,  if  the  Bank’s  purchase  of  risk  assets,  acting  as  a  catalyst,  leads  market 
participants to take a more active investment stance, this will smooth the intermediation of 
risk money and firms’ funding conditions will improve further.  
The  second  channel  is what  is  called  the  policy  duration  effect.  As  part  of  comprehensive 
easing, the Bank has made it clear that it “will maintain the virtually zero interest rate policy 
until it judges that price stability is in sight.” The Bank will judge whether price stability is in 
sight  based  on  the  understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term  price  stability  (hereafter 
understanding), which the Bank releases separately. The understanding is the inflation rate 
level  that  each  Policy  Board  member  understands  as  being  consistent  with  price  stability 
over the medium to long term and takes the form that “on the basis of the year-on-year rate 
of change in the CPI, it falls in a positive range of 2 percent or lower, and the midpoints of 
most Policy Board members’ understanding are around 1 percent.” Usually, in an economic 
recovery phase, there are various forecasts as to when the accommodative monetary policy 
will  be  changed  and  projections  for  the  future  level  of  interest  rates  consequently  vary. 
However,  with  the  recently  announced  framework  in  place,  it  is  expected  that  stable 
projections about future interest rates will be formed in the markets and long-term interest 
rates will be stabilized. In this way, the policy duration effect could exert significant easing 
effects, especially when economic recovery progresses and corporate profits improve. 
The  third  channel  is  that  the  recent  monetary  easing  measures,  through  their  effect  on 
business  and  household  sentiment,  will  underpin  the  economy.  The  recent  measures  are 
likely to have been effective in stabilizing the sentiment of firms and households, which have 
been  worried  about  the  adverse  effects  of  the  slowdown  in  overseas  economies  and  the 
appreciation  of  the  yen.  The  Bank  has  been  stating  for  quite  a  while  that  it  “will  carefully 
examine the outlook for economic activity and prices, and, if judged necessary, take policy 
4 
 BIS Review 160/2010
actions in a timely and appropriate manner.” I believe that public confidence in the central 
bank’s  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  by  alleviating  anxiety  about  a  possible  economic 
downturn, will boost the momentum for a self-sustaining recovery in Japan’s economy.  
In  addition  to  the  comprehensive  easing  I  have  just  explained,  in  June  2010  the  Bank 
introduced a new program through which it provides long-term funds at a low interest rate to 
private  financial  institutions  in  accordance  with  their  efforts  in  terms  of  lending  and 
investment to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. The reasoning underlying this 
measure is the Bank’s view that the decline in the growth trend of the economy has brought 
about sluggishness in business fixed investment and private consumption through a decline 
in firms’ and households’ growth expectations, which in turn is the fundamental cause of the 
current  deflation.  Related  to  this  point  is  that  when  we  look  at  Japanese  firms’  funding 
conditions,  overall,  they  have  abundant  on-hand  liquidity.  At  the  same  time,  deposits  at 
financial  institutions  far  exceed  loans  and  financial  institutions  use  those  surplus  funds  to 
invest in securities such as government bonds. This suggests that the biggest problem is not 
a shortage of cash or currency but limited investment opportunities resulting from the decline 
in  growth  expectations.  The  Bank  strongly  hopes  that  these  measures,  by  acting  as  a 
catalyst,  will  prompt  discussions  on  this  issue  as  well  as  efforts  toward  strengthening  the 
foundations for economic growth. 
Concluding remarks 
As  I  have  just  mentioned  and  as  you  experience  on  a  daily  basis,  the  biggest  challenge 
facing Japan’s economy is how to stop the decline in the potential rate of growth (Chart 8). 
Moreover, the fact that we as a country have not found an effective solution for this problem 
also  affects  short-term  cyclical  developments  and  is  a  fundamental  cause  of  deflation.  An 
economy’s growth potential is essentially determined by the rate of growth in the number of 
employed persons and in labor productivity. Japan’s labor force population peaked in 1998 
and has been declining since, while the total population started to decline in 2005. For this 
reason, existing domestic markets in many areas, such as automobiles, have been shrinking. 
The  demographic  situation  is  a  given.  Thus,  if  the  labor  force  participation  rate  for  each 
age/sex group remains the same, the number of persons employed will decline further in the 
next ten years. What is obvious from this is that what is necessary for increasing the growth 
potential of Japan’s economy as a whole is to increase the labor force participation rate and 
raise productivity. With regard to the latter, even today, Japan ranks relatively high among 
the advanced economies in terms of labor productivity growth (Chart 9). Therefore, while it 
may not be easy to increase productivity growth, it is necessary. To this end, it is essential to 
create, at home and abroad, new markets where a large increase in demand can be enjoyed, 
that  is,  to  create  added  value,  thereby  raising  productivity  in  the  economy  overall.  This 
applies not only to state-of-the-art products but also to, for example, services addressing the 
needs of an aging population. Services demanded by the elderly tend to be labor-intensive, 
but responding to such demand effectively will lead to an increase in added value in the form 
of an increase in labor income. It is important to note that in any era, it is firms that serve as 
the  engine  for  economic  growth.  Financial  institutions  are  expected  to  play  their  part  by 
actively  supporting  firms’  vigorous  efforts  through  their  function  as  financial  intermediaries. 
Meanwhile,  the  government  needs  to  provide  an  environment  that  makes  such  efforts  by 
private economic entities possible. It is necessary to constantly examine whether there are 
institutional  factors  that  put  Japanese  firms  at  a  disadvantage  in  global  competition.  The 
conclusion of free trade and economic partnership agreements currently being discussed, as 
well as issues related to tax and regulatory policies, are important issues that will affect the 
future management strategies of Japanese firms. 
For the sake of our children and grandchildren, we have a great responsibility to develop a 
vision for future economic growth. To this end, it is essential for private entities as well as 
policy authorities to sincerely examine what they can do from their respective standpoints, 
and make positive efforts in a specific manner. For its part, the Bank will consistently make 
contributions as the central bank. 
BIS Review 160/2010 
 5
 6 
   BIS Review 160/2010
 BIS Review 160/2010 
   7
 8 
   BIS Review 160/2010
  BIS Review 160/2010 
   9
 10 
 BIS Review 160/2010
