Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Forces of change 
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
Financial Industry Conference 2010, Kuala Lumpur, 3 November 2010. 
 It is with great pleasure that I welcome you to this year’s Financial Industry Conference. One 
year  hence  from  our  Conference  in  2009,  the  world  is  still  confronted  with  the  same 
challenge  –  achieving  a  self-sustaining  economic  recovery.  The  encouraging  signs  of 
recovery  that  emerged  a  year  ago  have  now  given  way  to  increasing  uncertainties  on  the 
sustainability  of  this  global  recovery.  Considerable  uncertainty  also  remains  on  how  the 
announced  regulatory  reforms  will  be  implemented  and  on  its  consequential  impact  on 
growth and on the financial intermediation process. In addition, market conduct challenges, 
the  uncertain  outcomes  of  the  unconventional  and  exceptional  measures  as  well  as  the 
considerable pressure on the public finances have added to the rising uncertainties on the 
sustainability of global growth. 
Economic outlook 
I.  
As  the  effects  of  the  massive  policy  support  begins  to  wear  off,  growth  in  the  advanced 
economies is slowing, weighed down both by crisis originated factors and structural issues. 
Unlike in the early part of the financial crisis, policymakers in the advanced economies now 
have  limited  policy  flexibility  to  undertake  further  measures  to  support  growth.  Amid  these 
increased  uncertainties,  there  has  been  heightened  volatility  in  the  international  financial 
markets, arising in part from increased sovereign credit risks and, more recently, the sharp 
movements in the major currencies in the foreign exchange markets. 
In  contrast,  the  recovery  in  the  emerging  market  economies,  in  particular  Asia,  remains 
robust,  with  the  potential  for  relatively  strong  growth  to  be  sustained.  While  most 
Governments  in  Asia  had  an  important  role  in  stimulating  the  economic  recovery,  private 
sector  activity  has  been  revived  and  is  now  having  a  greater  role  in  driving  the  economy. 
Also, with rising intra-regional trade, external demand from the region is providing additional 
support  to  growth.  Amid  this  favourable  growth  prospects,  the  region  however  is  also 
confronted  by  a  number  of  challenges.  As  highly  open  economies,  the  weaker  global 
environment will, and indeed, has already resulted in a moderation in external demand. In 
addition,  the  divergence  in  growth  prospects  between  the  advanced  and  emerging 
economies, has precipitated surges of capital inflows, in particular, to Asia. This could in turn 
lead to the risk in the build-up of destabilising imbalances in our economies. 
Asia today, is however, in a better position to address these rising concerns. First, domestic 
demand  has  steadily  increased  in  importance  since  the  beginning  of  this  decade  and  is 
contributing towards a more balanced growth. Second, is the diversification of Asia’s export 
markets towards increased intra-regional trade which now accounts for more than 50% of the 
total trade in Asia. Third, the extensive financial reforms and development of the domestic 
financial  markets  since  the  Asian  financial  crisis  have  significantly  strengthened  Asia’s 
financial  systems  to  better  manage  the  more  volatile  capital  flows.  In  addition,  rigorous 
surveillance  is  being  undertaken.  This  has  allowed  several  economies  to  introduce  pre-
emptive measures to preserve monetary and financial stability. 
The  near  term  outlook  for  emerging  Asia  going  into  2011  remains  positive.  For  Malaysia, 
despite slower external demand, the overall growth is expected to remain strong, supported 
by the continued expansion in private domestic demand. Favourable employment conditions, 
firm commodity prices and an accommodative policy environment will continue to underpin 
growth  in  private  consumption.  Meanwhile,  the  positive  outlook  on  the  domestic-oriented 
sectors and the recently announced economic transformation programme has improved the 
BIS Review 146/2010 
 1
investment climate. Intra regional trade is also expected to continue to provide support to the 
growth and development process. 
Transition to high value-added high income economy 
Beyond the near term horizon, the Malaysian economy is currently at a significant juncture in 
its  development.  The  economic  future  of  our  country  depends  on  the  success  in  our 
transition to becoming a high value-added economy. For more than five decades, Malaysia 
has  demonstrated  its  economic  flexibility  to  adjust  to  the  changing  environment  and  to 
continuously enter into new areas of competitive advantage. The ability to continue to do this 
as  we  advance  forward  into  the  future  will  however,  become  more  challenging  amidst  the 
rapidly  changing  global  environment,  characterised  by  increased  competition  and  a  higher 
degree of global and regional economic and financial integration.  
Fundamentally,  the  successful  transition  of  Malaysia  towards  a  high  value-added,  high 
income economy will depend on several critical factors. The first is to achieve an orderly shift 
towards  new  areas  of  growth  and  new  areas  of  comparative  advantage.  This 
transformation requires all sectors of the economy to be increasingly involved in higher value 
added  economic  activity.  In  the  manufacturing  sector,  existing  industries  need  to  move  up 
the value chain. This will be complemented by knowledge-intensive services sectors, such as 
information and communication technology (ICT), education and health. While multinationals 
and  large  domestic  corporations  will  remain  important  in  these  sectors,  the  contribution  of 
small  and  medium  enterprises  (SMEs)  have  an  important  role  in  supporting  these  new 
growth areas.  
The  second  critical  factor  is  that  productivity  improvements  will  become  a  critical 
determinant  of  our  future  growth  prospects.  Continuous  increases  in  productivity 
characterised by greater innovation and efficiency in production and business processes, are 
vital to achieve this transformation. Indeed, such productivity improvements are taking place 
in  the  financial  sector.  The  comprehensive  efforts  in  capacity  building  and  institutional 
development  in  the  early  part  of  this  decade  have  resulted  in  the  opportunity  to  achieve 
scale,  and  thus  allow  for  increased  investment  in  technology  and  in  people.  Increased 
competition also facilitate this trend. The higher productivity levels and thus the value added 
to the economy by the financial sector has increased to 11.7% of GDP in 2009, compared to 
9.2%  in  2000.  Commensurate  with  the  higher  value  added  by  the  financial  sector  is  also 
reflected  by  the  higher  average  wage  in  the  sector  which  is  about  70%  higher  than  the 
national  average.  This  trend  towards  higher  productivity  levels  needs  to  be  generalised 
throughout the economy. 
For  the  successful  shift  to  higher  value  added  activities  and  for  productivity  to  become  an 
important  driver  of  growth,  new  talents  are  required  to  achieve  this.  Human  capital 
development  is,  at  the  heart  of  Malaysia’s  transition  to  become  a  high  value-added 
economy. Physical capital accumulation will no longer be sufficient for Malaysia to make the 
transition into a more innovative and entrepreneurial society. A fundamental rethinking of our 
education system is thus crucial for the effective development of talents with the necessary 
skills  and  competencies  required  to  achieve  this.  The  cultivation  of  continuous  learning  is 
needed  for  the  constant  upgrading  of  talents.  In  the  financial  sector,  there  is  now  a 
comprehensive  institutional  arrangement  to  generate  the  supply  of  the  right  kind  of  talent 
required  by  the  industry  –  from  pre-employment  to  leadership  development  not  only  to 
focusing on the development of technical skills but also on the capabilities that practitioners 
require in the context of an emerging economy. 
The  fourth  critical  factor  is  the  extensive  enabling  infrastructure  to  facilitate  private 
sector economic activity. Malaysia already has in place high quality physical infrastructure 
but considerably more is needed. Steps already being taken include the development of an 
efficient  urban  public  transportation  system,  reliable  and  seamless  broadband  connectivity 
and  energy  efficiency-related  infrastructure.  This  also  needs  to  be  reinforced  by  the 
2 
 BIS Review 146/2010
transformation of the Government machinery to support the transition to a high value added 
economy.  
The final and fifth factor is the ability to effectively participate in the economic and financial 
integration with other emerging economies in particular with that of the region. Asia, in 
particular,  offers  immense  opportunities  for  increased  participation  by  Malaysia.  Indeed, 
there is already rising investment into the region by Malaysian companies and this trend can 
be  expected  to  continue  over  the  medium  term.  This  is  particularly  pronounced  in  the 
financial sector, where Malaysia’s domestic financial institutions are now increasingly having 
a greater presence in the region. Of importance, is that such ventures yield mutual benefit. 
There must also be value added to the countries concerned so as to ensure the sustainability 
of such ventures.  
Financial stability and potential risks in the financial system 
II.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  financial  system  and  financial  stability.  The  Malaysian  financial 
system has continued to perform well throughout 2010, with a high degree of resilience and 
stability  even  under  the  more  challenging  conditions.  The  capital  positions  of  both  the 
banking  and  the  insurance  sectors  have  remained  stable,  well  above  the  regulatory 
requirements.  Asset  quality  in  the  banking  sector  have  continued  to  improve,  with  the  net 
impaired financing ratio as at end September 2010 at 2% while the loan loss coverage ratio 
is  at  90%.  The  more  favourable  economic  conditions  and  the  positive  outlook  have  also 
resulted in strong profits being recorded by the industry.  
While these developments affirm the underlying strength of the financial sector, there needs 
to be greater vigilance on potential risks to the system. The first relates to the rising level of 
household sector indebtedness. Debt accumulation by the household sector has expanded 
rapidly, during the three year period leading up to 2009. Increasing at an annual rate of 9.3%, 
household debts now account for 73% of GDP. While the household balance sheets at the 
present remain healthy, household debt above prudent and sustainable levels would become 
an  area  of  concern.  In  addition,  history  has  shown  that  excessive  risk-taking  practices  by 
banking  institutions  that  involve  indiscriminate  lending  practices  with  inadequate  regard  to 
the aggregate debt obligations of borrowers would contribute to financial instability with its 
consequences not only on the financial system but also on the economy. 
This  recent  global  financial  crisis  has  shown  that  such  irresponsible  lending  practices 
contributed  to  the  build  up  of  excessive  leverage  among  households,  and  that  this  in  turn 
sowed the seeds for negative consequences on both the financial system and real economy. 
Banks and insurers are, therefore, expected to observe prudent underwriting standards and 
responsible behaviours in their lending activities. Boards also need to be accountable and 
ensure  that  the  risks  associated  with  consumer  financing  are  well  understood  and  being 
effectively managed. 
The second area that is being closely monitored is residential property prices. The aim is to 
ensure affordable housing for the population and that imprudent financing to this sector does 
not  become  a  source  of  financial  instability.  Generally,  the  price  levels  of  properties  in 
Malaysia have remained relatively stable, recording an annual increase of 5.6% in the first 
quarter and 4.2% in the second quarter of this year. At the national level, residential property 
prices  have  increased  steadily  in  tandem  with  economic  development  and  the  rise  in 
household  income  levels.  This  aggregate  growth  trend  of  this  sector  has  remained  largely 
manageable and residential property prices have not deviated from the long term trend. In 
the more recent period, however, certain specific locations, particularly in the urban centres, 
have  experienced  faster  growth,  both  in  house  prices  and  the  number  of  transactions. 
Supporting  this  trend  has  been  the  increase  in  financing  for  multiple  unit  purchases  by  a 
single borrower. This suggests investment activity that is of a speculative nature.  
BIS Review 146/2010 
 3
While  Malaysia  is  not  experiencing  a  general  property  price  bubble,  targeted  pre-emptive 
measures  are  appropriate  to  moderate  the  increases  in  property  prices  that  are  evident  in 
select locations arising from purchases that are speculative in nature. These measures aims 
to support a stable and sustainable property market, and to ensure that prices of properties 
remain affordable for the general public. Thus, with immediate effect, Bank Negara Malaysia 
announces the imposition of a maximum loan-to-value (LTV) ratio of 70% that is applicable 
from the third house financing facility taken by a borrower. Financing facilities for purchase of 
the first and second homes will not be affected by this measure and borrowers will continue 
to be able to obtain financing for these purchases at the present prevailing LTV level applied 
by the individual banks based on their internal credit policies. This measure is expected to 
moderate  excessive  investment  and  speculative  activity  in  the  residential  property  market 
and to ensure affordability of homes for genuine house buyer. The objective of encouraging 
house ownership among Malaysians continues to be an important national agenda.  
As part of its continuous efforts to raise the level of financial savvy and sophistication among 
Malaysians through the promotion of sound financial and debt management by individuals, 
Bank Negara Malaysia also wishes to announce the introduction of the Financial Capability 
Programme. This Programme will be offered by Agensi Kaunseling dan Pengurusan Kredit 
(AKPK) through its nationwide establishments and will commence from January 2011. The 
Programme  is  to  equip  individuals  with  practical  knowledge  and  skills  in  money  and  debt 
management.  This  is  aimed  at  promoting  sound  household  financial  debt  management. 
Individuals,  particularly  new  prospective  borrowers  and  young  adults,  are  strongly 
encouraged  to  participate  in  this  specially  designed  programme.  The  Bank  will  also  issue 
Guidelines  on  the  Conduct  of  Business  for  Retail  Financing  for  responsible  practices  in 
consumer  lending.  The  aim  of  these  combined  measures  is  to  reinforce  the  conditions  for 
financial  stability,  promote  a  sustainable  housing  market  and  deliver  socially  desirable 
outcomes through responsible lending and borrowing behaviours.  
Financial regulatory reforms 
III.  
These  measures  foreshadow  our  broader  plans  and  priorities  in  the  area  of  financial 
regulatory  reforms  going  forward.  While  banks  and  insurers  in  Malaysia  have  avoided  the 
pitfalls  that  have  set  back  some  of  the  largest  and  most  successful  global  financial 
institutions, our ambition to develop a dynamic and robust financial system demands that we 
remain  firmly  focused  on  continuously  strengthening  the  foundations  for  financial  stability. 
This will take into account our assessment of the domestic conditions, and the nature and 
direction  of  risks  in  the  financial  system.  The  regulatory  regime  will  be  based  on  the 
framework  of  international  standards,  specifically  those  set  by  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking Supervision, the International Association of Insurance Supervisors and the Islamic 
Financial Services Board.  
Following the global financial crisis, the most profound changes in the international standards 
have  been  focused  on  the  banking  system.  However,  as  a  result  of  more  prudent  risk 
management, a rigorous stress testing discipline and being subject to close supervision by 
the  Central  Bank,  banks  in  Malaysia  are  largely  already  operating  at  more  conservative 
capital levels than is being suggested under Basel III. While it is recognized that the global 
reforms have been designed to address problems not faced in our financial system and are 
guided  by  different  value  and  incentive  systems,  it  is  still  important  that  we  embrace 
initiatives that will enable us to avoid the same such mistakes. As more of our banks and 
insurers venture abroad into the regional markets, financial institutions will also be assessed 
by investors, analysts and market participants against these global standards.  
Moving forward, after a consultative process with the industry, the following enhancements 
will  be  incorporated  to  the  Risk  Weighted  Capital  Adequacy  Framework  for  banking 
institutions: 
4 
 BIS Review 146/2010
   higher capital requirements to support risks in trading activities, securitizations and 
counterparty credit exposures;  
strengthened definitions and criteria for the recognition of Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital; 
and  
higher  levels  of  common  equity,  Tier  1  and  total  minimum  capital  requirements 
which also provide for capital conservations buffers.  
The  appropriate  timing  of  transition  to  the  new  requirements,  will  be  determined  in  2011. 
While  the  Basel  Committee  has  set  a  generous  timeframe  for  implementation  of  the  new 
requirements, we anticipate that given the current position of strength of our banking system 
and together with other jurisdictions, including those in this region, we are in a position to be 
on a faster track to adopt the new requirements. In this endeavour, an appropriate balance 
will be maintained between our priority to substantially strengthen the capacity of the banking 
system to absorb future shocks arising from financial and economic stresses, and avoiding 
material competitive distortions that can arise from uncoordinated moves between countries 
on specific elements of the framework.  
Through  the  continued  rigor  of  our  stress  testing  requirements,  the  expectations  are  for 
banks and insurers to operate at levels that remain sound even under stressed conditions. 
This will be further reinforced with the implementation of Pillar 2 from 2011, which will accord 
greater focus on the individual banks’ own internal capital adequacy assessment processes 
to  determine  the  adequacy  of  capital  against  their  specific  risk  profiles  and  capital 
management strategies.  
With respect to liquidity, our existing Liquidity Framework will be enhanced in 2011 to bring it 
in  line  with  the  Basel  III  standard,  while  making  appropriate  customisations  to  take  into 
account  the  specific  structural  characteristics  of  our  market.  We  will  also  issue  additional 
guidance to promote more stable funding structures that will increase the robustness of bank 
liquidity positions, particularly during periods of stress in funding markets. These quantitative 
liquidity  standards  will  be  further  complemented  by  principles  for  sound  and  effective 
management of liquidity risk. 
While  major  agreement  has  been  reached  on  most  areas  concerning  capital  and  liquidity, 
proposals in other areas including the non-risk-based leverage ratio, countercyclical capital 
buffers  and  the  supervision  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions  continue  to  be  a 
work  in  progress  at  the  Basel  Committee.  It  is  important  that  bankers  including  board 
members remain current on all these developments and understand their implications on our 
domestic and regional financial landscape.  
In the insurance and takaful industry, there have been continued improvements in corporate 
governance  practices  and  further  strengthening  of  the  capital  positions  of  individual 
institutions.  These  improvements  have  however,  been  uneven  between  institutions  and 
overall progress can be further accelerated. We will monitor closely the implementation plans 
by  insurers  to  meet  and  maintain  internal  capital  targets  that  are  above  the  regulatory 
minimum  level.  Given  the  increasingly  more  complex  and  competitive  environment  going 
forward, smaller insurers, particularly in the general insurance industry, need to strengthen 
their ability to comply with the higher prudential standards. The option for mergers to form 
stronger and more resilient institutions would accelerate this process.  
In the critical area of corporate governance, we are well advanced in our concerted efforts to 
strengthen  the  Boards  of  Financial  Institutions  through  the  Financial  Institutions  Directors’ 
Education  (FIDE)  programme  which  is  now  managed  by  the  ICLIF  Leadership  and 
Governance Centre. More than 200 directors have completed the programme.  
Bank Negara Malaysia is also reviewing the need for boards of insurance companies to be 
served by a dedicated head of risk to provide assurance to the board on the quality of risk 
management  within  the  firm.  This  is  to  promote  better  risk  management  systems  and 
BIS Review 146/2010 
 5
processes  among  insurers  and  a  more  integrated  approach  to  risk  management  and 
oversight within insurers. The Bank is also reviewing the role of signing actuaries of general 
insurers  which  may  be  expanded  to  support  the  more  robust  management  of  risks  by 
insurers, particularly with respect to underwriting and solvency assessments. The regulatory 
framework for takaful operators will also be significantly strengthened with the issuance of 
the Takaful Operating Framework by the end of this year.  
These developments will further strengthen the preconditions for the wider adoption of more 
principle-based regulations in the insurance and takaful sector. This will include our plans to 
proceed with the liberalisation of operating cost control limits as set out under our Financial 
Sector Masterplan. This move will usher in a more competitive environment within a stronger 
framework of governance, market transparency and prudential safeguards that has already 
been put in place.  
Finally,  the  work  on  amagalmating  and  modernizing  the  existing  legislation  governing 
financial institutions and intermediaries under the purview of the Central Bank is now in its 
final stages. A key extension of the proposed new legislation involves putting in place a more 
comprehensive 
financial 
conglomerates.  This  will  include  proposals  to  cover  financial  holding  companies  under  an 
appropriate prudential regulatory and supervisory regime to ensure that the evolution of such 
complex  financial  groups  does  not,  over  time,  pose  a  threat  to  financial  stability  and  the 
safety and soundness of regulated institutions. The proposed new legislation will also provide 
strengthened  legal  powers  to  support  more  effective  market  conduct  regulation  and 
supervision.  
the  effective  regulation  and  supervision  of 
framework 
for 
The financial sector blueprint 
IV.  
Let  me  now  turn  to  our  progress  on  the  financial  sector  blueprint.  While  the  fundamental 
objective of this blueprint is to achieve a financial system that best serves our country as it 
transitions to becoming a developed economy in 2020, the formulation of the plan has also 
drawn from the important lessons of the recent global financial crisis. Most important, is that 
growth of the financial system should ultimately be anchored to the growth in the real sector.  
Based  on  the  rate  of  growth  of  the  economy  projected  for  the  next  decade,  the  financial 
sector is envisaged to increase in significance from 4.6 times of GDP currently, to between 
5 to 6 times of GDP by 2020. Meanwhile, the contribution of the financial services sector to 
GDP is expected to increase from 11.7% in 2009 to 14% by 2020. Following the increased 
liberalisation  in  this  decade,  this  expansion  will  be  based  on  both  domestic  and  foreign 
financial business activity. 
Also  important,  will  be  the  changing  structure  of  the  financial  system.  Going  forward,  the 
financial markets are expected to have a greater role in the intermediation of funds. Hence, it 
is envisioned that there will be further deepening and increased liquidity in financial markets 
as new players and a wider range of financial instruments combine to increase the efficiency 
of  the  financial  markets.  Of  increasing  importance  will  be  the  intermediation  of  long-term 
savings,  such  as  insurance  and  pension  funds,  and  long-term  investments  such  as 
investments in economic and social infrastructure. 
The  composition  of  financial  institutions  will  also  show  much  greater  diversity:  with  banks, 
insurers  and  takaful  operators  offering  higher  value-added  services  to  serve  the  more 
sophisticated  customers,  with  more  developed  venture  capital  industry  and  angel  funds 
providing risk capital for innovative firms, and with development financial institutions stepping 
up  to  widen  the  base  of  financial  services  to  all  Malaysians.  In  addition,  new  and  existing 
forms of financing that have thus far remained at the fringes of the financial system such as 
factoring, leasing and credit companies are expected to become more significant. Spurred by 
new  technologies,  such  as  greater  adoption  of  electronic  invoicing  and  receivables 
6 
 BIS Review 146/2010
exchanges,  it  will  generate  more  competition  to  the  traditional  players  while  enriching  the 
product offering, particularly to the SME segment.  
The evolution of the financial sector will also focus on the new growth areas that will catalyse 
Malaysia’s  transition  to  a  higher  value  added  economy.  These  include  areas  of  financing 
such as for green technology, infrastructure development, education, and entrepreneurship 
and innovation. These are key focal points that will yield increased national productivity, drive 
innovation  and  stimulate  the  formation  of  businesses.  It  is  anticipated  that  a  significant 
portion of new frontier industries will be spearheaded by young, innovative SMEs that would 
require substantial investments in research and development, and for the commercialisation 
of the research and development. To support these endeavours, a more diversified financial 
structure, involving new financing modalities will be essential. The new funding ecosystem 
will  thus  need  to  provide  comprehensive  and  flexible  financial  solutions  to  Malaysian 
consumers and businesses. 
Recognising the importance of having a payment system that is comprehensive and efficient 
to  support  the  needs  of  the  consumers  and  businesses  in  a  high-income  economy,  the 
payment  system  infrastructure  would  be  enhanced  and  more  inclusive,  capitalising  on  the 
advancements  in  technology  as  well  as  the  high  number  of  banking  accounts  and  mobile 
phone penetration in the country. The focus will be on infrastructure developments necessary 
to  provide  the  speed  and  efficiency  while  offering  convenience  to  consumers  and 
businesses.  Electronic  payments  should  be  the  preferred  medium  for  all  economic 
transactions.  This  includes  having  the  infrastructure  necessary  for  industry-wide  mobile 
banking  and  payment  ecosystem,  including  an  extensive  outreach  of  the  point-of-sale 
terminal facilities. The pricing structure and a comprehensive awareness programme to steer 
desirable payment behaviour are also key areas that will be addressed in our next phase of 
the development of our financial system. 
The blueprint will also seek to extend the reach to the potential untapped market represented 
by  the  latent  demand  for  financial  services  among  the  non-urban  population  and  urban 
residents  in  the  lower  income  group.  The  blueprint  will  endeavour  to  develop  a  conducive 
environment for the design of financial products and services and the utilisation of delivery 
channels  will  effectively  overcome  the  barriers  to  financial  access,  particularly  cost 
restrictions  and  physical  accessibility.  With  greater  regional  integration,  we  also  see 
significant potential to leverage domestic strategies to create a strong regional footprint in the 
provision of affordable and commercially viable financial products and services. 
Beyond  domestic  borders,  Asia’s  continued  growth  and  prosperity  offers  significant 
opportunities for the provision of financial services and productive investment prospects. An 
important  thrust  of  the  blueprint  will  therefore  be  to  develop  the  financial  infrastructure  to 
enhance the linkages within the region. This will be facilitated through the continued process 
of financial integration and increased connectivity within the region, with greater liberalisation 
of the financial sector, the integration of payment and settlement systems, and greater cross-
border cooperation in maintaining regional financial stability.  
Central to the development strategies for the next decade is the consolidation of Malaysia’s 
position  as  a  leading  international  Islamic  financial  centre.  Malaysia  already  has  a  strong 
brand affirmed by the growing importance of our sukuk market and the higher level of foreign 
participation  in  our  Islamic  financial  markets.  This  is  reinforced  by  the  diversity  of  market 
players  and  a  comprehensive  institutional  framework  for  Islamic  finance.  Two  landmark 
initiatives  achieved  this  year  is  the  establishment  of  the  Islamic  Financial  Stability  Forum 
(IFSF)  and  the  International  Islamic  Liquidity  Management  Corporation  (IILM).  Moving 
forward, Islamic finance is expected to further accelerate its pace of global expansion, having 
a more significant role in facilitating the intermediation of international financial flows. 
A critical factor that will determine the success of the financial services industry is the talents 
in  the  industry.  With  increased  international  mobility  of  talent,  the  global  war  for  talent  will 
intensify. Successful financial institutions will be those that are able to develop, attract and 
BIS Review 146/2010 
 7
retain talent. Financial services professionals also need to be regionally oriented and able to 
integrate  cross-border  businesses  effectively.  The  blueprint  will  also  address  this  issue  to 
ensure that the sector will be well supported. 
In  charting  the  future  for  the  industry,  the  foundation  for  financial  stability  will  be 
strengthened.  The  focus  will  be  on  addressing  systemic  risks  and  strengthening  crisis 
management  capability.  Regulatory  cooperation  will  be  enhanced  in  surveillance  and  in 
capacity  building  for  effective  cross  border  resolution  of  problem  institutions.  Domestically, 
significant supervisory attention will be directed towards achieving regulatory consistency in 
respect  to  risk  assessment  for  financial  groups  taking  into  account  the  trade-offs  and  the 
need for safeguards.  
Underpinning the more competitive and dynamic financial sector will also be a deep-seated 
core value system, with financial service providers operating responsibly, with integrity and 
offering financial products and services with dignity. More specific institutional arrangements 
will be considered for market conduct and consumer protection.  
In realizing this shared vision for the financial sector, of critical importance is the cumulative 
participation  of  the  public  sector  and  the  industry  in  the  development  of  the  Plan  and  its 
implementation.  This  combined  effort  will  ensure  that  the  new  blueprint  is  comprehensive, 
relevant and realistic. 
Conclusion 
V.  
Let  me  conclude:  Considerable  uncertainty  remains  in  the  outlook  for  the  global  economy 
and  we  must  thus  remain  vigilant  to  emerging  risks.  Second,  in  a  more  complex  and 
interconnected  environment,  broader  prudential  and  economic  considerations  must  factor 
more prominently in financial institutions’ management of risks. Third, while we believe our 
regulatory  and  supervisory  system  has  served  us  well,  we  are  not  complacent  and  will 
continue  to  work  hard  to  place  the  financial  sector  on  firmer  ground  so  that  our  ability  to 
manage future shocks will be further improved. And finally, we are confident that with a clear 
vision,  focus  and  effective  implementation,  our  strategies  to  bring  the  financial  sector  to  a 
new level in this next decade will deliver better outcomes for our financial system and our 
overall economy.  
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS Review 146/2010
