Glenn Stevens: The challenge of prosperity 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  at  the  
Committee  for  Economic  Development  of  Australia  (CEDA)  annual  dinner,  Melbourne, 
29 November 2010. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  play  a  part  in  marking  the  50th  anniversary  of  CEDA.  It  is 
particularly  significant  for  me  to  be  here  because  2010  also  marks  50  years  since  the 
commencement of central banking operations by the Reserve Bank of Australia. There were 
in fact a number of significant beginnings in 1960.  
It was a time of rising prosperity after a long period of difficulty. Between the depression of 
the 1890s and the end of World War II, real GDP per capita in Australia had risen by about 
35 per cent – or around half a percentage point per year. But in the 15-year period from the 
end of the war to 1960, it expanded by about 25 per cent – or about 1½ per cent a year.  
The long post war boom would eventually see growing excesses from the late 1960s, which 
ended in the disastrous instability of the 1970s. But in 1960, the boom still had a long way to 
run.1 
So 1960 was a time of optimism. There have been many ups and downs for the Australian 
economy since then. CEDA has played its role in informing discussion and debate along the 
way.  
Two years ago, when I last addressed this group, optimism was anything but the order of the 
day.2  The  global  financial  system  was  in  serious  disarray  and  the  global  economy  was 
heading into recession. It was obvious Australia would be affected but I suggested that there 
were good reasons for quiet confidence then about the long run future of Australia. There still 
are, two years later.  
But  we  have  to  turn  that  confidence  into  lasting  prosperity.  So  I  would  like  to  offer  a  few 
observations about some of the things we need to be thinking about. I do not have definitive 
solutions, but offer these observations as a modest contribution to the discussion.  
In so doing, I am not trying to convey anything about recent or prospective monetary policy 
decisions. Tonight, at an event marking the 50th anniversary of a body devoted to Australia’s 
economic  development,  it  is  more  useful  to  lift  our  gaze  beyond  the  next  interest  rate 
decision to look at a broader canvas.  
I have one picture to show.  
                                                 
1  
In 1960, some saw that care was needed. In the Economic Record in August of that year, there appeared the 
following statement: “In July 1960 the Australian economy is producing more, and expanding its production 
faster … than at any earlier date. … One outstanding economic problem seems to remain, and it has been 
frequently  discussed  academically  and  in  public  debate:  can  the  boom  be  sustained  without  a  dangerous 
degree of inflation?” (Bowen 1960). 
2   “The  Economic  Situation”,  address  to  CEDA  Annual  Dinner,  Melbourne,  19  November  2008.  Available  at: 
http://www.rba.gov.au/publications/bulletin/2008/dec/pdf/bu-1208-3.pdf. 
BIS Review 160/2010 
 1
  This is a very long-run chart of Australia’s terms of trade. You may have noticed the Reserve 
Bank saying a lot about the terms of trade in the past few years. Before I describe the chart, 
why is it important?  
Our terms of trade have a big bearing on national income. In economic commentary, there is 
typically a very strong focus on GDP – the value of production – as a summary of national 
material progress. There is also quite rightly an emphasis on lifting productivity – real GDP 
per hour worked – as the source of our growth of material living standards.  
For open economies, though, our standard of living is affected not just by the physical output 
we can obtain from our resources of labour and capital, but also by the purchasing power of 
that output over things we want to have from the rest of the world. This is what the terms of 
trade  is  measuring.  It  is  the  relative  price  of  our  export  basket  in  terms  of  imports.  At  the 
extreme,  if  the  economy  were  open  to  the  extent  that  we  exported  all  our  production  and 
imported all our consumption, then the price of exports relative to imports would determine 
our  living  standards  entirely,  for  any  given  level  of  productivity  per  hour  worked.  As  it  is, 
Australia is not that open, and not as open as many smaller economies, but it is considerably 
more open than the really large economies like the United States, the euro area or Japan. So 
the terms of trade matter.  
When the terms of trade are high, the international purchasing power of our exports is high. 
To put it in very (over-) simplified terms, five years ago, a ship load of iron ore was worth 
about the same as about 2,200 flat screen television sets. Today it is worth about 22,000 flat-
screen TV sets – partly due to TV prices falling but more due to the price of iron ore rising by 
a factor of six. This is of course a trivialised example – we do not want to use the proceeds of 
exports  entirely  to  purchase  TV  sets.  But  the  general  point  is  that  high  terms  of  trade,  all 
other things equal, will raise living standards, while low terms of trade will reduce them.  
Returning to the chart, to my eye there are three key features.  
The first is the degree of variability in the terms of trade through the middle parts of the 20th 
century, from about World War I to the aftermath of the Korean War. This was, of course, a 
period of considerable instability in the global economy, with the attempt to return to the Gold 
Standard after the “Great War”, followed by the 1930s depression, the Second World War, 
the post war expansion and then the Korean War. I might add that, in those days, with the 
attempt  to  maintain  a  fixed  exchange  rate,  these  swings  were  very  disruptive  to  the 
economy. Typically, a rise in export incomes would result in a rise in money and  credit, a 
boom in economic activity and a rise in inflation. Then the terms of trade would fall back and 
2 
 BIS Review 160/2010
the whole process would go into a rather painful reverse. The advent of the flexible exchange 
rate in the early 1980s made a great difference in managing these episodes.  
The second feature is the downward trend in the terms of trade, particularly noticeable from 
the early 1950s to about the mid 1980s.3 This was the period of resource price pessimism, 
the “Prebisch Singer hypothesis” and so on, which held that primary products would tend to 
decline in price relative to manufactured products.4 The latter part of this period was the one 
in  which  the  realisation  became  widespread  that  the  (apparently)  easy  gains  in  living 
standards  of  the  post-war  boom  were  gone,  and  in  which  pessimism  about  Australia’s 
economic future was probably at its most intense. It was also the period when, under strong 
political  leadership  backed  by  a  highly  capable  bureaucracy  and  an  economically  literate 
media,  our  determination  to  press  on  with  various  productivity-increasing  reforms  was 
greatest.  That  these  two  phenomena  occurred  together  was  probably  not  entirely  a 
coincidence.  
The third feature is the current level of the terms of trade relative to everything but the all-
time  peaks  over  the  past  century.  Measured  on  a  five-year  moving  average  basis,  and 
assuming (as we do) some decline in the terms of trade over the next few years from this 
year’s  forecast  peak,  the  terms  of  trade  are  as  high  as  anything  we  have  seen  since 
Federation.  
To  give  some  perspective  on  how  important  this  is,  let  me  offer  one  back-of-the-envelope 
calculation. The export sector is about one-fifth of the economy. The terms of trade are at 
present  about  60  per  cent  higher  than  their  average  level  for  the  20th  century,  and  about 
80 per cent higher than the outcome would have been had they been on the 100-year trend 
line. This means that about 12–15 per cent of GDP in additional income is available to this 
country’s producers and/or consumers, each year, compared with what would have occurred 
under  the  average  or  trend  set  of  relative  prices  over  the  preceding  100  years  (all  other 
things equal). That will continue each year, while the terms of trade remain at this level.  
Of course, part of this income accrues to those foreign investors who own substantial stakes 
in the mineral sector. In this sense, the current boom is a little different from the early-1950s 
one  where  most  of  the  income  went  first  to  Australian  farmers.  Nonetheless,  a  good 
proportion  accrues  to  local  shareholders  and  employees,  and  to  governments  via  various 
taxes.  A  non-trivial  part  of  it  is  available  to  consumers  as  higher  purchasing  power  over 
imports, as a result of the high exchange rate.  
It does not take much imagination to see that an event of this magnitude is expansionary. 
Incomes are higher – in some cases a lot higher – and, absent some offsetting force, some 
of that will be spent. So it has always proved in the past. Moreover, if, as seems very likely, 
these prices prompt a build-up in investment to supply more of the commodities concerned, 
there  are  further  expansionary  effects.  Even  applying  significant  discounts  to  stated 
investment intentions, as the Reserve Bank staff have done in their forecasts, there is likely 
to be a further significant rise in business investment over the next few years, from a level 
that is already reasonably high as a share of GDP. On all the indications available, we are 
living through an event that occurs maybe once or twice in a century.  
So a very important question for us is: how do we handle all this?  
We  obviously  have  to  be  wary  of  overheating.  The  Bank  has  given  its  views  on  this  point 
before and I will say no more about that tonight.  
                                                 
3  
In fact, fitting a trend to the data for the 20th century shows a statistically significant downward trend of about 
0.2 per cent per annum on average. 
4   Prebisch (1950) and Singer (1950). 
BIS Review 160/2010 
 3
But  in  fact  the  issues  are  broader  than  that.  They  extend  to  how  we  use  the  additional 
income, and how soon, and to questions of structural adjustment.  
One difficulty is that it matters a great deal whether the rise in the terms of trade is likely to 
be permanent or only temporary. Unfortunately, we cannot really answer that question. It is 
obvious from my chart that past episodes tended not to be permanent, but they sometimes 
lasted several years and certainly long enough to be very disruptive.  
If the rise in income is only temporary, it would be desirable not to raise national consumption 
by very much. Instead, it would make sense to allow the income gain to flow into a higher 
stock of saving, which would then be available to fund future consumption (including through 
periods  of  temporarily  weak  terms  of  trade,  which  undoubtedly  will  occur  in  the  future). 
Moreover, it would probably not make sense for there to be a big increase in investment in 
resource extraction if that investment could be profitable only at temporarily very high prices 
(and which could come at the cost of reduced investment in other areas).  
If  the  change  is  likely  to  be  persistent,  then  income  is  likely  to  be  seen  as  permanently 
higher. Households and most likely governments will probably see their way clear to lift their 
consumption  permanently,  both  of  traded  and  non-traded  goods  and  services.  Structural 
economic  adjustment  will  also  occur  as  the  sectors  whose  output  prices  have  risen,  now 
being more profitable, will seek to expand, in the process attracting productive resources – 
labour and capital – away from other sectors whose output will decline as a share of GDP. 
Australia’s floating exchange rate, which tends to rise in line with the increase in the terms of 
trade,  helps  the  reallocation  of  labour  and  capital  by  giving  price  signals  to  the  production 
sector. The higher exchange rate also speeds the spread of the income gains from the terms 
of  trade  rise  to  sectors  other  than  the  resources  sector,  by  directly  increasing  their 
purchasing  power  over  imports.  The  resulting  rise  in  imports  spills  demand  for  tradable 
goods and services abroad, which helps to reduce domestic inflation.  
So  the  shift  in  the  terms  of  trade  will,  unless  clearly  quite  temporary,  drive  shifts  in  the 
structure  of  the  economy.  It  is  easy,  of  course,  to  speak  in  the  abstract  of  “reallocation  of 
productive resources”, but this means that some businesses and incomes become relatively 
smaller;  jobs  growth  in  some  areas  slows  even  as  in  others  it  picks  up.  Some  regions 
struggle  more  than  others.  Some  sources  of  government  revenue  are  adversely  affected 
even as other sources see an improvement. This process will be seen, not unreasonably, as 
costly by those adversely affected, even though the overall outcome is that the country as a 
whole is considerably better off. (It is also obvious that, if the terms of trade change really is 
only temporary, it may not be worth paying these adjustment costs from the perspective of 
the  overall  economy.)  The  policy  challenge  for  governments  will  be  whether  to  help  these 
sectors resist change, or to help them adapt to it.  
We can carry out the thought experiment of imagining that, as a society, we wanted to resist 
these changes completely and seek to preserve the existing structure of the economy. Let 
me be clear I do not advocate this. But consider what would be involved. We would need, 
inter alia, to prevent the resources sector from responding to changed prices (preventing any 
increase  in  its  size).  That  would  probably  involve  taxing  away  completely  any  additional 
national  income  resulting  from  higher  prices,  and  maybe  also  preventing  any  additional 
exploration  or  capacity  expansion  to  take  advantage  of  strong  demand  that  could  be  met 
profitably  even  at  after-tax  prices.  We  would  probably  need  to  re-cycle  any  funds  raised 
overseas, in the process holding down the exchange rate. It is important to note, by the way, 
that such funds could not be spent at home without adding to aggregate demand and hence 
risking the inflation we would still be seeking to avoid in this scenario. In the scenario where 
we want as much as possible to be unchanged, the additional income handed to us by the 
change in global relative prices all has to be used offshore, one way or another.  
If all the above could be achieved – a very big if, when one considers the logistics of what 
would  be  required  –  then  the  economy’s  structure  could,  perhaps,  remain  as  it  was.  This 
course  would  mean  forgoing  the  potential  for  higher  export  income  by  investing  more  in 
4 
 BIS Review 160/2010
resource  extraction;  either  those  gains  would  go  instead  to  other  resource-supplying 
countries or, in commodities where Australia is a major producer, our lack of supply response 
would  result  in  further  upward  pressure  on  prices.  So  we  would  avoid  the  disruption  of 
structural change, but overall would be poorer than otherwise would have been the case, as 
would,  perhaps,  our  trading  partners.  It  is  hard  to  believe  such  an  outcome  could  be 
achieved and no less difficult to imagine it being thought desirable.  
Realistically, we won’t be able to hold the economic structure static in that fashion if there is 
a major, persistent change in relative prices. Nor, I would argue, should we try. Had we had 
that approach through our history, we would still be trying to employ 25 per cent of our labour 
in agriculture and still be trying to ride “on the sheep’s back” in chase of a world economy 
that had moved on to place a much higher value on many things other than wool. We would 
not have the highly developed services sector that we have today, nor the standard of living 
we currently enjoy. So if the terms of trade do remain fairly high for a lengthy period, the task 
is going to be to facilitate structural adjustment so as to make it occur in as low cost a way as 
possible. But that ought to be feasible given that overall income is considerably higher.  
Of course we cannot know whether the terms of trade will be high for a long period. History 
certainly would counsel caution in this respect. We do know that supply of various resources 
is set to increase significantly over the years ahead and not just from Australian sources. It is 
for this reason that we assume some fall in commodity prices over the next several years. 
The assumption underlying the Bank’s forecasts published a few weeks ago is that iron ore 
prices fall by up to about 30 per cent over the next several years. Even if they do, the terms 
of trade will remain quite high by the standards of the past 100 years in the near term, as the 
chart showed.  
Is  that  assumed  fall  realistic?  There  is  no  way  of  knowing.  Larger  falls  have  happened 
before. In fact they have been the norm. On the other hand, experienced people seem to be 
saying that something very important – unprecedented even – is occurring in the emergence 
of very large countries like China and India. If the steel intensity of China’s GDP stays where 
it is already, and China’s growth rate remains at 7 or 8 per cent for some years to come, 
which  appears  to  be  the  intention of  Chinese policy-makers,  then  the  demand  for  iron  ore 
and metallurgical coal will rise a long way over the next couple of decades. If India’s steel 
intensity goes the same way as most other countries have, that will add further. Even with 
allowance for supply responses by other producers and considerably lower prices than we 
see today, that seems to point to a prominent role for the resources sector, broadly defined, 
over a longish horizon.  
So the most prudent assumption to make might be that the terms of trade will be persistently 
higher than they used to be, by enough that we will need to accommodate structural change 
in the economy, but not by so much that we shouldn’t seek to save the bulk of the surge in 
national income occurring in the next year or two, at least until it becomes clearer what the 
long run prospects for national income might be.  
As it happens, there does seem to be a good deal of saving going on, thus far, in the private 
sector. A little-noticed recent statistical release was the annual national income accounts for 
the year 2009/10. In that release, the Australian Statistician has made some major revisions 
to the estimates for household saving (which of course is a residual arising from other major 
aggregates).  The  revision  lifted  estimated  household  saving  by  $45  billion,  or  about  5 
percentage points of income, from the previous estimates. The net saving rate is now seen at 
some  9–10  per  cent  of  income  over  the  past  year  or  two,  up  from  about  −1  per  cent  five 
years ago.  
In all the circumstances, considering what has happened around the world in recent years, 
more  cautious  behaviour  by  households  is  not  surprising.  Nor,  I  would  argue,  is  it 
unwelcome. With the stimulus from the terms of trade and the likely investment build-up, the 
economy can cope with more saving by households for a time. On the other hand, to expect 
it  to  absorb  a  major  surge  in  consumption  at  the  same  time  as  an  historic  increase  in 
BIS Review 160/2010 
 5
investment  is  also  occurring  would  be  rather  ambitious.  In  fact,  we  probably  need  private 
saving  to  remain  on  a  higher  trajectory,  and  we  will  also  need  public  saving  to  rise,  as 
scheduled.  
In  the  longer  term,  the  economy’s  increased  exposure  to  large  emerging  economies  like 
China and India (these two now accounting for over a quarter of exports) – assuming that 
continues  –  may  also  pose  important  questions.  If  these  and  other  emerging  economies 
continue  to  grow  strongly  on  average,  but  also,  as  with  every  other  country,  still  have 
business cycles, the result may be the Australian export sector, and therefore the Australian 
economy,  having  a  potential  path  of  expansion  characterised  by  faster  average  growth  in 
income, but with more variability. That possibility has been noted by some observers. It is 
worth  recording  that  such  concentration  would  hardly  be  unprecedented  –  think  about  the 
dominance of Japan in Australia’s trade in the 1970s and 1980s, or the dominance of the 
United Kingdom in an earlier era. Nonetheless, the degree of concentration could be higher 
than we have seen in the past decade or more, which was a time of considerable stability for 
the Australian economy overall.  
We can’t know whether this scenario of higher but more variable income growth will come to 
pass. But if it did, how should we respond?  
We  could  simply  accept  higher  variability,  if  that  comes,  as  the  price  of  higher  average 
income  growth.  That  would  see  higher  variability  in  demand  in  the  economy,  which  would 
have its own implications, not least that it could make it harder for macroeconomic policies to 
foster stability.  
Another approach would be to reflect the higher income variability in our saving and portfolio 
behaviour rather than our spending behaviour. We could seek to smooth our consumption – 
responding less to rises or falls in income with changes in spending and allowing the effects 
to be reflected in fluctuations in saving. In the most ambitious version of this approach, we 
could seek to hold those savings in assets that provided some sort of natural hedge against 
the  variability  of  trading  partners,  or  whose  returns  were  at  least  were  uncorrelated  with 
them. Of course, such assets might be hard to find – the international choice of quality assets 
with reasonable returns these days is a good deal more limited than it used to be.  
It is possible that this behaviour might be managed through the decisions of private savers. 
There might also be a case for some of it occurring through the public finances. That would 
mean accepting considerably larger cyclical variation in the budget position, and especially 
considerably larger surpluses in the upswings of future cycles, than those to which we have 
been accustomed in the past. There would also be issues of governance and management 
of  any  net  asset  positions  accumulated  by  the  government  as  part  of  such  an  approach, 
including whether it should be, as some have suggested, in a stabilisation fund of some sort. 
These are pretty big questions and addressing them would not be straightforward, so I am 
not going to attempt that tonight. The point simply is that, in the face of what appears to be a 
very big event in our terms of trade, these issues are deserving of consideration – perhaps 
by CEDA, among others, as you enter your sixth decade.  
Conclusion  
As I said at the outset, we have grounds for confidence in the future of our country, just as at 
CEDA’s  beginning  50  years  ago.  Recent  performance,  not  to  mention  the  economic 
opportunities in our time zone, has helped to strengthen our confidence.  
But it would be a mistake to rest on recent achievements, as significant as they have been, 
and to fail to press on in our efforts to do better. Past periods of apparently easy affluence, 
conferred  by  favourable  international  conditions,  probably  lessened  the  sharpness  of  our 
focus  on  the  other  element  of  raising  living  standards,  namely  productivity.  It  was 
subsequently  a  long  and  difficult  grind  when  we  realised  that  international  conditions  had 
become less favourable. So while I have not talked about productivity this evening, I do not 
6 
 BIS Review 160/2010
wish my focus on the terms of trade to be interpreted as implying that lifting productivity is 
unimportant. On the contrary, while our terms of trade are handed to us, for better or worse, 
by international relative prices, the efficiency with which we work is a variable we can actually 
do something about.  
A  prudent  approach  might  be  to  use  the  current  period  of  exceptionally  favourable 
international prices to raise our saving, while maintaining a disciplined approach to ensuring 
there are no impediments to lifting productivity. Consumption deferred – private or public – 
can easily be enjoyed in future; consumption we get used to today is harder to wind back in 
the future if circumstances change. These issues, and the associated structural adjustment 
issues, no doubt will pose a challenge. But that’s the challenge of prosperity – and not a bad 
challenge to have.  
It  is  sometimes  said  that  Australia  manages  adversity  well  but  prosperity  badly.  There  will 
never be a better opportunity than now to show otherwise. 
References 
Bowen  I  (1960),  “The  Australian  Economy,  July  1960”,  The  Economic  Record,  36  (75), 
pp 307–355.  
Prebisch R (1950), The Economic Development of Latin America and Its Principal Problems, 
United Nations, New York.  
Singer  H  (1950),  “The  Distribution  of  Gains  between  Investing  and  Borrowing  Countries”, 
American Economic Review, 40, pp 473–485. 
BIS Review 160/2010 
 7
