Manuel Sánchez González: Financial crises – prevention, correction and 
monetary policy  
Speech by Mr Manuel Sánchez González, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the 
Cato Institute 28th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington DC, 18 November 2010. 
 The opinions expressed herein are entirely my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Mexico. 
The  financial  crisis  that  surfaced  in  2007  has  stressed  the  need  to  identify  the  ultimate 
sources  of  the  incentives  that  were  behind  the  preceding  credit  and  housing  bubbles.  To 
lower  the  likelihood  of  future  financial  collapses,  prudent  economic  policies  as  well  as  an 
adequate  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  financial  institutions  are  required. 
Monetary policy, in turn, should be directed towards price stability, which is a central bank’s 
best contribution not only to long-term economic growth, but also to financial stability.  
Bubbles and recurrent crises  
Since the late 1990s, the United States and other advanced countries exhibited rapid rises in 
housing prices that were supported by sizeable leverage taken on by households and firms. 
A  credit  bubble  evolved,  along  with  a  housing  bubble,  as  banks  and  other  financial 
intermediaries  facilitated  borrowing  by  relaxing  mortgage  product  standards.  In  some 
countries, notably the United States, credit expansion was fueled by substantial use of loan 
securitization and credit derivatives.  
The eventual bursting of the housing and credit bubbles resulted in global turmoil with severe 
consequences in terms of financial instability and a drop in income. Through contagion, this 
burden was shared by many countries that did not create any autonomous asset bubbles. 
The most affected nations were those that hold close investment and trade ties with the 
United  States,  as  was  the  case  of  Mexico.  The  widespread  negative  impact  of  the 
meltdown has justifiably called the attention of policy makers to finding ways to pursue 
financial stability and avoiding future collapses.  
To  be  realistic,  the  scope  of  such  an  objective  should  be  properly  bounded.  Financial 
bubbles,  characterized  by  substantial  rises  in  asset  prices  departing  from  previous  trends 
that are suddenly interrupted by a sharp fall, have been common in economic history. While 
volatility  in  stock,  currency  and  commodities  prices  are  the  norm,  occasionally  bubbles 
emerge in many assets, including housing.1 
Bubbles are formed because many people believe that the price of the underlying asset will 
continue to rise into the indefinite future and that they can sell the asset before a change in 
fortunes occurs. Long durations of bubbles may  reflect information asymmetries and costs 
associated with arbitrage in the form of short-sale constraints. In market economies, asset 
price  fluctuations  and  bubbles  could  be  interpreted  as  unavoidable  and  even  beneficial  as 
they become the means of rewarding good choices and punishing bad decisions.  
One macroeconomic risk of asset price collapses is the possibility of a growth slowdown or a 
recession. The empirical evidence of the effects of price falls in stock and currency markets 
is  somewhat  mixed.  However,  the  likely  negative  real  consequences  of  housing  bursts 
                                                 
1   More  formally,  a  bubble  is  defined  as  rises  in  asset  prices  that  exceed  an  asset’s  fundamental  value.  Its 
testable implications are necessarily conditional on the theoretical model chosen. For alternative assessments 
of classical bubble cases, see Garber (2001) and Kindleberger and Aliber (2005). 
BIS Review 160/2010 
 1
appear to be clearer. Statistical analyses reveal that housing prices are strongly pro-cyclical 
and that they are leading indicators of recessions and expansions.2  
A second, potentially more serious cause of concern over large housing price fluctuations is 
that they have frequently ended in banking crises. These episodes may involve problems of 
liquidity and insolvency of certain financial institutions to the extent that the functioning of the 
economy  becomes  impaired,  for  instance,  if  they  produce  a  generalized  panic  and  loss  of 
confidence.3 
A target of smooth asset price behavior is hardly attainable through economic policy, given 
the intrinsic uncertainty involved in financial transactions and the imperfect information policy 
makers have at hand. More important, however, is the fact that such an objective is probably 
undesirable as it amounts to controlling risk and returns, thereby creating moral hazard and 
inhibiting innovation and growth.  
What  does  constitute  a  sound  policy  goal  is  building  conditions  to  ensure  the  continuous 
functioning of the basic financial system, particularly the banking system, without which the 
economy cannot work. This focus, which operationally requires a delimitation of what a basic 
system is, gives content to the objective of financial stability and crisis prevention.  
Preventing financial crises  
The global crisis reflected excessive risk taking and high leverage on the part of economic 
agents  and financial  institutions.  A basic  postulate  of  economics  is  that  people  respond  to 
incentives. Hence, to reduce the probability of another financial collapse, it is necessary to 
learn  from  experience  by  identifying  the  ultimate  sources  of  the  incentives  that  led  to  the 
crisis. By this, I mean the environment that economic agents face in making decisions. Given 
this  setting,  private  actions  can  be  regarded  as  results,  not  as  root  causes  of  problems. 
Examples  of  the  former  in  the  crisis  are  the  high  bonuses  paid  to  bankers  for  placing 
securitized  loans  and  the  poor  credit  evaluation  of  these  instruments  made  by  rating 
agencies.  
There is a large body of literature discussing the possible origins of the financial debacle. Of 
course, any list of factors is incomplete not only to explain the crisis but to enable anticipation 
of future ones. Despite this obvious limitation, one can expect that correction of the identified 
conditions for inadequate incentives will lower the probability of banking disasters.  
For expedience, the causes of the turmoil can be classified into cyclical and structural. In the 
first  group  two  contributing  factors  stand  out.  One  refers  to  the  low  interest  rates  that 
prevailed in the years prior to the global crisis. Authors are divided in stressing, as the main 
source of this phenomenon, either an expansionary monetary policy reflected in short-term 
policy  interest  rates,  or  capital  inflows  from  emerging  markets  to  developed  countries  that 
affected long-term interest rates.4 
There is much debate on the significance of the possible deviation of United States monetary 
policy  from  the  “correct”  Taylor  rule  during  2002–2005.  However,  many  empirical  studies 
conclude  that  policy  interest  rates  that  were  negative  in  real  terms  and  deviated  from 
                                                 
2   For example, considering 15 U.S. stock market crashes over the previous century, Mishkin and White (2002) 
find that not all resulted in economic contractions, and Bleaney and Castilla-Vargas (2009) demonstrate that 
currency depreciations during 1985–2004 were expansionary in developed markets. Leamer (2007) uncovers 
a strong impact of housing crisis on output in the U.S. and Assmann et. al. (2009) estimate significant real 
effects of housing crises for a group of 15 industrial countries. 
3   Reinhart  and  Rogoff  (2009)  pp.  158–162  examine  the  magnitude  and  duration  of  21  downturns  in  housing 
prices that have accompanied major banking crises in both advanced and emerging economies. 
4   This hypothesis was referred to as a “global saving glut” by Bernanke (2005). 
2 
 BIS Review 160/2010
traditional  Taylor  rules  in  the  advanced  economies  did  contribute  to  the  gestation  of  the 
crisis. The verified channels include an increase in housing investment and prices, a stimulus 
to  borrowing,  greater  risk  taking  by  economic  agents  and  banks,  an  increase  in  bank 
leverage, and the loosening of lending standards. On the other hand, statistical evidence of a 
separate contribution of capital inflows to the crisis appears less conclusive.5 
The  other  factor  of  cyclical  conditions  encompasses  policies  aimed  at  promoting  the 
expansion  of  lending,  through  fiscal  subsidies  for  borrowers,  credit  targets  for  banks,  and 
government guarantees on loans – for example, to make housing more “affordable” for low-
income people. In the United States, government-sponsored enterprises promoted massive 
securitization of subprime loans, something which was crucial in the gestation of the bubbles.  
A  central  lesson  here  is  that  economic  policy  should  not  become  a  source  of  problems. 
Expansionary  monetary  policy  beyond  optimal  rules  for  a  prolonged  period  of  time  and 
policies for artificially promoting credit expansion should be avoided, among other reasons, 
because they produce inadequate incentives.  
Moreover, the structural factors behind the crisis refer to a poor regulatory and supervisory 
framework for intermediaries. Regulation is justified to counter externalities such as the ones 
experienced  in  the  crisis.  The  prevailing  regulatory  rules  probably  contributed  to  the  high 
leverage  and  large  maturity  mismatch  taken  on  by  banks  and  other  financial  institutions 
which ended in widespread counterparty mistrust, liquidity shortages, and contagion to 
other  markets.  To  a  large  extent,  the  undue  exposure  to  risk  was  possible  because 
banks took much investment off their balance sheets.  
One possible source of weakness stems from capitalization and liquidity standards that were 
not effective enough to avert the crisis. A preventive, stronger set of requirements in terms of 
levels and composition, with “sufficiently” broad scope, is necessary to generate responsible 
behavior  in  the  financial  system.  In  principle,  more  stringent  capitalization  requirements 
would induce shareholders of institutions to monitor more carefully the risk positions adopted 
by  their  managers.  Also,  stricter  liquidity  standards  would  allow  banks  to  handle  stress 
situations associated with tightened funding sources and increased deposit withdrawals with 
more flexibility. Obviously, these restrictions may have an impact on the availability and price 
of credit. Yet, the increased social benefits are expected to surpass the costs.  
For  capitalization,  the  definition  of  capital  should  be  narrowed  to  include  only  truly  loss-
absorbing items such as common  equity. Ideally, one would like differentiate with different 
weights not only the type of asset in general but the specifics of such assets – for example, a 
mortgage for a low-risk customer should not absorb the same capital as one for a high-risk 
customer. In practice, however, this procedure might be cumbersome and most importantly, 
it would be largely dependent on judgment, despite the sophistication of any model. Hence, it 
is  probably  better  to  seek  high  standards  of  capital  relative  to  non-risk-weighted  assets 
including  off-balance-sheet  exposures;  i.e.,  the  total  leverage  ratio.  Also,  buffers  for  bad 
times and contingent debt conversions into equity for tail risk situations are highly desirable.6 
As for liquidity, although extreme versions of null maturity mismatch between the assets and 
liabilities of banks have proven historically impractical, a more flexible and modern version of 
                                                 
5   The  debate  has  been  led  by  Taylor  (2007)  and  Bernanke  (2010).  Adrian  and  Shin  (2009),  Eickmeier  and 
Hofmann (2010) and Maddaloni and Peydró (2010) provide empirical evidence of the effect of lax monetary 
policy on the crisis. Obstfeld and Rogoff (2009) consider that the possible existence of a “savings glut” was 
partly the result of the U.S. monetary policy stance, and Bracke and Fidora (2008) confirm empirically that the 
“savings glut” was probably a less important driver of the economic imbalances than a “liquidity glut”. 
6   On the contingent debt conversion proposal see Squam Lake Working Group on Financial Regulation (2009). 
BIS Review 160/2010 
 3
Simons’ (1948) full-reserve banking for retail deposits supporting the payment system should 
not be excluded a priori.7 
The agreement reached by the Basel Committee in September 2010, known as Basel III, that 
established  higher  capital  standards  including  two  new  capital  buffers  (“conservation”  and 
“countercyclical”)  to  be  introduced  gradually,  and  a  Tier  1  leverage  ratio  to  be  analyzed 
further, is a step in the right direction. Nevertheless, the new requirements may  still prove 
insufficient  to  prevent  crises,  given  their  relatively  low  target  values,  and  the  inclusion  of 
components  of  lesser  quality  than  common  equity  in  Tier  1  capital.  Overcoming  these 
limitations  is  of  the  utmost  importance  considering  the  poor  record  of  the  Basel  Core 
Principles for banking supervision in preventing financial problems in the past.8 
However, the regulatory weakness that more likely led to excessive risk taking in this crisis 
was  the  ambiguous  government  safety  net  held  out  to  investors  and  institutions.  This 
included  the  explicit  limited  guarantees  on  deposits  but  most  importantly,  the  realized 
assumption that, when problems arise, the government can extend this protection to other 
investments and rescue financially significant institutions.  
In particular, the “too big to fail” policy is a well-known source of moral hazard that leads to 
the  unpleasant  outcome  of  promoting  risk  taking  with  private  rewards  and  socially  shared 
costs. The only solution to dealing with this problem is to abolish the policy. This would imply 
forgoing the bailout capacity of the authorities, perhaps through a legal stricture, and treating 
all institutions alike in terms of standards and liquidation procedures. In the case of a failure, 
shareholders and unsecured creditors should fully absorb all costs.  
To  counter  possible  externalities  coming  from  the  failure  of  any  institution,  a  variable 
surcharge on capital may be imposed based on an index of significant variables such as size 
and interconnectedness. Clear rules of liquidity provision for solvent institutions on the part of 
the lender of last resort as well as expedient resolution mechanisms including living wills and 
efficient bankruptcy laws for insolvent ones, are essential elements of a stronger regulatory 
framework.  
The need for corrective measures  
The  preventive  approach  just  outlined  should  help  promote  financial  stability.  Presumably, 
the deeper the changes are, the less likely the financial system will face severe problems in 
the future. Unfortunately, these measures cannot guarantee the elimination of crises.  
In addition to the long history of recurrent financial calamities which by itself is a challenging 
precedent,  there  are  other  reasons  for  not  holding  overly  optimistic  expectations.  Among 
others,  the  list  of  possible  causes  of  crises  is  surely  longer  than  the  one  previously 
analyzed;  the  implementation  of  the  recommended  guidelines  could  be  deficient;  and 
unless  rules  are  sufficiently  broad  and  supervision  is  really  effective,  there  are  always 
ways to circumvent them.  
From this standpoint, it is necessary for authorities to stay vigilant in order to react in a timely 
way  to  early  warnings  of  a  possible  financial  crisis.  This  is  clearly  a  daunting  task,  as 
                                                 
7   Along these lines, Kotlikoff (2010) proposes a “limited purpose banking” framework in which banks only offer 
checking  accounts  and  shares  of  mutual  funds.  Checking  deposits  have  100%  reserves  and  mutual  funds 
serve the lending purpose and do not have maturity mismatch. In such an arrangement, there cannot be bank 
runs or wild swings in the money multiplier. 
8   King (2010) points out that Basel III may not avoid crises because capital requirements are insufficient, risk 
weights are computed from past experience, and considerations of liquidity and liability structures are omitted. 
Demirgüç-Kunt  and  Detragiache  (2010)  find  no  evidence  of  a  robust  statistical  relationship  between 
compliance with Basel Core Principles and improved bank soundness. 
4 
 BIS Review 160/2010
lags  can  even  make 
for  corrective  measures,  where 
policymakers face obvious limitations. Authorities hardly have knowledge that is superior to 
that of market participants, and typically most economic agents do not recognize bubbles as 
they  develop,  which  is  one  condition  for  the  persistence  of  bubbles.  Widespread 
underestimation of risks was certainly the case in the global crisis. Although some authors, 
such  as  Kasriel  (2004)  and  Rajan  (2005),  warned  of  increased  risks  before  the  problems 
arose, their admonitions were widely ignored.  
The fact that most authorities miscalculated the risks in the crisis is worrisome. The inability 
to  detect  incipient  problems  and  the  time  it  takes  for  any  economic  policy  to  exert  effects 
restrict 
them 
the  scope 
counterproductive.9 
In addition, even if detection were not a problem, authorities may be unwilling to implement 
policies to counter a likely imminent crisis. This may reflect capture by the regulated entities, 
which tend to evaluate most growth developments favorably, including unsustainable credit 
expansions.  Alternatively,  reluctance  to  act  preemptively  may  result  from  the  authorities’ 
preference  to  react  only  after  a  bubble  collapses.  In  monetary  policy,  this  position 
articulated by former Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, came to be known as 
the “Greenspan put.”10 
In  any  case,  the  debacle  proved  that  the  “hands-off”  approach  to  dealing  with  pre-crisis 
symptoms was too costly in terms of posterior instability and the unprecedented measures 
implemented  to  offset  the  effects  of  the  resulting  turmoil.  In  particular,  the  extraordinary 
actions undertaken post mortem pose significant challenges for the conduct of monetary and 
fiscal policies in the future. Hence, in light of the described limitations, the need to intervene 
in the form of corrective measures should be viewed as a “second best” solution to problems, 
to be used only to overcome deficiencies in the preventive approach.  
To make this requirement operational, a systemic risk supervisor needs to be defined which 
would  be  in  charge  of  assessing  evolving  risks  based  on  well-defined  methodologies.  It  is 
preferable  for  prescriptions  to  be  made  in  accordance  with  contingent  rules  announced  in 
advance  to  the  public.  The  authorities’  role  can  be  complemented  with  the  advice  of 
independent experts.11 
At  this  point,  the  obvious  question  is  which  tools  should  be  used  to  react  to  indicators  of 
crisis.  Assuming  that  no  undue  expansionary  monetary  or  financial  policies  prevail,  the 
appropriate instruments should strengthen the regulatory and supervisory framework. Within 
this area, it is reasonable to favor those measures that maximize effectiveness with the least 
possible  distortions.  The  menu  of  tools  includes  higher  capital  and  liquidity  requirements, 
lower  loan-to-value  ratios,  limits  to  lending  concentrations,  and  stricter  loan  origination 
standards.  
The role of the central bank  
In addition to the previous conditions, three issues seem to dominate the debate about the 
ways  in  which  central  banks  can  contribute  to  financial  stability.  The  first  is  the  idea  that 
monetary policy should attempt to directly control financial booms that may lead to a crisis. 
                                                 
9   For example, reviewing the financial stability reports of 47 central banks published in 2006, in the wake of the 
crisis, Čihák (2006) p. 22 finds that “virtually all (97 percent) started off with a positive overall assessment of 
the domestic system”. 
10   A term coined after the Fed’s interest rate cuts following stock market collapses. For an exposition of this view, 
see Greenspan (1999). 
11   For  example,  Tarullo  (2010)  proposes  the  creation  of  an  advisory  committee  that  would  assess 
macroprudential evaluations. 
BIS Review 160/2010 
 5
Given  the  relationship  between  relevant  interest  rates  and  asset  prices,  the  proponents  of 
such a strategy argue that central banks can raise their policy interest rate to “prick” asset 
bubbles.  
It is widely known that monetary policy affects the general level of prices, at least in the long 
run,  and  that  it  may  influence  output  only  transitorily.  The  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary  policy  to  relevant  variables,  which  is  a  subject  of  continuous  empirical  research, 
may include several channels, one of which is asset prices. Hence, to the extent that asset 
prices provide relevant information about the future state of the economy, central banks take 
them  into  account  in  setting  interest  rates.  However,  its  aggregate  effects  make  monetary 
policy ill suited for directly abating bubbles.  
Among the disadvantages is the possibility that this attempt may easily enter into conflict with 
other  goals  already  entrusted  to  policy  makers.  For  example,  the  interest  rate  increase 
necessary to “lean against” a bubble may be so large as to exert a negative effect on output. 
The possible conflict in the pursuit of the goals, in turn, may lead to a lack of accountability, 
since deviations from one goal could be justified in terms of the pursuit of the other. More 
importantly, perhaps, is the fact that using monetary policy to contain asset bubbles can be 
interpreted as a commitment to smoothing out asset price fluctuations, thereby dampening 
market signals and creating moral hazard.  
In light of the challenges involved, monetary policy should focus on the primary objective of 
pursuing price stability. Given that credit and housing bubbles are relevant to the extent that 
they may weaken the financial system, it is better to use the aforementioned regulatory and 
supervisory  tools  to  target  the  source  of  the  problems,  such  as  loose  credit  standards  or 
excessive bank leverage.  
A  second  issue  concerns  what  is  referred  to  by  some  authors  as  a  “new  central  bank 
paradigm.” In this view, it is claimed that central banks failed to detect the signs of the crisis 
and  to  implement  measures  to  prevent  it  because  their  focus  on  price  stability  was  too 
narrow. Accordingly, part of the problem was the use of incomplete economic models that do 
not incorporate crucial aspects of the financial sector. The solution to this weakness is then 
seen as a modification to the central banks’ mandate so that it includes financial stability in 
addition  to  price  stability  and,  in  some  countries,  full  employment,  making  central  banks 
accountable for all of these goals. It is also advised that augmented economic models should 
be built to guide policy decisions.  
Although suggestions to improve performance are always helpful, including those regarding 
methodological shortcomings, the intended paradigm revision should be viewed with caution. 
Most  central  banks  already  have  legal  obligations  related  to  financial  stability,  so  a  mere 
change to statutes would not necessarily make much difference.12  
Moreover,  monetary  decision  making  is  only  partly  based  on  models,  as  it  considers  all 
relevant available information and combines this with judgment. Of course, it is always wise 
to  refine  econometric  frameworks  to  include  significant  relationships.  However,  by  their 
nature, models are simplifications of reality, so of necessity they omit many factors. Simple 
criteria  such  as  the  Taylor  rule  are  powerful  not  because  they  incorporate  everything  but 
because  they  serve  as  a  robust  guide  to  monitoring  central  banks’  commitment  to  price 
stability.  
Furthermore, 
financial  stability  should  not  be 
underestimated. The worldwide conquest of inflation has been an outstanding achievement 
which has substantially increased social welfare and eliminated a common source of banking 
the  contribution  of  price  stability 
to 
                                                 
12   For  example,  the  Law  establishes  that  the  primary  objective  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico  is  “to  maintain  the 
purchasing  power  of  the  currency,”  and  two  other  ends  are  “to  promote  the  healthy  development  of  the 
financial system and to procure the good functioning of the payments systems”. 
6 
 BIS Review 160/2010
crises,  especially  in  emerging  economies,  such  as  that  witnessed  in  Mexico  in  the  mid-
1990s.  Price  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  for  avoiding  undue  banking  collapses.  This, 
however,  does  not  preclude  the  need  for  central  banks  to  be  involved  in  crucial  specific 
responsibilities aimed at promoting financial stability, applying their expertise in cooperation 
with other authorities.  
The  third  issue  centers  on  the  implications  of  the  unprecedented  expansionary  monetary 
stance  adopted  by  the  central  banks  of  the  developed  countries,  particularly  the  United 
States,  in  the  sequel  to  the  crisis.  In  addition  to  the  complications  from  eventually 
implementing effective exit strategies once inflation risks emerge, this stance have induced 
investors to search for higher yield, in the process assuming more risk.  
The resulting capital movements have tended to inflate the prices of certain assets, including 
the  currencies  of  emerging  market  economies.  Even  though  the  migration  of  funds  could 
soon  prove  to  be  transitory,  since  2009  the  governments  of  various  countries  have  been 
implementing measures intended to avert the appreciation of their currencies. These actions 
include  some  varieties  of  capital  controls  and  central  bank  interventions  in  foreign 
exchange  markets.  However,  capital  controls  may  lessen  investor  confidence  in  these 
economies,  generate  black  markets,  and  inhibit  the  entry  of  capital  necessary  for 
innovation  and  productivity  improvements.  Currency  interventions,  in  turn,  are  hardly 
effective and tend to impose financial losses on the central bank. Furthermore, the most 
important  threat  generated  by  these  actions  is  a  widespread  movement  toward 
protectionism that could hamper the sustained recovery of the world economy. Thus, it is 
preferable to completely avoid these measures.  
Conclusion  
The  global  crisis  has  revealed  the  importance  of  establishing  conditions  to  ensure  the 
continuous functioning of the financial system. To lower the likelihood of financial collapses, 
an indispensable prerequisite is for economic policy never to become a source of problems. 
Additionally, a preventive, rules-based approach to the regulatory and supervisory framework 
of financial institutions is a prerequisite for generating adequate incentives.  
The crisis confirmed that the “hands-off” approach in dealing with early warnings of risks was 
too  costly  in  terms  of  the  eventual  instability  that  ensued  and  the  unprecedented  policy 
measures  later  undertaken,  which  now  imply  future  restrictions.  Corrective  intervention 
measures  should  be  viewed  as  a  “second  best”  solution,  to  be  used  only  to  overcome 
deficiencies in the preventive regulatory approach.  
Finally,  monetary  policy  is  ill  suited  for  directly  abating  bubbles.  Given  that  bubbles  are 
relevant  to  the  extent  that  they  may  weaken  the  financial  system,  it  is  better  to  use 
regulatory and supervisory tools to target the source of problems. Moreover, the scope of 
a new central bank paradigm should be viewed with caution, especially if it implies the 
underestimation of the contribution of price stability to financial stability. Also, the risks 
associated with the unprecedented monetary measures undertaken by the central banks 
of  developed  nations  to  offset  the  consequences  of  the  crisis  include  the  threat  of 
protectionism, something that should by all means be avoided.  
References  
Adrian, Tobias and Hyun S. Shin (2009) “Money, Liquidity and Monetary Policy”, American 
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 99(2), pp. 600–605.  
Assmann,  Christian,  Jens  Boysen-Hogrefe  and  Nils  Jannsen.  (2009)  “Costs  of  Housing 
Crises: International Evidence”, Kiel Working Paper 1524, Kiel, Germany.  
BIS Review 160/2010 
 7
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2005)  “The  Global  Saving  Glut  and  the  U.S.  Current  Account  Deficit”, 
Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond Virginia, March 10.  
Bernanke, Ben S. (2010) “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble”, presented at the Annual 
Meeting of the American Economic Association, Atlanta, Georgia.  
Bleaney,  Michael  and  Liliana  Castilleja-Vargas  (2009)  “Real  Exchange  Rates,  Valuation 
Effects  and  Growth  in  Emerging  Markets”,  Open  Economies  Review,  Vol.  20,  No.  5,  
pp. 631–643.  
Bracke,  Thierry  and  Michael  Fidora  (2008)  “Global  Liquidity  Glut  or  Global  Savings  Glut”, 
ECB Working Paper Series, No. 911, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.  
Čihák, Martin (2006) “Central Banks and Financial Stability: A Survey of Financial Stability 
Reports”, presented at the IMF Seminar on Current Developments in Monetary and Financial 
Law, Washington, D.C., October 23–27.  
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli and Enrica Detragiache (2010) “Basel Core Principles and Bank Risk: 
Does Compliance Matter?”, IMF Working Paper, No. 81, Washington, D.C.  
Eickmeier,  Sandra  and  Boris  Hofmann  (2010)  “Monetary  Policy,  Housing  Booms  and 
Financial (Im)Balances”, ECB Central Bank Working Paper Series No. 1178, April.  
Garber, Peter M. (2001) Famous First Bubbles: Fundamentals of Early Manias, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts: MIT Press.  
Greenspan,  Alan  (1999)  “Testimony  before  the  Committee  on  Banking  and  Financial 
Services”, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington, D.C., July 22.  
Kasriel  Paul  L.  (2004)  “Collateral  Damage  from  a  U.S.  Housing  Bust”,  Positive  Economic 
Commentary, The Northern Trust Company, July 30.  
Kindleberger, Charles P. and Robert Aliber (2005) Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of 
Financial Crises, Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.  
King, Mervyn (2010) “Banking: From Bagehot to Basel, and Back Again”, presented at The 
Second Bagehot Lecture Buttonwood Gathering, New York City.  
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. (2010) Jimmy Stewart Is Dead, Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & 
Sons.  
Leamer,  Edward  E.  (2007)  “Housing  is  the  Business  Cycle”  in  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas City Housing, Housing Finance and Monetary Policy, pp. 149–233, Kansas City.  
Maddaloni,  Angela  and  José-Luis  Peydró  (2010)  “Bank  Risk-Taking,  Securitization, 
Supervision  and  Low  Interest  Rates:  Evidence  from  the  Euro  and  the  U.S.  Lending 
Standards”, ECB Central Bank Working Paper Series, No. 1248, October.  
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  and  Eugene  N.  White  (2002)  “US  Stock  Market  Crashes  and  their 
Aftermath: Implications for Monetary Policy” in William B. Hunter, George G. Kaufman and 
Michael Pomerleano (eds.) Asset Price Bubbles: The Implications for Monetary, Regulatory 
and International Policies, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.  
Obstfeld,  Maurice  and  Keneth  Rogoff  (2009)  “Global  Imbalances  and  the  Financial  Crisis: 
Products  of  Common  Causes”,  presented  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco 
Asia Economic Policy Conference, Santa Barbara, California, October 18–20.  
Rajan,  Raghuram  G.  (2005)  “Has  Financial  Development  Made  the  World  Riskier?”  in 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  The  Greenspan  Era:  Lessons  for  the  Future,  
pp. 313–369, Kansas City.  
Reinhart,  Carmen  and  Kenneth  Rogoff  (2009)  This  Time  Is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of 
Financial Folly, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.  
8 
 BIS Review 160/2010
Simons, Henry C. (1948) A Positive Program for Laissez Faire: Some Proposals for a Liberal 
Economic Policy, in his Economic Policy for a Free Society, pp. 62–65, Chicago, Illinois: The 
University of Chicago Press.  
Squam  Lake  Working  Group  on  Financial  Regulation  (2009)  “An  Expedited  Resolution 
Mechanism for Distressed Financial Firms: Regulatory Hybrid Securities” Council on Foreign 
Relations Working Paper, April.  
Tarullo,  Daniel  K.  (2010)  “Involving  Markets  and  the  Public  in  Financial  Regulation” 
presented at the Council of Institutional Investors Meeting, Washington, D.C., April 13.  
Taylor, John B. (2007) “Housing and Monetary Policy” in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas 
City Housing, Housing Finance and Monetary Policy, pp. 463–476, Kansas City. 
BIS Review 160/2010 
 9
