Mervyn King: Banking – from Bagehot to Basel, and back again 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Second  Bagehot 
Lecture, Buttonwood Gathering, New York, 25 October 2010. 
 I  am  indebted  to  Stephen  Burgess,  Philip  Evans,  Andy  Haldane,  Andrew  Hauser,  Vicky  Saporta,  Jenny  Scott, 
Paul Tucker and especially to Iain de Weymarn for their useful comments and suggestions on earlier drafts. 
Introduction  
1. 
Walter Bagehot was a brilliant observer and writer on contemporary economic and financial 
matters.  In  his  remarkable  book  Lombard  Street,  Bagehot  brought  together  his  own 
observations with the analysis of earlier thinkers such as Henry Thornton to provide a critique 
of  central  banking  as  practised  by  the  Bank  of  England  and  a  manifesto  for  how  central 
banks could handle financial crises in future by acting as a lender of last resort. The present 
financial crisis dwarfs any of those witnessed by Bagehot. What lessons can we draw from 
recent and current experience to update Bagehot’s vision of finance and central banking?  
Surely the most important lesson from the financial crisis is the importance of a resilient and 
robust banking system. The countries most affected by the banking crisis have experienced 
the  worst  economic  crisis  since  the  1930s.  Output  is  somewhere  between  5%  and  10% 
below  where  it  would  have  been  had  there  not  been  a  crisis.  Unemployment  is  up, 
businesses have closed, and the direct and indirect costs to the taxpayer have resulted in 
fiscal deficits in several countries of over 10% of GDP – the largest peacetime deficits ever.  
At the heart of this crisis was the expansion and subsequent contraction of the balance sheet 
of  the  banking  system.  Other  parts  of  the  financial  system  in  general  functioned  normally. 
And we saw in 1987 and again in the early 2000s, that a sharp fall in equity values did not 
cause the same damage as did the banking crisis. Equity markets provide a natural safety 
valve, and when they suffer sharp falls, economic policy can respond. But when the banking 
system failed in September 2008, not even massive injections of both liquidity and capital by 
the state could prevent a devastating collapse of confidence and output around the world. So 
it is imperative that we find an answer to the question of how to make our banking system 
more stable.  
As Bagehot knew only too well, banking crises are endemic to the market economy that has 
evolved  since  the  Industrial  Revolution.  The  words  “banking”  and  “crises”  are  natural 
bedfellows.  If  love  and  marriage  go  together  like  a  horse  and  carriage,  then  banking  and 
crisis go together like Oxford and the Isis, intertwined for as long as anyone can remember. 
Unfortunately, such crises are occurring more frequently and on an ever larger scale. Why? 
The practice of banking:  
2. 
For almost a century after Bagehot wrote Lombard Street, the size of the banking sector in 
the UK, relative to GDP, was broadly stable at around 50%. But, over the past fifty years, 
bank balance sheets have grown so fast that today they are over five times annual GDP. The 
size  of  the  US  banking  industry  has  grown  from  around  20%  in  Bagehot’s  time  to  around 
100% of GDP today. And, until recently, the true scale of balance sheets was understated by 
these  figures  because  banks  were  allowed  to  put  exposures  to  entities  such  as  special 
purpose vehicles off balance sheet.  
Surprisingly, such an extraordinary rate of expansion has been accompanied by increasing 
concentration: the largest institutions have expanded the most. Table 1 shows that the asset 
holdings of the top ten banks in the UK amount to over 450% of GDP, with RBS, Barclays 
BIS Review 140/2010 
 1
and HSBC each individually having assets in excess of UK GDP. Table 2 shows that in the 
US,  the  top  ten  banks  amount  to  over  60%  of  GDP,  six  times  larger  than  the  top  ten  fifty 
years  ago.  Bank  of  America  today  accounts  for  the  same  proportion  of  the  US  banking 
system as all of the top 10 banks put together in 1960.  
While banks’ balance sheets have exploded, so have the risks associated with those balance 
sheets.  Bagehot  would  have  been  used  to  banks  with  leverage  ratios  (total  assets,  or 
liabilities, to capital) of around six to one. But capital ratios have declined and leverage has 
risen.  Immediately  prior  to  the  crisis,  leverage  in  the  banking  system  of  the  industrialised 
world  had  increased  to  astronomical  levels.  Simple  leverage  ratios  of  close  to  50  or  more 
could be found in the US, UK, and the continent of Europe, driven in part by the expansion of 
trading books (Brennan, Haldane and Madouros, 2010).  
And  banks  resorted  to  using  more  short-term,  wholesale  funding.  The  average  maturity  of 
wholesale funding issued by banks has declined by two thirds in the UK and by around three 
quarters in the US over the past thirty years – at the same time as reliance on wholesale 
funding  has  increased.  As  a  result,  they  have  run  a  higher  degree  of  maturity  mismatch 
between  their  long-dated  assets  and  short-term  funding.  To  cap  it  all,  they  held  a  lower 
proportion of liquid assets on their balance sheets, so they were more exposed if some of the 
short-term funding dried up. In less than fifty years, the share of highly liquid assets that UK 
banks hold has declined from around a third of their assets to less than 2% last year (Bank of 
England, 2009). Banks tested the limits of where the risk-return trade-off was located, in all 
parts of their operations. As John Kay wrote about his experience on the board of HBoS, the 
problems began “on the day it was decided that treasury should be a profit centre in its own 
right rather than an ancillary activity” (Kay, 2008).  
Moreover, the size of the balance sheet is no longer limited by the scale of opportunities to 
lend to companies or individuals in the real economy. So-called “financial engineering” allows 
banks  to  manufacture  additional  assets  without  limit.  And  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis,  they 
were aided and abetted in this endeavour by a host of vehicles and funds in the so-called 
shadow banking system, which in the US grew in gross terms to be larger than the traditional 
banking sector. This shadow banking system, as well as holding securitised debt and a host 
of manufactured – or “synthetic” – exposures was also a significant source of funding for the 
conventional  banking  system.  Money  market  funds  and  other  similar  entities  had  call 
liabilities  totalling  over $7  trillion.  And  they  on  lent  very  significant  amounts  to banks,  both 
directly and indirectly via chains of transactions.  
This has had two consequences. First, the financial system has become enormously more 
interconnected. This means that promoting stability of the system as a whole using a regime 
of  regulation  of  individual  institutions  is  much  less  likely  to  be  successful  than  hitherto. 
Maturity mismatch can grow through chains of transactions – without any significant amount 
being  located  in  any  one  institution  –  a  risk  described  many  years  ago  by  Martin  Hellwig 
(Hellwig, 1995). Second, although many of these positions net out when the financial system 
is seen as a whole, gross balance sheets are not restricted by the scale of the real economy 
and so banks were able to expand at a remarkable pace. So when the crisis began in 2007, 
uncertainty about where losses would ultimately fall led confidence in banks to seep away. 
This was obvious through the crisis. Almost no institution was immune from suspicion, the 
result of the knock-on consequences so eloquently described by Bagehot when he wrote:  
“At first, incipient panic amounts to a kind of vague conversation: Is A. B. as good as he used 
to  be?  Has  not  C.  D.  lost  money?  and  a  thousand  such  questions.  A  hundred  people  are 
talked about, and a thousand think, “Am I talked about, or am I not?” “Is my credit as good as 
it used to be, or is it less?” And every day, as a panic grows, this floating suspicion becomes 
both  more  intense  and  more  diffused;  it  attacks  more  persons;  and  attacks  them  all  more 
virulently than at first. All men of experience, therefore, try to “strengthen themselves,” as it is 
called, in the early stage of a panic; they borrow money while they can; they come to their 
banker and offer bills for discount, which commonly they would not have offered for days or 
2 
 BIS Review 140/2010
weeks to come. And if the merchant be a regular customer, a banker does not like to refuse, 
because  if  he  does  he  will  be  said,  or  may  be  said,  to  be  in  want  of  money,  and  so  may 
attract the panic to himself.”  
This  sentiment  is  described  more  prosaically  in  Tables  3  and  4.  They  show  that  the  risk 
premia demanded by investors to lend to all large banks rose very sharply during the crisis. 
For most banks the spreads on their senior unsecured debt had more than trebled in October 
2008 relative to their levels at the start of 2007. Similarly, credit default swap premia – the 
cost of insuring a bank’s debt – shot up. All banks, irrespective of the precise nature of their 
business and balance sheet, were tarred with the same brush. Moreover spreads and CDS 
premia remain elevated today – almost universally, large UK and US banks face much higher 
borrowing charges compared to risk-free rates, and are seen as riskier entities, than prior to 
the crisis.  
The size, concentration and riskiness of banks have increased in an extraordinary fashion 
and  would  be  unrecognisable  to  Bagehot.  Higher  reported  rates  of  return  on  equity  were 
superficial  hallmarks  of  success.  These  higher  rates  of  return  were  required  by,  and  a 
consequence  of,  the  change  in  the  pattern  of  banks’  funding  with  increased  leverage  and 
more short-term funding. They did not represent a significant improvement in the overall rate 
of  return  on  assets.  Not  merely  were  banks’  own  reported  profits  exaggerating  the 
contribution of the financial sector to the economy, so were the national accounts.  
In the US, the share of gross value added of the financial sector as a share of GDP rose from 
around 2–3% in the decade after World War II to about 8% in 2008, driven in large part by a 
rise  in  the  gross  operating  surplus  of  financial  intermediaries.  And  in  the  UK,  in  the  past 
decade, the measured scale of the financial sector, compared to GDP, has roughly doubled 
to  around  10%.  But  this  exaggerates  the  contribution  of  financial  services.  Banks  do  not 
always  charge  directly  for  the  services  they  provide.  So  the  value  added  of  the  financial 
sector  is  measured  by  official  statisticians  (using  the  United  Nations  System  of  National 
Accounts) as the difference between interest receipts and payments of a “reference rate of 
interest”  which  attempts  to  measure  the  pure  cost  of  borrowing  funds.  This  convention 
overstates the true value added of the financial sector because it includes the return to risky 
lending represented by the difference between the hypothetical pure cost of borrowing funds 
and the return that is earned. But the fact that risk is channelled through an intermediation 
industry  does  not  mean  that  the  value  added  from  risk-bearing  in  the  economy  is  solely 
attributable to the existence of an intermediation sector. If companies financed themselves 
directly from households, the statisticians would regard the return on risk-bearing as value 
added created in that industry. Financial intermediation does add value, but not as much as 
the statistical convention would suggest.  
Moreover, a financial sector that takes on risk with the implicit support of the tax-payer can 
generate measured value added that reflects not genuine risk-bearing but the upside profits 
from the implicit subsidy. And even without an implicit subsidy the return to risk-bearing can 
be  mismeasured.  It  is  widely  understood  that  an  insurance  company  should  not  count  as 
profits  the  receipt  of  premia  on  an  insurance  policy  that  will  pay  out  only  when  a  low-
frequency  event  occurs  at  some  point  in  the  future.  But  part  of  the  value  added  of  the 
financial sector prior to the crisis reflected temporary profits from taking risk and it was only 
after  September  2008  that  much  of  that  so-called  economic  activity  resulted  in  enormous 
reported losses by banks.  
It  is  possible  to  make  a  very  rough  estimate  of  the  possible  size  of  this  distortion  in  the 
reported financial sector output data. If we assume that true labour and capital productivity in 
the  financial  services  industry  grew  in  line  with  that  in  the  wider  economy  in  the  10  years 
prior  to  the  crisis,  then,  given  the  inputs  of  capital  and  labour  over  that  period,  the  official 
estimate might have overstated UK financial sector value added by almost £30 billion up to 
2007 – around half of the growth in the official measure. The impact of this adjustment on 
overall GDP is likely to be relatively small because much of the output of the financial sector 
BIS Review 140/2010 
 3
is  treated  as  intermediate  inputs  to  other  sectors  in  the  economy.  Such  an  estimate  is 
supported  by  the  finding  of  my  Bank  of  England  colleagues  that  the  increase  in  rates  of 
return  on  equity  earned  by  banks  were  accounted  for  almost  entirely  by  an  increase  in 
leverage, capital gains on assets in trading books and the reported profits on contracts that 
produced  losses  only  after  the  crisis  occurred.  And  it  is  consistent  with  the  estimates 
calculated by Colangelo and Inklaar (2010) for the euro area. They found that around 40% of 
measured financial sector value added probably captured compensation for bearing risk.  
The theory of banking  
3. 
Why are banks so risky? The starting point is that banks make heavy use of short-term debt. 
Short-term  debt  holders  can  always  run  if  they  start  to  have  doubts  about  an  institution. 
Equity holders and long-term debt holders cannot cut and run so easily.  
Douglas  Diamond  and  Philip  Dybvig  showed  nearly  thirty  years  ago  that  this  can  create 
fragile institutions even in the absence of risk associated with the assets that a bank holds. 
All  that  is  required  is  a  cost  to  the  liquidation  of  long-term  assets  and  that  banks  serve 
customers  on  a  first-come,  first-served  basis  (Diamond  and  Dybvig,  1983).  Nevertheless, 
there are benefits to this maturity transformation – funds can be pooled allowing a greater 
proportion  to  be  directed  to  long-term  illiquid  investments,  and  less  held  back  to  meet 
individual needs for liquidity. And from Diamond’s and Dybvig’s insights, flows an intellectual 
foundation  for  many  of  the  policy  structures  that  we  have  today  –  especially  deposit 
insurance and Bagehot’s time-honoured key principle of central banks acting as lender of last 
resort in a crisis. If the only problem is one of illiquidity leading to fragility, then central banks 
can  easily  act  to  ward  off  problems.  By  demonstrating  a  willingness  to  step  in  to  provide 
temporary  liquidity  support,  then  the  likelihood  of  problems  arising  in  the  first  place  is 
dramatically  diminished.  It  was  wholly  appropriate  that  this  was  the  focus  of  Bagehot’s 
writings – at the time, the structure of the banking system meant that illiquidity was often the 
key problem. And central banks did not appreciate the importance of the role that they could 
play. Bagehot’s whole purpose was to convince the Bank of England to fulfil this role. But the 
changes  in  the  banking  system  over  the  past  fifty  years  mean  that  a  much  more  diverse 
range of problems can strike today. In September 2007, everyone thought that the crisis was 
one  of  liquidity  and  as  a  result  there  was  an  expectation  central  banks  could  provide  the 
solution. But it quickly became clear that it was in fact a crisis of solvency.  
Diamond and Dybvig’s analysis consciously omitted the fact that, in reality, banks’ assets are 
risky. And not only are banks’ assets risky, but banks are highly leveraged institutions. This 
leaves them heavily exposed – with very high debt-equity ratios, small movements in asset 
valuations are enough to wipe out their equity and leave banks insolvent. That means the 
distinction  between  illiquidity  and  solvency  can  be  difficult  in  practice  –  the  difference  in 
timing  might  be  just  a  few  days.  If  a  crisis  is  in  fact  one  of  insolvency,  brought  on  by 
excessive leverage and risk, then central bank liquidity provision cannot provide the answer. 
Central banks can offer liquidity insurance only to solvent institutions or as a bridge to a more 
permanent solution.  
It  is  this  structure,  in  which  risky  long-term  assets  are  funded  by  short-term  deposits,  that 
makes  banks  so  hazardous.  Yet  many  treat  loans  to  banks  as  if  they  were  riskless.  In 
isolation,  this  would  be  akin  to  a  belief  in  alchemy  –  risk-free  deposits  can  never  be 
supported by long-term risky investments in isolation. To work, financial alchemy requires the 
implicit support of the tax payer.  
When all the functions of the financial system are heavily interconnected, any problems that 
arise can end up playing havoc with services vital to the functioning of the economy – the 
payments system, the services of money and the provision of working capital to industry. If 
such  services  are  materially  threatened,  governments  will  never  be  able  to  sit  idly  by. 
Institutions supplying such services are quite simply too important to fail. Everyone knows it. 
So, highly risky banking institutions enjoy implicit public sector support. In turn, public support 
4 
 BIS Review 140/2010
incentivises banks to take on yet more risk, knowing that, if things go well, they will reap the 
rewards while the public sector will foot the bill if things go wrong. Greater risk begets greater 
size,  most  probably  greater  importance  to  the  functioning  of  the  economy,  higher  implicit 
public subsidies, and hence yet larger incentives to take risk – described by Martin Wolf as 
the “financial doomsday machine”.  
The  failure  in  the  crisis  was  not  one  of  intellectual  imagination  or  economic  science  to 
understand  these  issues.  Economists  recognised  that  distorted  incentives,  whether  arising 
from  implicit  public  subsidies,  asymmetric  information  or  a  host  of  other  imperfections,  will 
cause a market-based outcome to be sub-optimal from the perspective of society. This idea 
has been at the centre of modern economics since the extraordinary series of papers written 
by Arrow and Debreu in the 1950s (Arrow, 1951; Debreu, 1951; Arrow and Debreu, 1954).  
The real failure was a lapse into hubris – we came to believe that crises created by massive 
maturity transformation were problems that no longer applied to modern banking, that they 
belonged to an era in which people wore whiskers and top hats. There was an inability to see 
through  the  veil  of  modern  finance  to  the  fact  that  the  balance  sheets  of  too  many  banks 
were an accident waiting to happen, with levels of leverage on a scale that could not resist 
even the slightest tremor to confidence about the uncertain value of bank assets. For all the 
clever  innovation  in  the  financial  system,  its  Achilles  heel  was,  and  remains,  simply  the 
extraordinary – indeed absurd – levels of leverage represented by a heavy reliance on short-
term debt. 
Modern financiers are now invoking other dubious claims to resist reforms that might limit the 
public subsidies they have enjoyed in the past. No one should blame them for that – indeed, 
we  should  not  expect  anything  else.  They  are  responding  to  incentives.  Some  claim  that 
reducing leverage and holding more equity capital would be expensive. But, as economists, 
such  as  my  colleague  David  Miles  (2010)  and  Anat  Admati  and  her  colleagues  (Admati 
et. al., 2010), have argued, the cost of capital overall is much less sensitive to changes in the 
amount  of  debt  in  a  bank’s  balance  sheet  than  many  bankers  claim  –  a  proposition 
demonstrated forcefully by Professors Modigliani and Miller over fifty years ago (Modigliani 
and  Miller,  1958).  And  the  benefits  to  society,  most  obviously  through  greater  financial 
stability, but also through factors such as higher tax revenue, are likely to swamp any change 
in  the  private  costs  faced  by  banks.  What  does  reduce  the  cost  of  capital  is  the  ability  to 
borrow  short  to  lend  long.  But  the  scale  of  maturity  transformation  undertaken  today 
produces  private  benefits  and  social  costs.  We  have  seen  from  the  experience  of  first 
Iceland,  and  now  Ireland,  the  results  that  can  follow  from  allowing  a  banking  system  to 
become too large relative to national output without having first solved the “too important to 
fail” problem.  
Finding a solution  
4. 
Many  remedies  for  reducing  the  riskiness  of  our  financial  system  have  been  proposed, 
ranging from higher capital requirements on banks to functional separation and other more 
radical  ideas.  The  guiding  principle  of  any  change  should  be  to  ensure  that  the  costs  of 
maturity transformation – the costs of periodic financial crises – fall on those who enjoy the 
benefits  of  maturity  transformation  –  the  reduced  cost  of  financial  intermediation.  All 
proposals should be evaluated by this simple criterion.  
The first, and most obvious, response to the divergence between private benefits and social 
costs  is  the  imposition  of  a  permanent  tax  on  the  activity  of  maturity  transformation  to 
“internalise  the  externalities”.  Such  a  tax,  or  levy,  has  been  discussed  by  the  G7,  and 
introduced  in  the  UK.  The  principle  that  the  “polluter  pays”  for  the  costs  they  impose  on 
others is an old one, going back at least to Pigou in the 1920s. The main practical problem is 
to calibrate the costs to maturity transformation. The loss of world output from the financial 
crisis is enormous, even though such a crisis might be considered a once in a generation, or 
even  once  in  a  century,  event.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  a  crisis  that  reduces  output  by 
BIS Review 140/2010 
 5
between 5% and 10% for a number of years, and occurs once every fifty years, amounts to 
an annual cost several multiples of the revenue that will be generated by the UK bank levy 
(Haldane, 2010). But how can we be certain of correctly establishing what the tax should be 
when  we  are  trying  to  internalise  costs  that  occur  so  infrequently?  So  although  there  is  a 
sound  case  for  a  levy  directed  at  the  size  of  short-term  borrowing,  it  would  be  foolish  to 
regard that as the main tool to align costs and benefits of risky balance sheet activity.  
If setting the appropriate price is hard, then some form of controls on quantities might be a 
better  answer  (Weitzman,  1974).  For  example,  limits on  leverage  have  much  to commend 
them.  And  for  a  generation,  the  quantitative  control  of  this  type  that  regulators  have 
embraced was embodied in the capital standards set within the Basel framework. Last month 
a  new  concordat  on  such  standards  was  reached  in  Basel  –  the  so-called  Basel  III 
requirements.  The  challenge  here  is  to  set  the  requirements  in  a  way  that  will  materially 
affect the probability of a crisis.  
Other forms of quantitative intervention include functional separation to reduce the costs of 
maturity  transformation  by  ring-fencing  those  activities  that  we  are  most  concerned  to 
safeguard from disruption. If successful, the costs of any failure of financial institutions would 
be  reduced.  The  challenge  with  this  approach  is  to  prevent  the  costs  associated  with  the 
activity  of  maturity  transformation  from  gravitating  to  another  set  of  institutions  –  the 
“shadow” banking system.  
Whatever solution is adopted, the aim must be to align private and social costs.  
Why Basel III is not a complete answer  
5. 
Lauded  as  a  new  standard,  Basel  III  is  seen  by  some  as  the  answer  to  the  failure  of 
regulation  to  prevent  the  financial  crisis.  It  is  certainly  a  step  in  the  right  direction,  an 
improvement on both Basel I and the ill-fated Basel II, and we should all welcome it. But if it 
is a giant leap for the regulators of the world, it is only a small step for mankind. Basel III on 
its own will not prevent another crisis for a number of reasons.  
First,  even  the  new  levels  of  capital  are  insufficient  to  prevent  another  crisis.  Calibrating 
required capital by reference to the losses incurred during the recent crisis takes inadequate 
account  of  the  benefits  to  banks  of  massive  government  intervention  and  the  implicit 
guarantee. More fundamentally, it fails to recognise that when sentiment changes only very 
high levels of capital would be sufficient to enable banks to obtain funding on anything like 
normal spreads to policy rates, as we can see at present. When investors change their view 
about the unknowable future – as they will occasionally in sudden and discontinuous ways – 
banks that were perceived as well-capitalised can seem under-capitalised with concerns over 
their solvency. That is what happened in 2007–08. As the IMF have pointed out differences 
in capital ratios failed to predict which financial institutions would be vulnerable in the crisis 
(IMF,  2009).  Only  very  much  higher  levels  of  capital  –  levels  that  would  be  seen  by  the 
industry as wildly excessive most of the time – would prevent such a crisis.  
Second, the Basel approach calculates the amount of capital required by using a measure of 
“risk-weighted”  assets.  Those  risk  weights  are  computed  from  past  experience.  Yet  the 
circumstances in which capital needs to be available to absorb potential losses are precisely 
those  when  earlier  judgements  about  the  risk  of  different  assets  and  their  correlation  are 
shown  to  be  wrong.  One  might  well  say  that  a  financial  crisis  occurs  when  the  Basel  risk 
weights turn out to be poor estimates of underlying risk. And that is not because investors, 
banks or regulators are incompetent. It is because the relevant risks are often impossible to 
assess  in  terms  of  fixed  probabilities.  Events  can  take  place  that  we  could  not  have 
envisaged, let alone to which we could attach probabilities. If only banks were playing in a 
casino then we probably could calculate appropriate risk weights. Unfortunately, the world is 
more complicated. So the regulatory framework needs to contain elements that are robust 
6 
 BIS Review 140/2010
with respect to changes in the appropriate risk weights, and that is why the Bank of England 
advocated a simple leverage ratio as a key backstop to capital requirements.  
Third, the Basel framework still focuses largely on the assets side of a bank’s balance sheet. 
Basel II excluded consideration of the liquidity and liability structure of the balance sheet, so 
much so that when the UK adopted Basel II in 2007, of all the major banks the one with the 
highest capital ratio was, believe it or not, Northern Rock. Within weeks of announcing that it 
intended to return excess capital to its shareholders, Northern Rock ran out of money. Basel 
II was based on a judgement that mortgages were the safest form of lending irrespective of 
how they were financed. If a business model is based around a particular funding model that 
suddenly becomes unviable, then the business model becomes unviable too, as events in 
2007 showed. Whether the measures included in Basel III will be able to deal properly with 
the risks that result from inadequate levels of liquid assets and a risky structure of liabilities 
remains to be seen.  
One  criticism  of  Basel  III  with  which  I  have  no  truck  is  the  length  of  the  transition  period. 
Banks  have  up  to  2019  to  adjust  fully  to  the  new  requirements.  Although  some  of  the 
calculations  of  the  alleged  economic  cost  of  higher  capital  requirements  presented  by  the 
industry seem to me exaggerated (Institute of International Finance, 2010), I do believe that it 
is  important  in  the  present  phase  of  de-leveraging  not  to  exacerbate  the  challenge  banks 
face  in  raising  capital  today.  Banks  should  take  advantage  of  opportunities  to  raise  loss-
absorbing  capital,  and  should  recognise  the  importance  of  using  profits  to  rebuild  capital 
rather than pay out higher dividends and compensation. But we must not forget the principle 
underlying  the  Basel  approach:  asking  banks  to  maintain  a  buffer  of  capital  above  the 
minimum requirement allows them to run the buffer down in circumstances like the present. 
Rebuilding  the  buffer  is  a  task  for  the  future.  So  even  though  the  Bank  of  England  would 
have preferred an agreement to set capital ratios at higher levels in the long run, we have no 
intention of asking UK banks to adopt a faster timetable for implementation of Basel III. That 
logic should apply to any reforms we choose to implement. We should not expect to change 
the financial system for the better overnight. Rather we need radical reforms that will give us 
a  much  more  robust  system  in  the  long  run,  accepting  that  it  may  take  a  period  of  many 
years to get there.  
As  with  a  bank  levy,  it  is  no  criticism  of  Basel  III  to  say  that  it  is  not  a  “silver  bullet”.  The 
difficulty of identifying and calibrating the difference between the private and social costs of 
maturity transformation means that there is merit in having a basket of different measures to 
rein in excessive risk-taking. In the area of financial stability, it makes sense to have both belt 
and braces.  
Large institutions  
6. 
The implicit subsidy to banks that are perceived as “too important to fail” can be important to 
banks of any size but is usually seen as bigger for large institutions for which existing bank 
resolution procedures either do or could not apply. Moreover, most large complex financial 
institutions  are  global  –  at  least  in  life  if  not  in  death.  So  a  major  international  effort  is 
underway  to  try  to  work  out  how  best  to  deal  with  such  institutions,  initiated  by  heads  of 
government at the G-20 Summit in Pittsburgh in 2009. Much of this work is being led by the 
Financial Stability Board. Ideas agreed in principle or under consideration include an addition 
to the Basel III capital requirement of an extra layer of either equity or other loss-absorbing 
capital, a special resolution regime for large institutions that would allow losses to be shared 
among  creditors  as  well  as  equity-holders,  and  tentative  steps  towards  international 
harmonisation of resolution procedures on which my colleague Paul Tucker and others are 
engaged.  
Some countries have already started down the road of augmenting the Basel calibration with 
additional requirements of their own for large banks. Earlier this month the Swiss authorities 
announced just such a requirement for their two current systemically important banks – UBS 
BIS Review 140/2010 
 7
and Credit Suisse. In future, they will have to hold additional amounts of both equity capital 
and  loss-bearing  contingent  capital  which  takes  their  total  holding  of  equity-like  capital  to 
19%, compared with the Basel standard of 7%.  
But  in  most  other  countries,  identifying  in  advance  a  group  of  financial  institutions  whose 
failure would be intolerable, and so are “too important to fail”, is a hazardous undertaking. In 
itself  it  would  simply  increase  the  subsidy  by  making  it  explicit.  And  it  is  hard  to  see  why 
institutions whose failure cannot be contemplated should be in the private sector in the first 
place. But if international regulators failed to agree on higher capital requirements in general, 
adding to the loss-absorbing capacity of large institutions could be a second-best outcome.  
Solving  the  “too  important  to  fail”  problem  will  require  ultimately  that  every  financial  sector 
entity can be left to fail without risk of threatening the functioning of the economy. So it is 
natural that improved resolution procedures is part of the overall strategy – and within many 
countries big steps forward have already been taken. But the successful resolution of a large 
institution would, in the absence of an implausibly large deposit insurance fund, require the 
ability to bail-in creditors. Yet that possibility would give an incentive to the bank to increase 
its dependence on short-term funding so that more creditors might get out in time. That might 
increase  rather  than  decrease  the  fragility  of  the  institution.  So  there  would  need  to  be 
restrictions on the maturity structure of its liabilities. Resolution would naturally go hand-in-
hand with a greater reliance on instruments such as contingent capital. And there would be 
enormous  challenges  in  resolving  global  banks  that  span  countries  with  different  legal 
jurisdictions.  Extending  resolution  procedures  to  large  institutions  is  a  necessary  but  not 
sufficient condition for stability of the banking system.  
More radical reforms  
7. 
All of these potential reforms would be steps in the right direction. They would all help to put 
more of the costs of maturity mismatch on the shoulders of those who reap the benefits. But 
taxes,  the  Basel  capital  requirements,  special  arrangements  for  systemically  important 
financial  institutions  and  enhanced  resolution  procedures  all  have  drawbacks  and  are 
unlikely to do the job perfectly. So, if we cannot rely solely on these types of measures, are 
there  more  fundamental  directions  in  which  we  could  move  that  would  align  costs  and 
benefits more effectively?  
One  simple  solution,  advocated  by  my  colleague  David  Miles,  would  be  to  move  to  very 
much higher levels of capital requirements – several orders of magnitude higher. A related 
proposal  is  to  ensure  there  are  large  amounts  of  contingent  capital  in  a  bank’s  liability 
structure. Much more loss-absorbing capital – actual or contingent – can substantially reduce 
the size of costs that might be borne outside of a financial firm. But unless complete, capital 
requirements  will  never  be  able  to  guarantee  that  costs  will  not  spill  over  elsewhere.  This 
leads to the limiting case of proposals such as Professor Kotlikoff’s idea to introduce what he 
calls  “limited  purpose  banking”  (Kotlikoff,  2010).  That  would  ensure  that  each  pool  of 
investments made by a bank is turned into a mutual fund with no maturity mismatch. There is 
no possibility of alchemy. It is an idea worthy of further study.  
Another  avenue  of  reform  is  some  form  of  functional  separation.  The  Volcker  Rule  is  one 
example. Another, more fundamental, example would be to divorce the payment system from 
risky lending activity – that is to prevent fractional reserve banking (for example, as proposed 
by Fisher, 1936, Friedman, 1960, Tobin, 1987 and more recently by Kay, 2009).  
In essence these proposals recognise that if banks undertake risky activities then it is highly 
dangerous to allow such “gambling” to take place on the same balance sheet as is used to 
support  the  payments  system,  and  other  crucial  parts  of  the  financial  infrastructure.  And 
eliminating  fractional  reserve  banking  explicitly  recognises  that  the  pretence  that  risk-free 
deposits can be supported by risky assets is alchemy. If there is a need for genuinely safe 
8 
 BIS Review 140/2010
deposits  the  only  way  they  can  be  provided,  while  ensuring  costs  and  benefits  are  fully 
aligned, is to insist such deposits do not coexist with risky assets.  
The  advantage  of  these  types  of  more  fundamental  proposals  is  that  no  tax  or  capital 
requirement needs to be calibrated. And if successfully enforced then they certainly would be 
robust  measures.  But  a  key  challenge  is  to  ensure  that  maturity  transformation  does  not 
simply  migrate  outside  of  the  regulated  perimeter,  and  end  up  benefiting  from  an  implicit 
public subsidy (Tucker, 2010b). That is difficult because it is the nature of the services – not 
the institutions – that is the concern. Ultimately, we need a system whereby the suppliers of 
funds  to  risky  activities,  whether  intermediated  via  banks  or  any  other  entity,  must 
understand that they will not be protected from loss by taxpayer bailouts. Creditors should 
know that they will bear losses in the event of failure.  
We  certainly  cannot  rely  on  being  able  to  expand  the  scope  of  regulation  without  limit  to 
prevent the migration of maturity mismatch. Regulators will never be able to keep up with the 
pace  and  scale  of  financial  innovation.  Nor  should  we  want  to  restrict  innovation.  But  it 
should  be  undertaken  by  investors  using  their  own  money  not  by  intermediaries  who  also 
provide crucial services to the economy, allowing them to reap an implicit public subsidy. It 
will  not  be  possible  to  regulate  all  parts  of  the  financial  system  as  if  they  were  banks.  As 
Jeffrey  Lacker,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Richmond,  has  argued,  “merely 
expanding  the  scope  of  regulation  to  chase  those  firms  that  extract  implicit  guarantees  by 
engaging in maturity transformation would be an interminable journey with yet more financial 
instability in its wake” (Lacker, 2010). In the end, clarity about the regulatory perimeter is both 
desirable and unavoidable – a task given to the Financial Policy Committee as part of the 
Bank of England’s new responsibilities. And the attraction of the more radical solutions is that 
they offer the hope of avoiding the seemingly inevitable drift to ever more complex and costly 
regulation.  
The broad answer to the problem is likely to be remarkably simple. Banks should be financed 
much more heavily by equity rather than short-term debt. Much, much more equity; much, 
much less short-term debt. Risky investments cannot be financed in any other way. What we 
cannot countenance is a continuation of the system in which bank executives trade and take 
risks on their own account, and yet those who finance them are protected from loss by the 
implicit taxpayer guarantees. The difficulty is in finding the right practical way to achieve that. 
Some  of  the  solutions  that  economists  have  proposed  have  been  dismissed  by  some  as 
impractical and pie in the sky. But I am reminded of Keynes’ dictum that “practical men who 
believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influence are usually the slaves 
of some defunct economist” (Keynes, 1936). Of all the many ways of organising banking, the 
worst is the one we have today.  
I have suggested a number of ways in which the system could be reformed. But making the 
right choice will take much careful thought and a good deal of time. So I do not want today to 
offer  a  blueprint  –  and  indeed  that  is  for  others  to  do.  In  the  UK  we  are  fortunate.  The 
Independent  Commission  on  Banking  was  set  up  earlier  this  year.  It  has  outstanding 
members. I am sure they will lead us to the right solution, and I look forward to their findings.  
Conclusions  
8. 
There is no simple answer to the to important to fail nature of banks. Maturity transformation 
brings economic benefits but it creates real economic costs. The problem is that the costs do 
not  fall  on  those  who  enjoy  the  benefits.  The damaging  externalities created  by  excessive 
maturity transformation and risk-taking must be internalised.  
A  market  economy  has  proved  to  be  the  most  reliable  means  for  a  society  to  expand  its 
standard of living. But ever since the Industrial Revolution we have not cracked the problem 
of how to ensure a more stable banking system. We know that there will always be sharp 
and unpredictable movements in expectations, sentiment and hence valuations of financial 
BIS Review 140/2010 
 9
assets.  They  represent  our  best  guess  as  to  what  the  future  holds,  and  views  about  the 
future can change radically and unpredictably. It is a phenomenon that we must learn to live 
with. But changes in expectations can create havoc with the banking system because it relies 
so heavily on transforming short-term debt into long-term risky assets. For a society to base 
its financial system on alchemy is a poor advertisement for its rationality.  
Change is, I believe, inevitable. The question is only whether we can think our way through 
to a better outcome before the next generation is damaged by a future and bigger crisis. This 
crisis has already left a legacy of debt to the next generation. We must not leave them the 
legacy of a fragile banking system too.  
I have explained the principles on which a successful reform of the system should rest. It is a 
program that will take many years, if not decades. But, as Bagehot concluded in Lombard 
Street,  “I  have  written  in  vain  if  I  require  to  say  now  that  the  problem  is  delicate,  that  the 
solution is varying and difficult, and that the result is inestimable to us all.” 
(2009), 
“Financial  Stability  Report”,  June  2009,  available  at 
References  
Admati, A.R., DeMarzo, P.M., Hellwig, M.F., and Pfleiderer, P (2010), “Fallacies, Irrelevant 
Facts, and Myths in the Discussion of Capital regulation: Why Bank Equity is Not Expensiv” 
Stanford Business School, mimeo.  
Arrow, K.J. (1951), “An extension of the basic theorems of classical welfare economics”, In 
Proceedings of the Second Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, 
ed. J. Neyman, Berkeley: University of California Press, 507–32.  
Arrow, K.J. and Debreu, G. (1954) “Existence of an equilibrium for a competitive economy”, 
Econometrica 22, 265–90.  
Bagehot,  W.  (1873),  “Lombard  Street:  A  Description  of  the  Money  Market”,  Wiley  &  Sons, 
(reprinted 1999).  
Bank  of  England, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/fsr/2009/fsrfull0906.pdf  
Diamond,  D.W.  and  Dybvig,  P.  H.  (1983,  91(3)),  “Bank  Runs,  Deposit  Insurance,  and 
Liquidity”, The Journal of Political Economy, pp. 401–19.  
Brennan, S., Haldane, A. and Madouros, V. (2010), “The Contribution of the Financial Sector 
Miracle or Mirage?”, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech442.pdf  
Colangelo, A. and Inklaar, R. (2010), “Banking Sector Output Measurement in the Euro Area 
– A Modified Approach”, ECB Working Paper Series No. 1204.  
Debreu, G. (1951), “The coefficient of resource utilization”, Econometrica 19, 273–92.  
Fisher, I (1936), “100% Money”, Revised edition, New York: Adelphi Company, 1936.  
Friedman,  M.  (1960),  “A  Program  for  Monetary  Stability”  New  York:  Fordham  University 
Press, 1960.  
Haldane, A. (2010), “The $100 Billion Question”, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech433.pdf  
Hellwig, M. (1995), “Systemic Aspects of Risk Management in Banking and Finance”, Swiss 
Journal of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 131 (4/2), 723–737.  
IMF (2009), “Global Financial Stability Report”, April 2009.  
Institute  of  International  Finance  (2010),  “Interim  Report  on  the  Cumulative  Impact  on  the 
Global Economy of Proposed Changes in the Banking Regulatory Framework”, available at 
http://www.ebf-fbe.eu/uploads/10-Interim%20NCI_June2010_Web.pdf  
10 
 BIS Review 140/2010
“We 
(2008), 
folk  at 
let  down  diligent 
the  Halifax”,  Financial  Times, 
Kay,  J. 
24 September 2008. 
Kay, J. (2009), “Narrow Banking: The reform of banking regulation”, CSFI report.  
Keynes,  J.M.  (1936),  “The  general  theory  of  employment,  interest  and  money”,  London: 
MacMillan (reprinted 2007). 
Kotlikoff, L.J. (2010), “Jimmy Stewart is Dead: Ending the World’s Ongoing Financial Plague 
with Limited Purpose Banking”, John Wiley & Sons.  
Lacker, J.M. (2010), “Real Regulatory Reform”, available at 
http://www.richmondfed.org/press_room/speeches/president_jeff_lacker/2010/lacker_speech
_20100301.cfm  
Miles, D. (2010), “Leverage and Monetary Policy”, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech451.pdf  
Modigliani, F. and Miller, M.H. (1958), “The cost of capital, corporate finance and the theory 
of investment”, American Economic Review 48, 261–97.  
Pigou, A.C. (1920) “The Economics of Welfare”, 4th edition, London: Macmillan, 1932.  
Tobin,  J  (1987),  “The  Case  for  Preserving  Regulatory  Distinctions”,  in  Restructuring  the 
Financial System, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 1987, pp. 167–183.  
Tucker, P. (2010a), “Resolution of Large and Complex Financial Institutions: The Big Issues” 
available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech431.pdf  
Tucker, P. (2010b), “Shadow Banking, Financing Markets and Financial Stability” available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech420.pdf  
Weitzman,  M.  L.  (1974),  “Prices  vs.  Quantities”,  Review  of  Economic  Studies,  vol.  41, 
p. 477–91.  
Wolf, M. (2010), “The challenge of halting the financial doomsday machine”, Financial Times, 
20 April 2010. 
 
BIS Review 140/2010 
 11
 12 
 BIS Review 140/2010
 13
BIS Review 140/2010 
  14 
 BIS Review 140/2010
