Guy Quaden: International trade – threats and opportunities in a 
globalised world 
Introduction by Mr Guy Quaden, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, at the International 
Conference 2010, Brussels, 14 October 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
On behalf of Governor Quaden and also on my behalf, as member of the Board of Directors 
in charge of the Research Department, I am pleased and I indeed feel it an honour to have 
the opportunity to welcome you to the sixth National Bank of Belgium Conference. As you will 
have  seen  in  the  programme,  Governor  Quaden  was  initially  scheduled  to  open  the 
Conference. Unfortunately, in view of unforeseen circumstances, he cannot be here with us 
this  morning.  He  kindly  asked  me  to  offer  his  apologies  in  that  respect.  Instead,  he  will 
address  you  tomorrow  at  the  closure  of  Conference,  drawing  the  conclusions  from  the 
discussions, and will outline his views on a topic he thinks is of the utmost importance. 
At present, I would like to bid you once more a hearty welcome to our Conference. Held once 
every two years since the year 2000, this regular event is one of the initiatives taken by the 
Bank to promote scientific research in fields that lie at the heart of the concerns of all those 
involved in economic life, and also to expand its own understanding of the functioning of the 
economy. 
The theme that has been chosen for this sixth edition, namely international trade and capital 
flows,  is  of  particular  importance  for  our  institution,  just  as  it  is  for  other  observers  of  the 
Belgian  economy.  Indeed,  our  country  owes  a  good  part of  its  prosperity  to  its  particularly 
high level of openness to trade. One consequence of being so open to the rest of the world is 
of course the fact that our economy’s growth depends heavily on world demand and on the 
capacity of our domestic firms to tap new opportunities on foreign markets.  
The  close  relationship  linking  economic  growth  to  firms’  performance  on  external  markets 
obviously does not only concern Belgium. Against a backdrop of the increased globalisation 
that has rapidly taken hold over the last twenty years, it is a topic followed very closely by 
economic stakeholders in all the industrialised nations. That can be mainly explained by the 
rise in power of emerging countries, notably the central and eastern European states, India, 
Brazil  and,  above  all,  China.  Having  benefited  from  both  a  strong  trade  liberalisation  and 
large foreign investment inflows, while taking advantage of low production costs and raising 
their level of technological know-how, these economies now seem like fearsome competitors 
for  European  and  North  American  companies.  These  firms  must  therefore  take  up  many 
challenges in order to safeguard their competitive edge, both on their domestic markets and 
their foreign outlets. At the same time, the emerging countries are large in size and exhibit 
strong economic growth, too. Therefore, they also offer many opportunities for firms that are 
able to seize them. 
All these developments linked to the increasing globalisation of the economy obviously raise 
a good many questions. These include the determinants of trade flows, strategies enabling 
companies  to  gain  a  foothold  in  external  markets,  or  the  employment  consequences  of 
importing goods from low-cost countries. 
These  issues  have  been  extensively  discussed  in  both  the  theoretical  and  empirical 
economic  literature.  Since  the  mid-nineties,  a  growing  segment  of  this  literature  has  been 
paying  particular  attention  to  the  microeconomic  determinants  of  international  trade  and 
foreign investment. Researchers have made intensive use of firm-level databases specific to 
different countries that have gradually become available for them. 
BIS Review 136/2010 
 1
This microeconomic approach has brought an important contribution to our understanding of 
the causes and consequences of the globalisation, mainly because firm-level data make it 
possible to point up things that do not show up in aggregate statistics.  
If only one example had to be given, it would of course be the fact that trade is concentrated 
among  a  few  firms,  which  are  in  a  better  position  than  the  others  to  bear  the  high  costs 
associated  with  entering  foreign  markets.  Indeed,  within  each  industry,  firms  of  different 
sizes,  with  different  performances,  and  with  different  behaviour  in  terms  of  innovation  and 
international  involvement,  operate  alongside  each  other.  It  is  important  to  take  this 
heterogeneity into consideration to understand the dynamics of foreign trade. 
This heterogeneity also has very important implications for economic policy, in the sense that 
it  helps  to  identify  two  levers  that  are  likely  to  be  activated  as  a  means  of  boosting  firms’ 
international involvement. The first consists of encouraging their expansion – and especially 
that of SMEs – so as to give them the best preparation to go international, including policies 
designed  to  foster  their  research  and  development  efforts.  The  second  lever  concerns 
measures aimed at cutting the costs of entering foreign markets, for instance by helping firms 
to find potential new customers there or by removing administrative and regulatory barriers. 
Another undeniable advantage of the microeconomic approach is that it helps bring out the 
scale of reallocation of production factors from the weakest-performing firms towards those 
whose business is more flourishing. Among other things, this enables economists to gain a 
better  understanding  of the  impact  of  globalisation  on  the  labour  market.  Issues  related  to 
this  subject  are  naturally  of  paramount  interest  for  policy-makers.  Although  resource 
reallocation has always been a key determinant of economic growth, it also involves costs 
that need to be taken into account. These costs are mainly related to updating workers’ skills 
and  to  innovation  efforts  that  firms  have  to  undertake  to  adapt  to  changes  in  comparative 
advantages. 
By organising this conference, the National Bank of Belgium is hoping to contribute to the 
enrichment  of  this  growing  area  of  economics.  To  this  end,  we  have  invited  several  top 
economists to present the findings of part of their research work here today. Four of them, 
who  will  be  keynote  speakers,  have  already  made  a  very  significant  contribution  to  the 
literature  on  international  trade  over  the  last  fifteen  years.  It  is  a  great  privilege  for  us  to 
welcome  here  today  Andrew  Bernard,  Jonathan  Eaton,  Marc  Melitz  and  Gianmarco 
Ottaviano,  who  will  give  their  perspective  on  the  various  questions  dealt  with  during  this 
conference, and I would like to thank them warmly for accepting our invitation. 
These two days will also be largely devoted to the presentation of eight original contributions 
by research teams from different Belgian universities and the National Bank. The papers to 
be presented are the outcome of research work started about a year and a half ago, under 
the supervision of the Research Department, with the help of the Statistics Department and 
the Microeconomic Analysis Service. All these projects use microeconomic data on Belgian 
firms that we have made available for the different research teams. Moreover, these teams 
have been meeting regularly to discuss the progress made with their work. These exchanges 
of views also give the Bank a way of encouraging the sharing of knowledge and scientific 
research.  I  hope  that  they  have  been  beneficial  for  the  participants  and  enabled  them  to 
optimise the quality of their work.  
Four of the contributions look in particular at the strategies put into place by internationally 
active firms. In so doing, they tackle some very relevant questions on the factors that enable 
firms to maintain their international competitiveness. For instance, do firms that go into many 
different  markets  at  once  perform  differently  from  those  that  only  start  exporting  to  a  very 
small number of destinations? What determines the supply of products that are sold on these 
markets?  What  conditions  make  it  more  efficient  for  a  firm  to  resort  to  foreign  direct 
investment rather than supplying markets through exports? How can firms keep their place 
on the export markets in the face of competition from the emerging economies? These are 
2 
 BIS Review 136/2010
just some of the questions that will be dealt with in four of the presentations featured at this 
conference. 
Two other contributions should help to further deepen our understanding of the interaction 
between firms’ characteristics and the costs of entering foreign markets. One of them looks 
more specifically at the influence of technological change on trade in services. The other one 
deals  with  spillover  effects,  that  is,  the  influence  exporters  are  likely  to  have  on  the 
productivity of other firms, as well as on their propensity to export in their turn. 
And two last contributions focus on the impact of globalisation on the labour market. The first 
of these endeavours to study its influence on demand for labour. The second one addresses 
the question whether the costs related to employment adjustments vary significantly between 
local firms and multinational enterprises. 
In my opinion, the issues that will be debated today and tomorrow, during the four sessions 
of the conference, are extremely interesting, not just for academic circles but also for those 
involved  either  closely  or  indirectly  in  economic  policy  decision-making  processes.  And  I 
strongly  urge  members  of  the  audience  to  join  in  with  the  discussants,  who  will  be 
commenting on each paper, and voice their own remarks and ideas. 
May I take this early opportunity to thank the keynote speakers, the university researchers 
and those from the Bank who have contributed to this conference, as well as the discussants 
for stimulating the exchange of ideas over the next two days.  
All that’s left for me to do is to hand the floor to Peter Praet, who will be chairing the first 
session of this 2010 Conference, and to wish you all two very pleasant and instructive days. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 136/2010 
 3
