Muhammad Al-Jasser: Review of the latest economic developments in 
Saudi Arabia 
Speech  by  His  Excellency  Dr  Muhammad  Al-Jasser,  Governor  of  the  Saudi  Arabian 
Monetary Agency (SAMA), to the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, on the presentation of 
the 46th Annual Report of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency, Riyadh, 25 September 2010. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  that  the  celebration  of  our  National  Day  coincides  with  the 
submission of the 46th Annual Report of Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency which reviews the 
latest  economic  developments  in  the  Kingdom  for  fiscal  year  1430/1431H.  (2009)  and  the 
first quarter of the current year. 
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
The impact of the global financial crisis on the world economy continued during 2009, with 
the  world  production  of  goods  and  services  recording  a  downturn  of  0.6  percent  in  2009. 
However,  economic  variables  over  the  past  months  of  the  current  year  indicate  positive 
growth  rates.  Given  that  our  national  economy  is  characterized  by  its  openness  to  the 
external world and high levels of trade integration with it, it is natural to affect and be affected 
by developments in the global economic system. The growth rate of GDP at constant prices 
declined to 0.6 percent in the Kingdom during 2009 compared to 4.2 percent in the preceding 
year.  The  non-oil  sector  maintained  good  growth  rates,  growing  by  3.8  percent  in  2009 
compared to 4.3 percent in the preceding year.  
Several factors have contributed to reduce the impacts of the global financial crisis on our 
national  economy.  The  most  important  factors  are  the  strength  of  our  domestic  financial 
sector  and  increased  government  spending  despite  of  the  decline  in  crude  oil  prices.  The 
government  spending  stood  at  R1s  596.4  billion  in  2009,  reaching  unprecedented  record 
levels.  The  balance  of  payments  recorded  a  surplus  for  the  eleventh  consecutive  year, 
amounting  to  R1s  85.4  billion  in  2009.  The  monetary  and  banking  sector  contributed 
efficiently  to  enhancing  these  good  results  by  providing  appropriate  liquidity  to  finance 
economic  activity.  Money  supply  increased  by  10.7  percent  during  2009  and  commercial 
banks  expanded  in  providing  modern  and  miscellaneous  banking  services.  Moreover, 
positive economic developments included lower levels of domestic inflation, measured by the 
general cost of living index, standing at 5.1 percent in 2009 compared to 9.9 percent in the 
preceding  year.  Currently  available  economic  data  indicate  an  expected  and  notable 
improvement in the domestic economic performance for the current year despite of resumed 
inflationary pressures. The inflation rate stood at 6.1 percent in August 2010 compared to the 
same month of the preceding year. 
I  must  take  the  occasion  to  indicate  that  some  important  international  reports  have 
commended  some  of  the  Kingdom’s  achievements.  One  of  these  reports  is  the  IMF’s 
Executive  Board’s  assessment  report  of  the  Kingdom’s  economic  developments  which 
indicated that the Saudi economy was prepared to encounter the global financial crisis due to 
its  adoption  of  sound  supervisory  and  regulatory  frameworks  and  the  prudent  and 
macroeconomic  policies  followed  over  the  preceding  years.  The  Board  commended  the 
Kingdom for taking strong measures and increasing expenditure and for good management 
of  the  monetary  policy.  The  Fund  appraised  the  Kingdom’s  efforts  for  maintaining  the 
soundness of the banking system, improving the climate of credit and the positive economic 
outlook  in  general.  It  also  supported  the  Kingdom’s  plans  for  resuming  expenditure  at 
sustainable  levels  and  the  government’s  effort  aiming  at  slowing  the  growth  of  domestic 
consumption of oil products.  
BIS Review 128/2010 
 1
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
In pursuance of the government’s keenness to avoid the repercussions of the global financial 
crisis,  the  Supreme  Economic  Council  held  a  meeting,  chaired  by  your  Majesty,  on 
16 Shawwal 1428H (16 October 2008) to discuss the global financial crisis and the way to 
curb its potential effects on the national economy and it called for taking a number of actions 
to  face  it.  In  the  area  of  monetary  and  banking  policies,  SAMA  followed  monetary  policy 
aimed  at  achieving  stability  in  the  financial  sector  and  providing  the  necessary  liquidity  to 
meet domestic demand for credit, by taking a package of proactive measures to enhance the 
liquidity position and reduce the cost of lending in order to ensure that banks continue their 
financing  role  in  the  development  process  in  the  Kingdom.  The  most  prominent  measures 
were: reducing the Statutory Reserve requirements ratio, the Repo and the Reverse Repo 
Rates several times, enhancing the liquidity position in the banking system by placing long 
term  deposits  in  local  currency  and  US  Dollar  with  local  banks  on  behalf  of  government 
institutions  and  organizations,  reducing  the  pricing  of  treasury  bills,  facilitating  foreign 
exchange swaps in order to provide the necessary liquidity in US Dollar for the local banking 
system. As for fiscal policy, the government continued the expansion in public expenditure 
and  increasing  the  pumping  of  funds  to  specialized  lending  institutions  by  an  estimated 
amount of Rls 40 billion during 2009.  
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
In  spite  of  the  adverse  impacts  of  the  successive  financial  crises,  they  clearly  resulted  in 
combining  international  efforts  to  review  the  global  financial  system  and  commence  taking 
reforming  measures  to  perform  its  role  effectively  and  positively  in  the  global  economic 
activity  and  international  external  trade.  G20  has  set  a  comprehensive  work  program  to 
enhance  the  global  financial  system,  including  the  establishment  of  the  Financial  Stability 
Board  (FSB)  in  April  2009,  attaining  significant  progress  in  the  regulatory  area  and  capital 
adequacy standards, liquidity risk management, compensation rules for senior executives in 
the  financial  sector,  and  transparency  in  registering  hedge  funds  and  rating  agencies. 
Hopefully,  the  application  of  these  standards  would  enhance  significantly  the  financial 
positions of global institutions in the coming years. With this background, the Saudi economy 
has  not  been  affected  considerably  by  the  global  financial  crisis  due  to  conservative  and 
prudent oversight and control policies followed since a long time. For instance, attention is 
paid to capital adequacy ratios and loan provisions for countercyclicalities. 
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
Under  Your  ongoing  patronage  and  follow-up,  the  Supreme  Economic  Counsel  continued 
achieving many developmental steps aiming at reconstructing and organizing the economy 
and updating laws and legislation in order to promote the level of the economy’s efficiency 
and  competitiveness,  support  the  optimum  utilization  of  production  factors,  and  provide 
sophisticated  regulatory  and  administrative  frameworks  and  an  attractive  environment  to 
domestic  and  foreign  investments.  As  a  result  of  these  efforts,  the  economic  performance 
has improved greatly over the recent years. This has been highlighted by the growth of the 
private sector’s real GDP by an annual average of 5.1 percent during the last five years and 
the  increase  in  non-oil  exports  by  an  average  of  14.6  percent  during  the  same  period. 
Moreover, the investment environment in Saudi Arabia has improved, and the Kingdom has 
obtained  the  eighth  rank  at  the  global  level  for  attracting  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI), 
according to the UNCTAD’s report. 
On the other hand, Saudi Arabia has recently been lauded by FATFS’s report issued at the 
end  of  last  June  for  its  commitment  to  the  nine  Special  Recommendations  related  to 
Terrorism  Financing  combined  with  the  forty  Recommendations  on  Anti-money  laundering. 
As a result, Saudi Arabia occupies the first rank at the Arab level, and one of the G-20’s top 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2010
ten  positions.  The  tribute  paid  to  the  Kingdom  is  as  an  appreciation  by  the  international 
community of the Saudi efforts in combating the crimes of money laundering and financing of 
terrorism, and it highlights the soundness of the Saudi stance stemming from its adherence 
to the tolerant Shari’a, implementation of the resolutions of the UN and Security Counsel and 
implementation  of  the  best  practices  in  this  field.  All  these  achievements  have  been 
accomplished  by  the  grace  of  Allah  Almighty,  and  then  thanks  to  Your  diligence  and 
guidance,  may  Allah  safeguard  You.  The  Kingdom  of  Saudi  Arabia  is  one  of  the  first 
countries giving priority to combating the phenomenon of money laundering and financing of 
terrorism.  In  addition,  it  has  been  in  the  lead  in  combating  this  phenomenon  due  to  its 
security, social and economic repercussions. Financing of terrorism has been criminalized in 
Saudi Arabia in compliance with provisions of the Anti-Money Laundering Law issued by a 
royal decree on 25/6/1424H (23/8/2003). 
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques,  
The  recent  positive  developments  in  our  national  economy  represent  a  solid  brick  of  the 
economic  and  social  development  bricks  that  you  have  continued  to  consolidate  in  this 
country since assuming the reins of government on 26 Jumada II 1426H (corresponding to 
August  1,  2005).  One  of  the  most  prominent  indicators  of  development  is  the  rise  of  total 
government  expenditure  during  the  period  from  2006  to  2009  to  Rls  2.0  trillion.  Total 
government  spending  in  2009  reached  Rls  596.4  billion,  the  highest  in  the  history  of  the 
Kingdom,  and  you,  may  Allah  bless  you,  have  been  keen  to  take  advantage  of  financial 
resources  to  spend  effectively  on  the  completion  of  infrastructure  projects  and  the 
development of human resources. You have also urged quick completion of projects in the 
transport, health, education and water sectors for the service of citizens. You – may Allah 
bless you – have paid special attention to the human element where you have ordered the 
establishment of a number of universities, opened the door of welfare and development for 
future  generations  through  the  Custodian  of  the  Two  Holy  Mosques’  Program  For  Foreign 
Scholarships, and ordered its extension for other five years. This is in line with your attention 
paid to invest in the most important elements of development, namely, the human element. It 
is hoped that this will lead, with Allah’s grace and guidance, to the preparation of the coming 
generations  armed  with  science  and  knowledge  that  will  complement  the  development 
process witnessed by our beloved country.  
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, 
The Council of Ministers approved on 28th, Sha’aban, 1431H (9th, August, 2010) the Ninth 
Development Plan of the Kingdom, which covers the period from 1431/1432H to 1435/1436H 
(2010–2014). You, may Allah bless you, instructed all organs of the State to be very keen on 
the implementation of their programs and projects and achieving their goals within their set 
time limit, giving a high priority to those which have direct impact on raising the standard of 
living  of  citizens  and  improving  their  life  quality,  especially  in  light  of  what  have  been 
allocated  as  an  ambitious  development  expenditure  which  amounted  to  Rls  1,444  billion, 
67 percent  more  than  the  allocations  of  the  Eighth  Development  Plan.  This  plan  is 
complementary  to  the  achievements  of  previous  development  plans  that  led  to  a  quantum 
leap  in  living  standards  of  citizens  and  laid  solid  foundations  for  the  Saudi  economy  to 
assume an important position in the global economy. The plan focuses on five main points, 
namely,  continued  efforts  to  improve  the  standard  of  living  and  life  quality  of  citizens,  the 
development and employment of the national manpower, structural development of the Saudi 
economy,  balanced  development  of 
the 
competitiveness  of  the  national  economy  and  Saudi  products  in  domestic  and  overseas 
markets.  
regions  and  enhancing 
the  Kingdom’s 
BIS Review 128/2010 
 3
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques  
The endorsement of the Ninth Development plan coincided with the announcement by the 
Central  Department  of  Statistics  and  Information  of  preliminary  results  of  the  population 
census. The population of the Kingdom amounted to 27.1 million, of whom about 18.7 million 
are Saudis, and 8.4 million are residents. The number of houses stood at 4.6 million. These 
results support your Royal instructions to exert every effort to achieve the objectives of the 
Ninth  Development  Plan  in  a  timely  manner,  especially  with  regard  to  enhancing  citizens’ 
welfare,  providing  housing,  employment,  education,  health  care  services,  and  modern 
facilities  needed,  and  working  hard  to  fight  poverty,  paying  special  attention  to  balanced 
development in all regions of the Kingdom.  
At the regional level, the four member states of the GCC  Monetary Union (Bahrain, Saudi 
Arabia, Qatar and Kuwait) have ratified, at the beginning of this year, the convention of the 
Monetary  Union.  By  your  Royal  encouragement  and  support  and  that of  your  brothers  the 
leaders of the Council’s states, the Monetary Council began its work as the nucleus of the 
central bank to be established upon the completion of the main facilities and infrastructure of 
the Monetary Union. The central banks and monetary agencies, members of the Monetary 
Council,  are  doing  their  utmost  to  conduct  the  Council’s  work  in  accordance  with  the 
guidance of the leaders of the Council’s States.  
In  spite  of  these  bright  achievements,  there  are  still  many  challenges  posed  to  our 
development march. Such challenges have all been the preoccupation of your majesty, and 
you  have  been  constantly  urging  the  authorities  concerned  to  overcome  them.  The  most 
prominent of those challenges are the following:  
First: employment of the Saudi youth, which constitutes one of the major challenges facing 
the  national  economy.  In  spite  of  the  good  achievements  made  in  the  preceding  period, 
estimates indicate that unemployment among Saudis amounted to about 9.6 percent in 2009. 
Given  the  rate  of  population  growth  and  structure,  it  is  important  to  continue  intensifying 
current  efforts  to  increase  investment  to  develop  the  human  capital  with  the  active 
participation of the private and public sectors. Efforts should be intensified for Saudizing the 
jobs  in  the  private  sector,  and  obstacles  hindering  this  process  should  be  considered  and 
eliminated. The percentage of Saudization fit for the nature of each activity and sector needs 
to be determined, and work should be made to activate the procedures and regulations that 
respect productivity and safeguard the rights of workers and employers alike.  
Second: good utilization of economic resources of our country, most notably oil and gas that 
represent  the  most  important  elements  of  the  economic  development  of  the  Kingdom. 
Figures  indicate  that  the  rates  of  domestic  consumption  of  the  Kingdom’s  oil  and  gas  are 
growing at high rates, recording an average growth of 5.9 percent during the past five years. 
This is a high growth rate compared to the population growth and the size of GDP, which 
calls for investigating the reasons for such an increase and rationalizing it.  
Third: provision of adequate housing for citizens which is an issue of diverse dimensions and 
causes. Perhaps the most prominent of which are the limited availability of developable land 
within the urban boundary at prices appropriate to the citizen’s income, and the weakness of 
funding sources due to the absence of a regulatory framework. Here lies the importance of 
issuing financing and mortgage laws.  
May Allah bless your majesty and guide your steps along the path of goodness. 
4 
 BIS Review 128/2010
