Jean-Claude Trichet: Keeping the momentum for financial reform 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Eurofi Financial Forum, Brussels, 29 September 2010. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 Introduction 
It  is  always  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  participate  in  the  Eurofi  events. They  are  excellent 
platforms for debate about financial services issues in Europe.  
This  year’s  forum  takes  place  at  a  time  of  considerable  progress  on  matters  of  financial 
regulation.  The  establishment  of  the  European  System  of  Financial  Supervision  (ESFS), 
including  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board (ESRB)  and  the  three  European  Supervisory 
Authorities  (ESAs)  is  a  milestone.  I  would  like  to  commend  all  of  those  who  so  actively 
contributed to this achievement. Europe at times advances in steps, but the new supervisory 
architecture is more than a step; it is a leap forward.  
We can today look back with satisfaction on what the EU has achieved. The work of the high-
level group chaired by Jacques de Larosière proved to be seminal and has now born fruit. 
The  EU  has  shown  itself  able  to  accomplish  a  comprehensive  reform  of  its  financial 
supervisory framework within a respectable timescale. The new framework is an important 
response to the financial crisis and it also takes us forward in fostering European financial 
integration, a key dimension of the Single Market.  
The ESRB 
I  will  have  the  responsibility  of  chairing  the  ESRB,  which  has  the  mandate  of  mitigating 
EU-wide systemic risk through macro-prudential oversight.  
At present, we hardly need to describe systemic risk in words: we can almost feel it. In all our 
economies, financial distress became so widespread that it impaired the functioning of the 
entire  system  to  the  point  where  economic  growth  and  welfare  suffered  massively.  This 
financial crisis is an overwhelming case of the materialisation of systemic risk.  
The  ESRB  will  bring  together  risk  assessments  from  various  angles  and  pay  particular 
attention to the ways in which risks can reinforce each other in highly detrimental ways. It is 
therefore  appropriate  that  the  ESRB  draws  together  the  work  of  a  broad  range  of  EU 
institutions: central banks; our partners in the ESFS, including national supervisors; as well 
as the Commission.  
The ESRB is complementary to these institutions. It does not replace any of their functions. 
For the European Central Bank, which has been asked to provide specific support, I would 
like  to  stress  that  the  ESRB  is  a  body  distinct  and  separate  from  the  ECB,  its  Governing 
Council and General Council. Importantly, the ESRB will not change in any way the mandate 
and the functioning of the ECB’s statutory role, and the same holds true for all central banks 
in the EU. 
I believe that a key strength of the new institution will lie in the diversity of its members. Each 
of them will bring different knowledge and expertise in the many influences on the financial 
system. Indeed, fruitful interaction between ESRB members will be critical to ensure an all 
encompassing  system  of  macro-prudential  oversight  of  the  EU’s  financial  system.  But  the 
task  of  the  ESRB  will  be  very  challenging.  We  launch  this  body  at  a  time  when  important 
BIS Review 125/2010 
 1
parts of the financial system are still under strain and far-reaching structural and regulatory 
changes are ongoing.  
The ESRB’s mandate is wide-ranging, covering any material systemic risk that threatens the 
stability of the EU’s financial system; the system’s contribution to the smooth functioning of 
the  single  market;  and  its  sustainable  contribution  to  economic  growth.  The  ESRB’s  main 
tasks  are  threefold:  to  identify  and  prioritise  systemic  risks;  to  issue  early  warnings  when 
significant systemic risks emerge; and to issue policy recommendations for remedial action in 
response to the risks it identifies.  
The  ESRB  will  not  focus  on  individual  institutions,  individual  countries  or  individual 
macroeconomic issues – rather, the institution should have a strong horizontal focus, across 
countries, across sectors and across the boundaries between the financial sphere and the 
real economy. Interlinkages and spillovers should be key terms in its analysis.  
To  achieve  these  tasks,  the  ESRB  will  draw  on  information  from  many  sources,  including 
strong  analytical  input  from  its  members;  intelligence  gathered  from  financial  system 
participants; and the data necessary to understand the nature of the intricate interlinkages 
that  define  the  financial  system.  ESRB  analysis  must  be  broad-based  covering  potentially 
any  aspect  of  the  EU’s  financial  system  –  markets,  institutions  and  infrastructure.  In 
particular, it should extend to those areas of activity that reside outside the usual regulatory 
scope, often referred to as the “shadow” system. 
The ESRB does not have binding powers per se. It must convince through the quality of its 
work.  To  achieve  credibility,  it  must  ensure  that  warnings  are  well-timed  and  that 
recommendations are specific and well-targeted. To reinforce its actions, the ESRB has been 
given the responsibility of following up, including, where necessary, alerting the Council and 
the European Parliament, when it judges that compliance is less than satisfactory.  
Finally the new institution is embedded with a strong sense of public accountability. Strong 
links  between  the  ESRB  and  the  Parliament  in  particular  –  parliamentary  hearings  and 
annual reports, for example – will ensure that the ESRB is held to account in pursuing its 
oversight responsibilities.  
I am very much looking forward to the ESRB’s formal launch next January and very close 
cooperation with all authorities concerned. 
The Basel III reform package 
Let me turn to “Basel III”, the reform package intended to put the global financial system on a 
sounder  footing.  In  my  view,  this  achievement  will  be  a  cornerstone  of  the  new  regulatory 
system and I would like to take a few moments to explain its evolution. 
As  the  banking  sector  figured  prominently  in  the  crisis,  unsurprisingly  many  of  the  G20’s 
action points are targeted on the sector. The Basel Committee followed up on this call for 
action.  Last  December  it  published  its  proposals  on  strengthening  capital  and  liquidity 
management.  The  consultation  on  the  proposals  triggered  a  wide  response.  Almost 
300 comments  were  received  from  the  public.  The  Committee  also  performed  a  macro-
economic impact assessment of the stronger capital and liquidity requirements.  
Taking account of all these elements, earlier this month the Group of Governors and Heads 
of Supervision reached a final agreement on capital requirements and the transition to the 
new permanent regime.  
Some  commentators  suggest  that  the  agreements  are  too  lenient  while  others  argue  that 
they are too tight. I do not share these views, and I would like to explain why I disagree with 
them and why I believe that the solution we have reached strikes the right balance.  
Those who argue that the package is too lenient say that the regulators have been too soft 
on the banking sector, basically giving in to its intensive lobbying efforts. In this vein, they 
2 
 BIS Review 125/2010
question  the  prudential  soundness  of  some  of  the  agreed  measures,  for  example  the 
treatment of minority interests or certain intangibles in the capital framework, or the treatment 
of  certain  types  of  bonds  in  the  liquidity  framework.  The  implementation  period  for  the 
measures is another argument advanced by the “too soft” camp.  
By contrast, those who argue that the agreements are too tight, point to the risk to banks’ 
lending activity and therefore to the recovery of the global economy. The main point to keep 
in mind here is that despite the implementation costs, which are of a temporary nature, the 
new framework will benefit the global economy by enhancing financial stability through strong 
global  standards  and  by  contributing  to  avoid  the  massive economic  and  social costs  of  a 
major bust and deep recession. The so-called Long-term Economic Impact study – which like 
all such studies necessarily employs a range of simplifying assumptions – suggest that a 1% 
lowering of the yearly probability of a major financial crisis corresponds to an annual output 
gain of 0.6%. Of course, these figures need to taken with a pinch of salt, but they suggest 
that the order of magnitude is very significant. The same study suggests that, depending on 
the  level  of  capital  requirement,  an  increase  of  1%  in  that  capital  requirement  has  a 
significant impact on this probability.  
From a purely conceptual perspective, there is some validity in the argument that the value of 
certain of the assets that I mentioned earlier can be questioned in periods of extreme stress, 
which  would  suggest  their  deduction  from  regulatory  capital.  But  presenting  this  as  an 
illustration of regulatory capture is wrong, because it ignores the fact that under the achieved 
consensus there is overall a very significant tightening of the prudential standards.  
There are two things that are particularly remarkable: first, we have been able to reach an 
agreement  that  is  truly  global.  It  encompasses  not  only  industrial  economies  but  also 
emerging economies. As many as 27 countries are part of the GHOS, even more than in the 
G20.  Second,  the  end  results  are  tough  standards.  If  we  take  into  account  the  so-called 
capital conservation buffer, the required common equity has been increased from 2% to 7%, 
this is by a factor of 3.5. If I furthermore take into account the previous definition of capital, 
some institutions could present the level of common equity of only 1%. For these institutions 
it is a multiplication by 7 which has been agreed. This is a big step upward. And overall, I 
consider that our agreement strikes the right balance between the objective of strengthening 
the  resilience  of  the  financial  sector  and  the  need  to  avoid  unduly  severe  implications  for 
national banking systems. They are also global minimum standards and national regulators 
or  supervisors  can  set  tougher  standards  if  they  deem  that  appropriate.  The  transition 
arrangements  will  allow  banks  to  meet  the  new  standards  while  not  endangering  the 
progressive consolidation of the recovery.  
Let me mention a distinctly European note. The new European supervisory system will not 
only strengthen oversight, it will also foster integration. By developing a single rule book, the 
European  Supervisory  Authorities  will  contribute  to  a  level  playing  field  in  Europe.  By 
monitoring and addressing financial stability risks, the European Systemic Risk Board might 
increase the confidence of market players to engage in cross-border financial activities. I also 
see a future role for the ESRB in relation to the Basel III measures that have a clear macro-
prudential flavour, such as the countercyclical capital buffers.  
Issues on the G20 agenda of financial reform 
Let me turn to my last point, namely the G20 agenda as regards financial reform. Financial 
reform is a long and arduous process, and my main message is that we have to keep the 
momentum. 
Allow me to single out a few key areas where it is essential to keep the momentum. One is 
the work on reducing the moral hazard posed by systemically important financial institutions. 
The crisis revealed that these institutions might be major contributors to systemic risk. The 
G20 
to  regulatory  and  supervisory 
they  should  be  subject 
therefore  agreed 
that 
BIS Review 125/2010 
 3
requirements,  commensurate  with  the  risks  they  pose  to  the  financial  system  and  the  real 
economy.  This  is  a  very  complex  issue  to  tackle  as  there  are  many  different  aspects  for 
which tools need to be developed to mitigate the risks.  
First, it is essential that tools are developed which increase the shock-absorbing capacity of 
systemically important financial institutions and lower their contribution to systemic risk. The 
introduction  of  additional  measures,  for  example  through  capital  surcharges  and  more 
intrusive supervision, is presently under debate. When looking at these additional prudential 
requirements,  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  the  impact  of  Basel  III  on  the  banking 
system and the broader economy is fully taken into account.  
Second,  it  is  important  that  tools  are  developed  which  ensure  that  authorities  have  the 
appropriate mechanisms in place to resolve the failure of a systemically important financial 
institution in an orderly and prompt manner. We have to avoid recourse to taxpayers, as was 
too often the case in the crisis.  
There is no silver bullet to solve the problem of “too big to fail”. Instead, we need to have a 
combination  of  measures,  covering  the  full  spectrum  from  crisis  prevention  to  crisis 
management to crisis resolution.  
Another area where much progress has been achieved, but where we must remain active, is 
the extension of oversight to institutions and markets not sufficiently covered by regulation. In 
this  respect  I  hope  that  rapid  progress  will  be  made  with  the  Commission’s  legislative 
proposals on short selling and OTC derivatives, which address some important shortcomings 
of the current regulatory framework. We also need more work on credit rating agencies and 
hedge funds.  
Since  December  2009,  credit  rating  agencies  in  the  EU  have  been  subject  to  mandatory 
registration and oversight. I very much welcome the progress made, and I am pleased that 
the  work  continues.  In  the  US  also  strong  orientation  has  been  adopted.  We  have  to 
understand  better  the  problem  of  adverse  incentives  arising  from  the  over-reliance  of 
investors  and  regulators  on  external  ratings.  The  crisis  revealed  that  even  sophisticated 
investors and banks, supposed experts in assessing financial risks, too, often took the short-
cut  of  outsourcing  their  risk-assessments  to  credit  rating  agencies.  The  regulatory 
endorsement of external ratings, as in the capital framework, played an important role in this 
failing.  
On alternative investment vehicles, the G20 has called for greater oversight and in a number 
of jurisdictions, including the EU and the US, regulatory measures are under discussion. In 
this domain, too, I would call for a true level playing field at the global level and, in particular, 
a full convergence of the concept of oversight on both sides of the Atlantic. As envisaged in 
the  US  and  in  Europe,  aside  from  ensuring  proper  management  of  alternative  investment 
vehicles,  it  is  important  to  ensure  appropriate  and  timely  reporting  to  authorities  on 
investment activities so as to control systemic risk.  
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude with a few remarks on what I believe is essential to achieve effective reform 
of financial regulation – and why it is essential to keep the momentum. 
Effective  financial  reform  needs  perseverance.  Achieving  reform  is  complicated;  there  are 
many stakeholders, many legal issues and many international linkages. Reform should result 
in  policies  that  are  sound,  effective  and  convergent  across  countries.  Thus  dialogue  and 
coordination at a global level are essential.  
Effective financial reform also needs strong determination. Authorities avoided a collapse of 
the financial system only because they were able to take decisions with great rapidity and 
boldness that were not listed in any text books. I will not insist on what the central banks did. 
It  is  very  well-known.  Let  me  remind  us  that  the  executive  branches  and  Parliaments 
4 
 BIS Review 125/2010
decided to support the financial sector with a total amount of tax payer risk representing 27% 
of GDP – the same percentage on both sides of the Atlantic. This gigantic support permitted 
to  avoid  a  depression.  It  did  not  permit  to  avoid  the  deepest  recession  in  the  advanced 
economies since WWII. Our strong determination to make the financial system much more 
resilient, and much less fragile, is two-fold. First, we must avoid in the future, as much as 
possible, the immense cost in terms of long-term economic growth of such a financial crisis. 
And second, if we had again, by misfortune, to cope with the same acute challenge, I am 
convinced  that  this  time  we  would  not  obtain  from  our  political  democracies  the  same 
gigantic effort. Then a depression would be unavoidable.  
This  is  why  my  colleagues  and  I  are  calling  for  perseverance  and  for  resolve  in  financial 
reform.  Our  economic  environment  remains  very  demanding.  This 
for 
complacency. It is a time to remain alert, vigilant and inflexibly determined.  
I thank you for your attention. 
is  no 
time 
BIS Review 125/2010 
 5
