Christian Noyer: International financial stability 
Keynote address by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of 
the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the International Paris-
Europlace Financial Forum, Tokyo, 29 November 2010. 
 Although the financial crisis originated in one country, it quickly became apparent that it was 
truly  global  in  nature.  It  brought  home  a  simple  message:  capital  markets  are  closely 
interlinked around the world and, thus, domestic and international financial stability cannot be 
dissociated. They really are two sides of the same coin. 
Today, I would like to reflect upon international financial stability. The views expressed are 
my own but, as you know, France now holds the Presidency of the G20 and I will try to put 
my own thoughts in that perspective.  
International  financial  instability  has  increased  over  the  last  period.  Whether  we  look  at 
exchange  rates,  international  capital  flows  or  commodity  prices,  signs  abound  of  more 
intense volatility. 
Volatility may not necessarily be a bad thing. To some extent, it is a sign of well functioning 
financial markets. Movements in asset prices help the financial system to serve as a cushion, 
an “absorber” for exogenous economic shocks. This is welfare improving since it avoids, or 
mitigates, adjustment in more rigid goods or labor markets. 
Volatility  may  also  be  driven  by  fundamentals.  For  instance,  capital  inflows  to  emerging 
economies partly reflect very favorable long term growth prospects and high potential returns 
on capital. This can’t be seen as an anomaly. If anything, it remains counterintuitive that net 
capital flows are still going “uphill” from emerging to developed economies. That means that 
some of the poorest citizens of the world are lending money to some of the richest, allowing 
those to finance their consumption. 
The same holds true for commodities prices. Commodities markets increasingly function like 
asset markets with the development of financial instruments based on commodities baskets. 
In  fact,  commodities  have  become  an  asset  class  in  themselves  which  warrants  special 
attention in terms of financial stability. On the other hand, there may be good reasons to think 
that  “fundamentals”,  such  as  strong  growth  in  commodity  intensive  emerging  economies 
countries underpin the current behavior of many commodity markets. 
Finally, financial volatility may be the product of some very specific features of the current 
environment. The conjunction of economic uncertainty, high risk aversion and ample liquidity 
worldwide is especially conducive to abrupt shifts in sentiment and portfolio allocations. 
Volatility  becomes  a  problem  when  it  is  policy  induced  and,  therefore,  financial  markets 
contribute to aggravating shocks instead of attenuating them. Then, durable instability settles 
in and creates potential threats for the real economy. We may be in such a situation today as 
there  are  doubts  about  the  mutual  consistency  in  economic  strategies  pursued  by  major 
economies. At the same time, some of the policies implemented to deal with volatility may 
cause additional damages and distortions in capital markets. I will address those two issues 
before turning briefly to longer term challenges. 
Global imbalances and financial stability 
There  is  broad  agreement  on  the  need  to  rebalance  aggregate  demand  across  the  world. 
That shared objective has underpinned the cohesion exhibited by G20 countries during the 
acute  phase  of  the  crisis.  It  has  played  an  essential  role  in  2008  and  2009  in  restoring 
confidence and setting the path for the recovery. However, this concerted approach to global 
BIS Review 160/2010 
 1
imbalances  may  have  weakened  recently.  There  is  clearly  a  debate  going  on  about  two 
major and interrelated issues: first, the appropriate pace of the rebalancing, with advanced 
countries feeling a greater sense of urgency; and second, on the most efficient strategies, in 
particular regarding exchange rates.  
It would a mistake to ascribe responsibility for imbalances to one specific cause. All countries 
have  legitimate  concerns.  We  have  seen  in  recent  weeks  a  tendency  by  countries  to 
challenge each other monetary policy. This cannot produce a good outcome. 
We have to start from three basic realities. 
First, countries are free to conduct monetary policies they deemed appropriate. Indeed, when 
Central  Banks  are  independent,  they  are  legally  obliged  to  do  so.  Monetary  policies  are 
conducted with domestic objectives in mind but, as you have noticed, all central banks have 
the same mandate: to maintain price stability. This is true for all countries, whether small or 
large. The world has enormously benefited from two decades of price stability resulting from 
monetary  regimes  based  on  Central  bank  independence  and  a  focus  on  internal  price 
stability. 
Second, according to the IMF Articles, countries are free to choose their capital account and 
exchange rate regimes with the proviso that they do not engage in currency manipulation. 
This is a basic pillar of our current system. The proviso has proved very difficult to define, let 
alone to implement. The IMF has met with some difficulties in trying to set up an efficient a 
symmetric process of multilateral surveillance. 
And, third, we live in a world of greater interdependence and complexity. International capital 
flows  have  made  countries  truly  interconnected.  The  monetary  and  financial  system  has 
become “multipolar”. An increasing number of countries, both developed and emerging, have 
become active participants in the global capital market. Spillovers between national monetary 
and  economic  policies  have  multiplied.  And  no  country  can  truly  be  indifferent  to  actions 
taken by others. 
In current circumstances, those three basic realities have become much harder to reconcile. 
Divergences in monetary policies are unavoidable given the uneven paths of recovery across 
the  world.  And,  for  each  country,  this  may  be  a  time  where  price  and  financial  stability 
objectives  may  not  coincide.  In  advanced  economies,  monetary  easing,  together  with 
inhibitions  on  credit  growth,  creates  a  potential  for  further  financial  imbalances.  In  many 
emerging countries, inflationary pressures would warrant monetary tightening but there is a 
clear risk this would trigger destabilizing capital inflows.  
In  those  circumstances,  there  is  a  major  role  to  play  for  macro  prudential  policies.  For 
advanced  economies,  they  should  aim  at  spurring  credit  growth,  while  increasing  the 
resilience of the financial sector. Supervisors should also stand ready to act if bubbles like 
phenomena  appear  in  some  markets.  For  emerging  economies,  measures  aimed  at 
stabilizing capital inflows may help and relieve the pressure on domestic financial conditions 
and prevent further asset bubbles. 
International financial architecture 
In  the  longer  run,  however,  we  may  need  to  work  together  towards  a  more  efficient  and 
stable  international  financial  architecture.  Let  me  highlight  three  possible  avenues  for 
progress. 
First, we have to find ways of dealing with international capital flows volatility. For one given 
country, capital controls may temporarily reduce the pressure on its capital account or even 
permanently  limit  the  volatility  of  its  exchange  rate.  For  the  whole  international  system, 
however,  they  may  simply  displace  the  pressure  to  other  countries  or  asset  classes  and 
exacerbate,  rather  than  reduce,  overall  volatility.  There  might  be  ways  to  eliminate  those 
2 
 BIS Review 160/2010
negative effects by creating a predictable framework defining the circumstances, modalities 
and conditions through which temporary controls would be implemented. 
Second,  there  would  be  benefits  in  finding  ways  to  disconnect  reserve  accumulation  from 
exchange  rate  management  and,  more  generally,  from  balance  of  payment  situations  and 
monetary policies. At present, reserve accumulation can only occur through a conjunction of 
balance  of  payment  surplus  and  some  degree  of  exchange  rate  intervention.  Emerging 
countries have increased their foreign exchange reserves from 4 percent of GDP in 1990 to 
over 20 percent on average today. Precautionary reserve accumulation, however legitimate, 
unavoidably creates side effects for domestic macro policies as well as spillover effects on 
other countries. Stabilizing the demand for international reserves would therefore bring huge 
benefits  in  terms  of  world  welfare.  The  need  for  national  reserves  could  be  reduced  if 
credible mechanisms exist to provide for the supply of official liquidity on a multilateral basis. 
Hence the current search for international financial safety nets which has taken first stage in 
the G20.  
Finally,  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  financial  development.  Differences  between 
countries, are striking, whether one looks at capital account regimes, the broadness and debt 
of domestic financial markets or, more generally, their ability to generate locally a sufficient 
supply of safe and liquid assets. Some of those differences reflect true social choices and 
preferences  that  must  be  respected  and  accommodated.  Others  result  from  deliberate  or 
inadvertent policy‐induced distortions, which should be reduced or eliminated. 
Domestic financial imperfections and frictions in international capital flows interact with each 
other  to  create  and  amplify  imbalances.  Ultimately,  financial  instability  is  a  product  of  this 
interaction. Part of this instability shows up in exchange rates movements. It is very unlikely 
that  a  global  capital  market  driven  by  constant  frictions  between  highly  different  domestic 
financial systems would lead to a stable – and fundamentals based – equilibrium in foreign 
exchange markets. 
Ensuring that our different financial systems interact harmoniously should be a policy priority. 
Greater compatibility in approaches to financial regulation between advanced and emerging 
economies is within reach. Significant advances are being made. The institutional framework 
has adjusted to the new world reality. Emerging economies, now fully take their part and role 
in the constellation of Committees which, in Basel, work on defining core principle of financial 
regulation. The largest sit as full members of the Financial Stability Board, and its steering 
Committee. Finally, a landmark agreement on IMF reform reached at the last G20 meeting 
has  fully  recognized  their  role  and  place  in  the  new  financial  environment.  I  am  therefore 
confident that we can – and will – make progress in tackling the difficult issues we face and 
build a better and safer world financial system. 
BIS Review 160/2010 
 3
