José De Gregorio: Fiscal policy and macroeconomic performance 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  José  De  Gregorio,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  to  the 
14th Annual  Conference  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile  “Fiscal  policy  and  macroeconomic 
performance”, Santiago de Chile, 21 October 2010. 
 Good  morning.  Welcome  to  the  fourteenth  installment  of  our  annual  conference,  entitled 
Fiscal Policy and Macroeconomic Performance. 
Year after year, this event gathers an outstanding group of economists from academic and 
policy circles to discuss a topic at the forefront of the global discussion, and a glance at our 
program makes clear that this year is no exception. This venue serves to reinforce the strong 
links that our Bank has cultivated with top research institutions around the world. 
We at the Bank believe that rigorous research represents a fundamental pillar in the analysis 
of the causes and effects of economic developments, and we thus consider it an essential 
input  to  our  policy  decision-making  process.  Interaction  between  academics  and  policy 
makers  is  crucial,  because  it  provides  each  with  distinct  feedback,  permitting  advances  to 
occur  at  the  frontier  of  knowledge  –  where  they  are  most  needed  –  while  providing  solid 
grounds for policy decisions. 
As I have mentioned, the topic of discussion during this conference will be Fiscal Policy and 
Macroeconomic Performance. Understanding the way in which fiscal policy transmits into the 
economy  in  normal  and  abnormal  times  is  key  to  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  monetary 
policy. As the world economy began feeling the brunt of the global financial crisis with the fall 
of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, public discourse in most countries called for a rapid 
and  decisive  policy  response.  In  an  unprecedented  move,  finance  ministers  from  many 
OECD and emerging countries announced important fiscal packages in an attempt to revive 
the  world  economy.  Chile  was  no  exception,  where  the  government  implemented  a  fiscal 
expansion over 2% of GDP – in relative terms, among the largest in the world. 
Central  banks,  for  their  part,  also  implemented  large  monetary  expansion  measures  to 
stimulate  the  struggling  economy,  first  by  lowering  interest  rates  to  their  effective  lower 
bound,  and  then,  in  many  cases,  by  taking  additional  steps  aimed  at  providing  liquidity  to 
seized financial markets. This was also the case of Chile, where we reduced interest rates to 
its lowest historical level, and then increase its expansionary stance by implementing non-
conventional measures. This is a fundamental factor in Chile’s current strong recovery. The 
present challenge is the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus at an appropriate pace, which 
insures  that  inflation  forecast  is  consistent  with  our  target  of  three  percent  in  a  two  year 
horizon. We are taking into account the different factors affecting the outlook, such as the 
behavior of the exchange rate, the strength of the expansion of demand and activity, and the 
perspectives of lower interest rates in the world, among others. 
Two years into the crisis, the world economy has entered a new stage, in which fiscal policy 
is  increasingly  being  discussed.  The  joint  effects  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  have  been 
central in averting a much deeper crisis. However, disentangling the effects of each one on 
the economy’s performance and determining the best course of action remains the topic of 
heated debate within academia and in policy circles, in particular, on the speed and timing of 
the  fiscal  retrenchment.  This  is  largely  dependent  on  the  strength  of  each  country’s  fiscal 
accounts. 
The ten papers to be presented during the Conference will be organized into three sections. 
The  first  will  assess  the  effects  of  fiscal  policy  on  macroeconomic  outcomes.  The  first 
contribution to this section, by Tommaso Monacelli, Roberto Perotti and Antonella Trigari, will 
focus  on  the  effects  of  tax  cuts  on  the  labor  market.  Joachim  Voth  will  present  work  that 
BIS Review 143/2010 
 1
analyzes  the  extent  to  which  fiscal  retrenchment  can  take  place  before  civil  unrest  is 
provoked.  Rodrigo  Caputo  and  Miguel  Fuentes  will  examine  the  long-run  effects  of  fiscal 
transfers and investment on the real exchange rate in a broad panel of countries. Mauricio 
Villafuerte,  Pablo  López-Murphy,  and  Rolando  Ossowski  will  close  with  an  examination  of 
fiscal policies among resource-exporters in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
The second section will investigate the interactions of fiscal and monetary policy. In the first 
presentation, Gauti Eggertsson will analyze how the fiscal multiplier is affected by the degree 
of  coordination  between  the  fiscal  and  monetary  authorities.  Then,  Giancarlo  Corsetti  will 
question  the  conventional  wisdom  that  fiscal  policy  is  more  expansionary  under  a  fixed 
exchange rate than under a floating regime. Finally, Luis Felipe Céspedes, Jorge Fornero, 
and  Jordi  Galí  will  present  a  paper  that  estimates  the  effects  of  Chilean  fiscal  policy  on 
consumption  and  income  using  a  framework  that  relaxes  the  assumption  of  Ricardian 
equivalence. 
The final section will focus on fiscal policy in emerging market economies. Jeffrey Frankel will 
discuss  the  structural  fiscal  spending  rule  implemented  in  Chile  in  2001.  Eduardo  Engel, 
Christopher  Neilson,  and  Rodrigo  Valdés  will  conduct  a  welfare  analysis  of  the  effects  of 
Chile’s fiscal rule. Michel Strawczynski and Joseph Zeira will examine the cyclicality of fiscal 
policy in a broad set of emerging market economies, and will analyze whether the dynamics 
they observe can be characterized using Aguiar and Gopinath’s distinction of permanent and 
temporary shocks. I would like to thank the organizers, Jordi Galí and Luis Felipe Céspedes, 
for putting together this first-rate programme, and Yan Carrière-Swallow and the Department 
of Institutional Affairs for coordinating the logistics that have made this event possible. I look 
forward to two days of engaging presentations and fruitful discussions. Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 143/2010
