Guy Debelle: Bank funding and capital flows 
Speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, at the 23rd Australasian Finance and Banking Conference, Sydney, 15 December 
2010. 
 Thanks to Alex Heath, Chris Stewart and Crystal Ossolinski for their help in preparing this speech. 
The financial crisis has led to a significant re-assessment of risk. Having been underpriced 
for  a  number  of  years  prior  to  2007,  risk  was  rapidly  and  substantially  re-priced  as  the 
financial crisis unfolded. Counterparty risk came to the fore and there has also been a more 
fundamental re-assessment of the importance of liquidity risk. There is a new-found, or re-
found,  appreciation  for  the  complex  ways  in  which  risk  can  affect  the  broader  financial 
system.  
Given the pivotal role of banks in the financial system, the evolution of the financial crisis has 
placed particular focus on them and the way they fund themselves. Because one of the main 
features  of  banking  business  is  maturity  transformation,  banks  were  exposed  to  the 
realisation of a liquidity shock. Problems associated with liquidity (or more precisely the lack 
of it) proved to be an important channel for shocks in one part of the financial system to be 
propagated to others.  
The re-assessment and the re-pricing of these risks have caused changes in the structure of 
funding of Australian banks. Today, I will discuss these developments on the liability side of 
banks’ balance sheets. But at the same time, there have also been changes on the asset 
side  of  their  balance  sheets,  with  credit  growth  slowing  significantly,  particularly  lending  to 
large businesses. The combination of these changes, together with the investment-focused 
growth  of  the  Australian  economy,  has  had  a  marked  effect  on  the  composition  of  capital 
flows to Australia which I will discuss later in my talk. These developments may well persist 
for quite some time to come.  
Bank funding1 
The  re-pricing  of  risk  significantly  increased  the  cost  of  wholesale  funding  for  the  global 
banking  system.  At  the  shorter  end  of  the  yield  curve,  the  rise  in  costs  primarily  reflected 
counterparty concerns. This is best exemplified by the spread between a short-term rate in 
the interbank market and the expected policy rate (Graph 1). As has been noted in the past, 
this spread serves as one of the better summary illustrations of the evolution of the financial 
crisis.  
In Australia, this spread never rose as much as it did in other countries, reflecting the general 
absence of counterparty concerns and the associated smoother functioning of the interbank 
market  throughout  most  of  the  crisis.  As  Graph  1  shows,  this  spread  has  fallen  back  in 
Australia  to  be  not  far  above  its  pre-crisis  levels:  pre-crisis  the  90-day  spread  averaged 
around 10 basis points, now it is around 20 basis points. It is not surprising this spread has 
narrowed  so  far.  By  and  large,  one  would  expect  that  in  more  stable  times,  counterparty 
concerns  would  be  reasonably  absent  over  shorter  horizons  and  so  not  much  of  a  risk 
premium should be present in the pricing. But when counterparty concerns are rising, they 
tend to be rapidly incorporated into this spread.  
                                                 
1   For  more  detail  on  bank  funding,  see  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  submission  to  the  Senate  Economics 
References Committee Inquiry into Competition within the Australian Banking Sector, 30 November 2010. 
BIS Review 171/2010 
 1
Graph 1 
  At longer terms, the effect of this repricing of risk is much more stark and, while pricing has 
eased  back  from  its  peaks,  it  still  remains  well  above  its  pre-crisis  levels  (Graph  2).  The 
overall  cost  to  a  major  Australian  bank  of  issuing  a  three-year  bond  has  risen  to  around 
120 basis points over the government bond yield compared with around 50 basis points pre-
crisis. Graph 2 shows that similar, but larger, developments have occurred in other banking 
sectors.  
Graph 2 
2 
  BIS Review 171/2010
In addition to this effect on the pricing of wholesale funding, the re-assessment of risk has 
had a marked impact on the structure of banks’ funding (Graph 3). Banks, their regulators 
and  markets  have  re-assessed  the  riskiness  of  different  sources  of  funding,  particularly 
liquidity risk and the related concept of rollover risk. This change in perspective is embodied 
in the new Basel standards for the banking system.  
Graph 3 
  One notable change is the rise in the share of deposits from less than 40 per cent in 2007 to 
over  45  per  cent  currently.  The  Deputy  Governor  Ric  Battellino  talked  about  this  at  this 
conference last year.2 The desire to increase the share of deposits reflects the assumption 
that deposits represent a more stable source of funding.  
In  order  to  boost  their  share  of  deposit  funding,  banks  in  Australia  have  competed 
aggressively in terms of price. An indication of the degree of competition for deposits is the 
extent to which there has been an increase in the cost of deposit funding relative to the cash 
rate since mid 2008: the average cost of the major banks’ new deposits is now only slightly 
below  the  cash  rate,  whereas  prior  to  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis,  deposit  rates  were 
about 150 basis points below the cash rate (Graph 4). 
                                                 
2   See Battellino R (2009), “Some Comments on Bank Funding”, Remarks to the 22nd Australasian Finance and 
Banking Conference, Sydney, 16 December 2009. 
BIS Review 171/2010 
 3
Graph 4 
 Competition has been strongest for term deposits. The average rate on banks’ term deposit 
specials  is  currently  more  than  70  basis  points  above  market  rates  for  debt  of  equivalent 
terms  (Graph  5).  In  the  few  years  prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis  the  average  rate  was 
generally about 60 basis points below. This is notwithstanding the fact that wholesale debt is 
a liquid tradable instrument whereas a deposit is not; one might expect that this liquidity of 
wholesale debt would result in it being cheaper.  
Graph 5 
 4 
  BIS Review 171/2010
Rates  on  at-call  savings  deposits  –  including  bonus  saver,  cash  management  and  online 
savings accounts – have also risen relative to the cash rate. The average rate on the major 
banks’ at-call deposits, which account for a little under half of their total deposits, is currently 
estimated to be around 40 basis points below the cash rate compared to around 100 basis 
points below in mid 2007.  
So the bottom line of all of this is that the deposit market has been extremely competitive. 
The most marked increase in competition occurred late last year and the early part of this 
year. Since then, our liaison suggests that competitive pressures have not intensified further 
but nevertheless they remain at a high level. As Ric Battellino noted last year, at some point, 
it  is  likely  that  the  elasticity  of  deposits  to  price  declines.  This  means  further  increases  in 
prices  result  in  the  banks  mostly  shuffling  the  deposits  between  themselves,  rather  than 
generating further increases in the share of funds investors allocate to deposits.  
At  the  same  time  as  banks  have  increased  the  share  of  deposit  funding  by  around 
7 percentage  points,  the  share  of  longer-term  wholesale  funding  has  also  increased  by  a 
similar amount. This increase in the share of funding sourced from deposits and long-term 
debt has mirrored a decline in the share of funding sourced from short-term wholesale debt, 
both  from  domestic  and  foreign  markets.  The  share  of  short-term  funding  has  fallen  by 
10 percentage points over the past three years, a very large change indeed.  
As a result of these changes, the vulnerability of the Australian banking system to any further 
seizures in global financial markets has decreased. But these changes have increased the 
cost of funding for the banking system as a whole. The costs of all forms of funding have 
risen, and, at the same time, banks have shifted to more expensive sources of funding. As I 
said  earlier,  this  shift  has  reflected  market  and  regulatory  pressures  following  a  re-
assessment of risk.  
The re-pricing of risk has increased the cost of intermediation from its pre-crisis level, when it 
was arguably underpriced. This rise in the cost of intermediation is reflected in the increase 
in lending rates relative to the cash rate.3 
The financial crisis also raised awareness of the other sources of risk for the global banking 
sector. For a number of European banks, the currency and maturity mismatch between their 
assets  and  liabilities  raised  significant  issues  throughout  the  crisis  and  continues  to  be  a 
vulnerability. The fact that this issue is ongoing has been reflected in the recent rise in the 
EUR/USD cross currency basis swap. In contrast, the Australian banks hedged the currency 
risk  of  their  offshore  borrowing  using  instruments  that  were  maturity  matched.  As  a  result 
they did not face the issues that some European banks faced of funding US dollar assets 
from a euro funding base.  
The US dollar swap lines that a number of central banks, including the RBA, established with 
the Federal Reserve were established in large part to alleviate these stresses stemming from 
the  European  banking  system.  As  their  funding  was  being  severely  curtailed  from  other 
sources, the European banks turned to the swap market to fund their long-dated and illiquid 
US dollar asset positions. This demand from European banks for US dollars each day, at the 
same time as supply was being reduced, caused the price of US dollars to rise dramatically 
in all markets and time zones.4  
                                                 
3   Again,  more  details  on  this  are  in  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  submission  to  the  Senate  Economics 
References Committee Inquiry into Competition within the Australian Banking Sector, 30 November 2010. 
4   For more information, see “The Functioning and Resilience of Cross-border Funding Markets”, CGFS Papers 
No 37, March 2010. 
BIS Review 171/2010 
 5
The RBA participated in the swap line to help distribute US dollars into this time zone (the 
Bank of Japan’s participation served a similar purpose).5 It did not reflect any issue with the 
Australian banking system’s own need for US dollars. The funds provided under the swap 
line were cheaper than the extremely wide market price at the time. As a result, Australian 
based banks availed themselves of this and in a number of cases on-lent the funds to banks 
in other jurisdictions. The provision of these funds globally alleviated the strains in the swap 
market and the spread declined. Once it declined below the price of the swap line, demand in 
Australia dried up and the facility was no longer offered here, although it continued to attract 
demand for a longer period of time in other markets.  
Bank’s assets 
While  these  developments  have  been  taking  place  on  the  liability  (funding)  side  of  banks’ 
balance sheets, there have been some interesting developments on the asset side too.  
Since mid 2008, there has been a significant easing in the pace of credit growth, particularly 
for the business sector (Graph 6). Further disaggregation indicates that the easing in credit 
growth has been most striking for large businesses (Graph 7).  
 
Graph 6 
                                                  
5   The Fed has recently published details of these transactions, along  with that of all its other programs. See 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/reform_swaplines.htm. The RBA's participation in this program was 
made available to the market in real time. For more details see the Operations in Financial Markets section of 
the RBA 2009 Annual Report. 
6 
 BIS Review 171/2010
Graph 7 
  
 
The decline in credit outstanding to large businesses reflects a number of factors:  
 
Some businesses have found it more cost effective to access funds directly from the 
market rather than through the banking system.  
In 2009, there was a record level of equity raisings by large businesses that enabled 
them to repay debt (Graph 8).  
There  has  been  a  tightening  in  lending  standards  for  some  sectors,  most  notably 
commercial property.  
A number of large businesses, particularly in the mining sector, have been able to 
fund their activities and repay debt from their retained earnings resulting from their 
strong cash flow (Graph 9).  
   Looking forward, given the expected prominence of resource investment for GDP growth, it is 
quite possible this pattern of subdued business credit growth relative to robust growth in the 
economy might persist. The RBA’s forecasts have investment increasing as a share of the 
economy  in  the  period  ahead  to  historic  highs.  Much  (although  not  all)  of  this  pick-up  in 
investment is in the resources sector. The companies undertaking this investment tend to be 
much less reliant on credit intermediated through the domestic banking system. Instead they 
are  likely  to  fund  a  sizeable  share  of  this  investment  from  global  capital  markets  either 
through direct raisings or syndicated loans.  
BIS Review 171/2010 
 7
Graph 8 
Graph 9 
  BIS Review 171/2010
  8 
 This slowdown in growth on the asset side of the balance sheet has alleviated pressures on 
banks to increase their funding. Over the past couple of years, credit growth has been slower 
than the growth in deposits for the first time the early 1990s (Graph 10).  
Graph 10 
  
As  mentioned  earlier,  part  of  the  explanation  for  the  strong  growth  in  deposits  is  the 
increased competition for deposits in the banking system. But another part of the explanation 
reflects  the  changed  nature  of  the  financial  flows  in  the  economy.  While  parts  of  the 
corporate  sector  may  be  less  reliant  on  the  domestic  banking  system  for  their  funding, 
ultimately a large part of the funding they raise from other sources still finds its way into the 
domestic banking system in the form of corporate deposits. Hence, if the economy evolves 
as  forecast,  it’s  quite  possible  this  pattern  of  deposit  growth  outstripping  credit  growth 
continues and deposits may continue to rise as a share of bank funding.  
Bank funding and capital flows  
These  changes  in  bank  funding,  as  well  as  in  the  funding  of  the  increase  in  capital 
expenditure, are apparent in the financial accounts side of the balance of payments. These 
are the capital inflows that are the counterpart of the current account deficit.  
The net capital inflow into Australia masks very large gross capital flows both into and out of 
the  country.  For  example,  over  the  past  five  years,  the  average  annual  net  capital  inflow 
amounted to $55 billion. This net capital inflow comprised:  
 
 
 
 
foreign investment in Australian equity of $54 billion;  
Australian investment in foreign equity of $51 billion; 
foreign investment in Australian debt of $95 billion; and 
Australian investment in foreign debt instruments of $43 billion. 
BIS Review 171/2010 
 9
Given  the  size  of  these  gross  flows,  it  can  be  somewhat  misleading  to  analyse  shifts  in 
capital flows or how the current account deficit is funded by focusing on net flows only.  
For a number of years prior to 2007, Australian banks were a steady source of capital inflow, 
representing around 4 per cent of GDP, or around 80 per cent of net private sector inflow 
(Graph  11).  These  capital  inflows  reflected  the  fact  that  Australian  banks  found  it  cost 
effective  to  raise  wholesale  funds  offshore  to  fund  domestic  asset  growth.  That  these  net 
flows  into  the  banking  sector  were  similar  in  size  to  the  current  account  was  as  much 
coincidence as causation in my opinion.  
Graph 11 
  
Given the changes to bank funding and the slowdown in the credit growth discussed above, 
financial inflows in the form of offshore debt raisings by Australian financial institutions have 
declined. In the first three quarters of 2010, the net inflow of foreign funding to banks was 
only  1  per  cent  of  GDP.  All  of  this  occurred  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  year,  with  the  net 
amount of offshore funding by the banking sector amounting to zero in the two most recent 
quarters. At the same time, the current account deficit has fallen to around 2½ per cent of 
GDP.  
Going forward, the forecast rise in the investment share of the economy is likely to see an 
increase  in  capital  inflows.  As  discussed  above,  given  that  mining  companies  are  likely  to 
rely  less  on  locally  intermediated  debt  to  fund  their  activities,  there  are  likely  to  be  further 
changes  in  the  composition  of  net  private  capital  inflows  away  from  banks  towards  non-
financial  corporates.  Some  of  this  might  be  in  the  form  of  increased  direct  debt  raisings, 
some might be in the form of an increase in retained earnings. So the current account deficit 
may  increase  from  its  current  level,  but  on  the  capital  account  side,  there  may  not  be  a 
concomitant increase in banks’ net offshore raisings. 
10 
 BIS Review 171/2010
Conclusion  
The financial crisis has had a marked impact on financial flows globally. In this speech I have 
described some of the effects it has had on financial flows in the Australian economy. The 
funding of the Australian banking system has changed quite markedly as has the cost of that 
funding. In addition, the forecast composition of growth in the Australian economy and the 
funding  of  that  growth  may  have  implications  for  the  asset  side  of  the  banking  system’s 
balance sheet. It is quite possible that intermediated credit growth will be slower, and deposit 
growth relatively higher, than has been the case in recent years. These changes have been, 
and  may  continue  to  be,  reflected  in  the  changed  composition  of  capital  flows  to  the 
Australian economy. 
BIS Review 171/2010 
 11
