Thomas M Hoenig: Reforming US housing finance 
Speech by Mr Thomas M Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,  
at the National Association of Realtors conference, New Orleans, 5 November 2010. 
 The  views  expressed  by  the  author  are  his  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System, its governors, officers or representatives. 
Introduction 
My position on the current stance of our nation’s monetary policy is well known, especially to 
those who closely follow the Federal Reserve. The Federal Open Market Committee has met 
seven times this year, and at each of those meetings I have cast a dissenting vote against 
the majority opinion of keeping the federal funds rate target at its current level near zero for 
an “extended period.”  
I realize that advocating an interest rate increase is not the best applause line at a Realtors’ 
conference. However, I believe that moving rates modestly off of zero, where they have been 
since  December  2008,  still  represents  highly  accommodative  monetary  policy.  More 
importantly, such action is necessary if we are to ensure a more stable economy that can 
thereby foster a more sustainable housing market.  
How can we revive housing?  
We have all suffered through the worst collapse in housing prices since the 1930s, and the 
situation we face will not be easily corrected.  
The housing collapse can be characterized as a classic asset-price bubble spurred by low 
interest rates, easily accessible and often-unsound financing, over-optimism about housing 
price trends, and a high – and difficult to control – level of subsidies that flowed into housing. 
Although we may have experienced a few exceptional years of housing activity, those years 
do not come close to making up for the economic recession, foreclosures, erased wealth and 
slow recovery that we now are experiencing.  
Given this experience, the question that now confronts us is, “What can we do to create more 
stable  housing  markets  and  lessen  the  boom-bust  cycles  in  housing?”  These  cycles  have 
unfortunately become all too familiar over the past few decades.  
Some  argue  that  our  housing  and  mortgage  markets  will  not  recover  in  a  timely  fashion 
without  extensive  public  support.  Among  the  suggested  solutions  are  expanding  Federal 
Housing Administration lending and the role of the Federal Home Loan Banks and allocating 
whatever funds are needed to bring the two housing agencies, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, 
back to their pre-crisis role for housing. Other ideas include a renewal of tax credits for home 
purchases  and  more  extensive  programs  for  mortgage  restructurings.  From  the  Federal 
Reserve, some want a continuation of near-zero interest rates for an extended period and 
greater investments in mortgage instruments.  
In sharp contrast to that view, others suggest that the financial crisis has exposed a number 
of critical flaws in our housing policies and mortgage finance system that call for a significant 
“re-look” at how we finance this industry. For instance, Paul Volcker, who was chairman of 
the Federal Reserve during a portion of the 1980s real estate crisis, recently described the 
U.S.  mortgage  industry  as  “dysfunctional”  and  a  “creature  of  the  government”  that  needs 
reform.  
BIS Review 147/2010 
 1
The options seem to fall out to either rebuilding a system backed by extensive public support, 
subsidies  and  other  protections,  or  build  a  new  framework  that  returns  housing  finance  to 
greater reliance on private market forces.  
I support a policy path that returns the housing industry toward greater market discipline and 
greater  long-run  stability.  This  path  requires  a  greatly  reduced  role  for  governmental 
intervention  and  public  subsidies  that  have  distorted  the  market  over  recent  decades.  The 
American public, including aspiring homeowners and those of you employed in the housing 
industry, might be best served, over time, by reducing or removing these subsidies as part of 
our national policy.  
There  are  several  factors  that  argue  for  making  such  a  change  in  policy.  First,  the  crisis 
clearly  shows  that  a  mortgage  finance  system  based  on  expanding  the  incentives  and 
opportunities to take on more debt with little equity places households at significant financial 
risk and creates unsustainable trends in housing expansion.  
Second,  such  policies  create  harmful  distortions  within  the  economy,  and  they  are 
enormously expensive in terms of both their explicit and implicit costs, to both taxpayers and 
homeowners,  especially  when  things  go  badly.  Many  of  the  subsidies  directed  toward 
housing  have  been  extremely  inefficient,  with  other  parties  capturing  most  of  the  benefits 
rather than homeowners.  
Moreover,  with  the  growing  federal  budget  deficits  and  the  many  interests  that  will  be 
intensely competing for public funds, it is unrealistic to expect that all can be accommodated 
or  that  housing  can  continue  to  command  the  same  portion  of  public  funds  and  levels  of 
taxpayer support and exposure. In brief, housing policy is badly flawed, and today’s budget 
environment requires reform.  
Fix Freddie and Fannie  
What  specific  steps  should  we  take?  The  first and  most  obvious  step  is  to  reform  the  two 
housing  finance  vehicles  of  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac.  These  two  institutions  were 
responsible for more than half of all U.S. mortgages passed through the system at the height 
of the housing boom. These government-sponsored enterprises were assigned goals around 
affordable  housing  that  contributed  dramatically  to  the  growth  in  subprime  credit  and  the 
decline in lending standards that led to the crisis. Fannie and Freddie clearly fit the pattern of 
what Paul Volcker said we must avoid: “Private when things are going well and public when 
things are going badly.”  
Several studies have found that the various subsidies received by Fannie and Freddie have 
done  little  to  lower  mortgage  rates.  Instead,  the  vast  majority  of  such  benefits  accrued  to 
Fannie and Freddie’s stockholders or was used to gain political favor. For example, only two 
months  before  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac  were  put  into  conservatorship  in  September 
2008, media accounts detailed how both had made the list of Washington’s top 10 lobbying 
spenders over the previous decade. Together, they had spent a total of $170 million.1 At that 
time, Fannie employed 51 lobbyists and Freddie paid 91, with both counting former members 
of  Congress  among  their  hired  guns.  This  was  only  two  years  after  the  Federal  Election 
Commission levied a $3.8 million penalty against Freddie related to charges it was illegally 
involved in 85 political fundraisers.  
Considering  the  high  level  of  political  activism  on  the  part  of  these  GSEs,  it  should  not 
surprise  you  to  learn  that  both  Fannie  and  Freddie  are  considered  “heavy  hitters”  on  the 
Center  for  Responsive  Politics’  website,  OpenSecrets.org,  which  provides  a  wide  range  of 
                                                 
1   USA Today, July 17, 2008. 
2 
 BIS Review 147/2010
data on money’s influence on U.S. elections and policy. That designation means that both 
are among the biggest donors to federal-level politics since 1989.  
So,  while  Fannie  and  Freddie  have  spent  millions  on  lobbying  and  building  influence  in 
Washington, their losses could cost taxpayers as much as $363 billion, according to recent 
estimates – and those are just the direct losses. The overall losses that could be attributed to 
the GSEs are likely to be several multiples higher when we consider that without their implied 
“federal guarantee” and related incentives around risk, the markets might have been far more 
cautious  and  the  financial  crisis  far  less  prolific.  More  stunning  perhaps,  had  these 
institutions  been  held  to  stricter  financial  standards,  far  fewer  households  would  have 
suffered the tragedy of foreclosures, the lost home equity and the loss of personal savings 
and wealth that today continues to hold back our economic recovery.  
Given the costs and market distortions these government-supported institutions brought with 
them, we should be confident that they should not be allowed to operate in the future as they 
have  in  the  past.  We  cannot  afford  to  ignore  that  through  their  use  of  implicit  government 
funding  guarantees,  they  held  a  significant  competitive  advantage  in  the  marketplace,  and 
that this in turn encouraged excessive risk on their balance sheets, with tragic outcomes.  
Given  past  errors,  how  might  we  approach  the  need  for  some  modest  support  for  future 
financing within the housing industry? I see two basic options.  
First, if we judge that some public support is needed, we could establish public entities that 
focus  solely  on  the  securitization  of  conventional,  conforming  mortgages  with  strong 
underwriting standards, tight public oversight and balance sheets limited to holding amounts 
necessary  for  warehousing  loans  to  be  securitized.  This  makes  the  government  a  conduit 
only, facilitating the flow of capital but not providing the implicit guarantees on funding and 
assets held that contributed to this crisis. The market remains the final arbiter of standards 
and funding.  
A  second  option  would  be  to  give  private  entities  sole  authority  to  securitize  pools  of 
conforming mortgages – similar to what is now done with jumbo mortgages. If the Congress 
was disposed to provide some favor to housing, a federal guarantee could be given to certain 
securities  backed  by  mortgages  meeting  strict  conforming  loan  standards.  However,  such 
favored status should be based on some limiting factor, such as need or special purpose.  
Either of these two options would address many of the problems associated with Fannie and 
Freddie in this crisis and would create a more transparent and competitive marketplace. The 
latter option involving privately owned entities would offer the additional benefits of greater 
market discipline and insulation from political influence and control.  
Enforce sound lending standards  
Regardless of these actions, we must as a nation insist on the return to sound real estate 
lending standards. We know today that countries that avoided the worst of this most recent 
real  estate  meltdown  did  a  better  and  more  consistent  job  in  maintaining  an  effective  and 
consistent set of standards for loan-to-value and debt-to-income ratios. Some countries, such 
as Canada, even tightened mortgage lending requirements when real estate markets heated 
up. In the United States, the opposite occurred.  
While sound credit standards are a key responsibility of individual lenders, public policy also 
played  an  important  role  in  the  deterioration  of  loan  quality  in  the  United  States.  This 
occurred  largely  through  public  efforts  to  promote  and  subsidize  homeownership  and 
increase  access  to  housing  credit.  During  the  crisis,  politicians,  regulators  and  market 
participants were singled out for blame. In reality, it was a group effort.  
In  the  years  leading  to  this  most  recent  crisis,  a  common  theme  emerged  at  all  levels: 
Households  can  accommodate  more  debt  relative  to  income.  A  report  titled  The  1994 
National  Homeownership  Strategy:  Partners  in  the  American  Dream  stated:  “Financing 
BIS Review 147/2010 
 3
strategies  fueled  by  the  creativity  and  resources  of  the  private  and  public  sectors  should 
address … financial barriers to homeownership [and] … reduce downpayment requirements 
and interest costs by making terms more flexible.” In other words, the key to homeownership 
from  a  political  perspective  is  to  promote  more  creative  and  flexible  lending  standards,  or 
what, in hindsight, we might more correctly call high leverage.  
This political desire for creative and flexible lending was hardly new in 1994, though. It was 
also  a  central  fixture  in  the  real  estate  collapse  of  the  1980s.  A  Senate  report  on  a  1982 
legislative  provision  to  remove  national  bank  loan-to-value  limits  on  real  estate  lending 
provides a powerful insight into the causes of financial crises. According to this report, the 
purpose of the legislative change was “to provide national banks with the ability to engage in 
more  creative  and  flexible  financing,  and  to  become  stronger  participants  in  the  home 
financing market.”  
Although  creative  and  flexible  financing  might  remain  a  goal  in  housing,  sound  lending 
standards cannot be ignored if we are to have sustainable housing growth. With this in mind, 
the  Federal  Reserve  in  2008  revised  rules  implementing  the  Home  Ownership  and  Equity 
Protection Act. These rules simply prohibit lenders from making loans without considering a 
borrower’s ability to repay the loan from income and assets other than a home’s value. Who 
would  have  thought  it  necessary  to  write  rules  that  are  otherwise  nothing  but  common 
sense?  
We should also take a closer look at the loan-to-value guidelines that depository institutions 
are  required  to  follow  in  making  real  estate  loans.  We  should  review  guidelines  to  ensure 
they  are  adequate,  and  we  should  apply  them  equitably  to  other  lenders.  Other  lending 
provisions,  subsidies  and  public  policies  directed  toward  the  housing  sector  and  home 
financing also need to be examined. These would include the risk weights for mortgage loans 
and mortgage-backed securities under the Basel capital requirements, state and federal tax 
deductions  for  mortgage  interest,  reliance  on  credit  rating  agencies’  assessments  of 
mortgage-backed securities, and the wide variety of other public policies related to housing. 
Given  current  housing  conditions  and  the  way  a  number  of  subsidies  have  become 
embedded in our housing system, some policy reforms would have to be phased in gradually 
and after markets have recovered.  
A key point in reviewing U.S. housing finance policies should be to consider whether they 
encourage  homeownership  in  a  cost-effective  manner  without  putting  homeowners  at 
unacceptably  high  financial  risk.  The  2005  President’s  Advisory  Panel  on  Federal  Tax 
Reform, for instance, concluded that the federal tax deduction for mortgage interest provided 
an  “incentive 
that  encouraged 
“overinvestment in housing” and was “not shared equally among all taxpayers,” with higher-
income  households 
the  panel 
recommended replacing the deductions with tax credits and placing a cap on the benefits as 
a  means  of  distributing  the  benefits  more  evenly  and  limiting  the  incentives  to  take  on 
excessive amounts of debt.  
With regard to promoting housing through interest rate policies, I have many times publicly 
expressed my views about the dangers of using monetary tools and the Federal Reserve’s 
balance sheet to pursue low interest rates and  fund mortgage-backed securities. The only 
additional  point  that  I  would  repeat  is  that  for  home  financing  to  follow  a  path  that  is 
sustainable  over  time,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  must  begin  taking  steps  to 
normalize monetary policy.  
“a  disproportionate  benefit.”  Accordingly, 
take  on  more  debt,” 
large  subsidies 
receiving 
involved 
to 
Conclusion  
Economists Hyman Minsky, Charles Kindleberger, and, more recently, Carmen Reinhart and 
Kenneth Rogoff have all written extensively about how high credit growth and the financial 
imbalances  that  develop  during  economic  upturns  sow  the  seeds  for  future  financial 
4 
 BIS Review 147/2010
instability. In a similar manner, a Norwegian economist looked at banking and financial crises 
in Norway going all the way back to the early 1800s. She found that every major crisis was 
preceded  by  a  rapid  run-up  in  real  housing  prices.  Consequently,  it  is  apparent  that 
unsustainable trends in housing prices and home financing have been a major contributor to 
financial crises.  
The  United  States  stands  virtually  alone  in  its  use  of  GSEs  and  significant  subsidies  to 
promote homeownership. Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and their political supporters have long 
attempted to justify this system by saying that “American housing finance is the envy of the 
world.” Few would believe that today.  
It is time for a significant change. We must move toward a system with fewer subsidies and 
misdirected incentives. Furthermore, to ensure accountability, any housing subsidies that we 
decide to keep should be made explicit, voted on transparently and carefully targeted to the 
intended beneficiaries: potential homeowners most in need and for whom such support will 
bring success.  
Many  of  you  might  question  whether  a  system  with  greatly  reduced  subsidies  will  work.  A 
partial answer to this question can be found in international comparisons. A recent study, for 
instance, found that in terms of homeownership rates, the United States ranked only 17th out 
26 economically advanced countries. Many countries have achieved higher homeownership 
rates without – and perhaps because they don’t have – many of the special privileges of U.S. 
housing  finance,  such  as  GSEs,  minimal  down  payments,  30-year  fixed-rate  loans  and 
mortgage  interest  tax  deductions.  To  this  list,  we  could  also  add  non-recourse  debt 
instruments, government promotion of “creative and flexible financing,” the ability to prepay 
loans, affordable housing goals and similar government housing programs.  
In making these remarks, I am not suggesting we do away with all support for housing. I am 
saying it is time for change. 
BIS Review 147/2010 
 5
