Jean-Claude Trichet: Adoption of the European Parliament resolution on 
the ECB’s 2009 Annual Report 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
at the plenary of the European Parliament on the occasion of the adoption of the European 
Parliament  resolution  on  the  European  Central  Bank’s  2009  Annual  Report,  Strasbourg, 
22 November 2010. 
 Monsieur le Président,  
Mesdames et Messieurs les Membres du Parlement Européen,  
J’ai l’honneur de vous présenter – comme le prévoit le Traité – le Rapport annuel 2009 de la 
BCE. Du fait du calendrier légèrement bouleversé par les dernières élections européennes, 
c’est  en  mars  dernier  que  j’étais  intervenu  devant  vous  pour  vous  présenter  le  Rapport 
annuel 2008. C’est donc la deuxième fois cette année que j’interviens devant le Parlement 
au sujet du Rapport annuel. 
Permettez  moi  tout  d’abord  de  me  féliciter  du  soutien,  exprimé  une  fois  encore  par  la 
proposition de résolution du Parlement européen, en faveur des auditions régulières devant 
la Commission ECON et plus généralement en faveur du maintien de relations étroites avec 
la BCE. Je m’en réjouis d’autant plus que cette année, le Parlement européen a démontré 
avec force sa volonté et sa capacité à faire prévaloir l’intérêt supérieur européen, notamment 
sur le paquet de supervision financière. 
Ich werde Ihnen zunächst einen kurzen Überblick über die geldpolitischen Maßnahmen der 
EZB während der Finanz- und Wirtschaftskrise geben. Über die Krisenzeit hinaus möchte ich 
auch  auf  die  Leistung  der  EZB  während  der  ersten  12  Jahre  zurückblicken.  Schließlich 
möchte  ich  auf  die  dringendsten  Herausforderungen,  die  uns  im  Jahre  2011  erwarten, 
eingehen. 
Actions taken by the ECB during the crisis 
2009  was  a  most  challenging  year  for  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy.  It  started  with  a  severe 
economic downturn worldwide, following the outbreak of the financial crisis in autumn 2008. 
In  this  environment  of  subdued  inflationary  pressures,  we  continued  with  our  policy  of 
lowering  our  key  rates  further.  Overall,  within  a  period  of  only  seven  months  (between 
October 2008 and May 2009) we lowered our main refinancing rate by 325 basis points. This 
brought our main refinancing rate to 1%. 
To  ensure  that  households  and  firms  in  the  euro  area  would  benefit  from  these  most 
favourable  financing  conditions,  we  also  continued  in  2009  with  and  even  extended  our 
enhanced credit support to euro area banks. We did this in response to dysfunctional money 
markets that had weakened the ability of monetary policy to influence the outlook for price 
stability by interest rate decisions alone. Among those non-standard measures, as we use to 
call  them,  the  most  prominent  one  is  the  full  allotment  liquidity  provision  through  our 
refinancing  operations  with  euro  area  banks  –  against  good  collateral  and  at  the  main 
refinancing rate prevailing at the time for several maturities extending well beyond that of the 
weekly  operations.  In  2009  we  also  extended  the  maturity  of  our  longer-term  refinancing 
operations to up to one year. 
As rightly emphasised in your draft Resolution  on the ECB’s Annual Report, this “enhanced 
credit  support”  has  been  successful  in  avoiding  additional  dysfunctional  financial  tensions 
which would have led to a depression or an even deeper recession. Let me emphasise that all 
BIS Review 157/2010 
 1
our action was fully in line with our mandate to deliver price stability in the medium-term for the 
euro area as a whole. That we have been able to credibly deliver on our mandate is reflected in 
a favourable inflation outlook and well anchored inflation expectations in the euro area.  
Following some improvements in financial market conditions in the course of 2009, renewed 
market tensions erupted in a number of segments of the euro area bond market. Since the 
smooth  functioning  of  the  bond  market  is  essential  to  the  transmission  of  the  ECB’s  key 
interest rates, we decided to intervene in the euro area’s debt securities markets with the aim 
to help restoring a more normal transmission of monetary policy to the economy. To this end 
we introduced our Securities Markets Programme. To ensure that the programme does not 
impact on our monetary policy stance, we re-absorb all the liquidity injected. 
To sum up, let me emphasise that all our non-standard measures we have adopted during 
the  period  of  acute  financial  stress  are  temporary  in  nature  and  were  designed  with  exit 
considerations in mind. Some of the non-standard measures initiated in 2009 and early 2010 
already  have  been  phased  out  in  view  of  improvements  in  conditions  in  some  financial 
markets and taking the ongoing recovery of the euro area economy into account. 
Achievements over the past 12 years 
Before considering the challenges ahead, let me share with you for a moment a few thoughts 
on the track record of the euro. Three elements are fundamental.  
First, the ECB has delivered what it is expected to deliver according to its Treaty mandate 
that is price stability. Indeed, euro area average inflation over the past now almost 12 years 
stands at 1.97%. This fully reflects our definition of price stability, namely our aim to keep 
annual inflation rates in the euro area below 2%, close to 2%. In this sense, the Eurosystem 
over the past 12 years has operated as an anchor of stability and confidence, including in the 
more recent times despite the challenging environment created by the global financial crisis.  
Second,  and  favourably  reflecting  on  the  credibility  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy,  inflation 
expectations have remained solidly anchored at levels in line with price stability. 
Third,  this  success  is  firmly  grounded  in  the  full  independence  of  the  ECB  from  political 
influence,  in  its  primary  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability  and  in  its  transparent 
communication. The ECB’s two-pillar monetary  policy strategy allows for a forward-looking 
and  medium-term  oriented  course  of  action  that  is  underpinned  by  a  solid  analytical 
framework.  Such  framework  must  include  a  thorough  analysis  of  monetary  and  credit 
developments, taking the monetary nature of inflation over the medium to longer term into 
account. Such a comprehensive approach allows for well-informed and consistent decision-
making, while being steady and looking through the short-term volatility. 
And  fourth,  as  regards  the  external  dimension  of  the  euro,  our  currency  has  established 
itself internationally. In 2009, the euro represented around 30% in the stock of international 
debt securities, and in the stock of global foreign exchange reserves.  
Speaking  of  the  external  dimension  of  the  euro,  let  me  say  a  word  on the  present foreign 
exchange rate issues, domains where I would call for great prudence.  
There are two major topics. On the one hand, there is the relationship between the major 
floating convertible currencies of the industrialised countries, such as the dollar, the euro and 
the yen, the pound sterling, the Canadian dollar. These currencies have been floating since 
the collapse of the Bretton Woods system at the beginning of the 1970s. I should underline 
the  strong  view  of  the  International  Community  that  excess  volatility  and  disorderly 
movements  in  the  exchange  rates  have  adverse  implications  for  economic  and  financial 
stability.  And  I  appreciate  the  recent  statements  by  the  US  authorities  –  namely  the 
US Secretary of the Treasury and the Chairman of the Federal Reserve – reiterating that a 
strong  dollar  vis-à-vis  other  major  convertible  currencies  is  in  the  interest  of  the 
United States. I share this view entirely. A dollar that is credible among the major currencies 
2 
 BIS Review 157/2010
of the advanced economies is in the interest of the United States, of Europe and of the entire 
international community. 
On the other hand, the second topic concerns the currencies of emerging market economies 
which have current account surpluses and exchange rates that are not sufficiently flexible. 
On this issue, the international community agrees – and it was restated in Korea last week – 
that moving towards more market-determined exchange rate systems, enhancing exchange 
rate  stability  to  reflect  underlying  economic  fundamentals,  and  refraining  from  competitive 
devaluation of currencies, are in the interest of the emerging economies concerned and of 
the international community. 
Challenges ahead 
This is no time for complacency. The challenges lying ahead of us are manifold. All relevant 
authorities as well as the private sector must assume fully their responsibilities; governments 
and  parliaments,  central  banks,  regulators  and  supervisors,  private  sector  and  financial 
industry.  In  particular,  the  current  crisis  has  clearly  demonstrated  that  implementing 
ambitious reforms in economic governance is in the interest both of the euro area countries 
and the euro area as a whole. The proposals put forward by President Van Rompuy on the 
reform of the EU’s economic governance and approved by the European Council meeting of 
28–29 October 2010 represent an improvement to the current surveillance framework at EU 
level, and seem broadly appropriate for the EU countries not participating in Monetary Union. 
However, as regards the specific requirements of the euro area, they fall short of what the 
ECB  views  as  necessary  to  ensure  the  best  possible  functioning  of  the  single  currency 
economy.  
I  am  convinced  that,  over  the  coming  months,  the  European  Parliament  will  help  Europe 
making  the  necessary  quantum  leap  in  economic  governance  a  reality.  With  its  legislative 
role concerning financial supervision and the ESRB, the Parliament showed its determination 
when it comes to major issues. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for this, and 
to  express  again  my  conviction  that  the  influence  of  the  Parliament  will  be  decisive  in  the 
economic governance debate. 
Another important challenge ahead relates to financial regulation. We should fully draw the 
lessons of the crisis and keep the momentum for financial reform. As advocated in your draft 
Resolution, a consistent and speedy implementation of Basel III is of crucial importance in 
this regard. The Commission’s legislative proposals on short-selling and Over-The-Counter 
derivatives  are  also  indispensable  to  make  the  financial  system  more  transparent  and 
resilient.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, Honourable representatives of the European citizens:  
We  are  facing  a  decisive  year.  2011  should  see  the  adoption  of  the  revised  governance 
framework,  in-depth  discussions  on  the  crisis  management  framework  and  possibly  the 
launch of the procedure for a Treaty change. We need to get all these reforms right, so as to 
ensure  that  the  euro  area  can  meet  the  future  challenges  with  even  greater  capacity  and 
conviction. 
2011 will be also the first year of existence of the European Systemic Risk Board. (ESRB). 
As you call for in your draft Resolution, the ECB is doing its utmost to support this new body. 
At the same time, the full independence and the primary mandate of the ECB, enshrined in 
the  Maastricht  Treaty,  are  of  course  unchanged  as  I  have  already  stressed  before  the 
Parliament.  As  it  has  done  over  the  past  12  years,  the  ECB  will  continue  to  deliver  on  its 
mandate. This is what the Treaty calls upon us. And this is what our fellow citizens expect 
from us. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 157/2010 
 3
