Choongsoo Kim: Coping with volatile capital flows – Korea’s experience 
and the challenges ahead 
Speech  by  Mr  Choongsoo  Kim,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  European  Union 
Chamber of Commerce in Korea (EUCCK) Annual Seminar, Seoul, 27 October 2010. 
 Greetings 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here with you today at this “Annual Seminar of the EUCCK 
(European  Union  Chamber  of  Commerce  in  Korea)”.  This  is  all  the  more  so  as  your 
organization contributes so greatly to the growth of bilateral business activities between the 
EU and Korea.  
Korea and Europe will get much closer to each other as the Korea-EU FTA takes effect from 
July of next year. With experiences of living in Europe for nearly four years on two different 
occasions,  I’d  love  to  enjoy  high-quality  European  wine  at  a  cheaper  price  thanks  to  the 
Korea-EU FTA.  
Let me take this opportunity to express my very deep thanks to all seminar participants, and 
especially to President Jean-Marie Hurtiger, for this invitation to address you. 
Today,  I  wish  to  share  with  you  Korea’s  experiences  with  volatile  capital  flows  and  our 
related  policy  responses  over  the  last  decade.  I  will  then  mention  some  of  the  policy 
challenges that lie ahead of us. 
As  all  of  you  are  aware,  last  weekend,  we  were  able  to  come  up  with  an  agreement  on 
currency  issues  as  well  as  other  critical  global  issues  at  the  G20  Finance  Ministers  and 
Central  Bank  Governors  Meeting  at  Gyeongju.  I  find  it  a  win-win  result  for  all  parties 
concerned. 
In  particular,  I’d  like  to  remind  you  that  the  communique  includes  the  following  statement, 
“these actions will help mitigate the risk of excessive volatility in capital flows facing some 
emerging countries”. Such a statement has a significant policy implication for a country like 
Korea,  whose  day-to-day  currency  fluctuations  are  much  higher  than  those  of  other  G20 
member economies. 
Stylized facts on capital flows and the impossible trinity  
I’d  like  to  begin  my  speech  by  presenting  some  stylized  facts  on  capital  flows  and  a  few 
words about the impossible trinity. 
Korea,  like  most  other  emerging  market  countries,  has  in  recent  years  become  rapidly 
integrated  into  international  financial  markets,  through  capital  account  liberalization  and 
market  opening.  To  give  an  idea  of  the  scale  of  this  movement  of  capital  in  the  world 
economy,  cross-border  capital  flows  to  emerging  markets  increased  almost  eight-fold 
between 1994 and 2007.1  
The case for opening the capital market is that foreign capital inflows contribute to economic 
growth  –  not  only  directly,  through  capital  accumulation,  but  also  indirectly,  through  the 
associated benefits of the improvement of financial infrastructure. 
                                                 
1  They  expanded  from  220  trillion  US  dollars  to  1,726  trillion  US  dollars  during  the  period  according  to 
International Financial Statistics of IMF. 
BIS Review 141/2010 
 1
But there are many instances where large capital flows have proved to be something of a 
double-edged  sword.  They  bring  great  benefits,  but  also  pose  risks  and  policy  dilemmas. 
Here the words of IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn are very apt. Last week 
in  Shanghai,  he  warned  that  “capital  flows  can  lead  to  exchange  rate  overshooting,  credit 
booms, asset price bubbles, and financial instability”. 
What then are the risk factors inherent in international capital flows? Firstly there is the pro-
cyclicality  of  these  flows,  and  secondly,  there  is  the  dilemma  countries  face  in  their  policy 
responses to them. 
Pro-cyclicality of capital flows 
Once  their  capital  markets  are  liberalized,  capital  flows  bring  about  increased  economic 
volatility.  Capital  flows  are  essentially  pro-cyclical.  Put  more  simply,  capital  inflows  surge 
greatly during economic booms, but decline or go into reverse during economic slowdowns. 
In  boom  periods,  large-scale  capital  inflows  can  trigger  internal  imbalances  by  driving 
inflation up and increasing asset prices. At the same time they can cause or worsen external 
imbalances  as  well,  for  example,  by  widening  a  current  account  deficit  through  currency 
appreciation. Massive surges in capital flows can also increase systemic risk in the financial 
sector  by  aggravating  maturity  and  currency  mismatches  between  assets  and  liabilities  of 
financial institutions. 
In an economic downturn, or when exuberance turns to “angst”, in contrast, foreign capital 
flows out rapidly. This brings in its train currency depreciation and a sudden drop in foreign 
reserves.  Real  sector  economic  activities  also  slow  further,  due  to  balance  sheet  effects 
arising  from  currency  depreciation  as  well  as  a  double  drain  of  liquidity  –  from  both  the 
domestic financial and foreign exchange markets. 
There was an abrupt and massive outflow of capital after the global financial crisis erupted. 
The  emerging  market  economies  experienced  very  severe  turbulence  in  financial markets, 
even though they were not at the epicenter of the financial crisis. 
The impossible trinity 
Another problem arising from cross-border capital flows is the worsening of conflicts between 
a country’s internal and external policy goals. In an open economy, it must seek to resolve 
what is termed the “impossible trinity”. In this, one of three desirable goals – capital market 
opening, fixed and/or stable foreign exchange rate, and monetary policy autonomy – must be 
sacrificed  if  the  two  others  are  to  be  achieved.  Thus,  once  capital  market  opening  has 
progressed, a dilemma arises – a choice between foreign exchange stability and monetary 
policy autonomy. 
The first option for responding to capital flow volatility may be to use the exchange rate as an 
automatic  stabilizer  under  a  freely-floating  regime.  Allowing  the  rate  to  move  freely  at  all 
times  can  prevent  excessive  inflows  by  dampening  appreciation  expectations.  But the  real 
economy may be unable to adapt to large exchange rate swings within a short period and 
may be negatively affected. 
A  country  may  intervene  to  limit  exchange  rate  volatility  or  to  slow  the  currency’s 
appreciation.  But  siphoning  off  the  liquidity  injected  through  sterilization  may  damage  the 
central  bank’s  balance  sheet  and  attract  further  inflows  by  maintaining  a  gap  between 
domestic and international interest rates.  
As a last resort, capital controls may also be considered as a few countries have introduced 
recently.  But  as  a  recent  IMF  study  notes,  decisions  on  their  use  should  be  made  very 
2 
 BIS Review 141/2010
carefully.  The  distortions  and  costs  capital  controls  incur  must  be  compared  with  their 
benefits, though they may form a useful part of the policy toolkit.2 
Experience of capital flows and policy responses of Korea  
In this vein, I would like to look back over Korea’s experiences with volatile capital flows and 
policy responses. 
Capital inflows during the early and mid 2000s 
After Korea pulled out of the Asian currency crisis of the late 1990s, capital flows shifted back 
to an increase beginning in the early 2000s, due mainly to foreign portfolio investment rather 
than direct investment, which is inherently more stable. 
Equity  investment  led  the  portfolio  inflows  in  the  first  half  of  the  last  decade.  This  was 
encouraged  by  the  prevalent  low  interest  rates  in  advanced  countries,  abundant  global 
liquidity,  and  Korea’s  sound  economic  fundamentals.  Between  2006  and  2007,  however, 
bond investment inflows took on a more dominant role than equity investment, greatly helped 
by the increased arbitrage incentives for bond investment. 
As a result of these large capital inflows, pressures for the appreciation of the Korean won 
persisted.3 This coincided with an expansion of private sector credit and a steep run-up in 
housing prices. 
In response, beginning in the first half of 2006, the Korean government introduced policies to 
promote  capital  outflows,  making  it  much  easier  for  Korean  residents  to  invest  abroad. 
Thanks  to  these  policies,  residents’  overseas  portfolio  and  direct  investment  soared, 
offsetting the foreign capital inflows.  
Moving on, though, the hedging of the FX risk on these investments abroad, as well as heavy 
forward  selling  by  exporters,  especially  shipbuilders,  brought  about  a  large  rise  in  foreign 
borrowings  by  foreign  exchange  banks.  This  led  to  an  expansion  of  the  nation’s  foreign 
liabilities that was primarily short-term in nature.4 
Sudden reversal in capital flows after Lehman Brothers’ failure 
After the Lehman Brothers’ collapse in September 2008, Korea experienced a hemorrhage of 
foreign capital outflows, as there was a rapid increase in repayments of external borrowings 
by domestic banks and Korean branches of foreign banks. 
What is termed a “sudden stop” thus occurred. I should point out here that this was triggered 
not  by  domestic  factors,  as  Korean  fundamentals  remained  sound,  but  principally  by 
overseas  factors  in  the  form  of  the  global  credit  squeeze  and  massive  de-leveraging.  The 
turmoil in the financial and FX markets spread rapidly to the real sector. The roll-over ratio of 
banks’  external  borrowings  declined  sharply  to  less  than  30  percent  at  one  point,  and  the 
won/dollar  exchange  rate  and  CDS  (Credit  Default  Swap)  premium  surged,  fueled  by 
pessimism  about  the  Korean  economy.  Real  sector  economic  activities  also  shrank,  and 
GDP growth in the second half of 2008 was negative.  
                                                 
2  See IMF Staff Position Note 10/04(Feb. 2010). 
3  By end-2006, the won had risen 36 percent against the US dollar compared to end-2000. 
4  Short term external debt, in particular, increased from 65.9 billion dollars at the end of 2005 to 189.6 billion 
dollars  as  of  end-September,  2008.  Accordingly,  the  ratio  of  short  term  in  total  external  debt  rose  from 
35.1 percent at end-2005 to 44.5 percent at end-September, 2008. 
BIS Review 141/2010 
 3
Stepping up to the plate, the Bank of Korea (BOK) and Korean government swiftly provided 
FX liquidity to the FX money market, while supporting the working of the market mechanism 
in determining exchange rate movements.  
At the height of the global financial crisis in October 2008, the BOK entered into a 30 billion-
dollar swap agreement with the US Federal Reserve, and the announcement of this triggered 
a  dramatic  reversal  of  market  sentiment.  About  half  of  this  facility  was  drawn  down  and 
channeled to the market, preventing it from seizing up. 
Hard on the heels of this, the BOK signed currency swap agreements with the Bank of Japan 
and the People’s Bank of China, in a bid to strengthen regional cooperation in the face of the 
global crisis. These actions are judged to have helped Korea overcome the financial turmoil 
more quickly than most other countries. 
Recent developments 
As the global financial turmoil eased, large portfolio inflows to Korea then resumed starting in 
April  of  2009.  This  trend  has  continued,  and  can  be  attributed  to  the  return  of  global 
investors’ appetite for risk, quantitative easing policies in developed countries, and Korea’s 
rapid economic recovery.  
In contrast to the period before the global financial crisis, the recent capital inflows to Korea 
have had the following features. First, while banks’ borrowings have increased only slightly, 
equity  and  bond  investment  inflows  have  both  expanded  on  a  large  scale.  Second,  the 
proportion of long-term bond investment has increased. In terms of region, meanwhile, the 
source of inflows has diversified to include Asian countries as well. 
Influenced  by  the  abundant  capital  inflows,  domestic  stock  prices  have  risen  sharply,  the 
Korean won has appreciated against the US dollar and long term interest rates have fallen. 
This has led to a tri-polar bull market – in FX, equities and bonds. The other side of the coin 
is  that  the  financial  market  could  turn  highly  unstable  upon  any  sudden  negative  shift  in 
domestic or international conditions. 
As part of a bid to forestall such an eventuality, the BOK worked with the Korean government 
to introduce, this June, macro-prudential measures to mitigate the volatility of capital flows. 
The  main  goal  of  the  measures  is  to  minimize  systemic  risk  in  the  Korean  economy  and 
bolster its macro-prudential soundness. 
A  new  system  of  ceilings  on  banks’  FX  derivatives  positions  was  built  to  curb  excessive 
short-term overseas borrowings.5 FX derivatives positions traded before its introduction will 
of course be allowed to continue to maturity.  
Regulations on foreign currency loans were tightened as well, to guard against the possibility 
of increased demand for them due to the recent strong economic growth. Since July, their 
use has been restricted to overseas purposes only.  
Challenges ahead 
Having  run  through  Korea’s  experiences  with  capital  flows,  let  me  close  my  remarks  by 
briefly outlining the challenges that lie ahead.  
In light of our past experience, we have no choice but to be concerned about the problems 
capital inflows pose for macro-economic management in dealing with the impossible trinity I 
mentioned earlier and the risk of a “sudden stop”.  
                                                 
5  The ceilings were set and applied as 50% of previous month capital for domestic banks, and 250% for foreign 
bank branches, starting from October 9. 
4 
 BIS Review 141/2010
As Managing Director Strauss-Khan of the IMF recently pointed out, there is no one-size-fits-
all solution to problems associated with volatile capital flows. While we cannot resolve these 
problems entirely, we can try to mitigate them. In that spirit, I would like to put forward some 
policy options for effectively sustaining stable growth and moderating external shocks.  
Sound  macro-economic  policies  are  the  first  line  of  defense  in  reducing  countries’ 
vulnerability  to  external  shocks.  Events  that  might  trigger  a  crisis  situation  such  as  an 
overhang  of  short-term  external  debts  or  lack  of  foreign  reserves  should  be  promptly 
resolved. Over the long term, we must seek to develop foreign exchange markets to ensure 
that exchange rates do not fluctuate greatly over short periods of time due to sharp swings in 
capital flows. As a second step, it might be helpful to look into macro-prudential options for 
moderating  the  volume  of  capital  flows.  Properly-designed  and  well-implemented  macro-
prudential frameworks could play an effective role in alleviating the pro-cyclicality of capital 
flows. 
Last but by no means least, it is necessary to strengthen international cooperation. Given the 
current  environment  of  financial  globalization,  it  is  no  longer  possible  for  any  individual 
country to fully manage cross-border risk on its own. And in this regard the global financial 
safety net, which at Korea’s initiative has been placed on the agenda for the upcoming G20 
Summit, can, I feel, effectively complement precautionary foreign reserves and lead to capital 
market stability eventually. 
In two weeks, the G20 Summit will take place in Seoul. I have high expectations that leaders 
will reach agreements on many critical global issues, which will help overcome and prevent 
crises. I trust the G20 Seoul Summit will serve the purpose of guiding a new vision for a post-
crisis  economic  paradigm  that  will  definitely  mitigate  the  uncertainty  in  the  market.  And 
alleviating  this  uncertainty  is  essential  for  currency  volatility  reduction  and  financial  market 
stability. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 141/2010 
 5
