Ric Battellino: Financial developments 
Address  by  Mr  Ric  Battellino,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Property Council of Australia, Queensland Division, Brisbane, 8 October 2010. 
 I would like to thank Patrick D’Arcy of the Bank’s Domestic Markets Department for his assistance in preparing 
this talk. 
Introduction 
The Reserve Bank has put out a considerable amount of material on the economy in recent 
weeks,  so  today  I  will  keep  my  comments  on  economic  developments  relatively  short. 
Rather, I will spend most of my time today talking about finance.  
As you know, there are concerns at present about the availability of finance, particularly for 
the property sector, so I think it is worth spending some time examining what is going on.  
Recent economic developments 
Before I talk about financing, however, let me set the scene with a few brief words on the 
economy.  
The  global  economy  started  to  recover  about  a  year  ago  from  what  was  a  very  severe 
recession. That recovery is continuing, but the pace of growth differs significantly across the 
various regions of the world (Graph 1).  
Asian  growth  had  been  exceptionally  strong  late  in  2009  and  earlier  this  year  and  central 
banks  in  the  region  have  begun  to  tighten  monetary  policy  settings.  Many  commentators 
worry  that  the  tightening  might  result  in  excessive  slowing  in  these  economies,  but  our 
reading of recent data suggests that growth is returning to around a trend rate. 
Graph 1 
BIS Review 130/2010 
  1
Latin America is also generally performing well.  
Growth  in  the  US  economy,  however,  has  been  lacklustre.  It  is  continuing  to  grow,  but 
momentum  has  clearly  slowed.  While  recent  data  have  been  a  bit  better  than  over  the 
previous  couple  of  months,  risks  still  look  tilted  to  the  downside.  Consumer  confidence 
remains  low,  the  housing  and  labour  markets  remain  weak,  and  the  repair  of  household 
balance  sheets  still  has  quite  a  way  to  run.  One  bright  spot  in  the  United  States  is  that 
business balance sheets are in good shape and equipment investment is recovering.  
In Europe, there is a large disparity in growth across countries. Germany remains the clear 
front-runner,  benefiting  from  earlier  economic  reforms  and  Chinese  demand  for  German 
capital  goods.  German  unemployment  has  fallen  to  its  lowest  rate  since  the  early  1990s. 
Other  large  countries  such  as  France  and  Italy  are  growing  but  probably  still  below  trend, 
while  some  small  countries,  such  as  Greece  and  Ireland,  are  still  experiencing  very  deep 
recessions.  
Overall, recent data have been consistent with around trend growth in the global economy. 
Our central scenario is for growth to continue at around this pace over the next year or so. 
This view is broadly similar to that of the IMF and other forecasters (Graph 2).  
Graph 2 
 From  Australia’s  perspective,  this  would  represent  a  favourable  outcome,  resulting  in 
commodity prices remaining at relatively high levels compared with earlier decades, even if, 
as we forecast, they decline somewhat from their current elevated levels.  
In  the  Australian  economy,  growth  is  around  trend  and  underlying  inflation  is  in  the  target 
range. This is a comfortable position to be in, but the challenge is to keep the economy there 
over  the  next  few  years.  The  challenge  will  not  be  easy.  First,  the  economy  has  been 
growing continuously for almost 20 years, having experienced only relatively mild downturns 
during  that  period,  and  is  therefore  approaching  full  capacity;  and  second,  the  resources 
boom that began about 2005, and which abated for a time during the global financial crisis, is 
re-emerging, adding to the pressure on capacity.  
Over the next couple of years, we expect economic growth in Australia to pick up from its 
current rate of 3¼ per cent, to closer to 4 per cent. Domestic spending is expected to drive 
2 
 BIS Review 130/2010
this  pick-up.  Over  the  past  year,  final  demand  grew  by  about  5 per cent,  partly  due  to 
government spending (Graph 3). This is in the process of being scaled back, but indications 
are that private spending will pick up noticeably in the period ahead. This is especially the 
case  for  business  investment.  Income  growth  will  add  to  spending  capacity;  over  the  past 
year, reflecting the rise in the terms of trade, nominal GDP in Australia rose by 10 per cent.  
Graph 3 
If, as expected, growth in Australia increases to an above-trend pace, it is likely that in due 
course underlying inflation will pick up from its current level of 2¾ per cent. We are currently 
forecasting it to rise to around 3 per cent by the first half of 2012 (Graph 4).  
Graph 4 
 BIS Review 130/2010 
  3
As you know, earlier this year the Reserve Bank Board returned official interest rates to a 
level that is consistent with lending interest rates being close to their average levels. Having 
done  so,  we  have  been  comfortable  to  leave  official  interest  rates  unchanged  in  recent 
months.  However,  as  noted  in  the  statement  issued  after  the  Board  meeting  earlier  this 
week, if economic conditions evolve as currently expected, it will be likely that higher interest 
rates  will  be  required  at  some  point  to  ensure  that  inflation  remains  consistent  with  the 
medium-term target.  
Overall financing activity 
I will turn now to financing activity.  
Since the global financial crisis, the availability of credit has tightened significantly around the 
globe. The rate of growth of credit in most advanced economies is currently close to zero, or 
even negative (Graph 5).  
Graph 5 
 Australia has not been immune from these developments, though credit growth has held up 
better here than in other countries.  
We should not be surprised that credit growth has slowed, as this is typically what happens 
after a financial crisis.  
In  the  boom  years  that  precede  a  crisis,  credit  expands  very  strongly  as  businesses  or 
households  (or  both)  gear  up,  either  to  fund  spending  or  asset  acquisition.  Some  of  the 
decisions that people make during those periods are based on unrealistic expectations about 
future economic conditions or asset prices. As such, they turn out not to be financially viable.  
A  process  of  de-leveraging  therefore  follows.  Businesses  and  households  become  more 
cautious,  increasing  saving,  selling  assets  and  reducing  debt.  Lenders  also  become  more 
cautious, both because they see the weaker economic circumstances as increasing the risk 
on  loans,  particularly  as  collateral  values  decline,  and  because  they  typically  begin  to 
experience a noticeable increase in bad loans. The result is that both the demand for, and 
the supply of, credit tend to decline.  
4 
 BIS Review 130/2010
The authorities typically take steps to counter these forces, through tightening in the upswing 
and  then  easier  economic  policies  in  the  downswing,  and  sometimes  through  direct  fiscal 
assistance to lenders to help them sustain the supply of credit.  
However, it would be unrealistic to expect that these measures can entirely smooth out the 
credit  cycle,  just  as  it  would  be  unrealistic  to  expect  that  the  authorities  can  eliminate  the 
cycle in equity markets. These cycles are inherent in human behaviour. History shows that it 
takes  time  for  households,  businesses  and  lenders  to  regain  confidence  after  a  financial 
crisis, and there are limits on the extent to which economic policy measures can accelerate 
the process.  
This is a very significant issue in many developed countries at present. Here in Australia, the 
credit  cycle  was  mild  compared  with  overseas  experience,  but  nonetheless  there  was  a 
cycle. Credit, particularly to businesses, increased relatively quickly for a number of years, 
and now the downside of that cycle is currently being played out.  
In the period since the mid 1980s, there have been three broad expansion phases in credit in 
Australia: two related to business credit and one to household credit. The first of the cycles in 
business credit began in the mid 1980s when financial deregulation led to a strong expansion 
in  credit  to  businesses.  The  annual  growth  in  business  credit  exceeded  30 per  cent  for  a 
time. The subsequent economic downturn saw many business failures, large losses by the 
banks and a prolonged period of deleveraging by business (Graph 6).  
Graph 6 
 Following  that  episode,  it  took  almost  four  years  for  credit  growth  to  return  to  a  relatively 
normal rate.  
The next phase of credit growth was driven by the household sector. This began in the mid 
1990s.  Up  until  then,  Australian  households  had  relatively  little  debt  by  international 
standards, with debt outstanding equal to about 50 per cent of household disposable income. 
The fall in interest rates in the early 1990s, the switch in financial innovation from products 
directed  to  businesses  to  those  directed  to  households  and  the  general  prosperity  of  the 
economy saw households substantially increase their debt over the subsequent 10–15 years, 
to  about  1½ times  income  (Graph 7).  This  ratio  is  broadly  in  line  with  debt  levels  of 
households in other developed economies.  
BIS Review 130/2010 
 5
Graph 7 
 Most  of  this  increase  in  debt  was  for  the  purchase  of  housing,  and  was  mirrored  in  a 
corresponding rise in house prices.  
Since about 2005, the pace of growth of household credit has slowed, and on average has 
been broadly equal to the rate of growth of household income. As the Bank has noted before, 
ce continued increases in the gearing of the household 
this is a reassuring development sin
sector would eventually have exposed the sector to substantial risk.  
Growth in household credit continues to be moderate. Over the past year or so, household 
credit has increased by around 7 per cent. Most of this has been due to housing loans, while 
ns and personal loans 
other forms of household debt, such as credit card debt, margin loa
have been relatively flat.  
All this is consistent with households taking a more cautious approach to their finances, as 
evidenced also by the increase in the household saving rate relative to that seen in the early 
and middle parts of the pa
For households, therefore, the current picture is one where borrowing for housing is broadly 
growing in line with income, house prices are stable and there is little appetite for other forms 
pective, this seems to be a satisfactory state of affairs.  
of debt. From the Reserve Bank’s pers
The third episode I want to talk about is the pick-up in business credit that began in 2005. 
This cycle was not as pronounced as that in the 1980s but, nonetheless, for a time business 
credit grew by about 20 per cent per year.  
Part of this debt was to fund investment which, as you know, has been very strong, but a 
significant part was also for financial activity. There was a general increase in gearing in the 
ey could be seen as having lazy balance sheets, 
corporate sector, as boards worried that th
making  them  takeover  targets  for  private  equity.  Over  the  four  years  to  2008,  the  gearing 
ratio of the corporate sector rose from around 60 per cent to over 80 per cent (Graph 8).  
st decade.  
6 
 BIS Review 130/2010
Graph 8 
 The global financial crisis brought a change in thinking by both businesses and their lenders, 
and there has been a sharp slowing in business credit. Over the past year, business credit 
has fallen by about 4 per cent.  
This has not translated to a sharp weakening in economic activity, as was the case in the 
early 1990s, because a shift is taking place in the way businesses are funding themselves. 
Helped  by  the  pool  of  funds  that  has  been  built  up  through  the  superannuation  system, 
businesses  were  able  to  raise  substantial  amounts  of  equity  when  debt  markets  dried  up 
during  the  financial  crisis.  Most  importantly,  however,  internally  generated  funding  from 
profits has also been very strong. As such, the total availability of funds to businesses has 
continued to increase at around its long-run average rate (Graph 9).  
Graph 9 
BIS Review 130/2010 
  7
These shifts in funding patterns mean that movements in credit, by themselves, may not give 
an accurate picture of the overall availability of funds to businesses.  
The  trends  that  we  have  observed  recently  are  not  evenly  spread  through  the  business 
sector.  The  mining  sector  has  made  heavy  use  of  internal  funds  while  the  property  and 
infrastructure sectors have relied much more on debt. I will say more about these sectoral 
issues later.  
While the small business sector is often the focus when people worry about the availability of 
credit, the recent cycle in credit to small business has not been as severe as that in credit to 
large business (Graph 10). Growth in credit to the small business sector through the boom 
years was more restrained than the run-up in credit to the large business sector, and credit 
outstanding has held up better since. Over the past six months or so, credit to small business 
has grown at an annual rate of about 8 per cent.  
Graph 10 
 Property financing 
Given the obvious interests of this group, let me end by looking in more detail at property 
financing.  
Property-related  lending  accounts  for  a  very  significant  share  of  the  business  lending 
undertaken  by  banks  and  other  lenders.  It  also  tends  to  be  among  the  most  cyclical 
components of lending, rising strongly during boom periods and then contracting sharply. It is 
also a component of lending on which defaults can rise quickly.  
The  Reserve  Bank  monitors  lending  to  the  property  sector  very  closely,  because  it  has 
important  implications  for  both  the  performance  of  the  economy  and  the  stability  of  the 
financial system.  
Lending  to  the  commercial  property  sector  began  to  pick  up  noticeably  from  around  2004 
onwards, and at its peak just before the global financial crisis was growing by 27 per cent per 
year (Graph 11). Foreign-owned banks were the lenders with the fastest growth through this 
period (Graph 12).  
8 
 BIS Review 130/2010
Graph 11 
Graph 12 
  With lending for commercial property growing significantly faster than other business lending, 
its share of total business lending increased from about one-quarter to around one-third. For 
the  regional  banks  and  foreign-owned  banks,  the  ratio  was  considerably  higher,  in  some 
cases close to half.  
Given  this  rise  in  the  proportion  of  lending  going  to  the  property  sector,  it  is  perhaps  not 
surprising that many banks now feel they are overweight to that sector and are reluctant to 
make new loans, while some are seeking to cut back.  
BIS Review 130/2010 
 9
Since the peak in early 2009, commercial property lending has decreased by about 10 per 
cent.  Foreign  banks  have  led  the  contraction,  reducing  their  exposures  by  a  cumulative 
35 per cent since the peak. Loan limits have fallen more than outstandings, so that usage of 
lending facilities has increased to about 90 per cent.  
At  the  same  time,  funding  through  non-bank  sources  has  also  tightened.  Commercial 
mortgage-backed securities, which at the peak in 2007 accounted for around 5 per cent of 
total  commercial  property  funding,  have  contracted  by  about  two-thirds  since  then.  The 
contraction in mortgage trusts and some other funds, entities that were substantial investors 
in these securities, helped to drive the decline.  
Adding  to  the  cyclicality  in  commercial  property  lending  is  the  fact  that  these  loans  have 
tended to be among the most risky of bank loans. That was the case in the early 1990s and it 
has again been the case recently.  
The proportion of commercial property loans that are impaired has risen sharply since 2007, 
from  less  than  0.5 per cent  to  around  6 per cent.  This  is  much  higher  than  the  impairment 
rate for business loans in general, which has only risen to around 3 per cent (Graph 13). The 
impairment rate has risen particularly sharply for loans to the retail and residential segments 
of the commercial property sector.  
Graph 13 
The banks that expanded their lending the fastest through the boom have since experienced 
the  sharpest  increase  in  impaired  loans.  For  foreign-owned  banks,  about  15 per cent  of 
commercial  property  loans  are  impaired,  compared  with  around  4 per cent  for  the  major 
Australian banks (Graph 14).  
 10 
 BIS Review 130/2010
Graph 14 
 The property sector is vulnerable to changes in the availability of credit because it operates 
with a relatively high level of gearing and low holdings of cash. Gearing of listed real estate 
companies  has  risen  substantially  over  the  past  decade.  It  used  to  be  the  case  that  the 
sector had substantially lower gearing than the corporate sector in general, but the run-up in 
debt, followed by the fall in asset values, resulted in gearing of the sector reaching a peak of 
over 100 per cent by late 2008, well above the corporate sector average (Graph 15).  
Graph 15 
Similarly, cash holdings of corporations in the real estate sector are low compared with other 
corporates  (Graph 16).  Through  the  boom  years,  cash  holdings  of  listed  real  estate 
 BIS Review 130/2010 
 11
companies  fell  to  less  than  2 per cent  of  assets,  compared  with  6–8 per cent  elsewhere  in 
the corporate sector.  
Graph 16 
 In short, it is difficult not to conclude that the financing of the property sector became over-
extended during the boom years, and that a period of adjustment was largely unavoidable. In 
saying this, I don’t want to downplay the difficulties that some firms are now experiencing as 
that adjustment takes place, or the impact it is having on property development. The Reserve 
Bank is very much aware of both these issues. But cycles like the one we are going through 
seem to be endemic to the property sector and raise the question of whether, over the longer 
term, the financing model of the sector should shift towards more equity and less debt.  
Conclusion 
Let me end, however, on a more positive note by making the observation that the adjustment 
process has been underway for some time now and substantial progress has been made. 
The equity raisings that have taken place have made an important contribution to reducing 
gearing levels, and the run-up in arrears on property loans may be coming to an end. More 
generally, the expected improvement in the economy over the next couple of years will be 
reflected in the commercial property market also. I think there are already some signs of this. 
That in turn should boost lenders’ willingness to make loans to the sector, though I don’t think 
it would be in anybody’s interest to return to the free-flowing credit of a few years ago.  
12 
 BIS Review 130/2010
