Yves Mersch: Prospects of Islamic finance – the view of a central bank in 
Europe 
Closing keynote address by Mr Yves Mersch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, 
at the Islamic Finance Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 18 November 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to talk to an audience of such distinguished financial specialists. Before I 
embark on what Islamic finance means for central banking in Europe, I will have a look at the 
growing importance of the phenomenon, its characteristics in the context of financial stability 
in general and its performance during the financial crisis in particular. Finally, I will present 
the achievements within my own constituency to overcome the obstacles for an accelerated 
and safe spreading of Islamic finance in Europe.  
Islamic finance: growing importance 
The development of modern Islamic finance roughly started more than four decades ago. At 
the  very  beginning  it  occupied  a  small  niche  visible  in  Islamic  countries.  In  Malaysia  the 
Pilgrim Fund (Tabung Haji) was established in 1969 as an Islamic savings institution. More 
recently Islamic finance has expanded out of this niche. 
 
Worldwide, the assets of Islamic finance institution have grown at double-digit rates 
for a decade. Even some conventional banks have embarked into the provision of 
Shari’ah compliant financial assets reaching an estimated 509 billion USD at the end 
of 2007 according to Moody’s1. 
Today,  there  are  at  least  70  countries  that  have  some  sort  of  Islamic  financial 
services. Almost without exception, the major multinational banks offer some kind of 
these services.  
With the rise of the importance of Sovereign Wealth Funds (SWF), Islamic finance 
was  pushed  further.  About  a  decade  ago,  many  emerging  countries  started  to 
accumulate huge foreign exchange reserves, most of them benefiting from rising oil, 
gas  and  other  natural 
favorable 
macroeconomic  policies.  With  assets  under  management  of  an  estimated  
3,000 bn USD in 2009, SWF represent twice the wealth of hedged funds. Muslim 
countries, oil exporters in particular, account for more than 50% of all SWF’s assets 
– not all of which are Islamic finance products, though. 
While Islamic banking remains the main form of Islamic finance, Islamic Insurance 
companies  (Takaful),  mutual  funds  and  Islamic  bonds  (Sukuk)  have  witnessed 
strong global growth. The Sukuk markets in particular have gained importance. In 
recent years, the issuance rose from less than 8 bn USD in 2003 to 50 bn USD by 
mid-2007.2 After a sharp decline during the financial crisis, private sector estimates 
see  global  sukuk  markets  rebounding,  expecting  the  total  volume  to  surpass  
20 bn USD in 2010.3 
resources’  prices,  being  supported  by 
                                                    
1  Moody’s, Islamic Finance Explores New Horizons in Africa, 2008, http://www.moody’s.com. 
2   Cakir,  Selim  /  Raei,  Faezeh:  Sukuk  vs.  Eurobonds:  Is  There  a  Difference  in  Value-at-Risk?,  IMF  Working 
Paper, WP/07/237, Washington, 2007. 
3   Chua, Tony: CIMB Islamic optimistic on sukuk issuance, in: Asian Banking and Finance, August 2010. 
BIS Review 155/2010 
 1
This development might well continue. As Muslim populations are under-banked, and there is 
an increased financial need for infrastructure projects like roads and housing in many Muslim 
countries,  the  demand  for  Shari’ah  compliant  financing  is  still  growing.  The  International 
Organization of Securities Commissions predicts that as much as half of the savings of the 
world’s estimated 1.2–1.6 bn Muslims will be in Islamic financial institutions by 2015. 
The business model indeed could also be attractive outside the traditional Islamic territory, 
e.g.  in  Western  countries  with  large  Muslim  populations,  such  as  the  UK,  France  or 
Germany.4  According  to  estimates,  the  Muslim  population  in  Europe  currently  adds  up  to 
almost 40 million5. Additionally, Islamic finance provides an alternative for ethical investment 
and can help investors independent of their religious orientation to diversify their portfolios 
and funding sources. 
Ethical foundations of Islamic finance: neither new nor exclusive 
The  obvious  growing  importance  of  Islamic  finance  calls  for  a  deeper  understanding  of  its 
underlying principles. The main feature of Islamic finance is the idea of justice. This is mainly 
achieved by four principles. 
To a European observer the link between ethics or religion and finance seems awkward at 
first glance. This connection however is neither new nor exclusive to Islamic countries. It has 
a long tradition in economic thinking in the occidental world, too. Remember the reasoning of 
the German sociologist Max Weber. He argued that capitalism in northern Europe evolved 
when the Protestant ethic motivated people to engage in business and trade in the secular 
world, and to this end accumulated wealth for investment. In his view, the Calvinist ethic in 
particular was an unplanned driver behind capitalism. 
Similarly, the founding father of modern economics, Adam Smith, stressed the importance of 
ethical  foundations  of  markets.  Prior  to  the  “Wealth  of  nations”  (1776),  he  published  “The 
Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments”  in  1759  –  a  work,  Smith  himself  considered  to  be  a  superior 
work to his magnum opus. 
To sum up: Islamic Banks seek to maximize their profits just like other banks. They have to 
comply, however, with Shari’ah law – without being religious institutions. 
Making the financial system more resilient 
For  a  central  bank  financial  stability  is  a  prerequisite  for  achieving  its  goal  of  a  stable 
currency.  The  interplay  between  Islamic  finance  and  financial  stability  is  therefore  of 
particular interest. 
Generally,  an  increasing  number  of  approaches  in  banking  and  finance  should  make  the 
system safer overall because it reduces the concentration of funding sources on the macro 
level. 
On one hand, the particular character of Islamic finance could make banking more resilient to 
potential  financial  shocks.  The  lack  of  exposure  of  opaque  and  complex  assets  and  the 
absence  of  excessive  leverage  should  protect  Islamic  banks  from  the  impact  of  financial 
crises. Reliance on deposits rather than wholesale funding adds another layer of stability. On 
the  other  hand,  the  asset-based  and  risk-sharing  nature  of  Islamic  finance  can  make  the 
business  model  more  vulnerable  to  second  round  effects  of  a  financial  crisis,  i.e.  Islamic 
                                                 
4  
Imam,  Patrick;  Kpodar,  Kangni:  Islamic  Banking:  How  has  it  diffused?,  IMF  Working  Paper,  WP/10/195, 
Washington, 2010. 
5   Lugos, Luis et al.: Finance islamique et droit français, in: Mapping the Global Muslim Population, Pew Forum 
on Religion & Public Life, 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 155/2010
banks  may  suffer  more  from  the  real  economic  downturn  that  normally  follows  financial 
turbulences as the losses of the customers are partly shared. Moreover, the lack of product 
standardization and the missing harmonization of Islamic standards in general pose risks to 
the management of liquidity. 
The  judgment  on  the  contribution  of  Islamic  finance  to  financial  stability  is  therefore 
ambiguous.  In  principle,  Islamic  finance  can  make  the  financial  system  more  resilient, 
although  it  is  more  vulnerable  towards  negative  spillover  effects  from  the  real  economic 
sector.  However,  this  potential  can  only  be  realized,  when  the  regulatory  and  supervisory 
regime,  the  legal  framework  and  payment  and  settlement  systems  are  robust  and  current 
shortcomings in liquidity management are overcome. 
Experience during the current crisis 
Although we still lack comprehensive and detailed research on the performance of Islamic 
finance  during  the  financial  crisis  those  pieces  of  empirical  evidence  that  are  available 
support the former reasoning. 
According to a recent IMF study Islamic banks fared indeed better than conventional ones in 
2008.6  This  result  was  however  reversed  in  2009  when  the  financial  crisis  hit  the  real 
economy.  Overall,  Islamic  banks  performed  better  within  the  last  three  years  than  their 
conventional  counterparts.  Thanks  to  higher  solvency  and  lower  leverage  Islamic  banks 
succeeded in matching relatively higher demand for credit at a time when Europe and the US 
dealt with the threat of a credit crunch. 
Moreover,  according  to  various  credit  rating  agencies,  the  change  in  Islamic  Banks’  risk 
assessment has been better than that of conventional banks (with the exception of banks in 
the United Arab Emirates (UAE)). 
Ensuring a level playing field 
As long as financial stability and the functioning of the transmission mechanism of monetary 
policy  are  not  at  risk,  central  banks  should  not  interfere  with  the  structure  of  finance. 
Ensuring a level playing field can be seen as a prerequisite for functioning financial markets. 
If  the  demand  for  Islamic  compliant  financial  products  is  rising,  obstacles  for  its  further 
development  should  be  abolished  without  contradicting  the  principles  of  appropriate 
supervision  and  regulation  nor  the  prevalent  operational  framework  of  central  banks. 
Therefore,  the  infrastructure  and  supervisory  environment  should  be  provided  to  allow 
efficient  clearing  of  a  sufficient  number  of  investment-grade  Islamic  finance  papers  across 
the  whole  maturity  spectrum.  While  banking  authorities  are  committed  to  adapt  and  to  be 
accommodating for Islamic finance within the European regulatory framework, it is crucial to 
require  the  same  licensing  and  supervision  standards  from  Islamic  financial  institutions  as 
expected from conventional banks.7 Real challenges however remain on the legal side for 
example asset transferability. But these complications are to a large extent shared with the 
conventional banking system. 
Keeping that balance will be beneficial to both Islamic investors and the European financial 
system. 
                                                 
6   Hasan,  Maher;  Dridi,  Jemma:  The  Effects  of  the  Global  Crisis  on  Islamic  and  Conventional  Banks:  A 
Compartive Study, IMF Working Paper WP/10/201, Washington, 2010. 
7   Mersch,  Yves:  Speech  at  the  5th  Economic  Forum  Belgium-Luxembourg-Arab  Counties,  in  Brussels, 
17th November 2009. 
BIS Review 155/2010 
 3
Luxembourg’s pro active approach 
In Luxembourg, private and public decision makers of the financial industry are motivated to 
establish a regional hub for Islamic finance, making use of Luxembourg’s expertise in cross 
border finance. 
Major steps have been taken already. 
 
The  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg  is  a  member  of  the  Islamic  Financial  Services 
Board (IFSB), a standard setter for financial stability.  
Addressing  shortcomings  in  the  Sukuk  market  such  as  lack  of  liquidity  and 
international recognition, small size of issuances, insufficient number of high quality 
issuers and focus on domestic markets, the IFSB coordinated the establishment of 
an  International  Islamic  Liquidity  Management  Corporation  (IILM)  in  October  2010 
with  the  Banque  centrale  du  Luxembourg  as  a  founding  member.  This  new 
corporation will issue investment grade Sukuk across the whole maturity spectrum in 
order  to  facilitate  liquidity  management  for  institutions  offering  Islamic  Financial 
services (IIFS) and cross border investment flows.  
In 2002, the Luxembourg stock exchange was the first in Europe to receive a Sukuk 
listing.  The  number  of  Sukuk  listed  today  on  the  Luxembourg  stock  exchange 
compares well with the leading stock exchanges in Europe.  
Luxembourg provides the infrastructure for the post trade related aspects of Shari’ah 
compliant securities transactions, namely in settlement and custody services. In May 
2010, the Banque centrale du Luxembourg and Clearstream launched LuxCSD, a 
new Central Securities Depository for Luxembourg, which will enable the settlement 
of  securities  transactions  in  central  bank  money  and  thus  be  compliant  with  the 
highest  standards  of  safety  for  market  participants,  providing  at  the  same  time  a 
connection to the Euro system project Target2-Securities.  
The 
international  expansion  of  Sukuk  presupposes  a  higher  degree  of 
standardization,  reliability  in  terms  of  Shari’ah  compliance  as  well  as  robust 
accounting,  legal,  tax  and  regulatory  frameworks.  The  adoption  of  best  practice 
regulation  and  supervision  requires  sufficient  differentiation  among  Sukuk  types. 
Challenges  for  the  expanding  market  are  posed  by  sector  risk  due  to  an 
overreliance on real estate and construction, the involvement of different laws and 
jurisdictions together with enforceability issues.  
Luxembourg  is  the  leading  location  for  Shari’ah  compliant  investment  funds  in 
Europe. In 2008 the Grand Duchy set up a task force to identify possible hindrances 
to  the  local  development  of  Islamic  finance.  Tax  treatment  for  common  Islamic 
finance  transactions  has  been  adjusted  to  ensure  tax  neutrality  compared  to 
conventional transactions.  
Skilled  staff  is  essential  to  any  provider  of  financial  services.  Dedicated  training 
courses  have  been  set  up  by  the  Luxembourg  Institute  for  Training  in  Banking 
(IFBL),  the  Luxembourg  School  of  Finance  (LSF)  and  the  university  to  meet  the 
growing demand for education in Islamic finance.  
Next year in May, the Banque centrale du Luxembourg will host, for the first time in 
the  Euro  area,  the  Islamic  Financial  Services Board  annual  summit,  a  major  four-
day-conference. 
       Concluding remarks 
Islamic  finance  provides  opportunities  and  challenges  in  the  context  of  the  agreed  goal  of 
enhancing global financial stability. 
4 
 BIS Review 155/2010
From the perspective of a European central banker, Islamic finance should be a complement 
to  conventional  banking  and  capital  markets,  not  a  substitute.  Due  to  their  characteristics, 
Shari’ah  compliant  financial  products  can  enhance  the  stability  of  the  financial  system. 
Shortcomings in standardization and liquidity management must be tackled, however. 
Cooperation between investors, issuers and regulatory and supervisory authorities is a pre-
requisite  for  a  successful  integration  beneficial  to  all  stake  holders.  Luxembourg  with  its 
tradition  as  a  specialized  financial  center  will  continue  its  endeavors  to  establish  an 
international hub for Islamic finance. 
BIS Review 155/2010 
 5
