DeLisle Worrell: Managing the open economy in a time of crisis 
Address  by  Dr  DeLisle  Worrell,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados,  at  the  
Bermuda  International  Business  Association  (BIBA)  Investment  Conference,  Bridgetown, 
28 October 2010. 
 Let me begin this morning by reminding you of the message of my press release last week: 
the  success  of  the  US$200m  bond  raised  in  July  is  an  international  vote  of  confidence  in 
prospects for the Barbadian economy and the conduct of economic policy. That confidence is 
entirely justified: the economy is stable, in the midst of the continuing international storm. The 
peg is secure, backed by $1.4 billion in reserves. We have had to dip into those reserves, but 
to a lesser extent than in 2009. The foreign exchange reserves are monitored each day, by 
the  principal  economic  policy  makers  in  government  and  the  central  bank.  The  fiscal 
outcomes are closely monitored, in order to stay on track to achieve the deficit targets of the 
Government’s Medium  Term Fiscal Strategy.  We continue to ride out this storm. We have 
suffered  some  damage,  but  our  vital  systems  remain  intact,  ready  for  action  once  the 
tempest abates. 
The  growth  strategy  is  appropriate,  and  can  be  ramped  up  when  international  economic 
conditions permit, in particular when overseas travel by residents of the UK, US and Canada 
gathers momentum, and when mainstream airlines return to profitability, so that arrivals are 
no longer driven so much by special incentives. Once that happens, average expenditures 
per tourist should recover, and with them, the contribution of the sector to Barbados’ foreign 
earnings, employment and GDP.  
As  a  mature  tourism  destination,  Barbados  needs  to  constantly  refresh  and  diversify  its 
tourism product, to give first time visitors a reason to prefer Barbados over the competition, 
to win their hearts so they will want to return, and to repay the loyalty of our long term friends, 
who come year after year. We aim to do that by providing a quality tourism experience, by 
building a significant presence in the lucrative high end of the market, and by providing an 
increasingly  diverse  range  of  ancillary  services,  so  that  visitors  may  enjoy  our  culture  and 
heritage, engage in sports competitions, and share in our initiatives to protect and enhance 
the physical environment of the country. In addition, the Crop Over festival, which has over 
the  past  three  decades  opened  up  an  entirely  new  tourism  market  among  the  Barbadian 
Diaspora, continues to grow steadily. 
Tourism is by far Barbados’ most important source of foreign exchange, contributing about 
two-thirds  of  our  earnings  on  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments,  and  almost 
20 percent of  the  country’s  GDP.  Any  strategy  for  renewal  of  growth  has  to  start with  that 
sector.  Most  of  the  remainder  of  inflows  of  foreign  currency  on  the  current  account  come 
from other services, mainly international business and financial services, which all together 
contribute  another  20  percent  or  more.  Services  of  all  kinds  now  provide  Barbados  with 
almost 85 percent of all foreign earnings, with exports of sugar, manufactured goods, and oil 
to Trinidad for refining, down to no more than about 15 percent. 
The  international  business  and  financial  sector  constitutes  the  second  plank  in  Barbados’ 
growth  strategy.  Our  international  business  and  financial  sector  is  based  on  an  expanding 
network  of  double  taxation  treaties,  and  financial  regulation  that  is  of  an  internationally 
acceptable standard. In addition, we have a small but growing pool of expertise in the legal, 
accounting and financial services needed in this sector, and our wages for these skills are 
highly  competitive,  by  international standards.  To  crown  it  all,  we  offer  these  services  in a 
superior  environment:  we  are  in  a  convenient  time  zone,  in  the  tropics,  with  excellent 
infrastructure and first class international connections, and we speak English. 
BIS Review 148/2010 
 1
In every sector and activity, growth will be driven by the private sector, not the government. It 
is  the  thousands  of  decisions  made  by  rich  Barbadians,  not-so-rich,  ordinary  and  poor 
Barbadians, and by those who have an interest in investing in Barbados, that will determine 
how soon and how swiftly the economy will grow. Every one of us faces the need to make 
decisions about how we cope and make our way forward in very uncertain circumstances, 
whether  we  are  taximen,  policemen,  administrators,  teachers,  information  specialists, 
entertainers, engineers, managers, whatever our calling and however we make ends meet. 
Careful but innovative decisions, sensitive to the realities of the economic situation, are our 
ticket to renewed growth, once external circumstances permit. 
The fact that growth in Barbados is led by the private sector is something we all know, but it 
nonetheless bears repetition. The transformation of the Barbadian economy, over the past 
five  decades,  from  a  sugar-exporting  economy  to  one  that  has  become  a  byword 
internationally for high quality tourism and international business and financial services, is the 
result  of  the  many  initiatives  of  private  Barbadians  and  friends  of  Barbados,  who  have 
uncovered the economy’s potential for transforming itself, and have invested accordingly, in 
building the required infrastructure, and in equipping themselves with appropriate skills. 
Government  and  the  Central  Bank  have  played  a  vitally  important  role  in  this  economic 
development,  but  it  is,  quite  appropriately,  a  supportive  and  facilitating  role,  with  two 
remarkable exceptions. The first is the origin and nature of Barbados’ international business 
and financial sector. At the outset, in the late 1970s, Government determined that Barbados 
would  seek  to  provide  actual  services  to  international  companies  from  offices  located  in 
Barbados, and that those services would be subject to income tax, albeit at the preferential 
rate available to companies that earn foreign exchange exclusively. That decision, and the 
network  of  double-taxation  treaties  that  support  it,  have  served  as  the  foundation  for 
Barbados’ sound reputation in the sector. 
The success of the Crop Over festival in creating a new tourism niche is the second example 
of a successful government initiative. In this case, ironically enough, success was achieved 
in  a  totally  unexpected  way.  The  festival  was  moved  to  its  present  date  to  provide  an 
additional reason for visitors from our usual tourist markets to visit during the low season for 
tourism.  Instead,  the  idea  of  Crop  Over  as  a  way  of  diversifying  the  tourism  product 
happened  to  come  on  stream  just  as  an  entirely  new  potential  source  of  visitors  was 
developing: the Barbadian Diaspora. The Diaspora had now grown in size and earning power 
to the point where many could contemplate annual visits. Here was an opportunity for them 
to return at a time convenient for those with school age children, and when there was lots to 
see and do, with plentiful opportunities to meet old friends and socialise.  
These two successes are the exception. Against them we have to set the many government 
initiatives  over  the  years  that  have  failed  and  been  abandoned.  They  cover  a  wide  range, 
including  agriculture,  manufacturing,  tourism,  and  financial  services.  The  reasonable 
conclusion is that government has a role to play in economic growth, in collaboration with the 
private  sector,  but  that  it  is  the  investment  of  the  private  sector  that  underpins  expansion, 
year after year. Government support is especially important in the early development of new 
initiatives. However, the probability of success of new initiatives, based on past experience, 
is  quite  low,  so  we  must  avoid  overblown  expectations,  and  we  must  be  prepared  to 
recognize and abandon things that clearly have no future. 
The day-to-day role of Government, and of the Central Bank, is to provide information on the 
performance of the international markets which are of principal interest to Barbadians, and 
the potential implications for Barbados. In addition, government may provide support for the 
private  sector  in  strategic  areas  and  activities.  In  the  tourism  sector,  Government  has 
provided  support  measures  to  maintain  tourism  competitiveness  in  a  tough  market.  It  has 
negotiated  to  maintain  airlift  to  Barbados,  it  has  joined  with  other  Caribbean  countries  to 
protest  the  inequity  of  treatment  in  the  way  the  UK  travel  tax  is  being  applied,  and  it  has 
provided support and guarantees for private investment in a major tourism project. One area 
2 
 BIS Review 148/2010
is  overseen  by  an 
integrated  arrangement 
which  still  cries  out  for  attention  is  support  for  refurbishment  and  upgrade  of  hotels, 
previously  profitable,  whose  credit-worthiness  has  been  weakened  by  the  international 
recession. 
In the international business and financial sector government inevitably plays a leading role 
in expanding the network of double taxation treaties, and, in collaboration with the Central 
Bank and other regulatory agencies, in strengthening the oversight of the sector. 
The prospects for the Barbadian economy are very good, but we must be patient, because 
little  by  way  of  economic  activity  can  be  done  in  Barbados  without  a  supply  of  foreign 
exchange.  Over-ambitious  stimulus  will  merely  eat  into  the  country’s  foreign  exchange 
reserves, with no lasting benefit of jobs or income. We have no good option but to wait out 
the  global  recession,  until  the  observed  pickup  in  inward  investment  strengthens,  and  is 
accompanied by stronger inflows from tourism, international business and financial services, 
and other sources of foreign exchange. 
Fortunately  unemployment  has  increased  only  modestly,  although  many  businesses  are 
reaching the end of their tether after two years of insufficient cash flow, and there may be 
some worsening. However, we should not grow impatient just when the end may be in sight: 
tourist numbers are up, the UK market appears to have stabilised, and there is reason to be 
hopeful about the winter tourist season.  
Barbados is well positioned to take advantage of the recovery when it comes. The country 
has  a  good  name,  we  boast  a  diversified  tourism  product,  and  a  business  and  financial 
centre that is grounded on a sustainable foundation of double taxation treaties and regulation 
that  is  constantly  upgraded  in  accordance  with  the  best  international  guidance.  Economic 
performance 
for  collaboration  between 
government  and  the  Central  Bank,  supported  by  our  internationally  renowned  social 
partnership  arrangements,  as  well  as  a  range  of  formal  and  informal  opportunities  for 
discussion and dialogue. Essential partners in these arrangements are the communications 
media,  because  they  are  the  ones  who  convey  the  message  to  the  individual  Barbadians, 
investors  and  tourists,  whose  decisions  will  ultimately  decide  the  pace  of  economic 
expansion. 
Given our resources and the structure of our economy, we are doing at least as well as could 
be expected, perhaps a little better; and we have encouraging prospects, including in areas 
where we are just getting up to speed, such as alternative energy.  
This is not to make light of the formidable challenges we face. In the tourism sector, financing 
is  needed  for  the  refurbishment  and  upgrade  of  properties  which  cannot  qualify  for  the 
borrowing they need for this work, because of the prolonged recession. In the international 
business and financial sector there remains a serious data and information deficit. We are 
making efforts to address this, with the help of funding from the European Union, and the 
Central  Bank  has  enquired  about  the  possibility  of  collaboration  in  a  joint  initiative  of  the 
Financial Stability Board and the IMF on improving data flows in the international financial 
sector. Barbados’ well regarded systems of supervision of international banks are constantly 
being  upgraded,  and  Government  is  proceeding  with  legislation  and  implementation  of 
equally  strong  supervisory  arrangements  for  the  rest  of  the  sector.  Although  Barbados 
remains  untainted  by  international  financial  malfeasance,  this  is  another  area  where 
upgrading is an ongoing exercise.  
In  addition, there  are  new  initiatives  afoot.  In  tourism,  the renewed  foray  into  the Brazilian 
market seems to make sense, in view of the market potential just of one or two urban centres 
of that vast nation, and of Brazil’s growing interest in the Caribbean, most obviously in the 
case of Guyana. Encouragingly, it appears that the promoters have a multi-year perspective, 
perhaps as a result of their reflection on the previous abortive exploration of this market.  
New initiatives are also appearing in the area of alternative energy systems. Government has 
just  concluded  a  loan  agreement  with  the  Interamerican  Development  Bank  for  support  of 
BIS Review 148/2010 
 3
these activities, and Central Bank will soon announce the formation of an alternative energy 
network based on a new website, www.aen.bb, to facilitate collaboration and an exchange of 
ideas towards the implementation of alternative energy systems. 
In sum, the world economic storm has not yet abated, and the good ship Barbados has taken 
on water, but we are in no danger of sinking, and in much better shape than countries much 
larger, better endowed and richer than ourselves.  We know from our past experience that 
we  are  a  resilient,  inventive  people,  and  we  have  strong  institutions  of  governance  and 
collaboration between government and people, to inform decision making by government, by 
businesses and by individual households. There are formidable challenges ahead. The world 
economy  is  riven  by  an  unprecedented  degree  of  uncertainty,  and  we  will  be  buffeted  by 
changing winds over which we have no control. But we must have confidence, be sensible 
about what we can control and what we have to accept as given, in order to be poised to 
resume course when the storm at last is all over. 
4 
 BIS Review 148/2010
