Ignazio Visco: Comments on Mr Leszek Balcerowicz’s lecture “Sovereign 
bankruptcy in the EU – a comparative perspective” 
Comments by Mr Ignazio Visco, Deputy Director General of the Bank of Italy, on the lecture 
by Mr Leszek Balcerowicz on “Sovereign bankruptcy in the EU – a comparative perspective”, 
at the Lectio Marco Minghetti 2010, Rome, 26 October 2010. 
 While I retain full responsibility for the views put forward in this note, I wish to thank Raffaela Giordano for very 
useful suggestions. Leszek Balcerowicz’s lecture is published in Italian and English by IBL Libri, Torino (info@ibl-
libri.it, www.ibl-libri.it), and forthcoming in German in P. Behrens – Th. Eger – H.D. Schäfer (eds.), Ökonomische 
Analyse des Europarechts, Tübingen, Siebeck Mohr. 
More than three years after the emergence of the financial excesses and regulatory failures 
that triggered a global economic crisis second only to that of the 1930s, its consequences 
are still to be fully understood and, especially, adequately addressed. In the aftermath of the 
Great  Recession  of  2008–09,  we  are  left  with  a  series  of  risks  linked  to  the  possible 
re-emergence of global imbalances and associated turmoil in currency markets and to the 
huge  accumulation  of  public  debt  in  advanced  economies,  which  could  lead  to  higher 
borrowing  costs  and  further  financial  turbulence  if  markets  started  to  worry  about  its 
sustainability. The two risks are interrelated and are the subject of discussions within the G20 
and in other venues. Serious sovereign debt distress has indeed materialized this year in a 
number  of  countries,  in  particular  in  the  euro  area,  and  issues  such  as  debt  resolution 
mechanisms  and  the  design  of  fiscal  rules  have  again  come  to  the  forefront  of  the  policy 
debate in the European Union (EU). They are the subject of this most interesting lecture by 
Leszek Balcerowicz and I will deal with them sequentially.  
Sovereign debt distress resolution mechanisms 
Rather than focusing on the standard distinction between illiquidity and insolvency that may 
characterize situations of debt distress, Balcerowicz emphasizes that a sovereign default is 
most likely the result of unwillingness rather than inability to pay back a debt accumulated 
over time. This is a very reasonable starting point, as it is most likely that when structural 
reforms or macroeconomic adjustments that could help a country to regain solvency are not 
adopted, this is not for lack of possibilities but because they are deemed undesirable – the 
sovereign debtor prefers not to take on all the burden of the required adjustment – or socially 
and  politically  unfeasible  –  the  government  may  not  be  able  to  pass  and  enforce  the 
consolidation  package.  Indeed,  governments  are  different  from  firms.  While  the  latter  are 
forced  to  go  bankrupt  when  they  do  not  have  enough  resources  to  repay  their  creditors, 
governments may choose to default on their obligations even though, in principle, they could 
always find ways to honour their debt by cutting expenditures and/or increasing revenues.  
Concerning  the  desirability  of  a  default,  however,  as  the  IMF  has  recently  pointed  out1,  a 
default  is  not  an  easy  substitute  for  a  painful  fiscal  adjustment.  In  fact,  when  the  starting 
position  of  the  defaulting  country  is  a  primary  fiscal  deficit,  a  marked  move  into  a  primary 
surplus  is  also  required,  as  the  country  usually  has  no  longer  access  to  borrowing  in  the 
aftermath of a default. This would indeed be the case for many advanced economies today, 
for which the interest bill is not the main component of the deficit.  
I agree with Balcerowicz that the standard approach, treating the debt-distressed sovereign 
as a benevolent social planner maximizing social welfare in an infinite time horizon, is not 
                                                 
1   Cottarelli, Forni, Gottschalk and Mauro (2010). 
BIS Review 165/2010 
 1
to  cope  with  a  high-debt  situation  entail  different 
appropriate.  Different  strategies 
redistributive consequences and social groups have often conflicting economic interests with 
respect to the policy to pursue in the midst of a debt crisis. The choice made by governments 
to cope with high public debts may therefore be better explained from a political economy 
perspective:  the  specific  interests  and  relative  political  strength  of  different  constituencies 
may definitely matter in such a choice.  
This  approach  can  also  help  to  explain  the  historically  observed  phenomenon  that  some 
countries  are  more  likely  to  default  than  others;2
  to  cite  just  one  example,  Argentina  has 
defaulted three times since 1980. Moreover, most debt repudiation episodes in these default-
prone countries happened at what we would today consider relatively low levels of debt. At 
the end of 2001, for instance, when Argentina defaulted on the larger part of its public debt, 
the debt-to-GDP ratio was slightly above 50 per cent (though already 15 percentage points 
higher than three years earlier and 90 percentage points below its nominal value one year 
later,  after  the  1-to-1  peso-dollar  parity  had  been  abandoned).  By  contrast,  there  are 
countries and governments that can sustain much higher borrowing levels. A striking case is 
Japan,  whose  public  debt  recently  reached  220  per  cent  of  GDP  without  giving  rise  to 
significant market tensions.  
Several authors have argued that the degree of debt intolerance ultimately depends on the 
quality  of  a  country’s  institutions.  In  particular,  sovereign  default  is  often  the  outcome  of  a 
political struggle among different groups of citizens and is more likely to happen if domestic 
debt-holders  are  politically  weak  and  the  political  price  of  the  financial  turmoil  typically 
triggered  by  a  sovereign  bankruptcy  is  low.  These  conditions  are  in  turn  more  likely  to  be 
present if a country lacks a politically strong middle class and/or a sufficiently independent 
central  bank3.  As  Balcerowicz  remarks,  in  a  world  of  financial  liberalization  the  traditional 
distinction  between  domestic  and  foreign  debt  may  not  be  that  useful  in  explaining 
governments’ willingness to pay. While in the cases of Russia (1998) and Argentina (2001) 
the  distribution  of  the  public  debt  between  resident  and  non-resident  holders  certainly  did 
matter, with governments treating domestic creditors better than foreign ones, in the case of 
Turkey (also in 2001) default was not contemplated and the government took measures that 
helped to service the debt owned by both domestic and foreign creditors.  
It is worth noting that the share of public debt held by non residents has risen significantly in 
all European countries, owing to the integration of financial markets. However, not only the 
composition of debt holders but also other characteristics of the public debt matter in such 
circumstances. For example, a long enough maturity of government debt can make default 
avoidable, even for a country that records sizeable increases in yield spreads. The average 
cost of debt would react slowly, buying the country considerable time to convince the market 
of  its  solvency.  It  can  be  debated  whether  the  existence  of  alternative  sovereign  debt 
resolution mechanisms can create different ex ante incentives, influencing the behaviour of 
sovereign  debtors  and  their  creditors.  The  lecture  delves  into  the  pros  and  cons  of  the 
Sovereign Debt Restructuring Mechanism (SDRM), a debt resolution mechanism, yet to be 
implemented, proposed in 2001 by Anne Krueger, then IMF First Deputy Managing Director.  
Balcerowicz concludes that the SDRM is functionally equivalent to the already existing debt 
resolution mechanisms, and says that more faith should be placed in the working of “pure 
market solutions”. However, he also seems to accept the notion that, as the SDRM is a more 
debtor-friendly mechanism, it could induce more fiscal discipline, strengthening the financial 
markets early warning function. In my opinion, this is not a secondary aspect. The key to an 
efficient  approach  to  preventing  sovereign  distress  lies  in  strengthening  market  pressure 
while  also  making  it  operate  more  gradually  than  is  usually  the  case.  An  example  is  the 
                                                 
2   Cf. Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003). 
3   Cf. Giordano and Tommasino (2009). 
2 
 BIS Review 165/2010
Greek crisis. The spread between 10-year Greek and German bonds was less than 30 basis 
points in 2007. It widened to about 150 at the end of 2008 in the aftermath of the Lehman 
Brothers collapse and then fluctuated between 100 and 250 basis points until the beginning 
of this year. After that it skyrocketed, surpassing 900 basis points in the summer, and only in 
recent weeks has it fallen back somewhat to below 700.  
Of course, any institutional reform that forces governments to become more sensitive to the 
warning  signals  coming  from  financial  markets  is  welcome.  With  the  Stability  and  Growth 
Pact  (SGP)  the  EU  decided  to  use  fiscal  rules  rather  than  market  constraints,  which  were 
considered  ineffective  and  slow  in  imposing  fiscal  discipline.  As  early  as  1989,  the  Delors 
Committee  had  remarked  that:  “The  constraints  imposed  by  market  forces  might  either  be 
too  slow  and  weak  or  too  sudden  and  disruptive”4.  A  solid  fiscal  framework  can  improve 
budgetary coordination over time by removing the built-in bias towards fiscal profligacy that is 
often attributed to democratically elected governments. A  medium-term fiscal framework is 
particularly  important,  especially  in  the  current  situation,  which  requires  credible  plans  to 
anchor expectations and, at the same time, a degree of flexibility in implementation so as not 
to  hamper  economic  growth.  However,  it  does  not  follow  from  this  that  market  forces 
necessarily have to work only ex post and continue to be “too slow and weak or too sudden 
and  disruptive”.  We  must  strengthen  “gradual”  market  pressure.  For  that,  I  believe  having 
pre-defined  procedures  for  debt-restructuring  and  a  well-designed  crisis  management 
framework  would  help  greatly.  Defaults  are  certainly  “unnecessary,  undesirable,  and 
unlikely”, as Cottarelli et al. (2010) assert. But we should not only be ready in case they take 
place but also have institutions capable of conveying to the market the message that they 
are in fact possible.  
The sovereign debt crisis and the institutional setup in the EU  
I  agree  with  the  idea  that  what  we  ultimately  need  is  a  “strong  representation  of  fiscally 
conservative  voters”.  But  how  can  we  implement  this?  In  principle,  by  building  a  wide 
consensus  on  the  advantages  of  fiscal  discipline  we  may  actually  induce  voters  to  punish 
policy-makers who do not deliver it. Asking voters to agree on fiscal consolidation packages 
without convincing them of their advantages is not straightforward. But well-designed, stable 
and  easy  to  apply  fiscal  rules  can  contribute  to  the  emergence  of  a  public  consensus  in 
favour of policies aimed at fiscal sustainability.  
In the second part of his lecture Leszek Balcerowicz focuses on the problem of sovereign 
debt  in  the  EU,  analyzing  three  main  aspects:  (i)  the  management  of  the  Greek  crisis;  
(ii)  the  development  of  a  debt  resolution  mechanism  in  Europe  on  the  heels  of  the  Greek 
experience; and (iii) longer term solutions for the stability of the euro area.  
According to Balcerowicz, a double standard emerged between euro- and non-euro countries 
in  the  EU.  The  vulnerable  fiscal  position  of  some  euro-area  countries  led  to  the  fear  of 
contagion.  After  a  lengthy  debate  and  with  a  significant  delay,  the  possibility  of  an  IMF 
intervention was finally  accepted. For non-euro countries, where the risk of contagion was 
considered  modest,  the  application  for  IMF  conditional  loans  was  not  controversial.  In  the 
case of euro-area countries, however, such as Greece, a complete set of intervention options 
was never put on the table; some options were not considered at all, basically due to motives 
of prestige.  
With  reference  to  the  second  point,  Balcerowicz  charges  that  the  European  Financial 
Stabilisation  Mechanism  (EFSM)  is  inconsistent  with  the  letter  of  the  Article  122.2  of  the 
Treaty. He also criticizes the ECB’s Securities Market Programme as a possible threat to its 
reputation.  Finally,  turning  to  the  analysis  of  long-term  solutions,  he  advocates  a  proper 
                                                 
4   Committee for the Study of Economic and Monetary Union (1989), p. 20. 
BIS Review 165/2010 
 3
institutional  setting  able  to  avoid  pro-cyclical  policies.  Structural  reforms  should  be 
implemented  to  spur  long-run  growth  and  to  promote  the  adjustment  of  the  economy  to 
shocks.  
It is quite difficult to assess a single article of the Treaty out of context. The consistency of 
the EFSM with the letter of the Article 122.2 could be debated, but it is evident that the EFSM 
complies with the spirit of the Treaty, given the importance of the proper functioning of the 
EU and its very existence. Earlier this year, it was indeed conceivable that a debt crisis in a 
euro-area country could trigger a wider crisis involving other countries.  
Should a balance-of-payments crisis hit a member state, Article 143 of the Treaty governs 
mutual  assistance.  Hungary  received  support  on  this  basis.  A  similar  mechanism  was 
missing in the context of economic and financial crises with impact on sovereign debt. The 
European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), established in June by the Ecofin, fills the gap. 
The crisis has shown that the costs for the economy can mount quickly if crisis management 
is slow and if it is conditioned by political pressure in both the countries receiving and those 
providing  financial  assistance.  It  is  now  clearer  than  before  that  well-defined  procedures 
need to be established to provide temporary financial assistance under clear and enforceable 
conditionality. The EFSF is an important step in this direction.  
In order to guarantee an incentive-compatible scheme, the EFSF has been associated with 
efforts  in  strengthening  policy  coordination  in  the  EU.  The  crisis  has  confirmed  that  the 
reasons  underlying  the  introduction  of  EMU  fiscal  rules  (externalities  of  deficits and  debts, 
pressure for bail out, moral hazard in fiscal policy) are still very relevant, as national rules 
and financial market discipline do not necessarily deliver sound policies. EU fiscal rules are 
warranted  and  should  be  strengthened.  Under  the  European  Commission  proposal  put 
forward at the end of September, compliance with rules and principles of the SGP is going to 
be reinforced by speeding up the Excessive Deficit Procedure and giving more prominence 
to  public  debt  and  sustainability  criteria.  The  broader  surveillance  of  euro-area 
macroeconomic and competitiveness developments makes it possible to focus on structural 
issues.  The  involvement  of  the  EU  in  developing  the  ex  ante  dimension  of  budgetary  and 
economic  surveillance  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  prevention  can  be  more  effective 
than correction. Sanctions can play a role in dampening the relative convenience of profligate 
fiscal  policies,  but  a  system  of  early  peer-review  of  national  budgets  could  detect 
inconsistencies and emerging imbalances at an early stage.  
The Van Rompuy task force too will soon publish detailed proposals. It is important that the 
European  Council  rapidly  evaluate  these  proposals,  jointly  with  those  of  the  Commission, 
and come up with an effective decision that tackles the two main weak points of the SGP (in 
both the 1997 version and the 2005 revision): (i) the absence of incentives and sanctions for 
fiscal  behaviour  in  good  times,  and  (ii)  the  lack  of  an  independent  enforcer  of  EU  rules. 
Sanctions have been highly uncertain, as EU Council members were supposed to fine each 
other  via  lengthy  procedures  involving  discretionary  steps  that  would  lead  to  theoretically 
large,  but  actually  unlikely,  pecuniary  sanctions.  Reforms  such  as  the  interest  bearing 
deposits and the European semester aim at tackling the first problem. A greater automaticity 
in procedures, the reduction of EU funds and, possibly, the loss of voting rights would help in 
tackling the second problem. National fiscal rules and procedures can also help to pursue 
fiscal  consolidation  and  anchor  fiscal  expectations.  The  2009  reform  of  the  German  fiscal 
framework sets an important benchmark.5 Other countries may decide to assign a greater 
role to expenditure rules and to independent fiscal authorities.  
With  respect  to  the  proposals  advanced  to  make  the  debt  criterion  operational,  the 
Commission’s  suggestion  of  allowing  excessive  deficit  procedures  for  insufficient  debt 
reduction (vis-à-vis an annual 1/20 reduction of the excess over the 60 per cent standard for 
                                                 
5   See Franco and Zotteri (2010). 
4 
 BIS Review 165/2010
the debt-to-GDP ratio over a three-year period) has been praised for its automaticity as well 
as  its  simplicity.  It  has  been  argued  that  “the  practical  translation”  of  the  debt  principle  is 
“elegant,  but  short-termist”,  even  if  this  “way  of  turning  around  the  60%  nonsense  is 
undoubtedly  clever”.6  There  is  no  question,  however,  that  a  consistent  and  progressive 
reduction of the current high debt levels over the cycle is absolutely necessary; they are a 
major constraint on our countries’ adjustment possibilities, especially in the event of shocks 
that could have irreversible consequences (due either to the unwillingness to pay or to the 
socio-political  unfeasibility  discussed  by  Balcerowicz).  In  this  perspective,  it  seems  beside 
the point at this stage (and impossible given the letter of Treaty) to question the reference 
standard,  as  well  as  the  speed  of  convergence,  even  if  we  may  readily  acknowledge  that 
“business cycles usually extend over more than three years”.7 
The debate on how to cope with the accumulation of public debt following the crisis has led  
–  inter  alia  –  to  some  proposals  for  European  countries  to  pool  their  debt  at  least  up  to  a 
certain level (60 per cent of GDP)8
 or to pool in a fund operating in the market (and possibly 
financed with a levy on financial transactions) the share of their debt directly tied to rescuing 
the financial system (a proposal not limited, in this case, to the EU).9 Both types of proposal 
are  interesting  and  may  improve  market  liquidity.  The  first  would  be  especially  directed  at 
reducing  the  burden  of  debt,  the  second  at  offsetting  the  negative  consequences  of  debt 
accumulation related to the financial crisis. They leave, however, significant open questions. 
To  mention  only  a  couple:  (i)  it  may  be  hard  to  reach  a  consensus  on  the  definition  of  the 
share of debt that has to be pooled; (ii) countries having debt substantially in excess of such a 
share may face a bond market liquidity problem. In addition, these proposals pose problems 
in  terms  of  incentives  to  participate  for  countries  with  lower  debt  and  higher  credibility 
(typically Germany) and with less debt directly tied to rescuing the financial system (typically 
Italy). More generally, these schemes imply some cross-subsidization which is hard to price, 
even though in the case of the establishment of a fund, profits may be used to progressively 
compensate different country contributions.  
But we should be aware that weak fiscal positions are not the only source of the tensions on 
sovereign  debt.  In  2007  Ireland  and  Spain  recorded  fiscal  surpluses  (respectively  0.3  and 
1.9 per cent of GDP) and had relatively low public debt-to-GDP ratios (25 and 36 per cent, 
respectively).  This  suggests,  as  Balcerowicz  also  acknowledges,  that  standard  fiscal 
indicators are not sufficient. Moreover, a tighter fiscal policy can sometimes help, but it is not 
a  panacea  for  macro  imbalances.  The  European  Commission  now  suggests  introducing  a 
new Excessive Imbalances Procedure. It will comprise the regular assessment of the risks of 
imbalances based on a scoreboard composed of several economic indicators. Indicators of 
both the external position of the economy (e.g. current accounts, external debt, real effective 
exchange  rates)  and  of  the  internal  situation  (e.g.  private,  as  well  as  public,  sector  debt) 
should be considered. The proposal, though important, faces three difficulties: first, detecting 
macroeconomic  imbalances  may  not  be  simple;  second,  identifying  appropriate  policies  to 
address structural problems is not straightforward; third, putting pressure on a country from 
Brussels can be politically difficult when all seems to be going well. This is an area in which 
national independent authorities could have a role.  
A very important issue concerns the lessons we have learnt from the crisis for the design and 
the  conduct  of  our  monetary  policy,  as  well  as  for  its  interactions  with  macro-prudential 
policies. If anything, the crisis has confirmed that we should firmly stick to our objective to 
                                                 
6   Wyplosz (2010). 
7  
8   Cf. Delpla and Von Weizsacker (2010). 
9   V.  Visco  (2010),  and,  for  a  similar  proposal  that  contemplates  the  transfer  of  such  debt  in  excess  to  an 
Ibidem. 
international institution such as the IMF, Savona (2010). 
BIS Review 165/2010 
 5
deliver  price  stability  in  the  medium  term.  Indeed,  the  credibility  of  the  Eurosystem  in 
pursuing  this  objective  was  crucial  in  allowing  us  to  adopt  exceptional  measures  without 
compromising  the  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations.  The  crisis  has  also  shown  how 
important  it  is  to  interpret  credit  and  money  developments  properly  and  take  them  into 
account in our decisions, in particular by “leaning against the wind” in case of credit booms 
and asset price imbalances. This is embodied in the Eurosystem setup, insofar as the careful 
monitoring  of  monetary  and  credit  aggregates  helps  to  identify  risks  both  to  financial  and 
price stability. A crucial issue is how to detect the accumulation of systemic risk in time. I am 
confident that the new framework based on the ESRB will provide a fundamental contribution 
in this respect. Enhanced interaction among macro-prudential bodies, between them and the 
micro-prudential authorities, and between macro-prudential and monetary policy authorities 
will be crucial.  
With  reference  to  the  ECB’s  Securities  Market  Programme,  suffice  it  to  say  that 
developments in financial markets called for special interventions. The programme is in line 
with  the  shared  principles  of  European  monetary  policy-making  and  does  not  represent  a 
change  in  the  monetary  policy  stance.  The  current  financial  crisis  has  been  described  as 
valuation crisis. In fact, bond spreads for several euro-area countries widened beyond any 
reasonable  level,  and  severe  tensions  in  the  bond  market  hampered  the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism, demanding action by the central bank. However, a very important 
and  more  immediate  issue  is  the  exit  from  the  exceptional  monetary  policy  measures  that 
have been adopted. All the various non-conventional measures that central banks, including 
the  ECB,  have  taken  over  the  last  years  have  been  directed  at  avoiding  a  financial  and 
economic collapse. That collapse has not materialized. The relevant issue now is the timing 
and speed of the exit from these measures. This will have to be guided, on the one hand, by 
the need to maintain support for the orderly functioning of the money and financial markets 
and  to  sustain  credit  flows  to  the  economy,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  by  the  need  to  avoid 
introducing  distortions  into  the  system  and  sowing  the  seeds  of  future  imbalances.  In  the 
euro area, our “credit enhancing” policy was almost entirely based on temporary refinancing 
to the banking system and can easily be unwound. Indeed, gradual phasing out has started 
with the maturity of the six-month and twelve-month operations. The speed with which the 
exit will proceed will depend on how quickly financial markets get back to normality, on the 
pace of the economic recovery, on banks’ ability to obtain stable funding from private capital 
markets.  
Finally, as Balcerowicz forcefully argues, an adequate response to debt distress requires to 
counter  with  decision  the  ongoing  erosion  of  fiscal  discipline.  Structural  reforms  that  are 
perceived as capable of enhancing a country’s adjustment possibilities, such as those that 
would lead to the removal of unnecessary administrative barriers, a higher efficiency of 
public  services  and  a  substantial  improvement  of  the  education  system,  are  also  of 
fundamental  importance.  Furthermore,  in  the  market  perception  what  matters  most  for 
debt sustainability is the ability to implement specific initiatives, capable of affecting the 
medium- to long-term growth possibilities of a country as well as the trends in its public 
expenditures, rather than the (ephemeral) short-term flexibility of its (nominal) exchange 
rate.  This  is  what  is  shown,  inter  alia,  by  the  Italian  experience  of  1992–95,  when  the 
adoption of a critical pension reform was what really mattered to convince markets of the 
return to a sustainable trend in public finances.  
References 
Committee for the Study of Economic and Monetary Union (1989), Report on the economic 
and monetary union in the European Community, Brussels.  
Cottarelli,  C.,  L.  Forni,  J.  Gottschalk  and  P.  Mauro  (2010),  “Default  in  today’s  advanced 
economies: Unnecessary, undesirable, and unlikely”, IMF Staff Position Note, 10/12, September.  
6 
 BIS Review 165/2010
Delpla,  J.  and  J.  Von  Weizsacker  (2010),  “The  blue  bond  proposal”,  Bruegel  Policy  Brief, 
2010/3, May.  
Franco D. and S. Zotteri (2010), “Fiscal rules: What lessons from Germany?”, mimeo, Banca 
d’Italia.  
Giordano,  R.  and  P.  Tommasino  (2009),  “What  determines  debt  intolerance:  the  role  of 
political and monetary institutions”, Temi di discussione, 700, Banca d’Italia, January.  
Reinhart, C., M.K. Rogoff and M.S. Savastano (2003), “Debt intolerance”, Brookings Papers 
on Economic Activity, 1.  
Savona, P. (2010), “Un parcheggio per i debiti pubblici del mondo”, Il Messaggero, 18 febbraio.  
Visco, V. (2010), “Come salvarsi dalla deflazione”, Il Corriere della Sera, 13 luglio.  
Wyplosz,  C.  (2010),  “Eurozone  reform:  Not  yet  fiscal  discipline  but  a  good  start”,  Vox, 
4 October. 
BIS Review 165/2010 
 7
