K C Chakrabarty: Prospects for economic growth and the policy 
imperatives for India 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  
at the inaugural plenary of the National Conference on Leadership, at the Confederation of 
Indian 
for  Leadership,  Kolkata, 
10 December 2010. 
Industry  (CII)-Suresh  Neotia  Centre  of  Excellence 
 The assistance provided by Dr M Saggar in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged.  
Mr Harshvardhan Neotia, Chairman, CII-Suresh Neotia Centre of Excellence for Leadership, 
distinguished  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  begin  by  thanking  the  organisers  for 
inviting  me  to  deliver  this  address  on  a  theme  which  is  both  topical  and  of  considerable 
relevance. My objective is to give a realistic assessment of the prospects of India’s economic 
growth, and the policy imperatives to achieve what is within our reach, while also ensuring 
that we do not fall off the cliff in an attempt to cross the valley. Our success will depend on 
grooming innovative and focussed leadership at every level of the society.  
There are several successful business leaders in the audience and on the dais today at this 
“Second National Conference on Leadership”. The CII believes that in order to succeed in 
India’s  mission  to  achieve  sustained  growth  and  competitiveness,  the quality  of  leadership 
and  human  resource  management  plays  a  very  significant  role  and  is  one  of  the  key 
requirements for achieving business excellence. The CII-Suresh Neotia Centre of Excellence 
for Leadership is facilitating in a big way the growth objectives through the development of 
leadership and through these deliberations on what policy imperatives are necessary to grow 
at a rapid pace. I am sure the institute would soon turn into a premier institution of global 
fame to develop business leaders not just in India but for other emerging markets also.  
My talk today would be in two parts. In the first, I would focus on (1) the upsurge in economic 
growth since the 1980s and further acceleration during 2003–04 to 2007–08, (2) the impact 
of the crisis and the V-shaped recovery that followed, (3) the near term growth prospects and 
challenges  for  India  in  a  world  facing  multi-speed  recovery  and  (4)  long-term  growth 
prospects  for  India.  Part  II  would  contend  that  in  spite  of  growth  success  and  remarkable 
near  term  growth  prospects,  growth  sustainability  in  India  would  critically  hinge  on  the 
following three things: (1) our ability to make the growth process more inclusive, (2) improved 
governance, and (3) developing leadership in all walk of life. There is some slack in all these 
aspects,  as  a  result  of  which  India  is  not  harnessing  its  full  long-term  growth  potential. 
However, opportunities exist for India to step up its high growth rate still higher.  
I 
The transformation to the high growth phase  
The  high  growth  phase  for  the  Indian  economy  started  from  1980–81  when  the  economy 
clearly  broke  through  what  was  known  as  the  “Hindu  Rate  of  Growth”  of  3.5%  that 
represented a low-level equilibrium trap for the Indian economy. Average real GDP growth 
rate for the Indian economy improved to 5.6% in the 1980s and was distinctly higher than the 
averages of 3.6% for the 1950s, 4.0% for the 1960s and 2.9% for the 1970s.  
What caused this structural shift? In my view, four factors were particularly important. First, 
the high growth of 1980s was helped by industrial de-licensing and trade liberalization. There 
was  a  clear  improvement  in  the  growth  rates  of  mining,  registered  manufacturing  and 
electricity  during  this  period.  Second,  high  fiscal  deficits  fuelled  faster  growth,  but  fiscal 
deterioration  spilled  over  to  twin  gaps  and  on  the  back  of  the  Gulf  crisis,  precipitated  the 
BIS Review 169/2010 
 1
balance of payments crisis of the 1991. Gross fiscal deficit (GFD) averaged 6.7% of GDP in 
the  1980s,  compared  with  just  3.8%  in  the  1970s.  This  also  resulted  in  increased 
monetization of the deficit with net RBI credit to the Centre increasing to 2.1% of the GDP 
from just 1% in the 1970s thus impinging on the monetary policy efficacy. Third, the saving 
and investment rates in the economy picked up since the second half of 1970s, laying the 
foundation for the higher growth in the 1980s. Gross domestic saving rate had improved to 
21.2% in 1978–79 from 15.7% in 1974–75, led by improvement in household’s financial rate 
that increased to 6% from 3% over the same period. Correspondingly, the gross investment 
rate improved to 21.3% from 16.5%. However, saving rate and investment rates stagnated in 
the  1980s  till  1986–87,  especially  as  public  sector  savings  deteriorated  after  1982–83. 
Fourth, structural transformation gathered pace during that decade, with services like trade, 
hotels and restaurants, transport, communications moving up to a 6% p.a. growth trajectory, 
real  estate  surpassing  7%  growth  and  banking  and  insurance  growing  at  an  astounding 
10.6%. As a result, in a clear break from the past, non-agricultural sector that was generally 
growing in 4–5.5% range, recorded a 7.1% growth in the latter half the 1980s.  
The high growth phase that started in the 1980s has now lasted for three decades, with the 
pace  of  the  1980s  being  maintained  in  the  1990s  before  it  accelerated  further  in  the  next 
decade. The average growth rate in the 1990s at 5.7% was statistically not different from that 
in the 1980s, but qualitatively it was better because efforts were made to reign in fiscal gaps. 
The  GFD/GDP  ratio  averaged  lower  at  5.9%  in  the  1990s.  The  current  account  of  the 
balance of payment also showed a remarkable improvement and the period was marked by 
India  starting  to  reap  the  gains  from  globalization.  Yet,  the  industrial  growth  disappointed 
during  this  period  and  averaged  5.7%  in  this  period;  lower  than  the  6.4%  recorded  in  the 
preceding  decade,  as 
the  mining,  registered  manufacturing  and  electricity  growth 
decelerated. The growth in the 1990s was mainly driven by the services sector that grew at 
7.1% p.a., with impressive activity in most services segments with the exception of storage.  
Growth trajectory shifted still higher in the decade 2000–01 to 2009–10. Real GDP growth 
averaged 7.3% catapulting the Indian economy to the status of the second fastest growing 
economy  amongst  the  G-20  members.  Industrial  growth  recovered  and  averaged  6.8% 
during this decade. Registered manufacturing grew at 8.7%, though electricity decelerated. 
Services sector posted a growth of 8.0%, with communication sector stealing the show with 
an annual average growth of 25.3%, banking and insurance growing at 10.8%, construction 
at 9.2% and hotels and restaurants at 9.1%. High services growth has further changed the 
structure  of  the  economy.  Including  construction,  the  services  sector  now  accounting  for 
almost 65% of the GDP, compared with just about 34% at the start of the planning era. The 
share of industry has about doubled to 20% from 11% over these six decades, while share of 
agriculture and allied activities has fallen to about 15% from 55%.  
The impact of the crisis & the V-shaped recovery  
For  three  years  2005–06  to  2007–08,  the  Indian  economy  grew  at  an  astonishing  pace  of 
9.5%  before  the  global  financial  crisis  caused  a  global  downturn.  It  could  not  and  did  not 
leave India alone or decoupled. Notwithstanding the coupling and decoupling theorists, it was 
obvious  that  with  India  had  substantially  globalized.  Its  trade  in  goods  and  services 
accounted  for  48%  of  its  GDP  and  the  economy  substantially  depended  on  large  capital 
inflows to sustain its high growth the spillover from the global financial crisis was inevitable.  
Inherent  resilience  arising  from  India’s  large  domestic  demand,  a  stable  financial  system, 
high domestic saving rate, prudent monetary policy and fiscal improvement that followed the 
FRBM Act, 2003 along with the unprecedented counter-cyclical fiscal and monetary policies 
helped India cope with the global crisis better than most others. The economy decelerated 
over the next two years but still grew at 6.7% in 2008–09 and 7.4% in 2009–10. This was in 
spite the fact that that a cyclical correction in industrial growth had already begun at the start 
of 2008–09 even before the Lehman struck the financial markets.  
2 
 BIS Review 169/2010
Monetary  policy  reaction  was  nimble  and  sizeable  during  this  period.  The  repo  rate  was 
lowered by 425 bps to 4.75% from 9%. The reverse repo rate was cut by 275 bps to 3.25% 
from 6%. The CRR was slashed by 400 bps to 5% from 9%. SLR was lowered to 24% from 
25% for the first time in 11-years. Large liquidity was imparted through MSS unwinding, open 
market  operations, standing  facilities  and  some  unconventional  liquidity  support  measures. 
All this action was taken within a space of 7-months. The moves were coordinated with those 
in fiscal space that included large tax cuts and an expenditure stimulus. This portrayed a rare 
exemplary  monetary-fiscal  coordination  that  enabled  the  economy  not  only  to  limit  the 
downturn, but also assay a V-shaped recovery.  
Industrial  growth  bounced  back  since  June  2009  and  had  moved  back  to  a  double-digit 
trajectory by August 2010. The recovery soon spilled over to the services sector, though the 
economy  faced  a  newer  shock  from  the  monsoon  failure.  The  resilience  of  the  Indian 
economy was still evident as higher rural incomes and greater diversification in rural activity 
helped agriculture to record a positive 1.2% growth in a year of one of the severest droughts. 
On back of breezy industrial growth and resumed services sector buoyancy, the output gap 
had completely closed by Q4 of 2009–10, thus completing the V-shaped recovery.  
The near term growth prospects and the challenges  
India has now posted an 8.9% growth in each of the first two quarters of the current fiscal 
year. Purely on the statistical estimates of potential growth, this may appear to be the case of 
growth  surpassing  the  potential.  However,  it  is  important  to  understand  that  the  growth 
trajectory has been pushed high on a low base. With these favourable base effects waning 
away, it may in the short-run be difficult to step up growth without overheating the economy. 
The near term growth prospects remain very encouraging even if we see slight adjustment in 
growth  numbers  ahead  arising  from  unfavourable  base  effects.  We  are  beginning  to  see 
capacity pressures emerge in select industries. It is important to manage both demand and 
supply conditions and see investment response kick in while maintaining price stability.  
Adjusted for base effects, at the moment the economy neither appears to be overheated, nor 
appear  to  face  a  slack.  The  inflation  is  above  comfortable  level  but  is  trending  down.  The 
risks to growth remain on either side. On the one hand, the new spell of quantitative easing 
by some advanced economies has increased the uncertainty about future output and inflation 
gaps and is risking new short term asset price bubbles. On the other hand, the central banks 
in  the  advanced  economies  are  trying  to  boost  short  term  inflation  expectations,  but  are 
risking  un-anchoring  of  long-term  inflation  expectations.  We  need  to  be  watchful  in  this 
uncertain environment and if needed, take speedy corrective responses ahead. However, the 
direction of change and the relative weights in reaction function that it may be required ahead 
remains unclear at the moment. The level of capital flows in recent period has been in line 
with  our  absorptive  capacity,  but  the  potential  volatility  has  to  be  borne  in  mind  by  policy-
makers  as  well  as  private  agents  in  planning  their  risk  management.  It  is  not  without 
significance that in a world where global imbalances and currency battles have again come 
to  fore,  India  has  managed  the  impossible  trinity  without  any  significant  interventions  and 
capital controls. This in many ways reflects a new maturity level for the Indian economy that 
augurs well for its growth prospects.  
The long-term growth prospects  
India’s  long-term  growth  prospects  remain  encouraging  but  with  a  larger  uncertainty  
band ahead. With capital stock growing at about 8–9% p.a, working force growing at about 
1.9% p.a. and total factor productivity growth exceeding 3% p.a., India can grow at 8% or 
more. Conventional time series methods based on past data suggest a potential growth rate 
of  7.5–8%  for  the  Indian  economy.  However,  the  issue  is  how  India  can  move  to  a  10% 
growth trajectory ahead. We may think it is difficult to do so in the short-term but we must 
BIS Review 169/2010 
 3
also realize that for the long-term sustenance of the society, we need to grow by 10% for the 
next 20 years. The issue is not whether we can or cannot, but what we all must collectively 
do  to  ensure  that  it  happens.  We  also  have  to  see  that  this  growth  is  inclusive  and  job-
oriented otherwise it will not be sustainable. Only then would we be able to meet the rising 
aspirations  of  the  newer  generation.  We  are  at  an  ever  greater  risk  of  social  cohesion 
collapsing should the growth fall from here. Herein lay the challenges for our leadership in 
various walks of life. Herein lay the policy imperatives that are needed to deliver this tough 
goal.  
India has demographic dividends to support its growth ambitions. The share of working age 
population of 20–59 years may rise from 49% in 2000 to 55% in 2025 and stay still high at 
53% by 2050. India’s old age dependency may be just 12% in 2025. This is in stark contrast 
to the ageing populations in many OECD countries, where dependency ratios are rising fast. 
In Japan the dependency ratio is set to rise from about 30% in 2005 to over 70% by 2050. 
Old age dependency ratios in EU countries are also rising fast. They are projected to go up 
from about 26% now to about 53% by 2050.  
India’s growth story also has potential to benefit from rapid urbanization. The share of urban 
population in total is also rising rather rapidly. It was below 20% in 1971, but has climbed to 
29% by 2001 and is projected to rise to 37% by 2016. However, both demographic dividends 
and  the  urbanization  can  be  a  great  promise  or  a  potential  nightmare  for  the  future 
depending  upon  what  we  do.  For  example,  over  20  million  Indians  can  potentially  join 
workforce  every  year,  but  we  are  creating  job  opportunities  at  a  rate  of  roughly  7  million 
annually over the last three decades of high growth. We need to step up our focus on how to 
reap  the  best  from  the  demographic  dividends  and  rapid  urbanization.  This  would  require 
increased  resource  allocation  and  resource  generation  in  activities  like  education,  health, 
urban and rural infrastructure. It would require efforts to bridge energy demand-supply gaps, 
new investments in renewable energy and stepping up mineral exploration. We need to do 
more to remove factors that might constraint future growth.  
II 
What policy imperatives are needed to push the potential or macro-economically sustainable 
growth rate up? As I had mentioned, I would discuss three sets of policy imperatives.  
Making growth process more inclusive  
India has been a remarkable growth story for the last decade all right. However, the growth 
process  has  not  been  very  inclusive.  There  are  several  indicators  that  would  leave  us 
uncomfortable with the current growth process. According to the United Nation’s Development 
Program  (UNDP)’s  Human  Development  Index  (HDI),  2010,  India  was  placed  at  a  rank  of 
119  amongst  169  countries,  which  is  clearly  not  in  sync  with  India’s  economic  strength. 
Almost  all  our  competing  emerging  market  economies  including  Malaysia,  Russia  China, 
Sri Lanka, Thailand, Philippines, Indonesia and Vietnam have better HDI rankings than us. 
India’s  relative  position  has  not  improved  very  much  over  the  years,  with  a  rank  of  77 
amongst 95 countries in 1980 and a rank of 95 amongst 118 countries in 1990. This may not 
be  surprising  once  we  consider  that  we  spend  only  less  than  3.5%  of  GDP  on  education, 
ranking 117th amongst 142 countries and comparing poorly with countries like Lesotho and 
Cuba that spend 14% of their GDP on education and Botswana that spends 10%. We spend 
just 1% of our GDP on public health services and rank a dismal 181 amongst 188 countries 
ranked  in  terms  of  HDI  indicators. Small  countries  like  Kiribati  and  Marshall  islands  spend 
14% of GDP on this and Cuba spends 9%. Most OECD countries spend 6–9% of their GDP 
on public health services.  
Rapid growth has made a dent on poverty, but perhaps not enough. Over a quarter of our 
population still lives below the poverty line. Based on National Sample Survey (NSS)’s 61st 
4 
 BIS Review 169/2010
Round, the poverty ratio was 27.5% in 2004–05, with 28.3% in case of rural areas and 25.7% 
in  case  of  urban  areas.  However,  these  ratios  compare  well  with  those  in  1993–94  which 
were 36.0% at All-India level, 37.3% in case of rural areas and 36% in case of urban areas. 
42% of India’s population earns less than US$1.25 per day on PPP basis. According to some 
estimates,  more  than  half  of  country’s  wealth  is  shared  by  only  10%  of  the  population. 
However,  India’s  income  Gini  coefficient  is  36.8%,  which  compares  favourably  than  most 
emerging markets. As per the latest round of NSS, the unemployment rate in 2007–08 was 
8%  on  the  current  daily  activity  status.  India’s  health  and  education  statistics  are 
disappointing even by the developing country status.  
An inclusive growth process goes far behind income redistribution. It embraces a long-term 
growth  framework  with  a  view  to  ensure  that  segments  of  population  do  not  get  excluded 
from the growth dividends. The process goes far beyond poverty reduction strategy and to 
my mind is build on four pillars – (1) empowerment of the poor through provision of health, 
education  and  skill  formation,  (2)  financial  inclusion  by  improving  the  reach  of  institutional 
finance to the poor and (3) entitlement to food and nutrition and (4) asset creation, especially 
housing  with  water,  electricity  and  sanitation  so  that  poor  gets  shelter  and  is  able  to  work 
therein or around and generate steady source of income to live a sustainable his livelihood.  
I see financial inclusion holding the key to more inclusive growth. India’s remarkable growth 
story cannot be sustained in absence of rapid strides in financial inclusion. The targets under 
priority sector lending, the banks’ linkage to the Self Help Groups (SHGs), the introduction of 
Kissan Credit Cards (KCC), the regulatory nod to the Business Facilitators (BC)/ Business 
Correspondent (BC) model, the introduction of the no-frill accounts have been some of the 
several steps facilitated by the Reserve Bank to promote financial inclusion.  
However, a lot more needs to be done. As many as 145 million households or about 43% of 
India’s population still do not have access to banking. Regional disparities further compound 
the problem. The Report of the Committee on Financial Inclusion (Chairman: Dr. C. Rangarajan) 
states  that  about  95%  of  the  farmer  households  in  the  North-East  do  not  have  access  to 
formal  finance.  At  an  All-India  level  49%  the  farmer  households  are  indebted,  though  the 
level of their indebtedness to the formal sources is less at 27%. About 10% of the population 
has life insurance coverage. Over 90% of the villages still do not have bank branches. Banks 
are today working with micro-finance institutions in many parts of the country in their quest to 
reach out to those who have been excluded. However, the challenge remains gigantic and 
would need to be provided by the mainstream lending institutions.  
Capital formation in agriculture has started to pick up again, though the mainstream lending 
institutions could do more to support this process. The gross capital formation in agriculture 
and allied activities has increased to Rs1,38,597 crore in 2008–09 from  Rs78,848 crore in 
constant (2004–05) prices. This is 76% increase that betters the 51% increase in case of all 
industries.  However,  we  still  have  missing  growth  in  relation  to  the  potential  that  the 
agriculture sector holds. India’s yields compare poorly in relation to world standards. India’s 
yield of foodgrains has improved only marginally over last 10 years to 1798 kgs/hectare in 
2009–10 from 1704 kgs/hectare in 1999–2000 and compares poorly with global average of 
4168 kgs/ hectare. The yield of paddy in Egypt is as high as 9731 kgs/hectare and the yield 
of wheat in UK is 8281 kgs/hectare. While the yields have a lot to endowments, they are also 
a function of our technology, investments and institutional arrangements. Not all the yield gap 
is  explained  by  different  initial  endowments.  One  needs  a  better  understanding  of  the 
reasons  why  foodgrains  yield  in  U.P  is  56%  of  that  of  Punjab  or in  case  of  Bihar it  is  just 
42%. In Maharashtra it is just 24% that of Punjab. Agri business leadership need to partner 
state interventions in stepping up productivity keeping in view regional conditions. Only then 
can we generate the supply response to push agricultural growth up.  
BIS Review 169/2010 
 5
Improved governance leading to better delivery model 
Over  the  last  decade,  growth  theorists  and  development  experts  have  realized  that 
governance  goes  a  long  way  in  explaining  growth.  Good  governance  refers  to  good  order 
and workable arrangements that cover a wide array of institutional arrangements including 
regulatory and legal framework which are a must to ensure a cost-effective delivery model for 
the entire range of products and services. In India, we have created many institutions in this 
direction  over  the  last  two  decades.  However,  we  do  not  still  compare  well  in  terms  of 
governance  indicators.  In  terms  of  the  World  Bank  governance  indicators  developed  by 
Kaufman,  Kraay  and  Mastruzzi,  India  ranked  at  about  46th  percentile  in  2009  based  on  a 
range  of  indicators  that  are  considered,  implying  that  more  than  half  of  the  210  countries 
studied score better on governance. Our governance deficit can be reduced through faster 
decision-making  and  speedier  implementation  of  all  types  of  projects  we  engage  in;  be  it 
safety nets, social infrastructure, road, other transportation or power or telecom projects.  
Striking  a  fruitful  public-private  partnership  holds  the  key  to  improved  governance.  On  the 
one hand, the enabling environment for the business needs to improve further. On the other, 
the  business  leadership  needs  to  focus  more  closely  on  investment  project  deliveries  and 
bridge  the  wide  chasm  between  planned  investment  and  actual  capital  formation  at  the 
grass-root  level.  According  to  the  World  Bank  database  for  2009,  it  takes  on  an  average 
30 days to complete the procedures to legally start operating the business in India that puts it 
at  a  rank  of  113  amongst  182  nations.  In  29  countries  it  takes  a  week  or  less  to  start  a 
business. New Zealand tops the chart as you can do so in just 1 day. In Australia it takes 
2 days  and  in  Singapore  3  days.  Similarly,  it  takes  in  India  271  hours  to  prepare  and  pay 
taxes, ranking 114 amongst 182 nations. India scores even worse in bankruptcy resolution. 
On an average it takes 7 years in India to resolve insolvency through settlement of distressed 
assets through courts. On this score, India ranks 155 amongst 156 nations in the World Bank 
database, ahead only of Mauritania whereas in troubled Ireland it takes only 0.4 years and in 
54 other countries it takes 2-years or less.  
If each one of us, whether in public or private sector or as an individual works to capacity, the 
governance and delivery mechanisms would all improve. We have started to create marvel 
infrastructure, but it sometimes takes us more than a decade to complete an infrastructure 
project.  There  is  no  dearth  of  finance  to  fund  infrastructure  and  experts  from  the 
infrastructure  finance  industry  tells  me  that  no  commercially  viable  project  that  has  the 
requisite  clearances  and  the  input  availability  is  suffering  because  of  lack  of  debt  finance. 
There is no dearth of initiatives undertaken to step up infrastructure investments. The Viability 
Gap  Funding  (VGF),  enhanced  financing  by  infrastructure  finance  companies,  takeout 
financing, model concession agreements, annuity based funding are few examples. What is 
required  today  is  commitment  for  speedier  implementation.  We  still  have  glaring  gaps  in 
infrastructure. We still have about 9% energy shortage. Large transmission and distribution 
losses,  estimated  at  nearly  40%  and  absence  of  adequate  competition  impacts  electricity 
industry. At least 7% output is lost due to electrical outages. As a result, India’s per capita 
electricity consumption at 542 kWh is only 4% that of United States and 1.5% that of Iceland. 
Our  infrastructure  deficit  is  reducing  at  a  slow  pace  and  we  need  to  accelerate 
implementation  of  our  plans.  A  lot  may  have  been  achieved  in  terms  of  the  Golden 
Quadrilateral project and NHDP Phase III, but the road deficit remains large in terms of the 
ambitious but needed target of creating 20 kms of road every day.  
Business  leadership  with  integrity  and  vision  can  make  a  difference  to  our  Governance. 
There  are  several  areas  where  governance  can  be  improved.  This  range  from  safety  net 
delivery to corporate governance in our most dynamic of the businesses. We can easily push 
up our growth by at least 1-percentage point by improving governance. We can improve a lot 
other economic parameters including the fiscal deficit also. What we need to aim at delivery 
mechanisms to speed up project implementation in all walks of life.  
6 
 BIS Review 169/2010
Providing leadership  
While  economists  recognised  that  governance  matters  for  growth,  they  have  had  little 
recognition  for  the  role  of  leadership  in  the  same.  Leadership  issues  were  left  to  the 
management  experts.  Yet,  to  my  mind,  leadership  plays  a  vital  role  in  growth  and 
development in a society. The right leadership can ensure a number of things that include 
inclusive  growth,  green  growth,  good  governance,  entrepreneurship,  economic  stability, 
peace, social cohesion. All of these ultimately act with force multipliers to deliver not just high 
growth, but economic transformation. What we need is good political leadership, corporate 
leadership, managerial leadership and social leadership. In all these walks we need leaders 
who can transform their workspace. Without leadership, we may grow at an inertial pace for 
some time but drift eventually.  
Take the simple case of provision of education services. Our Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan 
Singh, has recognised the centrality of literacy in our growth and development strategy and 
asked how in this “knowledge century” a third of our people have remained illiterate. We also 
have the dubious distinction that a third of the illiterates across globe reside in India. There 
are enough leaders in this country inside and outside the corporate world who can join and 
own up national literacy as a mission, taking up the challenge of removing illiteracy through 
social responsibility.  
The quintessential Bengali genius Amartya Sen has highlighted the lack of access to basic 
education as a prime cause for underdevelopment. In my view, it is pity that we could not still 
implement the Article 45 of our Constitution that required us to provide free and compulsory 
education till the age of 14 within the first 10 year of our becoming a Republic. This is in the 
land of Raja Rammohan Roy, Swami Vivekanand, Sir Syed Ahmed Khan, Maharishi Mahesh 
Yogi  and  Sarvpalli  Radhakrishna.  Have  we  lost  leadership  now  in  our  quest  for  greed, 
bonuses  and  bureaucratic  power?  Can  we  not  have  innovative  solutions  that  provide  a 
reasonable  economic  basis  for  providing  basic  education  to  all,  while  creating  more 
institutions of excellence in different streams of education?  
Presently, the country has over 300 million adult illiterates. The drop-out rates at primary and 
elementary education level are falling supported by the Sarva Siksha Abhiyan and the Mid-
Day Meal schemes, but still remain above 25% and 40%, respectively. Today almost all rural 
habitations are served with at least one primary school. However, over 40% of our primary 
schools  still  do  not  have  toilets  or  boundary  walls.  The  quality  of  education  right  from  the 
primary  to  the  higher  education  stage  leaves  lot  to  be  desired.  The  business  leadership 
needs to step in and the public policy needs to create a workable space for private sector to 
invest in education. Such investment needs to flow in not only in profitable IB schools, but in 
bridging the gap illiteracy and in technical and skill education.  
If  India  was  to  truly  emerge  as  the  world’s  leading  knowledge  economy,  the  business 
leadership needs to partner in technical education and skill development. If labour supply is 
augmented through vocational education and training, the biggest gainers would be business 
leaders  themselves.  Industrial  Training  Institutes  (ITIs)  can  no  longer  be  the  preserve  of 
Governments. These need to come up in PPP mode. Of nearly 7 million or more that enter 
into workforce each year, ITIs are able to supply less than 10% of it. The total number of IT 
and BPO professional employed in India are rising by nearly 0.2 million per annum currently. 
We do not have enough supply of trainers. So the leadership needs to grapple with how best 
to create more IITs as well as more ITIs at the same time.  
Business  leadership  should  also  look  inwards.  In  an  era,  where  the  business  leadership 
frequently  looks  to  banks  for  debt  restructuring,  history  throws  up  many  examples  when 
corporate leadership can innovatively work out solutions on its own. Take the case of the US 
airline industry. It has faced a roller-coaster ride over the last 90 years of its existence. At its 
inception, even though there was no threat from hijackers or terrorists, they found it difficult 
to sell tickets as people thought airplanes were inherently dangerous. Till 1978, the industry 
was  also  overregulated  by  government,  but  full  deregulation  that  followed  brought  new 
BIS Review 169/2010 
 7
competitive pressures. I would urge you to read the book co-authored by Anthony J. Mayo 
and  Nitin  Nohria  of  Harvard  Business  School,  and  Mark  Rennella,  a  former  research 
associate  titled  “What  the  Airline  Industry  Can  Teach  Us  about  Leadership”.  The  authors 
write in the introduction of the book that, “Leaders are change agents who see opportunities 
and promise where others see only defeat.” At each stage of aviation’s business life cycle – 
start-up, growth, maturity, decline, rebirth – new types of leaders emerged. They may have 
represented different leadership archetypes as the industry went through its life-cycle stages, 
but they believed in themselves as winners, rather than falling into the trap of looking out for 
bailouts.  
Friends, we have done reasonably well over the last decade or three. But we can do much 
better.  So  why  not?  It  is  in  this  context  that  I  drew  your  attention  to  the  need  for  a  more 
inclusive growth, better governance and better leadership. We also need to focus more on 
higher  investments  in  agriculture  and  rural  infrastructure,  education  and  skill  development, 
better  health  services,  scaling  up  infrastructure  investments  further  by  faster  execution  of 
projects  and  speedier  delivery.  These  would  work  to  take us  to  a  10%  sustainable  growth 
path,  but  we  would  need  to  look  beyond  the  narrow  business  interests  to  so.  An enabling 
environment  through  stable  macro-economy  and  a  vibrant  financial  system  exists,  but 
improved governance is a necessary condition. We have the elephants and we have tigers 
within  us.  We  need  the  leadership  that  not  only  takes  us  higher  on  growth,  but  takes 
everybody  along  so  that  each  one  of  us  can  partner  in  these  efforts  and  share  the  fruits. 
Sharing  these  thoughts,  I  leave  you  all  to  deliberate  further  upon  the  various  aspects  of 
leadership and the policy imperatives necessary for future sustainable and inclusive double 
digit growth.  
Thank you! 
8 
 BIS Review 169/2010
