Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Business models in Islamic finance – 
challenges and opportunities 
Keynote  address  by  HE  Rasheed  Mohammed  Al  Maraj,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  
of  Bahrain,  at  the  IFSB  seminar  on  business  models  in  Islamic  finance,  Manama, 
3 October 2010. 
 Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It gives me great pleasure to be here this evening and to have the opportunity to contribute a 
few thoughts to the important and timely seminar on business models in Islamic finance. I am 
sure that the morning session provoked many lively debates as the issues considered are of 
fundamental importance to the future of the Islamic financial industry. As a major centre of 
Islamic finance, Bahrain wishes to see the industry move from strength to strength. However, 
this means on occasion being willing to pose some challenging questions for the industry to 
answer. 
We are all aware of the great potential that exists in the Islamic finance field. Following the 
global financial crisis there has been a resurgence of interest in the Islamic finance model. 
Some consultants are predicting that the size of the industry, currently estimated at around 
one trillion US dollars, could double within a decade. These are exciting predictions, but like 
all predictions they need to be treated with a degree of caution. As the health warnings on 
investment products constantly remind us, past performance is not necessarily a guide for 
the future. As a result, projections of spectacular future growth of the industry which rely on 
extrapolating the growth trends of the last five or ten years may not be the best guide to the 
future.  The  industry  will  only  realise  the  predicted  growth  trends  if  it  can  properly  address 
some  fundamental  issues,  central  to  which  are  the  business  models  of  Islamic  financial 
institutions. 
The  rapid  growth  in  the  industry  in  the  last  decade  has  meant  that  few  Sharia-compliant 
financial institutions have been able to achieve significant economies of scale. Many remain 
comparatively small and focused on niche markets. The result is that we have an industry 
that  comprises  many  small  scale  firms  engaged  in  very  similar  activities  and  with 
comparatively high concentrations of risk. As I have said several times in the past, for the 
long-term health of the industry it is important to generate greater scale and diversity. 
Diversification of the industry needs to occur over several different dimensions. 
In the first place, diversification is needed of the industry’s exposure to particular economic 
and industry sectors, such as real estate. Many Islamic financial institutions have built up a 
comparatively high exposure to the real estate sector. In part, this is the consequence of the 
requirement  for  Sharia-compliant  institutions  to  have  a  real  asset  to  back  their  financial 
assets. Nonetheless, these exposures also have a downside, as the experience of the past 
few  years  has  reminded  us.  Like  conventional  financial  institutions,  some  Islamic  financial 
institutions have suffered losses resulting from their exposure to real estate markets around 
the world. Moreover, because they are frequently the direct owners and developers of real 
estate projects, Islamic financial institutions have been exposed to wider range of risks than 
conventional ones. 
As the IFSB argued in a recent paper, the events of the past few years should have given the 
industry a clear signal that it must reduce its reliance on real estate as an asset class. The 
requirement for a real asset to back financial assets can be met in many other ways than by 
financing  the  construction  of  office  buildings,  shopping  malls  or  luxury  apartments.  The 
industry should look instead at the scope for increasing the finance it provides for productive 
assets such as factories, ports, mines, and oil processing facilities. Financing these activities 
BIS Review 126/2010 
 1
may  appear  less  profitable  in  the  short-term,  but  may  be  a  better  proposition  on  a  risk-
adjusted basis. 
Diversification is also needed of product offerings that will allow Islamic financial institutions 
to serve their customers better and to generate more stable revenues. Surveys of the Islamic 
financial  industry  tend  to  show  that  firms  have  a  comparatively  narrow  range  of  financial 
products  to  offer  their  clients.  Developing  a  greater  product  range  will  not  only  benefit 
consumers. It will also create new sources of revenue that tend to be more stable than those 
generated by cyclical industries such as real estate. 
As I said at the beginning of my remarks, it is in the interests of all involved in the industry – 
regulators,  standard  setters  and  above  all  practitioners  –  to  ensure  that  it  rests  on  secure 
foundations. In other words, the industry must be prepared constantly to subject itself to the 
sort  of  intellectually  rigorous  analysis  that  has  been  the  hallmark  of  the  work  of  Professor 
Simon Archer whose contribution to the industry we celebrate this evening. 
Throughout  his  long  and  distinguished  involvement  with  the  Islamic  financial  industry 
Professor  Archer  has  assessed  its  prospects  both  sympathetically  and  honestly.  While 
aiming  to  encourage  the  growth  and  development  of  the  industry,  he  has  also  recognised 
that its long-term potential can only be realized if it rests on strong foundations. The long-run 
objective of a sound and stable industry should not be sacrificed to short-term gain. These 
sound principles are exemplified by the work that Professor Archer has done over the years, 
both with AAOIFI and with the IFSB. He has provided an example that everyone involved in 
the Islamic financial industry should seek to follow. I am sure you will join me in expressing 
our appreciation of the deep and lasting contribution that Professor Archer has made to the 
development of Islamic finance. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2010
