 Spencer Dale: 2010 – a progress report 
Speech by Mr Spencer Dale, Executive Director and Chief Economist of the Bank of England, 
at the Kent Business School 21st anniversary dinner, Canterbury, 1 December 2010. 
 I would like to thank Ryan Banerjee, Rohan Churm, and Geoff Coppins for their considerable help in preparing 
this  speech.  The  views  expressed  are  my  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  other  members  of  the 
Monetary Policy Committee. 
Introduction 
It is an honour to be invited here this evening to help you and the Business School celebrate 
its 21st anniversary. Birthdays are a natural time to pause and reflect – especially those that 
mark a coming of age. 
Reflecting  on  your  first  21  years,  much  has  changed  since  the  Business  School  was 
founded.  Some  of  you  may  remember  that  1989  was  the  year  in  which  Nigel  Lawson 
resigned as Chancellor and the Berlin Wall fell. You may remember less well that it was also 
the year that Kylie and Jason enjoyed four Number 1 hits and Coronation Street attracted its 
largest  ever  audience  to  watch  Alan  Bradley  meet  his  grisly  end  under  a  Blackpool  tram. 
How time flies. 
The  economy  has  also  had  its  fair  share  of  ups  and  downs  since  then.  After  the  1990s 
recession, we enjoyed 63 quarters of consecutive growth, withstanding en route the effects 
of Black Wednesday and the dotcom bubble. Inflation targeting was introduced, the Monetary 
Policy  Committee  created  and  we  benefitted  from  a  sustained  period  of  low  and  stable 
inflation.  But  as  you  know,  this  period  of  Great  Stability  came  to  an  abrupt  end  with  the 
largest  financial  crisis  for  at  least  a  generation.  Output  fell  like  a  stone  and  inflation  was 
buffeted by a series of price level shocks. 
I  want  to  continue  this  theme  of  reflection  in  my  comments  tonight.  However,  with  2010 
drawing to a close, I will restrict my observations to events over the past year – and what 
they may herald for the future – rather than your entire 21 years. A progress report for 2010. 
This has certainly been a busy year. The UK economy continued along the road to recovery. 
A new coalition Government was formed and set in train what is planned to be the largest 
fiscal consolidation of the post-war period. The Government also announced a major reform 
of  the  structure  of  financial  regulation,  assigning  considerable  new  responsibilities  to  the 
Bank  of  England.  These  events  have  taken  place  against  a  backdrop  of  strong  global 
recovery, but one in which some countries, most notably within the euro area, continue to 
face acute fiscal and banking pressures, and large imbalances between surplus and deficit 
countries persist across the globe. 
You will be relieved to hear that I do not intend to consider all of these developments tonight. 
Instead, my progress report will focus on two key issues. First, how much comfort should we 
take from the recovery seen so far and what factors are likely to determine its future vigour? 
And second, to what extent are the Bank’s planned new responsibilities for macroprudential 
policy likely to address the “missing instrument” problem exposed so painfully by the financial 
crisis? I will conclude with some reflections on monetary policy. 
The recovery so far 
There has been a strong start to this recovery. After four consecutive quarters of growth, the 
pace  of  the  recovery  to  date  compares  favourably  with  previous  episodes:  output  is 
BIS Review 161/2010 
 1
 estimated to have grown by 2.8% over the past year, quicker than at the same stage of either 
the 1980s or 1990s recoveries.  
Some  encouragement  can  also  be  taken  from  the  composition  of  growth.  Spending  by 
households  and  businesses  has  begun  to  pickup;  this  despite  strains  on  private  sector 
balance sheets, muted disposable income growth and an impaired banking system. Over the 
past  year,  this  increase  in  private  sector  spending  has  helped  offset  a  weaker  net  trade 
performance,  which  has  been  particularly  disappointing  given  the  early  and  substantial 
depreciation of sterling. 
However, it is too soon to say we are out of the woods. Economic recovery has to be judged 
in terms of the level of output, not the rate at which it is growing. It is the level of households’ 
incomes  that  determines  their  well-being.  And  it  is  the  level  of  economic  activity  which 
governs companies’ profitability and their viability. The fall in output during this recession was 
larger than that in either the 1980s or 1990s recession. One year of growth does not make a 
recovery. We need to see a sustained period of robust growth for the economy to function 
normally again.  
So  what  are  the  prospects  for  demand  and  output,  and  how  likely  are  we  to  achieve  this 
sustained period of growth? 
The  strength  of  the  recovery  over  the  next  few  years  will  depend  on  the  balance  of  the 
substantial headwinds and tailwinds buffeting our economy. Economic forecasting at the best 
of  times  feels  like  a  triumph  of  hope  over  experience.  That  is  especially  so  in  the  current 
environment in which the economy is subject to gale force winds blowing in both directions. 
But it is at least possible to identify some of the key factors that will determine the future pace 
of growth.  
Headwinds and tailwinds 
Consider first the main headwinds hampering growth. 
Most obvious is the fiscal consolidation now underway in the UK. Public sector spending, as 
a  share  of  nominal  GDP,  is  projected  to  fall  by  around  8  percentage  points  over  the  next 
5 years. 
My central  view is that the direct impact of this reduced spending, via the impact of lower 
government  procurement  and  smaller  transfer  payments,  is  unlikely  to  derail  the  recovery. 
The  spending  cuts  will  certainly  dampen  growth.  And  some  households  and  companies 
directly affected by the  cuts could suffer significant hardships. But the  substantial stimulus 
from  monetary  policy  and  the  lower  level  of  sterling  should  ensure  that  the  recovery 
continues. 
The impact of the fiscal consolidation may be partially mitigated if it causes businesses and 
households to become less uncertain about their prospects and so behave less cautiously. 
But the reverse is also possible. In that regard, it is perhaps notable that, following a brief 
revival, measures of consumer confidence have fallen back since the spring of this year. 
The  importance  of  Keynes’  animal  spirits  has  been  demonstrated  all  too  clearly  by  recent 
events. Although the recession was triggered by a financial crisis, the speed and severity of 
the  downturn  was  greatly  amplified  by  the  accompanying  collapse  in  confidence,  as 
companies and families pulled back on spending and increased savings. More recently, the 
pickup in private sector spending has occurred alongside a fall in the household saving ratio 
and a stabilisation in company saving.  
2 
 BIS Review 161/2010
 A recent survey carried out for the Bank provides some evidence on households’ attitudes 
towards the fiscal tightening.1 90% of survey respondents said that they thought the fiscal 
consolidation  would  have  some  impact  on  them.  Perhaps  surprisingly,  a  majority  of  these 
households said they had not yet taken any actions in response to the consolidation. But it’s 
clearly still early days in this process and there is a chance they will react more as the impact 
of the austerity measures increases. This is something that the MPC will continue to monitor 
carefully. 
A second headwind tempering the pace of progress is that UK banks are still not in a position 
in  which  they  can  lend  normally.  As  many  of  you  know  only  too  well  from  your  own 
experiences,  the  banking  crisis  led  to  a  marked  tightening  in  credit  conditions,  making  it 
difficult for businesses and households to borrow. 
UK banks have made significant strides over the past year in strengthening both their capital 
and  funding  positions.  However,  the  extent  to  which  that  has  led  to  increased  access  to 
credit appears to have varied across different sectors of our society. 
For  large  businesses,  conditions  do  appear  to  have  improved.  For  such  companies,  with 
strong cash flow and good credit ratings, the corporate bond markets have in recent months 
been  open  with  yields  close  to  historical  lows.  Furthermore,  the  Bank  of  England’s  Credit 
Conditions  Survey  indicates  that  the  availability  of  bank  credit  has  increased  and  spreads 
have fallen.2 This thawing in credit conditions for large firms is important since they account 
for the majority of investment in our economy.  
But for smaller companies, who are typically more dependent on bank finance, progress has 
been more glacial. Smaller businesses regularly tell our Agents that they continue to have 
difficulty in accessing affordable finance. And this is not really disputed by the major lenders, 
who  report  in  the  Bank’s  survey  of  credit  conditions  that  the  availability  of  credit  for  small 
firms has increased only slightly.  
The tightening in credit conditions contributed materially to the severity of the recession. But 
the extent to which continuing constraints on the supply of bank credit are likely to impede 
the recovery is less clear. 
On the one hand, banks still face significant challenges, especially in terms of the ease and 
cost at which they can refinance maturing funding. This is undoubtedly affecting the ability of 
some small firms to borrow at affordable rates. 
On the other hand, many companies started this recovery with increased levels of savings 
and so are in a position to finance increased investment if and when they wish to. And we 
have seen “creditless” recoveries in the past. For example, the corporate sector in aggregate 
repaid bank lending in each of the first three years of the 1990s recovery. 
I’m  hopeful  –  but  by  no  means  certain  –  that  strains  within  the  banking  system  will  exert 
increasingly less drag on the economy going forward. 
But  what  of  the  tailwinds  that  are  pushing  against  these  factors  and  ensuring  that  the 
burgeoning recovery continues? 
The most significant factor is the highly accommodative stance of monetary policy. As you 
know, Bank Rate remains at 0.5% and the stock of asset purchases – quantitative easing – 
                                                 
1   This is an annual survey conducted for the Bank by NMG Financial Services Consulting. This year’s survey 
was conducted between 24 and 30 September 2010 and covered almost 2000 households. Some results from 
this year’s survey featured in the November 2010 Inflation Report (pages 22–23). Full details of the survey will 
be made available in an article published in the 2010 Q4 Quarterly Bulletin on 13 December. 
2   Those developments are also consistent  with results from  the Deloitte  CFO surveys  –  the 2010 Q3 survey 
indicated  that  a  majority  described  credit  as  easily  available  for  the  first  time  since  the  survey  began  in 
mid-2007. 
BIS Review 161/2010 
 3
 has  been  maintained  at  £200  billion.  Although  monetary  policy  has  not  been  eased 
substantially further over the past year, the stance of policy remains highly stimulatory and 
continues to provide significant support to economic activity. 
The level of sterling following its substantial depreciation through 2007 and 2008 should also 
aid the recovery by encouraging a rebalancing of our economy towards external demand.  
However, at first blush, the support provided by the lower level of sterling over the past year 
looks  distinctly  underwhelming.  Yes,  the  most  recent  data  suggest  that  net  trade  made  a 
positive contribution to growth in the third quarter of this year and this is encouraging. But 
these early estimates are noisy and prone to revision. Stepping back, net trade has detracted 
from growth over the past year. And within that, the growth of exports has underperformed 
expectations, especially when judged against the acceleration in global demand. 
However, the story is somewhat different if we look at the performance of goods and services 
exports separately. 
The  lower  level  of  sterling  does  appear  to  have  supported  goods  exports,  which  have 
increased  by  well  over  10%  over  the  past  year.  Perhaps  more  tellingly,  the  increased 
competitiveness  of  our  goods  exports  has  succeeded  in arresting  the  persistent  decline  in 
our share of world export markets seen over the past 15 years or so. 
In  contrast,  exports  of  services  –  at  least  as  measured  –  have  fallen.  These  declines  are 
concentrated  in  exports  of  financial  and  business  services,  areas  in  which  the  UK  has 
particular  expertise.  It  would  not  be  surprising  in  the  current  environment  if  this  weakness 
partly  reflects  reduced  global  demand  for  these  types  of  services.  If  that  is  the  case,  our 
prospects for net trade will depend in part on the extent to which demand for financial and 
business services revives as the recovery in world demand continues and the functioning of 
the financial system gradually returns to normal.  
Where does all this leave us? 
Judging the net impact of these opposing forces on the growth outlook is very difficult. The 
pattern of growth from quarter to quarter is quite likely to be choppy. But smoothing through 
this, my central view is that over the next few years the economy is likely to grow at rates 
around or a little above its historical average, supported by monetary policy and the lower 
level of sterling. This is similar to the outlook in the November Inflation Report. But to repeat 
the point I made earlier: the depth of the recession means that output and employment are 
likely to remain below what would feel like normal levels for many companies and families for 
some  considerable  time.  I  will  return  to  the  monetary  policy  implications  of  this  growth 
outlook in a while. 
The missing instrument problem 
But before doing so, I want to report on the progress that has been made in strengthening 
the  macroeconomic  policy  framework  in  the  UK  in  response  to  some  of  the  fault  lines 
exposed by the financial crisis. 
Much analysis and soul searching has been conducted in the aftermath of the crisis, and the 
lessons and implications for different aspects of economic, financial and other areas of public 
policy are wide ranging. 
In  terms  of  the  lessons  to  be  learnt  for  monetary  policy,  many  commentators  and 
policymakers  –  myself  included  –  told  a  variant  of  what  could  be  termed  the  missing 
instrument problem.3 This analysis argues that the case for an inflation targeting framework 
remains  sound:  the  focus  on  a  clear  numerical  target  for  monetary  policy  has  served  our 
                                                 
3   Dale (2009). 
4 
 BIS Review 161/2010
 economy well, and low and stable inflation remains a cornerstone of our long-term prosperity. 
However,  it  acknowledges  that  control  of  short-term  interest  rates  –  the  main  tool  of 
monetary policy – is a relatively blunt instrument best deployed maintaining a broad balance 
between nominal demand and supply. In particular, movements in short-term interest rates 
are  not  well  suited  to  managing  risks  from  credit  cycles  and  other  imbalances  within  the 
financial  sector.  As  such,  a  key  lesson  from  the  financial  crisis  is  the  need  to  expand  the 
range  of  instruments  available  to  policymakers,  so  they  are  better  equipped  to  ensure  the 
resilience of the financial system. 
This missing instrument problem provides the backdrop to the Government’s announcement 
earlier this year that it intends to create a new policy committee in the Bank – the Financial 
Policy Committee – which will have responsibility for conducting macroprudential policy. In 
2010, quantitative easing was entered into the Oxford Dictionary of English, along with chillax 
and defriend (don’t ask!). I predict that 2011 may be the year of macroprudential policy. 
The legislation determining the precise tools and objectives of macroprudential policy is still 
to  be  enacted.  But  as  the  Governor  recently  emphasised,  the  over-riding  objective  is  to 
ensure  the  resilience  and  stability  of  the  banking  system.4  If  successful,  macroprudential 
policy will represent a significant advance. As we have seen repeatedly through history and 
across  countries,  banking  crises  come  hand-in-hand  with  deep  and  costly  recessions. 
Promoting the resilience and smooth functioning of the financial and banking system in bad 
times as well as good would contribute greatly to our future economic stability. 
But it would be wrong to conclude from this that macroprudential policy is likely to solve the 
missing instrument problem entirely. That is for at least three reasons. 
First,  macroprudential  policy  is  not  the  instrument  that  will  solve  the  problem  of  global 
imbalances.  Charlie  Bean  –  the  Bank’s  Deputy  Governor  –  likened  the  various  factors 
contributing to the financial crisis to a murder in an Agatha Christie novel in which everyone 
had a hand in it.5 But a central character in almost any telling of the financial crisis story are 
the huge capital flows associated with the imbalances between surplus and deficit countries. 
These  capital  flows  affected  the  price  of  financial  assets  and  distorted  the  incentives  of 
borrowers  and  creditors.  These  global  imbalances  remain  and  are  forecast  to  get  bigger.6 
Macroprudential  policy  should  mean  that  the  tensions  associated  with  these  imbalances 
manifest  themselves  in  different  ways,  in  particular  in  ways  that  are  less  damaging  to  the 
stability  of  the  banking  system.  But  it  does  not  address  the  underlying  problem.  Solving 
global imbalances requires international coordination and we are still missing the instruments 
that will truly deliver that. 
Second,  it  is  unlikely,  at  least  as  currently  conceived,  that  macroprudential  policy  will  be 
designed  to  prevent  equity-financed  bubbles.  These  types  of  bubbles  have  a  long  and 
colourful history: from the 18th century South Sea bubble, the 19th century railway mania to 
the  more  recent  20th  century  dotcom  bubble.  Importantly,  equity-financed  bubbles  are  not 
associated  with  credit  cycles  and  increased  banking  exposures  and  so  are  unlikely  to 
threaten financial stability, which is the focus of macroprudential policy.7 Moreover, because 
the effects of these types of bubbles are not amplified by financial instability, they typically 
have a smaller impact on output.8 But that does not mean that equity-financed booms and 
busts  cannot  have  sizeable  macroeconomic  consequences  via  other  channels,  such  as 
misallocating  resources,  wealth  effects  and  their  impact  on  confidence.  In  the  5  years 
                                                 
4   King (2010). See also Tucker (2009) and Haldane (2009). 
5   Bean (2010). 
6  
IMF (2010). 
7   See Tucker (2009). 
8   See Mishkin (2008). 
BIS Review 161/2010 
 5
 following  the  dotcom  bust,  GDP  growth  in  the  US  averaged  almost  two  percentage  points 
lower than in the preceding 5 years; this despite a very aggressive easing in monetary policy.  
Third, as Claudio Borio of the Bank for International Settlements and others have stressed, 
actions necessary to preserve the resilience of the banking system may not be sufficient to 
prevent credit cycles altogether.9 A much-studied example of this comes from Spain. Since 
2000, Spain has had a system of dynamic provisioning whereby banks had to put aside more 
capital as they increased lending. This increased the resilience of the Spanish banks, but it 
did not prevent a large run-up and subsequent crash in house prices in the Spanish property 
market. If – and it is a big if – macroprudential policy could be used to prevent such credit 
cycles it could potentially have even greater benefits for our economy. But we need to be 
careful  not  to  expect  too  much  from  this  new  set  of  policy  instruments,  especially  at  the 
outset  as  the  newly  formed  Financial  Policy  Committee  learns  about  the  use  and 
effectiveness  of its  policy  tools. Just  as  monetary  policy  does  not  attempt  to  eradicate  the 
business  cycle,  so  macroprudential  policy  is  unlikely  to  be  able  to  eradicate  fully  credit 
cycles. 
The  creation  of  the  Financial  Policy  Committee  with  the  responsibility  for  conducting 
macroprudential policy represents a major advance in responding to the missing instrument 
problem.  Ensuring  the  stability  of  our  banking  system  will  contribute  greatly  to  our  future 
prosperity. But macroprudential policy is not –  nor is it intended to be  – the solution to all 
problems associated with financial markets and the international monetary system. Unless or 
until  effective  instruments  can  be  found  to  manage  these  other  issues,  vulnerabilities  will 
remain, to which monetary policy will need to stay vigilant.  
Monetary policy 
So what does all this imply for monetary policy? 
The job of the Monetary Policy Committee is to hit the 2% inflation target. Judged against 
that objective, we might not appear to have done a very good job recently. CPI Inflation stood 
at  3.2%  in  October.  Over  the  past  4  years,  inflation  has  been  above  target  for  39  of  the 
48 months  and  has  averaged  almost  3%.  And  inflation  is  likely  to  remain  above  target 
throughout 2011, elevated by the increase in VAT to 20% at the beginning of next year. 
But despite inflation being above target, monetary policy remains highly stimulatory. Interest 
rates  are  close  to  zero  and  we’ve  injected  a  huge  sum  of  money  into  the  economy  via 
quantitative easing. This uncomfortable juxtaposition of high inflation and loose policy has led 
some people to put two and two together and make five. The MPC has gone soft on inflation, 
they claim. It has taken its eye off the ball. 
I understand why some people think this. But it is simply not true. 
The  deep  recession  that  we  have  all  just  endured  has  led  to  a  degree  of  spare  capacity 
opening  up  in  our  economy.  That’s  evident  in  the  increase  in  unemployment  we  have 
suffered. It’s also evident in the relatively low levels of productivity within firms. There is a 
very  real  question  as  to  exactly  how  much  spare  capacity  there  is  and  what  impact  that’s 
likely to have on costs and prices. Even so, it seems clear to me that there is some degree of 
spare capacity and that this is likely to damp inflationary pressures. This is most apparent in 
the labour market, where annual private sector earnings growth has averaged below 1½% 
since the start of the recession, around a third of its rate in the preceding five years. 
But this downward drag on headline inflation has been offset by a sequence of large shocks 
– to energy and other commodity prices, to VAT, and to the value of sterling – which have 
                                                 
9   Borio (2010). 
6 
 BIS Review 161/2010
 increased the level of prices. Any of you that have read the Bank’s Inflation Report or heard 
other MPC members speak will know that we have made this point repeatedly over the past 
few  years.  My  concern  is  that  although  many  people  understand  the  basic  argument,  it  is 
easy to forget the sheer size of the effects.  
Let me give you some idea of the magnitudes involved. CPI inflation averaged 3.1% in Q3. 
Some rough back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that of that 3.1%, increases in energy 
prices may have contributed between 0–0.5% points, the increase in VAT earlier this year 
0.5–1%  points  and  the  increase  in  import  prices  associated  with  sterling’s  depreciation 
around 1–2% points.  
Now these estimates come with two very significant health warnings. First, they are highly 
uncertain  and  other  plausible  assumptions  would  give  different  ranges.  Second,  it  is  not 
possible simply to sum these different impacts together to calculate how much lower inflation 
would have been in the absence of these factors. If these events had not happened, many 
other aspects of the economy would have been different. But the scale of these effects does 
suggest  that,  had  these  shocks  to  the  price  level  not  occurred,  inflation  would  have  been 
substantially lower and almost certainly below target.  
But who cares you may say. Inflation is inflation. Your job is to hit the inflation target based 
on the factors affecting inflation. Not based on what would have happened to inflation had it 
not been affected by a series of unfortunate events. 
That  is  a  perfectly  fair  argument.  The  Committee’s  mandate,  as  given  to  us  by  the 
Government, is an inflation target of 2% at all times. The onus is on us to explain why, in the 
face of persistently above target inflation, we are not tightening policy. 
My current approach to policy is based on the judgement that as long as these price level 
shocks aren’t repeated, and aren’t reflected in medium-term inflation expectations or wage 
setting, they are unlikely to have implications for inflation in the medium term. They lead to 
an  increase  in  the  level  of  prices,  not  to  a  persistent  increase  in  inflation.  If  a  significant 
degree of spare capacity persists in the medium term, inflation is likely to fall below target. 
The current focus of monetary policy is on providing the stimulus necessary to support the 
recovery so the degree of spare capacity in our economy is gradually reduced. That is critical 
if we are to hit the inflation target in the medium term.  
To have tried to have used monetary policy to offset the impact of these price level shocks 
on headline inflation would have required us to have tightened monetary policy in the depths 
of the recession. That would have led to an even bigger fall in output, an even bigger rise in 
unemployment, and an even bigger risk of materially undershooting the inflation target in the 
medium term.  
But there are clearly significant risks to this strategy of looking through the temporary impact 
of  price  level  shocks  on  inflation.  Most  importantly,  if  the  strategy  causes  companies  and 
households  to  question  the  MPC’s  competence  or  its  commitment  to  maintaining  low 
inflation, and this starts to be reflected in wage and price setting. If that were to happen, we 
would  be  forced  to  tighten  policy,  potentially  aggressively  so  with  all  the  output  costs  that 
would entail, in order to avoid a return to the bad old days of the 1970s and 80s with truly 
high and volatile inflation. My single most important message to you this evening is that the 
MPC remains as hard-nosed as ever in its determination to hit the inflation target. That is the 
remit given to us by Government, and for which we are accountable to Parliament and the 
public. 
To sum up my progress report for 2010: it has been a busy year; substantial progress has 
been made, both in terms of starting along the road to economic recovery and responding to 
some  of  the  fault  lines  exposed  by  the  financial  crisis;  but  there  is  still  a  long  way  to  go. 
There will be as much to do in your 22nd year as there was in your 21st. Happy birthday. 
BIS Review 161/2010 
 7
 References 
Bean,  C.  (2009),  “The  Great  Moderation,  the  Great  Panic  and  the  Great  Contraction” 
Schumpeter  Lecture  at  the  Annual  Congress  of  the  European  Economic  Association  in 
Barcelona on 25 August 2009, available at:  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech399.pdf  
Borio, C. (2010), “Implementing a macroprudential framework: blending boldness and realism” 
http://www.bis.org/repofficepubl/hkimr201007.12c.htm 
Dale, S. (2009), “Inflation Targeting: Learning the Lessons from the Financial Crisis”, Speech 
at  the  Society  of  Business  Economists’  Annual  Conference,  London  on  23  June  2009, 
available at: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech395.pdf  
Haldane, A. (2009), “Rethinking the Financial Network”, Speech delivered at the Financial 
Student Association in Amsterdam on 28 April 2009, available at:  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech386.pdf  
IMF  (2010),  “G-20  Mutual  Assessment  Process  –  IMF  Staff  Assessment  of  G-20  Policies” 
http://www.imf.org/external/np/g20/pdf/111210.pdf 
King, M. (2010), “Banking: From Bagehot to Basel, and back again”, Speech given at the 
Second  Bagehot  Lecture  Buttonwood  Gathering,  New  York  City  on  25  October  2010, 
available at: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech455.pdf  
Mishkin, F. (2008), “How Should We Respond to Asset Price Bubbles?” 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/mishkin20080515a.htm 
Tucker, P. (2009), “The Debate on Financial System Resilience: Macroprudential Instruments” 
At Barclays Annual Lecture in London on 22 October 2009, available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech407.pdf 
8 
 BIS Review 161/2010
