Jürgen Stark: In search of a robust monetary policy framework 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Jürgen  Stark,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the 6th ECB Central Banking Conference “Approaches to monetary policy 
revisited – lessons from the crisis”, Frankfurt am Main, 19 November 2010. 
 I  am  very  pleased1  to  open  the  second  day  of  the  ECB  Central  Banking  Conference.  We 
witnessed very interesting presentations and discussions yesterday, and today’s programme 
promises to be no less stimulating. 
In my remarks I would like to offer some reflections on what I consider to be the desirable 
features of a robust monetary policy framework. Only three years ago, it was widely believed 
that this issue had been settled once and for all. At that time, several studies outlined the 
then prevailing consensus view on monetary policy.2 
This view emphasised, among other things:  
 
 
 
central bank independence;  
price stability as the primary objective of central banks; and 
the  importance  of  transparent  communication  for  the  solid  anchoring  of  long-term 
inflation expectations.  
But the consensus also emphasised four elements to which the ECB has never subscribed, 
namely:  
 
 
the targeting of inflation at a relatively short and fixed horizon;  
the  assignment  of  a  primary  role  to  monetary  policy  in  the  management  of 
aggregate demand in the short term; 
the systematic disregard of money and credit indicators in the conduct of monetary 
policy; and  
the asymmetric reaction to asset price bubbles as opposed to busts; the latter often 
referred  to  as  the  “cleaning-up  strategy”  in  the  context  of  the  “Jackson  Hole 
consensus”. 
  This  framework  has  been  severely  tested  during  the  financial  crisis  and  perhaps,  to  some 
extent, damaged. Moreover, the crisis has exposed the fact that, on some crucial questions, 
the consensus view, as expressed in these studies, is in need of revision.  
Certainly, some aspects of the framework will, in my view, have to survive the crisis. The first 
aspect  is  central  bank  independence  and,  at  least  in  the  EU  context,  the  prohibition  of 
government  debt  monetisation.  The  second  aspect  is  the  centrality  of  price  stability  for 
monetary policy. And the third aspect is the importance of transparent communication. The 
crisis  has  not  at  all  discredited  these  three  principles.  Together  they  have  formed,  and  I 
believe  will  continue  to  form,  the  basis  for  central  banks’  credibility  and  efficiency  in 
contributing to the economic welfare of nations. 
                                                 
1  
I am grateful for support and comments by Claus Brand, Francesco Drudi, Philippine Cour-Thimann, Dieter 
Gerdesmeier, Christophe Kamps, Wolfgang Schill, Wolfgang Modery, Philippe Moutot, Huw Pill, and Massimo 
Rostagno. 
2   See e.g. Goodfriend (2007), Mishkin (2007) and Woodford (2008). 
BIS Review 155/2010 
 1
International convergence on these principles has, however, been a slow process. After the 
collapse of the Bretton Woods system there was a long period of confusion created by the 
loss of a nominal anchor, which, during the system’s good times, had been provided by the 
US  commitment  to  peg  its  currency  to  the  price  of  gold.  In  the  1970s  even  some  central 
bankers were sceptical that monetary policy alone could control inflation.3 Failed attempts to 
fine-tune  the  economy  and  the  associated  stop-and-go  policies  resulted  in  stagflation  in  a 
vast portion of the industrialised world. Drawing lessons from this experience, and inspired 
by  monetarist  views  that  had  successfully  influenced  monetary  policy  in  Germany  and 
Switzerland,  central  banks  in  the  1980s  gained  confidence  in  their  ability  to  bring  inflation 
down to levels consistent with price stability at a modest cost to the economy at large. 
The 1990s were characterised by the development of monetary policy frameworks capable of 
perpetuating  the  achieved  degree  of  price  stability.  In  my  view,  two  major  initiatives  stand 
out:  first,  the  development  of  inflation  targeting.  Inflation  targeting  developed  in  many 
countries  when  other  strategies  failed  to  bring  about  the  desired  level  of  price  and 
macroeconomic stability. Some countries turned to inflation targeting because the instability 
of  money  demand  in  the  face  of  ongoing  financial  innovation  appeared  to  render  the 
application  of  textbook-type  versions  of  monetary  targeting  unappealing.  Even  so,  inflation 
targeting  was  heavily  influenced  by  the  monetarist  view  that  monetary  policy  can  control 
inflation. 
The  second  development  was  the  establishment  of  the  ECB,  with  its  two-pillar  monetary 
policy  strategy.  Inflation  targeting  and  the  ECB’s  strategy  share  important  features:  the 
insistence on central bank independence, the priority assigned to the price stability objective, 
and the importance of transparent communication. These three principles are fundamental to 
sound monetary policy.  
Nevertheless,  for  various  reasons,  the  ECB  does  not  view  itself  as  an  inflation-targeting 
central bank, at least not in the way inflation targeting is commonly described. One reason 
relates to our definition of price stability and our specification of the policy horizon. Another 
reason relates to the special role our monetary policy strategy assigns to money and credit. 
Both aspects differ markedly from textbook inflation targeting. But I should also add that the 
ECB’s monetary pillar builds on the tradition developed by the most successful central banks 
prior  to  the  introduction  of  the  euro  –  a  tradition  which  precedes  the  advent  of  inflation 
targeting, in some cases by decades.  
Let  me  adopt  a  stylised  incarnation  of  a  flexible  inflation-targeting  regime,  a  description 
which, nonetheless, follows closely early expositions in the literature. Inflation targeting has 
evolved, as we all know, both in theoretical work and in the practice of the inflation-targeting 
central banks. However, it might still be useful to identify elements in the regime – as it was 
originally  conceived  –  which  have  influenced  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  the  years 
immediately prior to the crisis more profoundly than was perhaps ideal.  
I will concentrate on two specific features, the implied short-termism in terms of excessive 
focus on aggregate demand management, on the one hand, and the systematic disregard of 
monetary  phenomena,  on  the  other,  which  in  my  view  are  essential  ingredients  for 
understanding the genesis of the crisis. 
A key lesson from the current crisis is that, going forward, any monetary policy framework 
that lays claim to being “robust” will have to satisfy the following two requirements – beyond 
the uncontroversial principles I mentioned earlier: first, the monetary policy strategy needs to 
be  geared  towards  the  medium  term  to  resist  the  fine-tuning  temptation;  and  second,  the 
strategy needs to assign a prominent role to developments in money and credit which – as 
                                                 
3  See Burns (1979). As Chairman of the Federal Reserve, Burns had long lamented the difficulty for a central 
bank to control inflation. 
2 
 BIS Review 155/2010
the  crisis  has  shown  convincingly  –  provide  reliable  signals  of  risks  to  long-term  price 
stability, financial stability and overall macroeconomic stability.  
In my view, these two requirements are natural complements. The key role of money, both 
before and during the crisis, has been to maintain a focus on developments in nominal trends 
at lower frequencies. 
The case for monetary policy strategies oriented towards the medium term 
In this context let me elaborate the case for monetary policy strategies oriented towards the 
medium term. You may ask “but isn’t this exactly what central banks around the world have 
been pursuing for the past two decades?” Well, perhaps or perhaps not. Five years ago, at 
the  Jackson  Hole  conference,  for  example,  former  Fed  Vice  Chairman  Alan  Blinder 
described  US  monetary  policy  since  the  late  1980s  in  terms  of  the  “resurrection  of  fine-
tuning”.4  Moreover,  flexible  inflation  targeting,  with  its  added  focus  on  output  stabilisation 
beyond inflation stabilisation is at risk of succumbing to the temptation of fine-tuning. 
An element of the so-called “Jackson Hole consensus” was that monetary policy should play 
a key role in the management of aggregate demand in the short term, whereas fiscal policy 
was viewed as an inappropriate instrument, mainly because of decision and implementation 
lags  embedded  in  the  policy  process.  I  would  argue  that  we  should  not  overestimate  the 
potency of either policy. Before the crisis there was a common misperception that monetary 
policy  could  focus  more  on  demand  management  because  inflation  was  durably  under 
control. Proponents of this view found apparent vindication in the phenomenon of the “great 
moderation” observed in the 20 years before the crisis. However, there were clear warnings 
that the short-term orientation could have negative side effects in the medium to long term.5 
As  we  now  know,  the  side  effects  manifested  themselves  in  a  spectacular  build-up  of 
monetary and financial imbalances. The sudden unwinding of these imbalances marked the 
beginning of the current crisis. Although monetary policy frameworks oriented more towards 
the  medium  term  could  probably  not  have  completely  prevented  the  current  crisis,  I  am 
convinced that they would have helped to make it less disruptive. 
The then dominant theoretical framework suggested otherwise. The New Keynesian model 
generated policy prescriptions which assigned the central bank the task of stabilising inflation 
and output developments at short horizons and in quite precise terms.  
These  prescriptions  have  shaped  the  inflation-targeting  policy  advice  to  a  non-negligible 
extent.  Let  me  emphasise,  though,  that  many  inflation-targeting  central  banks  retain  a 
considerable degree of flexibility when putting this advice into practice – although in a very 
different  way  from  the  meaning  the  term  “flexibility”  has  received  in  theoretical  work.  I  will 
return to this point shortly. 
Simplifying, the inflation-targeting policy advice can be articulated in three main precepts:  
 
First,  look  at  inflation forecasts  and  output  gap  forecasts  as  summary  statistics  of 
the state of the economy.  
Second, rely on your best model of the economy, even if it does not integrate or just 
assigns a trivial role to a host of variables, particularly money and credit, which are 
assumed to adjust to the state of the economy.  
Third, follow the best policy implied by the model and set the policy instrument so 
that inflation forecasts – whatever the nature of the shocks that might have caused 
them – are stabilised, and output volatility is minimised, at a pre-set horizon. 
                                                   
4   See Blinder and Reis (2005). 
5   See e.g. Rajan (2005). 
BIS Review 155/2010 
 3
Now,  it  is  easy  to  imagine  economic  conditions  in  which  these  prescriptions  induce 
destabilising behaviour on the side of monetary policy, which is the exact opposite of what 
monetary policy should do.  
Limiting  the  information  set  to  inflation  forecasts  and  output  gap  forecasts  can  be  highly 
misleading. One of the reasons for this has been known for a long time: output gaps cannot 
be observed in real time. An imperfectly understood concept – which, in addition, is statistically 
very  imprecisely  measured  and  subject  to  frequent  revisions – is  not  a  safe  indicator  to 
choose as a guide for policy. Indeed, the great policy failures of the 1970s have been traced 
to policy-makers’ exaggerated real-time measures of economic slack.6 
Another reason which argues against limiting the policy-makers’ information set is that the 
same  inflation  forecast  can  result  from  very  different  combinations  of  economic  shocks.  In 
other words, inflation forecasts are not summary statistics of the state of the economy: you 
have  to  look  at  the  underlying  shocks  in  order  to  interpret  inflation.  This  is  far  less 
appreciated, but it is one of the economic foundations of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. 
A  fundamental  principle  of  our  strategy  is  that  different  underlying  shocks  –  although 
potentially leading to the same inflation forecast – can have vastly different implications for 
policy. Failing to recognise that a prudent policy stance is always conditional on the shocks 
that  hit  the  economy,  and  that  accordingly  the  policy-relevant  horizon  varies  with  those 
shocks,  would  not  comply  with  the  requirements  of  a  medium-term  orientation  and,  in 
addition, would be extremely hazardous. 
Let me give you an example. Think of a benign disinflation caused by positive supply-side 
shocks. Positive supply-side shocks tend to produce lower inflation and high output growth at 
the  same  time.  The  attempt  to  stabilise  inflation  at  a  certain  horizon  –  and  thus  resist 
disinflation  –  can,  in  those  circumstances,  introduce  pro-cyclicality  in  monetary  policy.  A 
central bank that is instructed to stabilise inflation at a pre-set horizon in those circumstances 
can  well  end  up  providing  too  much  accommodation,  precisely  at  a  time  when  output  and 
incomes are growing robustly and asset markets are most prone to exuberance. Think of the 
protracted  period  of  productivity  growth  and  negative  price  surprises  associated  with 
technological innovation and globalisation that we saw over the second half of the 1990s. If 
you combine that scenario with systematic resistance to disinflation, and systematic neglect 
of monetary phenomena, you can lay the ground for financial instability down the road.  
As  I  said,  central  banks  describing  themselves  as  inflation  targeters  have  realised  that,  in 
practice,  one  needs  to  go  beyond  the  standard  inflation-targeting  policy  advice  emanating 
from the New-Keynesian framework. 
Referring back to my example, my feeling is that the central bank community is increasingly 
sharing the view that – in the face of positive supply-side shocks – one should accept in the 
short  run  inflation  somewhat  lower  than  the  inflation  objective  so  as  to  avoid  the  risks 
involved in potentially large deviations from target at longer horizons.7 
This view is perfectly consistent with the ECB’s view of the medium term, also in the sense of 
not trying to manage aggregate demand. It points to the advantages of limiting the central 
bank’s  mandate  to  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  without  any 
reference to aggregate demand management. However, it immediately raises the question of 
how  to  enshrine  this  view  into  a  monetary  policy  strategy.  For  inflation-targeting  central 
banks, embedding this view appears to be achieved by extending the forecast horizon and 
by  applying  judgement.  In  contrast,  the  ECB’s  monetary  analysis  can  be  seen  as  a 
formalisation of the view that the policy horizon should be commensurate with the nature and 
size of shocks, rather than being determined by a particular set of inflation forecasts. 
                                                 
6   See Orphanides (2002). 
7   See e.g. King (2004), p. 15. 
4 
 BIS Review 155/2010
This  leads  me  to  my  second  topic,  the  case  for  correcting  the  systematic  disregard  of 
monetary phenomena in the consensus framework. 
The case for correcting the systematic disregard of monetary phenomena  
As  I  have  stressed  before,  in  my  view,  monetary  policy  should  avoid  any  kind  of  short-
termism. The necessary medium-term orientation of monetary policy calls for the use of tools 
and indicators that have a comparative advantage over such a horizon. At the same time, it 
is an undisputed fact in academic and central banking circles that prolonged periods of high 
inflation are associated with high money growth. On both theoretical and empirical grounds, 
the  ultimately  monetary  nature  of  inflation  cannot  be  challenged.  While  other  factors  can 
influence  price  developments  at  shorter  horizons,  this  does  not  call  into  question  the 
underlying  long-term  relationship  between  money  and  prices.8  Furthermore,  the  empirical 
evidence clearly points to monetary trends leading inflationary trends, thus giving support for 
a  monetary  analysis  in  a  forward-looking  monetary  policy.  The  analysis  of  monetary 
aggregates allows the ECB to identify the longer-term and more persistent trends in inflation. 
This is the main reason for the monetary pillar in our monetary policy framework. 
The  monetary  pillar  should  not  be  confused  with  a  “financial  stability  pillar”.  Monetary 
analysis  is  not  conducted  with  the  principal  goal  of  detecting  financial  imbalances.  It 
ultimately rests on the quantity-theoretic notion of there being a reliable link between money 
and price developments. Exploring the link between money and asset prices should be seen 
as a complementary way of better understanding the role of money.  
A  number  of  recent  studies  have  demonstrated,  in  a  quite  impressive  way,  that  monetary 
developments  –  especially  when  seen  in  conjunction  with  credit  developments  –  can  also 
alert policy-makers to unwarranted financial developments and imbalances. Needless to say, 
the financial crisis we have experienced has, in my view, clearly demonstrated the need for 
policy-makers to have such reliable early warning signals at their disposal. 
While some parts of the academic literature have long held the view that identifying a bubble 
in real time is an impossible task, the academic literature on early warning indicator models 
has made significant progress over the past ten years. Research carried out within the BIS 
and the ECB have illustrated that – among other variables, such as price-earnings ratios or 
price-dividend ratios – simple deviations of money and credit aggregates from a trend that 
exceed a given threshold are among the few early indicators for (potentially costly) boom and 
bust periods.9 And one key property that strikes me as being of particular interest for policy-
makers is the fact that these warning signals emerge well before the alarm bells of standard 
conjunctural analysis start ringing. 
The  financial  crisis  and  its  subsequent  shockwaves  have  also  led  to  recommendations  for 
greater importance to be placed on an approach of “leaning against the wind”. According to 
this  approach,  monetary  policy  should  be  conducted  in  a  “symmetric”  manner  over  the 
financial cycle. More precisely, monetary policy should be more accommodative in times of 
falling asset prices, but less accommodative during a financial market boom. For instance, 
the central bank should conduct a slightly tighter monetary policy than warranted by its price 
stability objective, when the build-up of a potentially detrimental asset price boom has been 
identified.  In  so  doing,  the  central  bank  would  better  ensure  price  stability  over  extended 
horizons and – at the same time – contain the future growth of the bubble. Such an approach 
can be compared to “buying insurance” against the risk of a harmful asset boom-bust cycle, 
with its potential costs in terms of macroeconomic and financial stability.  
                                                 
8   See Lucas (1972, 1996) or McCandless and Weber (1995). 
9   For a number of illustrative examples see, for instance, ECB (2010a). 
BIS Review 155/2010 
 5
if 
the  asset  price  valuation 
the  economy  unnecessarily 
Traditionally, however, there has been a great deal of scepticism about “leaning against the 
wind”  for  at  least  four  reasons.10  First,  it  has  been  argued  that  it  is  not  evident  that  asset 
price boom-bust cycles are necessarily a bad thing for real long-term growth in all countries. 
The  benefits  from  the  realisation  of  additional  investment  projects  could,  on  average, 
outweigh the costs incurred during the bust phases.  
Second, as I have already mentioned, it is considered very difficult to identify an asset price 
bubble in real time. In particular, a tight policy response to asset price increases may end up 
destabilising 
is  driven  by 
fundamentals.  
Third, it has been claimed that the policy interest rate is “too blunt a tool” to contain potential 
bubbles.  Raising  policy  rates  will  depress  the  prices  of  many  assets  –  including  those  not 
booming – as well as the real economy and consumer prices.  
Furthermore,  in  times  of  market  euphoria,  the  policy  rate  might  have  to  be  raised  quite 
significantly  in  order  to  have  a  measurable  effect  on  booming  asset  prices.  When  taken 
seriously, these considerations lead to doubts about the effectiveness and efficiency of an 
active “leaning against the wind” approach.  
A fourth argument basically refers to cost-benefit considerations. In essence, the argument 
postulates  that  the  costs  of  “cleaning  up  afterwards”  (namely  by  loosening  the  monetary 
policy stance after the bust) are smaller than the “collateral damage” of a leaning against the 
wind  approach  pursued  during  the  boom.  These  considerations  describe  the  so-called 
“cleaning-up strategy” I mentioned earlier.  
In essence, these arguments all reflect valid concerns and cannot be easily dismissed. More 
recently,  however,  a  number  of  arguments  have  given  reason  for  a  tempering  of  the 
concerns  I  have  just  expressed  and  have  lent  support  to  a  “leaning  against  the  wind” 
approach to asset price bubbles.  
First of all, with regard to the welfare implications of “leaning against the wind”, the analysis 
of the costs of boom/bust cycles in asset prices in developed economies has been deepened 
and refined. Existing theoretical models use fairly specific assumptions to allow for bubbles in 
general equilibrium, and tend to neglect important aspects which make bubbles costly in the 
real  world.  Admittedly,  not  all  boom/bust  cycles  are  detrimental  and  have  significant  real 
effects. This is also one of the reasons why the mechanical targeting of asset prices is not a 
sensible option for monetary policy. However, the experience of the recent financial crisis –
 which has been accompanied by sharp declines in global economic activity and increasing 
unemployment in advanced economies – is a vivid reminder that there are boom/bust cycles 
which  have  the  potential  to  trigger  systemic  crises  and  thus  constitute  a  serious  threat  to 
world economic growth. 
Furthermore, as regards the scepticism on the effectiveness of monetary policy in containing 
asset  price  bubbles,  recent  research  has  detected  some  additional  monetary  policy 
transmission  channels  that,  in  essence,  relate  to  the  risk-taking  behaviour  of  banks,  the 
signalling effects of monetary policy and the breaking of herding behaviour. Taken together, 
the  results  then  point  towards  the  fact  that  each  of  these  channels  can  reasonably  be 
expected  to  amplify  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  during  boom  periods.  For  instance,  the 
“risk-taking” channel suggests that banks’ attitudes towards risk are strongly correlated with 
the  monetary  policy  stance.  In  the  presence  of  very  considerable  intra-financial  sector 
leverage, even relatively modest increases in policy rates can lead to significant changes in 
credit conditions and market dynamics, to the extent that they alter financial institutions’ risk 
tolerance.  Similarly,  mechanisms  that  operate  through  the  signalling  effects  of  monetary 
policy or the role potentially played by central banks in discouraging herding behaviour by 
                                                
 
10   For a more detailed discussion, see Papademos and Stark (2010), especially Chapter 6. 
6 
 BIS Review 155/2010
investors can result in policy rate changes exerting more pronounced effects on asset prices 
than was typically thought to be the case in the past.  
Regarding  the  appropriate  policy  reaction  to  the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances,  there 
seems  to  be  broad  agreement  that  monetary  policy  would  hardly  be  the  first  best  line  of 
defence against, for example, systemic risk associated with asset markets, let alone asset 
price bubbles detected in specific market segments. This task would rather fall to regulatory 
and  supervisory  policies.  But  if  bubble-like  behaviour  becomes  more  widespread  and 
reflected  in  imbalances  in  money  and  credit  developments,  it  becomes  a  concern  for 
monetary policy too.  
If the past is of any guidance for the future, monetary policy needs to support regulatory and 
supervisory policies on two accounts. First, by making sure that the very short-term, risk-free 
price of credit – which the central bank controls – does not become a pro-cyclical source of 
volatility.  And  second,  by  intervening  in  a  timely  manner,  both  before  asset  price  booms 
develop  and  when  the  bust  of  a  bubble  impacts  the  economy.  Indeed,  regulatory  and 
supervisory  policies  lag  behind  innovation-driven  financial  market  developments,  and 
sometimes  they  tend  to  be  implemented  too  cautiously  or  too  slowly.  In  this  context,  it  is 
worth keeping in mind that asset prices by no means constitute the end point of the monetary 
policy transmission process. There are a variety of mechanisms – among them wealth and 
confidence  effects  –  through  which  higher  asset  prices  have  an  impact  on  business  cycle 
developments and may eventually result in higher consumer prices. 
As  the  financial  crisis  illustrates,  the  macroeconomic  costs  of  financial  instability  and  the 
challenges that it poses for the maintenance of price stability provide support to the case for 
a flexible and cautious strategy encompassing the need, in some well chosen circumstances, 
to influence financial markets. But how can such a policy be made operational? And if it can, 
can it really be implemented in practice? The answer to these questions very much depends 
on the monetary policy framework specifically adopted by a central bank. In this respect, the 
ECB’s monetary policy strategy embodies elements that – in my view – provide a suitable 
and  robust 
for  an  occasional,  but  appropriate  “leaning-against-the-wind” 
approach. 
The ECB’s Governing Council has defined its aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close 
to 2% over the medium term. The medium-term anchoring of inflation expectations allows the 
conduct  of  a  less  accommodative  monetary  policy  during  a  period  of  buoyant  financial 
markets, even in an environment of relatively subdued inflationary pressures. While this will 
result  in  lower  inflation  over  shorter  horizons,  one  could  expect  it  to  be  more  effective  in 
maintaining  price  stability  over  longer  horizons  by  helping  to  prevent  the  emergence  of 
possible deflationary risks after the bursting of the bubble.  
Taken together, I tend to regard the ECB’s monetary policy strategy as being particularly well 
equipped  to  deal  with  risks  to  price  stability  across  different  time  horizons  insofar  as  they 
arise from imbalances in money and credit.  
It is fair to say that there have been times when the ECB’s monetary policy strategy has not 
been  well  understood  in  some  academic  circles.  In  my  view,  there  is  only  one  way  of 
addressing  these  concerns  in  a  constructive  way:  the  ECB  needs  to  foster  the  public’s 
understanding  of  its  monetary  policy  strategy  and,  thereby,  especially  the  robustness  of 
monetary analysis.  
In  spring  2007  the  Governing  Council  endorsed  the  pursuit  of  an  agenda  to  enhance  the 
ECB’s monetary analysis. Having faced excessive money growth, we then perceived serious 
challenges. We have made significant progress on our agenda. The results look promising 
and they will hopefully stimulate the debate further. To this end we have published a book on 
“Enhancing Monetary Analysis”. Copies of this book will be made available outside the room 
during  the  break.  Of  course,  the  book  should  not  be  seen  as  the  final  word.  While  it  has 
interesting answers to offer regarding some questions, other questions and challenges have 
arisen  during  the  process  of  compiling  the  material.  But  I  am  confident  that  the  new 
framework 
BIS Review 155/2010 
 7
generation of tools presented in the book and the results of the subsequent debate will help 
us to prevent a crisis of the magnitude seen in the recent past in future decades. 
Conclusions 
Let  me  conclude  by  summarising  what  are  –  in  my  view  –  the  main  features  of  a  robust 
monetary policy framework.  
 
First, there is broad agreement that central bank independence, price stability and 
transparent  communication  will  remain  key  features  of  effective  and  credible 
monetary policy-making.  
Second, in the case of the ECB, a quantitative definition of price stability, a medium-
term orientation and a broad analytical framework, with money and credit playing an 
important role, have been key elements in the conduct of monetary policy. The crisis 
seems to be paving the way for solidifying support for the medium-term orientation 
and for the role of money and credit in a central bank’s analysis.  
Third, in relation to this, the crisis seems to point towards a need for a symmetric 
approach in central banks’ reaction to asset price bubbles and busts. Traditionally, 
the  proposal  of  “leaning  against  the  wind”  has  faced  a  considerable  degree  of 
scepticism.  Recent  results,  however,  call  for  a  fair  reassessment  that  does  more 
justice to the advantages of such an approach. 
  I am confident that these features of a robust monetary policy framework will guide us in the 
future. At the same time, I am convinced that central bankers have a responsibility to ensure 
that  their  monetary  policy  frameworks  create  the  proper  incentives  for  the  banking 
community  to  assume  its  responsibilities  and  take  the  appropriate  decisions  in  a  timely 
manner to shape a healthy banking sector at the service of the real economy. 
References 
Blinder,  A.S.  and  Reis,  R.  (2005),  Economic  Performance  in  the  Greenspan  Era:  The 
Evolution of Events and Ideas, paper presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Symposium on “Rethinking Stabilization Policy”, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
Burns, A.F. (1979), The Anguish of Central Banking, Per Jacobsson Lecture, 30 September 
1979, Belgrade. 
Detken, C., Gerdesmeier, D. and Roffia, B. (2010), Interlinkages between Money, Credit and 
Asset Prices and their Implications for Consumer Price Inflation: Recent Empirical Work, in: 
Papademos,  L.D.  and  Stark,  J.  (eds.),  Enhancing  Monetary  Analysis,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
European Central Bank. 
ECB  (2010a),  Asset  Price  Bubbles  and  Monetary  Policy  Revisited,  Monthly  Bulletin 
December. 
ECB  (2010b),  The  ECB’s  Monetary  Policy  Stance  During  the  Financial  Crisis,  Monthly 
Bulletin January. 
Goodfriend, M. (2007), How the World Achieved Consensus on Monetary Policy, Journal of 
Economic Perspectives 21 (4), pp. 47–68. 
King,  M.  (2004),  What  Has  Inflation  Targeting  Achieved?,  in  Ben  S.  Bernanke  and 
M. Woodford  (eds.),  The  Inflation-Targeting  Debate,  The  University  of  Chicago  Press,  
pp. 11–16. 
Lucas, R.E. (1972), Expectations and the Neutrality of Money, Journal of Economic Theory, 
pp. 103–124.  
8 
 BIS Review 155/2010
Lucas,  R.E.  (1996),  Nobel  Lecture:  Monetary  Neutrality,  Journal  of  Political  Economy, 
Vol. 104, pp. 661–682.  
McCandless,  G.T.  and  Weber,  W.E.  (1995),  Some  Monetary  Facts,  Federal  Reserve  of 
Minneapolis Review, Vol. 19, No. 3, pp. 2–11.  
Mishkin, F.S. (2007), Will Monetary Policy Become More of a Science?, paper presented at 
the conference “Monetary Policy Over Fifty Years”, organised by the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
on 21 September 2007. 
Orphanides, A. (2002), Monetary Policy Rules and the Great Inflation, American Economic 
Review 92(2), pp. 115–120. 
Papademos,  L.D.  and  Stark,  J.  (2010),  Enhancing  Monetary  Analysis,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
European Central Bank. 
Rajan, R. (2005), The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future, speech given at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium on “Rethinking Stabilization Policy”, Jackson Hole, 
Wyoming. 
Woodford,  M.  (2008),  Convergence  in  Macroeconomics:  Elements  of  the  New  Synthesis, 
paper presented in the session “Convergence in Macroeconomics?” at the annual meeting of 
the American Economic Association on 4 January 2008. 
BIS Review 155/2010 
 9
