Shyamala Gopinath: Inauguration of Inter-Bank Mobile Payment Service 
Remarks by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
inauguration  of  Inter-Bank  Mobile  Payment  Service  (IMPS)  of  the  National  Payment 
Corporation of India (NPCI), Mumbai, 22 November 2010. 
 Mr  Hota,  Mr  Balachandran,  my  colleague  Mr  Padmanabhan,  other  executives  of 
NPCI,  fellow  bankers,  other  dignitaries  and  my  media  friends  present  here.  I  am 
honoured to be here and I thank the NPCI for inviting me to inaugurate the Interbank 
Mobile  Payment  Services  (IMPS),  which  has  the  potential  to  change  the  retail 
payment landscape in India provided all the stakeholders get it right.  
The  success  of  mobile  penetration  in  India  is  now  widely  recognized.  This  huge 
success  has  encouraged  it  being  increasingly  leveraged  to  address  other  frontier 
issues  of  inclusive  growth  process.  Exchange  of  money,  one  of  the  most 
fundamental economic functions in any economy, is one of such frontline issues. I 
can do no better than refer to the observations from a recent book1 coauthored by 
Mr.  Sam  Pitroda,  one  of  the  key  architects  of  telecom  revolution  in  India: 
M-commerce  is  poised  for  a  revolution,  commencing  in  China  and  India.  It  may 
initially  focus  on  mobile  banking  and  later,  with  integration  of  applications  for 
consumer convenience, extend to other services.  
Intuitively,  the  mobile  phone,  being  more  ubiquitous  in  nature  offers  a  greater 
opportunity  for  effective  delivery  of  financial  services  and  furthering  the  cause  of 
financial  inclusion  in  a  significant  way.  With  the  evolution  through  Information  & 
Communication Infrastructure, knowledge based initiatives, right to information and 
education, delivery of public services and employment and entrepreneurship mobile 
money has the potential to facilitate inclusive growth. 
Reserve  Bank  has  acknowledged  the  importance  of  mobile  banking  channel  as  a 
critical element to achieving inclusive growth in India and has been taking several 
important  steps,  the  recent  being  enabling  the  mobile  companies  to  partner  with 
banks as business correspondents. The twin challenge in our country would be to 
succeed  in  reducing  the  use  of  cash  while  encouraging  the  spread  and  use  of 
mobile wallet to reap the full benefits of this ubiquitous product.  
The  three  stakeholders  viz.  the  telecom  operators,  banks  and  merchants  have 
realized  the  value  proposition  and  the  only  sustainable  business  model  is  where 
these stakeholders work together to deliver true value to customers and effectively 
share the costs saved and new revenues generated. Hence it is imperative that all 
the  three  while  being  cognizant  of  their  strengths,  do  not  lose  sight  of  their 
weakness and find ways to integrate their offerings without losing their individuality.  
As  far  as  banks  are  concerned,  the  real  challenge  would  be  to  reorient  their 
business models to exploit the synergies provided by this model while addressing 
the key concerns.  
Leveraging on new technology  
Extend the existing risk management practices to various delivery channels 
Acquire all these transactions over the existing settlement networks  
1.  
2.  
3.  
4.  
5.  
6.  
                                                  
1   Pitroda, Sam and Desai, Mehul: “The March of Mobile Money”. 
BIS Review 157/2010 
 1
   Aggregate  various  services  as  part  of  their  existing  cross-selling  and  co-branding 
initiatives 
Fraud  prevention  and  security  standards;  safeguards  against  money  laundering, 
KYC issues 
Ability to leverage their existing reporting, auditing, and campaign management at 
back end  
Mobile phones for financial services – across the globe 
7.  
World over there has been increased use of mobile phones for extending financial 
services  to  the  excluded  populations.  Two  models  are  mainly  evident  (i)  bank  led 
model and (ii) Non-bank led model.  
The bank led model involves extending all banking facilities including money transfer 
facility  to  bank  customers  through  the  mobile  channel.  This  pure  bank  led  model 
essentially  incorporates  the  whole  gamut  of  financial  services  like  acceptance  of 
deposits, extending loans and also providing money transfer facility. The agents are 
employed by the banks and are therefore directly responsible for their activities.  
The  non-bank  led  model  which  are  mainly  provided  by  MSPs.  A  virtual  electronic 
prepaid  wallet  on  the  mobile  phone  is  provided  to  the  customers.  Customers  can 
use  the  amount  in  the  virtual  account  for  remittance/payments  for  goods  and 
services (M-Pesa, Kenya). The number of such models across the globe is very few. 
In this model the focus is on providing remittance facility. These models provide a 
virtual prepaid account held with the MSP, which can be used by the customer for 
person-to-person remittance and payments.  
In India, it has been decided to adopt the bank-led model.  
Mobile payments in India 
11. 
The significance of this channel for the development of payment instruments and as 
payment  channel  has  been  recognized  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  Accordingly  the 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  issued  the  guidelines  for  Mobile  Banking  Transactions  in 
October 2008.  
The guidelines permit banks to provide mobile banking transactions and mandates 
that  all  transactions  have  to  originate  from  one  bank  account  and  terminate  in 
another  bank  account.  The  guidelines  also  permit  banks  to  extend  this  facility 
through their business correspondents. The mobile banking guidelines were relaxed 
in December, 2009 to –  
(a)  enhance  the  daily  cap  on  both  funds  transfers  and  transactions  involving 
purchase of goods and services to Rs.50,000; 
requirement of end-to-end encryption relaxed for transactions up to Rs.1000/- 
for small value transactions; 
facilitate funds transfer from a bank account using a mobile phone with cash 
payout at ATMs/BCs up to Rs 5000. 
(b) 
(c) 
Non-bank  entities  have  been  permitted,  in  August  2009,  to  issue  semi  closed 
prepaid m-wallets up to the value of Rs 5000/- with full KYC compliance based on 
the  representation  received  from  Cellular  Operators  Association  of  India  (COAI). 
The  objective  of  keeping  the  limits  low  was  to  study  the  trend  and  progressively 
liberalize based on the experience. As on date a total of 6 non-bank entities have 
BIS Review 157/2010
8.  
9.  
10.  
12. 
13.  
2 
 14.  
15.  
16.  
17.  
been authorized to issue prepaid mobile wallets. This includes one Mobile service 
provider. Another application is under process.  
Given  that  India  is  still  far  from  being  a  cash  less  society,  the  cash-in/cash-out 
arrangements  in  these  models  play  an  important  part  for  scaling  up.  This  can 
happen only if banks and mobile operators/card issuers work together as partners. It 
is  gratifying  to  note  that  the  high  level  of  Inter-Ministerial  Group  anchored  by  the 
Department  of  Information  Technology,  Government  of  India  that  went  into  the 
issue, after extensive discussions, have reached more or less the same conclusion. 
GOI has consequently appointed various committees to address issues pertaining to 
provision of prioritized services for mobile banking transactions and pricing of such 
services.  
The recent relaxations contemplated in enabling mobile operators as BCs of banks 
should give a further fillip to these efforts.  
It has to be appreciated that in India, unlike in Kenya and Philippines, there are a 
number  of  MSPs  and  a  huge  base  of  mobile  subscribers.  To  have  an  efficient 
mobile  based  payment  and  remittance  system  would  require  inter-MSP  payment 
services. This inter-operability is an important criterion for any payment product to 
be  successful  and  acceptable.  Facilitating  this  would  require  the  setting  up  of  a 
clearing  and  settlement  arrangement  for  such  non-bank  operators.  Such  clearing 
and  settlement  arrangements  could  have  systemic  implications.  This  is  where  the 
facility being inaugurated today by the NPCI is filling an important pre requisite for 
the product to scale up.  
RBI has permitted 40 banks to do mobile banking and the customer base availing of 
mobile banking facilities as on September 30, 2010 stands at 8.87 lakh as compared 
to  6.16  lakh  as  at  the  end  of  August  2010.  During  September,  2010,  4.9  lakh 
transactions  of  value  Rs.  44  crores  were  carried  out  using  this  mode  of  payment 
both for transfer of funds and purchase of goods and services.  
Concluding thoughts 
18. 
While  the  growth  of  mobile  payments  has  been  rapid,  it  is  far  from  becoming  an 
important  source  of  financial  inclusion.  This  in  my  view  calls  for  two  important 
facilitations.  One,  partnership  rather  than  competition  among  the  stake  holders, 
importantly mobile companies and banks and two, a ubiquitous switch for enabling 
interbank p to p and p to b payments. While we are working towards achieving the 
first  facility,  NPCI  has  taken  the  important  step  of  enabling  the  second  important 
facility.  
The  Interbank  Mobile  Payment  Services  (IMPS)  provides  an  inter-operable 
infrastructure  to  the  banks  for  enabling  interbank  real  time  funds  transfer 
transactions. What may be one of its strongest points, IMPS rides on the existing 
NFS Interbank ATM transaction switching infrastructure and message format – and 
hence  easy  for  banks  to  adopt.  It  has  the  potential  for  the  wide  reach  across  the 
country  when  all  NFS  member  banks  adopt  this  service  and  promote  this  service 
aggressively.  
Alongside this, with the recent relaxations in the BC guidelines, I believe that all the 
building blocks are in place. Now it is entirely up to the various stake holders to take 
the product forward. More importantly, what has been facilitated by NPCI today can 
be construed as yet another step towards achieving its stated vision of becoming a 
true  umbrella  organisation  for  retail  payments  in  this  country.  I  hope  NPCI  will 
continue  to  show  equal  enthusiasm  in  commissioning  and  completing  other 
important projects like the cheque truncation and the much awaited India Card.  
19. 
20. 
BIS Review 157/2010 
 3
21. 
I too join Mr Balachandran in congratulating the IBA, entire NPCI team and all others 
who have contributed to the roll out of this product. I wish the NPCI success in all 
their endeavors. 
4 
 BIS Review 157/2010
