Paul Tucker: Developing an EU cross-border crisis management 
framework 
Remarks by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
at the Eurofi Financial Forum, Brussels, 30 September 2010. 
 Thank you very much for inviting me to join you here today. 
It is terrific that the EU, and the Commission in particular, have been taking resolution really 
seriously  as  part  of  the  programme  for  reforming  the  financial  system.  This  is  a  domestic 
issue, an EU-wide issue, and a global issue. 
In introducing this session of the conference I’ve got five points, and I’m going to try to be 
quite crisp on those five points once I have made an introductory comment about resolution 
regimes in general. 
It may be helpful to say a few words about what resolution is. Resolution is what happens 
when  we  are  in  the  “last  chance  saloon”.  That  is  to  say  when  supervision,  however 
enhanced, has not prevented distress. When higher capital and liquidity requirements have 
proved  insufficient.  When  any  Cocos  or  other  instruments  have  been  converted  or  written 
down  but  have  proved  insufficient  to  absorb  the  distressed  firm’s  losses,  and  so  the 
institution  is  still  teetering  on  the  edge  of  failure.  That  is  we  are  talking  about  the  point  at 
which  all  the  usual  remedies  have  been  exhausted,  and  the  authorities  face  a  desperate 
choice  between  taxpayer  bailout  or  chaotic  liquidation  unless  special  resolution  tools  are 
available. All those other, essential measures are about reducing the probability of distress. 
Resolution  is  about  coping  when,  notwithstanding  those  measures,  we  do  face  severe 
distress in a financial institution.  
The trigger for putting a financial firm into resolution should essentially be when the criteria 
for  the  authorisation  of  the  bank  (or  dealer,  or  whatever)  are  no  longer  met,  there  is  no 
reasonable prospect that they are going to be met in the future. Which in practice, actually 
means  that  the  institution  is  effectively  insolvent  or  what  amounts  to  insolvency.  Effective 
resolution  regimes  are  designed  to  manage  these  situations.  They  are  about  making  the 
private  sector  pay  rather  than  making  the  taxpayer  pay  through  the  mediation  of  a  public 
sector  bailout  when,  because  of  the  firm’s  provision  of  critical  services,  we  cannot  afford 
simply to put it through a standard corporate bankruptcy procedure. 
Against that background, I would make five points. 
First of all I would say that it is absolutely essential that each of the EU member states, and 
indeed  all  the  countries  in  the  world,  should  have  a  national  resolution  regime  for 
conventional commercial banks. Not to have such a regime is a great mistake. It can indeed 
be a disaster, as the UK very sadly demonstrated through the Northern Rock problem, with 
spillovers to confidence beyond our borders. 
Why  do  I  start  with  this?  Essentially  because,  at  present,  very  few  countries  of  the  EU  – 
including  until  18  months  or  so  ago  the  UK  –  have  a  national  resolution  regime  for 
conventional  commercial  banks.  This  is  a  real  gap  in  the  infrastructure  for  the  financial 
system. One of the most important things the EU can do in the period ahead is to say to all of 
the member states “You really must have the elementary regime that exists on the other side 
of the Atlantic”.  
That benchmark system enables us, the authorities, to take a distressed bank and transfer 
the deposits to another viable bank, transfer or sell the good assets, and put the bad assets 
into receivership or run off. Plainly this requires safeguards if it interferes with property rights.  
BIS Review 144/2010 
 1
So  that’s  the  first  proposition.  I’ll  now  go  on  to  talk  about  globally  important,  systemically 
important  financial  institutions  (so-called  SIFIs),  where  the  issues  are  much  harder,  way 
more important and much more topical. But we should not lose sight of that vital first step. It 
is the foundation stone; and one that will help us to speak a common language on resolution.  
The  second  proposition  is  that  we  must,  as  a  global  community  and  as  a  European 
community,  develop  tools  to  be  able  to  resolve  the  largest,  most  complex  cross-border 
systemically  important  financial  institutions.  This  is  absolutely  at  the  core  of  the  work  to 
address  the  problem  of  Too  Big  To  Fail.  And  unless  we  make  real  progress  with  this 
problem,  we  won’t  bring  back  into  our  financial  system  the  market  discipline  on  which 
capitalism  relies.  The  goal,  of course,  is  to  be  able  to  resolve  distressed  giant  institutions, 
complex  institutions,  without  taxpayer  solvency  support,  but  also  without  disastrous 
disruptions  to  the  flow  of  essential  financial  services  to  our  economies.  I  would  say  two 
substantive things about the tools needed to make this feasible.  
First of all, as the crisis around the world has demonstrated, we need to extend the basic 
resolution toolkit I was talking about beyond commercial banks to bank holding companies 
and to affiliated companies; in other words, to groups. And we must extend the scope of the 
basic resolution regime to non-bank financial institutions and groups in circumstances where 
their distress could prove systemic. This is essentially what the Dodd-Frank Act does in the 
United  States.  It  makes  it  possible  for  the  FDIC  to  manage  and  run  down  a  SIFI  from  a 
bridge company. This could work well in some circumstances; for example, where there are 
buyers for parts of the business in the wings, as with Lehman. This is, therefore, a resolution 
instrument which we should seriously contemplate adopting in Europe. I am not certain that it 
would definitely work in all circumstances; eg if there were no buyers in prospect, the state 
ends  up  running  the  group,  which  could  be  quite  a  thing,  with  a  risk  that  staff  and 
counterparties may drift away. But even in those circumstances it would surely be preferable 
to a normal liquidation.  
The second tool that many of us believe really should be considered, and which the Financial 
Stability Board is likely to urge countries in the G20 to consider seriously, is to be able to 
write  down,  or  haircut,  claims  of  unsecured,  uninsured  creditors  and  impose  a  partial 
conversion from debt to equity in conditions of distress while leaving the non-toxic parts of 
the  bank  or  dealer  as  an  otherwise  viable  concern.  This  is  a  technique  sometimes  called 
Bail-in, although that term is also used for a purely contractual route for recapitalising banks 
which is rather different in some crucial respects (both operationally and in terms of policy). 
Reduced  to  its  bare  essentials,  it  involves  the  following.  You  take  the  distressed  bank  or 
dealer, and examine whether it is rotten all the way through, or whether – as can easily be 
the case for highly-levered firms – its financial problems are concentrated in specific parts of 
the business. In other words, is there a viable underlying franchise once the toxic parts are 
written off? That will sometimes be the case, although by no means always. When it is, you 
also make an estimate of the firm’s loss. Sometimes that may not be possible due to chaos 
in the firm or the breadth of its problems. But if you think about the SIFI failures during this 
financial  crisis,  there  are  some  instances  where  supervisors  could,  perhaps,  have  made 
estimates of the losses before the final curtain came down because they were on notice of 
accumulating stress. Having made a conservative estimate of the loss, it must be absorbed 
by the firm’s capital structure, respecting the ranking of priority that would apply in liquidation. 
So you start by writing off the equity to the extent that that is needed. If the loss is bigger 
than the equity, you also write off the subordinated debt. If there is still some loss left, then 
you  write  down  the  claims  of  uninsured,  unsecured  creditors  in  one  way  or  another;  the 
scope of this would need to be made clear in the statutory framework for resolutions. The 
loss is then covered. But it is still necessary to recapitalise to the bank, so you convert some 
of  the  residual  claims  of  the  unsecured,  uninsured  creditors  into  equity.  How  much? 
Whatever the microprudential regulatory authority concludes is needed to provide adequate 
capitalisation for the bank or dealer going forward. 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2010
This is a technique that will work only in circumstances where the size of the loss could be 
estimated in the run up to the resolution and where the underlying franchise of the business 
remains basically viable. But it has the promise of being able to take an essentially viable 
business with a toxic part, write-off the toxic part and reconstruct the capital structure of the 
bank or dealer so as to be able to maintain the business as a going concern. For those of 
you familiar with Chapter 11 in the United States for non-financial corporates, this amounts to 
applying  those  techniques  in  a  very  accelerated  way  and  under  the  discretion  of  the 
resolution  authorities  rather  than  through  a  negotiation  mediated  by  a  judge.  As  I  have 
described it, it is a resolution tool. There is no good reason of public policy why resolution 
should always involve closing the firm, provided that shareholders, uninsured creditors, the 
board and management pay the appropriate price. 
Whichever  combination  of  tools  is  incorporated  into  resolution  regimes,  we  should  expect 
them to induce changes over time in behaviour of banks and their creditors. There might, for 
example, be greater incentives to lend to banks against security or at short maturities. As we 
reintroduce the disciplines of capitalism back into the heart of the financial system, we might 
have to think carefully about regulatory policies on the encumbrance of assets and on the 
maturity structure of liabilities. 
The third point I would make is that even if we were equipped with a decent set of tools for 
the domestic context, we must be able to cope with the cross-border element of a financial 
firm failure. Within the EU, this should not be the hardest thing in the world and I hope that 
the Commission will be able to develop proposals that will lead the way for the rest of the 
international  community  in  identifying  how  we  can  do  this.  Because  within  the  EU  we  can 
enter  into  more  or  less  binding  commitments  under  the  terms  of  rules  and  legislation  that 
comes out of the process here in Brussels, without infringing on national sovereignty.  
The fourth point I would make is that the EU, as well as leading the way in addressing that 
problem regionally, must take a very close interest in the arrangements for global resolution, 
because pretty well every single one of Europe’s largest financial institutions operates on a 
global scale and, furthermore, the largest global institutions headquartered outside the EU all 
have  sizable  and  complex  businesses  within  the  EU.  In  the  run  up  to  the  G20  meeting  of 
Finance Ministers and Governors in October and then the Leaders summit in November, our 
community  and  the  political  community  will  have  to  think  about  the  extent  to  which 
sovereignty in this area could be pooled or whether, instead, to come up with a middle road 
which at least removes obstacles to co-operation. I suspect it is unrealistic at this stage of 
global financial development and co-operation for there to be a multilateral binding treaty that 
would  put  a  single  country  in  the  sole  and  unqualified  lead  in  the  resolution  of  a  global 
financial  institution.  But  that  doesn’t  mean  that  there  is  nothing  useful  to  do.  We  could  do 
things along the following lines.  
First  of  all,  in  our  national  and  EU  legislation,  we  could  all  remove  impediments  for  one 
country  to  co-operate  with  other  countries  in  the  event  of  a  resolution.  This  sounds  quite 
straightforward  but  actually  it  would  be  quite  a  step  because,  of  course,  all  of  us  are 
answerable  to  our  national  parliaments.  But  nor  do  I  think  it  is  realistic  for  countries  to 
engage in or embark on what one might think of as unilateral disarmament, where a country 
that acts as host to financial institutions says to the home countries “I will let you lead in the 
resolution of all banks in all circumstances, notwithstanding whether you take account of the 
interests of my country”. So countries probably need to reserve some powers for themselves 
but should eliminate from their regimes any automatic triggers that can cut across sensible 
resolution led by a firm’s home country.  
The other step that we could sensibly take, I suspect, is for there to be much closer planning 
on a bilateral basis between host and home countries in respect of particular banks. I mean 
at the level of entering into more or less binding agreements on who would do what in the 
event of distress. That, again, sounds easy, but actually it would be embarking on quite a 
change from where we are right now. 
BIS Review 144/2010 
 3
And that brings me to my fifth and final point, which is that even if we were to put in place 
nationally,  in  the  EU  or  globally  the  best  possible  statutory  frameworks  for  resolution  of 
international banks and dealers, it would work only if there is also a great deal of planning by 
the regulatory and resolution authorities case by case. This is what has become known as 
the  preparation  of  Recovery  and  Resolution  Plans,  colloquially  Living  Wills.  What a  robust 
resolution plan looks like depends on the statutory resolution regimes that we have. At the 
moment  we  shouldn’t  kid  ourselves  as  to  how  much  progress  can  be  made.  In  an 
environment where few countries have viable resolution regimes on statute, there are going 
to  be  few  viable  resolution  plans  for  the  largest  institutions  in  the  world.  So  the  first  step 
needs to be statutory change, in which the EU can take a lead. And thereafter the financial 
authorities  would  need  to  do  very  serious  planning,  so  that  we  could  in  earnest  put  these 
institutions  through  our  improved  resolution  regimes  if  we  needed  to,  without  taxpayer 
solvency support.  
That is a formidable agenda. But it is within reach, and the EU can be part of the leadership. 
4 
 BIS Review 144/2010
