Jean-Claude Trichet: Europe’s frameworks for macro-prudential 
oversight and economic governance 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Economic Club of New York, New York, 12 October 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
Stopping  over  in  New  York  after  the  IMF  meetings  has  become  a  tradition  I  very  much 
cherish.  
And it is a particular pleasure for me to speak before the Economic Club of New York today. 
The last time I spoke here was on 14 October 2008. At that time, we were in the eye of the 
storm,  with  fresh  and  acute  challenges  to  the  global  financial  system  arising  by  the  hour. 
Today  we  have  to  remain  permanently  alert,  while  we  must  address  all  of  the  challenges 
associated with the need to ensure long-term financial stability. We must find a way to create 
a financial system in which a crisis of this magnitude cannot happen again.  
If  I  were  to  draw  one  lesson  from  the  IMF  meetings  which  have  just  taken  place  in 
Washington, it would be that the international community is fully aware of the need to remain 
particularly vigilant in the present period. A lot of hard work has been accomplished since the 
intensification  of  the  crisis  in  mid-September  2008.  But  a  lot  remains  to  be  done  both  as 
regards  the  resilience  of  the  global  financial  system  and  as  regards  the  rebalancing  of 
domestic and external imbalances at a global level within and between the advanced and the 
emerging economies. More than ever, resolve is of the essence.  
Today, I would like to address two issues: Europe’s new macro-prudential framework and the 
planned strengthening of Europe’s economic governance.  
How Europe is addressing systemic risk 
Let me start with the macroprudential framework. Here, I have three basic messages.  
First,  I  am  honoured  to  speak  to  you  not  only  in  my  present  capacity  as  President  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  but  also  –  if  I  may  –  in  my  future  capacity  as  Chairman  of  the 
European Systemic Risk Board or ESRB. This new European Union (EU) body, established 
to provide macro-prudential oversight, will become operational in January.  
Second, there is a remarkably strong political consensus in Europe in favour of establishing 
this new body. The European Parliament approved the legislation supporting the functions of 
the ESRB with an overwhelmingly large majority of around 80%.  
Third,  the  establishment  of  the  ESRB  is  part  of  a  more  comprehensive  reform  of  financial 
supervision  in  Europe,  which  encompasses  also  the  creation  of  three  micro-supervisory 
European authorities, of a European System of Financial Supervision and an acceleration of 
structural reforms in the broader financial arena. The breadth and depth of reform in Europe 
is, in my view, comparable to that recently enacted by the US Congress. 
Allow me to elaborate on these issues of macroprudential supervision and broader financial 
regulation. 
Establishing Europe’s macro-prudential framework 
One of the overarching objectives of the reforms carried out in recent months in Europe and 
the  United  States  has  been  the  near  simultaneous  establishment  of  a  new  supervisory 
architecture. On both sides of the Atlantic, new legislation has been enacted with the specific 
for 
financial 
its  part  will  consider 
aim  of  overseeing  systemic  risks  in  the  financial  sector  as  a  whole.  This  represents 
considerable  progress  towards  regulatory  convergence  across  our  two  economies,  which 
only a few years ago would have been considered impossible.  
In  the  EU,  progress  is  expected  to  be  achieved  at  all  levels  of  authority.  In  a  third  of  the 
Member  States,  policy-makers  have  announced  or  enacted  a  revision  of  existing  national 
institutions.  I  consider  it  significant  that  these  events  are  taking  place  in  the  context  of 
increasing consensus among European authorities. Only a short while ago it was feared that 
divided and partial responses by the regulators to the financial crisis had put Europe’s single 
market at risk. Today, I observe with satisfaction that institutions acting in different financial 
markets – from the City of London to the major financial centres of continental Europe – are 
increasingly speaking a common language. 
At  the  EU  level,  reform  has  involved  a  comprehensive  overhaul  of  all  segments  of  the 
financial  sector:  banks;  securities  markets;  and  insurance  and  occupational  pensions.  For 
each  of  these,  the  EU  has  created  new  European  Supervisory  Authorities  (ESAs),  which 
bring  together  the  competent  national  institutions,  and  will  draw  up  guidelines  and 
recommendations  to  ensure  that  systemic  risks  arising  from  individual  institutions  are 
adequately  addressed.  These  institutions  will  establish  a  “single  rule  book  for  Europe”, 
reducing  inconsistencies  between  national  regulations  and  fostering  cooperation  across 
Europe’s national borders.  
The  ESRB 
institutions,  markets,  products  and 
infrastructures. It will have a horizontal focus, across countries, across sectors and across 
the  boundaries  between  the  financial  sector  and  the  real  economy.  Understanding 
interlinkages and spillovers will be at the core of its analysis. To fulfil its mandate, the ESRB 
will  perform  three  main  tasks:  identifying  and  prioritising  systemic  risks;  issuing  early 
warnings  when  significant  systemic  risks  emerge;  and  making  policy  recommendations  for 
remedial  action  in  response  to  the  risks  it  identifies.  It  will  be  the  ESRB’s  responsibility  to 
initiate corrective responses to any identified threats to the EU’s financial stability.  
The  institutional  framework  remains  complex  in  the  United  States,  but  it  is,  for  obvious 
reasons, even more complex in Europe. That complexity requires a unique combination of 
Europe-wide  and  national  competences,  which  are  attributed  to  different  institutions. 
Adopting legislation requires, following a proposal by the Commission, both the assent of the 
Council  –  a  body  representing  the  27  national  governments  –  and  the  approval  of  the 
European Parliament. Despite this complex decision-making process, Europe has delivered 
a  new  framework  in  around  the  same  time  as  the  United  States,  a  framework  which 
represents a high level of ambition, comparable to the ambition shown by the Dodd-Frank 
legislation.  
The new Europe-wide institutions will also receive substantial new assignments. Many issues 
are common to Europe and the United States. To mention but a few, Europe is discussing 
provisions to bring the shadow banking sector into the regulatory system, to reduce risks by 
bringing  transactions  into  transparent  and  secure  financial  infrastructures,  and  to  increase 
consumer protection against the abuse of market power.  
Months of intense work lie ahead of all of us – in all the entities making up the European 
System  of  Financial  Supervision  –  to  implement  these  new  regulatory  powers.  The  ESRB 
and the ESAs will need to develop a common set of quantitative and qualitative indicators to 
identify  and  measure  systemic  risk.  We  will  need  to  understand  how  to  coordinate  our 
functions, in terms of data collection, analysis and communication. All of this will need to be 
performed  within  tight  deadlines  and  under  pressure  to  deliver  functional  arrangements.  I 
understand  that  our  colleagues  in  Washington  face  equally  demanding  assignments  with 
equally tight time frames. 
Basel III 
There is no question that this is the time for action on our financial system – in Europe, in the 
United States and globally. This leads me to the most global of regulatory frameworks: that 
established in Basel.  
Since I have the honour of chairing the Committee of Governors and Heads of Supervision 
that oversees the work of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, let me say a few 
words about the “Basel III” reform package. In my view, this achievement is a cornerstone of 
the new regulatory system and I would like to pay tribute to all those who have worked on 
this new framework and succeeded in agreeing on it at a global level.  
Basel III represents a decisive improvement in global capital standards. In this context, I find 
the Long-term Economic Impact study particularly noteworthy. It reminds us of the fact that 
tighter rules can be beneficial for economic welfare, for the simple reason that they help to 
avoid  the  major  crises  triggering  abrupt  busts,  deep  recessions  and  threats  of  depression 
that are so damaging to our societies. The study suggests in particular that if tighter rules 
were  to  lower  the  yearly  probability  of  a  major  financial  crisis  by  1  percent,  this  could 
correspond, on average, to an annual output gain of 0.6%. 
The  study  also  suggests  that  the  increase  in  capital  requirements,  which  is  part  of  the 
Basel III consensus, would indeed significantly reduce the probability of a crisis. Of course, 
the figures need to be interpreted with caution, but the various models applied in the impact 
study all suggest that the net social benefits of strengthened regulation can be substantial. 
They also remind us that, in the long run, growth is only meaningful if it is sustainable.  
Overall,  I  consider  that  the  agreement  strikes  a  good  balance  between  the  objective  of 
decisively strengthening the resilience of the financial sector in this new permanent regime, 
and at the same time, establishing a transitional period which is sufficiently well crafted not to 
hamper the ongoing recovery.  
Wider financial reform 
But we are far from done on financial reform.  
Financial reform at the global level is necessarily complex, and achieving it demands resolve 
and perseverance. For some comprehensive measures such as the framework to address 
risks posed by systemically important financial institutions, hard work remains to be done, in 
particular  through  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  to  clarify  the  concept  of  systemically 
important institutions, to investigate the properties of the pertinent tools – additional capital 
requirements, contingent capital, bail-in instruments, etc. – appropriate to increase the loss 
absorbency of their capital base and to develop firm-specific recovery and resolution plans. 
This  will  require  continued  resolute  coordination  and  dialogue  in  order  to  resolve  potential 
conflicts and avoid regulatory arbitrage. 
But there is much more to the financial system than the main regulated banks. 
The financial system has grown in scope and dimensions that – since finance is largely an 
invisible service – are hard to imagine.  
There are three figures that I consider it important to note in absolute terms. First, assets of 
major  investment  banks  have  risen  from  less  than  USD 2  trillion  20  years  ago  to 
USD 22 trillion  just  before  the  crisis.  That  is  around  1.5  times  US  GDP.  Second,  hedge 
funds, which had capital under management of less than USD 100 billion in the early 1990s, 
were estimated to manage around USD 3 trillion in 2007 – 30-fold increase in 17 years – and 
are probably of this order of magnitude or larger today. And finally, the notional value of all 
categories of derivatives contract has increased by a factor of 20 over the past two decades 
to stand at more than USD 600 trillion, ten times world GDP.  
is  straightforward: 
These  figures  give  a  measure  of  the  structural  transformation  seen  in  the  global  financial 
markets over the last two decades.  
I  consider  that  we  are  a  long  way  from  fully  understanding  what  those  dramatic 
transformations mean in terms of concentration and the spreading of real risks, in terms of 
the additional unpredictability of the behaviour of the system as a whole and, therefore, in 
terms of potential systemic financial instability.  
There  are  still  many  issues  on  the  agendas  of  the  G20  and  the  FSB  that  need  to  be 
implemented.  My  message  on  these 
these  agendas  should  be 
implemented fully and equally on both sides of the Atlantic. Rigour and a level playing field 
are the two key terms in this context.  
Apart from the issue of systemically important financial institutions, which will figure high up 
on the upcoming G20 agenda, there are at least six other items where progress needs to be 
made in the design and/or implementation of reform. These are: accounting, ratings, short-
selling, compensation, OTC derivatives and alternative investment vehicles.  
Accounting,  ratings  and  short-selling  practices are  all  issues  that  need  to  be  addressed  in 
order to lessen the degree of procyclicality in our financial system.  
On accounting, the G20 summit in London decided that accounting standard setters should 
reduce the complexity of standards for financial instruments, achieve clarity and consistency 
in  the  application  of  valuation  standards  internationally,  and  make  significant  progress 
towards a single set of high-quality global standards.  
The  announcement  made  in  June  2010  by  the  IASB  and  FASB  on  their  convergence 
strategy is welcome, also because time lags in implementation are considerable. If the SEC 
decides in 2011 to incorporate IFRS into the US domestic reporting system, this would mean 
that US issuers would potentially not actually report under these rules until 2015 or 2016.  
Moreover, even though many attempts are underway, in key accounting areas there are still 
divergences  to  be  addressed.  For  example,  the  accounting  for  financial  instruments  still 
diverges  considerably  between  the  IASB  and  FASB  on  the  role  of  market  valuation.  As 
regards ratings and the G20’s call to engage in decoupling the financial system from external 
ratings, work is also in progress on both sides of the Atlantic.  
For short-selling rules and practices, the key shortcoming prior to the crisis – i.e. the fact that 
there was no European harmonised framework – will soon be rectified. The Commission has 
recently  made  its  proposals  for  a  harmonised  framework  at  EU  level,  which  also  aims  at 
ensuring consistency with rules prevailing in the US.  
Short-termism in the financial system was a key element contributing to the crisis. I note that 
G20 leaders in Toronto in June this year considered implementation on compensation rules 
and  practices  –  one  of  the  issues  underlying  short-termism  in  finance  –  to  be  “far  from 
complete”.  Indeed,  there  is  still  considerable  divergence,  and  a  lot  of  work  remains  to  be 
done with supervisors and regulators to ensure that compensation practices do not provide 
incentives for an excessive focus on short-term returns.  
Finally let me stress two issues that concern extending the perimeter of regulation.  
First, the creation of infrastructures for OTC derivatives with the decision to clear all standard 
derivatives  products  on  central  infrastructures  by  end-2012  at  the  latest.  The  Commission 
proposal for a European framework has been designed so as to aim at a level playing field 
with the approach in the United States. If decided on in due course, timely implementation 
could be assured.  
Second, the G20 also agreed to extend the perimeter of regulation to systemically important 
financial  intermediaries  including  alternative  investment  funds.  The  London  G20  summit 
declaration  had  stated  “to  extend  regulation  and  oversight  to  all  systemically  important 
financial institutions. This will include, for the first time, systemically important hedge funds.” 
If  there  is  one  area  where  a  global  level  playing  field  is  absolutely  necessary  and,  in 
particular,  a  level  playing  field  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic,  it  is  certainly  the  sector  of 
alternative investment funds.  
We  are  still  fully  in  the  process  of  implementation  of  financial  reform.  Given  the  issues  at 
stake and the complexity of finance as well as the global financial system it is not astonishing 
that implementing this agenda takes time. What is of the essence, is rigorous and equalised 
implementation on both sides of the Atlantic, and in the rest of the world.  
Strengthening of Europe’s economic governance 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  economy  and  devote  the  second  part  of  my  remarks  to  Europe’s 
economic situation and planned reforms in the area of economic governance. 
Real  GDP  in  the  euro  area  grew  by  1%,  quarter  on  quarter,  in  the  second  quarter  of  this 
year.  Growth  has  been  supported  mainly  by  domestic  demand,  but  also  reflects  some 
temporary  factors.  Recent  statistical  releases  and  survey  evidence  generally  confirm  our 
expectation of a moderation in the second half of this year in the euro area. Therefore, we do 
not declare victory and we have to remain cautious and prudent. That being said, the positive 
but modest underlying momentum of the recovery remains in place. Annual inflation in the 
euro  area  is  currently  1.8%,  and  we  expect  inflation  to  remain  moderate  in  2011.  Very 
importantly, we note that inflation expectations over the medium to longer term continue to 
be firmly anchored in line with our definition of price stability.  
As all developed economies, Europe has experienced a period of unprecedented turbulence 
in the last three years. As regards the policy response of the executive branches, the EU and 
the euro area do not take decisions in the same way as a fully fledged political federation like 
the United States. Decision making processes are of a different nature and certainly more 
difficult to decipher by external observers.  
That said, the trend over the last three years has been that, when faced with new challenges, 
the euro area has found solutions. This was the case in the rescue of the financial sector in 
2008, when no systemically important institution failed in Europe and no economic support 
package was refused by any of the numerous Parliaments. That was also the case earlier 
this year in the support for Greece and the establishment of the new stability facility. If I were 
to draw a tentative lesson from this period, it would be that there is a high level of resolve in 
the euro area to engage in the decisions and the reforms that are necessary to preserve and 
consolidate the functioning of the Economic and Monetary Union.  
Looking ahead, I see two trends that support this view. 
Prioritising fiscal sustainability 
The first trend is a general recognition among euro area countries of the need to prioritise 
fiscal  sustainability.  The  governments  of  all  euro  area  countries  have  committed  to  fiscal 
consolidation, although implementation is more advanced in some cases than in others. In 
many  countries,  implementation  is  already  bearing  fruit.  The  IMF  currently  projects  the 
aggregate fiscal deficit for the euro area next year to be 5.1% of GDP – compared with 9.7% 
of GDP in the United States, 8.1% of GDP in the United Kingdom and 8.9% of GDP in Japan. 
I am confident that this trend towards fiscal sustainability will continue. Euro area countries 
are  demonstrating  their  commitment  to  a  sustainable  path  by  taking  action  towards 
consolidation  that  is  necessary  and  in  their  own  interests.  In  the  euro  area  generally,  the 
public debate is mostly supportive of the rationale for fiscal consolidation. 
Some have asked why I see fiscal consolidation as a positive trend for the euro area. The 
well known counter-argument is that consolidation risks dampening the prospects for growth. 
But I believe that fiscal consolidation is not only positive, but essential – for three reasons. 
First, experience suggests that the short-term costs of fiscal consolidation can be contained if 
the consolidation strategy is effectively designed and includes a comprehensive programme 
of structural reforms. Conversely, the long-term costs of not consolidating can be non-linear 
and unpredictable. 
Second, the excessive level of fiscal imbalances in many euro area countries puts them in 
“uncharted  waters”,  where  they  can  be  vulnerable  to  a  rapid  deterioration  of  confidence 
among firms, households and investors. This makes consolidation imperative. 
Third, we are still in uncertain economic times, and it is important that governments retain the 
capacity to intervene in the face of possible future adverse events, including unforeseeable 
circumstances such as natural disasters, which can have a significant fiscal dimension. This 
requires sound public finances and specific strategies tailored to national circumstances. 
A new framework of economic governance 
The other trend that is encouraging for the euro area, but where there is still a great deal of 
hard work before us, is the review of the economic governance framework. The European 
Commission  and  the  Task  Force  chaired  by  the  President  of  the  European  Council, 
Mr van Rompuy, have been very active in this area. The Commission has come forward with 
proposals  to  strengthen  economic  governance,  published  on  29  September.  A  number  of 
these  proposals  go  in  the  right  direction  and  address  some  important  gaps  in  the  existing 
governance  framework.  But  let  me  lay  out  what  I  believe  to  be  critical  points  in  the 
implementation of a new framework. 
What  we  need  is  a  fundamental  strengthening  of  economic  governance  in  the  euro  area. 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  rests  on  two  pillars,  the  economic  pillar  and  the  monetary 
pillar.  The  monetary  pillar  is  firmly  established  and  the  ECB  has  fully  delivered  on  its 
mandate to maintain price stability at below and close to 2%, over the medium term. Over the 
first 11½ years of the euro, the average annual inflation rate has been 1.97%. What is more, 
inflation expectations are firmly anchored in line with our mandate.  
In contrast, the economic pillar of our union remains under construction and there is much 
work to do. One key area is surveillance of fiscal policies to prevent excessive deficits and 
unsustainable  public  debt.  It  is  essential  to  establish  sound  procedures  to  enhance  and 
enforce  fiscal  surveillance  in  the  euro  area.  We  need  shorter  deadlines  under  excessive 
deficit  procedures  so  that  corrective  policy  action  is  taken  in  good  time.  We  need  quasi-
automaticity  in  the  application  of  sanctions,  based  on  clearly  defined  criteria  and  with  less 
discretion  over  outcomes.  And  we  need  ambitious  targets  for  the  reduction  of  public  debt 
towards the 60% of GDP ceiling.  
The crisis has also demonstrated the importance of broader surveillance of macroeconomic 
policies in the euro area. Given the large spillovers from the macroeconomic policies of one 
country to other members of the single currency, much needs to be done. I am in favour of 
the creation of an early warning system to identify unsustainable policies. 
A number of the Commission’s proposals point in this direction, but we need to go further 
still. The framework for the assessment of macroeconomic imbalances within the euro area 
should focus primarily on countries with vulnerabilities, losses in competitiveness and high 
debt levels, as these countries face the greatest sustainability challenges.  
The  framework  should  also  use  a  limited  number  of  indicators  to  ensure  clarity  and 
consistency. When the indicators reveal potential problems, they should automatically trigger 
an  in-depth  analysis  of  the  country  concerned,  including  missions  by  the  Commission  in 
liaison  with the  ECB  and  public  scrutiny.  This  process  should  be  backed  up  by  graduated 
sanctions, which kick in at an early stage, to reinforce compliance with recommendations. 
The  effectiveness  of  these  enhancements  to  the  governance  framework  will  in  part  be 
determined by the quality and independence of the economic analysis that underpins them. 
Without reliable statistical data, interpreted and acted on by independent arbiters, we cannot 
be  certain  that  the  governance  framework  will  provide  the  quantum  leap  forward  that  is 
necessary.  It  is  therefore  extremely  important  that  the  Commission  services  charged  with 
conducting  macroeconomic  and  fiscal  surveillance  for  the  euro  area  be  sufficiently 
independent, ideally supported by a body of “wise persons” providing external assessments. 
We  are  now  at  a  stage  where  we  need  to  remain  bold  and  enact  those  reforms  that  we 
envisaged  when  the  crisis  was  at  its  deepest.  It  was  then  that  we  witnessed  the  clearest 
manifestation  of  risks  and  our  judgement  was  sharpest.  It  would  be  a  big  mistake  if,  with 
gradually improving conditions, we fell back into accepting the status quo. I therefore call on 
all parties to remain as bold in their reforms as they were when we were in the eye of the 
storm.  
Concluding remarks 
Let me say in conclusion that I consider it essential to preserve, consolidate and reinforce the 
remarkable unity demonstrated by the international community in the crisis period.  
We were able to agree on the following major points.  
First, there was the consensus on the need to increase participation in the informal global 
governance framework to include all systemic emerging economies. This was illustrated by 
the G7 passing the baton to the G20 as the primary forum for global economic governance.  
Second,  there  was  consensus  –  spanning  both  emerging  and  advanced  economies  –  in 
confirming, at the very moment the crisis was unfolding, that market economy rules are the 
most effective and efficient means to create prosperous economies and societies.  
Third, there was consensus on working together to reinforce rules, regulations and standards 
in the financial sector with a view to decisively strengthening its resilience and improving the 
coordination  of  fiscal  and  structural  policies  within  a  framework  for  strong,  stable  and 
sustainable growth.  
This  was  no  time  for  complacency.  The  unity  of  the  international  community  made  a 
difference. We avoided a depression, and the recovery began in the second half of 2009.  
This is still no time for complacency. What we need today is not “wars” of any kind, but a 
strong and renewed commitment to confident and resolute cooperation.  
Together we must say “no” to protectionism and “no” to beggar-thy-neighbour policies. The 
international  community  can  and  must  continue  to  make  a  difference  by  being  united  and 
showing a strong sense of medium and long-term direction.  
I thank you for your attention. 
