European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
and Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
2 December 2010. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting. 
Based on its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council confirmed that 
the  current  key  ECB  interest  rates  are  appropriate.  It  therefore  decided  to  leave  them 
unchanged. Taking into account all the new information and analyses which have become 
available since our meeting on 4 November 2010, we continue to expect price developments 
to  remain  moderate  over  the  policy-relevant  medium-term  horizon.  Recent  economic  data 
are  consistent  with  a  positive  underlying  momentum  of  the  recovery,  while  uncertainty  is 
elevated. Our monetary analysis confirms that inflationary pressures over the medium term 
remain contained. We expect price stability to be maintained over the medium term, thereby 
supporting the purchasing power of euro area households. Inflation expectations are firmly 
anchored  in  line  with  our  aim  of  keeping  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the 
medium term. The firm anchoring of inflation expectations is of the essence. 
The  Governing  Council  today  also  decided  to  continue  conducting  its  main  refinancing 
operations  (MROs)  and  the  special-term  refinancing  operations  with  a  maturity  of  one 
maintenance  period  as  fixed  rate  tender  procedures  with  full  allotment  for  as  long  as 
necessary, and at least until the end of the third maintenance period of 2011 on 12 April 2011. 
Furthermore, the Governing Council decided to conduct the three-month longer-term refinancing 
operations (LTROs) to be allotted on 26 January, 23 February and 30 March 2011 as fixed 
rate tender procedures with full allotment. The rates in these three-month operations will be 
fixed at the average rate of the MROs over the life of the respective LTRO. 
Overall,  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  remains  accommodative.  The  stance,  the 
provision  of  liquidity  and  the  allotment  modes  will  be  adjusted  as  appropriate,  taking  into 
account the fact that all the non-standard measures taken during the period of acute financial 
market  tensions  are,  by  construction,  temporary  in  nature.  Accordingly,  the  Governing 
Council will continue to monitor all developments over the period ahead very closely. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Euro area real GDP grew by 0.4% on a quarterly basis in the third quarter of 2010, following 
exceptional  growth  of  1.0%  in  the  second  quarter.  Recent  statistical  releases  and  survey-
based  evidence  generally  confirm  that  the  positive  underlying  momentum  of  the  economic 
recovery in the euro area remains in place. In line with previous expectations, this implies 
ongoing real GDP growth in the fourth quarter of this year. Euro area exports should further 
benefit  from  a  continued  recovery  in  the  world  economy.  At  the  same  time,  private  sector 
domestic demand should increasingly contribute to growth, supported by the accommodative 
monetary policy stance and the measures adopted to restore the functioning of the financial 
system.  However,  the  recovery  in  activity  is  expected  to  be  dampened  by  the  process  of 
balance sheet adjustment in various sectors. 
This assessment is also reflected in the December 2010 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, according to which annual real GDP growth will range between 
1.6% and 1.8% in 2010, between 0.7% and 2.1%% in 2011 and between 0.6% and 2.8% in 
2012. Compared with the September 2010 ECB staff macroeconomic projections, the range 
for 2010 has narrowed somewhat and shifted towards the upper end of September’s range, 
while  the  range  for  2011  is  slightly  narrower.  The  December  2010  Eurosystem  staff 
projections are broadly in line with forecasts by international organisations. 
BIS Review 163/2010 
 1
In the Governing Council’s assessment, the risks to this economic outlook are tilted to the 
downside, with uncertainty remaining elevated. On the one hand, global trade may continue 
to grow more rapidly than expected, thereby supporting euro area exports. At the same time, 
it is to be noted that the level of business confidence in the euro area remains relatively high. 
On the other hand, downside risks relate to the tensions in some segments of the financial 
markets and their potential spillover to the euro area real economy. Further downside risks 
relate to renewed increases in oil and other commodity prices, protectionist pressures and 
the possibility of a disorderly correction of global imbalances. 
With regard to price developments, euro area annual HICP inflation was 1.9% in November, 
according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  unchanged  from  October.  In  the  next  few  months 
HICP inflation rates will hover around current levels before moderating again in the course of 
next  year.  Overall,  in  the  period  ahead  inflation  rates  should  remain  moderate.  Inflation 
expectations over the medium to longer term continue to be firmly anchored in line with the 
Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term. 
This assessment is also reflected in the December 2010 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation in a range between 1.5% 
and 1.7% for 2010, between 1.3% and 2.3% for 2011 and between 0.7% and 2.3% for 2012. 
Compared  with  the  ECB  staff  projections  published  in  September,  the  range  for  2010  is 
unchanged,  while  the  range  for  2011  is  marginally  higher.  Available  forecasts  from 
international organisations provide a broadly similar picture. 
Risks  to  the  outlook  for  price  developments  are  broadly  balanced.  Upside  risks  relate,  in 
particular,  to  developments  in  energy  and  non-energy  commodity  prices.  Furthermore, 
increases in indirect taxes and administered prices may be greater than currently expected, 
owing  to  the  need  for  fiscal  consolidation  in  the  coming  years.  At  the  same  time,  risks  to 
domestic price and cost developments are still expected to be contained. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  M3  remained  broadly 
unchanged  at  1.0%  in  October,  after  1.1%  in  September  2010.  The  annual  growth  rate  of 
loans to the private sector increased to 1.4% in October from 1.2% in the previous month. 
Broad  money  and  loan  growth  hence  remained  low,  supporting  the  assessment  that  the 
underlying pace of monetary expansion is moderate and that inflationary pressures over the 
medium term are contained. 
The  steepness  of  the  yield  curve  has  continued  to  lessen  somewhat,  implying  a  gradual 
softening  of  the  dampening  impact  on  M3  that  was  associated  with  shifts  of  funds  from 
monetary assets to longer-term financial assets outside M3. The interest rate constellation 
also includes a further widening in the spread between interest rates paid on short-term time 
deposits and those paid on overnight deposits. As a result, annual M1 growth has continued 
to moderate, standing at 4.9% in October 2010, after 6.2% in September, while the annual 
growth rate of other short-term deposits continues to become less negative. 
The  annual  growth  rate  of  bank  loans  to  the  private  sector  continues  to  conceal  positive 
growth  in  loans  to  households,  with  2.9%  in  October  after  2.8%  in  September,  and  still 
negative  growth  in  loans  to  non-financial  corporations,  which  stood  at  –0.6%  in  October, 
unchanged from September. When correcting for the impact of derecognition of loans from 
bank  balance  sheets,  the  growth  in  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  continued  to 
strengthen, further confirming that a turning point was reached earlier in 2010. 
Over the past few months, banks have generally stabilised the size of their balance sheets 
while expanding the provision of credit to the private sector. However, the challenge remains 
to  expand  the  availability  of  such  credit  when  demand  picks  up  further.  To  address  this 
challenge, where necessary, it is essential for banks to retain earnings, to turn to the market 
to  strengthen  further  their  capital  bases  or  to  take  full  advantage  of  government  support 
measures for recapitalisation. 
2 
 BIS Review 163/2010
To sum up, the current key ECB interest rates remain appropriate. We therefore decided to 
leave them unchanged. Taking into account all the new information and analyses which have 
become  available  since  our  meeting  on  4  November  2010,  we  continue  to  expect  price 
developments  to  remain  moderate  over  the  policy-relevant  medium-term  horizon.  Recent 
economic  data  are  consistent  with  a  positive  underlying  momentum  of  the  recovery,  while 
uncertainty is elevated. A cross-check of the outcome of our economic analysis with that of 
the  monetary  analysis  confirms  that  inflationary  pressures  over  the  medium  term  remain 
contained.  We  expect  price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby 
supporting the purchasing power of euro area households. Inflation expectations are firmly 
anchored  in  line  with  our  aim  of  keeping  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the 
medium term. The firm anchoring of inflation expectations is of the essence. 
Turning to fiscal policies, while budgetary developments for some euro area countries are 
more  favourable  than  expected,  concerns  about  unsustainable  fiscal  positions  and  their 
vulnerability  to  adverse  market  reactions  remain  very  high  for  others  and  have  had 
repercussions  throughout  the  euro  area.  In  this  environment,  there  is  a  clear  need  for  the 
responsible authorities to strengthen confidence in sound public finances, thereby reducing 
risk premia in interest rates and supporting sustainable growth over the medium term. At the 
same  time,  all  euro  area  countries  should  pursue  ambitious  and  credible  multi-year 
consolidation  strategies  and  implement  fully  the  planned  corrective  measures,  focusing  on 
the expenditure side. In their 2011 budgets, countries need to specify the necessary fiscal 
adjustment measures in detail, while standing ready to correct any slippages from the fiscal 
objectives announced. 
Substantial and far-reaching structural reforms should be rapidly implemented to enhance 
the  prospects  for  higher  sustainable  growth.  Major  reforms  are  particularly  necessary  in 
those  countries  that  have  experienced  a  loss  of  competitiveness  in  the  past  or  that  are 
suffering from high fiscal and external deficits. The removal of labour market rigidities would 
further  support  the  adjustment  process  of  these  economies.  Increasing  product  market 
competition, particularly in the services sectors, would also facilitate the restructuring of the 
economy and encourage innovation and the adoption of new technologies. Such measures 
are crucial for enhancing productivity growth, one of the main drivers of long-term growth. All 
these structural reforms should be supported by an appropriate restructuring of the banking 
sector. Sound balance sheets, effective risk management and transparent, robust business 
models remain key to strengthening banks’ resilience to shocks and to ensuring adequate 
access  to  finance,  thereby  laying  the  foundations  for  sustainable  growth  and  financial 
stability. 
Finally,  let  me  recall  that  the  Governing  Council  welcomes  the  economic  and  financial 
adjustment programme which was agreed by the Irish government following the successful 
conclusion of the negotiations with the European Commission, in liaison with the ECB, and 
the International Monetary Fund. The programme contains the necessary elements to bring 
about a sustainable stabilisation of the Irish economy. It addresses in a decisive manner the 
economic  and  financial  causes  underlying  current  market  concerns  and  will  thereby 
contribute to restoring confidence and safeguarding financial stability in the euro area. The 
Governing  Council  welcomes  the  commitment  of  the  Irish  public  authorities  to  take  any 
further measures that may become appropriate to achieve the objectives of the programme. 
BIS Review 163/2010 
 3
