Jan F Qvigstad: On making good decisions 
Speech  by  Mr  Jan  F  Qvigstad,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway), at the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters, Oslo, 9 November 2010. 
The  text  below  may  differ  from  the  actual  presentation.  This  speech  does  not  contain  assessments  of  the 
economic situation or current interest rate setting. 
 I would like to thank Øyvind Eitrheim, Amund Holmsen, Marie Norum Lerbak, Kjetil Olsen and Øistein Røisland for 
their valuable assistance in preparing this lecture. I would also like to thank Helle Snellingen for her contribution to 
the translation of the Norwegian text into English. 
Introduction 
1. 
When  Hans  Rasmus  Astrup  was  appointed  minister  in  Johan  Sverdrup’s  government  in 
1885, he sold his business in Stockholm and moved back to Norway. As I mentioned in my 
lecture here two years ago1, Astrup was at the time perhaps Norway’s wealthiest man. On 
his return to Norway, he needed a place to live, bought a plot of land here in Drammensveien 
and decided to build the house we are sitting in now.  
The  question  might  be  raised  whether  it  was  a  good  decision  to  build  such  a  large  and 
ostentatious house. But Astrup was not just looking for a home for his family. The house was 
also intended to provide a venue for interdisciplinary and political discussions.2 
We all make many decisions every single day, some more important than others. And we all 
presumably want these decisions to be good ones. But how can we ensure that a decision is 
good? This is a weighty and far-reaching question. If I am to make meaningful contribution, I 
will need to limit my focus.  
Norges  Bank  makes  many  decisions.  The  monetary  policy  decisions  every  six  weeks  are 
awaited with particular interest. Based on my experience from interest rate decision-making, I 
will focus on how the quality of a decision can be assessed. Even though I am speaking from 
my  own  perspective,  I  hope  I  am  able  to  touch  on  more  general  issues  that  are  of  wider 
relevance. 
Independence provides a sound framework for interest rate decisions  
2. 
Most countries have now delegated the task of ensuring price stability to the central bank. 
This  is  also  the  case  in  Norway.  The  government  has  set  an  inflation  target  for  monetary 
policy and delegated the operational conduct of monetary policy to Norges Bank.3  
This framework can be regarded as an institutional solution to the problem of avoiding major 
mistakes.  An  independent  central  bank  is  better  able  to  give  priority  to  long-term  interests 
over short-term gains.  
                                                 
1   The lecture “On keeping promises”, commentaries by Endre Stavang and Henrik Syse and Francis Sejersted’s 
summary of the debate are published in Norges Bank Occasional Paper No.39 (2009). 
2   Kim  Gunnar  Helsvig  (2007):  Elitisme  på  norsk.  Det  Norske  Videnskaps-Akademi  1945–2007  [Elitism  in 
Norway. The Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters 1945–2007], Novus forlag, Oslo, pp. 18–19. 
3   See inter alia Report No. 29 (2000–2001) to the Storting, Guidelines for economic policy, Ministry of Finance, 
and the Regulation on Monetary Policy of 29 March 2001. 
BIS Review 147/2010 
 1
That  it  is  tempting,  but  dangerous,  for  a  government  to  focus  on  short-term  gains  was  a 
lesson Greek politicians learned this spring. Government spending exceeded revenues over 
a  long  period.  Accounts  and  official  statistics  were  fudged.  Politicians  may  have  hoped  to 
secure  a  quick  admission  for  Greece  into  the  euro  area,  with  the  advantages  this  would 
bring. They may have also believed that high government spending and low taxes might help 
their  re-election  prospects.  Instead,  they  now  have  to  steer  the  country  through  harsh 
reforms and substantial cuts.4 
The Norwegian economist Finn Kydland received the Nobel Prize for economics in 2004 for 
having  shown  that  on  the  whole,  monetary  policy  decisions  are  better  if  policymakers 
delegate interest rate setting to an independent central bank under a clear mandate.5 As a 
central bank we must adhere to the mandate we have been given and be able to set the key 
rate based on a professional assessment.6 This is a system that lays a solid foundation for 
making good decisions.  
We make decisions under uncertainty 
3. 
Independence  alone  does  not  guarantee  good  decisions.  Even  if  an  independent  central 
bank is better positioned to avoid having short-term expediency and changing preferences 
dictate interest rate policy, its decisions must be made under considerable uncertainty.  
We have imperfect knowledge about the state of the economy, nor are we absolutely certain 
of  how  economic  relationships  function.  Alan  Greenspan,  the  former  Chairman  of  the  US 
Federal Reserve, described this in the following words: 
“Uncertainty is not just an important feature of the monetary policy landscape; it is 
the defining characteristic of that landscape” 7  
Sometimes,  the  nature  of  the  uncertainty  allows  one  to  draw  inferences  regarding  the 
probabilities  of  different  outcomes.  It  is  possible,  in  other  words,  to  judge  the  risks  one  is 
facing, at least to a certain degree. In that case, decisions can be made on the basis of a 
calculated risk, which is an approach underlying theories of equity investment,8 for example.  
But  the  financial  crisis  reminded  us  that  keeping  the  overall  risk  picture  in  view  may  be 
difficult. When Queen Elizabeth visited the London School of Economics in autumn 2008 she 
asked why no one had foreseen the crisis. The British Academy Forum replied to the Queen 
in a letter six months later. Included in the letter was the following: 
 
                                                 
4   The euro area operates under rules intended in principle to facilitate long-term policy choices. The Maastricht 
criteria require participating states to keep fiscal deficits and public debt within defined limits. Recent history 
has shown that this framework must be reinforced through sanctions. Decision-makers need an incentive to 
comply with the rules in practice. 
5   See  Finn  E.  Kydland  and  Edward  C.  Prescott  (1977):  “Rules  Rather  than  Discretion:  The  Inconsistency  of 
Optimal Plans”, Journal of Political Economy, 85, no. 3, pp. 473–491. 
6   See  Arne  Kloster  and  Kristin  Solberg-Johansen  (2006):  “Forecasting  in  Norges  Bank”,  Economic  Bulletin, 
3/2006,  Jarle  Bergo  “Interest  rate  projections  in  theory  and  practice”  (speech  at  the  Foreign  Exchange 
Seminar of Norwegian Economists on 26 January 2007) and Svein Gjedrem “Inflation targeting – some theory 
with main focus on practice” (speech at the Centre of Monetary Economics/Norwegian School of Management 
on 8 June 2004. 
In  Alan  Greenspan’s  opening  remarks 
http://www.bis.org/review/r030905a.pdf. 
the  Jackson  Hole  symposium 
in  2003,  available  at: 
to 
7  
8   See  for  example  William  F.  Sharpe  (1964):  “Capital  Asset  Prices:  A  Theory  of  Market  Equilibrium  under 
Conditions of Risk”, Journal of Finance, vol. XIX, no. 3 and Harry M. Markowitz (1952): “Portfolio selection”, 
Journal of Finance, vol. XII, no. 1. 
2 
 BIS Review 147/2010
“One of our major banks, now mainly in public ownership, reputedly had 4000 risk 
managers. But the difficulty was seeing the risk to the system as a whole rather 
than to any specific financial instrument or loan (...) They frequently lost sight of 
the bigger picture.”9  
In setting the key policy rate, too, we often face more fundamental uncertainty, where it is 
very  difficult  to  calculate  probabilities  for  possible  scenarios.10  In  decision  situations  like 
these, it may be appropriate to establish routines that can guard against especially severe 
consequences.  
Many might believe that since Norges Bank’s key policy rate is set every six weeks, there 
might be scope for correction should it transpire that economic developments were not as 
expected. To a certain extent this is the case. But since it takes time for the effects of our 
decisions to come into evidence, our scope for correction is in reality rather narrow. Setting 
the key rate at an inappropriate level for a period of time, may have serious consequences 
for the Norwegian economy.  
Without  complete  and  reliable  information  at  our  disposal,  it  is  easy  to  err.  A  number  of 
studies  have  shown  that  in  such  situations  humans  often  resort  to  more  or  less  qualified 
guesses, gut feelings or rules of thumb. 
Allow me to offer an example involving distance judgement. Ordinarily, the closer an object 
is,  the  more  clearly  we  will  see  it.  Thus,  if  they  see  an  object  clearly,  most  people  will 
perceive it as nearby. But when the astronauts landed on the moon, they had great difficulty 
judging  distances,  nearly  always  underestimating  them.  The  reason  was  that  visibility  was 
unusually clear and they were in a landscape without known references.11  
One  approach  to  uncertainty  is  to  do  what  others  do  in  similar  circumstances.  The  UK 
decided to abandon the gold standard in summer 1931. In practice this meant a devaluation 
of the pound sterling against the US dollar. A few days later, Norway and the other Nordic 
countries decided to follow suit. History has shown that the countries that devalued in 1931 
weathered the depression better than those which did not.12 Following the British lead was a 
decision that produced a good outcome.  
In 1949 there was a new sterling devaluation, this time 30 per cent against the US dollar. As 
in 1931, the Norwegian government announced that the value of the krone would be lowered 
correspondingly13. But unlike at that time, the level of activity in Norway was now high, and 
                                                 
9   The letter from the British Academy to the Queen is available at:  
http://media.ft.com/cms/3e3b6ca8-7a08-11de-b86f-00144feabdc0.pdf. 
10   See Frank H. Knight (1921): Risk, uncertainty, and profit, Hart, Schaffner & Marx; Houghton Mifflin Co, Boston. 
11   See the article “Fotspor med historie” [Footsteps with history], Aftenposten, 8 July 1989 and Rod Pyle (2007): 
Destination  Moon:  The  Apollo  Missions  in  the  Astronauts’  Own  Words,  Harper  Paperbacks.  For  further 
discussion  and  additional  examples,  see  Thomas  Gilovich,  Dale  Griffin  and  Daniel  Kahneman  (2002): 
Heuristics and biases. The psychology of intuitive judgment, Cambridge University Press. 
12   See  the  discussion  in  Tore  Jørgen  Hanisch,  Espen  Søilen  and  Gunhild  Ecklund  (1999):  Norsk  økonomisk 
politikk  i  det  20.  århundre.  Verdivalg  i  en  åpen  økonomi,  [Norwegian  economic  history  in  the  20th  century. 
Ethical choices in an open economy] Høyskoleforlaget, Kristiansand. 
13   The government had discussed how Norway should respond to a British devaluation. However, they had not 
reached a final conclusion and the government was split. The Minister of Trade and Industry at the time, Erik 
Brofoss,  advocated  following  UK  actions  to  the  full,  and  was  supported  in  this  view  by  Gunnar  Jahn,  the 
director of Norges Bank. They feared a substantial loss of competitiveness if Norway was the only one among 
its trading partners not to follow the sterling devaluation. When the magnitude of the UK devaluation became 
known, Gunnar Jahn was attending the annual meeting of the IMF in Washington. He had received provisional 
authorisation from the government to inform the IMF that Norway would follow a moderate British devaluation. 
The expectation was a sterling devaluation of around 20 per cent. However, Erik Brofoss had informed Jahn 
that  he  favoured  following  the  UK  move  regardless  of  how  much  they  devalued.  At  an  IMF  dinner  on  the 
evening of 16 September Jahn received a business card with the date “18 September”, the number “30.5” and 
the words “Tell Bramsnæs” written on it (Bramsnæs was the director of Danmarks Nationalbank, who was also 
BIS Review 147/2010 
 3
demand pressures were elevated. The krone devaluation triggered high inflation.14 This time, 
the rule “do what the UK does” contributed to a less favourable outcome.15 
Groups often make better decisions than individuals 
4.  
So what steps can we take to ensure that important decisions are the best they can be, even 
if they have to be made under uncertainty?  
In  his  novel  L,  Erlend  Loe  discusses  advantages  and  drawbacks  of  different  decision 
systems. The author-narrator has embarked on an expedition to a South Pacific island with 
six  companions.  On  the  island  they  experiment  with  different  forms  of  social  organisation. 
After  the  group  tries  despotism,  anarchy,  democracy,  etc.,  Loe  concludes  that  enlightened 
despotism has much to recommend it:  
“Of course it very much depends on who the ruler is and how enlightened he or 
she  is,  but  at  its  best  this  is  probably  one  of  the  more  sensible  forms  of 
government.” 16  
Martin, one of the other members of the expedition, also thinks that this system might work 
well. He stresses, however, that the form of despotism must be a truly enlightened one:  
“Not  just  moderately  enlightened,  but  ultra-enlightened.  The  ruler  needs  to  be 
highly educated, plus be well travelled and have lots and lots of varied interests 
(…)  Just  find  an  exceedingly  likeable  individual,  someone  you  trust,  someone 
who is warm-hearted and good-natured, and ask him or her to manage things as 
best they can.” 17  
Most  people  would  probably  argue  that  despite  certain  benefits,  enlightened  despotism 
would  not  be  very  robust.  As  you  may  have  noted,  a  number  of  assumptions  underlie 
Martin’s  conclusion,  and  these  assumptions  are  not  always  satisfied.  Delegating  decision-
making responsibility to a group may help to guard against situations where the individual’s 
weaknesses  and  vested  interests  come  to  dominate.  It  can  also  provide  some  insurance 
                                                                                                                                                      
attending the IMF meeting). The business card revealed the date and magnitude of the British devaluation. It 
was a busy night. Jahn sent a telegram to Brofoss where he recommended that Norway devalue the krone to 
the same extent as the UK. By then the Ministry of Trade and Industry had already been informed of the UK 
decision through official channels. Then, without first consulting with the other members of the government, 
Brofoss  decided  that  the  Norwegian  krone  should  be  devalued  by  30.5  per  cent.  After  being  instructed  by 
Brofoss,  Gunnar  Jahn  informed  the  IMF  of  the  decision  on  behalf  of  the  Norwegian  government  in  a  letter 
dated 17 September. See Gunhild J. Ecklund (2008): “Creating a new role for an old central bank: The Bank 
of Norway 1945–1954”, Series of Dissertations 2/2008, BI Norwegian School of Management, pp. 141–143 
and  William  Jansen  (1975):  “Devalueringen  i  1949”  [The  devaluation  of  1949],  History  thesis,  NTNU, 
Trondheim. 
14   For more on the background for these decisions, see Gunnar Jahn, Alf Eriksen and Preben Munthe (1966): 
Norges  Bank  gjennom  150  år,  [Norges  Bank  through  150  years]  Norges  Banks  seddeltrykkeri,  Oslo  and 
Nicolai Rygg (1950): Norges Bank i mellomkrigstiden, [Norges Bank in the interwar period] Gyldendal Norsk 
Forlag, Oslo. 
15   In  1965  the  former  director  of  Statistics  Norway  Odd  Aukrust  assessed  the  successes  and  mistakes  in 
Norwegian  economic  policy  since  the  Second  World  War.  Concerning  the  devaluation  decision  in  1949  he 
writes: “This devaluation was probably the most important single economic decision made in this country since 
1945, with a greater impact on prices and income distribution than any wage settlement. There can hardly be 
any doubt that in the 1950s, price changes would have been less abrupt in Norway if the devaluation had not 
taken  place.”  See  Odd  Aukrust  (1965):  Tjue  års  økonomisk  politikk  i  Norge:  suksesser  og  mistak,  [Twenty 
years of economic policy in Norway: successes and mistakes] Articles from Statistics Norway, no. 15. 
16   Erlend Loe (1999): L, J. W Cappelens forlag, p. 376. 
17   Loe (1999), pp. 397–398. 
4 
 BIS Review 147/2010
against serious missteps, which seems to be particularly important when decisions are made 
under uncertainty.  
This  notion  is  part  of  the  justification  for  the  jury  system  in  our  courts  of  law.  The  French 
philosopher Marquis de Condorcet’s now well known jury theorem states that the higher the 
number  of  the  group  is,  the  higher  the  probability  is  that  the  group  will  make  the  correct 
decision by majority vote.18 Group decision making has been widely accepted, not only by 
the courts but also by business, public administration and elected governing bodies. 
In his book The Wisdom of Crowds, James Surowiecki cites a number of examples where 
large groups outperform individuals or small groups of experts. Contestants on the television 
game  show  Who  Wants  to  Be  a  Millionaire?  have  various  so-called  “lifelines”,  including 
telephoning a smart friend or asking the studio audience for help. It has transpired that the 
studio  audience  is  the  contestants’  absolute  best  bet.  The  majority  of  the  studio  audience 
votes for the correct answer nine out of ten times, beating out smart friends, who provide the 
correct answer only 65 per cent of the time.19  
This  decision-making  strategy,  where  each  individual  in  a  group  gives  an  answer 
independently  of  the  others,  can  function  well  for  some  types  of  decisions.  But  there  may 
also be advantages to allowing the group to arrive at a decision through deliberation.  
The economists Alan S. Blinder and John Morgan have shown in several experiments that 
students who work together to solve a problem obtain a better result than the average of the 
students who work alone.20 In Blinder’s words:  
“  …the  group  seems  to  foster  some  sort  of  collective  wisdom  that  makes  the 
whole (a bit) greater than the sum of its parts.”21  
These experiments indicate that there may be benefits to be gained from group interaction, 
which  can  provide  increased  access  to  varied  knowledge,  deconstruct  opinions  and  test 
viewpoints. We can learn from each other.  
I have learned a lot in this area from the organisational psychologist Ingeborg Baustad and 
her  colleagues.  Baustad  argues  that  there  may  be  a  relationship  between  intragroup 
communication and task solving. Some tasks are so simple that unilateral communication is 
sufficient. For deliberative tasks the requirements are higher. Active bilateral communication 
is necessary, with a willingness to listen to the views of the others in the group. For more 
strategic  decision-making,  the  level  of  communication  must  be  raised  a  notch  further.  The 
hallmarks of such a high communication level are curiosity about the other person’s views 
and the ability to broaden one’s views or change one’s mind as a result of discussion with 
others.  This  type  of  communication  normally  requires  a  high  level  of  professional 
                                                 
18   This outcome assumes that each member of the group singly is more likely to arrive at the correct conclusion 
than the wrong one. 
19   See James Surowiecki (2004): The wisdom of crowds. Little, Brown, London, pp. 3–4. This example was also 
cited  in  the  speech  “Uncertainty  in  macroeconomic  policy  making:  art  or  science?”,  which  Mervyn  King, 
Governor  of 
is  available  at: 
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/news/2010/034.htm  .  That  we  both  use  this  example  may  not 
be a coincidence. I received my copy of The Wisdom of Crowds from Dr. John Llewellyn. Llewellyn and King 
were fellow students at Cambridge. 
the  Bank  of  England,  gave  on  22  March  2010,  and 
20   See Alan S. Blinder and John Morgan (2005): “Are two heads better than one: An experimental analysis of 
group versus individual decision making”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 37, no 5, pp. 789–811 and 
Alan S. Blinder og John Morgan (2007): “Leadership in groups: a monetary policy experiment”, CEPS Working 
Paper No. 151. 
21   Alan S. Blinder (2008): “On the design of monetary policy committees”, Norges Bank Working Paper, 2008/6. 
BIS Review 147/2010 
 5
competence,  mutual  sympathy  and  trust  and  a  large  degree  of  openness.  The  potential 
reward is better decisions by the group.22  
As in most central banks, interest rate decisions in Norges Bank are entrusted to a committee. 
Committee deliberations are informed by advice given by the governor and deputy governor 
of  Norges  Bank.  Norges  Bank’s  Executive  Board  has  seven  members.  The  number  of 
committee members at other central banks varies between three and 22.23 A committee of 
many  members  can  draw  on  an  ample  supply  of  varied  backgrounds  and  opinions,  but  a 
larger number will then also have to have a say in the final decision. While research has yet 
to  determine  the  optimal  committee  size,  Anne  Sibert,  one  of  the  experts  in  this  field,  has 
said that the committee should be “dinner size”.24  
But groups are no guarantee for good decisions 
5. 
Norges Bank’s Executive Board can be described as a collegial committee. The committee 
seeks consensus through deliberations and its members stand behind the final decision.  
The  deliberative  process  does  not  necessarily  lead  to  a  better  decision.  When  the  group 
members share the same world view and thinking, groupthink can lead the members astray. 
There is typically little dissent in discussions where participants think alike. The group can 
therefore be convinced that their common standpoint must be right.25  
Nor  is  it  unusual  for  independent  thinking  to  be  lost  in  a  group  setting.  At  an  internal 
conference, the research department at Norges Bank was divided into three groups tasked 
with answering three sets of questions. Unbeknownst to the other participants, one member 
in each group had been instructed to argue for the wrong answer within one of the question 
sets. They did their job well. The groups did very poorly on the set of questions where the 
conference organiser’s confederates argued for the wrong answer.26  
There is thus a danger that members of a group can be swayed by other members to make 
the  wrong  choice.  But  falling  into  the  opposite  trap  –  paying  insufficient  heed  to  others’ 
advice  –  is  not  unusual  either.  This  is  a  pitfall  that  many  people,  who  have  been  in 
management  for  a  while,  will  be  acquainted  with.  Psychologists  have  known  that  such 
                                                 
22   See more about this in Erling S. Andersen, Ingeborg Baustad and Åge Sørsveen (1994): Ledelse på norsk 
[Norwegian management], Ad Notam Gyldendal, Oslo, pp. 117–126. 
23   Three in Switzerland and 22 in the European Central Bank. 
24   See  more  about  this  in  for  example  Alan  S.  Blinder  (2008)  and  Anne  Sibert  (2006):  “Central  Banking  by 
Committee”, International Finance 9:2, pp. 145–168. In September 2007 Norges Bank hosted a conference on 
monetary policy committees. The opening address was given by Alan S. Blinder, former vice chairman of the 
Federal Reserve Board, and is one of the economists who has focused most on group decision making. Anne 
Sibert also attended this conference. 
25   It has also been shown that when people are in groups of like-minded persons, and especially when they are 
socially  isolated,  they  are  prone  to  taking  more  extreme  positions  than  they  would  on  their  own.  The 
psychologist Irving L. Janis is particularly known for his research into groupthink. His analyses concerned US 
foreign  policy,  where  groupthink  might  deserve  much  of  the  blame  for  competent  persons  making  poor 
decisions. See Irving L. Janis (1972): Victims of groupthink; a psychological study of foreign-policy decisions 
and fiascoes, Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston. 
26   The psychologist Salomon Asch conducted a number of similar experiments in the 1950s. He found that “the 
tendency to conformity in our society is so strong that reasonably intelligent and well meaning young people 
are  willing  to  call  black  white.”  See  Salomon  E.  Asch  (1995):  “Opinions  and  social  pressure”,  Scientific 
American, vol. 193, no. 5, pp. 31–35. 
6 
 BIS Review 147/2010
exaggerated self-confidence is found in many occupations.27 There is no reason to believe 
that we economists are so different from others in that regard. 
Norges Bank’s Executive Board consists of five external members with varied backgrounds, 
in  addition  to  the  governor  and  deputy  governor  of  the  Bank.  The external  members  have 
influence  over  decisions  on  a  par  with  the  internal  members.  The  Bank  is  in  a  peculiar 
situation  in  that  the  central  bank  governor  is  both  administrative  head  of  the  Bank  and 
chairman  of  the  Executive  Board.  The  external  members  are  not  full-time  employees  of 
Norges Bank, and their primary occupations are outside the central bank. In this respect, the 
Executive  Board  has  an  important  control  function.  Its  external  members  can  act  as  a 
counterweight to any internal cultures of opinion that may arise at the Bank.28  
In some central banks, such as Sveriges Riksbank and the Bank of England, interest rate 
decisions  are  made  by  individualistic  committees.  Decisions  are  made  by  majority  voting, 
with  each  member  individually  accountable  for  his  or  her  vote.  There  are  advantages  and 
drawbacks  to  both  individualistic  and  collegial  committees.  As  I  discussed  in  last  year’s 
speech,  individual  accountability  can  provide  good  incentives.  There  is  no  one  to  hide 
behind.  At  the  same  time  such  accountability  entails  more  work  and  probably  full-time 
employment  at  the  Bank.  In  that  case,  the  former  outsiders  may  quickly  assimilate  the 
internal culture. The control function of the external members might be lost. 
How do we arrive at a decision? 
6. 
We  also  need  to  think  carefully  about  how  we  should  agree  on  a  decision.  There  two 
approaches: premise-based or conclusion-based.29  
The  two  approaches  may  have  different  outcomes.  Allow  me  to  offer  a  stylised  example. 
Assume that a three-member committee is to reach an interest rate decision. They base their 
decision on two premises: inflation and pressures in the economy. The first member believes 
that inflation has risen more than expected, but finds that the pressures in the economy are 
broadly  as  expected.  The  interest  rate  should  therefore  be  raised.  The  second  member 
believes  that  inflation  is  broadly  as  expected,  but  the  pressures  in  the  economy  are 
surprisingly high on the upside. This member, too, will conclude, that the interest rate should 
                                                 
27   See  overview  and  further  references  in  Carl  Andreas  Claussen,  Egil  Matsen,  Øistein  Røisland  and  Ragnar 
Torvik  (2009):  “Overconfidence,  monetary  policy  committees  and  chairman  dominance”,  Norges  Bank 
Working Paper 2009/17. 
28   The  members  of  the  Executive  Board  are  appointed  by  the  government.  According  to  Proposition  No.  81 
(2002–2003) to the Odelsting, the appointment process shall ensure that the Executive Board reflects a broad 
range  of  backgrounds  and  expertise,  with  particular  emphasis  on  economics  and  finance,  as  well  as  a 
thorough  understanding  of  economic  issues.  The  proposition  states  that  the  Executive  Board  shall  be 
composed  of  persons  of  different  backgrounds  to  ensure  that  it  is  capable  of  being  critical  of  its  own 
assessments. See Proposition No. 81 (2002–2003) to the Odelsting: Om lov om endringer i sentralbankloven 
og 
finansieringsvirksomhetsloven  og  om  opphevelse  av  valutareguleringsloven  og  penge-  og 
kredittreguleringsloven (Concerning an Act to amend the Norges Bank Act and the Financial Institutions Act 
and concerning the repeal of the Exchange Control Act and the Monetary and Credit Policy Act). Ministry of 
Finance. Board appointment guidelines and rules relating to limitations on members’ ownership interests and 
functions are set out in the Norges Bank Act and the Regulation of 7 August 2000 relating to Norges Bank’s 
Executive  Board  members’  relationship  to  other  credit  institutions  and  undertakings.  Executive  Board 
members  cannot  inter  alia  be  married  to  a  member  of  parliament  and  external  members  cannot  receive 
remuneration  from  or  sit  on  the  board  or  supervisory  council  of  financial  institutions,  securities  firms  or 
collective  investment  undertakings.  Nor  are  they  permitted  to  buy  or  sell  fixed  income  or  foreign  exchange 
products when they are in possession of information concerning conditions that may influence prices, unless 
the information is available to the public. In addition, the general impartiality provisions under Section 6 of the 
Public Administration Act apply. 
29   For  a  discussion  of  the  relationship  between  conclusion-based  and  premise-based  decisions,  see  Carl 
Andreas  Claussen  og  Øistein  Røisland  (2010):  “A  quantitative  discursive  dilemma”,  Social  Choice  and 
Welfare, vol. 35, no. 1. 
BIS Review 147/2010 
 7
be adjusted upwards. The third member believes that developments have been as expected 
and concludes that the key rate should remain unchanged. 
In a conclusion-based decision, the majority would vote to increase the key rate. Two out of 
three members came to this conclusion. But a premise-based conclusion would in this case 
have produced a different outcome. Two out of the three members believed that inflation and 
economic pressures were as expected. A premise-based decision would thus leave the key 
rate unchanged. 
Many will favour the premise-based approach because it gives weight to the underlying basis 
for the decisions we make.30 Research has also shown that it is better to discuss and vote on 
the grounds for any disagreements than to go directly to the conclusion.31 At Norges Bank 
we base our procedures on a premise-based decision-making process.  
Economists working at Norges Bank have an important role in decision-making, particularly 
because decisions are premise-based.32 The Bank’s economists thus constitute a stabilising 
element  in  the  decision-making  process  that  is  robust  to  changes  in  central  bank 
management and the Executive Board’s external members. 
For the Bank’s economists to perform this role properly, it is essential that they are of a very 
high  professional  calibre.  Here  the  Executive  Board  also  performs  a  vital  role,  providing 
constant feedback on the quality of the research supporting policy decisions. The Board also 
discusses the Bank’s personnel policy and measures to maintain and develop the skills of 
staff economists. 
But  Norges  Bank  has  a  monopoly  on  setting  the  key  interest  rate  in  Norway.  One  of  the 
dangers of monopolies is a tendency towards complacency, which is why it is imperative to 
be in the critical spotlight. This keeps us, Board and staff economists alike, constantly on our 
toes and helps us to develop as professionals. This, in turn, results in better decisions.  
Every year we must stand to account for the way in which we carry out our mandate. There 
is  reporting  to  the  government  and  hearings  in  the  Storting.  In  addition,  the  Ministry  of 
Finance  commissions  an  independent  review  of  monetary  policy  though  what  is  known  as 
“Norges Bank Watch”.33 At the same time we are open about what we do and why. There are 
external evaluations of work routines and professional standards.34 There are no comparable 
institutions in Norway – there is only one central bank. The benchmark must be international 
best  practice.  The  evaluations  are  generally  performed  by  international  central  banking 
experts or economists at other central banks. 
                                                
 
30   See  for  example  Bruce  Chapman  (2003):  “Rational  Choice  and  Categorical  Reason”,  University  of 
Pennsylvania  Law  Review  151(3),  1169–1210  and  Philip  Pettit  (2001):  “Deliberative  Democracy  and  the 
Discursive Dilemma”, Philosophical Issues (supplement to Noûs) 11, 268–99. 
31   See  the  discussion  in  Carl  Andreas  Claussen  and  Øistein  Røisland  (2010):  “The  discursive  dilemma  in 
monetary policy”, Norges Bank Working Paper 2010/5. It should be noted that premise-based decisions can 
be  vulnerable  to  strategic  behaviour.  It  is  possible  to  vote  on  the  premises  in  such  a  way  as  to  reach  a 
preferred outcome. 
32   The material on which interest rate decisions is based is published on the Norges Bank website. For a more 
detailed discussion, see “On transparency” in Norges Bank Occasional Paper No. 41 (2010). 
33   Reports  from  Norges  Bank  Watch  are  available  at:  http://www.bi.no/en/Research/Research-Centres/Centre-
for-Monetary-Economics-CME/Norges-Bank-Watch/ 
34   See inter alia David Longworth and Asbjørn Rødseth (2003):“Report on the Decision-Making Process and the 
Strategy Document”, Hans Genberg, Charles Wyplosz and Andrea Fracasso (2003):“How  do central banks 
write?  An  Evaluation  of  Inflation  Targeting  Central  Banks”  and  Ingimundur  Fridriksson  (forthcoming):  “The 
Monetary Policy Report Process in Norges Bank”. 
8 
 BIS Review 147/2010
Was the decision good?  
7. 
Even if our delegating authority and critics have access to the background for our decisions 
and the way we arrive at them, one big question still remains: what should the criteria be for 
judging whether our decisions are good?  
The  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  a  natural  place  to  begin  our  assessment.  Have  we  or 
have we not achieved price stability? Even if we make our best efforts, there is no guarantee 
that  we  will  succeed  in  reaching  this  objective.  The  key  policy  rate  is  not  the  only  factor 
affecting  the  economy  and  that  can  disturb  the  outcome.  Even  so,  we  can  give  weight  to 
accurate  information,  assess  the  most  relevant  alternatives  and  listen  to  input.  Making  a 
decision on this basis might excuse us from blame if the outcome should in retrospect turn 
out to be unfavourable.35  
Let us return to the decision in 1949 to follow the pound sterling. As I said, in retrospect the 
consequences of this decision appear to be less favourable. Nor, perhaps, was the decision-
making  process  sufficiently  thorough.  Doubts  have  been  raised  as  to  whether  alternative 
courses of action were adequately assessed.36  
But  the  authorities  apparently  felt  that  they  had  no  choice  other  than  a  comparable 
the  krone.37  Norway’s  competitiveness  could  have  been  weakened 
devaluation  of 
substantially  if  they  had  not  followed  the  British  move.  In  view  of  this,  it  can  therefore  be 
argued that their motives for doing what they did were good ones. 
The 1949 decision also illustrates the problem of counterfactual analyses. Determining what 
might  have  happened  if  the  authorities  had  acted  otherwise  is  no  easy  task.  Allow  me  to 
present a hypothetical example: The central bank thinks financial imbalances are building up, 
and the Executive Board sets the key rate higher than it otherwise would have done. While a 
financial  crisis  does  not  actually  materialise,  unemployment  rises  and  economic  growth 
slows. Inflation could fall below target. In this situation, it may be difficult to assess whether 
the Board made a good decision to raise the key rate.  
Such assessments of motives and outcomes are also the subject of moral philosophy and its 
discussion of what constitutes a good decision. In setting the key rate, both intentionalist and 
deontological ethics will provide us with the same guidance as to what good decisions are. In 
both cases, the decision must be based on achieving the objective of monetary policy, and 
                                                 
35   A fundamental principle of criminal law is that a person can only be judged if that person can be charged with 
a criminal offence and is proven guilty. There are two forms of guilt: One is guilty with intent, which typically 
means  that  the  offender  intended  to  produce  the  negative  outcome.  The  other  form  of  guilt  is  negligence, 
which somewhat simplified implies a failure to use reasonable care or prudence. In determining whether an 
offender has acted with negligence, his behaviour must be measured against ordinary reasonable and prudent 
behaviour in a comparable situation. A Supreme Court ruling from 1984 provides an illustration of negligence 
consideration. The Supreme Court was to decide whether a the driver of a car was negligent when in a very 
difficult intersection he crashed into a car that had the right of way on the other crossing road. The collision 
occurred in the midst of rush traffic, and the Court argued that crossing traffic should be expected at that time. 
However, a number of conditions made it difficult for the  man to see the traffic before he  was close to the 
intersection. It was dark, with rain and sleet and icy roads. On the other hand, the driver was very familiar with 
the site and he should have been aware of the all the risks at the intersection. As he did not adjust his driving 
so  that  he  was  able  to  stop,  the  Court  found  that  the  driver  had  acted  negligently.  See  Norsk  Retstidende 
(Norwegian journal of law) 1984–91. 
36   Preben  Munthe,  professor  of  economics,  believes  that  the  government  was  probably  surprised  by  the 
magnitude of the sterling devaluation. He  writes: “When the authorities learned of the British decision, they 
probably felt they were under time pressure, which is why the situation was not nearly as thoroughly discussed 
as it actually could have been.” See Jahn Eriksen and Munthe (1996), p. 371. 
37   Nor was this decision criticised by the business sector or the press, and in its publication “Økonomiske utsyn 
over året 1949”, Statistics Norway wrote that “the Norwegian external economy is so closely linked to that of 
the  UK,  that  there  was  hardly  any  alternative  to  following  the  pound  sterling”.  See  Jahn,  Eriksen  and 
Munthe (1966), p. 371. The decision to devalue the krone in 1949 is also discussed in Jansen (1975). 
BIS Review 147/2010 
 9
that alone. From a consequentialist standpoint, it matters little whether the intentions were 
good, if the consequences of the decision were not. Our decisions are good only if we reach 
the  objective  of  price  stability.  As  mentioned,  our  performance  cannot  be  measured  by 
whether  inflation  is  always  at  target,  partly  because  the  economy  is  frequently  exposed  to 
abrupt and unexpected shocks. We will nearly always be slightly over or slightly under the 
target. But over time we can expect that these disturbances will even out, and in the long run 
we must also be evaluated on whether or not we achieve the objective of monetary policy. 
Have we, or have we not, achieved price stability these past ten years?  
Conclusion 
8. 
Making  a  good  decision  is  of  little  use  unless  one  also  manages  to  have  it  implemented. 
Norges Bank enjoys a privileged position. When we make a decision, we can also implement 
it. Our independence gives us the freedom to decide what the key policy rate shall be.  
In other areas of society, it is not always the case that those who are qualified to make good 
decisions also have the power to implement them. In the interest of democratic governance 
there may be good reasons why this is so, but the decision-making process will then require 
considerable attention.  
We can concentrate on promoting an understanding of the decisions we make. We must be 
transparent  about  what  we  do,  and  explain  premises,  economic  relationships  and  results. 
Our  decisions  must  be  well  communicated  and  understood.  If  we  are  unsuccessful  in  this 
respect, our reputation may be impaired.  
Independence,  transparency  and  good  decisions  are  intertwined.  Independence  is  a 
precondition for keeping promises. Keeping promises was the topic of my lecture here two 
years ago.38 We must also communicate and explain interest rate decisions to the public so 
that  they  have  confidence  that  we  are  discharging  our  duties  properly.  Transparency  is  a 
precondition for accountability and that was the topic of my lecture here last year.39 Today I 
have  been  speaking  about  how  we  can  arrive  at  decisions  that  are  good  ones.  Adequate 
institutional arrangements, high-quality professionals and appropriate routines are important 
elements for doing just that. 
Hans Rasmus Astrup died in 1898, twelve years after this building was completed. Astrup’s 
two daughters sold the house to the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters a few years 
after their father’s passing. They gave the Academy a gift of 106,000 kroner to go towards 
buying the house. The remaining funds were raised from donations.40  
Was the decision to build this stately residence a good one? Yes, given the outcome, it must 
be said to have been a very good decision indeed. Ever since Astrup’s time, Drammensveien 
78  has  been  a  venue  for  interdisciplinary  discussions.  The  benefits  of  learning  across 
disciplines are well illustrated by the success of Olympiatoppen. Olympiatoppen serves as a 
venue  for  different  sports.  Where  coaches  and  leaders  have  traditionally  focused  on 
international  developments  in  their  own  disciplines,  Olympiatoppen  also  gives  them  an 
opportunity  to  learn  from  one  another’s  experiences,  across  disciplines.  Many  believe  that 
this is part of the reason for Norway’s numerous Olympic medals in recent decades.41  
                                                 
38   See Norges Bank Occasional Paper No. 39 (2009). 
39   The  lecture  “On  transparency”,  the  commentaries  by  Inge  Lorange  Backer,  Andreas  Føllesdal  and  Bernt 
Aardal and Aanund Hylland’s summary of the debate are published in Norges Bank Occasional Paper No. 41 
(2010). 
40   See Helsvig (2007), pp. 19–20. 
41   See 
the  article  “Særnorsk  oppskrift 
10 February 2010, available at (in Norwegian). 
for  OL-gull” 
[Uniquely  Norwegian  recipe 
for  Olympic  gold],  
10 
 BIS Review 147/2010
For 150 years the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters, by fostering contact across 
academic disciplines, has functioned as a kind of Olympiatoppen for science and scholarship. 
The Academy has always convened its members for discussions of topics that although may 
be rooted in a single field, are at the same time broader in scope and of common interest.42 
This lays the foundation for making good decisions. 
Thank you for your kind attention! 
 
                                                
42   See Øyvind Østerud’s introduction in the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters annual report for 2009 
at (in Norwegian). 
BIS Review 147/2010 
 11
