Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The euro area’s economic outlook 
Intervention  by  Ms  Gertrude  Tumpel-Gugerell,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  during  a  panel  discussion  on  Europe’s 
forecast  
at the Bloomberg Businessweek European Leadership Forum, London, 23 November 2010. 
financial 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to attend this year’s Bloomberg Businessweek European Leadership Forum. 
Bloomberg’s  and  Europe’s  economy  have  at  least  one  thing  in  common.  Coincidently, 
Bloomberg was founded in 1981 and so was the ECU, the European currency unit, one of 
the forefathers of our common currency, the euro.  
So let me take the opportunity, today, to speak about the state of the euro area economy. 
When assessing the euro area economic outlook, three criteria are of particular relevance in 
the current juncture. First, how much does the euro area banking sector still rely on central 
bank  liquidity  support  measures?  And  second,  can  we  be  confident  that  private  sector 
domestic demand can contribute to a sustained economic recovery? And third, what are the 
implications for price stability against this background? 
In  what  I  will  present  to  you  I  will  argue  that  there  are  some  good  news  when  assessing 
these  two  questions.  First,  money  market  activity  in  the  euro  area  improved  which  has 
allowed the ECB to withdraw some of the liquidity support. Second, household incomes and 
non-financial  corporations’  balance  sheets  are  improving  supporting  a  positive  outlook  on 
euro area growth, also against the background of further consolidation efforts of euro area 
governments.  And  third,  we  expect  price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term, 
thereby  supporting  the  purchasing  power  of  euro  area  households,  also  as  inflation 
expectations remain firmly anchored in line with our aim of keeping inflation rates below, but 
close to, 2% over the medium term. 
So let me assess the euro area financial and economic outlook in a bit more detail. 
Part I:  Assessing the euro area financial and economic outlook 
Reduction of central bank intermediation… 
The  size  of  refinancing  operations  has  decreased  considerably  since  30  June  2010,  from 
€881 billion on that date to €510 billion in mid-November. The phasing-out of non-standard 
measures continued in the third quarter of 2010, and is still continuing in the fourth quarter, 
as all maturing one-year and six-month longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs) are not 
being renewed.  
… as money markets are improving. 
Conditions  in  the  euro  area  money  markets  are  improving.  The  volumes  in  the  interbank 
money market (EONIA) have virtually doubled since summer, and are now back to the levels 
prevailing before August 2007. The overall reduction in central bank liquidity has brought the 
interbank  (EONIA)  rate  closer  to  the  policy  rate,  which  is an  important  step  towards  going 
back to our pre-crisis framework. 
BIS Review 157/2010 
 1
Euro area activity recovered in the second quarter of 2010… 
Economic activity in the euro area is recovering. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, GDP 
grew by 0.4%, quarter on quarter, in the third quarter of 2010, after increasing by 1.0% in the 
second quarter. 
While  no  breakdown  is  available  for  the  third  quarter  of  2010,  all  components  contributed 
positively  to  quarterly  GDP  growth  in  the  second  quarter.  In  particular,  domestic  demand 
contributed quite strongly for the first time since the crisis, namely by 0.5 percentage point. 
… and surveys point to ongoing growth into the fourth quarter. 
Looking beyond the third quarter, survey indicators, such as the Purchasing Managers’ index 
(PMI) and European Commission business surveys for the manufacturing and the services 
sectors, point to ongoing growth in October. 
Consumer confidence increased in October and stood above its long-term average, pointing 
to a gradual recovery in euro area consumption. 
Good prospects for households’ income from the stabilisation in the labour markets… 
The sentiment in the survey data finds its support in a number of encouraging developments, 
both in the household and in the non-financial corporations sector.  
On  the  household  side,  labour  markets  are  stabilising,  with  employment  levels  remaining 
stable in the first and the second quarters of 2010, while hours worked increased by 0.2%, 
quarter on quarter, in both these quarters. The effect of the crisis on hours worked was far 
stronger than that on the number of persons employed. Therefore, the upturn has also been 
stronger in terms of the hours worked. 
Moreover, the unemployment rate has stabilised in the last few months and stood at 10.0% 
in the third quarter of 2010. 
Overall,  the  stabilisation  in  the  labour  markets  is  creating  good  prospects  for  household 
income  and,  thereby,  also  for  private  consumption.  Indeed,  the  breakdown  of  households’ 
income shows that the share of compensation of employees has increased recently, while 
the contribution of net social benefits has declined. 
… and upward trend in production and new orders. 
As  to  non-financial  corporations,  we  can  observe  an  increasing  improvement  in  their 
conditions. 
Industrial production (excluding construction) and new orders (excluding ships, railway and 
aerospace  equipment)  are  on  a  rising  trend  after  the  strong  decline  observed  during  the 
crisis. 
Financing conditions are showing signs of improvement… 
Euro area financing conditions are showing signs of a gradual improvement. Short term and 
long  term  bank  lending  rates  are  currently  at  very  low  levels  by  historical  standards 
supporting a turnaround in the demand for credit. 
… supporting the turnaround in the growth of lending to households and non-financial 
corporations. 
The  annual  growth  of  MFI  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  became  less  negative  in 
September, confirming that the turnaround in loan dynamics is ongoing. The annual growth 
2 
 BIS Review 157/2010
of loans to non-financial corporations is actually expected to turn positive in the last quarter 
of 2010. 
Part II:  Challenges ahead 
The crisis has brought to the fore a number challenges for the euro area economy and our 
common currency, the euro. Some of these challenges are new ones, but some are existing 
ones that were amplified by the crisis developments.  
It is clear that we cannot be complacent against the background of the positive sentiment on 
the  euro  area  economic  outlook.  We  need  to  ambitiously  and  urgently  address  the 
challenges that we are facing to ensure a continued and sustainable outlook for euro area 
growth  and  price  stability.  For  this  reason  we  need  bold  reforms  in  Europe’s  economic 
governance, particularly with regard to fiscal and macroeconomic policy surveillance. 
Consolidation of public finances… 
The crisis has caused public finances to deteriorate significantly, not only in the euro area, 
but throughout the advanced world. This can be seen, first and foremost, from the rapid rise 
in government deficits and debt ratios over a short period of time. The budget gaps in the 
United Kingdom and the United States have actually reached double-digit figures, with Japan 
coming close as well.  
As  regards  the  euro  area,  according  to  the  Spring  2010  projections  by  the  European 
Commission, the government deficit could rise to 6.6% of GDP this year, before moderating 
to 6.1% in 2011.  
… and its underlying factors. 
These  budgetary  developments  reflect  three  main  factors.  The  first,  is  the  operation  of 
automatic fiscal stabilisers, i.e. the reaction to the recession built into the budgets, given the 
existing social security and tax systems. Second, the origins of the fiscal expansion are to be 
found in the stimulus packages that were a coordinated response to the European Economic 
Recovery  Plan  of  December  2008  and  bank  recapitalisation.  Their  cumulative  impact  was 
roughly  2.3%  of  GDP  in  2009–10.  Third,  a  number  of  other  factors  show  up  in  an 
expansionary  fiscal  stance,  namely  other  discretionary  measures,  unexpected  revenue 
shortfalls (e.g. losses of income linked to the decline in asset prices) and ongoing spending 
trends (e.g. in public wages), even as the trend of nominal GDP growth fell markedly. 
However,  against  the  background  of  rapidly  deteriorating  fiscal  positions,  many  euro  area 
countries  have  started  to  implement  their  consolidation  plans,  which  is  reflected  in  the 
projected decrease in fiscal deficits for the coming year by the European Commission.  
Diverse developments in unit labour costs across countries. 
In  the  years  prior  to  the  crisis,  the  development  of  competitiveness  diverged  significantly 
across euro area countries.  
Relative  price  adjustments  have  thus  far  been  relatively  moderate  within  the  euro  area,  if 
there have been any at all. In fact, unit labour costs in the period 2008–09 have generally 
increased in deficit countries relative to those in the euro area as a whole. Looking forward, 
such  cost  adjustment  in  the  period  2010–11  is  currently  expected  to  be  relatively  limited. 
According  to  European  Commission  forecasts,  only  Ireland  is  expected  to  experience  a 
significant improvement in its labour costs relative to those in the euro area. While the growth 
of labour costs is also expected to decline in all other deficit countries, it will in many cases 
remain close to, or even above, the corresponding rate for the euro area as a whole. 
BIS Review 157/2010 
 3
Therefore including competitiveness as an indicator for surveillance at the European level is 
key and already foreseen in the new EU economic governance framework.  
Reform of the EU’s economic governance framework… 
European  leaders  recognize  the  need  of  a  considerable  strengthening  of  the  economic 
model. At their meeting on 28 and 29 October 2010, the EU Heads of State and Government 
agreed  on  the  reform  of  the  European  Union’s  economic  governance.  The  proposals  put 
forward  by  President  van  Rompuy  represent  a  strengthening  of  the  existing  framework  for 
fiscal  and  macroeconomic  surveillance  in  the  European  Union.  However,  the  Governing 
Council feels that they do not go far enough to be the quantum leap forward in the economic 
governance of Monetary Union that it has been calling for.1 
On the fiscal surveillance, we need an effective surveillance mechanism so that corrective 
policy action is taken in good time. And we need ambitious targets for the reduction of public 
debt towards the 60% of GDP ceiling.  
On  the  broader  surveillance  of  macroeconomic  policies  in  the  euro  area,  we  need  a  new 
system of mutual surveillance in the euro area, concentrating firmly on euro area countries 
experiencing sustained losses of competitiveness and large current account deficits as these 
countries face the greatest sustainability challenges. It should be determined by transparent 
and effective trigger mechanisms and specify clearly the sanctions in case of breach. And we 
need full transparency. The assessments of macroeconomic imbalances and recommendations 
for corrective action should be given broad publicity at all stages of the surveillance process.  
… with a special focus on financial surveillance. 
And finally, the financial crisis has taught us that economic growth can be severely impacted 
by financial market disruptions. For this reason, European leaders agreed on a new financial 
supervisory architecture for the EU aiming to prevent financial disruptions of the kind that we 
have been experiencing in the future. This new financial supervisory architecture, which will 
become  operational  as  of  1 January  2011,  includes  the  three  new  European  Supervisory 
Authorities  (ESAs)  for  banking,  insurance  and  securities  markets  to  enhance  micro-
prudential supervision and the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) as the new macro-
prudential supervisory body in the EU.  
The  ECB  will  provide  the  secretariat  to  the  ESRB.  The  assignment  to  the  ECB  of  specific 
tasks concerning the functioning of the ESRB is welcome, but does not constitute a change 
in  the  mandate  or  an  additional  objective  for  monetary  policy.  Rather,  these  tasks  should 
contribute  to  financial  stability,  while  being  fully  in  line  with  the  ECB’s  primary  objective  of 
maintaining price stability. There are clear lines of institutional separation between the ECB 
and  the  ESRB.  In  particular,  both  institutions  are  independent  and  have  separate,  clearly 
defined mandates, namely the maintenance of price stability in the case of the ECB and the 
mitigation of systemic risk in that of the ESRB. 
                                                 
1   See  the  ECB  proposals  on  “Reforming  economic  governance  in  the  euro  area”,  which  President  Trichet 
submitted to the van Rompuy Task Force on behalf of the Governing Council on 15 June 2010. 
4 
 BIS Review 157/2010
 BIS Review 157/2010 
   5
   6 
 BIS Review 157/2010
 BIS Review 157/2010 
   7
    8 
 BIS Review 157/2010
  BIS Review 157/2010 
   9
    10 
 BIS Review 157/2010
   11
BIS Review 157/2010 
 