Alan Bollard: The recovery, the aftershock and the economic future 
Speech by Mr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, at the Deloitte 
Tax Conference, Auckland, 19 November 2010. 
 The crisis 
The Global Financial Crisis has been the major economic event of our time. As we continue 
through the recovery phase and encounter unexpected aftershocks it is timely to reconsider 
what this means for New Zealand. 
The Global Financial Crisis was not as harmful as the 1930s Depression, but from that event 
we learnt that recovery to economic normality can be a slow, fragile, uncertain process with 
temporary set-backs and aftershocks.  
The 2008 Global Financial Crisis has been different from the 1930s: it was widespread and 
internationally synchronised, it hit deep, but not long. It originated from the banking sector, 
spread virally across a number of sectors, hit the housing sector particularly hard, and was 
ultimately arrested by active government stimulus. 
The  Global  Financial  Crisis  finally  troughed  in  mid-2009  in  an  internationally-synchronised 
way. There was general relief as the macroeconomic data became more reassuring, and the 
very large contractions in economic activity ceased. At that stage our focus turned to what 
the recovery would look like.  
The history of major financial crises shows a consistent pattern emerges: a long period of 
building up stresses (averaging a decade), a rapid unwinding, then an equally long period of 
gradual recovery1. 
 
                                                 
1   Carmen M. Reinhart & Reinhart, Vincent R. (2010) “After the Fall”, Jackson Hole Symposium. 
 BIS Review 155/2010 
 1
Following regular post-war business downturns that were not associated with financial and 
banking crises, economies have traditionally recovered speedily and strongly. Not this time in 
the West. Instead we have seen businesses very cautious about reinvestment, with scarcely 
any credit growth. In the US, households have been traumatised by the twin fear of losing 
their jobs and their houses.  
We have observed two particular aftershocks to the crisis, neither of which was expected, as 
countries struggle to rebalance in two distinct ways. 
External rebalancing 
We are seeing an external “aftershock” playing out across the globe right at the moment with 
big movements in exchange rates to cross-rate extremes not seen for decades. The need to 
rebalance externally has been driven by the record build-up of international imbalances that 
created the pre-conditions for the Global Financial Crisis. In short-hand the East was building 
trade surpluses, savings and high reserves, while in the West the opposite was happening. 
 
  In late 2009 we saw an initial rebalancing, driven mainly by negative forces: a reduction in 
spending  by  Western  consumers,  a  reduction  in  Western  imports,  and  a  deleveraging  of 
Western balance sheets, rather than a shift to an export-led growth recovery. However the 
forecasts  suggest  this  rebalancing  may  not  continue,  and  we  have  not  yet  reduced  these 
international imbalances to sustainable levels. 
In the US these concerns have been manifested in weak labour and housing markets. Up to 
30%  of  mortgagees  face  negative  or  near  zero  equity  in  their  homes  and  long-term 
unemployment is stubbornly elevated, with intense political pressures on monetary policy to 
provide relief.  
This  has  led  to  further  moves  to  inject  liquidity  in  unorthodox  ways,  referred  to  by  the 
financial markets as “QE2”. So far these policy measures have had a major effect on equity 
and  bond  prices,  on  capital  flows  and  on  exchange  rates.  They  have  depressed  the  $US, 
generated  a  new  carry  trade  in  $US,  and  resulted  in  significant  new  capital  inflows  to 
emerging markets. 
2 
 BIS Review 155/2010
  
The US economy remains weak, with housing and labour markets mired as both households 
and businesses seek to rebuild impaired balance sheets. This requires a policy prescription 
of  very  easy  monetary  policy.  But  the  growing  currency  tensions  risk  unleashing  trade 
conflicts, a development that proved very costly in the 1930s. Many countries expected to 
have their recovery and external rebalancing aided by a softer currency, and when this did 
not happen they became very concerned. 
Chinese – US economic tensions have risen, as the US sees the RMB staying unnaturally 
low, a result of the tie to the $US, with much rhetoric but a political reluctance to revalue. The 
Chinese response has been to increase regional convertibility mechanisms, but only to allow 
minimal  RMB  appreciation.  As  this  dispute  escalates,  there  is  a  risk  of  Congressional 
intervention and anti-dumping actions. 
In the Eurozone, tensions between Germany and the peripheral PIIGS countries mirror the 
China-US relationship, with Germany running large current account surpluses via very strong 
exports,  buoyant  growth  and  the  euro  currency.  Hurt  most  are  the  Swiss  (who  have  been 
trying to intervene to depreciate the Swiss franc), and other peripheral European economies 
outside the EMS. 
Japan,  with  its  own  economic  problems  and  a  strengthening  yen,  took  major  unexpected 
unilateral  action  in  mid-September:  a  massive  (2  trillion  yen)  sell-off  of  the  Japanese 
currency. This has had some short-term effects on the value of the yen, but it angered other 
G-7 economies whose currencies are themselves at risk. In addition it has implications for 
other East Asian currency regimes, where countries under exchange rate pressure such as 
Thailand,  Taiwan,  South  Korea  and  Philippines,  could  be  encouraged  to  intervene.  Other 
countries such  as  Malaysia  that  have  been  trying  to  liberalise,  may  find  themselves  under 
pressure to re-impose capital controls. 
Internal rebalancing 
The second aftershock has been a sovereign debt crisis resulting from the need for countries 
to  rebalance  internally.  Financial  markets  pressured  overstretched  Western  fiscal  balance 
BIS Review 155/2010 
 3
sheets  and  the  price  of  debt  rose  dramatically.  Countries  needed  to  rebalance  internally: 
domestic demand needed to take over from public demand. 
Governments  have  spent  hugely  on  fiscal  stimulus,  liquidity  injections,  and  bank  support 
through  the  crisis.  There  was  a  broad  expectation  that  the  private  sector  would  take  over 
from public sector stimulus to once again be the engine of growth: businesses would restock 
and  reinvest,  and  the  household  sector  would  regain  confidence.  But,  as  local  economies 
slowed,  the  costs  of  stimulus  and  rescues,  low  tax  revenue  and  high  demand  for  social 
spending hit government fiscal accounts hard. 
The resulting crisis first burst out in Ireland and the Southern European cluster of countries, 
collectively  labelled  the  PIIGS,  where  there  had  been  persistent  over-stimulus  and  loose 
fiscal management. This profligacy meant that these countries were faced with a premium on 
their  debt  (see  figure  below)  and  the  complex  pan-European  political  and  monetary 
institutions struggled to provide guarantees to bolster this situation, while also ensuring these 
countries took appropriately tough domestic fiscal actions.  
 
  
Spurred  by  these  events,  financial  markets  have  now  also  focussed  on  some  more  major 
G-7 sovereign risks, in particular in the UK, US and Japan, where demographic ageing adds 
pressure  to  major  government  funding  burdens.  With  the  recession  delivering  lower  tax 
revenue, higher social spending, and banking sector liabilities, projected government funding 
requirements  in  these  countries  now  look  very  tight,  severely  limiting  the  room  for  future 
support to (increasingly unorthodox) monetary policy. 
Thus private demand in Western countries remains too weak to provide real impetus to the 
recovery.  This  reflects  excesses  prior  to  the  crisis,  the  current  outlook  and  the  limited 
willingness and limited ability of fiscal policy to come to the rescue. 
Of  course  this  has  significant  imbalances  for  the  New  Zealand  outlook.  Demand  from 
Western countries is gradually improving, but still not very encouraging. The sad US housing 
story  is  bad  for  our  wood  exports,  the  UK  fiscal  retrenchment  is  hurting  our  UK  tourist 
numbers and the fragile Japanese recovery restrains our food exports. 
4 
 BIS Review 155/2010
Our  own  internal  rebalancing  is  progressing,  but  very  slowly.  Substantial  fiscal  stimulus 
helped cushion the economy over the past few years. The fiscal deficit will need to be closed 
and private demand take over public sector support. Moreover, it appears that some of the 
fiscal deficit is structural and unwinding this support will subtract from growth for a number of 
years,  with  our  housing  market  remaining  weak,  consumption  impaired,  balance  sheets 
fragile and businesses remaining cautious. Private demand is still impaired. 
What is yet to come 
However at the same time the strong growth in East Asia and Australia emerging markets 
has  been  very  beneficial.  These  markets  were  much  less  affected  by  the  financial  crisis, 
have  themselves  enjoyed  strong  export  prices,  and  are  now  being  buoyed  by  growing 
domestic demand. Russia, Brazil, energy exporters, South Africa and the Southern American 
countries are also in this group. They are developing a much stronger geopolitical voice for 
the G-20. 
 
  
The Chinese and India stories exemplify this – not by any means a simple picture, but here 
are  two  economies  with  continued  strong  export  demand,  government  building  of 
infrastructure, and evolving domestic demand. These economies have strong connections to 
regional  growth  that  will  benefit  New  Zealand  indirectly  over  and  above  our  direct  trade 
exposure.  
Other  medium  term  implications  look  particularly  interesting  for  New  Zealand.  Post-war 
evidence  shows  that  as  emerging  markets  develop  significant  middle  classes,  there  is  a 
commensurate increase in demand for protein, increasingly animal-based. That has been the 
pattern across a number of countries with different cultures in different geographies. Many of 
these countries are limited in expanding their own food production, by lack of suitable land, 
BIS Review 155/2010 
 5
lack  of  water,  increasing  climatic  volatility,  and  high  oil  prices.  A  recent  Nomura  report2 
argues that real food prices will need to rise significantly. 
New Zealand is not a huge food producer (not being among the top half dozen producers of 
any of the world’s key food product groups). However our food exports (as a % of GDP) top 
the  world,  and  we  are  the  best  placed  in  competitive  terms  in  Nomura’s  food  vulnerability 
index.  Food  trade  is  volatile  in  the  short  term,  but  these  trends  are  very  positive  for  New 
Zealand’s terms of trade which have picked up significantly over the last decade. 
The other important positive pressure is from Australian growth. The Australian mineral boom 
is now well documented, and expected to continue, if not intensify. The drivers in China and 
elsewhere look reasonably sustainable and as a low cost producer, Australia appears better 
positioned than most to weather any reduction in Chinese prices.  
The strength of the mineral boom has meant a strong Australian recovery and a very strong 
AUD currency. Both of  these outcomes are driving strong Australian demand for food and 
manufacturing  exports  from  a  more  competitive  New  Zealand.  We  are  a  primary  product 
supplier to Asia, but we need to see ourselves also as a post-primary supplier to Australia. 
 
 
So  the  medium-term  outlook  looks  favourable.  In  the  meantime  we  see  New  Zealand 
continuing its recovery. The aftershocks identified so far, and other aftershocks yet to come, 
mean that this recovery could yet be a prolonged process. 
                                                  
2   “The coming surge in food prices”, Nomura, Sept 2010. 
6 
 BIS Review 155/2010
