 Mario Draghi: The transatlantic relationship in an era of growing 
economic multipolarity 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial  Stability  Board,  at  the  Peterson  Institute  for  International  Economics  –  Bruegel 
Conference, Washington DC, 8 October 2010. 
 Let  me  start  by  thanking  [Fred,  the  IIE,  Bruegel]  for  inviting  me  to  this  policy  debate  on 
regulatory reform and transatlantic relations. The issues on the conference agenda are highly 
topical and present challenges for international policy makers.  
Just  as  is  the  case  for  tackling  the  problem  of  global  climate  change  –  another  important 
topic on your agenda – achieving a more stable and resilient global financial system requires 
coordinated action at the global level. The US and Europe have strong joint interests in this 
and  are  critical  to  progress.  But  so  are  the  growing  weight  of  countries  beyond  these 
continents,  and  they  have  come  to  play  an  increasingly  important  role  in  shaping  global 
outcomes.  
In my remarks I will first review what we have achieved so far in terms of financial reforms. 
I will then turn to important challenges still ahead of us. And I will conclude with thoughts on 
international policy coordination and the role of the FSB. 
Achievements so far 
We  have  come  a  long  way  towards  strengthening  the  financial  system  since  this  crisis 
began,  reflecting  an  unprecedented  amount  of  international  co-ordination  in  achieving 
consistent reforms. While issues remain to be resolved, in Europe, in the US and elsewhere, 
we are, collectively, fundamentally reshaping the framework for systemic financial oversight. 
Let me note some examples: 
– 
First,  top-down,  system-wide  oversight  arrangements  are  being  put  in  place  at 
national,  regional  and  international  levels.  These  arrangements  are  designed  to 
deliver  more  encompassing  surveillance,  with  broadened  macro-prudential 
perspectives,  and  better  mechanisms  for  triggering  action  on  identified  risks. 
Examples are the European Systemic Risk Board and related arrangements, the US 
Financial Services Oversight Council, the IMF-FSB Early Warning Exercise, and the 
establishment of the FSB itself.  
Second,  major  jurisdictions  have  overhaulied  their  regulatory  and  supervisory 
structures  to  strengthen  responsiveness  to  risks,  improve  coordination  and  close 
gaps. The FSB is in many ways the international manifestation of these efforts;  
Third, the regulatory perimeter is being expanded. Major jurisdictions have finalized 
or will shortly finalize legislation that establish regulation and oversight over the OTC 
derivatives markets, hedge funds and credit rating agencies. In each of these areas, 
principles for what regulation should achieve have been internationally agreed and 
implementing regulation is being closely coordinated;  
Fourth,  we  have  put  in  place  cross-border  oversight  and contingency  planning  for 
the largest and most complex global financial institutions, each of which now have 
functioning core supervisory colleges and crisis management groups.  
   At the level of the essential regulatory policies to buttress financial stability, let me recall: 
– 
that with Basel III, we have a fundamentally revised global bank capital framework 
which will establish stronger protection through improved risk coverage, more and 
BIS Review 131/2010 
 1
      higher  quality  capital,  a  counter-cyclical  buffer  and  a  constraint  on  the  build-up  of 
banking sector leverage; 
Second, as part of Basel III, we will for the first time have a global liquidity standard 
for  banks  that  will  promote  higher  liquidity  buffers  and  constrain  the  maturity 
mismatching that created the condition for this crisis;  
Third,  as  I  will  describe  later,  we  are  making  progress  in  developing  a  policy 
framework and tools to roll back the moral hazard risks posed by institutions that are 
TBTF;  
Fourth,  we  have  eliminated  the  perverse  incentives  that  pervaded  securitization, 
including  the  scope  for  leverage  to  develop  in  opaque  off-balance  sheet  vehicles 
through changes to accounting standards and regulatory and prudential rules;  
Fifth,  we  are  establishing  central  clearing  of  standardised  contracts  in  the  OTC 
derivatives markets and a OTC global trade repository is now in operation; 
Fifth,  we  have  developed  a  series  of  supervisory  tools  to  raise  standards  of 
governance,  risk  management  and  capital  conservation  at  financial  institutions.  In 
this context, let me note that:  
 
we  are  making  good  progress  with  accounting  standard  setters  towards 
expected  loss  provisioning  regime  for  credit  losses,  which  will  dampen 
procyclicality and align accounting and prudential objectives in this key area; and  
principles  and  standards  have  been  issued  to  better  align  compensation 
systems  with  prudent  risk-taking.  The  standards  give  supervisors  powers  to 
restrain compensation structures and the level of pay-out to conserve capital 
in the firm. As we move to raise capital levels, we will encourage supervisors 
to use these powers.  
 I have been selective in my enumeration. But the point I want to leave with you is that we 
should not underestimate what has been accomplished. Each of the above areas are difficult 
in  their  own  right.  That  we  have  been  able  to  progress  global  policy  development  and 
implementation  on  such  a  broad  front,  while  fighting  a  very  serious  financial  crisis,  is 
something that has never happened before.  
So, the direction in which we are moving internationally is encouraging. But important issues 
remain. And it is political resolve that will determine whether we accomplish the credible and 
robust reforms that our citizens rightly demand, yet preserve the enormous advantages of an 
internationally integrated financial system. 
Addressing TBTF 
Addressing  the  “too-big-to-fail”  (TBTF)  problem  is  perhaps  the  most  challenging  remaining 
legacy of the crisis. Basel III will greatly strengthen banking system resilience, but it does not 
address this problem.  
The  FSB  has  assessed  a  broad  range  of  policy  options  in  this  area  and  will  present  its 
recommendations to the G20 in November. 
It  is  important  to  recognise  that  SIFIs  vary  widely  in  structures  and  activities  and  that  the 
nature  and  degree  of  the  risks  they  pose  also  differ.  Some  are  large,  complex  highly 
integrated global financial institutions with activities spanning a range of sectors. Others may 
have  a  global  customer  base  but  are  simpler  commercial  banking  operations.  Yet  a  third 
category  is  entities  that  are  large  at  a  domestic  or  regional  level  but  nonetheless  globally 
interconnected through wholesale funding markets.  
Whatever their nature, SIFIs have two things in common: that their uncontrolled failure would 
cause significant systemic disruption and that we, as authorities, cannot at present resolve 
2 
 BIS Review 131/2010
 them in an orderly fashion without use of public funds. The framework we have agreed to 
address SIFIs is therefore based on four necessary pillars.  
First,  we  must  radically  improve  our  capacity  to  resolve  SIFIs  without  disruptions  to  the 
financial system and without taxpayers’ support. Effective resolution regimes must advance 
the goals of both financial stability and market discipline. This means they need to be able to 
impose  losses  on  shareholders  as  well  as  creditors  while  ensuring  continuity  of  essential 
financial functions. All countries should have a Dodd Frank style regime in place. In addition, 
we need to acquire additional resolution tools. The bail-in of debt holders holds significant 
attractions  both  from  the  perspective  of  correcting  creditor  incentives  and  protecting  tax 
payers. But the legal issues associated with the bail-in in group structures and in a cross-
border context are non-trivial.  
Moreover, to be effective backstops in dealing with global firms, national resolution regimes 
need  to  converge  towards  common  standards.  And  these  need  to  be  supplemented  by 
cross-border  cooperation  arrangements  underpinned  by  national  law  that  provides  both 
mandate  and  capacity  for  resolution  authorities  to  cooperate.  Legislative  changes  will  be 
needed  in  many  countries  to  enable  this.  Lastly,  “living  wills”  will  be  mandatory  for  major 
firms. These will include assessments of firm resolvability. Supervisors will have the power to 
require changes to a firm’s structure to improve its resolvability.  
Second, the loss absorption capacity of systemic firms should reflect their role in the global 
financial system and their potential contribution to systemic risk. Even with the best possible 
resolution  tools,  the  failure  of  a  major  global  firm  would  cause  significant  damage.  This 
reinforces the importance of strengthening the resilience of major global firms. Higher loss 
absorption capacity for SIFIs than the minimum agreed Basel III standards, especially for the 
largest globally operating SIFIs, therefore are at the core of our recommendations. A credible 
process of peer review will be established to challenge the policy choices made within each 
jurisdiction  and  to  ensure  that  measures  applied  on  a  country-by-country  and  SIFI-by-SIFI 
basis are consistent and mutually supportive.  
The third area is strengthened oversight and supervision. Senior line supervisors have drawn 
a  frank  assessment  of  weakness  leading  up  to  this  crisis.  These  weaknesses  were  not 
present in equal amounts everywhere, but there is scope for improvements all around. Our 
recommendations in this area have been developed with the IMF. One set is focused on the 
mandates,  independence  and  resourcing  of  supervisors.  Another  is  on  improved  methods 
and practices to proactively identify and address risks.  
Fourth,  we  will  be  setting  out  higher  robustness  standards  for  core  financial  infrastructure. 
These  infrastructures  –  including  for  central  counterparties  –  are  themselves  sources  of 
systemic risk were they to malfunction or fail. 
This  is  a  complex  project  which  will  unfold  over  a  number  of  years.  It  will  need  to  be 
consistently  implemented  in  all  major  countries  to  maintain  a  level  playing  field,  avoid 
regulatory  arbitrage  and  effectively  address  the  risks  to  the  overall  system.  The  already 
established  FSB  framework  of  country  and  thematic  peer  reviewing  process  will  address 
improved resolution frameworks and more intensive supervision In addition for SIFIs with the 
potential to create damages at a global level we will establish a mutual policy review process 
that will review and challenge the national policies towards major global SIFIs. 
Ahead of us, other issues still require attention: 
– 
So far, most of our attention has been on strengthening the resilience of the banking 
system, and rightly so. Yet, the shadow banking sector remains a large part of our 
financial  systems, 
the  credit 
intermediation and maturity transformation, and subject to runs in damaging ways. 
We  need  to  make  frameworks  for  macro-prudential  policies  and  systemwide 
oversight  operational.  We  will  be  sharing  approaches  for  surveillance,  powers  to 
obtain  information  and  modalities  for  action  on  identified  risks.  The  FSB  will 
less  regulated,  but  nonetheless  significant 
in 
 BIS Review 131/2010 
 3
 coordinate  approaches  where  an  international  regulatory  response  is  needed.  We 
will  be  working  with  the  BIS  and  the  IMF  to  build  principles  for  effective  macro-
prudential policies. 
Lastly, the FSB is developing arrangements to broaden the involvement non-members in its 
work at early stages of policy development. We will be setting up regional arms of the FSB. 
Each regional group will be co-chaired by an FSB member and a regional non-member who 
will attend FSB Plenary meetings. 
Conclusions 
Let  me  conclude.  Three  things  have  been  important  in  making  the  progress  we  have  on 
reforms: 
 
First,  the  sheer  seriousness  of  the  crisis,  and  the  recognition  that,  in  a  globally 
integrated system, we all sit in the same boat;  
Second, the readiness in the official community to agree objectives and timelines for 
substantial reform, including through the G20 process; and  
Third,  the  establishment  of  mechanisms,  such  as  the  FSB,  to  hasten  the  policy 
development needed to meet these objectives.  
  I am quite confident that, with these, we will be able to achieve globally consistent rules that 
will lastingly increase the resilience of the financial system and the real economy and deliver 
the level playing field that a global system needs. 
4 
 BIS Review 131/2010
