Philipp M Hildebrand: Europe’s fiscal challenges 
Speech by Mr Philipp M Hildebrand, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank,  at  the  Annual  General  Meeting  of  the  Swiss-American  Chamber  of  Commerce, 
Rüschlikon, Switzerland, 21 June 2010. 
 I would like to thank Rita Kobel Rohr for her valuable support in drafting this speech. I also want to thank Matthias 
Lutz for helpful comments. 
I  want  to  thank  the  Swiss  American  Chamber  of  Commerce  for  the  kind  invitation.  It  is  a 
privilege to speak to you this evening at your Annual General Meeting. 
The  last  time  I  was  with  you  –  it  is  now  nearly  two  years  ago  –,  I  paid  homage  to  Albert 
Gallatin, the legendary Swiss-American Secretary of the Treasury of the United States at the 
beginning of the 19th century. On that occasion, I chose to honour Gallatin because I felt he 
incorporates fundamental values long shared by Swiss and Americans alike. As it turns out, 
recent  developments  in  Europe  and  elsewhere  demonstrate  compellingly  that  one  of  the 
important  lessons  of  Gallatin’s  outstanding  career  remains  particularly  relevant  today.  He 
teaches  us  that  public  debt  reduction  requires  unwavering  political  commitment  to  fiscal 
discipline.  
In  my  remarks  this  evening,  I  will  attempt  to  put  the  fiscal  challenges  Europe  is  currently 
facing in a broader context. The handling of these challenges by Europe’s governments and 
its citizens will have implications for Switzerland, but also for the United States and ultimately 
for the world. 
In an attempt to understand what is currently happening in Europe, we have to go back to the 
1950’s. European integration as we know it began 60 years ago, and until recently, it has 
been  a  success.  The  signing  of  the  treaty  establishing  the  European  Coal  and  Steel 
Community  on  18  April  1951  was  the  first  genuine  step  towards  economic  and  political 
integration.  The  six  signatories  –  Germany,  France,  Italy,  the  Netherlands,  Belgium  and 
Luxembourg –, agreed to run their coal and steel industries under a common management. 
The overriding goal was to secure a lasting peace on the European continent. The introduction 
of the Euro in 1999 was just one further – albeit major – step in this long-standing integration 
process.  Throughout  these  decades,  the  world  benefited  from  economic  prosperity  and 
peace  on  the  European  continent; a  continent,  that  had previously been torn apart by two 
world wars within the span of forty years.  
From a Swiss perspective, regardless of one’s political or ideological leanings, there can be 
no doubt that the Swiss economy situated at the very heart of Europe but remaining outside 
the European Union (EU) has benefited from the continued process of European integration. 
There are a host of examples to illustrate this.  
The bilateral agreements Switzerland concluded with the EU in 1999 and 2004 would have 
been  very  difficult  to  reach  with  27  individual  nations.  Among  other  things,  this  has  led  to 
greater immigration from the EU. Despite initial fears here in Switzerland, open and integrated 
labor  markets  between  the  EU  and  Switzerland  have  clearly  given  the  Swiss  economy  a 
welcome boost in recent years. 
Indeed,  private  Swiss  firms  and  even  semi-public  sectors  like  health  care  have  reaped 
substantial benefits by drawing on the supply of large numbers of highly skilled immigrants 
from the EU member states and in particular from Germany. Moreover, this has not come at 
BIS Review 87/2010 
 1
the expense of Swiss workers. Recent research actually suggests that the immigration from 
the EU during the last couple of years has narrowed the wage differential.1 
Immigrants have also been an important source of demand during the financial crisis. They 
are clearly one of the reasons why Switzerland’s economy has weathered the financial crisis 
relatively well. Indeed, Switzerland is one of the very few developed countries where private 
consumption  remained  a  steady  source  of  growth  virtually  throughout  the  entire  financial 
crisis.2  
A  particularly  relevant  benefit  directly  linked  to  the  introduction  of  the  Euro  pertains  to 
exchange rate volatility. After the introduction of the Euro and before the peak of the financial 
crisis  in  2008,  the  average  Euro  –  Swiss  franc  volatility  was  roughly  30%  lower  than  the 
prevailing Deutsche Mark – Swiss franc volatility in the 1990. The compression in exchange 
rate  volatility  is  significantly  larger  if  one  takes  the  Lira  or  the  Peseta  or  any  of  the  other 
peripheral European currencies as a reference point. 
With the mounting concerns in financial markets over the ability of several, mainly peripheral 
European countries to handle their public debt level, the situation has evolved significantly. 
Exchange rate developments became a challenge for the Swiss National Bank (SNB). With 
interest  rates  at  zero  and  limited  means  to  further  expand  monetary  policy  through  other 
quantitative easing channels, exchange rate interventions were a necessary unconventional 
monetary policy tool. The SNB made it clear that it would fight off “safe haven” flows out of 
the Euro in accordance with its objective to prevent deflationary risks from materializing by 
way of an excessive appreciation of the Swiss franc.  
This strategy of fighting off deflation risks has yielded the intended results. The deflationary 
risk in Switzerland has largely disappeared and the Swiss economy has been able to benefit 
from  the  ongoing  recovery  of  the  global  economy.  While  the  weakening  of  the  Euro  with 
respect  to  the  Swiss  franc  is  dampening  export  activity,  exports  are  being  supported  by 
growth  in  foreign  demand.  Overall,  today  the  outlook  for  the  Swiss  economy  remains  a 
favourable one. Admittedly, the adopted strategy is not without risk which comes primarily in 
the form of increased currency and concentration risk in the SNB’s balance sheet. This risk 
reflects the burden the SNB has assumed in order to protect the Swiss economy from the 
threat of deflation. The SNB has sufficient equity capital to withstand even large losses. 
When considering the favourable economic outlook for Switzerland, we must not lose sight of 
the fact that the latest tensions on the financial markets have increased the downside risks. 
Should these downside risks materialise and, via an appreciation of the Swiss franc, lead to 
a  renewed  threat  of  deflation,  the  SNB  would  take  all  the  measures  necessary  to  ensure 
price  stability.  In  other  words,  the  SNB  would  do  whatever  it  takes  to  fight  deflation  and 
safeguard price stability in the medium- and longer-term. 
Switzerland has an obvious and enormous interest in Europe’s ability to manage through this 
public debt crisis decisively and ultimately successfully. Europe’s ability to navigate out of the 
current  crisis  is  also  very  much  in  the  interest  of  the  United  States  and  indeed  the  world. 
When I say this, I don’t mean to refer solely to the potential economic strains as a result of 
Europe’s public debt concerns.  
What  is  ultimately  at  stake  is  the  vision  of  the  founding  fathers  of  the  EU;  the  vision  of  a 
continent living in peace and prosperity and thereby contributing to a stable world order.  
                                                 
1   See Gerfin, Michael and Boris Kaiser (2010), “Auswirkungen der Immigration der Jahre 2002 bis 2008 auf die 
Löhne in der Schweiz”, in: Die Volkswirtschaft, No. 6. 
In 2009,  annual  growth of  private consumption  amounted to 1.2%  in Switzerland,  while in the  euro  area,  it 
contracted by 1.2%. 
BIS Review 87/2010
2  
2 
 Merely upholding this vision will not, however, resolve the debt situation. But it explains the 
bold  and  decisive  steps  taken  by  European  governments,  together  with  the  International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), to begin to address market concerns. It also explains why after a rapid 
deterioration of public finances in Europe, collective monitoring of fiscal discipline and peer 
pressure experience a revival. Arguably, more importantly, several countries have embarked 
on a path that entails much needed structural reforms. 
This public debt crisis is multi-layered. It is clearly a crisis of market confidence and as such 
a liquidity crisis. The trigger was a classic fiscal crisis combined with severe competitiveness 
problems in the periphery of the EU. However, it is also an institutional crisis. The institutional 
mechanism to ensure fiscal discipline inside the Eurosystem was clearly insufficient.  
Obviously, part of the fiscal imbalances and the resulting build-up in public debt were directly 
related  to  the  financial  crisis  and  its  aftermath.  One  part  of  the  fiscal  expansion  can  be 
explained by the direct fiscal effects of the measures taken to stabilize the financial system. 
Another part is explained by the drop in revenues and increases in social benefit payments in 
response to the post-crisis recession. According to recent IMF calculations, this accounts for 
about fifty percent of the increase in debt levels globally since the outbreak of the crisis. The 
other roughly fifty percent are unrelated to the financial crisis and its effects on the broader 
economy.3  To  put  it  differently,  some  countries  had  simply  lived  beyond  their  means  well 
before the financial crisis erupted in 2007. 
The  reaction  of  financial  markets  is  a  wakeup  call  to  all  countries  that  sooner  or  later 
government finances must be put on a sustainable path. 
The  main  measures  implemented  so  far  at  the  EU  level  are  mainly  short-term  oriented  to 
fight  of  the  liquidity  crisis  and  associated  contagion  risks. A  large  assistance  package  has 
been established jointly by the EU and the IMF for Greece. To ward off the risk of contagion, 
the EU has put in place the European Financial Stabilization Facility (EFSF) while the IMF 
has committed to provide significant bilateral funding. Overall, the funding secured amounts 
to 750 bn Euros. This significant amount is justified by the high risk of international spillover 
effects. Additional support to ward off this contagion risk was given by the European Central 
Bank which decided to intervene in the euro area public and private debt market in order to 
restore an appropriate monetary policy transmission mechanism.4  
These measures provide essential backstops. By adopting them, the governments of the EU 
member  states  and  the  European  authorities  have  unequivocally  stated  their  intention  to 
safeguard  the  Euro.  While  this  was  a  crucial  first  step,  initial  market  reactions  suggested 
persistent scepticism. The uncertainty regarding the health of the balance sheet of European 
banks  is  high  and  is  keeping  tensions  on  financial  markets  elevated.  It  is  not  only  the 
exposure  of  European  banks  towards  mainly  peripheral  EU  countries  that  is  a  concern  to 
market participants. Markets are also questioning the overall solidity of bank balance sheets 
in the aftermath of the financial crisis. 
Therefore, last Thursday the heads of governments of the EU member states agreed that the 
results of stress tests on their respective banks will be published in the second half of July. 
This  decision  can  play  an  important  role  in  fostering  market  confidence.  In  the  event  that 
these stress tests reveal cases where additional capital is necessary, recapitalization efforts 
will  have  to  be  undertaken  swiftly.  Institutional  investors  appear  to  be  underweight  in  their 
exposure to European banks. This should prove helpful in lending support to potential capital 
raising efforts following a credible and transparent stress test exercise. Indeed, one of the 
reasons investors currently appear to underweight European banking stocks may very well 
                                                 
3   See IMF (2010): World Economic Outlook, April, chapter 1, p. 9. 
4   ECB press release, 10 May 2010. 
BIS Review 87/2010 
 3
be  related  to  the  fact  that  there  is  insufficient  transparency  about  bank  balance  sheet 
conditions in Europe. Credible stress tests can remedy this problem. 
Contrary to what some commentators suggest, financial markets also look beyond the short-
term.  As  a  result,  Europe’s  authorities  had  to  recognize  that  decisive  and  comprehensive 
longer-term fiscal programs are needed to put the EU as a whole on a sound fiscal basis.  
Equally, individual countries can’t forever live beyond their means. Under pressure from the 
market,  a  number  of  countries  have  therefore  initiated  far  reaching  multi-year  programs, 
which at least partly address structural problems.  
Moreover, the way the EU as an institution deals with public finances will change. As many 
European  officials  have  pointed  out,  in  2004,  it  was  not  Greece  or  Portugal  but  Germany  
– together with France – that undermined fiscal discipline by successfully averting sanctions 
foreseen under the Stability and Growth Pact. Now, the EU and in particular the big countries 
are  openly  advocating  measures  to  amend  and  significantly  strengthen  the  institutional 
mechanism in order to enforce fiscal discipline.5  
In this context, the member states of the EU are faced with a fundamental issue. The public 
debt crisis has shown that interdependence between member states of a monetary union is 
strong.6 Going forward in reforming the institutional set up of the EU, the core question is to 
what degree EU member states are ready to further relinquish sovereignty. How centralised 
or federal should the EU be? 
This discussion bears remarkable resemblance to the early years of the United States. At the 
time, an intense debate took place around the full assumption of the Revolutionary War debt 
of  the  states  by  the  national  government.  The  debate  pitted  the  Treasury  Secretary 
Alexander  Hamilton  against  James  Madison  and  Thomas  Jefferson.  While  his  opponents 
saw  the  assumption  of  the  states’  debt  by  the  national  government  as  a  threat  to  the 
republican  government,  Hamilton  saw  it  as  a  unique  opportunity  to  pursue  his  agenda  of 
creating  a  more  powerful  national  government.  He  considered  assumption  as  a  way  to 
assure  the  new  country  a  solid  credit  standing  at  home  and  abroad.  This  would  allow  the 
United  States  to  take  full  advantage  of  the  emerging  global  commercial  and  financial 
opportunities.  In  the  end,  Hamilton  prevailed  thanks  to  a  classic  political  compromise 
involving the future permanent site of the capital of the United States.7  
With history in mind, let me end on an optimistic note: 
As more details emerge about the EFSF and as the European authorities proceed with their 
stress tests, I am confident that market strains will begin to ease. While the EFSF provides a 
financial backstop, the importance of publishing credible bank stress test results cannot be 
overemphasized.  I  am  convinced  that  meaningful  transparency  about  the  solidity  of 
European banks and corresponding swift action to raise capital where necessary will bolster 
market confidence significantly. 
In a longer term perspective, credible steps are now being examined and will be undertaken 
to enhance fiscal discipline in the EU. The EU authorities and governments of the member 
                                                 
5   See  also  Lorenzo  Bini  Smaghi:  “…  it  requires  a  strengthening  of  the  institutional  framework  for  budgetary 
surveillance”,  Speech  at  “Group  of  Thirty”,  63rd  Plenary  Session,  Session  1:  The  crisis  of  the  Eurosystem, 
Rabat, and 28 May 2010.  
6   See also Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa: “…the sovereign debt crisis has finally alerted those who had not yet 
woken up to the fact, that interdependence has developed to such a degree that all of the Union’s member 
states  –  the  strong,  and  the  weak,  the  virtuous  and  the  sinners  –  have  lost  their  full  economic,  and  even 
political sovereignty.”, in: The Debt Crisis in the Euro Area: Interest and Passions. Notre Europe Policy Brief 
No 16, May 2010. 
7   See Ron Chernov (2004): Alexander Hamilton, The Penguin Press, New York NY. 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2010
states will have no choice but to take decisive steps to address the underlying institutional 
flaws that led to the current debt crisis in Europe. 
This is decisively not the first time the European integration process arrives at a crossroad. 
Since it began in earnest sixty years ago, many severe challenges had to be overcome to 
bring Europe to where it is today. As Jean Monnet, the pre-eminent founding father of the EU 
wrote in his memoirs in 1976:  
“Europe will be forged in crises and it will be the sum of the solutions adopted for 
those crises”.8 
I  have  no  doubt  that  Europe’s  authorities  will  once  again  rise  to  the  occasion.  They  will 
ultimately adopt the necessary solutions to overcome the current public debt and confidence 
crisis. In doing so, they will safeguard the long-standing European integration process that 
has proven so valuable to Switzerland and to the rest of the world. 
                                                 
8   See Monnet, Jean (1976): “Memoires”.  
BIS Review 87/2010 
 5
