Duvvuri Subbarao: Reserve Bank of India archives – way forward 
Comments  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
inauguration  of  the  RBI  Archives  Museum:  “Evolution  of  Reserve  Bank  of  India  –  
1935–2010”, Pune, 1 June 2010. 
 1.  
I am delighted to be here today for the inauguration of the RBI Archives Museum. You 
will all recall that we have just concluded the Platinum Jubilee celebrations of the Reserve 
Bank.  The  events  and  initiatives  that  we  had  taken  up  as  part  of  the  celebrations  centred 
around introspection on the evolution of the Reserve Bank, reflection on its current and future 
challenges,  and  on  how  the  Reserve  Bank  can  fulfill  its  objectives  even  better  so  that  it 
continues to make a positive difference in the life of every Indian. The theme of the Museum 
that we are inaugurating today, “Evolution of the Reserve Bank – 1935–2010” is part of that 
continuing process of our quest to look ahead by looking back. 
2.  
I visited RBI Archives when I was here at the CAB in June last year. It was a brief visit; 
even in that brief visit, I could sense the richness, in terms of historical value, of the material 
preserved here. I am glad to have an opportunity today to spend more time here and see 
valuable documents, photographs, artifacts and currency displayed in these Archives. I am 
also happy to note that the Archives Museum has been recently renovated to accommodate 
a larger, better and more user friendly display of records. 
3.   The word “archive” traces its origin from the Greek word “arkheion”, which refers to the 
home or dwelling of the “archon” or the ruler, in which important official state documents are 
filed  and  interpreted  under  the  archon’s  authority.  The  documents  and  other  material 
preserved in these archives are similarly valuable for the rich historical content they embody. 
As they say, the hierarchy of transition is from data to information to knowledge to wisdom. 
Archives such as these aid that hierarchical transition. These Archives of the Reserve Bank 
are  not  just  an  internal  store  of  information  for  the  Bank’s  staff;  they  are  a  record  of  the 
events and times that should be of great historical significance.  
4.   Haunted as we often are by an essential dilemma that Nobel Laureate Saul Bellow had 
once posed, “can we ever forget about remembering?”, for many of us Archives also allow 
the  pursuit  of  our  “incurable  thirst  for  the  sense  of  escape”  from  the  immediacy  of  the 
present. The historic records and documents that we have here provide visuals and vignettes 
that transcend time and help us go down our institutional memory lane.  
5.   Come  to  think  of  it,  “it  is  surprising  how  much  of  memory  is  built  around  things 
unnoticed at the time”. Every document, every object, every artifact here records or refers to 
an event that may just have been an unnoticed part of contemporary setting in real time. But 
looking back at them from this distance of time, we get a treasure trove of stories about the 
Reserve Bank that are diverse and fascinating. There is, for example, the share issue of the 
Reserve Bank, the largest in the country, the apprehension that it may get into the hands of 
“an exploiting group or caucus”; and the attempt to prevent that. Then there is the story about 
the  first  advertisement  by  the  Bank  for  staff  recruitment  that  caused  a  traffic  jam  on  the 
streets of what was then Calcutta. 
6.   Or take the story of the RBI Seal. The seal was approved by the RBI Board. Even so, 
Sir  James  Taylor,  the  then  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank,  was  disappointed  with  it.  He 
ordered  preparation  of  fresh  sketches  by  the  Government  of  India  Mint  and  the  Security 
Printing  Press  at  Nasik.  His  dissatisfaction  was  with  the  image  of  the  tiger  on  the  seal, 
presumably because it did not quite look like a tiger. 
7.   Sir  James  could  not  find  anyone  to  photograph  a  live  tiger.  So  he  did  the  next  best 
thing, and ordered the photographing of the statue of the tiger on the entrance gate at the 
BIS Review 75/2010 
 1
Belvedere in Calcutta. Sir James was clearly a man hard to please; he was not happy with 
those sketches either. 
8.  
“The tiger”, wrote Sir James, apparently inclined to be a bit ribald, “looks too like some 
species of dog, and I am afraid that a design of a dog under a tree would arouse derision 
among the irreverent”. 
9.   A second effort produced better results with the tiger. But the palm tree went wrong. 
The fastidious Sir James wrote again, “The tiger is distinctly good, but the tree has spoiled it. 
The stem is too long and the branches too spidery, but I should have thought that by putting 
a firm line under the feet of the tiger and making the tree stronger and lower, we could get 
quite a good result from the design”. 
10.   The Security Printing Press at Nasik had to go to work again until it could get better 
results that eventually passed muster with Sir James. 
11.  
I have recounted this story here not only because it is part of our history preserved in 
these Archives, not only because it is interesting and funny, but also because many of our 
staff,  especially  those  from  the  Central  Office  who  observe  me  closely,  find  that  I  am 
fastidious about small things such as margins, formats, line spacing etc. Many of them feel, 
perhaps rightly, that the Governor should be spending his time and effort on more weighty 
concerns such as, for example, the menu of the staff cafeteria. The story of Sir James and 
the  seal  is  therefore  a  matter  of  comfort  for  me.  It  shows  that  some  of  my  illustrious 
predecessors  were  equally  fastidious,  admittedly  about  more  important  things.  Hopefully, 
future  generations  will  appreciate  my  fastidiousness  even  if  the  current  staff  think  I  am  a 
nuisance. 
12.   The history of RBI over the past 75 years is indeed replete with such interesting events 
and developments. These archives tell many of those stories and they include extracts from 
the Report of the Edward Young Commission recommending the establishment of a central 
bank  for  India  to  be  named  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  the  congratulatory  telegram  dated  1st 
April  1935  from  the  Viceroy  of  India  to  the  RBI  Governor  on  the  commencement  of 
operations  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  the  draft  of  RBI  Bill  1934,  the  minutes  and 
photograph  of  the  first  meeting  of  the  Central  Board  of  Directors,  the  design  of  currency 
notes and the weights earlier used for weighing coins and gold, a letter from our first Prime 
Minister Pandit Nehru to Sir C.D. Deshmukh, the first Indian Governor of the Reserve Bank, 
requesting  him  to  send  an  analytical  report  on  the  deteriorating  economic  condition  and 
suggest remedial measures, a letter from Prime Minister Indira Gandhi requesting release of 
foreign exchange for her son Rajiv’s studies abroad, the reasons for closure of the RBI office 
in London and the devaluation of the rupee in 1966. 
13.   The Archives also contain important records that predate the establishment of the RBI. 
For  example,  the  RBI  Archives  preserves  the  cancelled  securities  and  bonds  of  the  East 
India Company and the Government of India pertaining to the period 1777–1894. Records 
such  as  these  capture  the  economic  situation  of  the  time  and  are  of  great  historical 
significance. 
14.   Established  in  August  1981,  the  Reserve  Bank  Archives  were  among  the  earliest 
corporate  archives  in  the  country.  This  was  a  pioneering  effort  to  preserve  the  invaluable 
archival  heritage  of  the  Bank  which  was  at  that  time  scattered  all  over  the  country,  in  the 
Central Office Departments, and in the Regional Offices. The RBI Archives were driven by 
the  twin  objective  of  (i)  serving  as  the  central  archives  of  the  Bank;  and  (ii)  acting  as  an 
archival repository of the non-current records of enduring value to the Bank. 
15.   Over  the  last  28  years,  the  RBI  Archives  has  been  engaged  in  pursuing  these 
objectives,  in  particular  in  identifying,  acquiring,  preserving  and  making  accessible  the  
non-current  records  of  enduring  historical  and  legal  value.  This  is  a  legacy  for  future 
generations.  
2 
 BIS Review 75/2010
16.   Archival institutions and archivists are key players in the exchange of information and 
dissemination of ideas. The RBI Archives should also be proactively involved in the appraisal 
and  selection  of  records  of  vital  importance  to  the  Bank,  and  in  framing  preservation 
schedules for the various Departments and Offices. We should further streamline procedures 
and protocols for the management of records. A good principle of records management is 
that there should be a reasonable ratio between creation and destruction of records as the 
space and time available for management is limited.  
17.   Change, as they say, is the only constant in life. The palm leaf and parchment records 
made way for paper records. And now paper is having to yield to electronic records. Retrieval 
of  digital  records  pose  a  challenge  qualitatively  different  than  that  of  retrieval  of  paper 
records. In RBI, we are now faced with a situation where paper as well as electronic records 
are being created. An important task on the way forward for the RBI Archives is to efficiently 
manage this transition from physical to digital records.  
18.  The world is witnessing an information revolution. That is clichéd, but true. The volume 
of information we are creating and storing is expanding at a mind-boggling pace. There is a 
growing  concern  that  the  mere  ability  to  store  larger  and  larger  volumes  of  information  is 
itself  triggering  storage  of  larger  volumes  of  information  without  any  consideration  of  its 
potential  value.  Management  of  information,  that  is  deciding  what  to  preserve,  how  to 
preserve,  where  to  preserve  and  how  to  retrieve,  is  therefore,  an  area  of  potentially  huge 
importance to organizations including importantly the Reserve Bank. 
19.  The Right to Information Act has added a new dimension to storage and retrieval  of 
information in public institutions. To fulfill the true objective behind the Right to Information 
Act,  we  should  be  able  to  give  precise  information  in  quick  time.  This  means  giving 
information that is requested, and only the information that is requested, in good enough time 
for it to serve the purpose of the applicant. Management Information Systems and Archival 
Systems should retool themselves to redeem this obligation.  
20.  The  guiding  principles  for  information  management  are:  first,  information  should  be 
shared;  second,  information  should  be  accessible;  third,  information  should  enable  us  to 
work  more  efficiently;  and  finally  and  most  importantly,  everyone  should  realize  that 
managing  the  valuable  resource  of  information  is  a  shared  responsibility.  In  the  Reserve 
Bank,  we  are  getting  increasingly  conscious  of  the  comparative  advantage  and  efficiency 
gains that accrue with successful management of information. There is, therefore, a need for 
common digital infrastructure and open content to share our archives and ensure their long 
term preservation and sustainable accessibility. Archivists and record managers have to play 
an  important  role  in  ensuring  the  accessibility  and  authenticity  of  records  to  serve  as  an 
effective tool for decision making. 
21.   Any  formal  archival  system  must  be  supported  by  a  clearly  articulated  Archival  and 
Records  Management  Policy.  In  RBI,  for  instance,  the  Archival  and  Records  Management 
Policy  should  define  the  responsibilities  of  the  Central  Office  Departments  and  of  the 
Regional  Offices  for  ensuring  proper  care  and  management  of  current,  semi-current  and  
non-current  records  in  their  possession,  and  their  subsequent  transfer  to  the  Archives. 
Furthermore,  there  is  need  to  sensitize  the  Departments  and  Offices  of  the  Bank  to  the 
importance of early identification and segregation of non-current permanent records having 
administrative, historical and legal value, and their timely transfer to the Archives. I am happy 
to inform you that the Archival and Records Management Policy for RBI has been approved 
by the Committee of the Central Board of Directors, and we will roll out the implementation 
shortly. 
22.  
In order to encourage historical research using original records as source material, the 
RBI  Archives  allows  access  to  all  non-current  permanent  records  which  are  more  than 
30 years  old.  Such  access  is  available  to  post-graduate  students,  research  scholars,  and 
members of the staff of the Reserve Bank and other banks as well as students from other 
institutions.  As  economists  tell  us,  supply  does  not  always  generate  its  own  demand.  The 
BIS Review 75/2010 
 3
reason I am saying that is it is one thing for the RBI Archives to have a liberal policy towards 
providing  access  to  records  to  encourage  research.  It  is  another  matter  to  generate  the 
demand  for  the  study  of  the  records  for  research  purposes.  Only  then  can  we  have  a 
situation  where  demand  meets  supply.  I  would,  therefore,  urge  the  managers  of  the 
RBI Archives to go beyond supply side responses and to launch a campaign to disseminate 
information  about  the  records  they  hold  in  a  way  that  will  whet  the  appetite  of  potential 
scholars. 
23.   As  I  said  earlier,  we  have  just  concluded  the  platinum  jubilee  celebrations  of  the 
Reserve Bank. The celebrations generated a variety of memorabilia captured in documents, 
photographs, video clips and films. I would urge the management of the Archives to collect 
all this material, screen it, categorize it and preserve it. I am sure it will have both historic and 
nostalgic value besides being, I hope, a guide for the future Governor as the Reserve Bank 
celebrates its centenary in 2035. 
24.  As Jeremy Irons, the British actor, once said “We all have our time machines. Some 
take us back, they’re called memories. Some take us forward, they’re called dreams.” The 
RBI  Archives  Museum  that  we  are  inaugurating  today  will,  I  hope,  be  an  effective  time 
machine as we in the Reserve Bank and all our stakeholders, grapple with our memories of 
the past and our dreams for the future. 
25.   The  RBI  Archives,  as  an  institution,  has  earned  a  well  deserved  reputation  for  the 
integrity of its contents, for the management of the records and for the professionalism of its 
staff. The museum that is being inaugurated today is yet another initiative in their continuing 
pursuit  of  excellence.  I  want  to  compliment  the  Principal  of  the  College  of  Agricultural 
Banking,  Ms.  Kamala  Rajan,  the  Chief  Archivist  Shri  Ashok  Kapoor  and  the  staff  of  the 
Archives  for  the  good  work  they  are  doing  and  wish  them  all  the  best  in  furthering  the 
objectives of the Archives. 
4 
 BIS Review 75/2010
