Njuguna Ndung’u: East African Monetary Union 
Opening remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, during 
the  East  African  Legislative  Assembly  Workshop  on  the  East  African  Monetary  Union, 
Nairobi, 4 March 2010. 
 Honorable Chairperson of Communication, Trade and Investment Committee of East 
African Legislative Assembly, Hon. Dahilo; 
Representative of the Clerk of EALA, Mr. Enock Musiime;  
Honorable Members of Parliament from EALA; 
Honorable Members of Parliament from Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Burundi, Rwanda; 
Director  of  Planning  and  Infrastructure,  EAC  Secretariat,  Mr.  Phillip  Wambugu  and 
other officials from the EAC Secretariat;  
Senior Government Officials from the EAC; 
Distinguished Delegates; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I am privileged by this invitation to participate in this important Workshop on the East African 
Monetary Union being held here in Nairobi. On behalf of the Central Bank of Kenya and on 
my own behalf, I welcome you all to Nairobi, Kenya. 
Honorable members of EALA and EAC National Assemblies, this workshop comes at a time 
when East Africans are anxious to appreciate the benefits from the East African Community 
Common Market. The protocol on its establishment was signed in November 2009. The EAC 
Common Market will ensure free movement of factors of people, services and capital across 
the  five  Partner  States.  Under  the  common  market,  goods  will  be  freely  traded  when  the 
region attains the status of a fully fledged Customs Union. 
As  the  honorable  members  are  aware,  the  EAC  Common  Market  Protocol  has  provisions 
that will guide elimination of capital restrictions that continue to impede free flow of capital 
among the EAC Countries. The cardinal principal of free movement of capital ties with the 
next level of integration that is the East African Monetary Union. 
In line with the regional integration as stipulated in the Treaty provision, the 6th Extraordinary 
Summit of EAC Heads of State held in Arusha, Tanzania on 20th August 2007 underscored 
the need to move expeditiously towards establishing a Monetary Union by 2012. 
Following that Summit Directive, Governors of EAC Central Banks met in Kampala, Uganda 
in January 2008 to map out a strategic framework for fast tracking the establishment of an 
East African Monetary Union by 2012. 
The meeting of Governors of Central Banks in Kampala decided on a comprehensive study 
of the East African Monetary Union whose major objectives were: 
i) 
To take stock of the current state of preparedness of the EAC Partner States for a 
Monetary Union. Among these was the economic convergence of member states; 
To  make  proposals  on  the  institutional  framework  and  structure  of  the  proposed 
East African Monetary Union; 
To design a model protocol for the East African Monetary Union that would form the 
basis for the Monetary Union negotiations among the EAC Partner States; 
To propose an institutional framework for the East African Monetary Institute which 
would precede and spearhead the creation of an East African Central Bank; and 
To propose a mechanism for the monitoring and enforcement of the macroeconomic 
convergence criteria among the EAC Partner States. 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
BIS Review 26/2010 
 1
Honourable members, the Monetary Affairs Committee (MAC), that comprises Governors of 
EAC Central Banks considered the terms of reference for the Study that were approved by 
the  Council  of  Ministers.  The  Monetary  Affairs  Committee  through  the  EAC  Secretariat 
engaged the services of the European Central Bank in 2009 to carry out the study through an 
internationally competitive bidding process. 
As  you  may  be  aware  honorable  members,  the  Draft  Final  Report  of  the  study  on  the 
establishment  of  the  Monetary  Union  among  the  EAC  Partner  States  was  validated  in  a 
workshop held in Kampala, Uganda in January 2010. Subsequently, and after incorporating 
the comments of the validation workshop the Final Report was submitted and considered by 
the  Joint  Session  of  the  Monetary  Affairs  Committee,  Fiscal  Affairs  Committee,  Capital 
Markets  Insurance  and  Pensions  Committee  held  in  Arusha  on  March  1,  2010.  In  our 
meeting  held  on  March  1,  2010,  the  EAC  Central  Bank  Governors  and  Permanent 
Secretaries from the Ministries of Finance, Trade and EAC recommended to the Ministers of 
Finance that the Study report on the establishment of the EAC Monetary Union, together with 
all its annexes be adopted as one of the working documents for the East African Monetary 
Union negotiation process. 
Honorable members, the Committee of Permanent Secretaries from the Ministries of Finance 
and Governors of the EAC Central Banks considered a draft road map for the establishment 
of  the  East  African  Monetary  Union.  The  Committee  noted  the  following  issues  under  the 
draft  road  map  that  required  detailed  consideration;  Legal,  Institutional  and  Regulatory 
Framework; Operational Issues and Policy Direction on available options for establishing the 
East  African  Central  Bank.  It  was  recommended  that  a  High  Level  Task  Force  (HLTF)  be 
formed to negotiate the East African Monetary Union Protocol and review the draft road map. 
The meeting recommended to kick start the process towards an East African Monetary Union 
by  Commencing  negotiations  on  the  comprehensive  protocol  on  the  establishment  of  the 
East  African  Monetary  Union.  This  protocol  also  features  the  Statute  of  the  East  African 
Monetary Institute and the East African Central Bank. The proposed Institute will carry out 
the preparatory work that will guide the region towards formation of an East African Monetary 
Union and its supporting institutions. 
In  order  to  give  this  process  the  necessary  institutional  momentum,  our  meeting 
recommended  that  a  sectoral  Council  of  Ministers  responsible  for  Finance  be  formed  to 
spearhead the East African Monetary Union process and proposed their terms of reference. 
This Sectoral Council of Ministers of Finance will provide policy guidance on the negotiations 
of the East African Monetary Union process. 
I  note  from  the  programme  of  this  workshop  that  members  will  be  taken  through  the 
presentations on the prerequisites for the establishment of the East African Monetary Union; 
Legal and Institutional Framework for East African Monetary Union; Preparatory work for the 
establishment  of  a  single  currency  and  at  the  end  of  each  presentation,  there  are  plenary 
discussions. The recommendations that will come from the discussions in this workshop will 
inform the negotiation process. 
I wish to remind honorable members that one of the benefits of a monetary union is to reduce 
the costs and risks of doing business across the national boundaries. Most of these costs are 
transactions  related.  With  a  single  currency,  the  costs  of  having  to  transact  in  different 
currencies  and  the  risk  of  adverse  exchange  rate  movements  that  could  impede  intra-
regional trade within the EAC Community will be removed. 
Secondly, as banks continue covering the region, they will spread the financial services for 
traders but also bring all regulators on a common platform. A Monetary Union will make this 
more efficient. 
Honorable  members  of  Parliament,  the  gradual  convergence  of  all  the  East  African 
economies is critical while moving to a Monetary Union. Fiscal policy and fiscal rules are the 
most critical and crucial for economic convergence, and perhaps even more importantly, for 
BIS Review 26/2010 
 2
the  credibility  and  sustainability  of  the  Monetary  Union.  Monetary  Policy  will  be  driven  by 
other decisions like exchange rate policy and reserves as well. One recent development, for 
example in Kenya is inflation measurement. Inflation will determine the direction of monetary 
policy in any country. But for EAC members, we have to compare ourselves when we use a 
common methodology. There are many such challenges and the central banks in the region 
are ready to tackle them in totality to develop more convergence. 
Honorable  members,  as  I  conclude,  I  see  enormous  opportunities  for  East  Africans  as  we 
move ahead. As East Africans, we need to tap and consolidate these opportunities. Certainly 
the way ahead will bring about legal and legislative reforms that need to be embraced in the 
road to a single currency. 
I thank you honorable Chair for your kind attention and wish you fruitful deliberations over the 
next two days of your meeting. 
BIS Review 26/2010 
 3
