Masaaki Shirakawa: Recent economic and financial developments and 
the conduct of monetary policy 
Statement by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, concerning the Bank’s 
“Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary Control” before the Committee on Financial 
Affairs, House of Councillors, Tokyo, 13 April 2010.  
 Introduction 
The Bank of Japan submitted to the Diet its Semiannual Report on Currency and Monetary 
Control  for  the  second  half  of  fiscal  2008  and  the  first  half  of  fiscal  2009  in  June  and 
December 2009, respectively. I am pleased to have this opportunity to talk about the recent 
developments in Japan’s economy and present an overall review of the Bank’s conduct of 
monetary policy. 
Developments in Japan’s economy 
I. 
Japan’s  economy  has  been  picking  up  mainly  due  to  improvement  in  overseas  economic 
conditions and to various policy measures, although there is not yet sufficient momentum to 
support  a  self-sustaining  recovery  in  domestic  private  demand.  The  trend  of  pick-up  is 
becoming  more  evident.  Exports  and  production  have  been  increasing  mainly  against  a 
backdrop of robust growth in emerging economies. According to the March Tankan (Short-
Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) released at the beginning of April, business 
sentiment  has  been  improving,  with  such  improvement  spreading  to  the  nonmanufacturing 
industry and small firms, in addition to large manufacturing firms. Business fixed investment 
is leveling out, and private consumption, notably durable goods consumption, is picking up 
mainly  due  to  policy  measures,  despite  the  continued  severe  employment  and  income 
situation. 
As for the outlook, the Bank projects that the pace of improvement of the economy is likely to 
be  moderate  for  the  time  being,  and  it  judges  that  the  risk  of  the  economy  deteriorating 
substantially again, the risk of the so-called “double dip,” about which market participants had 
expressed  concern,  has  diminished  considerably.  Thereafter,  as  improvements  in  the 
corporate sector originating from exports are expected to spill over to the household sector, 
the growth rate of the economy is likely gradually to rise. 
Financial  conditions,  with  some  lingering  severity,  have  shown  increasing  signs  of  easing. 
Firms’  borrowing  rates  from  banks  have  continued  to  decline  due  in  part  to  the  fact  that 
financial institutions’ lending stance has become active, in addition to monetary easing by the 
Bank. Issuing conditions for CP are more favorable than in the period prior to the Lehman 
shock. Issuing conditions for corporate bonds have also been favorable, and even those for 
low-rated  corporate  bonds  have  shown  signs  of  improvement.  Meanwhile,  although  many 
small firms still see their financial positions as weak, the overall financial positions of firms, 
including small ones, have continued to show signs of easing.  
The  CPI  (excluding  fresh  food) is declining  on  a  year-on-year  basis due  to  the substantial 
slack  in  the  economy  as  a  whole,  but  the  decline  leveled  out  in  August  2009  and  the 
moderating  trend  of  decline  has  continued.  The  outlook  for  the  trend  change  in  prices  is 
determined  by  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance  and  the  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation expectations. It should be noted that, statistically, the year-on-year rate of change in 
the CPI will decline for a year due to the introduction of subsidies for high school tuition and 
other  policy  measures  in  fiscal  2010,  but  in  assessing  the  trend  change  in  prices,  it  is 
necessary  to  exclude  such  one-off  factors.  In  terms  of  the  trend  change  in  prices,  with 
medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  likely  to  be  stable,  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
BIS Review 46/2010 
 1
decline  in  the  CPI  (excluding  fresh  food)  is  expected  to  continue  to  moderate  as  the 
aggregate supply and demand balance improves gradually. 
While I have thus far explained the baseline scenario for economic activity and prices, the 
Bank is also fully aware of the risks concerning such scenario. Upside risks to the scenario 
are  developments  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies.  The  robust  growth  of 
emerging and commodity-exporting economies has driven the pick-up of Japan’s economy. If 
the growth in those economies further accelerates, it will pose an upside risk to economic 
activity  in  Japan.  Meanwhile,  downside  risks,  although  somewhat  diminished,  include  the 
possible  consequences  of  balance-sheet  adjustments  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  as 
well  as  potential  changes  in  firms’  medium-  to  long-term  growth  expectations.  Moreover, 
attention  should  continue  to  be  paid  to  various  recent  international  financial  developments 
and  their  effects.  With  regard  to  prices,  there  is  a  risk  that  inflation  will  rise  more  than 
expected in the event of a rise in commodity prices due to higher growth rates in emerging 
and commodity-exporting economies. On the other hand, there is also a risk that the rate of 
inflation  might  decline  due,  for  example,  to  a  decline  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
II. 
The Bank recognizes that Japan’s economy is faced with a critical challenge of overcoming 
deflation and returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability. Therefore, the Bank 
has been implementing various measures, taking into account the two factors that determine 
the trend change in prices. 
As a measure to prompt an improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance, in 
terms  of  interest  rates,  the  Bank  has  kept  the  policy  rate  at  the  effectively  zero  level.  To 
encourage  a  further  decline  in  longer-term  interest  rates  in  the  money  market,  the  Bank 
introduced in December 2009 a new funds-supplying operation, through which funds with a 
maturity of three months are provided at an extremely low interest rate of 0.1 percent, and 
the  total  amount  of  loans  to  be  provided  through  this  operation  was  set  at  approximately 
10 trillion yen. The total amount of loans was increased to 20 trillion yen in March 2010. In 
terms of funds provision, the Bank has been providing ample funds through various funds-
supplying  operations,  including  the  new  operation.  Furthermore,  the  Bank  has  made  its 
stance  clear  that  it  will  consistently  maintain  the  extremely  accommodative  financial 
environment. 
As  for  inflation  expectations,  the  other  determinant  of  prices,  the  Bank  has,  to  prevent 
people’s expectations for prices from declining, clearly showed its stance, in the form of the 
“understanding of medium- to long-term price stability,” that it is critical to achieve a positive 
year-on-year rate of changes in the CPI. 
To overcome deflation and achieve a sustainable economic growth with price stability, the 
Bank will continue to consistently make contributions as central bank. 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2010
