Stefan Ingves: The crisis in the Baltic – the Riksbank’s measures, 
assessments and lessons learned 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riskbank, to the Riksdag Committee 
on Finance, Stockholm, 2 February 2010. 
 The crisis in the Baltic – the Riksbank’s measures, assessments and lessons learned 
It  is  not  possible  to  provide  a  comprehensive  reply  to  all  of  the  questions  discussed  in 
connection with the crisis in the Baltic in the space of 15 minutes. I shall therefore give a brief 
summary  of  the  assessments  made  by  the  Riksbank  during  the  course  of  the  crisis  and 
something about the measures we have taken. In conclusion, I shall say a few words about 
the lessons that can be learned.  
Before I discuss the role of the Riksbank, I would like to point out that the responsibility for 
developments in the Baltic countries primarily lies with their own governments with regard to 
economic  policy,  and  with  the  banks,  which  have  a  responsibility  for  understanding 
developments in the economy and taking sustainable, long-term action.  
People often seem to forget in the general debate that we are talking about three different 
countries here. Financial market participants also tend to see the Baltic countries as a unit, 
which makes it difficult to manage the crises in these countries. Of course there are many 
similarities  between  the  countries,  for  instance,  their  economic  expansion  and  decline. 
However, there are also important differences.  
Swedish banks’ commitments in the Baltic  
The  Swedish  banks’  total  lending  to  the  Baltic  countries currently  amounts  to  around  SEK 
400  billion.  There  are  mainly  two  Swedish  banks  that  have  had  a  large  presence  in  this 
region;  SEB  and  Swedbank.  These  banks,  their  subsidiaries  and  branches  dominate  the 
markets in the Baltic and comprise 80 per cent of the Estonian market, 55 per cent of the 
Lithuanian market and 60 per cent of the Latvian market. Around 16 per cent of Swedbank’s 
total lending is to the Baltic countries. The corresponding figure for SEB is 13 per cent and 
the  figure  for  Nordea  is  3  per  cent.  Swedbank’s  loan  losses  for  the  three  first  quarters  of 
2009 total SEK 19 billion, and 60 per cent of this stems from the Baltic countries. SEB’s loan 
losses total SEK 9 billion, with 75 per cent stemming from the Baltic region. According to the 
Riksbank’s  own  estimates,  the  three  banks’  total  loan  losses  in  the  Baltic  region  will  be 
SEK 27  billion  for  the  whole  year  2009,  and  roughly  the  same  in  2010,  with  around 
80 per cent,  or  SEK  50  billion,  falling  to  the  lot  of  Swedbank  and  SEB.  This  figure  of 
SEK 50 billion should be regarded in the light of the two bank groups’ total primary capital, 
which  is  SEK 185 billion,  or  the  capital  held  in  their  Baltic  subsidiaries  which  amounts  to 
SEK 27 billion.  It  will  be  necessary  for  the  parent  banks  to  continue  transferring  capital  to 
their  subsidiaries  to  maintain  their  creditworthiness.  Assuming  that  developments  in 
Swedbank’s  and  SEB’s  other  markets  continue  to  be  relatively  good,  however,  the  bank 
groups should be able to cover most of the losses from the Baltic region with the earnings 
from the remainder of their operations. Swedbank and SEB have subsidiaries in the Baltic 
countries,  while  Nordea  has  a  branch.  According  to  EU  regulations,  the  authorities  in  the 
country  where  subsidiaries  are  located  have  responsibility  for  their  supervision,  while  the 
home country authorities have the responsibility for branches and for the bank group as a 
whole.  
Around 80 per cent, equivalent to SEK 320 billion, of the Swedish banks’ lending to the Baltic 
countries is in euro. These euro are lent almost exclusively in the international loan markets 
by the parent bank in Sweden.  
BIS Review 11/2010 
 1
The  Baltic  economies  developed  rapidly  after  these  countries  gained  their  independence, 
although  there  have  been  some  setbacks.  This  development  was  supported  by  extensive 
inflows of capital from abroad, particularly after EU membership in 2004. Much of the money 
came from neighbouring countries such as Finland and Sweden. The average standard of 
living for the populations in the Baltic countries increased rapidly from 41 per cent of the EU 
average in the year 2000 to 62 per cent in the year 2008.  
Domestic and to an even greater degree foreign banks (which had better access to liquidity 
from  their  parent  banks)  increased  their  lending  at  a  rapid  rate  and  demand  was  further 
boosted by rather lenient fiscal policy in Latvia and Lithuania, although not in Estonia.  
However, the rapid growth led to the economies overheating. As early as 2007, for instance, 
the rate of wage increase was 20–30 per cent a year, bank lending to the corporate sector 
increased by 30–50 per cent and lending to the private sector by 50–70 per cent. The deficit 
in the current account was 25 per cent of GDP, although that in Lithuania was slightly lower. 
Foreign  analysts,  such as  the  IMF,  came  to  the  conclusion  that  this  development  was  not 
sustainable in the long run.  
The course of the crisis  
As a result of the large imbalances in the Baltic economies, developments would sooner or 
later have led to an economic crisis regardless of the external circumstances. Now the global 
financial crisis acted as the trigger. Investors no longer wished to take on as much risk and 
as the Baltic region was considered risky, with a risk of their currencies devaluating, capital 
was  withdrawn  from  the  region.  Governments  and  banks,  both  local  and  foreign-owned, 
experienced  difficulties  in  finding  funding.  The  outflow  led  to  an  acute  currency  crisis  in 
Latvia.  
The  downswing  in  the  economies  was  very  rapid  and  severe,  as  a  number  of  factors 
combined:  
• 
The countries’ competitiveness had been undermined by the large wage increases, 
at the same time as the strong demand in the domestic markets had led to a waning 
interest in production for export.  
“Bubbles” of overproduction and high prices, primarily in the property sector, led to a 
more or less complete stop in construction.  
The global crisis meant that demand for the countries’ export goods declined.  
The  global  crisis  led  to  foreign  investors  being  neither  willing  nor  able  to  inject 
capital  to  the  Baltic  countries.  At  the  same  time,  foreign  depositors  made  large 
withdrawals from the banks.  
  The crisis led to GDP in the Baltic countries falling by up to 20 per cent during 2009 alone, 
and budget deficits soared, as did the outflow of currency, which put pressure on the foreign 
currency reserves. Real wages fell, unemployment rose, property prices collapsed and the 
number of borrowers experiencing problems repaying their loans increased rapidly. However, 
the outcomes in the different countries differed somewhat from one another.  
How has the Riksbank assessed developments in the Baltic countries and what action 
has it taken?  
As many of the major Swedish banks have such large commitments in these countries, the 
Riksbank has long been closely following developments in the region. This forms a natural 
part of our work in the financial stability field, which also encompasses other countries where 
the Swedish banks have a significant presence. We analyse statistics and other information 
from  these  countries  and  we  discuss  developments  with  management  and  employees  at 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2010
their  central  banks,  governments  and  financial  supervisory  authorities.  We  also  follow  the 
reports  on  these  countries  from  other  sources  such  as  the  IMF,  the  EU/ECB  and  market 
data. Representatives of the Riksbank have accompanied the IMF on several of their visits to 
the  Baltic  countries  and  have  taken  part  in  the  discussions  with  governments  and  public 
authorities  there.  The  purpose  of  this  participation,  which  has  been  at  the  invitation  of  the 
countries concerned and of the IMF on each individual occasion, has been to acquire up-to-
date knowledge of the situation in the country and of the negotiations, so that the Riksbank 
could, if necessary, provide financial support at very short notice.  
The  Riksbank’s  Financial  Stability  Report,  which  is  published  twice  a  year,  sounded  a 
warning as early as 2005 regarding economic developments in the Baltic region and the tone 
has gradually sharpened in the reports published since then. The Financial Stability Report 
also publishes the results of stress tests, in which the banks’ resilience is tested in the light of 
improbable but nevertheless possible scenarios. Examples of some of the scenarios tested 
include the effects on the banks of various crisis situations in the Baltic region. Back in 2006 
we made the first stress test based on a possible worse development in the Baltic region and 
noted  that  if  this  were  to  occur,  the  banks’  resilience  would  deteriorate  and  their  scope  to 
manage other negative shocks would be reduced.  
The Riksbank’s Deputy Governor Lars Nyberg informed the board of Finansinspektionen (the 
Swedish  financial  supervisory  authority)  of  his  fears  regarding  developments  in  the  Baltic. 
Mr. Nyberg raised the issue in Finansinspektionen, in the summer of 2008, that the capital 
adequacy requirement for Swedish-owned banks with operations in the Baltic region should 
be raised to compensate for the higher risk. However, the board concluded that bank groups’ 
capital already exceeded the legal minimums on a consolidated, group-wide, basis and thus 
the parent bank could transfer part of its excess capital to a subsidiary in the Baltic countries, 
if necessary. Hence, no further measures were required.  
The  Riksbank  has  regularly  informed  the  Swedish  banks  of  our  assessment  of  risk  in  the 
Baltic countries. We have also required that the banks send us supplementary information so 
we  can  analyse 
together  with 
Finansinspektionen  we  have  visited  the  banks’  subsidiaries  and  branches  in  the  Baltic 
countries to study in detail, for instance, their loan management.  
The  Riksbank  has  for  several  years  now  carried  out  regular  crisis  management  exercises 
regarding financial crises. In 2007 a crisis management exercise was held together with all of 
the Nordic and Baltic countries, where the scenario involved a crisis in a cross-border Nordic 
bank. The purpose was to get the countries to cooperate in analysing and solving problems 
and to clarify the distribution of roles and responsibilities.  
When the crisis moved into an acute phase in Latvia in December 2008 and large amounts 
of  capital  left  the  country,  a  loan  agreement  was  signed  at  very  short  notice  with  the 
Riksbank and Danmarks Nationalbank on the one side and the Latvian central bank on the 
other side. The agreement totalled EUR 500 million, around SEK 5 billion. The main purpose 
of the agreement was to support Latvia’s foreign currency reserve up to the point when the 
first payments from the IMF and EU became available. One condition was that Latvia should 
sign an agreement with the IMF, as the Riksbank neither can nor should become involved in 
assessing whether or not the country is making the necessary economic adjustments. The 
Riksbank’s assessment was that if Latvia had not received extensive financial support from 
abroad at this stage it could have led to uncontrolled exchange rate depreciation and very 
large currency outflows.  
In  February  2009  the  Riksbank  offered  an  arrangement  to  the  Estonian  central  bank  for 
short-term currency support. This arrangement was never used. Its purpose was to give the 
central bank the possibility to provide emergency liquidity support in the event of an acute 
crisis in local currency to the Swedish subsidiaries. It thus had a different purpose than the 
agreement  with  Latvia.  Given  Estonia’s  own  currency  board  arrangement,  it  would  not 
otherwise have been possible for them to provide support other than on a very small scale 
the  potential  risks 
in  greater  detail. 
In  addition, 
BIS Review 11/2010 
 3
and the Swedish authorities would have been forced to take full responsibility for a liquidity 
injection.  This  agreement  is  a  good  example  of  the  allocation  of  responsibility  between 
countries with interwoven financial systems.  
The legal base for the Riksbank’s loan arrangements with Latvia and Estonia is described in 
the Sveriges Riksbank Act, which enables loans to be granted for monetary policy purposes 
and currency policy purposes. An acute crisis in these countries would probably have such 
repercussions  in  Sweden  that  it  would  be  difficult  for  the  Riksbank  to  conduct  efficient 
monetary  policy,  and  the  exchange  rate  would  probably  be  weakened  to  an  extent  which 
would be detrimental to Sweden’s economic development.  
The  Riksbank  has  strengthened  its  own  foreign  currency  reserve  through  extensive 
borrowing abroad to have sufficient resources to be able to act effectively in a crisis. The size 
of the foreign currency reserve prior to the borrowing was not adequate to meet the demand 
for  support  measures  that  arose.  When  access  to  foreign  markets  disappeared  after  the 
Lehman  collapse  in  the  autumn  of  2008,  demand  for  foreign  currency  from  the  Riksbank 
increased sharply.  
international  uncertainty  and 
the  market  was  particularly  sensitive 
Why has the Riksbank acted in the way it has?  
When  foreign  market  participants  assess  the  situation  and  risks  for  Sweden  and  Swedish 
financial institutions, they also take into account to a large degree what is happening in the 
other  Nordic  countries  and  in  the  Baltic  countries.  The  global  financial  crisis  has  affected 
financial stability in Sweden, although financial institutions here have coped better than those 
in  many  other  countries.  At  the  end  of  2008  and  the  beginning  of  2009  there  was 
considerable 
to 
consequences for Swedish banks resulting from the crisis in the Baltic. There was thus good 
reason for the Riksbank to take measures to stabilise the situation among the major Swedish 
banks in accordance with its task "to promote a safe and efficient payment system”.  
As the problems of the Swedish banks concerned mainly lay in the Baltic region, there was 
even  greater  justification  for  aiming  the  measures  at  strengthening  these  countries  and 
thereby the banks there. The costs of these measures would probably be much lower if the 
problem could be dealt with at source rather than waiting until it had spread to the parent 
banks in Sweden, for instance through a dead stop in the liquidity supply from international 
markets. When the Riksbank made an assessment of the resources required to manage a 
widespread  Swedish  bank  crisis,  we  took  into  account  the  fact  that  the  Swedish  banks’ 
balance  sheets  nowadays  amount  in  total  to  3.7  times  Sweden’s  GDP  (which  can  be 
compared to 1.2 times GDP during the bank crisis in the 1990s).  
There is a debate regarding the fixed exchange rates in the Baltic countries. The Riksbank 
has no reason to question the Latvian government’s wish to retain its fixed exchange rate. 
The main argument for our stance is that the Latvians themselves wish to maintain a fixed 
exchange rate to be able to ultimately apply to adopt the euro. They are prepared to make 
far-reaching  sacrifices  in  the  form  of  wage  reductions,  budget  cutbacks  and  the  ensuing 
unemployment, to attain the cost reductions that will restore competitiveness. I consider that 
the  possibilities  for  the  Latvian  government  to  obtain  popular  support  for  such  painful 
measures would be greatly undermined if other countries were to force an unwanted solution 
on Latvia. Nor is devaluation an easy path to take. There are considerable risks that it will not 
be possible to control the magnitude of the exchange rate changes and that there may be 
large distortion of the economy.  
I also want to refute the argument that the Riksbank is supporting fixed exchange rates in 
these  countries  because  the  Swedish  banks  would  suffer  large  losses  in  the  event  of 
devaluation. Devaluation or not, economic restraint is required over a long period of time to 
restore balance to the economies. This implies that the banks’ loan losses will be around the 
4 
 BIS Review 11/2010
same size in both alternative scenarios, but will probably have a slightly different distribution 
over time.  
What has the Riksbank learned?  
As I have described, the Riksbank had detected at a relatively early stage that the Swedish 
banks’ lending in the Baltic region was not sustainable and that it would lead to significant 
risks.  Admittedly,  the  severity  of  the  risks  did  gradually  become  clearer  as  time  went.  We 
took a number of measures, although they were all of a ”soft” nature, such as discussions 
with  the  banks,  with  the  authorities  in  the  Baltic  countries  and  with  Finansinspektionen. 
However, it became clear that these measures did not have the intended effect. This is not a 
unique  phenomenon;  experiences  from  many  countries  show  that  it  is  very  difficult  for  the 
authorities to require constraint from the banks as long as their profitability remains good and 
loan losses are low. A complicating factor was that the authorities in the Baltic countries did 
not see the impending risks, but expressly encouraged the Swedish banks to maintain a high 
level of lending. The Riksbank lacks sharp, legally-binding instruments for dealing with the 
banks in these situations. Prior to autumn 2008 there was also no Swedish framework for 
crisis management, and there are still significant shortcomings in the public management of 
individual banks in distress, which became clear in the case of Custodia. The Riksbank is 
currently analysing what further tools that might prove necessary.  
The Riksbank is also considering how our messages regarding risks to financial stability can 
be made clearer. Perhaps they must be based on a clearer interpretation of our mandate in 
the  Sveriges  Riksbank  Act  which  currently  states  that  we  shall  “promote  stability  in  the 
payment system”. Perhaps we need to use more formal measures to a greater extent, such 
as  expressing  our  recommendations  in  letters  to  the  parties  concerned.  Regardless  of  the 
importance of clarity, it is always a sensitive issue to determine at what point the Riksbank 
can  issue  warnings  regarding  weaknesses  in  the  financial  system.  This  is  of  course  even 
more difficult when it refers to another country. The Riksbank therefore also works through 
non-public  contacts  with  other  authorities  in  Sweden  and  abroad,  with  international 
organisations  and  with  the  Swedish  banks.  It  is  important  to  achieve  consensus  on  the 
problems  and  possible  measures.  Of  course,  it  is  also  very  important  to  make  our  views 
public to put pressure on those concerned and to inform a broader public. – The Riksbank’s 
basic outlook is that we shall be as open and clear as possible.  
One  lesson  learned  from  both  the  global  crisis  and  that  in  the  Baltic  countries  is  that  the 
regulation  and  supervision  of  the  financial  sector  must  be  strengthened.  This  entails,  for 
instance,  more  and  better  capital  in  the  banks,  stricter  requirements  regarding  the  banks’ 
liquidity  and  risk  management  in  general,  as  well  as  stricter  supervision  of  large,  cross-
border bank groups. The Riksbank works actively in various international forums such as the 
EU/ECB, the BIS and the IMF to be able to detect at an early stage weaknesses that could 
lead  to  financial  crises  and  to  meet  threats  to  stability.  We  support  in  various  ways  the 
endeavours  to  strengthen  and  harmonise  international  regulations  and  supervision  work  in 
different countries.  
Concluding remarks  
The  economic  downturn  in  all  three  Baltic  countries  is  a  deep  one.  There  are  some 
indications that the recession may have bottomed out or is at least close to it. The trade and 
current account balances have improved, which is mainly due to domestic constraint, but to 
some extent also to improvements in exports. The pressure on the currencies has declined. 
It is easier for the countries’ governments to fund their budget deficits. Although those deficits 
are  still  high,  they  appear  to  be  held  in  check,  at  least  temporarily,  through  drastic  fiscal 
stabilisation  measures.  The  IMF’s  and  the  EU’s  loan  programmes  for  Latvia  are  still  in 
operation. With regard to Estonia, efforts are being focused on clarifying the conditions for a 
BIS Review 11/2010 
 5
possible  adoption  of  the  euro  as  early  as  the  turn  of  the  year.  All  three  countries  have 
recently succeeded in acquiring loans on the international markets.  
But at the same time as we note these positive signs, we must be aware of the continued 
crises  in  the  economies,  with  high  and  rising  unemployment,  and  a  heavy  fall  in  GDP, 
consumption and investment. On the financial side, we can see that the number of borrowers 
who are unable to repay their loans is increasing rapidly. Both foreign and domestic banks 
must make corresponding provisions for losses, which has made an impact on, for instance, 
Swedbank’s and SEB’s interim reports.  
As  consumption  demand  will  be  weak  for  many  years,  the  way  out  of  the  crisis  must  be 
through  investment  and  exports.  This  is  only  possible  if  competitiveness  improves  through 
further reductions in real wages. Moreover, demand from abroad must increase from the low 
levels experienced during the crisis.  
Finally, I would like to stress for the sake of clarity that the Riksbank, and thus the Swedish 
taxpayers, has not lost any money on the transactions with the Baltic countries. Those who 
have  suffered  financial  losses  are  the  banks’  shareholders,  who  have  been  forced  to 
compensate for the losses with new capital. But there is also another loss – in addition to the 
economic contraction which the citizens of the Baltic countries currently suffer from – that is 
more  important,  and  this  concerns  the  Swedish  economy  as  a  whole.  When  banks  make 
losses abroad they do not have the same possibilities to provide loans in Sweden, and thus 
our country may have poorer economic development. The Riksbank has done all it can to 
prevent such a negative development.  
6 
 BIS Review 11/2010
