Choongsoo Kim: The Korean economic outlook and policy initiatives for 
the course ahead 
Speech by Mr Choongsoo Kim, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at a special luncheon of the 
New  York  representative  office  of  the  Bank  of  Korea  and  The  Korea  Society,  New  York, 
25 August 2010. 
 Greetings 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am indeed delighted to be here with you this afternoon to deliver a speech on the topic of 
the Korean economic outlook and policy initiatives.  
Let me take this opportunity to express my deep thanks to all participants in this meeting, 
especially  to  Chairman  Thomas  C.  Hubbard,  former  US  Ambassador  to  the  Republic  of 
Korea, for this invitation to address you, and to Terrence J. Checki, Executive Vice President 
of FRB New York, for his close cooperation with the Bank of Korea. 
In addition, my thanks go to H.E. Inkook Park, Ambassador to the UN, and Youngmok Kim, 
Consul General in New York, and 
the very many distinguished experts from Wall Street. 
I intend to speak today about how Korea overcame the shock of the global financial crisis 
and the policy challenges that lie ahead. 
I.  
Economic movements after Lehman’s collapse 
Foreign exchange and financial market 
1.  
While the Korean foreign exchange and financial markets were thrown into turmoil due to the 
global credit crunch following the collapse of Lehman Brothers, they have improved markedly 
since the second quarter of 2009. 
 
The  Korean  won/dollar  exchange  rate,  which  had  risen  to  1,530  at  the  end  of 
February 2009, subsequently fell back to a level of 1,270 at the end of June 2009 as 
the  foreign  exchange  supply  and  demand  conjuncture  improved  because  of  the 
sustained current account surplus. 
In  September  2009,  spreads  between  long-term  market  interest  rates  such  as 
corporate  bond  yields  and  Treasury  bond  yields  narrowed  to  their  level  before 
Lehman Brothers’ collapse amid the waning of credit risk fears. 
Share prices in terms of the KOSPI index continued on an upward trend in keeping 
with the turn for the better in the economic situation, rising from 1,070 as of the end 
of November 2008 to 1,690 as of the end of September 2009. 
  Even  amid  the  overall  foreign  exchange  and  financial  market  stabilization,  though,  the 
exchange rate volatility of the Korean currency is still much higher than other countries’. 
 
Day-to-day volatility in the Korean won/dollar exchange rate was running at 0.92% in 
the second quarter of 2010, much higher than the 0.56% of UK pound or 0.51% of 
Japanese yen against the greenback. 
BIS Review 110/2010 
 1
2.  
Real economy 
Growth 
Real economic activity has maintained its swift recovery trend since the second quarter of 
last year. 
 
The rate of GDP growth in the fourth quarter of 2008, just after Lehman Brothers’ 
collapse, tumbled to  △4.5% quarter on quarter. However, economic growth swiftly 
returned into positive territory so that it registered 0.2% year on year for 2009 as a 
whole. 
A clearly-marked upward trend has been maintained also from the beginning of this 
year with quarter-on-quarter GDP growth coming in at 2.1% for the first quarter and 
1.5% for the second quarter. 
 Among  the  OECD  member  countries,  only  three  countries,  Korea,  Australia  and  Poland, 
chalked up positive growth in 2009. 
What is more while it took six quarters for the economy to regain its pre-crisis scale following 
the Asian foreign currency crisis in 1997, it took only four quarters after this latest crisis. 
 
This is largely ascribable to the fact that it was possible to take bold monetary and 
fiscal policy measures to deal with the crisis in contrast to the situation following the 
foreign currency crisis. Korean financial institutions and firms had put themselves on 
a sound financial footing following the 1997 meltdown. 
Employment 
Similarly, labor market conditions, which lag economic activity, have improved greatly since 
the beginning of the year. 
 
The number of persons in private sector employment shifted to an increase in the 
fourth quarter last year, and by the second quarter this year it was higher than its 
level just before Lehman Brothers’ collapse. 
– 
On the other hand, the main advanced countries have not so far been able to 
pull out of the downward trend in the number of persons in employment. 
Prices 
Mirroring the movements of the real economy, consumer price inflation eased from 4.1% in 
2008 to 2.8% last year and this year it has continued at a little above 2 ½%. 
 
Actually the scale of the change in Korean price movements has been rather lower 
than that of other countries. 
– 
The rate of increase in US consumer prices fell steeply from 3.8% in 2008 to 
∆0.4%  in  2009  and  that  in  Chinese  prices  similarly  tumbled  from  5.9%  to 
∆0.7% over the same two-year period. 
House prices 
House prices in Korea have shifted to an upward trend since the second quarter of last year, 
after experiencing a mild drop following Lehman Brothers’ collapse. 
 
Due to the tightening of mortgage lending regulations including DTI ratios, however, 
house prices show a slower pace of increase this year; with the Greater Seoul area 
turning to a mild decrease. 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2010
In contrast to their very steep falls from pre-crisis levels in countries such as the USA and the 
UK, house prices in Korea have remained relatively unaffected. 
 
From January 2008 up until the present, house prices fell by 20.8% in the USA and 
7.0% in the UK whereas they edged up 5.5% in Korea. 
Policy responses 
3.  
Thanks  to  the  active  implementation  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policies,  the  Korean  economy 
could overcome the financial crisis faster than other major countries. 
Monetary policy 
In the immediate aftermath of the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the Bank of Korea moved 
boldly from that October to bring stability to the foreign exchange market and ease the credit 
squeeze. 
 
It supplied a total of 26.8 billion US dollars in foreign currency liquidity by making 
active use of the foreign exchange reserves and a currency swap facility with the US 
Fed. 
Through open market operations and support for a bank recapitalization fund and so 
on,  it  also  pumped  in  Korean  won  liquidity  of  28  trillion  won,  amounting  to  the 
equivalent of around 2.6% of nominal GDP. 
In a further move, between October 2008 and February 2009, it cut its policy rate 
dramatically from 5.25% to its lowest-ever level of 2%. 
  From the second quarter of 2009, in line with the stirrings of improvement in finance and the 
economy, it progressively withdrew the liquidity supplied in the course of tackling the financial 
crisis. 
 
During 2009, it collected in full the foreign currency liquidity provided through swaps 
and loans. 
Similarly last year, it recouped the entire amount of the liquidity pumped in by way of 
RPs. 
In June this year the Aggregate Credit Ceiling for the financial support of SMEs was 
reduced  by  1.5  trillion  won,  part  of  the  3.5  trillion  won  increase  undertaken  in 
response to the crisis. 
Right now the total scale of the Korean won liquidity supplied and still outstanding 
amounts to only 6.9 trillion won (0.6% of nominal GDP), being made up of part of the 
increases in the Aggregate Credit Ceiling (2.0 trillion won), the Bank Recapitalization 
Fund (3.1 trillion won) and the Bond Market Stabilization Fund (1.8 trillion won). 
   The Bank of Korea adjusted its policy rate upward from 2% to 2.25% on July 9 this year after 
keeping it on hold for 17 straight months. 
 
Consideration  was  given  to  the  possibility  of  mounting  upward  price  pressures 
against the background of business activity’s continued increasing trend. 
The scale of this recent rise in the interest rate being moderate and to some degree 
factored in, it is not considered likely to have any great impact on the financial and 
housing markets or on the household and corporate sectors. 
 Fiscal policy 
The  government  implemented  active  fiscal  stimulus  measures  to  ward  off  an  overly-deep 
recession in the real economy. 
BIS Review 110/2010 
 3
  Total  additional  fiscal  spending  and  tax  cuts  directly  and  indirectly  related  to  the 
financial crisis amounted to 38.8 trillion won in 2009.  
The 
fiscal  expansion  associated  with  crisis-related  discretionary  measures 
amounted to 3.7% of nominal GDP, larger than that in both the U.S. and the U.K., 
the epicenters of the financial crisis. 
Fiscal  policy  for  2010  is  being  implemented  in  such  a  way  as  to  support  the  economic 
recovery and improve fiscal soundness. 
 
Government expenditures for this year will contract to 261.4 trillion won, 4.2% less 
than last year’s (272.9 trillion won).  
– 
The ratio of the fiscal deficit to nominal GDP is expected to decrease from last 
year’s 4.1% to 2.4%. 
 Nevertheless, in order to increase the economic stimulus effect, the disbursement of 
the budget has been front-loaded like last year’s. 
II.  
Economic outlook 
Growth 
1.  
Looking forward, economic activity appears set to continue on its upward track so that GDP 
growth for the year as a whole is forecast to rise greatly from last year’s 0.2% to stand at 
5.9%. 
 
Although  the  government  sector  policy  effects  will  weaken,  the  private  sector  is 
expected to lead the economic upturn. 
– 
The drawing-down of inventories has been almost completed so that we are 
moving  into  a  phase  of  intended  inventory  rebuilding.  Facilities  investment, 
likewise, should build up swiftly, bolstered by the buoyant business situation in 
the IT sector. 
The  situation  as  regards  consumption  should  improve  as  wage  and  salary 
income increases in an improved labor market. 
 GDP growth in 2011 is likely to come in at around 4.5%, somewhat lower than this year’s. 
I would add the caveat, though, that no small degree of uncertainty surrounds the course of 
growth including the possibility of a slowdown of the recovery in major countries and fiscal 
problems in European countries. 
Prices 
2.  
The rate of consumer price increases this year will move up from 2.7% during the first half to 
around 3.0% in the latter half-year. Notably, from  Q4 onwards, it is forecast to be running 
above the mid-point of the medium-term inflation target (3%). 
 
Demand-side  pressures  are  expected  to  build  up  in  future  because  of  rising 
business  activity  at  a  time  when  international  commodity  prices  are  themselves 
continuing on an increasing trend. 
The rate of increase in the CPI next year is put at 3.4%, much higher than this year’s 2.8%. 
 
Core  inflation,  which  strips  out  food  and  energy  prices,  is  similarly  expected  to 
accelerate substantially from this year’s 1.8% to 3.1% next year. 
There  is  also  a  possibility  that  expected  inflation  will  pick  up  owing  to  the 
acceleration of the rate of price increases. 
BIS Review 110/2010
 4 
  Although the rate of increase in consumer prices dropped back below 3% from 
May last year, expected inflation is still running above the 3% mark. 
Current account 
3. 
Turning  to  the  current  account,  although  the  underlying  surplus  will  continue,  its  scale  is 
predicted  to  narrow  gradually  owing  both  to  the  increased  goods  imports  drawn  in  by  the 
recovery of domestic demand and to the widening of the services account deficit. 
 
The current account surplus is forecast to shrink from last year’s 42.7 billion dollars 
to 21.0 billion this year and to around 11.0 billion next year.  
The ratio of the current account surplus to GDP is expected to drop from 5.1% in 
2009 to 2.0% this year and further to 1.0% in 2011. 
 III.  
Future policy tasks 
Monetary policy 
1.  
Looking ahead, the Bank of Korea will conduct monetary policy in such a way as to help the 
economy maintain price stability, while sustaining sound growth. 
 
The outlook is that the improving trend in the USA, China and other major countries 
will  be  maintained,  even  though  the  pace  of  the  recovery  will  be  slower  than 
expected. In the case of China, the government’s targeted 8% growth is likely to be 
easily reached both this year and next year. 
In  Korea  there  is  a  need  for  vigilance  against  the  possibility  of  the  awakening  of 
inflation expectations among the general public along with the acceleration of price 
increases. 
Lately  the  housing  market  has  presented  a  subdued  pattern  as  transactions  have 
been  drying  up  under  the  combined  impact  of  the  regulation  of  lending  and  the 
expanded supply of public housing while housing sale prices have declined, led by 
those in the Greater Seoul area. 
There are, however, some limits on the possibility of the depressed housing market 
leading to a sharp fall in house prices. 
   Despite  the  hike  in  the  policy  rate  last  month,  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  is  still 
deemed  highly  accommodative,  given  the  financial  and  economic  situation  at  home  and 
abroad. 
 
Since  Lehman  Brothers’  collapse,  the  real  interest  rate  in  the  short-term  money 
market has been hovering around zero. 
Major policy tasks 
2. 
Enhancing macro-prudential soundness 
Spurred on by the financial crisis, a lively debate has sprung up about whether central banks 
should play an active role not just in maintaining price stability but also financial stability. 
 
The  rationale  here  is  that  because  central  banks  maintain  close  linkages  with 
financial  market  participants  they  are  in  a  position  to  pick  up  on  financial  system 
problems at an early stage while in a financial crisis they carry out the role of lender 
of last resort. 
BIS Review 110/2010 
 5
 Similarly  in  Korea,  the  desirability  of  strengthening  the  central  bank’s  financial 
stability  function  is  being  advocated  in  order  to  heighten  the  country’s  capacity  to 
respond to financial crises. 
– 
The National Assembly is now examining the incorporation of this purpose in a 
revised draft of the Bank of Korea Act. 
In the USA, the UK and elsewhere proposals for a realignment of the macro prudential policy 
framework  to  secure  financial  stability  have  now  been  put  in  place  or  are  under 
consideration. 
 
This  June,  the  UK  unveiled  plans  for  an  overhaul  of  the  financial  supervisory 
system.  Its  main  points  included  scrapping  the  Financial  Services  Authority  and 
endowing the Bank of England with macro-prudential supervisory authority. 
In the case of the USA, under a financial reform bill (entry into effect July 22), the 
Federal  Reserve  was  entrusted  with  the  authority  to  establish  regulations  for  the 
application  of  heightened  standards  and  safeguards  concerning  systemically 
important financial institutions (SIFIs). 
 In terms of macro-prudential policy instruments, three main target areas have been identified 
for their application. 
1) 
In order to buffer structural shocks arising from herding risk, contagion effects and 
so  on,  we  should  strengthen  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  capital  and 
liquidity of systemically important financial institutions. 
To  cushion  shocks  to  the  real  economy  brought  about  by  a  sharp  expansion  or 
contraction of credit supply in keeping with changes in economic activity, we need 
the introduction of regulations calling for counter-cyclical loan-loss provisioning. 
Proposals  should  be  worked  out  for  the  appropriate  management  of  cross  border 
capital  flows  so  that  excessive  capital  in-  and  outflows  do  not  give  rise  to  a 
heightening of foreign exchange and financial market volatility. 
This June the Bank of Korea, the government and the financial supervisory authority 
jointly announced plans for easing the volatility of capital in- and outflows; and this 
step forms part of the drive to heighten macro-prudential soundness. 
2) 
3) 
 Construction of a global financial safety net 
In order to avoid any repetition of the financial crisis, individual countries around the world 
will in future emphasize soundness in their operation of the macro economy and the financial 
system. 
Under the global economic system in which we live, there are inevitably limits to what any 
one  single  country  can  do  and,  in  this  respect,  its  efforts  need  to  be  underpinned  by  the 
construction of a global financial safety net. 
 
Many  countries  including  Korea  maintained  sound  financial  systems  and  built  up 
their  foreign  exchange  holdings  as  a  buffer  against  external  shock  only  to 
experience  acute  foreign  exchange  and  financial  market  turmoil  right  after  the 
financial crisis broke out. 
A global financial safety net can be built drawing on existing international resources including 
a  bilateral  dimension  such  as  swap  lines  between  central  banks,  a  regional  dimension  as 
represented by the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralisation, and an international dimension in 
forms such as the IMF’s Flexible Credit Lines. 
6 
 BIS Review 110/2010
1) 
2) 
3) 
  The  Bank  of  Korea  sought  to  engineer  foreign  exchange  and  financial  market 
stability by activating currency swap contracts with the US and Japan following the 
outbreak of the global financial crisis. 
Last  March,  under  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiative  Multilateralisation  involving  a  regional 
grouping of Asian countries, Korea actively sought to pursue financial cooperation 
and prevent a renewed crisis. 
– 
The scale of the fund’s total resources was enlarged from USD 78 billion to 
USD 120 billion, of which Korea contributed 16%, or USD 19.2 billion. 
In  regard  to  the  IMF,  studies  are  now  underway  on  improving  its  current  lending 
system and supplementing the necessary lending resources so that it may carry out 
the function of global lender of last resort more effectively. 
It  is  anticipated  that  a  global  financial  safety  net  would  contribute  to  warding  off 
potential  crises  pre-emptively  and  restricting  the  spread  of  those  that do  occur  by 
supplementing the foreign exchange reserve holdings of individual countries. 
At the Washington meeting of prime ministers and central bank governors this April, 
Korea  successfully  put  discussion  of  a  global  financial  safety  net  on  the  formal 
agenda for the upcoming G20 summit in Seoul. 
Consolidating domestic demand 
In tandem with efforts to prevent further financial crises we should seek to cushion the shock 
of those that do occur. 
 
This  requires  consolidating  domestic  demand  by  strengthening  platforms  for  the 
growth of SMEs, identifying and fostering industries with fresh growth momentum, 
and rightsizing household liabilities. 
1) 
 
 2) 
 
 Strengthening SMEs growth platforms 
Job  creation  and  an  increase  in  household  income  can  be  brought  about  by 
fostering SMEs that have high employment generation effects. 
Government support for the fostering of SMEs should put emphasis on new start-
ups that have high growth potential rather than on existing marginal or zombie firms. 
– 
In the course of tackling the global financial crisis, structural adjustment was 
delayed,  so  that  the  proportion  of  marginal  SMEs  whose  interest  servicing 
ratio is less than 100% stands at more than 30%. 
long-term  perspective  and  heightening 
Identifying and fostering industries with fresh growth momentum 
By fostering the next-generation growth momentum of NT, BT etc. from a medium 
and 
the  competitiveness  of  service 
industries, employment can be improved both qualitatively and quantitatively. 
Such  high  value  added  industries  are  vital  in  order  to  solve  the  problem  of  youth 
unemployment, which exhibits a high “reservation wage”. 
– 
Although there has been an overall improvement in the labor market in Korea, 
unemployment among young people stood at 8.3% this July, which was still 
above its pre-crisis level. 
BIS Review 110/2010 
 7
3) 
 
 Rightsizing household debt 
As  household  liabilities  have  been  increasing  faster  than  household  incomes,  the 
rightsizing of household liabilities, bringing them into an appropriate relationship with 
income, should be encouraged to avoid the shrinking of households’ consumption 
capacity. 
Care is necessary as household liabilities may increase excessively when interest 
rates are low. 
– 
In  the  advanced  countries  there  has  been  considerable  deleveraging  by  the 
household sector as the financial crisis runs its course, but in contrast in Korea 
the household debt to income ratio rose from 146% in 2007 to 153% at the 
end of 2009. 
Closing words 
Korea  has  won  praise  as  the  country  that  overcame  the  global  financial  crisis  most 
successfully. 
 
GDP growth for this year as a whole will be somewhere very close to 6% and next 
year it is expected to continue at its potential level. 
This  macro  economic  performance  is  considered  to  owe  much  to  the  great 
dynamism of Korean economic agents, both households and firms, together with the 
timely and appropriate response of the policy authorities. 
 While  the  world  economy  is  not  considered  to  have  fully  overcome  the  crisis  and  there  is 
always  the  likelihood  of  ups  and  downs  occurring  in  economic  activity  in  certain  regions, 
there is judged to be only a slight possibility of a double-dip recession or recurrence of the 
crisis. 
 
In  this  situation  the  Bank  of  Korea  will  conduct  monetary  policy  appropriately  in 
keeping with our particular economic situation. 
At the same time it intends to seek the further strengthening of international policy 
cooperation such as the construction of a global financial safety net in order to bring 
about coexistence and prosperity while warding off renewed crises. 
 As the chair country of the G20 meeting, now preparing for the Seoul summit in November 
this year, we intend to firmly anchor our vision of “the Korean economy as a model for the 
world economy”. 
8 
 BIS Review 110/2010
