Thomas M Hoenig: Are community banks important? 
Speech by Mr Thomas M Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, at 
the  American  Bankers  Association  Government  Relations  Summit,  Washington  DC, 
18 March 2010. 
 As  a  Federal  Reserve  Bank  president,  I  am  occasionally  asked  outrageous  questions 
regarding  central  banking  and  commercial  banks.  “Is  the  Federal  Reserve  owned  by  a 
European banking cabal?” “How much ownership of the Federal Reserve do the Rockefellers 
hold?” But over the past few days, the questions have become truly outrageous: 
“Will the regional and community bank model survive in the future?” Are community banks 
important? 
“Shouldn’t  the  Federal  Reserve  supervise  only  the  very  largest  banks  and  not  community 
banks?” 
What’s more, it is particularly bothersome to me that these last two questions are most often 
asked by individuals who have not been in or know what a community bank does. So let me 
answer the question. 
Whether you are here today representing JP Morgan or the First State Bank of Hometown, 
Kansas, the answer is the same. When you cut through the fog, there is no question as to 
the need for and the importance of community banks in our nation’s financial system. The 
maps on the screen behind me show that banks with less than $10 billion in total assets hold 
substantial market share in much of the United States and hold the majority of deposits in 
16 states. Bank subsidiaries of bank holding companies with less than $50 billion hold the 
majority of deposits in 26 states. 
As you can see from these maps, regional and community banks serve local markets, and in 
turn,  support  local  economic  growth.  These  banks  rely  on  knowing  their  customer,  and 
managing those relationships to work with borrowers through good times and bad. Regional 
and community banks are also typically locally owned and managed, which means they have 
an immediate and vested interest in the success of their local communities. 
Yes, regional and community banks also are under pressure from this crisis, and it will be a 
struggle for them to regain their footing; but, certainly no more so than that for our largest 
institutions  that  received  significant  government  support.  Commercial  real  estate  will  be  a 
drag on earnings for some quarters yet, and there will be bank failures. But this segment of 
the industry will recover and its model, with its focus on relationship banking, will prosper as 
the economy recovers and expands. 
Interestingly, looking at preliminary data, I suspect future analysis of this crisis will find that 
regional  and  community  banks  during  the  crisis  actually  may  have  done  a  better  job  of 
serving their local markets and maintaining lending standards. While this group of banks has 
a higher concentration of commercial real estate to capital, there is evidence that they are 
working effectively, and in some instances, more cooperatively than the largest banks with 
their borrowers to work out or reduce losses, based on their knowledge and active monitoring 
of customers. 
Some of our largest banks would be well-served to take a lesson. 
It is also no coincidence that with breakdowns in other parts of the marketplace, a substantial 
portion of regional and community banks have increased their loans to businesses. During 
2009,  45  percent  of  the  banks  with  under  $1  billion  in  assets  increased  their  business 
lending. 
BIS Review 34/2010 
 1
And while it may make some of the largest banks uncomfortable to hear this, regional and 
community banks have managed all this while operating at a competitive disadvantage. For it 
is  the  largest  financial  firms  that  have  an  implicit,  recently  made  explicit,  guarantee  that 
taxpayer  dollars  will  be  used  to  protect  them  from  failure,  regardless  of  what  risks  they 
assume. It is only now that we are discussing legislation to address the issue of a special 
class of the largest firms that we have deemed too-big-to-fail. This is the one item that must 
be addressed if we are to have any real competitive equity among all financial institutions. 
What is proposed may need to be strengthened, but it is a start. 
Let  me  end  my  remarks  by  quickly  commenting  on  the  Federal  Reserve’s  role  as  a 
supervisor of regional and community banks, something that will soon come under debate in 
the Senate and perhaps again in the House. The strong opposition to removing the Federal 
Reserve from regional and community bank supervision, voiced by myself and others from 
the Federal Reserve, is not driven by the idea of simply protecting our “turf” or saving Federal 
Reserve jobs. 
The  record  very  clearly  shows  that  the  Federal  Reserve  System  has  made  important 
changes to its operations when such moves benefit the country as a whole regardless of the 
impact on the Federal Reserve. Most notably, the Federal Reserve was among the strongest 
supporters  of  Check  21  legislation,  while  realizing  it  would  mean  the  eventual  loss  of 
thousands of Federal Reserve check processing jobs. The legislation improved the efficiency 
of our payments system, and while it was painful for me personally to see the elimination of 
hundreds of jobs in my District, it was a step we had to take to best serve the nation.  
In  this  case,  however,  serving  the  best  interest  of  the  nation  does  not  mean  reducing  the 
Federal Reserve’s supervisory role. 
Given  the  importance  of  6,800  regional  and  community  banks  located  in  almost  as  many 
communities across this country, it is inconceivable to me that the Central Bank of the United 
States  would  not  have  a  role  in  their  oversight,  through  the  supervision  of  state  member 
banks and bank holding companies. 
The Federal Reserve System was designed by its founders with the goals of it supervising a 
broad cross section of U.S. banks, assuring equitable access to the Federal Reserve liquidity 
facilities  regardless  of  institutional  size  or  location,  and  contributing  to  the  stability  of  the 
financial system – not only on Wall Street but on America’s Main Street. It does this job well. 
In the crisis of the ‘80s, which affected both large and small banks, banks supervised by the 
Federal  Reserve  proportionately  imposed  the  least  losses  on  the  FDIC  when  they  failed 
relative to banks supervised by other Federal agencies. 
In addition, the Federal Reserve’s role in supervision of banks and bank holding companies 
provides it critical information on local economies in places such as Muskogee, Okla.; Santa 
Fe,  N.M.  and  Scottsbluff,  Neb.  And  to  answer  the  question:  yes,  our  role  in  regional  and 
community bank supervision supports our responsibilities as members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee, by expanding our understanding of local and regional economies. 
Stripping  the  Federal  Reserve  of  its  responsibility  for  supervising  regional  and  community 
banks  and  bank  holding  companies  should  be  unacceptable  to  anyone  who  cares  about 
equity in the nation’s banking system, largest to smallest bank, and the nation’s regional and 
local economies. Confining the Federal Reserve’s supervisory role to only the largest firms 
will,  I  fear,  inadvertently  make  the  Federal  Reserve  the  Central  Bank  to  the  largest  firms 
while disenfranchising the other 6800 banks. The map tells the story. 
When  Congress  created  the  Federal  Reserve  nearly  a  century  ago,  it  gave  us  a 
decentralized system that spanned the continent. The explicit purpose for this structure was 
to better balance the interest of Main Street against those of Wall Street. Recent experience 
confirms  that  this  structure  is  as  important  today  as  then,  perhaps  more  so.  Community 
banks are important to the banking system and to the economy, and therefore continue to be 
important to the Federal Reserve. I have said before but it deserves repeating: It would be a 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2010
tragic irony if the outcome of this crisis is a gain in power for the largest firms at the expense 
of the other 6,800 regional and community banks. If so, it would be a win for Wall Street. 
  
 BIS Review 34/2010 
   3
