Axel A Weber: Progress on the G20 agenda 
Speech  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
International  Capital  Markets  and  Emerging  Markets  Roundtable,  Institute  of  International 
Finance (IIF), Washington DC, 25 April 2010. 
 1.  
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The financial crisis has certainly been a devastating event. But it also set in motion a process 
that will lead to the creation of a more stable and more resilient financial system in the future. 
As  warranted  by  the  global  character  of  the  crisis,  this  process  has  found  a  sound 
international  basis  in  the  G20,  bringing  together  major  advanced  as  well  as  emerging 
economies. Nevertheless, the G20 Agenda is not just a response to the financial crisis but 
also  a  response  to  the  needs  of  a  globalised  world.  Consequently,  the  agenda  covers  a 
broad range of topics such as the realisation of a more balanced pattern of global economic 
growth, the reform of the international financial institutions, and the strengthening of financial 
regulation.  Whereas  a  lot  could  be  said  about  the  first  part  and  the  sometimes  overly 
ambitious and activist policy recommendations associated with it, I would like to focus on the 
last-named aspect for the remainder of my speech. 
2.  
Major issues in the reform process 
With regard to financial regulation, a comprehensive reform agenda was set in train by the 
G20 summits in Washington, London and Pittsburgh. The envisaged reforms aim at creating 
a  strong  regulatory  framework  that  ensures  financial  stability  and  supports  steady  and 
sustainable economic growth. Although significant progress has already been made, much 
remains to be done. As the implementation of the agreed rules is what finally counts, 2010 
and 2011 will prove to be crucial years. 
What have been the main achievements up to now? The major step has been the reform of 
the  Basel  II  framework  for  capital  and  liquidity  regulation.  Relevant  proposals  were  put 
forward  in  December  2009,  including,  among  other  things,  measures  to  raise  the  quality, 
consistency and transparency of the capital base, a global standard for funding liquidity as 
well as the introduction of a leverage ratio. Throughout 2010 the proposed measures will be 
calibrated on the basis of an extensive quantitative impact study. The fully calibrated set of 
measures will then be issued by the end of 2010 and the new standards will be phased in by 
the end of 2012 provided that economic recovery is assured. 
Other  major  elements  of  reform  centre  on  the  problem  of  systemically  important  financial 
institutions. Here, the reform of the Basel framework is part of the solution, too, as it will help 
to improve the capacity of such institutions to absorb losses. However, what is required is a 
more comprehensive approach which specifically ensures that accountability is brought back 
into  the  game.  Necessary  proposals  that  go  beyond  the  reformed  capital  and  liquidity 
framework include capital surcharges for systemically important institutions, better resolution 
regimes and a strengthening of the financial infrastructure. Commissioned by the G20, the 
FSB is already working towards that goal. Nevertheless, some thorny issues are still waiting 
to be resolved, such as the calibration of measures to assess systemic relevance. 
While traditional microprudential supervision is still important, the crisis has taught us that it 
is far from being sufficient for effective crisis prevention. Thus, the microprudential approach 
has to be supplemented by macroprudential supervision that takes due account of systemic 
BIS Review 56/2010 
 1
risk and the overall stability of the financial system. Towards that end, material progress has 
been made on the European level by establishing the European Systemic Risk Board and 
the European System of Financial Supervisors. Yet again, further efforts are required. 
3.  
The role of the private sector 
The  few  remarks  I  have  just  made  show  that  the  agenda  set  by  the  G20  is  an  ambitious 
endeavour for governments and regulatory authorities. Even so, it is important not to leave 
the  private  sector  on  the  sidelines.  Market  participants  are  also  in  charge  and  have  to 
contribute  to  the  reform  process.  This  is  all  the  more  true  since  the  reform  agenda  also 
strives to strengthen or re-establish the disciplining effect of market forces.  
Hence, despite the fact that markets are stabilising and recovery is lingering on the doorstep, 
going  back  to  “business  as  usual”  cannot  be  the  way  forward.  Rather,  market  participants 
should  seize  the  opportunity  provided  by  the  current  favourable  times  to  strengthen  their 
risk-bearing  capacities  and  to  build  up  adequate  buffers.  This  is  especially  important  as 
regulatory changes such as higher capital and liquidity requirements, while still to be phased 
in, are definitely on the way. 
In this context, I can assure you that recent complaints about regulatory uncertainty posing a 
major  downside  risk  to  financial  institutions  are  being  taken  seriously.  However,  as  the 
decisions to be taken will shape the financial system for years to come, accuracy is more 
important than speed. We have to be careful not to implement oversimplistic solutions. 
Regarding the required complexity of regulatory measures, potential interactions have to be 
taken  into  account  as,  otherwise,  the  danger  of  unintended  consequences  grows.  At  the 
same  time,  the  cumulative  effect  of  new  measures  has  to  be  considered,  which  makes 
thorough impact assessments necessary. Also, actions have to be sufficiently coordinated on 
the global level in order to maintain a level playing field and to reduce the risks stemming 
from  a  fragmented  and  piecemeal  regulatory  response.  Even  so,  policy  development  is 
proceeding  to  agreed  –  and  very  ambitious  –  timelines,  thereby  reducing  regulatory 
uncertainty as far as possible. 
4.  
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Given the magnitude of the challenges that lie ahead of us, it seems fair to say that we have 
come a good distance already. However, there are a couple of things we have to be aware 
of: first of all, it is essential that the process of reform remains an international endeavour 
and is not hampered by unilateralist leanings. Also, as we are now hopefully entering better 
times, there is a certain danger that some major issues on the reform agenda might fall prey 
to dwindling commitment and political interests. This must not be allowed to happen as only 
a coordinated and harmonised effort will enable us to ensure financial stability and thus pave 
the way for steady and sustainable global development. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2010
