Caleb M Fundanga: Financial sector development in Zambia 
Remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the farewell cocktail 
hosted in honour of the Barclays Bank Zamia Limited Managing Director, Lusaka, 4 February 
2010. 
 The Chairman – Barclays Bank Zambia Plc, Mr J J Sikazwe 
The Chairman – Bankers Association of Zambia, Mr Saviour Chibiya 
Chief Executive Officers of Commercial Banks 
Outgoing Barclays Southern Africa Regional Managing Director, Mr Zafar Masud 
Acting Barclays Bank Plc, Managing Director, Mr Bret Packard 
Management and Staff of Barclays Bank Zambia Plc 
Colleagues from Bank of Zambia 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Ladies and gentlemen I am privileged to officiate at this farewell cocktail as we say goodbye 
to  Mr.  Zafar  Masud  who  has  been  the  Managing  Director  of  Barclays  Bank  Zambia  since 
January 2008.  
In the past few years, Barclays Bank Zambia Plc has contributed to making banking more 
accessible through its outreach programme  which saw an increase in its ATM and branch 
network  to  over  150  ATMs  and  55  distribution  points  comprising  branches  and  agencies 
nationwide.  Clearly  the  grass-root  population  in  Zambia  has  continued  to  benefit  from  this 
initiative.  
As is the case with a number of other banks, Barclays Bank Zambia Plc has continued to 
innovate  and  positively  contribute  to  financial  sector  development  in  Zambia.  Notable 
innovations  that  came  under  Mr.  Masud’s  time  include  the  commissioning  of  the  bank’s 
Branch Queue Management System at its Mutaba and Kafue House branches and Northend 
ATM Lobby, as well as the launch of Premier Banking.  
Barclays Bank Zambia Plc may have not pioneered all of these innovations, but they have 
provided reasonable competition to their colleagues which we at Bank of Zambia believe will 
be of benefit to the Zambian financial sector in the medium to long-term.  
It is my expectation that Barclays Bank Zambia PLC will continued to contest the market in a 
meaningful and beneficial way.  
Let  me  also  acknowledge  the  contribution  made  by  Barclays  Bank  Zambia  Plc  under  Mr. 
Masud  through  the  bank’s  partnering  with  the  corporate  world  to  cosponsor  the  first  ever 
Euromoney Investors’ Conference in Zambia.  
In addition, it is worth mentioning that BAZ, under the chairmanship of Barclays Bank Zambia 
Plc  and  Mr.  Masud,  helped  initiate  the  beautification  of  Cairo  Road  by  adopting  the 
maintenance of its wonderful gardens. The positive change to our immediate surroundings 
particularly around the Bank Square is there for all to see.  
Further,  Barclays  Bank  Zambia  has  continued  to  work  closely  with  Junior  Achievement 
Zambia where I serve on the Board. The bank has been providing office space as well as 
hosting  the  meetings  of  Junior  Achievement  at  its  premises.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  on  22 
February, 2009, the Junior Achievement Worldwide/Barclays Bank partnership was launched 
in Dubai. As a result of this partnership JA Zambia receives annual grants which are utilized 
to deliver JA entrepreneurship and work-readiness education to the local young people.  
I further wish to acknowledge the contribution that Barclays Bank Zambia Plc continues to 
make to the development and deepening of the banking sector in Zambia. Clearly Mr. Masud 
BIS Review 18/2010 
 1
has  been  a  key  factor  in  the  process  and  our  expectation  is  that  the  incoming  caretaker 
Managing Director Mr. Bret Packard will continue to progress this process.  
It is in this vein ladies and gentlemen that I request you to join me in formally wish Mr. Masud 
success in his future endeavors as we welcome Mr. Bret Packard, the new Acting Managing 
Director at Barclays Bank Zambia Plc.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2010
