Ben S Bernanke: The Federal Reserve’s role in bank supervision 
Testimony  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Financial Services, US House of Representatives, 
Washington DC, 17 March 2010. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Chairman  Frank,  Ranking  Member  Bachus,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am 
pleased to have the opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve’s role in bank supervision 
and the actions that we are taking to strengthen our supervisory oversight.  
The Federal Reserve’s role in supervision 
Like  many  central  banks  around  the  world,  the  Federal  Reserve  cooperates  with  other 
agencies  in  regulating  and  supervising  the  banking  system.1  Our  specific  responsibilities 
include  the  oversight  of  about  5,000  bank  holding  companies,  including  the  umbrella 
supervision of large, complex financial firms; the supervision of about 850 banks nationwide 
that are both state-chartered and members of the Federal Reserve System (state member 
banks); and the oversight of foreign banking organizations operating in the United States.  
The Federal Reserve’s involvement in regulation and supervision confers two broad sets of 
benefits to the country. First, because of its wide range of expertise, the Federal Reserve is 
uniquely  suited  to  supervise  large,  complex  financial  organizations  and  to  address  both 
safety  and  soundness  risks  and  risks  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole. 
Second, the Federal Reserve’s participation in the oversight of banks of all sizes significantly 
improves  its  ability  to  carry  out  its  central  banking  functions,  including  making  monetary 
policy, lending through the discount window, and fostering financial stability.2  
The  financial  crisis  has  made  clear  that  all  financial  institutions  that  are  so  large  and 
interconnected  that  their  failure  could  threaten  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  the 
economy  must  be  subject  to  strong  consolidated  supervision.  Promoting  the  safety  and 
soundness  of  individual  banking  organizations  requires  the  traditional  skills  of  bank 
supervisors,  such  as  expertise  in  examinations  of  risk-management  practices;  the  Federal 
Reserve has developed such expertise in its long experience supervising banks of all sizes, 
including  community  banks  and  regional  banks.  But  the  supervision  of  large,  complex 
financial  institutions  and  the  analysis  of  potential  risks  to  the  financial  system  as  a  whole 
require not only traditional examination skills, but also a number of other forms of expertise, 
including macroeconomic analysis and forecasting; insight into sectoral, regional, and global 
                                                 
1  
In  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  the  view  that  the  involvement  of  central  banks  in  bank  supervision  strongly 
complements their roles as lender of last resort, guardian of financial stability, and monetary policymaker has 
received increasing international support. For example, following the problems at Northern Rock in the United 
Kingdom, the Bank of England was given statutory responsibilities in the area of financial stability, its powers 
to  collect  information  from  banks  were  augmented,  and  many  have  called  for  it  to  be  given  increased 
supervisory authority. In Germany, plans to shift bank supervisory powers from the financial services regulator 
to the Bundesbank have received significant attention. In the European Union, a new European Systemic Risk 
Board is being established under which national central banks and the European Central Bank will play a key 
role  in  efforts  to  protect  the  financial  system  from  systemic  risk.  More  broadly,  in  most  industrial  countries 
today the central bank has substantial bank supervisory authorities, is responsible for broad financial stability, 
or both. 
2   See Ben S. Bernanke (2010), letter to Christopher J. Dodd and Richard C. Shelby (with enclosure, “The Public 
Policy Case for a Role for the Federal Reserve in Bank Supervision and Regulation”), January 13. 
BIS Review 31/2010 
 1
economic  developments;  knowledge  of  a  range  of  domestic  and  international  financial 
markets,  including  money  markets,  capital  markets,  and  foreign  exchange  and  derivatives 
markets;  and  a  close  working  knowledge  of  the  financial  infrastructure,  including  payment 
systems and systems for clearing and settlement of financial instruments.  
In the course of carrying out its central banking duties, the Federal Reserve has developed 
extensive knowledge and experience in each of these areas critical for effective consolidated 
supervision. For example, Federal Reserve staff members have expertise in macroeconomic 
forecasting  for  the  making  of  monetary  policy,  which  is  important  for  helping  to  identify 
economic  risks  to  institutions  and  markets.  In  addition,  they  acquire  in-depth  market 
knowledge through daily participation in financial markets to implement monetary policy and 
to  execute  financial  transactions  on  behalf  of  the  U.S.  Treasury.  Similarly,  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  extensive  knowledge  of  payment  and  settlement  systems  has  been  developed 
through  its  operation  of  some  of  the  world’s  largest  such  systems,  its  supervision  of  key 
providers  of  payment  and  settlement  services,  and  its  long-standing  leadership  in  the 
international  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems.  No  other  agency  can,  or  is 
likely  to  be  able  to,  replicate  the  breadth  and  depth  of  relevant  expertise  that  the  Federal 
Reserve  brings  to  the  supervision  of  large,  complex  banking  organizations  and  the 
identification and analysis of systemic risks.  
Even as the Federal Reserve’s central banking functions enhance its supervisory expertise, 
its involvement in supervising banks of all sizes across the country significantly improves the 
Federal  Reserve’s  ability  to  effectively  carry  out  its  central-bank  responsibilities.  Perhaps 
most important, as this crisis has once again demonstrated, the Federal Reserve’s ability to 
identify and address diverse and hard-to-predict threats to financial stability depends critically 
on the information, expertise, and powers that it has as both a bank supervisor and a central 
bank. Not only in this crisis, but also in episodes such as the 1987 stock market crash and 
the  terrorist  attacks  of  September  11,  2001,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  supervisory  role  was 
essential for it to contain threats to financial stability.3  
The  Federal  Reserve’s  making  of  monetary  policy  and  its  management  of  the  discount 
window also benefit from its supervisory experience.4 Notably, the Federal Reserve’s role as 
a supervisor of state member banks of all sizes, including community banks, offers insights 
about conditions and prospects across the full range of financial institutions, not just the very 
largest,  and  provides  useful  information  about  the  economy  and  financial  conditions 
throughout the nation. Such information greatly assists in the making of monetary policy. The 
legislation passed by the House last December would preserve the supervisory authority that 
the Federal Reserve needs to carry out its central banking functions effectively.  
Improving the Federal Reserve’s supervision of banking organizations 
The Federal Reserve strongly supports ongoing efforts in the Congress to reform financial 
regulation and close existing gaps in the regulatory framework.5 While we await passage of 
                                                 
3   For further discussion, see the Bernanke letter to Dodd and Shelby in note 2. 
4   Our ability to monitor key payment and settlement systems also depends critically on our supervisory powers, 
as several key institutions involved in payments and settlements have state member bank or Edge charters. 
Without bank supervisory authority, the Federal Reserve would have no ability to examine or regulate such 
institutions. 
5   Lack of strong consolidated supervision of systemically critical firms not organized as bank holding companies 
proved  to  be  the  most  serious  regulatory  gap.  In  addition,  under  the  Gramm-Leach-Bliley  Act  of  1999,  the 
Federal  Reserve’s  consolidated  supervision  of  bank  holding  companies  was  both  narrowly  focused  on  the 
safety and soundness of their bank subsidiaries and heavily reliant on functional supervisors of the bank and 
regulated  nonbank  subsidiaries  of  these  companies;  in  turn,  the  functional  supervisors  themselves  were 
statutorily focused only on the safety and soundness of the specific entities they regulated. None of the federal 
regulators had sufficient authority to focus on the systemic risk that large banking organizations posed. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2010
comprehensive reform legislation, we have been conducting an intensive self-examination of 
our  regulatory  and  supervisory  performance  and  have  been  actively 
implementing 
improvements.  
On  the  regulatory  side,  we  have  played  a  key  role  in  international  efforts  to  ensure  that 
systemically critical financial institutions hold more and higher-quality capital, have enough 
liquidity to survive highly stressed conditions, and meet demanding standards for company-
wide  risk  management.  We  have  also  been  taking  the  lead  in  addressing  flawed 
compensation  practices  by  issuing  proposed  guidance  to  help  ensure  that  compensation 
structures  at  banking  organizations  provide  appropriate  incentives  without  encouraging 
excessive risk-taking.6 Less formally, but equally important, since 2005 the Federal Reserve 
has been leading cooperative efforts by market participants and regulators to strengthen the 
infrastructure  of  a  number  of  key  markets,  including  the  market  for  securities  repurchase 
agreements  and  the  markets  for  credit  derivatives  and  other  over-the-counter  derivative 
instruments.  
To improve both our consolidated supervision and our ability to identify potential risks to the 
financial system, we have made substantial changes to our supervisory framework. So that 
we  can  better  understand  linkages  among  firms  and  markets  that  have  the  potential  to 
undermine  the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  we  have  adopted  a  more  explicitly 
multidisciplinary  approach,  making  use  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  broad  expertise  in 
economics,  financial  markets,  payment  systems,  and  bank  supervision  to  which  I  alluded 
earlier. We are also augmenting our traditional supervisory approach that focuses on firm-by-
firm examinations with greater use of horizontal reviews that look across a group of firms to 
identify  common  sources  of  risks  and  best  practices  for  managing  those  risks.  To 
supplement information from examiners in the field, we are developing an off-site, enhanced 
quantitative  surveillance  program  for  large  bank  holding  companies  that  will  use  data 
analysis and formal modeling to help identify vulnerabilities at both the firm level and for the 
financial sector as a whole. This analysis will be supported by the collection of more timely, 
detailed, and consistent data from regulated firms.  
Many  of  these  changes  draw  on  the  successful  experience  of  the  Supervisory  Capital 
Assessment  Program  (SCAP),  also  known  as  the  banking  stress  test,  which  the  Federal 
Reserve led last year. As in the SCAP, representatives of primary and functional supervisors 
will be fully integrated in the process, participating in the planning and execution of horizontal 
exams and consolidated supervisory activities.  
Improvements in the supervisory framework will lead to better outcomes only if day-to-day 
supervision is well executed, with risks identified early and promptly remediated. Our internal 
reviews  have  identified  a  number  of  directions  for  improvement.  In  the  future,  to  facilitate 
swifter,  more-effective  supervisory  responses,  the  oversight  and  control  of  our  supervisory 
function  will  be  more  centralized,  with  shared  accountability  by  senior  Board  and  Reserve 
Bank supervisory staff and active oversight by the Board of Governors. Supervisory concerns 
will be communicated to firms promptly and at a high level, with more-frequent involvement 
of  senior  bank  managers  and  boards  of  directors  and  senior  Federal  Reserve  officials. 
Greater  involvement  of  senior  Federal  Reserve  officials  and  strong,  systematic  follow-
through will facilitate more vigorous remediation by firms. Where necessary, we will increase 
the  use  of  formal  and  informal  enforcement  actions  to  ensure  prompt  and  effective 
remediation of serious issues.  
In  summary,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  wide  range  of  expertise  makes  it  uniquely  suited  to 
supervise large, complex financial institutions and to help identify risks to the financial system 
                                                 
6   For additional information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), “Federal Reserve 
Issues  Proposed  Guidance  on  Incentive  Compensation,”  press  release,  October  22.  We  are  currently 
conducting a horizontal review of compensation practices at the largest firms. 
BIS Review 31/2010 
 3
as  a  whole.  Moreover,  the  insights  provided  by  our  role  in  supervising  a  range  of  banks, 
including  community  banks,  significantly  increases  our  effectiveness  in  making  monetary 
policy and fostering financial stability. While we await enactment of comprehensive financial 
reform legislation, we have undertaken an intensive self-examination of our regulatory and 
supervisory performance. We are strengthening regulation and overhauling our supervisory 
framework  to  improve  consolidated  supervision  as  well  as  our  ability  to  identify  potential 
threats  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  And  we  are  taking  steps  to  strengthen  the 
oversight and effectiveness of our supervisory activities.  
Thank you. I’d be pleased to respond to your questions.  
4 
 BIS Review 31/2010
