Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The changing landscape of financial 
regulation – implications for Islamic finance 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the 
7th Independence  Federal  Savings  Bank  (IFSB)  summit  on  Global  Financial  Architecture, 
Manama, 4 May 2010. 
 following 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  on  the  occasion  of  the  7th  IFSB  Summit  on  Global  Financial 
Architecture:  Challenges  for  Islamic  finance.  I  am  honoured  to  be  invited  to  speak  on  the 
ongoing  regulatory  and  supervisory  reforms  being  undertaken 
the  recent 
international financial crisis, focusing on its implications for Islamic finance particularly in the 
context of strengthening the financial stability of the Islamic financial system. 
It  was  exactly  10  years  ago  in  a  speech  here  in  Bahrain  when  I  reflected  on  then  the 
remarkable achievements of Islamic banking and highlighted that while the amount of funds 
managed  in  the  Islamic  financial  system  was  only  a  fraction  of  the  total  assets  of  the 
international financial system, it represented that portion of financial activities that was truly 
supported  by  underlying  productive  capacity  that  generated  growth  of  economies  across 
continents,  and  that,  it  was  this  form  of  financial  activities  that  we  should  encourage,  as 
opposed to the financial flows that were destabilising and destructive. 
Today, it is precisely this element in Islamic finance amongst others, that are highly relevant 
to the discussions on the reform of the national and international financial system so that we 
have a system of financial intermediation that is stable, sustainable and contributes to global 
growth.  In  ten  years  now  Islamic  finance  has  experienced  accelerated  growth  and  the 
financial landscape has undergone a major transformation with great progress achieved on 
many  fronts.  The  transformation  is  particularly  evident  in  three  dimensions,  firstly,  Islamic 
finance  has  evolved  into  a  complete  and  competitive  form  of  financial  intermediation, 
effectively  serving  consumers  and  businesses,  both  Muslims  and  non-Muslims.  Islamic 
finance  has  become  a  competitive  form  of  intermediation  with  several  established 
conventional  players  now  entering  the  Islamic  finance  industry,  resulting  in  more  diverse 
Islamic financial institutions with wide spectrum of product range. 
Secondly, this recent decade has also seen significant milestones being achieved in the area 
of the international Islamic financial infrastructure of Islamic finance since the establishment 
of  the  Accounting  and  Auditing  Organisation  for  Islamic  Financial  Institutions  (AAOIFI)  in 
1990.  In  2002,  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB)  was  established  as  an 
international  prudential  standard  setting  body  for  Islamic  finance.  The  IFSB  with  a 
membership  of  now  50  regulatory  authorities  has  since  developed  a  number  of  standards 
ranging  from  capital  adequacy  requirements  to  standards  for  governance  and  risk 
management, taking into account the specificities of Islamic finance. There have also been 
notable achievements in the area of talent development with the proliferation of programmes 
and  certifications  which  have  focussed  on  Islamic  finance  offered  by  several  major 
institutions  of  higher  learning,  professional  entities,  training  agencies  and  industry  groups 
around  the  world.  More  recently,  platforms  for  greater  engagement  among  practitioners, 
scholars and regulators have further added to international collaboration in Islamic finance. 
And  finally,  the  evolution  of  Islamic  finance  in  this  decade  has  been  marked  by  its 
international dimension in which it is becoming an increasingly important part of the global 
financial landscape. The development of Islamic finance in emerging economies also reflects 
the changing global pattern of financial and economic integration. This is taking place with 
the strengthening of financial and economic linkages between Asia and the Middle East and 
the increased activity of Islamic finance beyond the traditional Muslim countries including the 
more established financial centres. Cross-border transactions are growing as more issuers 
BIS Review 64/2010 
 1
consider Islamic finance as an attractive alternative means for raising capital, whilst investors 
are also increasingly considering it as a new asset class in their investment universe. This 
internationalisation  and  sustained  global  expansion  of  Islamic  finance  has  taken  place 
despite  the  more  challenging  environment  presented  by  the  global  financial  crisis, 
demonstrating the resilience of Islamic finance as a stable form of financial intermediation.  
Global financial regulatory reforms  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Much has been said and written about the causes of the global financial crisis. Efforts are 
now underway to address many of the shortcomings in the financial infrastructure that have 
contributed to the crisis. With the worst of the crisis now seemingly over, attention has turned 
to strengthening the global financial system. There is now an even greater need to restore 
confidence  in  the  integrity  of  the  global  financial  system  given  the  loss  of  trust  between 
society  and  the  financial  sector  particularly  in  advanced  economies  .  At  the  core  of  this 
reform  agenda  is  the  development  of  a  new  financial  regulatory  framework  that  would  be 
more  effective,  one  that  is  premised  on  greater  emphasis  on  ethics,  fairness,  and 
accountability and that promotes global economic, social and environmental sustainability. It 
also  needs  to  be  anchored  on  a  sensible  balance  of  supporting  growth  while  maintaining 
financial  stability  ,  and  one  founded  on  greater  international  coordination  of  regulatory 
approaches and supervisory oversight with a crisis management framework that will reduce 
systemic risk, and the severity of any such future financial crises. 
Given  the  scale  and  magnitude  of  this  recent  crisis,  the  global  regulatory  reform  being 
shaped is wide-ranging. Bold measures are being developed in various international forums 
with fundamental changes to the current approaches to financial regulatory and supervisory 
oversight.  Some  of  these  reform  proposals  have  attracted  intense  international  debate 
generating divergent views on these issues. A broad consensus however is emerging on the 
need to raise both the quantity and quality of regulatory capital, strengthen liquidity rules and 
improve  market  transparency.  There  also  seems  to  be  agreement  for  the  extension  of 
regulatory  tools  to  address  pro-cyclicality  in  the  financial  system  through  the  creation  of 
counter-cyclical  capital  buffers,  dynamic  loan-loss  provisioning  and  greater  alignment  of 
incentives  with  long-term  goals.  This  consensus  reflects  the  objective  of  avoiding  having 
incentives that would encourage the material build-up of leverage and the excessive appetite 
for risk. Other measures under consideration include the implementation of non-risk-based 
leverage limits to contain the build-up of leverage in the banking sector and the strengthening 
of  the  supervisory  framework  and  the  arrangements  for  dealing  with  oversight  on  cross-
border financial groups and for resolution.  
Implications for Islamic finance  
Islamic  finance  does  not  exist  in  isolation  and  as  it  becomes  an  increasingly  important 
component  of  the  global  financial  system,  it  will  inevitably  be  impacted  by  the  changing 
global  landscape  of  financial  regulation.  This  is  particularly  the  case  as  its  growth  gains 
momentum both in terms of number of services providers and in terms of business volume 
and as its internationalisation process continues. The global call for improved regulation and 
increased  oversight  will  thus  intensify  the  efforts  that  have  already  been  undertaken  to 
strengthen the financial regulation for Islamic finance. 
Let  me  now  focus  my  remarks  on  four  major  implications  of  the  changing  global  financial 
regulatory  landscape  for  Islamic  finance  –  first,  particularly  in  financial  systems  in  which 
Islamic  finance  is  being  developed  alongside  the  conventional  financial  sector  in  a  dual 
system  environment,  (which  is  the  case  for  most  IFSB  member  countries),  there  will  be  a 
need to ensure that the reforms are undertaken in parallel. The concern is that there would 
be insufficient attention given for Islamic finance and consequently, the tendency for broad-
2 
 BIS Review 64/2010
brush  application  of  regulatory  measures  intended  for  conventional  finance  on  Islamic 
finance. 
In developing the appropriate regulatory framework for Islamic finance, it is not uncommon to 
leverage  on  the  established  wisdoms  of  prudential  regulation  for  conventional  finance  to 
achieve  regulatory  efficiency  particularly  in  a  dual  system  environment.  Whilst  it  may  be 
envisaged that it is not necessary to reinvent the wheel, it should not override the importance 
of  addressing  the  specificities  of  Islamic  finance  where  necessary.  Such  a  prudential 
regulatory  design  that  takes  into  account  the  unique  mix  of  risks  associated  with  Shariah-
compliant instruments would enhance the effectiveness of the regulatory outcomes intended 
for  Islamic  finance.  Although  there  is  already  a  broad  international  consensus  on  the 
prudential  areas  that  need  to  be  enhanced,  different  regulatory  parameters  may  be 
necessary  to  address  the  specific  risks  and  unique  characteristics  of  Islamic  finance.  The 
Islamic financial community thus needs to effectively respond to this, by strengthening their 
internal  capability  to  make  sound  assessments  on  the  need  for  making  similar  regulatory 
reforms that are specifically attuned for Islamic finance to achieve the common objective of 
financial stability. 
With this in mind, I am pleased to inform you that following the recent completion of the work 
by the Task Force on Islamic Finance and Global Financial Stability, that was jointly formed 
by  the  Islamic  Development  Bank  (IDB)  and  the  IFSB  in  2009,  the  Report  has  now  been 
released  following  the  endorsement  by  the  IFSB  Council  in  Khartoum,  Sudan,  in April  this 
year. The Report examines the conceptual elements inherent in Islamic finance that form the 
foundation  of  its  strengths  and  contribution  towards  financial  stability.  The  Report  also 
provides a preliminary assessment on the performance of Islamic finance during this recent 
international financial crisis. The final part of the Report outlines eight key recommendations 
to  further  strengthen  the  foundations  of  the  Islamic  financial  system  in  a  more  challenging 
global environment. Although the Islamic financial services industry has generally performed 
well in the face of the recent global financial turbulence, there are clear lessons to be learnt 
from the crisis. The recommendations were therefore developed upon careful reflection on 
the conditions and financial practices that have contributed to the global crisis, as well as the 
current direction of the global regulatory reform. 
A  central  theme  of  the  recommendations  in  the  Report  is  the  need  for  greater  collective 
efforts  to  be  given  to  putting  in  place  eight  building  blocks  for  strengthening  the  financial 
infrastructure  of  Islamic  finance  and  its  institutional  capacity  both  at  the  national  and 
international  levels.  The  building  blocks  identified  in  the  Report  relate  firstly  to  the  global 
implementation  of  the  IFSB  prudential  standards;  second,  the  development  of  systemic 
liquidity management infrastructure; third, the establishment of strong financial safety nets; 
fourth,  putting  in  place  an  effective  crisis  management  and  resolution  framework;  fifth, 
strengthening the accounting, auditing and disclosure standards; sixth, the development of 
an  effective  macro-prudential  surveillance  framework;  seventh,  having  in  place  credible 
rating  institutions;  and  eighth,  to  institute  close  international  cooperation  and  coordination 
among countries in achieving financial stability. This also includes cooperation in the area of 
capacity building and talent development. Addressing these eight areas are highlighted in the 
Report as being fundamental to ensuring the continued development of a robust and resilient 
Islamic  financial  system,  that  can  effectively  preserve  financial  stability  and  contribute  to 
growth and development. 
This brings me to the second implication of the changing financial regulatory landscape in 
respect  of  preserving  financial  stability  and  the  broader  agenda  of  effective  and  efficient 
financial  intermediation,  taking  into  consideration  the  unique  considerations  in  Islamic 
finance. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
A  sustained  process  of  excessive  financial  deregulation  and  over  reliance  on  market 
discipline particularly in advanced economies which led to a prolonged cycle of optimism and 
BIS Review 64/2010 
 3
risk taking has been widely cited as part of the root cause of the recent global financial crisis. 
Indeed,  the  pre-crisis  era  was  a  period  of  exuberance  in  financial  innovation  and  rapid 
development  in  the conventional  financial landscape.  Although  it  was argued  that  financial 
deregulation  encourages  innovation  which  in  turn  result  in  the  more  efficient  allocation  of 
resources,  the  recent  crisis  has  shown  that  there  is  a  need  to  balance  between  market 
discipline and regulatory oversight. 
Whilst there is general support for the reform measures, there is also concern on the dangers 
of  over-reaction  by  policymakers  that  could  undermine  the  role  of  financial  intermediation, 
and  adversely  affect  the  ultimate  objective  of  economic  growth  and  development.  The 
concern is specifically on the unintended consequences of the regulatory reform. Financial 
stability  is  not  an  end  in  itself;  it  is  a  means  towards  achieving  the  ultimate  goal  of 
sustainable  growth  and  shared  prosperity.  This  presents  the  challenge  for  policymakers  in 
finding  the  appropriate  balance  between  preserving  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system 
versus maintaining the ability of the system to perform their intended function of delivering 
effective,  efficient  and  innovative  financing  solutions  to  customers  in  the  wider  economy. 
Hence, the concern is that that the regulatory reforms would increase the cost of financial 
intermediation. A careful assessment needs to be made of the potential medium and long-
term  effects  of  the  proposed  reforms  on  market  structures  and  behaviour.  These 
considerations are equally relevant in the context of Islamic finance. 
The assessment on the aims and relevance of each of the proposed reform measures needs 
to take into account the two important considerations in Islamic finance; the need to support 
sustainable and responsible innovation, and secondly, to leverage on its inbuilt strengths that 
set  Islamic  finance  apart  in  performing  its  role  in  supporting  the  efficient  mobilisation  and 
allocation of resources to generate real economic activities. Given the damaging effects of 
complexity  and  opacity  associated  with  the  recent  unfettered  innovative  activities  in  the 
conventional financial markets, it has resulted in a reassessment of the role and benefits of 
financial  innovation.  In  Islamic  finance,  innovation  is  key  in  pushing  the  frontier  of  market 
development to generate the range of products and services, processes and functions. The 
key lies in preserving the benefits of innovative initiatives and activities whilst ensuring that 
they do not result in negative externalities. 
In  considering  the  relevance  of  the  global  regulatory  reform  to  Islamic  finance,  there  is 
therefore  a  need  to  consider  the  underlying  elements  that  guide  the  process  towards 
sustainable and more socially-responsible financial innovation. This comes in the forms of its 
strong  paradigm  in  governance,  disclosure  and  transparency,  as  well  as  its  emphasis  that 
innovations  are  anchored  in  the  objectives  of  Shariah  and  thus  are  for  the  benefit  of  the 
people.  Importantly,  Islamic  finance  has  the  disposition  to  facilitate  financial  deepening 
without financial excesses through the fundamental Shariah requirement for Islamic financial 
transactions to be supported by an underlying economic activity. Moreover, the profit-sharing 
and  risk-sharing  characteristics  of  Islamic  financial  transactions  strengthens  the  incentives 
for  Islamic  financial  institutions  to  undertake  the  appropriate  due  diligence  on  the  Islamic 
financial transactions to ensure that the profits are commensurate with the risks assumed. T 
he  Shariah  board  of  Islamic  financial  institutions  additionally  serve  as  a  vital  institutional 
safeguard  to  ensure  that  the  inherent  strengths  of  Islamic  finance  are  fully  realised.  This 
accommodates  innovative  activities  in  a  manner  that  achieves  the  objectives  of  protecting 
customers and the system on an ongoing basis. Islamic finance is essentially also consistent 
with the “equator principles”, the voluntary guidelines governing social and environmental risk 
in project finance which are increasingly growing in prominence in this post-crisis era as an 
integrated approach to sustainable and more responsible banking and finance. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The  third  implication  relates  to  the  mobilisation  of  stronger  international  cooperation  in  the 
pursuit  to  preserve  global  financial  stability,  particularly  in  the  light  of  an  enhanced 
internationalisation of Islamic finance. This post-crisis era will usher in a new chapter in the 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2010
the 
the 
the  application  and  enforcement  of 
development phase of Islamic finance. The trend of internationalisation can be expected to 
be  more  pronounced.  As  Islamic  finance  facilitates  greater  financial  and  economic 
interlinkages between jurisdictions, this enhanced international dimension will bring about a 
new  set  of  challenges  presented  by  the  fundamentally  different  operating  environment  of 
heightened competitive dynamics, greater uncertainty, and more complexity. This will require 
greater collaboration and cooperation at the global level in the endeavour to preserve global 
financial stability. 
The  recent  crisis  has  highlighted  that  financial  integration  across  borders  needs  to  be 
accompanied  by  international  cooperation  and  coordination  to  prevent  regulatory  arbitrage 
across borders and the risk of implications for contagion. A stronger collective effort needs to 
ensure  that  Islamic  finance  is  subject  to  consistent,  high-quality  regulation  across  borders 
through 
international  prudential  standards 
promulgated by the IFSB. This would reduce the opportunities for regulatory arbitrage, which 
in turn, will contribute to a more successful international integration of Islamic finance. 
Beyond the prudential standards, a higher level of cross-border vigilance is pivotal to allow 
for  appropriate  and  decisive  actions  to  be  taken  pre-emptively  to  deal  with  any  imminent 
financial  distress.  This  underscores 
importance  of  adequate  coordination  and 
cooperation among supervisors across borders in strengthening their responsiveness to risks 
associated  with  markets  interconnectedness.  In  particular,  more  transparency  is  essential 
towards  understanding  the  ramifications  of  national  actions  or  inaction  and  the  potential 
spillover  effects  from  one  country  to  another,  whilst  equally  important  is  to  recognize  that 
financial regulation and intervention are subject to country-specific circumstances and hence, 
must  fall  within  remit  of  national  autonomy.  Regular  information  exchange  and  better 
coordinated  oversight  among  supervisors  to  address  home-host  issues  of  internationally-
active  institutions,  and  to  identify  emerging  systemic  risks,  are  thus  recognised  to  be  the 
important focus of effective cross-border surveillance and crisis management. 
Recognising the need to mobilise stronger international cooperation in the pursuit to preserve 
financial  stability  in  an  increasingly  global  operating  environment,  the  Islamic  Financial 
Stability Forum (IFSF) was recently established based on the recommendation of the Task 
Force of Islamic Finance and Global Financial Stability. The IFSF is to serve as a strategic 
platform  for  the  regulators  to  deliberate  common  issues  and  to  collaborate  endeavours  in 
achieving  financial  stability  in  the  Islamic  financial  system.  This  represents  yet  another 
milestone  in  the  development  of  the  institutional  infrastructure  for  Islamic  finance, 
complementing the important roles and functions of the IDB, the IFSB and the AAOIFI. 
As Islamic finance becomes a growing component of the international financial system, it will 
become important for the ongoing global engagement by the international community that is 
driving the financial reform agenda to be extended to the perspectives of financial stability in 
the  Islamic  financial  system.  The  IFSF  would  be  able  to  facilitate  the  process  of  greater 
interface  between  regulators  of  conventional  and  Islamic  finance  to  take  place  given  the 
common goal of preserving global financial stability. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  final  point  on  major  implications  of  the  global  financial  reforms  on 
Islamic  finance  –  in  the  area  of  liquidity  risk  management.  The  recent  crisis  clearly 
demonstrated a number of vulnerabilities both in the liquidity risk management in individual 
banks, and on a systemic basis. Uncertainty and the lack of transparency over the holdings 
of  toxic  assets  led  to  general  reluctance  to  provide  funding  to  each  other,  resulting  in  the 
freezing  of  the  wholesale  money  market  in  several  developed  economies.  This  resulted  in 
short term liquidity to evaporate affecting participants that were too dependent on the market 
for  funding.  This  largely  stemmed  from  poor  liquidity  risk  management  practices,  and  has 
now  prompted  the  Basel  Committee  to  develop  new  proposals  for  global  liquidity 
management standards. In the context of Islamic finance, the impact of the proposed Basel 
requirement to maintain sufficient cushion of high quality liquid assets needs to be carefully 
BIS Review 64/2010 
 5
considered, as the infrastructure and tools for liquidity risk management by Islamic banks is 
still  in  its  infancy  in  many  jurisdictions.  A  very  narrow  definition  of  liquid  assets  that  is 
currently proposed may exacerbate liquidity risks in many Islamic financial markets in which 
Islamic  banks  compete  with  conventional  counterparts  for  the  limited  stock  of  shariah-
compliant government securities. This will certainly increase compliance cost and render the 
market  illiquid  when  the  demand  exceeds  supply,  placing  Islamic  financial  institutions  at  a 
disadvantage. 
The  importance  of  a  robust  liquidity  management  infrastructure  for  Islamic  financial 
institutions is well-recognised. The growing internationalisation and cross-border activities in 
Islamic finance in recent years further accentuates the importance to enhance the ability of 
the  Islamic  financial  system  to  withstand  shocks  from  externalities.  Moreover,  access  to  a 
robust liquidity management infrastructure will reduce the cost of intermediation which is an 
important enabler for a more efficient and competitive Islamic financial system. Recognising 
that liquidity management in the Islamic financial system is still under-developed, a Liquidity 
Task Force was established by the IFSB in 2009 with the aim to formulate an institutional 
arrangement  to  address  this  need.  Significant  progress  has  already  been  made  in  this 
endeavor  with  several  key  proposals  now  at  the  final  stage  for  operationalisation.  When 
operationalised,  this  liquidity  mechanism  will  be  another  landmark  development  for  Islamic 
finance. 
Conclusion 
The recent global financial crisis has spurred the resolve of the world community to chart a 
new  course  towards  greater  and  lasting  social  and  economic  stability  with  fairness  and 
accountability. Whilst this presents a unique opportunity for Islamic finance to transition into 
the next development stage of greater international integration, there needs to be a higher 
level of resilience to withstand the new challenges it will bring. This, in essence, requires the 
strengthening  of  the  financial  infrastructure  to  preserve  the  soundness  and  stability  of  the 
Islamic  financial  system.  Indeed,  our  collective  will  to  mobilise  a  higher  level  of  global 
cooperation  in  promoting  this  outcome  will  enhance  the  prospects  of  Islamic  finance  to 
contribute towards securing global financial stability and a greater shared prosperity. 
6 
 BIS Review 64/2010
