Barbro Wickman-Parak: The repo rate path – experiences three years on 
Speech  by  Ms  Barbro  Wickman-Parak,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the 
Danske Bank, Stockholm, 17 June 2010. 
 Around three years ago the Riksbank began publishing its own forecasts for the repo rate, 
and  there  were  many  reasons  for doing  this.  It  made  the  forecasts  more  consistent  and  it 
was now easier to evaluate the Riksbank’s forecast in relation to those of other analysts. We 
were  also  given  an  opportunity  to  describe  alternative  paths  for  economic  developments, 
which  was  a  good  educational  tool  that  further  contributed  to  increasing  transparency. 
Publishing a whole path for the repo rate was also one step towards becoming more open 
and clear. It also improved the chances of steering longer term expectations . Experiences 
so  far  show  that  the  work  on  the  repo  rate  and  its  publication  have  functioned  well.  The 
monetary  policy  discussions  focus  more  on  long-term  issues,  and  they  now  concern  the 
whole repo rate path rather than an individual decision. This is good. Today the repo rate 
path is a natural part of monetary policy. Moreover, the repo rate path has served us well 
during the crisis, in that we could clearly signal that the interest rate was expected to remain 
low over a long period of time. 
Market participants’ expectations of the repo rate have rarely been exactly the same as the 
Riksbank’s  expectations.  My  assessment  so  far  is  that  the  deviations  have  not  been  a 
problem. It is not reasonable to believe that we and the market participants will always reach 
the same conclusions. Inflation expectations are well-anchored around the target, which is 
the most important indication that the market has confidence in monetary policy. 
Why publish our own repo rate forecast? 
To put it plainly: a forecast for growth and inflation requires an assumption about the interest 
rate. The inflation target was introduced in 1995, and it was then assumed in the forecasts 
that the repo rate would be unchanged during the forecast period. This had an advantage in 
terms  of  clarification; if the  forecast  for  inflation  was  that  it  would  overshoot  the  target  (be 
higher than 2 per cent) a couple of years ahead, then the repo rate would be raised, and vice 
versa. However, an unchanged repo rate throughout the forecast period was an unrealistic 
assumption. The realisation came gradually that the forecasts needed to be based on a more 
realistic  view  of  the  future  repo  rate.  It  was  decided  that  the  Bank  would  use  market 
expectations,  as  reflected  in  implied  forward  rates,  as  a  base.1  From  autumn  2005  the 
Riksbank began working with this new assumption in its forecasts. 
Once  this  “second  step”  had  been  introduced,  a  further  question  arose.  Although  a  future 
repo rate being in line with forward rates was a more realistic assumption than a constant 
repo  rate,  situations  could  arise  where  the  forward  rate  path  did  not  agree  with  what  the 
Riksbank considered to be the “best” forecast for the repo rate. Moreover, it was difficult to 
communicate how “appropriate” the forward rate path was as an interest rate forecast, and 
the logical consequence of this was to quite simply go on  to publish our own interest rate 
forecast.  The  period  with  implied  forward  rates  as  a  forecast  assumption  can  therefore  be 
                                                 
1   See Irma Rosenberg’s speech “The Riksbank and monetary policy” in September 2005, on the reasons for 
changing over to implied forward rates in the forecasts. 
BIS Review 85/2010 
 1
regarded  as  a  learning  process  on  the  road  towards  publishing  our  own  interest  rate 
forecasts, which has several advantages compared with using forward rates.2  
When we began publishing our own repo rate path, this was the start of a learning process 
for us at the Riksbank, but also for market participants. I believe that we have made a lot of 
progress in this direction. 
Monetary policy through “management of expectations” 
The  established  view  today  is  that  a  large  part  of  the  monetary  policy  effect  is  through 
influencing expectations among participants in the economy. By publishing our own repo rate 
forecasts we improve the opportunities to influence rates with longer maturities by influencing 
the  general  public’s  expectations  of  future  repo  rates  (“management  of  expectations”), 
something that proved very useful during the financial crisis. 
Figure 1 shows the development of the repo rate and market rates with different maturities. 
We see that the Riksbank has considerable influence over developments in market rates with 
maturities of up to six months. The repo rate path also has significance for developments in 
long-term  rates,  although  other  factors  than  expected  repo  rates,  such  as  international 
events, may have significance in the development of long-term interest rates. 
Figure 1 
Interest rates at different maturities in Sweden 
Per cent 
Note. The interest rates refer to treasury bills and government bonds.  
Sources: Reuters EcoWin and the Riksbank. 
 Greater  openness  and  clarity  from  the  Riksbank  creates  better  conditions  to  govern 
expectations in the corporate and household sectors. The publication of a repo rate path can 
be regarded as a contribution to this. Any forecast for the Swedish economy made by any 
reasonable  type  of  model  also  generates  a  forecast  for  the  repo  rate.  So  why  should  one 
                                                 
2   See, for example, Michael Woodford (2005): “Central Bank Communication and Policy Effectiveness”, paper 
presented at the conference Inflation Targeting: Implementation, Communication and Effectiveness, Sveriges 
Riksbank. 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2010
then  “hide  the  most  central  forecasting  variable”,  as  my  Executive  Board  colleague 
Lars Svensson put it.3  
A particular advantage in publishing one’s own repo rate path is the opportunity to describe 
alternative scenarios for future economic developments and the consequences they would 
have for monetary policy. This has made it easier for market participants and households to 
judge how we Executive Board members will act with regard to the repo rate depending on 
the different alternative paths for growth and inflation. 
The  Monetary  Policy  Report  shows  alternative  scenarios,  not  merely  for  economic 
developments, but also for the repo rate. The alternative scenarios for the repo rate show 
different monetary policy alternatives. What would happen to the economy if the  Riksbank 
followed  a  repo  rate  path  that  was  higher  or  lower  than  that  in  the  main  scenario?  The 
consequences  of  various  monetary  policy  alternatives  can  thus  be  compared.  This  can 
systematically justify the repo rate path chosen by the Riksbank. 
Introduction of repo rate path not entirely uncontroversial 
Many  people  welcomed  the  Riksbank’s  decision  to  introduce  its  own  repo  rate  path. 
However, there were also some misgivings. For example, there were fears that confidence in 
the Riksbank might be harmed if the actual repo rate in the future deviated from the earlier 
forecast. This was also the type of misgiving expressed when the Riksbank began publishing 
forecasts  for  inflation  and  growth.  In  addition,  there  was  concern  that  the  Riksbank  might 
hesitate  to  change  the  repo  rate  forecast  for  reasons  of  prestige,  even  if  circumstances 
indicated this was necessary. 
If there were fears that the Riksbank might be unwilling to change the repo rate path when 
the situation required, this fear has come to nought. Autumn 2008 is a very good example of 
this.  Now,  three  years  after  its  introduction,  I  believe  I  dare  say  that  the  repo  rate  path  is 
regarded as a natural part of the Riksbank’s policy. I also believe that the discussion outside 
of the Riksbank is characterised more by long-term discussions on monetary policy than on 
individual decisions.  
I shall now go on to briefly describe how the repo rate forecast is produced. 
How is the repo rate path determined?  
The  publication  of  our  repo  rate  forecasts  makes  greater  demands  than  previously  on  the 
internal preparation work. The new method of working requires a greater interaction between 
the staff and the Executive Board, and the Board members are involved at an earlier stage of 
the  process.  This  is  made  easier  by  members  of  the  Executive  Board  being  full-time 
employees and not merely being called together for monetary policy meetings. So what does 
the practical work leading to the published repo rate path actually entail? 
The  monetary  policy  decision-making  process  normally  follows  an  established  preparatory 
process.4 During a number of weeks employees in the Monetary Policy Department prepare 
draft  forecasts  for  economic  developments,  including  the  repo  rate.  After  this  there  are 
meetings  together  with  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank,  and  a  main  scenario  for 
economic developments, including the repo rate, is drawn up. Of course, the main scenario 
is based on a combination of model-based forecasts and assessments. 
                                                 
3   See  Lars  E.O.  Svensson,  “Policy  expectations  and  policy  evaluations:  the  role  of  transparency  and 
communication”, Economic Review 2010:1, Sveriges Riksbank. 
4   For  a  more  detailed  description  of  the  preparatory  work  prior  to  the  monetary  policy  decisions,  see  Kerstin 
Hallsten  and  Sara  Tägtström  (2009):  “The  decision-making  process  –  how  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Riksbank decides on the repo rate,” Economic Review 2009:1, Sveriges Riksbank. 
BIS Review 85/2010 
 3
During the forecasting process, the main scenario presented at the monetary policy meeting 
has  in  practice  become  a  scenario  that  is  supported  by  a  majority  of  the  Executive  Board 
members.  If  there  are  any  reservations  against  the  main  scenario  or  the  monetary  policy 
decision, these are made clear at the monetary policy meeting. 
Thus, the monetary policy decision is preceded by a long process. As the decision now also 
includes the Board’s view of the future repo rate, more in-depth and long-term discussions 
are required than if it was merely a question of whether or not to alter the repo rate. The repo 
rate path has entailed a fruitful change. 
The role of the repo rate path during the financial crisis 
When  we  began  to  make  repo  rate  forecasts  a  few  years  ago,  I  do  not  believe  anyone 
expected a situation like the one we had when GDP fell by 5 per cent in 2009. During the 
financial  crisis  several  central  banks  were  forced  to  cut  their  policy  rates  to  close  to  zero. 
This  has  entailed  restrictions  on  future  decisions,  as  the  nominal  interest  rate  has a  lower 
bound. The classical argument in favour of this lower bound is that the nominal interest rate 
on cash is zero, and that a negative interest rate would mean that economic agents would 
hoard banknotes. There are many discussions in the academic world as to whether the lower 
bound lies at zero or slightly below.5 I will not go in to it here, but merely note that a majority 
of  us  on  the  Executive  Board  has  regarded  the  current  repo  rate  as  in  practice  being  the 
lower bound. 
This zero interest rate problem received much attention in the academic world in connection 
with  the  Japanese  central  bank  cutting  its  policy  rate  to  zero  as  a  result  of  the  economic 
stagnation in the 1990s. One of the possible solutions if a central bank has cut its policy rate 
to its lower bound, and wants to cut it further, is to promise a policy rate around zero for a 
long time to come. Over time this would have a similar effect to cutting the interest rate to 
below zero and then raising it to above zero.  
The repo rate path facilitated communication  
During  the  financial  crisis,  lessons  from  this  research  became  surprisingly  topical  for  a 
number of countries in addition to Japan. The repo rate path fulfilled a central role here, as it 
enabled  the  Riksbank  to  make  clear  its  intentions  for  monetary  policy  during  an  uncertain 
situation. When the Riksbank cut the repo rate to 0.25 per cent in July last year, the repo rate 
path signalled a low repo rate for a long period ahead. I believe this gave us an advantage 
over many other central banks, who tried to use purely verbal methods to signal that their 
policy rates would be low for a long time.  
Credibility plays an important role in monetary policy. One central issue in this context is the 
inflation target. If a central bank “promises” low inflation, but the economic agents do not find 
this  credible,  it  will  not  have  the  desired  effect.  It  is  possible  to  inspire  confidence  in  the 
inflation target by the central bank being politically independent. What does this have to do 
with the zero interest rate problem and the repo rate path? What I mean is that the existence 
of a repo rate path in connection with cutting the repo rate to 0.25 per cent, provided credible 
evidence that a low interest rate over a long period of time was what was needed to attain 
                                                 
5   One argument in favour of the bound possibly being below zero is that there are handling costs for cash. This 
would  then  mean  that  one  can  accept  a  negative  interest  rate  to  refrain  from  cash  and  invest  in  interest-
bearing  assets.  See,  for  example,  Meredith  Beechey,  and  Heidi  Elmér  (2009),  “The  lower  limit  of  the 
Riksbank’s repo rate”, Economic Commentaries no 11, 2009, Sveriges Riksbank. 
4 
 BIS Review 85/2010
the  Riksbank’s  monetary  policy  objective  of  an  inflation  rate  close  to  the  target,  and  to 
stabilise resource utilisation. One could say that we put our cards on the table.6  
Figure 2 shows the relationship between market expectations according to forward rates and 
the Riksbank’s repo rate path in connection with the repo rate being cut to 0.25 per cent in 
July 2009. The Riksbank’s forecast indicated that the repo rate would remain at this low level 
until the second half of 2010. The forward rates prior to the publication of the repo rate path 
indicated that the repo rate would not be cut to 0.25 per cent and that increases in the repo 
rate would begin as early as the end of 2009. Surveys carried out by Prospera indicated that 
expectations were in line with the forward rates. Although the forward rates were adjusted 
down  after  the  publication  of  the  repo  rate  path,  the  pricing  still  showed  that  expectations 
were  set  at  a  first  repo  rate  increase  at  the  end  of  2009.  Where  the  Riksbank’s  forecast 
indicated a first repo rate increase, the forward rate was already up at around 1.5 per cent. 
This large deviation caused considerable discussion, partly concerning the current situation 
and  monetary  policy,  and  partly  more  general  as  to  whether  it  is  a  problem  if  market 
expectations deviate from the Riksbank’s forecast. As shown in Figure 2, however, market 
expectations  were  lower  than  the  Riksbank’s  repo  rate  forecast  at  the  end  of  the  forecast 
period.  Seen  across  the  entire  forecast  period,  therefore,  the  average  deviation  is  not  so 
great. With hindsight, we can also note that in summer 2009 market expectations deviated 
considerably from the repo rate outcome we can see so far. 
Figure 2 
The repo rate path and market expectations in July 2009  
Per cent 
Note. Market expectations are based on forward rates. “Before” are the closing rates on the 
day before the repo rate path was published and “After” are the closing rates on the day it 
was published. Prospera’s survey covers money market participants.  
Sources: Reuters EcoWin, TNS SIFO Prospera and the Riksbank. 
 A recurring phenomenon during the three years with our own repo rate path has been that 
market  expectations  of  the  repo  rate  have  from  time  to  time  deviated  from  the  Riksbank’s 
repo rate forecast. Allow me to comment further on this. 
                                                 
6  
In addition to the repo rate cut of 0.25 per cent, the Riksbank has granted loans at a fixed interest rate for the 
purpose of bringing down actual interest rates paid by companies and households. 
BIS Review 85/2010 
 5
Market expectations and the repo rate path 
As I mentioned earlier, one important purpose of publishing a repo rate path is to influence 
expectations among the participants in the economy. The established view at present is that 
monetary  policy  has  its  main  impact  by  influencing  expectations  of  future  interest  rates.  A 
natural  question  here  is  if  the  Riksbank’s  repo  rate  path  has  differed  from  other  agents’ 
expectations  of  the  repo  rate,  and  how  large  the  deviations  have  been.  What  role  do  the 
differences between market expectations and the Riksbank’s forecasts play? 
How large are the deviations… 
As we have seen, the Riksbank, the market and other economic agents can have different 
views  on  how  the  repo  rate  will  develop.  Sometimes  the  differences  are  small,  and 
sometimes they are large.  
Figure 3 shows two summarising measures for the deviations between market expectations 
according  to  forward  rates  and  the  Riksbank’s  repo  rate  forecast  at  the  time  of  all 
18 publications.7 We can see that the deviations have become larger since the financial crisis 
erupted, which is natural as uncertainty increases. Looking at the whole period since 2007, 
however, there does not appear to be any systematic deviation in any direction (the average 
deviation  is approximately  zero  for  the  whole  period).  It  is  important  to  point  this  out.  One 
question that may nevertheless arise is why market expectations deviate from the Riksbank’s 
forecast. 
Figure 3 
Deviations during the forecasting horizon between the repo rate path  
and market expectations according to forward rates 
Percentage points 
Note. For a description of the calculations, see footnote 7. 
Sources: Reuters EcoWin and the Riksbank. 
                                                  
7   The measures show the following: at the time of a given forecast the difference between market expectations 
and  the  Riksbank’s  forecast  for  the  repo  rate  1  to  12  quarters  ahead  are  measured.  This  thus  gives 
12 different deviations for each time of publication. One measure gives the average of all 12 deviations. The 
other measure shows a “standard deviation”, where the sign of the deviation is unimportant.  
6 
 BIS Review 85/2010
…and what are they due to? 
To  begin  with,  I  would  like  to  make  the  reservation  that  market  expectations  cannot  be 
observed, they can only be estimated. Some of the deviations may thus be due to the fact 
that we have not succeeded in adjusting the forward rates for various types of premium. In 
addition to this, there are a number of other possible explanations for the deviations. 
In one sense it may be natural that market expectations deviate from the Riksbank’s repo 
rate  forecast.  Market  agents  may  have  a  different  picture  of  future  inflation  and  economic 
developments as a whole, which would motivate a different repo rate in the future. Even if 
market agents share the Riksbank’s view of economic developments, there may well be a 
deviation with regard to future interest rates. This can be due to different views regarding the 
transmission mechanism, that is, the effects of the repo rate on the economy. 
Are the deviations a problem? 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  one  reason  for  publishing  repo  rate  paths  is  the  opportunity  to 
effectively  steer  market  expectations.  We  have  seen  that  market  expectations  sometimes 
deviate from the Riksbank’s published path. One reason for this is that the uncertainty over 
future economic developments has been unusually great during the financial crisis. However, I 
would like to tone down the importance of the deviation between market expectations and the 
Riksbank’s repo rate path. There has not been any systematic deviation in either direction, if 
one looks as the average of the repo rate paths and market expectations over three years.  
Inflation expectations are a decisive factor for credibility 
My  view  is  that  the  decisive  factor  for  a  central  bank  with  an  inflation  target  is  inflation 
expectations. Expectations should be anchored around the inflation target in the long run. I 
say  “long  run”,  as  inflation  expectations  in  the  short  term  vary  considerably  in  accordance 
with actual inflation. Figure 4 shows inflation expectations 1, 2 and 5 years ahead according 
to Prospera’s survey for money market participants. We can see that inflation expectations 
5 years ahead have been around 2 per cent during the past 10 years. I interpret this to mean 
that there is still unshaken confidence in the inflation target. 
Money market participants’ inflation expectations according to Prospera 
Per cent 
Figure 4 
Note. Monthly data from September 2009. Quarterly data prior to this.  
Source: TNS SIFO Prospera. 
BIS Review 85/2010 
  7
I have so far discussed our experiences of publishing repo rate paths. Let me now go on to 
discuss the most recent repo rate path in the Monetary Policy Update published in April this 
year. 
Some aspects of the current repo rate path  
Figure  5  shows  the  repo  rate  path  from  the  Monetary  Policy  Update  in  April  together  with 
market  expectations  of  the  repo  rate.  For  the  coming  year  both  forward  rates  and  survey 
expectations were very close to the Riksbank’s forecast. Expectations as expressed in the 
surveys  agree  fairly  well  with  the  Riksbank’s  forecast,  even  in  the  longer  run.  However, 
expectations according to forward rates were much lower than the Riksbank’s repo rate path 
in the longer run. The total deviation between the repo rate path and forward rates can also 
be seen on the far right in Figure 3. 
Figure 5 
The repo rate path and market expectations in April 2010 
Per cent  
Note. Market expectations are based on forward rates. “Before” are the closing rates on the day 
before  the  repo  rate  path  was  published.  “After”  are  the  closing  rates  on  the  day  it  was 
published. Prospera’s survey covers money market participants. 
Sources: Reuters EcoWin, TNS SIFO Prospera and the Riksbank. 
 The real repo rate path 
How expansionary is the monetary policy that follows on from the Riksbank’s repo rate path? 
One way to gain an idea of this is to look at the development of the real interest rate. The 
real interest rate is the most important for the development of the real economy, as it is the 
interest rate on which consumption and investment decisions are based. It is defined as the 
nominal interest rate minus expected inflation. The Riksbank also publishes forecasts for the 
real repo rate in its Monetary Policy Reports.  
8 
 BIS Review 85/2010
Figure 6 shows the Riksbank’s forecast from the April Monetary Policy Update together with 
different measures of market participants’ expected real repo rate.8 Let us begin by looking at 
the Riksbank’s forecast for the real repo rate. We can note that the real repo rate is presently 
below zero, and according to the Riksbank’s forecast it is not expected to be above zero until 
the end of this year. If the forecast proves correct, the real repo rate will have been negative 
for  a  two-year  period  –  this  is  very  unusual  in  an  historical  perspective.  The  Riksbank’s 
assessment is that a long-term normal level for the real repo rate is around 2 per cent.9 Seen 
from this perspective, the repo rate path thus indicates a very expansionary monetary policy. 
We have previously seen that in April the market was expecting a lower nominal repo rate in 
relation to the Riksbank’s forecast. Figure 6 shows that this also appeared to apply to the 
real repo rate. 
Figure 6 
The Riksbank’s real repo rate forecast  
Per cent  
Note. See footnote 8 for a description of the calculation of the real repo rate expectations. 
Sources: Reuters EcoWin, TNS SIFO Prospera and the Riksbank. 
                                                  
8   The real repo rate forecast is calculated as a mean value of the Riksbank’s repo rate forecast for the coming 
year  minus  the  inflation  forecast  (CPIF)  for  the  corresponding  period.  Prospera’s  interest  rate  and  inflation 
expectations are based on surveys carried out on 28 April and 28 April–7 May respectively. Interpolation has 
been used for the interest rate and inflation expectations to produce the expected repo rate for the coming 
year  and  inflation  expectations  for  the  corresponding  period.  “Forward  rates  minus  Prospera  inflation 
expectations”  shows  nominal  forward  rates  from  28  April  for  the  coming  year  minus  inflation  expectations 
according to Prospera for the corresponding period. 
9   See the box “What is a normal level for the repo rate?” in the Monetary Policy Report, February 2010 for a 
discussion  of  a  normal  level  for  the  repo  rate.  See  also  Björn  Lagerwall  “Real  interest  rates  in  Sweden”, 
Economic commentary no. 5, 2008, Sveriges Riksbank, for a discussion of real interest rates. 
BIS Review 85/2010 
 9
Concluding thoughts 
Publishing our own repo rate path was a further step towards openness and transparency in 
the Riksbank’s monetary policy. Our forecast for the repo rate is reported in the same way as 
other important forecast variables. We can also use alternative scenarios to illustrate how the 
Executive  Board  may  respond  with  its  monetary  policy  if  economic  developments  deviate 
from the main scenario.  
When the Riksbank introduced the repo rate path there were fears that many analysts would 
stop making their own forecasts and slavishly follow the Riksbank. The merit of having many 
different assessments would be lost. However, this has not been the case. There was also 
concern that we would avoid changing the repo rate path, even when this was motivated by 
changed conditions. This has not happened either. “The repo rate path is a forecast, not a 
promise”, this has been a message that the Riksbank has communicated all along.  
Experiences so far show that the work on the repo rate path and publication of the path have 
functioned well. To crown it all, we have gained a monetary policy discussion that is aimed 
more at long-term issues and not merely at whether or not the interest rate should be altered 
a stage. My view is that our own repo rate path is quite clearly preferable to the other two 
alternatives that were tested. I believe that this is also the predominant view of most of those 
outside of the bank, now, three years later.  
The repo rate path served us well during the crisis. We were able to clearly signal that the 
repo rate will be low for a long period of time to alleviate the effects of the fall in demand and 
to  attain  the  inflation  target.  There  have  been  slight  differences  of  opinion  among  us 
Executive  Board  members  with  regard  to  the  time  when  an  increase  in  the  repo  rate  will 
begin.  But  these  have  been  only  slight,  the  larger  moves  have  been  clear.  It  has  been 
necessary to have a low repo rate over a long period of time. In this context, changes in the 
repo  rate  amounting  to  0.25  percentage  points  slightly  sooner  or  later  do  not  make  a 
significant difference. According to our repo rate forecast in April, the real repo rate will have 
been below zero for two years, and it will remain low throughout the forecast period.  
There have been and are differences between the market agents’ expected repo rate and the 
repo rate path. However, there are also difficulties in measuring market expectations through 
forward  rates.  This  applies  in  normal  cases  and  even  more  so  in  times  of  financial  crisis. 
Even if it is the case, we can probably note that the differences have been rather the rule 
than the exception. There has been no systematic deviation in any one direction. All in all, I 
think  that  with  the  aid  of  the  repo  rate  path  we  have  succeeded  relatively  well  in  steering 
expectations. 
In  connection  with  the  introduction  of  the  repo  rate  path,  there  were  discussions  as  to 
whether there would be a confidence crisis if the market does not “buy” our repo rate path. 
But,  as  shown,  this  does  not  need  to  be  an  expression  of  mistrust.  And  talking  about 
confidence, my view is that the final proof that households and companies have confidence 
in  the  Riksbank’s  monetary  policy  is  that  inflation  expectations  are  anchored  close  to  the 
target of two per cent. Surveys indicate clearly that inflation expectations in the long run are 
very well anchored around the inflation target. I interpret this to mean that the general public 
has confidence that the Riksbank will adapt its monetary policy to attain the inflation target. 
10 
 BIS Review 85/2010
