Kwesi Bekoe Amissah-Arthur: Conduct of monetary policy in a 
challenging economic environment  
Address  by  Mr  Kwesi  Bekoe  Amissah-Arthur,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Ghana,  at  the 
swearing in ceremony of new executives of the Association of Ghana Industries (AGI), Accra, 
14 January 2010. 
 Mr. Chairman  
Hon. Minister of Trade and Industry  
Out-going and In-coming Presidents of the AGI  
Togbe Afede and Nii La  
Members of Council  
Members of the AGI  
Distinguished Guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
1. 
It is a pleasure for me to join this important event of the Ghanaian industrial sector; to 
swear in new executives of the Association of Ghana Industries (AGI). The membership of 
this  association  is  said  to  be  truly  national  and  representative;  spreading  across  small, 
medium and large scale enterprises operating in all sectors of the economy across the entire 
country.  
2. 
Let  me  commend  members  of  the  Association  for  their  contribution  to  Ghana’s 
economic  progress  over  the  years.  I  hope  that  your  hard  work  will  continue  in  the  coming 
years.  
3.  Mr. Chairman, my address today will focus on the “conduct of monetary policy in a 
challenging economic environment”. Ghana faces two key economic challenges; the long-
term accelerated growth and development agenda which can only be pursued aggressively 
after the challenge of macroeconomic instability has been tackled. Restoring macroeconomic 
stability  is  important  given  that  the  global  (and  indeed  our  own  domestic)  economy  is 
gradually  recovering  from  severe  economic  imbalances  that  characterized  the  past  two 
years.  
I  will  begin  by  explaining  to  you  the  peculiar  challenges  that  confronted  monetary 
4. 
policy, the conduct and role of monetary policy in addressing these, and conclude with an 
outlook for 2010.  
5.  Mr. Chairman, in first half of 2009 major economic challenges confronted businesses, 
investors, individuals and policymakers. The rate of inflation which began rising in the last 
quarter of 2008 increased consistently in the first six months peaking at 20.7 percent in June, 
the  highest  level  in  over  four  years.  Between  January  and  June,  the  cedi  depreciated  by 
17.5 percent against our main reserve currency, the US dollar. Gross international reserves 
declined  to  about  1.9  months  of  imports  cover  by  June  2009.  The  deterioration  in  theses 
indices were the results of both global and domestic developments. Dramatic increases in 
energy  prices,  combined  with  high  prices  of  imported  foods,  contributed  to  increases  in 
inflation. On the domestic front, Government’s reaction was to accommodate the shocks by 
providing subsidies on oil products, leading to large budget deficits partially financed by the 
Central Bank. Clearly these developments signaled an economy in distress, underlying the 
urgency of implementing policies to reverse the trend and restore stability.  
6.  Of  the  economic  challenges,  the  continuing  high  inflation  was  particularly  worrisome 
due  to  its  impact  on  fixed  income  earners,  savers,  investors  and  the  poor.  Rising  inflation 
creates  uncertainty  in  long-term  decision-making,  delaying  investment  decisions  and 
BIS Review 3/2010 
 1
distorting  business  plans.  Therefore  inflation  has  fundamental  implications  for  long-term 
employment and growth.  
7.  Given the adverse economic conditions just described , the Government had to take 
decisions  to  improve  the  business  environment.  As  I  just  stated  with  respect  to  inflation, 
business decisions are taken with a higher degree of confidence and certainty under stable 
economic  conditions.  Consequently,  monetary  policy  had  to  be  decisive  in  reducing 
uncertainty and turning the economy around towards stability.  
8.  Mr. Chairman, the primary mandate of the Bank of Ghana is to maintain price stability. 
To achieve price stability the Bank has to manage the supply of money. In classical theory, 
the control of the money supply is the basis of monetary policy; the process through which 
the  monetary  authority  controls  the  cost  of  money  or  interest  rates  and  supply  of  credit, 
thereby influencing inflation, exchange rates and employment levels.  
9. 
Interest rate adjustments influence inflation. Rising interest rates reduces consumption 
and  Investment  thereby  dampening  aggregate  demand.  A  low  interest  rate  environment 
results  in  the  opposite  effect,  raising  consumption  and  investment;  therefore  aggregate 
demand.  
10.  Now  let  me  turn  my  attention  to  the  role  of  fiscal  policy  on  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary  policy.  To  a  large  extent,  the  achievement  of  a  stable  interest  rate  and  credit 
environment  depends  on  the  size  of  Government  borrowing  (the  Public  Sector  Borrowing 
Requirements  or  PSBR)  and  how  it  is  financed.  The  sources  for  financing  Government 
borrowing within the domestic economy are the public and the banking system (whether or 
not including the Central Bank). When financed such Government borrowing “crowds out” the 
private sector from accessing capital. It is often said that for “every cedi government borrows, 
the private sector has one cedi less”. But more importantly, the effect of excessive borrowing 
is to raise the cost of money.  
11.  Mr.  Chairman,  The  interest  rate  policy  setting  process  at  the  Bank  of  Ghana  is  very 
extensive.  The  objective  is  to  gain  a  comprehensive  understanding  of  the  state  of  the 
economy.  
12.  To do this, we assess developments in the external sector, the state of Government 
operations,  the  banking  and  financial  sectors,  the  real  sector  through  monitoring  business 
and consumer confidence, and price conditions in the economy. It includes the analysis of 
liquidity,  credit,  balance  of  payments,  employment  levels,  and  a  broad  range  of  other 
economic data which helps us to create an index of economic activity.  
13.  The desire to take account of real sector issues in the monetary policy process results 
in the construction of a Composite Index of Economic Activity which estimates the upswings 
or downswings in economic activity. This Index incorporates indicators such as construction, 
exports,  imports,  consumption,  industrial  production,  formal  employment  generation,  and 
credit to the private sector among others.  
14. 
I need to state that contrary to popular perception the Bank of Ghana does not focus 
exclusively  on  price  stability.  Some  of  your  members  may  be  aware  that  we  conduct 
bi-monthly business surveys on some 45 companies in all sectors of the economy, through 
which we collate diverse information from the market.  
15.  Admittedly,  the  sample  size  is  small  and  may  not  capture  the  broad  concerns  of 
industry but it provides the Bank with relevant information on industrial performance. I would 
therefore use this platform to appeal to the Association to open up its membership database 
to the Bank of Ghana for policy purposes. This will provide us with useful information such as 
employment trends, rising or falling profitability levels. so we can broaden the critical factors 
that inform our decision making.  
16.  Mr. Chairman, the conduct of monetary policy during the economic challenges of the 
first  part  of  2009  focused  on  restoring  macroeconomic  stability.  The  decision  to  raise  the 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2010
prime rate in the first quarter of 2009 was essential. I know that the private sector was not 
enthused by the decision but by the second half of the year, there was clear evidence that 
the policy initiatives were beginning to take effect.  
17.  Government’s  fiscal  prudence  in  2009  paved  the  way  for  significant  reduction  in  the 
fiscal deficit. The second half of 2009 was characterized by consistent declines in inflation 
from  20.7  percent  to  16.9  percent  by  end  November  and  there  are  strong  indications  that 
inflation will fall further. The currency stabilized in the foreign exchange markets and even 
appreciated  against  some  major  currencies.  Given 
these  encouraging  economic 
developments,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  responded  by  lowering  the  prime  rate  in  November, 
signaling to the market that the economy was entering into a cycle of declining interest rates.  
18.  Looking ahead, Mr. Chairman, the Central Bank anticipates a much stronger rebound 
in  economic  activities  in  2010.  The  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  to  foster  growth  by 
encouraging further declines in interest rates as inflation declines and inflation expectations 
diminish. This will set the stage for the private sector to access credit at relatively cheaper 
costs  to  pursue  productive  ventures  while  the  Central  Bank  works  to  preserve  macro-
economic and financial stability requisite for economic growth.  
19.  As we move towards an era of low and stable inflationary environment, access to credit 
for  productive  activities  will  improve  and  businesses  must  begin  to  map  out  strategies  to 
improve efficiency and reduce operating costs in order to stay competitive. I will encourage 
the  incoming  executives  of  the  AGI  to  promote  strategies  that  will  ensure  that  our  local 
industries stay competitive especially as the Ghanaian economy continues to integrate into 
the global economy. 
20.  To conclude, let me state that the primary objective of the Central Bank is to pursue 
sound monetary and financial policies aimed at price stability and the creation of an enabling 
economic  environment  for  sustainable  economic  growth.  Together  with  members  of  this 
Association  and  the  private  sector  at  large,  we  must  collaborate  to  achieve  the  common 
objective of sustained economic growth.  
21. 
Thank you.  
I wish the new AGI executives good luck as they embark on their period in office.  
BIS Review 3/2010 
 3
