Axel A Weber: Making the financial system more resilient – the role of 
capital requirements 
Speech  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  Financial 
Services Ireland (FSI), Dublin, 10 March 2010. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is said that a good speech has a good beginning and a good end and that the two are as 
close  together  as  possible.  I  think  this  is  especially  true  when  it  comes  to  after-lunch 
speeches  which  deal  with  rather  weighty  and  complex  issues  such  as  the  regulatory 
response to the financial crisis. 
The financial crisis has indeed been one of the most devastating economic events of the past 
decades. Nevertheless, as the markets have stabilised and recovery has finally set in, the 
time  has  come  to  look  ahead.  Our  main  challenge  now  is  to  initiate  the  reforms  that  are 
necessary to create a more stable and more resilient financial system for the future.  
The necessity of enhancing the resilience of the financial system 
2. 
The first step towards achieving that goal is to gain a clear understanding of the underlying 
causes of the financial crisis. The crisis is a very complex phenomenon, however. It can be 
analysed from a vast number of perspectives, each of which can teach us a specific lesson. 
And  it  cannot  be  denied  that  many  of  the  lessons  learned  show  us  that  there  is  room  for 
improvement in the field of financial regulation. Consequently, a lot of effort is being put into 
far-reaching  and  ambitious  reforms  of  the  regulatory  framework.  The  main  goal  of  these 
reforms is to make crises less likely in the future. Even so, it has to be acknowledged that 
such a probability can never be reduced to zero. And this insight brings us to the concept of 
“resilience”. Only a truly resilient financial system will be able to fully absorb the shocks that 
could not be prevented beforehand. 
The most obvious benefit of a more resilient financial system would be to lessen the need for 
governments  to  act  as  lenders  of  last  resort.  Although  such  intervention  proved  very 
successful during the current crisis, it generates undesired side effects. The most obvious of 
these is the burden it places on the state budget. Not only is this a problem in itself, it also 
leads to other unfavourable outcomes. First, the costs of stabilisation are not borne by those 
who  caused  the  crisis  but  by  the  taxpayers  (although  there  might  be  a  certain  overlap,  of 
course). This uneven distribution of costs is certainly not right morally, and it is also fraught 
with problems from a financial-stability viewpoint. The fact that it is not the originators of the 
crisis that have to foot the bill induces moral hazard and this, in turn, promotes risk-prone 
behaviour and increases the likelihood of future crises. 
For these reasons alone, it is important to enhance the resilience of the financial system and, 
by  doing  so  reduce  the  necessity  for  public  bail-outs.  This  goal  could  be  pursued  by 
strengthening  two  consecutive  lines  of  defence.  The  first  line  of  defence  would  comprise 
measures  that  reduce  the  likelihood  of  banks  failing  in  the  first  place.  The  second  line  of 
defence would consist of instruments that reduce the systemic impact of actual or looming 
bank failures. Let us take a closer look at the relevant measures and instruments that are 
under discussion. 
BIS Review 28/2010 
 1
Reducing the likelihood of individual bank failures 
3. 
The most comprehensive proposal to reduce the likelihood of individual bank failures is the 
reform  of  capital  requirements  within  the  Basel  II  framework.  This  is  based  on  the 
assumption  that,  for  the  individual  institution,  capital  requirements  constitute  the  central 
buffer against losses. However, the crisis revealed that the overall level of capital that banks 
were  required  to  hold  was  insufficient  compared  with  the  magnitude  of  the  losses.  At  the 
same time, it became apparent that the loss-absorbing capacity of the capital held was too 
low. 
Consequently,  vigorous  efforts  are  being  put  into  adjusting  the  capital  requirements  within 
the  Basel  II  framework.  The  explicit  goal  is  to  promote  a  more  resilient  banking  sector  by 
raising  not  only  the  level  but  also  the  quality,  consistency  and  transparency  of  the  capital 
base. Given the particular risks resulting from the failure of a systemic bank, the introduction 
of  a  special  capital  surcharge  for  systemic  banks  is  being  discussed.  This  would  not  only 
enhance the resilience of such institutions, it would also make it less attractive to become 
systemically relevant in the first place. 
An outline of the complete set of measures was published in December 2009. Currently, the 
proposed measures are being analysed in a comprehensive quantitative impact study, and in 
the  course  of  2010  they  will  be  calibrated  and  finalised.  Together  with  new  standards  for 
liquidity provisions, the new rules should be implemented by 2012. 
A second proposal to reduce the likelihood of bank failures was put forward by the German 
Council  of  Economic  Experts,  and  similar  proposals  have  been  made  by  others.  The 
proposal  features  a  European  Stabilisation  Fund.  The  thinking  behind  this  might  initially 
seem to be not too different from the underlying concept of Basel II. Banks would be obliged 
to contribute to a fund according to their risk structure and their systemic relevance. Thus, 
just  like  the  capital  requirements  under  Basel  II,  a  price  would  be  placed  on  risk-taking, 
especially  if  it  has  a  major  impact  on  the  system  as  a  whole.  However,  in  contrast  to  the 
capital  held  under  Basel  II,  the  resources  that  are  contributed  to  the  fund  are  lost  to  the 
individual banks. Thus, the Stabilisation Fund puts an outright (Pigouvian) tax on risk-taking 
in order to internalise the effects of risky activities on financial stability. 
As an ex post instrument to put a burden on the originators of the crisis, such a tax might be 
justified.  Nevertheless,  as  an  ex  ante  steering  tool,  the  proposed  fund  has  major 
shortcomings.  First,  it  would  drain  capital  from  banks.  But,  more  importantly,  it  would  not 
solve  the  moral  hazard  problem.  As  the  fund  would  act  as  lender  of  next-to-last  resort  for 
failing  banks  (the  government  would  still  have  to  step  in  if  the  fund’s  resources  were 
exhausted in a crisis), the problem would merely be shifted from the level of government to 
the level of the fund. The banks, in fact, would still have an incentive to take on too much 
risk, while relying on the fund to cover potential losses. In the case of a European fund, the 
moral hazard problem might even be amplified, since costs that would normally occur at the 
national level could be shifted, at least partially, to the supranational level. A systemic crisis 
might even provoke a rat race among national governments for the fund’s limited resources. 
While the Basel II framework puts a shadow price on risk, and the Stabilisation Fund puts a 
tax on risk, a third proposal goes one step further. This proposal – a core element of what is 
known as the Volcker rule – was proposed by President Obama in mid-January. This rule 
aims at barring banks completely from certain forms of risk-taking: they would not be allowed 
to invest in or sponsor hedge funds or private equity funds. They would also be banned from 
engaging in proprietary trading operations for their own profit. Thus, the risk of bank failures 
would be significantly reduced. At the same time, a cap would be put on the size of banks to 
reduce their systemic relevance. 
One  shortcoming  of  the  Volcker  rule,  however,  is  that  it  most  likely  would  not  apply  to 
investment vehicles, such as hedge funds or investment banks. And a failure of these could 
also  lead  to  systemic  distortions,  as  was  demonstrated  by  the  case  of  Long-Term  Capital 
Management or – more recently – Lehman Brothers. Moreover, European experience shows 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2010
that universal banks with a broad range of business can also be a stabilising factor during a 
crisis. 
However, the most fundamental problem of the Volcker rule lies in the fact that a complete 
prohibition  of  certain  activities  –  activities  that  are  perhaps  more  risky  but  not  necessarily 
economically inefficient – is a very far-reaching market intervention. The reformed Basel II 
framework and the Stabilisation Fund also try to restrict possibly destabilising activities but, 
unlike  the  Volcker  rule,  the  penalty  they  impose  on  these  activities  is  finite.  Technically 
speaking, the Volcker rule enforces a corner solution and, as such, might have unintended 
and  unfavourable  consequences.  It  could,  for  example,  have  undesirable  effects  on  the 
transmission of monetary policy. 
I  have  just  described  three  different  approaches  to  reducing  the  likelihood  of  failure  for 
individual banks, particularly if they are systemic. These three approaches represent three 
different levels of intensity. While the Basel II framework puts a shadow price on certain risky 
activities,  the  Stabilisation  Fund  taxes  them,  and  the  Volcker  rule,  as  a  corner  solution, 
prohibits them entirely. However, as none of the three approaches would be able to entirely 
rule out the possibility bank failures, they would have to be reinforced by other measures. 
That is, a second line of defence would have to be drawn. 
Reducing the systemic impact of individual bank failures 
4. 
If  a  bank  gets  into  trouble  and  if  its  problems  threaten  to  spread  throughout  the  financial 
system,  supervisors  have  to  act  quickly.  This  requires  a  proper  set  of  instruments  and, 
ultimately,  private  or  public  money  that  can  be  mobilised  at  short  notice.  For  this  reason, 
proposals  such  as  the  Stabilisation  Fund  include  the  establishment  of  a  war  chest  for 
financial  crises,  that  is,  a  capital  stock  reserved  for  rescue  measures.  However,  once  this 
capital stock is depleted during a crisis, governments would again have to step in as lender 
of last resort. Moreover, I have already hinted at the additional moral hazard problems that 
could result from such a funding solution. 
Therefore,  a  more  important  supplementary  measure  would  be  the  implementation  of  a 
special  resolution  regime  for  banks.  Such  a  regime  would  ensure  that  even  large  and 
systemically  relevant  banks  could  fail  without  triggering  far-reaching  disruptions  within  the 
financial  system.  The  crisis  has  made  it  perfectly  clear  that  existing  bankruptcy  law  –  for 
example, Chapter 11 in the US – is not well suited to the peculiarities of the financial system 
and the dynamics of a financial crisis. As a key requirement, a new regime would have to 
allow  supervisors  to  choose  restructuring  over  bailing-out  and  thus  avoid  unfair  burden 
sharing and moral hazard. In this context, a restructuring involving private investors would be 
the  first  choice  and  clearly  preferable  to  direct  public  intervention.  Additionally,  the  regime 
should enable supervisors to act swiftly to reduce the risk of bank runs by creditors or clients. 
And, finally, if the resolution regime manages to separate stabilising the bank from rescuing 
its  owners  and  creditors,  it  also  reduces  moral  hazard  and  thereby  the  likelihood of  future 
crises. 
A  related  proposal  that  might  be  worth  discussing  is  the  concept  of  “living  wills”.  This 
concept requires systemically relevant banks to produce recovery and resolution plans which 
set  out  how  operations  could  be  resolved  in  an  orderly  fashion.  As  a  result,  governments 
would not have to rescue systemic banks as a whole but only those parts that are important 
to the economy. Thus, the moral hazard problem would be reduced. However, current bank 
structures have evolved over many years. Consequently, restructuring as a necessary part of 
a “living will” would be costly, complicated and time-consuming.  
BIS Review 28/2010 
 3
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen  
Let me conclude by returning to the very beginning. The title of my speech asks about the 
role of capital requirements in making the financial system more resilient. The answer is that 
they play a central role as they define the first line of defence in the event of a crisis. Other 
instruments in this category could  be a Stabilisation Fund or the Volcker rule. In my view, 
both  of  these  instruments  have  significant  shortcomings,  however.  The  best  option  would 
therefore be to stick to a revised Basel II framework. 
Even  so,  revised  capital  requirements  alone  will  not  be  enough  to  prevent  bank  failures. 
Since the failure of a systemically relevant bank poses a great risk to the financial system, it 
will  be  necessary  to  draw  a  second  line  of  defence.  Here,  the  most  important  instrument 
would  be  a  special  resolution  regime  for  banks,  particularly  if  the  banks  are  systemically 
relevant. 
I am confident that the combination of revised capital requirements and a strong resolution 
regime  would  significantly  enhance  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system.  And  it  is  to  be 
hoped  that  this  set  of  instruments  would  prevent  the  last  line  of  defence,  that  is  the 
government  budget  and  national  taxpayers,  from  once  more  becoming  stretched  to  the 
worrying extent we are currently seeing.  
Thank you for your attention.  
 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2010
