Sada Reddy: Financial literacy for all 
Speech by Mr Sada Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the Launch of the 2010 
Green Ribbon Campaign, Suva, 19 August 2010. 
 Chairman  and  Members  of  the  Financial  Literacy  Working  Group,  distinguished  guests, 
ladies and gentlemen.  
Introductory remarks  
A  very  warm  welcome  to  you  all.  I  am  delighted  to  be  here  today  to  officially  launch  the 
Green  Ribbon  Campaign,  a  partnership  of  the  public,  private  sector  and  non  government 
agencies to raise awareness and promote financial literacy for all.  
Today  marks  the  beginning  of  a  week  of  awareness  on  the  benefits  and  need  to promote 
financial literacy for all. Financial literacy, ladies and gentlemen, has been recognized as an 
important skill that helps individuals to participate in a modern economy, as it enables one to 
confidently  manage  and  make  informed  decisions  relating  to  their  personal  finances. 
Financial  literacy  is  an  empowering  skill  that  is  needed  throughout  life,  from  childhood 
through to retirement. Where ever people are, whether they live in an urban or rural area, 
they will be faced with different types of financial decisions throughout their lives – whether 
it’s balancing their income with day to day living expenses, managing borrowings for major 
purchases such as a house or planning ahead to meet needs or unforeseen risks.  
It  is  therefore  not  at  all  surprising  to  learn,  that  so  many  countries  have  put  into  place 
strategic  policies,  to  ensure  that  financial  literacy  is  available  to  all  citizens.  Here  in  the 
Pacific  the  importance  of  financial  literacy  has  been  recognized  at  the  regional  level  by 
Pacific Education Ministers and Finance Ministers in 2009. At their October meeting, Finance 
and Economic Ministers agreed that each Pacific island nation, through combined actions of 
the public and private sectors, achieve the following goals by 2020:  
 
 
 
 
all children to receive financial education through core curricula;  
all adults to have access to financial education;  
simple and transparent consumer protection to be in place; and  
halve the number of households without access to basic financial services.  
What has been done to promote financial literacy in Fiji?  
I am very happy to say the Reserve Bank has taken on a lead role in this area. We have 
taken  a  different  approach  in  that  the  Reserve  Bank  has  taken  the  initiative  to  support 
Government  in  setting  up  the  Financial  Literacy  Working  Group  comprising  private,  public 
sector and non government agencies working with the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce 
(NFIT).  
NFIT was established in February this year to promote greater financial inclusion in Fiji. This 
Green  Ribbon  campaign  being  launched  today  is  the  initiative  of  the  Financial  Literacy 
Working Group of NFIT.  
The Financial Literacy Working Group has identified three key areas as their task plan that 
they will work on this year. These are;  
1. 
Develop a national strategy – this would require a stock take and assessment of 
current financial literacy programs and to carryout a national financial literacy survey 
and to use the results to formulate Fiji’s first financial literacy strategy  
BIS Review 109/2010 
 1
2. 
Develop  and  implement  a  financial  education  curriculum  to  be  offered  in  all 
schools  
Develop financial competencies at household levels  
3. 
Considerable work has already been undertaken in these areas by the Working Group and 
you will be pleased to note the progress achieved to date.  
On teaching financial literacy to school children: The Pacific Financial Inclusion Program 
(PFIP)  engaged  a  team  of  consultants  from  the  New  Zealand  Young  Enterprise  Trust  to 
develop an implementation strategy in April 2010. The strategy, which will see teaching of 
financial literacy from class 1 to Form 7, has been endorsed by the Minister of Education and 
the  NFIT.  We  are  confident  that  by  2012  onwards  all  our  children  that  pass  through  the 
national  school  education  system  will  have  attained  some  fundamental  competencies  that 
will  assist  them  in  making  informed  financial  decisions  that  positively  impact  on  the 
management of personal and household’s finances.  
Household and adult financial competencies  
Whilst  it  is  all  very  well  and  good  to  teach  our  children  about  better  management  and 
understanding of their personal finances, it cannot be very effective unless these lessons that 
are taught at schools are also being supported and practiced in their home environment. This 
brings  us  to  the  importance  of  adult  financial  education.  Financial  issues  are  constantly 
changing reflecting the modern society that we live in.  
Today more than ever before people are being faced with financial decisions earlier in their 
life. The availability of easy credit and the pervasive power of advertising expose consumers 
to  so  many  choices  and  challenges.  Consumers  need  to  weigh  up  and  carefully  consider 
these  choices,  as  all  too  easily  uninformed  decisions  can  lead  to  too  much  debt  that  can 
spiral  into  a  crisis.  It  also  does  not  help  when  consumers  find  it  difficult  to  assess  and 
compare costs of financial products or services because of lack of information and technical 
jargons and terms that are too complicated or intimidating to understand.  
Financial  literacy  is,  therefore,  a  protection  mechanism  that  Governments  can  employ  to 
empower and assist consumers to make informed choices and decisions. When consumers 
are  better  informed  they  are  in  a  better  position  to  save  money,  plan  ahead  and  to  some 
extent  avert  financial  crises.  There  are  also  many  benefits  when  consumers  shop  around, 
they are able to drive competition and help in the most efficient allocation of capital that will 
help develop greater productivity of resources and contribute to growth in our economy.  
Develop a national financial literacy strategy for Fiji?  
The importance of financial literacy to our nation cannot be underestimated, particularly when 
it  supports  and  promotes  a  range  of  Government  economic  and  social  policies  such  as 
financial inclusion. In this regard I am pleased to announce that work has already begun on 
formulating  a  National  Financial  Literacy  Strategy  for  Fiji.  A  consultant  is  working  with  the 
Pacific Financial Inclusion Program to conduct a Financial Competency Survey. The Survey 
is  expected  to  be  carried  out  in  the  first  quarter  of  2011  and  will  determine  the  level  of 
financial  competency  of  low  income  households  and  the  results  will  assist  the  Financial 
Literacy  Working  Group  to  form  the  basis  of  a  medium  term  strategic  plan  to  strengthen 
financial literacy in the country.  
We are aware and commend the different organizations out there that are already conducting 
financial literacy programs for their target clients. We would like to see more programs made 
available to the different age groups and sectors of our communities. For example there is a 
lack  of  awareness  on  retirement  planning  and  this  will  need  to  be  addressed  as  the  Fiji 
National Provident Fund has announced major policy changes relating to workers retirement 
fund.  
2 
 BIS Review 109/2010
Concluding remarks  
Let me wrap up by informing you ladies and gentlemen, that Fiji, like any other developing 
country, is currently reviewing and reforming its financial sector to make it a locomotive for 
growth and development.  
The National Financial Inclusion Taskforce shares Government’s vision to have more of our 
people  in  the  informal  sector  to  move  into  the  formal  sector  so  that  they  can  all  actively 
contribute to economic activity that will create employment and prosperity for all our people. 
It is through initiatives such as improved financial literacy that will enable our people to make 
informed decisions, plan and work towards improving their livelihoods.  
However, the task of imparting financial knowledge and competency will require the support 
of  all  stakeholders  in  the  private,  public  and  NGO’s.  We  have  taken  the  right  approach  in 
establishing the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce and its supporting Working Groups. 
The  challenge  is  ensuring  that  information  is  available  in  an  easy  to  understand  language 
and  is  accessible  to  those  who  need  it  so  that  we  will  realize  the  goal  of  developing  a 
financially literate society.  
We can all contribute to financial literacy this week by encouraging our families, friends and 
colleagues  to  join  us  in  learning  and  talking  about  financial  literacy  within  their  different 
groups.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, a nation – whose people save, spend and invest wisely is a robust 
and resilient one.  
With these words, I now declare the Green Ribbon Campaign week open and wish you great 
success.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 109/2010 
 3
