Jean-Claude Trichet: Lessons from the crisis and steps towards 
economic stability 
Keynote speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank (ECB), 
at the 9th Munich Economic Summit, Munich, 29 April 2010. 
 Sehr geehrter Herr Bundespräsident, lieber Horst Köhler,  
Sehr geehrter Herr Chrobog, sehr geehrter Professor Sinn,  
Meine sehr verehrten Damen und Herren, 
ich  danke  den  Veranstaltern  dieser  Konferenz  recht  herzlich  für  die  Einladung.  Besonders 
dankbar  bin  ich  für  die  Gelegenheit,  im  Anschluss  an  meinen  langjährigen  Freund  Horst 
Köhler  sprechen  zu  dürfen.  Wir  sind  uns  über  einen  langen  Zeitraum  hinweg  in 
verschiedenen  Positionen 
immer  wieder  begegnet  und  haben  oft  sehr  eng 
zusammengearbeitet. 
It has always been an enormous pleasure to talk with him and to work with him. Both of us 
were  engaged  in  the  negotiations  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty.  That  is  where  we  met  nearly 
twenty years ago. 
We were also heavily involved with the handling of the European Monetary System crisis in 
1992/93.  I  remember  that  episode  very  well.  It  was  a  defining  moment  not  only  for  the 
monetary integration of Europe. It remains in our memories as a vivid example of what close 
and friendly cooperation can do in very exceptional and demanding circumstances.  
In my remarks today I would first like to reflect on the lessons that I believe we can draw from 
today’s financial and economic crisis. In the second part, I will touch on the current situation, 
and  describe  the  three  key  steps  that  I  believe  we  need  to  take  to  return  to  the  path  of 
economic stability. 
Lessons of the financial crisis 
The financial crisis has taught us painful lessons. It has revealed fundamental weaknesses in 
our global financial system. In the years that led up to the crisis, the European Central Bank 
was  among  those  institutions  that  warned  against  the  under-pricing  of  risk  in  financial 
markets.  But  the  growing  complexity  of  the  global  financial  system  and  specifically  its 
international linkages made it difficult to predict how and when developments would turn.  
With hindsight we know a great deal about the causes of the crisis. Financial innovation led 
to  the  development  of  new  instruments  that  were  intended  to  expand  the  diversification  of 
risk  for  savers  and  investors.  In  retrospect,  we  know  that  instead  they  contributed  to  a 
common exposure to systemic risk.  
Gradually, the focus of finance shifted in the recent past. From its traditional role of helping 
the real economy to cope with economic risk, finance became a self-referential activity. The 
notion  of  “financial  engineering”  is  a  striking  illustration  of  the  shift  of  attitudes  that 
spearheaded the changing focus of finance. When I started my professional career, no one 
would  have  used  this  expression.  Engineering  is  about  building  tangible  structures  that 
support human endeavours. Some of the structures that were invented in finance turned out 
to be neither tangible nor helpful to society. 
Nevertheless,  the  vast  expansion  of  the  financial  sector  would  not  have  been  possible 
without  both  supportive  macroeconomic  conditions  and  inadequate  prudential  regulation. 
Global current account imbalances have generated large financial flows, as large developed 
countries  sucked  in  massive  capital  flows  from  oil  exporting  and  emerging  economies. 
BIS Review 59/2010 
 1
Seemingly  bright  macroeconomic  prospects  combined  with  deregulation  and  global 
conditions of over-extended credit.  
The crisis has shown that deregulation does not always pave the way for greater efficiency 
and  greater  prosperity.  Rather  we  have  rediscovered  the  value  of  properly  functioning 
regulatory and supervisory institutions. And we have also rediscovered the value of medium-
term orientation, sustainability and stability.  
Consequences of the financial crisis 
The consequences to be drawn to minimise the risk of a comparable crisis in the future are 
numerous and wide-ranging.  
First, comprehensive regulatory reforms of the financial system have to be implemented with 
top priority. While some progress has been already made, major challenges lie ahead. Most 
importantly,  the  pro-cyclicality  of  the  financial  system  must  be  mitigated.  It  is  essential  to 
change regulatory and accounting rules that tend to amplify the natural cyclical swings of our 
economies.  
Second, we have to enhance the transparency of financial structures. That concerns rules of 
disclosure as well as market infrastructure. In particular, derivative market instruments need 
to  be  subject  to  greater  transparency.  But,  beyond  changes  in  financial  governance,  there 
needs to be a deeper economic assessment of the benefits of these structures to society. 
Third,  incentives  should  be  aligned.  Remuneration  schemes,  for  example,  should  support 
sustainable business rather than myopic trading. 
There  is  one  over-arching  issue  that  I  would  like  to  highlight:  the  financial  industry  has  to 
reconsider its role in the economy. Returning to a role of serving the real economy would be 
desirable.  “Financial  engineers”  may  prefer  to  create  ever  more  “sophisticated”  financial 
products. But finance has to come back to the basics. Among the basic tasks of the financial 
industry  is  the  supply  of  credit  to  the  real  economy.  This  too  is  a  profitable  business,  the 
profits  from  which  are  justified  because  they  are  mirrored  by  the  social  value  of  the 
intermediation function. Businesses and individuals depend in particular on the steady supply 
of credit by banks. 
The  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  of  the  euro  area  have  taken  comprehensive 
measures during the crisis to help commercial banks and other financial institutions. When 
the  turbulence  started  in  August  2007,  the  ECB  was  the  first  central  bank  to  step  in  by 
frontloading liquidity.  
After the intensification of the crisis in the autumn of 2008, we tackled the paralysis of inter-
bank transactions in the money market. In addition to a swift and substantial reduction of our 
policy rate, in line with our primary objective of maintaining price stability over the medium 
term, we decided to implement a set of non-standard measures, which we collectively refer 
to  as  “enhanced  credit  support”.  I  explained  these  measures  in  detail  here  in  Munich  in  a 
speech last July. 
These measures have significantly helped to maintain banks’ liquidity. But we did not pursue 
this policy with the ultimate goal of reconstructing banks’ profitability. Rather, the purpose of 
our  enhanced  credit  support  has  been  to  ensure  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy 
transactions to the broader economy. 
Global economic governance 
The crisis has important implications for economic governance, and here remarkable efforts 
have been made or are under way. On the global level, the G20 has become the main forum 
for international cooperation, and a strong consensus has emerged within this group not only 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2010
about the causes of the crisis but also about the appropriate policy responses. The G20 has 
been highly effective in addressing the global crisis. 
The  more  technical  questions  concerning  regulation  and  financial  stability  are  mainly 
delegated to the Financial Stability Board (FSB). The extension of both the membership and 
the  range  of  tasks  of  the  previous  Financial  Stability  Forum  have  pushed  the  Financial 
Stability  Board  into  a  leading  role  when  it  comes  to  coordinating  the  reform  of  financial 
regulation.  
The  European  regulatory  response  to  the  crisis  will  include  a  new  body  that  will  provide 
macroprudential  oversight  and  focus  on  the  avoidance  of  systemic  risk  in  the  financial 
system  of  the  European  Union  as  a  whole.  This  is  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board 
(ESRB), the establishment of which intends to make macro-prudential oversight operational 
at the European level.  
While the ECB and the national central banks of the European Union will be heavily involved 
in the ESRB framework, it is essential to make a clear separation between macro-prudential 
oversight  and  monetary  policy.  The  primary  objective  of  euro  area  monetary  policy  will 
remain the maintenance of price stability.  
Financial  stability  lays  the  conditions  for  the  central  bank  to  pursue  its  task  of  maintaining 
stable prices. It is also the outcome of an environment of steady macroeconomic prospects 
and confidence, which only stable prices can ensure.  
Current challenges for European integration 
Ladies and gentlemen, although the financial crisis did not originate here, it has profoundly 
challenged the European economy – and it is continuing to do so.  
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  –  in  short:  EMU  –  is  a  union  based  on  two  foundations: 
economic and monetary. These are two foundations that reinforce one another.  
Responsibility for the “M” is centralised and assigned to the Eurosystem with the ECB at its 
core,  aiming  to  ensure  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  over  the  medium  term.  We  have 
defined  price  stability  as  an  average  annual  inflation  rate  below  but  close  to  2%  over  the 
medium term.  
How have we performed against this objective since the introduction of the euro? Based on 
current  staff  projections  for  this  year,  by  the  end  of  2010,  the  average  inflation  rate  in  the 
euro area since the introduction of the euro is estimated to be around 1.95%. Beyond the ups 
and downs of the economic cycle since 1999, despite the swings in the international prices of 
raw materials, monetary policy has managed to keep its inflation record faithful to its strategic 
aim. I am satisfied that we have fulfilled our mandate.  
Speaking  in  Germany,  I  would  like  to  recall  that  the  average  annual  inflation  rate  in  this 
country in the 1990s was 2.2%, and in the 1980s it was 2.9%.  
Given the initial promise made to all people of Europe that the euro would be as credible, 
reliable and as good a store of value as were the best of the national currencies. On these 
figures, I can say that with an estimated average annual inflation rate of 1.95% for the first 
twelve years, the euro is in terms of safeguarding purchasing power “stark wie die D-Mark”.  
In a nutshell, the “M” has done its part. The main current challenges for our union originate in 
the  “E”.  Economic  union  is  based  on  responsible  national  policies:  fiscal  policies,  wage 
policies,  structural  policies.  At  the  core  of  the  economic  union  is  the  Stability  and  Growth 
Pact.  
The  crisis  has  revealed  some  of  the  shortcomings  of  national  policies  to  comply  with  the 
requirements of an economic union. In particular, in a number of cases, national policies that 
BIS Review 59/2010 
 3
are  responsible  for  domestic  public  finances  and  for  the  competitiveness  of  member 
economies have not achieved their objectives.  
But  the  crisis  has  also  revealed  weaknesses  in  the  peer  surveillance  process  and  in  the 
implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact. Thus another major lesson of the crisis is 
the need to strengthen the institutional framework of the economic union. 
Of  course,  the  deterioration  of  public  budgets  has  partly  been  due  to  a  “migration”  of  risk 
from the financial sector to the public sector. Public budgets have been called on to absorb 
the excessive risk that the financial industry had been creating during the booming years that 
led up to the crisis.  
Partly, however, the deterioration of public budgets is also due to some short-sighted fiscal 
and economic decisions in the brighter times that preceded the crisis. Before the crisis, weak 
public finances had combined in some countries with inattention to domestic competitiveness 
and a lack of long-term strategies to prepare national economies for competing successfully 
in the challenging – but rewarding – environment of the internal market.  
In  Greece,  in  particular,  past  fiscal  irresponsibility  and  inattentiveness  to  domestic 
competitiveness  made the  national  economy  extraordinarily  vulnerable  to  a  sudden  turn  in 
confidence.  
As I have implied, after the crisis, the main players in the world economy will be judged by a 
new  yardstick.  Private  players  will  be  held  accountable  to  new  and  stricter  standards  of 
economic  integrity  and  prudent  management.  And  governments,  the  world  over  –  and  in 
Europe  in  particular  –  will  have  to  show  self-discipline  and  trustworthiness  to  gain  respect 
and preserve confidence.  
That is why financial reform will have to go hand in hand with fiscal reform. Fiscal reform will 
reinforce confidence. In the current situation, we have to – and we do – stand firm on these 
principles. 
Speculation on more and more elevated sovereign risk has been one factor behind spreads 
being driven to very high levels. This is why it was very important that the heads of state and 
government  declared  on  11  February  2010  that  they  were  ready  to  “take  determined  and 
coordinated action, if needed, to safeguard financial stability in the euro area as a whole”. I 
said, on behalf of the ECB, that I approved of this important statement. 
In this respect let me stress the following: Loans are not transfers, and loans come at a cost. 
They  come  not  only  at  a  financial  cost;  they  also  come  with  a  strict  conditionality.  This 
conditionality needs to give assurance to lenders, not only that they will be repaid but also 
that the borrower will be able to stand on its own feet over a multi-year horizon. In the case of 
Greece,  this  will  require  courageous,  recognisable  and  specific  actions  by  the  Greek 
government that will lastingly and credibly consolidate the public budget.  
Other  countries  in  the  Union  and  elsewhere  have  gone  through  times  that  were  no  less 
difficult,  and  they  have  emerged  from  a  determined  adjustment  stronger  and  more 
competitive  than  in  the  past.  These  countries  have  demonstrated  that  a  clear  U-turn  in 
national  policy  governance  is  achievable.  After  making  the  turn,  they  have  reaped  large 
payoffs.  
I will not comment on the negotiations that are currently taking place in Athens. They have to 
be concluded by a courageous, comprehensive and convincing multi-year programme. And I 
am confident as regards the results of these discussions between the Greek government, the 
European Commission, the ECB and the International Monetary Fund.  
Let  me  add  a  word  about  Germany  and  the  current  public  debate  here.  I  very  much 
appreciated  the  invitation  by  Finance  Minister  Schäuble  yesterday  to  speak  with  the  floor 
leaders of all political parties represented in the Bundestag. I said yesterday in Berlin that I 
had found this meeting – in which Jürgen Stark and I could respond to all questions of our 
4 
 BIS Review 59/2010
interlocutors  –  extremely  important.  My  main  message  was  that  a  fast  parliamentary 
procedure was highly recommended in the present circumstances.  
What we need most at this time is a strong sense of direction. We need a sense of direction 
that can guide us on how we can emerge from these turbulent events and how we can return 
to the path of economic stability.  
In my view, this sense of direction can be provided in three steps: first, in the case of Greece, 
a strong and credible programme, negotiated between the Commission, the ECB, IMF and 
the  Greek  government.  Second,  the  support  I  have  mentioned  that  will  avoid  the 
materialisation of financial risks for the euro area as a whole. And third, a giant step forward 
in  our  own  framework  of  surveillance,  peer  pressure  and  policy  adjustment  within  the 
monetary union.  
Speaking in the presence of Federal President Köhler, who played such a decisive role in 
creating monetary union and in the presence of the former Finance Minister Theo Waigel, the 
father of the Stability and Growth Pact, I must say that I count on the contribution of Germany 
with regard to the third step – the leap forward in policy surveillance and policy adjustment.  
Fiscal adjustment alone will not be sufficient to ensure sustainability. Structural reforms that 
will lead to more balanced growth are also vital to rebuild the resilience of our economies.  
The result must therefore be a renewal of the Stability and Growth Pact and the incorporation 
of  a  framework  of  surveillance  for  national  policies  of  competitiveness.  I  hope  that 
considerable energy will be devoted to this area in this country, so that a central outcome of 
the present demanding episode will be to strengthen the foundations of our monetary union.  
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Europe has reacted with speed, energy and determination in the financial crisis. We have to 
stay on this path. We continue to need wise and sound, rapid and determined action by all 
countries.  
We  need  to  resolutely  improve  the  effectiveness  of  the  peers’  surveillance  of  fiscal  and 
economic policies. The weak points of past multilateral surveillance will be corrected, and the 
Stability and Growth Pact will be reinforced and rigorously applied in its letter and in its spirit. 
It has to spot at an early stage and to correct deviant behaviours. The overall scope of peers’ 
surveillance  should  be  resolutely  broadened  to  include  the  competitiveness  as  well  as 
structural reforms of individual countries, so as to maintain healthy and sustainable growth as 
the ECB has constantly asked for during the past year.  
In doing so we will pave the way for a European economy which will have a higher level of 
growth potential, and which will be prosperous, stable and resilient.  
The introduction of the single currency represents the greatest achievement to date in the 
history  of  European  integration  –  a  process  that  has  ensured  six  decades  of  peace  and 
prosperity in Europe.  
Countries that share a common currency share a common destiny.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 59/2010 
 5
