Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Expanding further understanding of Islamic finance 
Welcoming remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 
INCEIF's (The Global University in Islamic Finance) Public Lecture by Dr Abbas Mirakhor, the 
First Holder of INCEIF Chair of Islamic Finance, Kuala Lumpur, 29 January 2010. 
 It is my great pleasure to welcome you to the INCEIF's Inaugural Public Lecture by Dr Abbas 
Mirakhor, a distinguished scholar and the first holder of the INCEIF Chair of Islamic Finance. 
The  INCEIF  Public  Lecture  Series  aims  to  provide  a  forum  for  promoting  intellectual 
engagement  to  discuss  the  issues,  developments  and  challenges  in  the  area  of  Islamic 
finance.  
The global financial crisis that has dominated the headlines across the world for more than 
two years has brought to the forefront the fundamental issues in the international financial 
system  that  need  to  be  addressed.  Now,  as  the  growth  prospect  resumes,  the  debate  is 
focussed on the priorities and direction needed to reshape the post crisis world to ensure that 
the recovery will be sustainable.  
While Islamic finance has demonstrated its resilience during this period, the industry is now 
entering  into  an  environment  that  is  fundamentally  different  in  this  post  crisis  era.  The 
international financial reform agenda will result in new structures, standards and regulatory 
regimes for the global financial industry. Greater financial inter-linkages and integration will 
also  require  greater  cooperation  and  collaboration  in  the  endeavour  to  preserve  global 
financial stability.  
In this environment, the foundations for the sustainability for Islamic finance as a competitive 
form of financial intermediation will need to continue to be strengthened. Efforts are therefore 
being  focussed  on  the  further  development  of  Islamic  financial  markets,  the  financial 
infrastructure,  research  and  development  to  support  innovation,  and  enhancing  the  legal, 
regulatory and supervisory framework. In addition, the adoption of the relevant advances in 
technology and the development of human capital are also key to support the development 
of Islamic finance. The ongoing efforts in these areas are aimed towards enhancing further 
the  resilience  of  Islamic  finance  which  would  in  turn  enhance  its  potential  to  contribute 
towards global financial stability and the prospects for global growth. Indeed, the topic of the 
INCEIF's Public Lecture today, “Paradigm Change in Shaping the Future of Islamic Finance” 
is  timely  for  us  to  deliberate  and  reflect  on  the  issues  confronting  Islamic  finance  moving 
forward.  
We are indeed honoured today to have Dr Abbas Mirakhor. Dr Abbas joins INCEIF following 
a  long  and  distinguished  career  as  an  economist  and  academician  with  considerable 
contribution  in  the  field  of  Islamic  economics,  finance  and  banking.  Dr  Abbas  started  his 
academic career in 1968 with University of Alabama, in the United States of America as a 
Professor of Economics and later at the Florida Institute of Technology. In 1984, he joined 
the IMF in Washington DC as an economist before serving as the organisation's Executive 
Director and Dean of its Executive Board. He completed his term at the IMF in 2008. 
Dr  Abbas  is  also  the  recipient  of  several  awards  from  several  governments  and  from  the 
Islamic Development Bank, he received the Annual Prize for Research in Islamic Economics 
in recognition of his service in advancing the knowledge in Islamic finance. He has published 
books  and  research  articles  on  a  wide  range  of  areas  including  microeconomic  theory, 
mathematical economics and Islamic economics. 
During his tenure at INCEIF, Dr. Abbas will also engage in research and consultancy in on 
Islamic  finance,  including  guiding  academic  research  and  supervising  dissertations  and 
theses of INCEIF students. He will also present lectures abroad organised by INCEIF as part 
of the efforts to strengthen the international alliances that have been established with INCEIF 
BIS Review 9/2010 
 
1
from other centres of learning in other parts of the world. His appointment as the inaugural 
holder  of  INCEIF  Chair  of  Islamic  Finance  would  certainly  give  INCEIF  the  opportunity  to 
raise its capacity to become a world class learning institution dedicated to Islamic Finance. 
Dr Abbas valuable knowledge and insights and his extensive experience in both academia 
and at the IMF, will benefit and enhance the knowledge and expertise of INCEIF graduates 
as well as the academia and financial community. 
Since its establishment in 2006, INCEIF has grown from strength to strength and has been 
recording  a  steady  increase  in  the  number  of  students  for  its  three  programmes,  the 
Chartered Islamic Finance Professional or the CIFP, Masters in Islamic Finance and PhD in 
Islamic  Finance.  The  first  batch  of CIFP  graduates  received  their  scrolls  in  February  2009 
and  all  32  have  gained  employment  or  have  continued  their  studies  further.  This  year, 
INCEIF will see the first batch of Masters in Islamic Finance graduate and next year will see 
the first batch of students to graduate from the PhD programme. This is indeed a significant 
milestone for INCEIF that is achieved in such a short period of time. 
As the Chancellor of INCEIF, it is my hope that the setting up of the INCEIF Chair of Islamic 
Finance will contribute to the development of expertise of the academic faculty and students 
at INCEIF in addition to expanding further understanding of Islamic Finance by the financial 
community. Please join me in welcoming Dr Abbas Mirakhor to deliver his lecture. 
2 
 
BIS Review 9/2010
