Christian Noyer: Banking regulation and the financing of the economy 
Introductory speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of 
the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  to  the  Paris-Europlace 
Forum, New York, 26 April 2010. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to be here in New York and address the audience of this Paris-
Europlace  Forum.  As  always,  the  forum  is  an  opportunity  for  sharing  experiences  and 
perspectives.  As  we  make  progress  in  our  efforts  to  strengthen  financial  regulation,  such 
discussions are very valuable for confronting views and making sure that we are on the right 
track. 
To  some  extent,  the  ultimate  aim  of  financial  regulation  has  to  do  with  financing  the  real 
economy.  Sound  regulation  should  enable  the  stable  provision  of  financial  services  to 
economic agents as they strive to finance their activities. This is why I would like to discuss 
with you a few aspects of the current reforms of financial regulation that are critical in terms 
of the financing of the economy.  
More precisely, in the few minutes I have, I would like to share with you some thoughts on 
three important policy challenges. 
How can we make our financial systems more resilient and therefore capable of financing the 
economy on a long term basis? 
How can we reduce the procyclicality of financial systems?  
How can we address systemic risk? 
Before discussing these topics, let me first set the stage and recall why the current focus on 
enhancing banking regulation is right. 
From an economic viewpoint, banks perform two broad functions. They first perform maturity 
and liquidity transformation. Maturity and liquidity transformation is due to the nature of their 
assets and liabilities: traditional bank assets are rather illiquid and longer term, whereas their 
liabilities  are  more  liquid  and  shorter  term.  Banks  also  perform  a  credit  risk  screening 
function, as they should be well-equipped to assess such risks. 
As  such,  banks  are  central  to  the  financing  of  economic  activity.  Economic  development 
requires  sound  banking  systems.  Indeed,  productive  investment  and,  to  some  extent, 
consumption, which constitute the fuel for growth, require financing in order to be carried out. 
This financing may be obtained through two channels: capital markets or banks. These two 
channels are complementary. But the role of banks is clearly central. This is especially true in 
continental  Europe,  where 
financial 
intermediation. Although US firms rely much more on financial markets, banks play a key role 
here too.  
Admittedly, large companies, which are regularly monitored by rating agencies, may “avoid” 
borrowing  through  banks,  but  we  know  the  limitations  of  extending  this  aspect  of  the 
securitization process, which enables direct market financing, to the financing of small and 
medium-sized enterprises or households. 
Typically, two constraints weight on the supply of credit by banks. The first is a constraint on 
banks’ capital. Prudential rules, by linking the development of banking loans to the level of 
banks’ capital and by weighting the loans according to their risks, create a capital constraint 
that  is  especially  harsh  in  times  of  crisis  when  the  weighting  increases  with  the  risks  and 
when due to accounting rules, which impose marking to market for certain assets, the capital 
base  is  eroded.  The  second  constraint  is  a  liquidity  constraint.  It  is  linked  to  the  ability  of 
financial players to access markets to refinance themselves. When banks cannot refinance 
they  are  responsible 
than  80%  of 
for  more 
BIS Review 57/2010 
 1
their portfolios, they are forced to shed assets and cut back on new credit. The recent crisis 
has featured the combination of these two constraints. 
Let me now turn to the main points I would like to discuss.  
How can we make our financial systems more resilient on a long term basis? 
It is clear that the level and quality of pre crisis capital in the banking system has not been 
adequate  relative  to  the  types  of  losses  that  have  been  experienced  and  that  may  be 
expected to materialize in a broader economic downturn. Larger capital and liquidity buffers 
are necessary, especially for trading activities.  
The  recent  reform  package  of  the  Basel  Committee  will  lead  to  a  much  more  robust  and 
resilient  banking  system  in  the  future,  with  both  a  stronger  capital  and  liquidity  base.  The 
challenge,  now,  is  to  calibrate  and  phase  in  the  new  framework  in  a  way  that  does  not 
impede the recovery and does not contradict our macroeconomic objectives. In the long run, 
we  want  stronger  balance  sheets  in  the  banking  system  but  too  high  capital  requirements 
could have negative effects, reducing loan supply and, paradoxically, fostering risk-taking in 
order to keep a high return on equity. In the immediate future, disorderly deleveraging is one 
of  the  main  downside  risks  to  the  recovery  process.  A  macroeconomic  assessment  of  the 
reforms is underway and will help us strike the optimal balance. The broader point here is 
that  the  proposed  reforms  may  have  significant  macroeconomic  consequences  and  these 
should be factored in when designing and implementing them. 
A critical issue put forward relates to the behavior of banks with respect to the capital buffers 
that they retain on top of the existing minimum. If banks target buffers above the regulatory 
minimum,  which  is  an  endogenous  market  outcome,  they  may  need  to  raise  even  larger 
amounts  of  equity  than  what  can  be  expected  by  just  looking  at  the  current  package.  We 
know from empirical studies that weaker capitalized banks typically exhibit weak loan growth 
compared to other better-capitalized banks. We also know that banks may find it less costly 
to adjust loan volumes and loan pricing than capital, as frictions in the market for bank capital 
make the latter option more expensive. 
While the crisis has clearly had global ramifications, its impact on financial systems has not 
been  uniform  across  the  world.  Financial  structures  differ  greatly  between  countries  and 
there needs to be scope for different countries to tailor solutions to their circumstances and 
structures,  while,  at  the  same  time,  doing  so  within  a  globally  agreed  framework.  For 
instance,  our  experience  in  France  is  that  our  banks’  universal  model  has  weathered  the 
storm relatively well. It would be a major paradox to put in place rules that would challenge 
such models. 
Finally,  any  regulatory  framework  needs  to  manage  regulatory  arbitrage  and  keep  up  with 
innovation  and  other  forms  of  structural  changes.  For  this,  a  necessary  but  not  sufficient 
condition 
in  coverage  and  consistent  across 
jurisdictions. I am not sure, for instance, that the leverage ratio, if it were to be implemented 
as  a  compulsory  instrument,  would  meet  this  double  test.  Given  existing  accounting 
divergences,  consistency  will  be  very  difficult  to  achieve.  Furthermore,  it  is  likely  to 
encourage migration of credit activities towards other – less regulated – parts of the financial 
system. 
Convergence between accounting standards is a precondition for a consistent implementation 
of some of the prudential reforms discussed by the Basel Committee. It is also essential that 
new prudential standards for banks become truly universal. We should not underestimate the 
difficulties on the road to accounting and regulatory convergence. 
that  standards  be  comprehensive 
is 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2010
How can we reduce the procyclicality of financial systems? 
Our accounting and prudential regimes have increased procyclicality in recent years. This is 
detrimental to a stable flow of credit to the economy. In a mark-to-market environment, asset 
price increases quickly translate into a larger capital base of financial institutions, which, in 
turn, trigger additional demand for assets and a further increase in their prices. A spiral is 
launched. Actually this is a kind of “inverted demand curve” where demand increases with 
prices  and  vice-versa,  possibly  creating  the  conditions  for  deep  and  lasting  financial 
instability. Addressing procyclicality caused by the regulation itself is therefore a priority.  
The first line of defense against procyclicality should be the accounting framework. I strongly 
support the current focus on changing the accounting rules. Reducing the scope of the mark-
to-market approach and moving from an incurred loss model to a forward-looking model is 
essential.  The  ultimate  objective  of  ongoing  negotiations  is  to  create  synergies  between 
prudential and accounting standards.  
Some of the procyclicality can also be trimmed through prudential regulation. Efforts to make 
solvency ratios potentially less procyclical are welcome and should be pursued. In particular, 
those  efforts  aimed  at  imposing  a  measure  of  risks  “through  the  cycle”  are  useful.  Other 
options  to  reduce  some  of  the  procyclicality  through  prudential  standards  include  a  fixed 
buffer or a countercyclical capital buffer. I see clear limitations to the former and challenges 
for the latter. In any case, such mechanisms may not necessarily be cumulative and we may 
have to choose.  
How can we address systemic risk? 
As techniques for managing and allocating risk became more sophisticated, the network of 
counterparties expanded in scale and in complexity. This was clearly a systemic change that 
was properly understood but not fully captured by regulators at the time. 
The  definition  of  systemic  entities  should  rely  on  different  criteria  beyond  size,  such  as 
interconnection, complexity or substitutability, and depend on the context in which the entity 
evolves.  Various  initiatives  to  deal  with  systemic  entities  are  currently  being  discussed, 
including tighter cooperation between supervisors, compulsory actions on banks’ structures 
and, more controversially, additional capital charges and/or taxes and levies. They certainly 
require further thorough analysis. It is essential to avoid threshold effects and never forget 
that risks are continuous in nature, time-varying and state-contingent. 
The  debate  about  systemic  firms  also  echoes  concerns  about  the  activities  and  business 
models of some institutions. The presumption is that smaller and leaner financial institutions 
would  pose  less  risk  to  financial  and  macroeconomic  stability  than  larger  and  more 
diversified ones. Yet, facts suggest that this cannot hold as a general lesson from the crisis. 
Indeed,  the  banks  that  suffered  most  from  the  crisis  were  precisely  those  that  were  more 
specialized, such as investment banks. By contrast, large universal banks, reliant on a large 
deposit base, were able to withstand the shocks comparatively better. 
To deal with systemic risks, there is a lot of merit in taking a closer look at what I would call 
“market options”. To reap the benefits of financial innovation and reduce its risks, we need 
robust  and  resilient  financial  systems  and  infrastructures.  In  this  respect,  concentrating 
systemic  risks  in  central  clearing  counterparties  for  the  most  important  markets  (such  as 
interbank and derivatives markets) may bring us a long way towards reducing them, provided 
these CCPs are properly regulated. In this respect, I think that locating these infrastructures 
in the same area as that of the currency they deal in and allowing them access to central 
bank money are key factors. 
A last option which is currently gaining some international momentum concerns the possible 
taxation of financial institutions and activities. In principle, this idea seems quite appealing. 
However, the diversity of objectives that may be given to such a tax shows that the policy 
BIS Review 57/2010 
 3
debate must be clarified. In a financial crisis prevention perspective, it is aimed at changing 
incentives  and  at  forcing  financial  intermediaries  to  internalize  the  risks  that  their  activities 
generate  for  the  whole  system.  In  a  crisis  management  perspective,  it  should  enable 
governments to recoup the costs of financial bailouts in a systemic crisis. 
My main concerns regarding this issue are twofold. My first point concerns the articulation 
with  regulation.  The  added  value  of  a  tax  over  prudential  regulation  still  remains  to  be 
demonstrated  for  countries,  such  as  France,  that  have  taken  advantage  of  an  effective 
regulatory and supervisory framework and in which public interventions in the financial sector 
have entailed no net costs to the government. My second point concerns the mitigation of 
moral hazard. We absolutely have to avoid situations in which the payment of taxes or levies 
is understood as a de facto bailout policy insurance. In this respect, the allocation of the tax 
to  a  resolution  fund  or  to  the  general  budget  does  not  enable  public  authorities  to  totally 
remove such a risk.  
Against  this  background,  I  think  that  an  adequate,  median  way  would  be  to  extend  the 
mandate of National Deposit Guarantee Schemes to early intervention tools and resolution 
powers.  Moreover,  we  should  build  on  the  experience  gained  from  ex  ante  risk-sensitive 
premiums, which seem to be very important for mitigating moral hazard.  
Most  of  these  remarks have  focused  on  the  major  and  vital  incentive to  enhance financial 
regulation. Let me conclude by looking into the future. A macro-prudential policy framework 
could provide further room for manoeuvre. Indeed, the crisis has illustrated the necessity to 
have a wider spectrum when designing financial regulation. We should also not forget that 
financial  intermediaries  are  primarily  tools  to  promote  a  stable  financing  for  the  economy. 
That said, in practice, developing a well-articulated macro-prudential policy framework raises 
some challenges. I trust that the benefits of addressing them are worth the impressive hard 
work currently underway. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2010
