Axel A Weber: Macroeconomic imbalances in the European Monetary 
Union – causes and policy challenges 
Speech  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
Kangaroo-Group/EPIC lunch, Strasbourg, 22 September 2010. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
First, I would like to thank you for your invitation. It is a pleasure to be here, and I am looking 
forward  to  discussing  the  problem  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  in  European  Monetary 
Union  (EMU)  with  you.  Intra-EMU  divergencies  and  the  resulting  imbalances  in  current 
account positions are not a new phenomenon. In fact, they have existed since the beginning 
of the monetary union. However, in the pre-crisis years the associated problems were partly 
masked by strong global economic expansion and the continuing integration within the euro 
area. It was the financial crisis that revealed the structural nature of the divergencies, and 
they are now a prominent and controversial issue in public debate. 
In  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  provide  a  brief  overview  of  the  causes  of  the  intra-EMU 
divergencies and imbalances. Having laid the groundwork, I would then like to discuss what 
policy options we have in dealing with the imbalances. 
2. 
Causes of macroeconomic imbalances in EMU 
Diverging current accounts are not per se a problem … 
2.1 
The public debate on divergencies within EMU focuses on the current account positions of 
member  states;  let  us  take  a  look  at  them  first.  Some  member  states  such  as  Germany, 
Austria or the Netherlands have persistent current account surpluses. Other countries such 
as Portugal, Spain, Greece or Ireland show persistent current account deficits. In principle, a 
current account surplus or deficit reflects saving or borrowing at the national level. And, as 
for  individuals,  there  is  no  reason  why  economies  as  a  whole  should  not  save  or  borrow. 
Consequently, there is no reason for current accounts to be balanced in equilibrium. 
A  current  account  surplus  or  deficit  reflects  a  discrepancy  between  domestic  savings  and 
investment.  Such  a  discrepancy  is  not  necessarily  a  bad  thing.  Consider  the  following 
examples: countries with an ageing population usually save more than they invest as they 
face  declining  domestic  investment  opportunities.  Hence,  they  have  temporary  current 
account  surpluses.  At  the  same  time,  countries  that  are  catching  up  on  economic 
development  usually  invest  more  than  they  save  as  they  have  ample  investment 
opportunities but are usually short of capital. As a consequence, they run temporary current 
account deficits. The common feature in both these cases is that the current account serves 
to  smooth  consumption  over  time,  and  thereby  raising  welfare.  Thus,  it  has  an  inherent 
intertemporal dimension. 
As  a  result  of  the  relationships  I  have  just  sketched,  capital  flows  from  countries  with 
relatively large savings to countries with relatively high investment. In EMU this flow of capital 
was  increased  by  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  There  were  two  reasons  for  this.  First, 
exchange  rate  risk  was  eliminated,  making  cross-border  investments  less  risky.  Second, 
country  default  risks  were  increasingly  perceived  as  converging  towards  a  relatively  low 
level. According to theory, the intra-EMU capital flows should reverse  once investments in 
deficit countries start to pay off. However, in reality, diverging current account positions might 
also reflect underlying distortions – this was the case in EMU. 
BIS Review 122/2010 
 1
… but proved problematic in EMU 
2.2 
The  main  problem  for  member  states  with  current  account  deficits  was  that  the  inflow  of 
capital  was  not  always  allocated  efficiently.  In  Spain  and  Ireland  it  went  into  booming  real 
estate  markets,  in  Greece  it  funded  high  government  deficits  and  in  Portugal  it  supported 
private consumption. This allocation spurred internal demand and, owing to inflexible labour 
markets, wages increased more than productivity. This, in turn, reduced the competitiveness 
of the countries in question. As a consequence, imports increased, exports dwindled and the 
current account deficit grew further. 
Although these imbalances have domestic roots, the associated problems are not confined to 
the  national  level.  Given  spill-over  effects  in  the  closely  integrated  euro-area  financial 
markets, they are also a problem for other member states and for the monetary union as a 
whole.  The debt  crisis  in  the  first  half  of  this  year  was  a  case  in  point.  Its  external  effects 
mean the problem of divergencies and imbalances in EMU has to be solved. What are the 
policy options? 
Policy options 
3. 
A major dispute regarding policy options is the question of which group of countries has to 
adjust. In an asymmetrical approach only the deficit countries would act while a symmetrical 
approach would require economic policy in both deficit and surplus countries to adjust. As I 
just  argued,  the  deeper  causes  of  the  imbalances  are  domestic  factors  within  the  deficit 
countries. Hence, it is mainly incumbent on them to act. A number of structural reforms are 
necessary to enhance the competitiveness of domestic companies by increasing productivity 
and keeping costs in check. At the same time, the deficit countries have to increase labour 
market flexibility and consolidate government budgets. In the end, domestic absorption will 
have to return to a sustainable level. 
Proponents of a symmetrical approach say that surplus countries must also act. They claim 
that  these  countries  have  to  boost  domestic  demand  and,  consequently,  imports  by  using 
fiscal  policy  stimulus.  It  is  also  argued  that  surplus  countries  should  raise  wages,  which 
would further increase domestic demand and at the same time reduce their competitiveness. 
However, when taking a closer look at these proposals, it becomes apparent that they are 
based on invalid assumptions. 
To demand measures that would boost imports neglects the fact that trade flows are highly 
diversified. Given the current trade structure, an increase in German imports by 10% would 
in  Spain,  Portugal  and  Greece  by  a  mere 
improve 
0.25 percentage  point.  The  current  account  balance 
improve  by 
1 percentage point. The proposal of raising wages to support domestic demand and reduce 
competitiveness  does  not  only  neglect  that  wages  are  not  a  political  control  variable. 
Moreover, simulation studies show that the effects would be confined almost entirely to the 
home economy in the form of changes in employment. Finally, the argument that fiscal policy 
should  be  used  to  stimulate  internal  demand  and  imports  overlooks  the  fact  that  public 
finances in surplus countries are also strained and that ambitious consolidation efforts are 
required in these economies as well to restore the sustainability of public budgets. 
When  looking  at  the  international  discussion,  we  must  also  bear  in  mind  that  the  current 
account surpluses of China and, for instance, Germany are of a different nature – Germany 
does not manage its exchange rate nor does it impose capital controls. Nevertheless, what I 
just said does not imply that there is no need for reforms in surplus countries. Germany, for 
example,  would  benefit  from  more  flexible  labour  markets  and  deregulated  services  and 
product  markets.  Improvements  to  the  education  system  would  also  raise  the  economic 
potential. But these measures will not ease the need for adjustment in deficit countries. 
the  current  account  balance 
Ireland  would 
in 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2010
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me summarise my speech. The large current account imbalances 
in EMU are mainly due to structural domestic imbalances in deficit countries. Given spillover 
effects in integrated euro-area financial markets, the imbalances are a serious strain on the 
monetary union as a whole. They must therefore be corrected. 
The  relevant  reform  agenda  has  to  centre  on  deficit  countries.  They  will  have  to  align 
demand and potential output more closely and, at the same time, consolidate government 
budgets.  Compensatory  measures  by  surplus  countries  would  neither  adequately  address 
the problem nor would they bring notable relief to deficit economies. 
What  can  European  policymakers  contribute?  In  the  long  run,  procedures  to  ensure  fiscal 
policy commitment will have to be strengthened, for example by enhancing the Stability and 
Growth  Pact.  More  effective  macroeconomic  surveillance  and  the  development  of  a  crisis 
resolution mechanism would, at least in the medium term, also be helpful. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 122/2010 
 3
