V K Sharma: Launch of the Financial Literacy Project in Karnataka 
Welcome address by Mr V K Sharma, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
joint  function  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  and  Government  of  Karnataka  on  the 
Financial Literacy Project in Karnataka, Bangalore, 22 March 2010. 
 1. 
On this momentous occasion of the launching of the project on Financial Literacy in 
Karnataka,  it  is  my  honour  and  privilege  to  extend  a  very  warm  and  hearty  welcome  to 
Respected Dr Subbarao, Governor, Reserve Bank of India. I also extend a hearty welcome 
to Shri S. V. Ranganath, Chief Secretary, Govt. of Karnataka, Smt. Shyamala Gopinath, Smt. 
Usha Thorat, Dr. K. C. Chakrabarty and Dr. Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governors, RBI, Principal 
Secretaries of the Govt. of Karnataka. I also take this opportunity to welcome the Chairmen 
and Managing Directors of all banks, all distinguished invitees and guests, Chairman, SLBC, 
Karnataka,  and  other  senior  officials  of  the  State  Government,  Education  Department 
officials,  senior  officials  of  banks,  Chairmen  of  Regional  Rural  Banks,  Lead  District 
Managers, prize-winning students and their proud parents, other students hailing from semi-
urban and rural areas and the members of the print & electronic media.  
2. 
Three  important  events  have  been  scheduled  for  this  afternoon.  These  events, 
which  are  jointly  hosted  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and  Government  of  Karnataka, 
comprise  release  of  textbooks  containing  material  on  Financial  Education  in  school 
curriculum,  distribution  of  prizes  to  the  winners  of  the  State-wide  Quiz  Competitions  and 
launching of Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) Scheme in Karnataka. 
3. 
The  background  to  this  momentous  event  was  the  decision  taken,  during  the 
meeting of the respected Governor with Hon’ble Chief Minister of Karnataka, on May 14, 2009 
to launch a pilot programme on Financial Literacy in Karnataka in association with the State 
Government.  The  programme  envisaged  introducing  financial  literacy  in  the  curriculum  of 
schools  and  colleges  in  the  State  of  Karnataka.  Subsequently,  at  a  high  Level  meeting 
between  Shri  Sudhakar  Rao,  the  then  Chief  Secretary,  Government  of  Karnataka  and 
Smt. Usha  Thorat,  Deputy  Governor,  RBI,  it  was  decided  that  revision  of  syllabus  and 
content of textbooks for classes V, VII, VIII and IX would be carried out for the academic year 
2010–11.  Accordingly,  the  content  for  the  proposed  curriculum  change  was  developed  by 
RBI  and  formally  handed  over  by  the  Reserve  Bank  Governor  to  the  Chief  Secretary, 
Government  of  Karnataka  on  September  22,  2009  during  the  Outreach  Programme 
organized in Doddabelavangala village in Bengaluru Rural district. I am happy to inform you 
that  the  textbooks  incorporating  the  content  provided  by  RBI  have  since  been  printed  and 
made available by the Government of Karnataka.  
4. 
Another  significant  decision  taken  during  the  meeting  of  the  respected  Governor 
with the Hon’ble Chief Minister of Karnataka on May 14, 2009 was that steps would be taken 
to  make  Financial  Literacy  part  of  non-formal  education.  As  a  follow  up  to  this  decision, 
State-wide  Quiz  competitions  covering  the  schools,  and  PU  colleges  in  all  the  blocks  and 
districts of the State, were held in association with Government of Karnataka, SLBC and the 
Lead  Banks.  The  literature  developed  by  RBI  under  “Raju  and  Money  Kumar”  series  and 
other material prepared on features of genuine currency notes, etc. were used for conduct of 
the  Quiz  competitions  in  both  English  and  Kannada.  RBI,  Bangalore,  printed  around 
8.80 lakh booklets for distribution to the targeted schools/colleges through the Lead District 
Managers  and  Deputy  Directors  of  the  Education  Department.  The  block  and  district  level 
Quiz competitions culminated in the State Level Quiz Competitions. I am pleased to inform 
this august audience that distinguished dignitaries sitting on the dais will give away the prizes 
to the winners of the State Level Quiz Competition. 
BIS Review 40/2010 
 1
Finally,  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  Electronic  Benefit  Transfer  (EBT) 
5.  
Scheme  which  is  formally  being  launched  today  by  Chief  Secretary,  Shri  S.V.  Ranganath. 
This  was  a  sequel  to  Governor’s  meeting  with  senior  officials  of  the  State  Government, 
commercial  banks  and  financial  institutions  represented  in  Karnataka  on  May  14,  2009, 
where it was decided that all issues relating to implementation shall be resolved to facilitate 
its implementation in the State. Accordingly, steps were taken to implement the scheme as a 
pilot in Bellary, Chitradurga and Gulbarga districts under “One district-multiple banks” model 
for  routing  payments  through  “no  frills”  accounts,  or  other  bank  accounts,  under  Mahatma 
Gandhi  Rural  Employment  Guarantee  Programme  and  Social  Security  Pensions schemes. 
Such account-holders will be issued biometric smart cards with individual IDs. Later on, the 
Government of Karnataka identified three other districts viz. Chamarajanagar, Mandya and 
Dharwad for implementation of the scheme under “One district- one bank” model. This entire 
initiative is being planned and executed in co-ordination with the State Government, SLBC 
and the respective Lead banks of the above six districts.  
6. 
I am sure that today’s momentous and landmark event would be a watershed in the 
march  of  the  State  of  Karnataka  towards  financial  inclusion  and  inclusive  growth  and 
sustainable prosperity and going forward would pave the way for its replication across the 
entire country. 
7. 
I once again extend my warm welcome to all the dignitaries. My special welcome to 
the young students whose participation would undoubtedly make today’s programme more 
lively, vibrant and enriching. 
Thank you all so very much indeed! 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2010
