Choongsoo Kim: Recovering from the crisis and the policy initiatives 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Choongsoo  Kim,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  Wharton 
Global Forum, Seoul, 29 May 2010. 
 I. 
The global financial crash and the course of recovery 
(Greetings) 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  indeed  delighted  that  so  many  distinguished  experts  from  managerial  and  academic 
circles  at  home  and  abroad  together  with  fellow  alumni  are  gathered  here  today  at  this 
Wharton Global Forum. I count myself privileged to have been asked to deliver this keynote 
speech. 
I intend to speak today about how Korea has confronted the global financial crisis and the 
policy challenges that lie ahead. 
1. 
The outbreak of the global financial crisis 
(Foreign exchange and financial markets) 
In  the  wake  of  Lehman  Brothers’  collapse,  the  Korean  foreign  exchange  and  financial 
markets were thrown into turmoil under the influence of the global credit squeeze.  
The Korean won/US dollar exchange rate increased by a large margin and market interest 
rates in the corporate bond and CP markets and elsewhere rose precipitately. Although the 
loss  in  the  exchange  value  of  the  Korean  won  was  less  than  that  in  the  earlier  foreign 
currency crisis, it was relatively large in scale compared to that of other Asian currencies. 
The  foreign  exchange  and  financial  market  unrest  was  heightened  as  foreign  portfolio 
investment funds were hurriedly pulled out. Over the course of 2008 there was an outflow of 
some 35 trillion won in foreign equity investment funds and the share price index plunged by 
more than 40%.  
Factors making for the fragility of the Korean foreign exchange and financial markets under 
the  impact  of  external  shocks  included  the  sharp  rise  in  short-term  foreign  debt  and  the 
inadequate asset liability management of financial institutions. Total external debt more than 
doubled  after  2006  and  the  ratio  of  short-term  external  debt  surged  from  46%  to  97%. 
Because of high loan-to-deposit ratios, domestic banks’ market risk had increased. 
(The real economy) 
Domestic business activity shrank rapidly as a mood of unease came on top of the global 
credit  crunch,  the  consequent  worldwide  economic  recession,  and  the  worsening  foreign 
exchange  market.  The  subdued  state  of  domestic  demand  in  terms  of  consumption  and 
investment intensified while exports declined abruptly. 
In  Q4  of  2008,  GDP  registered  deeply  negative  growth,  falling  4.5%  quarter  on  quarter 
(annualized rate 16.8%). Economic activities shrank on a much larger scale than countries at 
the epicenters of the financial crisis such as the United States and the Euro-zone. 
BIS Review 105/2010 
 1
2. 
The policy response 
(Monetary policy) 
Seeking to rein in the sharp plunge in economic activity, the Bank of Korea reduced its policy 
rate at an unprecedentedly fast pace. From October 2008 to February 2009, it cut its policy 
rate in a series of six steps, bringing it down by 3.25 percentage points from 5.25% to 2.0%. 
Although the scale in the reduction in the policy rate was less than the United States where 
the economic maelstrom was at its most intense, it was at a similar level to that prevailing in 
the other advanced countries.  
In addition, Korean-won and foreign-currency liquidity was supplied in an active manner to 
alleviate the credit squeeze and bring stability to the foreign exchange markets. Liquidity of 
some 28 trillion won, equivalent to 2.6% of nominal GDP, was supplied in order to restore 
financial market stability. 
Liquidity  support  for  the  financial  markets  as  a  whole  was  stepped  up  by  means  of  open 
market operations including long-term and ad-hoc RP purchases and outright purchases of 
Treasury bonds. Liquidity supply was also expanded to sectors that were suffering because 
of  the  credit  crunch  by  means  of  subscriptions  to  the  Bank  Recapitalization  Fund  and  the 
Bond Market Stabilization Fund. 
A total of USD 26.8 billion in foreign currency liquidity was injected through the use of the 
foreign  currency  reserves  and  the  proceeds  of  currency  swaps  in  the  period  from 
October 2008  until  February  2009.  Notably,  the  scale  of  the  foreign  currency  available  for 
use was greatly expanded by currency swaps with the central banks of major countries. 
(Fiscal policy) 
The government, for its part, operated fiscal policy boldly in order to counter the downturn in 
activity. 
Over the course of 2009, a total of 38.8 trillion won directly or indirectly linked to the financial 
crisis was additionally injected through the disbursement of fiscal funds and tax reductions. 
For example, to avoid the contraction of private consumption becoming protracted, car sales 
tax was temporarily reduced. 
The total scale of the stimulation package, amounting to 3.7% of nominal GDP, was larger 
than that in the USA, the UK and other advanced countries. 
Current state of the economy 
3. 
Domestic economic activity recovered swiftly from the second quarter of last year onwards, 
helped by the easing of the global financial unrest and the pro-active operation of policy. 
For 2009, GDP growth came in at a positive rate of 0.2% year on year. Among the OECD 
member  countries,  apart  from  Korea,  only  two  others,  Poland  and  Australia,  registered 
positive growth in 2009. 
In Q1 this year, GDP growth chalked up high rates of 1.8% quarter on quarter and 7.8% year 
on year as exports and domestic demand continued buoyant.  
Going forward, too, the Korean economy is expected to maintain its solidly-based recovery 
trend led by the private sector. 
The GDP growth rate is projected to rise to 5.2% this year and 4.8% next year. 
Exports  are  continuing  their  double-digit  increase  thanks  to  the  recovery  of  the  world 
economy, and private consumption, similarly, is maintaining its improving trend, bolstered by 
the increase in household incomes and suchlike. 
2 
 BIS Review 105/2010
Facilities investment seems set to increase substantially owing to the upturn in IT activity, but 
construction  investment  remains  lackluster  owing  to  subdued  construction  of  buildings  for 
residential use. 
Employment  conditions  are  improving  along  with  the  recovery  of  business  activity,  but  the 
extent of the improvement remains relatively constrained.  
The scale of the increase of the number of persons in employment over the year is unlikely to 
reach its pre-crisis level of 300,000 persons owing to the weakened employment generation 
capacity of growth and is forecast to stand at around 240,000 persons. 
The rise in the CPI is predicted to stay around the 2 and a half percentage level for some 
time, but to gradually pick up during the latter half of the year owing to the increased demand 
pressure resulting from the recovery of activity. During 2011, the rates of headline inflation 
and core inflation will both exceed 3%.  
The current account is forecast to sustain its underlying surplus trend but the scale of the 
surplus will gradually narrow to USD 10.5 billion this year and to USD 5.5 billion next year. 
The goods account surplus will narrow in scale as import growth outstrips that of exports and 
the  services,  income  and  transfers  account  will  move  more  deeply  into  the  red  owing  to 
sharply increased overseas travel payments. 
The  future  outlook  is  surrounded  by  no  small  degree  of  uncertainty  with  the  opposing 
interplay of upside and downside risks. 
Upside risks are as follows: 
As  private  sector  deleveraging  is  now  in  its  closing  stages  including  the  shift  back  to  an 
increase  in  bank  lending,  global  financial  conditions  return  to  a  normal  state  at  an  early 
stage. 
The growth of the world economy expands amid a more rapid than expected improvement in 
labor market conditions in the US and other major countries. 
And, downside risks are: 
Global financial market unrest recurs in response to the fiscal problems within the Euro-zone 
and China’s tightening of liquidity management. 
The  world  economic  recovery  stalls  out  amid  a  sharp  run-up  in  international  commodity 
prices including that of oil. 
The  recovery  in  business  activity  is  constrained  owing  to  increased  failures  of  domestic 
SMEs. 
Future policy challenges 
II. 
Going forward, economic policy needs to secure and enlarge a stable basis for counteracting 
the possible outbreak of a crisis on the domestic front, complementing the efforts to avoid the 
recurrence of a global financial crisis at an international level. 
Strengthening of international policy cooperation 
1. 
Toward this end, strengthening international policy cooperation constitutes the priority task. 
The world economy has been recovering more rapidly than expected owing to the fact that 
international policy cooperation has been swiftly brought to bear against the global financial 
crisis. 
A  great  contribution  to  this  has  come  from  the  soothing  of  market  uncertainties  by  the 
delivery  of  a  consistent  message  of  recovery  from  the  crisis  by  every  country  around  the 
BIS Review 105/2010 
 3
world and, in addition, from the forestalling of the leakage of the effects of independent policy 
implementation in open economies. 
In future, every country around the world needs to strengthen the basis for global financial 
stability still further through international cooperation. 
Under  the  aegis  of  the  BIS,  discussions  on  proposals  for  policy  cooperation  are  now 
underway  with  the  aim  of  reducing  gaps  in  financial  regulations  among  countries  and  the 
tendency  of  financial  institutions  to  indulge  in  risk-taking  behavior.  Standards  for  financial 
soundness  including  those  relating  to  capital,  leveraging  and  liquidity  are  being  tightened 
with a major focus on systemically important financial institutions. 
Korea proposed placing the construction of a global financial safety net on the official agenda 
at the last G20 global summit meeting. 
In  regard  to  individual  countries,  the  financial  safety  net  now  consists  of  the  IMF  lending 
system (FCL), bilateral currency swaps and the expansion of the foreign exchange holdings. 
However,  in  actual  fact,  it  is  difficult  for  these  arrangements  to  function  in  the  envisaged 
manner because of problematic points such as the stigma effect and the expansion of global 
financial market imbalances. 
For the construction of an effective global financial safety net, it is considered appropriate to 
discuss  these  at  the  G20  level  in  view  of  the  necessity  of  fine  tuning  conflicts  of  interest 
between the advanced countries and the newly emerging market countries with respect to 
international capital movements. The presentation of specific proposals is eagerly awaited at 
the forthcoming Seoul summit in November. 
At the same time, Korea is pushing energetically for financial cooperation and the avoidance 
of a renewed crisis among Asian regional countries through the Chiang Mai Initiative Multi-
lateralization (CMIM). 
On  March  24  this  year,  the  existing  bilateral  CMI  was  expanded  and  enhanced  into  the 
multilateral  CMIM,  putting  in  place  a  financial  stability  facility  able  to  supply  swift  funding 
support. The arrangements for short-term foreign currency liquidity support by way of “mutual 
currency  swaps  between  central  banks”  has  been  converted  into  a  method  of  “uniform 
contract multilateral swaps”. 
The total pot available has been expanded from USD 78 billion to USD 120 billion, of which 
Korea has been allocated USD 19.2 billion with a corresponding withdrawal facility. 
Heightening macro prudential stability 
2. 
Heightening macro prudential stability constitutes the second policy challenge. 
In the aftermath of the global financial crisis the importance of macro-prudential policy has 
been greatly elevated. 
It has been a fundamental experience that the macro prudential risk to the future financial 
system has been overlooked, including that from the expansion of credit and a run up in real 
estate  prices  under  price  stability.  Owing  to  the  development  of  financial  derivatives 
products, the mutual linkages between financial institutions had grown closer and this made 
tackling risk generation and its expansion to the financial system as a whole solely by micro 
prudential regulation and supervision a difficult proposition. 
Recently the USA, the UK, and other jurisdictions have witnessed lively discussion on the re-
organization of the macro prudential policy framework. 
While there has been an emphasis on multi-lateral cooperation on financial policy including 
the government, the central bank and the supervisory agency, the importance of the central 
bank’s financial stability role has also been emphasized. 
4 
 BIS Review 105/2010
The  rationale  is  this:  the  central  bank  maintains  close  linkages  with  financial  market 
participants and is also well placed to pick up on financial system strains at an early stage. 
Additionally, it traditionally carries out the role of the lender of the last resort role at times of 
financial crisis. 
Even though the central bank strives for financial stability, this is not seen as conflicting with 
price stability. 
Considering that financial system unrest generally means that the transmission channels of 
monetary policy are not working as they should, financial stability is a precondition for a price 
stability. 
The  central  bank’s  expansion  of  liquidity  supply  in  order  to  contain  the  crisis  is  also 
consistent with price stability in that deflation and disinflation may be generated at times of 
financial crisis. 
On the other hand, financial crises are mainly provoked by excessive liquidity supply, and so 
the  central  bank  needs  to  expand  its  liquidity  adjustment  tool-kit  to  carry  out  its  financial 
stability function efficiently. 
In  consideration  of  discussions  on  the  organizational  structure  in  major  countries,  Korea 
needs  to  establish  a  macro  prudential  policy  framework  with  a  view  to  heightening  its 
financial crisis response capacity. 
Strengthening the economic fabric 
3. 
The third challenge is to strengthen the economic fabric so as to minimize the impact on the 
real economy of external shocks such as the eruption of a financial crisis. 
Growth  potential  should  be  enhanced  by  cultivating  industries  offering  new  growth 
momentum while the structural adjustment of existing firms should be driven forward without 
delay or error. 
(Drive for corporate restructuring) 
The  thoroughgoing  corporate  structural  adjustment  undertaken  following  the  1997  Asian 
foreign  currency  crisis  has  contributed  greatly  to  Korea’s  swift  recovery  from  the  global 
financial crisis. 
Firms’ financial structures were greatly improved, helped by the turnaround, exit or sale of 
distressed  firms  and  the  tightening  of  accounting  standards  to  heighten  management 
transparency. Corporate debt ratios in manufacturing were slashed from 396% at year-end 
1997 to 98% at year-end 2007 and there was a rise in the equity capital ratio from 20% to 
51% over the same period. 
Meanwhile,  firms’  further  structural  adjustment  has  been  delayed  in  the  course  of  the 
response to the global financial crisis. 
Instead of the number of firms in default shrinking, there was a big increase in the number of 
firms  with  an  interest  coverage  ratio  less  than  unity  owing  to  the  promotion  of  various 
emergency  support  measures  including  the  government’s  fast  track  support  for  SMEs  and 
increased credit guarantee ceilings. 
Since the Korean economy has largely shaken off the influence of the global financial crisis, 
the drive for the restructuring of firms should in future be carried out in a normal manner at 
their own initiative based on the market mechanism. 
Systematic  improvement  efforts  should  be  redoubled  so  that  the  market  mechanism  can 
work properly by reducing the barriers to new entry and exit for firms. Government support 
should be limited to start-ups that have just entered the market so as to block the continued 
existence of firms that are dependent upon rent-seeking behavior. 
BIS Review 105/2010 
 5
(Expanding growth potential) 
Given that overcoming the financial crisis ultimately hinges upon the sustaining of growth, it 
is an essential task for policy to foster industries that offer future growth momentum. 
Most  advanced  countries  and  our  developing  country  rivals  are  also  pressing  ahead  with 
similar types of growth strategies. 
Considering Korea’s stage of economic development and its changing demographic structure 
including the ageing of the population, there is little to be gained by continuing to follow a 
growth strategy relying on the expansion of inputs of capital and labor.  
In the early stages of economic development, labor intensive industries take the lion’s share 
because the quantitative expansion of factors of production is quite simple while growth is 
driven by investment in capital goods for the enlargement of production capacity. 
When the economy enters the mature stage, there are limits to the extent to which growth 
can  be  generated  by  the  quantitative  expansion  of  capital  owing  to  restrictions  on  further 
inputs of labor. Growth is then led by the enhancement of productivity based on technological 
advances. 
For fresh growth momentum, we must look to green technology industries such as renewable 
energy,  industries  incorporating  leading-edge  technologies  including  broadcasting  and 
communications, and high value-added services including global healthcare. 
the 
Closing words 
III. 
Despite  the  fiscal  problems  of  Southern  European  countries  acting  as  a  source  of  global 
financial  market  turmoil,  the  global  economy  now  appears  to  be  breaking  free  from  the 
influence of the financial crisis.  
Consequently  countries  around  the  world  are  now  seeking  exit  strategies  for  the 
unconventional  policy  tools  that  were  mobilized  in  the  course  of  surmounting  the  crisis.  In 
view  of  differences  in  the  state  of  their  economies,  the  timing  and  sequencing  of  exit 
strategies will vary from country to country, but it is vital to maintain a fundamental spirit of 
policy cooperation as exemplified by information sharing. 
In the case of Korea, the foreign currency crisis in late 1997 was overcome by bold corporate 
restructuring  under 
fundamental  principles  of  market  opening  and  economic 
liberalization. Similarly, Korea is held up as the country that has most swiftly recovered from 
the recent financial crisis.  
This  Wednesday,  the  OECD  predicted  that  the  Korean  economy  would  grow  at  a  rate  of 
5.8% for the year as a whole. This puts the country second only to Turkey (6.8%) among its 
members.  
Going forward, it is crucial to encourage principles of economic liberalization, openness and 
free trade so as to promote world economic prosperity, while trying to ward off a repetition of 
the global financial crisis. 
As the chair country of the G20, advocating principles of liberalization and openness, Korea 
will  do  its  utmost  to  ensure  that  discussions  concerning  the  global  financial  safety  net 
achieve specific and tangible outcomes. 
Drawing my remarks to a close, I hope that at this meeting all of you have been able to gain 
valuable information about the Korean economy and engage in lively exchanges of views. 
Thank you very much for listening so attentively. 
6 
 BIS Review 105/2010
