Glenn Stevens: Monetary policy and the regions 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Foodbowl 
Unlimited Forum Business luncheon, Shepparton, 20 September 2010. 
 Thank you for the invitation to come to Shepparton. No one knew, when the invitation was 
issued almost a year ago, that you would be battling floodwaters just a couple of weeks prior 
to today. It is good to see the recovery already well advanced.  
In the global economy, recovery from the effects of a different kind of deluge – a man-made 
one – has been under way for a while. Progress has been quite varied, however, and the 
outlook is uncertain just now. I will give an update on those matters today. 
It  also  seems  a  fitting  occasion  to  talk  about  “monetary  policy  and  the  regions”,  since  a 
question we are often asked is how we take account of differing economic conditions across 
the country in the setting of monetary policy. I will offer some perspectives on the issues that 
arise  when  we  have  one  policy  instrument  for  a  fairly  diverse  economy.  The  essential 
message  here  is  that  such  diversity  matters,  but  is  often  not  as  pronounced  as  people 
assume, because all the parts of the economy are ultimately connected. Things that affect 
one sector tend to have spillover effects elsewhere. Furthermore, economies have a certain 
capacity to adjust to differing conditions. In Australia this works reasonably well.  
Current economic conditions 
The  global  economy  continues  to  present  a  mixed  picture.  In  the  Asian  region,  most 
countries have well and truly recovered from a downturn that occurred in late 2008 and the 
first few months of 2009. The main exception is Japan. In the bulk of cases, economies are 
much closer to their potential output paths now than they were a year ago and policies are 
moving  to  less  expansionary  settings.  As  a  result,  over  the  year  ahead  the  growth  in  the 
Asian region is unlikely to be as rapid as over the year to mid 2010, when the “v-shaped” 
recovery was in full swing. Similar comments could probably be made about Latin America. 
In Europe, the German economy has been powering ahead this year, reaping the benefits of 
many  years of attention to containing costs and building productivity. But other continental 
economies are not as strong, and some are in the grip of a very painful adjustment to a world 
of  constricted  private  credit  and  limits  to  budgetary  flexibility.  In  the  United  States  an 
expansion has been under way for some time, but seems lately to have been losing a bit of 
steam and growth has recently not been robust enough to reduce high unemployment.  
In Australia, growth has been quite solid over the past year, unemployment is relatively low, 
and inflation has, for the moment, declined. In fact, growth trends have been favourable over 
several years now in comparison with many other economies. 
The charts below, comparing trends in Australia’s real GDP per capita with that of several 
countries,  are  illustrative.  Of  course  we  cannot  match  the  extent  of  growth  in  China  –  a 
country where living standards are rapidly increasing in a process of “catch up” to the higher 
levels  of  high-income  countries  (Graph  1).  But  it  is  clear  that  compared  with  the  US  or 
Europe,  or  Japan,  Australia’s  per  capita  output  and  income  has  done  pretty  well  over  the 
past several years (Graph 2). 
BIS Review 119/2010 
 1
Graph 1 
Graph 2 
  The task ahead, then, is to seek as far as possible to continue a solid trend like this, through 
various  challenges  which  lie  ahead.  The  future  is  of  course  unknowable,  and  economic 
forecasts unfortunately are not very reliable. But we have no option but to try to form a view 
of how things will probably unfold. 
2 
 BIS Review 119/2010
We think the global economy will record reasonable growth over the coming year, though not 
as strong as the past year (a strength that, incidentally, surprised most observers). We think 
Australia’s terms of trade, after reaching a 60-year high in the current quarter, will probably 
decline a bit, but remain high. We expect that this high level of relative export prices will add 
to  incomes  and  spending,  even  as  the  stimulative  effects  of  earlier  low  interest  rates  and 
budgetary  measures  continue  to  unwind.  We  expect,  and  indications  from  businesses  are 
that they do as well, that resource sector investment will rise further – as we experience the 
largest minerals and energy boom since the late 19th century. Even with continued caution 
by households, that probably means that overall growth, which has been at about trend over 
the past year, will increase in 2011 to something above trend. We think that means that the 
fall in inflation over the past two years won’t go much further.  
Of  course  that  central  forecast  could  turn  out  to  be  wrong.  Something  could  turn  up  
– internationally or at home – that produces some other outcome. We spend a fair bit of time 
thinking about what such things could be. Possible candidates might be a return to economic 
contraction  in  the  United  States,  or  a  bigger  than  expected  slowdown  in  China,  or  the 
resumption  of  financial  turmoil  that  abruptly  curtails  access  to  capital  markets  for  banks 
around  the  world  and  damages  confidence  generally.  But  if  downside  possibilities  do  not 
materialise, the task ahead is likely to be one of managing a fairly robust upswing. Part of 
that task will, clearly, fall to monetary policy. 
The objectives of monetary policy 
What then are the objectives of monetary policy? Put simply, our job is to preserve the value 
of  money  over  time  and  to  try,  so  far  as  possible,  to  keep  the  economy  near  its  full 
employment potential. Over the long run, these are mutually reinforcing goals, not conflicting 
ones. For the past 17 years the way we have pursued these goals has been to operate a 
medium-term  target  for  CPI  inflation  of  2–3  per  cent,  on  average.  The  “on  average” 
specification allows us to accept short-term fluctuations in inflation – as long as they are only 
short-term – and so avoid the risk of attempting to over-control inflation and in the process 
de-stabilising  the  economy.  But  the  specification  still  requires  us  to  limit  inflation  in  the 
medium term. Over the 17-year period, CPI inflation has averaged 2.5 per cent (excluding 
the  one-time  impact  of  the  GST  in  2000),  and  the  economy  generally  has  exhibited  more 
stability, with real GDP mostly a little closer to trend than it had been in the preceding couple 
of decades. 
How does monetary policy work? 
The Reserve Bank has very effective control over one interest rate – namely the rate that 
applies when one financial institution lends cash overnight to another (hence the label the 
“cash rate”). This rate has a major impact – though not to the exclusion of other forces – on a 
range of short-term market rates. Since the bulk of financing activity in Australia is contracted 
on variable interest rates, that are axiomatically affected by changes in short-term rates, the 
rates paid by borrowers are usually closely affected by cash rate decisions – though other 
factors can impinge as well from time to time. Through this device the Bank can affect the 
relative incentives for saving versus borrowing, and so have an impact on spending on goods 
and  services  and  on  financial  and  “real”  assets.  Because  the  relative  rates  of  return  on 
Australian assets compared with foreign assets are altered when we change interest rates 
here, the exchange rate also moves in response to monetary policy changes (although most 
of the time it is moving in response to a host of other factors as well).  
Often, the expectation of what will happen to the cash rate in the future is just as important 
as, or even more important than, the level of the cash rate today. For this reason what the 
Bank  says  –  or  what  people  think  we  have  said  –  can  be  very  influential  on  markets  and 
BIS Review 119/2010 
 3
behaviour.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  central  bankers  are  usually  so  guarded  in  public 
comments. 
The effects of monetary policy in a diverse economy 
It  is  obvious  even  from  the  above  highly  condensed  description  that  monetary  policy  will 
affect  different  groups  in  different  ways.  For  a  start,  changing  interest  rates  shifts  the 
distribution of income between savers and borrowers. The larger the size of one’s balance 
sheet – either assets or debt – the more likely one is to be affected by a change in rates of 
interest. Someone with no debt and no savings will probably feel little impact – if they feel 
anything at all – of a change in interest rates, at least directly. 
In addition, we only have one set of interest rates for the whole Australian economy; we do 
not  have  different  interest  rates  for  certain  regions  or  industries.  We  set  policy  for  the 
average Australian conditions. A given region or industry may not fully feel the strength or 
weakness in the overall economy to which the Bank is responding with monetary policy. In 
fact  no  region  or  industry  may  be  having  exactly  the  “average”  experience.  It  is  this 
phenomenon that people presumably have in mind when they refer to monetary policy being 
a “blunt instrument”. 
The issue is that it is not possible to have different monetary policies by region or by industry 
within the country, at least not while we are all using one currency and funds are free to flow 
around. Either each area that wanted its own interest rate would also have to have its own 
currency, or there would need to be a draconian set of regulations to prevent savings in one 
region  flowing  to  another  to  be  loaned  out  –  a  sort  of  local  and  regional  equivalent  to  the 
pervasive  capital  controls  which  once  existed  on  international  capital  movements.  Quite 
possibly both of the above might be needed for a comprehensive tailoring of interest rates to 
each set of local conditions. Obviously that is unlikely to be practical. 
Moreover  there  would  be  costs  for  a  region  having  its  own  currency.  It  would  have  to 
establish its own Reserve Bank for a start, and would have to accept additional transactions 
costs for cross-border transactions with other regions, which would probably inhibit trade and 
investment flows with other regions in its own country. Very small currency areas have also 
often got into trouble over the years. These are reasons why many very small countries often 
peg  their  currency  to  that  of  a  larger  neighbour  or  simply  adopt  that  currency  outright. 
Perceived gains from being part of a larger monetary union have continued to attract small 
European  countries  to  the  euro,  even  though  the  membership  conditions  are  fairly 
demanding, as we have recently seen. 
There  is  a  field  of  economics  that  thinks  about  this  set  of  issues.  Apart  from  the  obvious 
criteria  like  language,  culture  and  political  unity,  a  suitable  case  for  a  single  currency  is 
thought to be stronger when: 
 
the forces (“shocks”) that affect a group of regions or countries are fairly similar and 
the way in which the regional economies respond is similar; 
there  is  a  lot  of  trade  between  the  regions  (as  there  usually  is  within  a  single 
country);  
factors  of  production  (labour  and  capital)  flow  fairly  easily  between  the  regions  in 
response to differences in conditions; and/or  
when  other  means  for  responding  to  differences  in  experience  (particularly  fiscal 
transfers) are available.  
   That framework suggests several questions we might ask for Australia and its regions:  
 
 
How different are the shocks by region?  
How flexibly does the economy respond to such differences?  
4 
 BIS Review 119/2010
 What other policy mechanisms are at work to respond?  
And finally, how different, ultimately, are the experiences after these responses have 
occurred?  
Differences across the country 
It is worth observing that not all “shocks” that hit the economy have markedly different effects 
by region or industry. Some of them are fairly widespread in their effect. 
Take the sudden intensification of financial turmoil in September 2008. Confidence slumped 
and  people  began  to  “batten  down  the  hatches”  –  in  just  about  every  industry  and  every 
region  around  the  world  –  more  or  less  simultaneously.  Banks  became  more  cautious  in 
lending – most particularly to the property sector, but generally to almost all borrowers – in 
every country. 
Other  shocks  are  more  particular.  The  one  most  people  would  think  likely  to  have  a 
differential impact across regions would be the big rise in mining prices and associated build-
up in investment that we saw a few years ago, and which has returned over the past year 
and a half. Since the mineral resources are not found in abundance in every region, some 
areas would be expected to receive more of a boost than others. For example in Western 
Australia, mining accounts for a quarter of production; it is only 2 per cent of production in 
Victoria. So it would seem obvious that the impact of an event that increases the demand for 
minerals is likely to see, in time, the output of WA given more of a boost than that of Victoria. 
But as usual, the picture gets more complicated when we think further. The headquarters of 
some major mining companies are in Melbourne. Those companies will be putting additional 
demand on various service providers around the nation – from air travel to consultants, from 
geologists to manufacturers, and so on. The effects of the engineering and construction build 
up for some of the minerals investment will be felt in other regions around the country (and 
indeed also by overseas suppliers). The higher incomes generated from the mineral boom 
will be felt by employees, shareholders (some of whom are overseas) and by governments 
(via various taxes). Depending on how these entities respond to these gains in income, there 
will be subsequent effects on economic activity around the country. It may well still be the 
case  that  the  effects  are  most  obvious  and  most  pronounced  in  WA,  but  there  will  be 
substantial  spillovers  as  the  economy  responds.  Incidentally,  most  data  suggest  that  until 
quite recently economic activity was growing faster in Victoria than in WA. 
So  to  the  second  question,  how  about  the  mobility  of  factors  of  production?  A  remarkable 
feature of some of the remote area mining operations is the way the labour operates on a 
“fly-in, fly-out” basis. Any user of Perth airport can easily attest to this but the “commutes” 
also  occur  from  the  eastern  states.  More  generally,  population  shifts  have  long  been 
occurring  between  the  south-eastern  states  and  the  resource-rich  states.  While  moving  is 
costly, in most analyses I have seen the mobility of the Australian workforce is pretty good – 
people  shift  in  response  to  opportunity.  Capital  is  of  course  highly  mobile,  at  least  at  the 
margin. 
As for other policy mechanisms at work, there are substantial fiscal transfers. The “automatic 
stabilisers” will take more taxes from regions that are doing well, since incomes will be rising 
relatively  quickly,  and  transfer  it  to  areas  doing  less  well  in  the  form  of  welfare  payments. 
Governments can also use discretionary spending or other policies as part of this. Moreover 
there  are  structures  in  place  that  are  deliberately  designed  to  lessen  systematically  the 
differences in outcomes which might otherwise occur. 
Opinions will differ about how effective these have been, and about how effective they should 
be – as recent political events have probably demonstrated. But the general point is that in a 
political federation such as Australia, there are various fiscal transfer mechanisms that act to 
diminish the divergences that might result from differences in initial conditions and exposure 
BIS Review 119/2010 
 5
to economic events. This is likely to be less so in an area which is a monetary union but not a 
political federation. Indeed some economists have long pointed to this as a potential difficulty 
for the euro area in some sets of circumstances, like the ones that exist in Europe at present. 
That said, we are seeing, albeit on a somewhat ad hoc basis, more intra-European transfer 
mechanisms being developed. 
So for Australia, the effects of a “shock”, even if concentrated initially, will tend to be felt more 
generally across the economy over time. The way the economy works will naturally tend to 
help this occur, as will various other policy devices. That is what is supposed to happen in a 
well-functioning, integrated national economy. 
The next question, then, is how different outcomes turn out to be after all these mechanisms 
have responded to the various impacts. Of course differences will remain at the industry level 
– ultimately, it looks likely that the mining sector and the areas that supply it will grow, and 
some other industries will, relatively, get smaller. And at this point, much of the impact of the 
recent resource price changes is yet to be seen. Nonetheless it is still worth examining just 
how different key trends have been to date across regions.  
There are various indicators at a state level and even a regional level. These are of varying 
reliability – sample sizes get pretty small in some cases. Two of the more reliable data sets 
are likely to be the consumer price index and the unemployment rate. It is these, of course, 
that people are probably most interested in as well. 
The CPI is available only for capital cities. Consumer prices in the capital cities have tracked 
remarkably closely (Graph 3) – at least as much as in other single currency areas like the 
United States or the euro area (Graphs 4 and 5). 
Graph 3 
 6 
 BIS Review 119/2010
Graph 4 
Graph 5 
  In  the  case  of  unemployment  rates,  a  fair  bit  of  disaggregated  data  is  available.  Graph  6 
below  shows  the  national  unemployment  rate  and  the  range  across  the  statistical  regions 
measured by the ABS for which there are reasonably reliable continuous time series.1 If we 
                                                 
1  
In general, the most disaggregated data available have been used. However, the “Northern, Far West-North 
Western  and  Central  West”  statistical  region  in  NSW  has  not  been  disaggregated,  as  there  have  been 
instances in the past when the ABS did not publish data for one of its sub-regions. The number of regions 
varies  with  data  availability,  with  two  breaks  in  the  series  when  the  number  of  regions  changed.  From 
November 2007, there are 68 statistical regions. 
BIS Review 119/2010 
 7
weight these unemployment rates by population, the shaded area is where 80 per cent of the 
weighted observations lie. Recent rates of unemployment have been between almost zero in 
the Hunter region (outside of Newcastle) of New South Wales and about 9 per cent in the far 
north  of  Queensland.  Eighty  per  cent  of  the  population  face  unemployment  rates  between 
3 and 7 per cent. 
Graph 6 
Graph 7 
  8 
 BIS Review 119/2010
Also shown is the dispersion at a state level (Graph 7), which enables a comparison with the 
50 states of the United States, and the 16 countries of the euro area (Graphs 8 and 9). 
Graph 8 
Graph 9 
  BIS Review 119/2010 
 9
These comparisons are affected just now by the fact that the US and Europe have had deep 
recessions  and  are  only  in  an  early  stage  of  recovery,  whereas  Australia  had  only  a  mild 
downturn  and  unemployment  has  been  falling  for  about  a  year  now.  As  the  charts  show, 
dispersion of unemployment rates does tend to have a cyclical dimension. 
Nonetheless I think it is reasonable, based on the history shown here, to conclude that, while 
some events can lead to a divergence in economic conditions across Australia, overall these 
differences have not been especially large in recent times compared with those seen in other 
entities  with  whom  we  might  compare  ourselves.  That  is  not  to  say  the  differences  are 
unimportant or immaterial to people’s lives, nor that they could not get larger. Nonetheless 
some perspective as to how large they actually have been is useful. 
How does the reserve bank keep track of different economic performances? 
That  having  been  said,  it  is  important  to  add  that  the  Reserve  Bank  makes  considerable 
efforts to look below the level of national data in its pursuit of a full understanding of what is 
happening on the ground. Over the past decade or so we have put substantial resources into 
a  comprehensive  liaison  program  with  firms,  industry  groups  and  state  and  regional 
government entities. Officers based in every mainland state capital spend much of their time 
talking to people about what is going on. Every month they talk to up to 100 organisations 
around the country. I know that some of our staff visited Shepparton last month and some of 
you may have met them. 
The  purpose  of  this  is  to  help  us  understand  what  is  happening  “at  the  coal  face”  –  the 
conditions that businesses are actually experiencing and the things that concern them. This 
helps give a richer and often more timely understanding of what is going on than the higher-
level  aggregate  data  alone  might  provide.  Talking  to  businesses  about  their  plans  for  the 
future  helps  inform  our  forecasts,  and  has  been  especially  useful  recently  for  building  a 
profile  of  conditions  in different  sectors,  such as  expected  investment  in  the  mining  sector 
over  the  coming  years.  This  is  important  for  our  analysis  of  capacity  in,  for  instance,  the 
mining sector, which affects how we see commodity prices, the terms of trade, the exchange 
rate and exports. 
Conclusion 
As a physically large country, with quite a diverse set of industries, and our largest population 
centres separated by long distances and even living in different climates, Australia is always 
likely to see some differences in economic experience by region. What is remarkable, in fact, 
is that the differences are not, in the end, larger. That they are not is testimony to the degree 
of flexibility within our national economy that has been built up over time, and to the design of 
national  policies  that  aim  to  lessen  the  more  stark  differences  that  might  otherwise  occur. 
Those structures have grown up in the context of a system of a national money. 
Monetary policy is, by design, appropriately a national policy. In conducting it, the Reserve 
Bank devotes considerable attention to finding out and understanding what is happening at 
the regional and industry level. That helps us to maintain an overall set of financial conditions 
that are appropriate for the national economy. But we know that there will always be some 
differences in how changes to monetary policy are felt (though it is not always to be assumed 
that these impacts are necessarily greatest in country areas).  
Monetary  policy  can’t  make  those  differences  disappear.  In  the  end,  however,  if  monetary 
policy can help to deliver reasonable macroeconomic stability, that will offer the best chance 
for any industry, any region, any business or any individual to succeed on their merits. The 
Reserve  Bank,  taking  account  of  all  the  conditions  across  the  various  sectors,  remains 
committed to that goal. 
10 
 BIS Review 119/2010
