Tadao Noda: My answers to the frequently asked questions regarding 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Tadao Noda, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Shiga, 4 March 2010. 
 Introduction 
I was appointed as a member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan in June 2006 after 
having worked mostly at a bank and also at firms in the private sector, for a total of 37 years. 
Thus, my background does not make me a central banker in the strictest sense. However, 
since my appointment as a full-time Bank officer, I am able to draw on my experience in the 
private sector in day-to-day deliberations and discussions on monetary policy and the Bank’s 
operations. 
Today,  in  this  speech,  I  will  present  my  views  by  means  of  answering  frequently  asked 
questions (FAQs) about economic and financial developments and the conduct of monetary 
policy. Broadly speaking, I will discuss the following three FAQs. 
I.  
II.  
III.  
Where is Japan’s economy heading? 
How is the Bank’s monetary policy conducted? 
What is the cause of, and remedy for, the issue of deflation?  
The outlook for Japan’s economy: where is it heading? 
I.  
I will first discuss where Japan’s economy is heading. 
A.  
The current situation: the economy has been picking up, but the momentum 
to support self-sustained recovery is still weak 
Japan’s real GDP growth rate was in the range of 2–3 percent from fiscal 2003 to fiscal 2006, 
but dropped to 1.8 percent in fiscal 2007. In fiscal 2008, economic conditions deteriorated 
substantially and the economy registered negative growth of 3.7 percent. After the failure of 
Lehman Brothers, extreme cautiousness spread in many financial markets and the flow of 
funds necessary for economic activity contracted, rapidly reducing global demand. Demand 
in  Japan  fell  sharply,  mainly  in  leading  industries  –  notably  automobiles,  electronic 
machinery,  and  general  machinery  –  and  the  economy  was  affected  more  heavily  by  the 
global financial crisis than that of the United States, where the crisis started.  
Since the beginning of fiscal 2009, Japan’s economy has been picking up, as shown by the 
relatively  large  growth  in  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  on  a  quarter-on-quarter  basis  for  two 
quarters – the April–June and October–December quarters – although it registered 0 percent 
growth  for  the  July–September  quarter.  Exports  have  been  increasing  due  to  the 
improvement in overseas economies. Private consumption has also been picking up, mainly 
due  to  the  strong  sales  of  some  durable  goods,  namely  automobiles  and  electrical 
appliances, which have been supported by the government’s economic stimulus measures 
that favor energy-efficient products. 
Regarding the outlook for Japan’s economy, it is expected to follow a sustainable recovery 
path  reflecting  improvement  in  overseas  economies,  although  the  recovery  may  not  be 
smooth. 
The  world  economy  decelerated  significantly  following  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in 
September 2008. Currently, however, economic conditions around the world have generally 
BIS Review 47/2010 
 1
continued  to  recover  moderately  due  to  the  effects  of  economic  stimulus  measures  by 
governments  and  inventory  restocking.  The  U.S.  and  European  economies  remain  in  the 
early stages of recovery, but the pace continues to be moderate due to prolonged balance-
sheet adjustments.1 However, economies in Asia, including China, have continued to grow at 
a relatively rapid pace, in line with the improvement in domestic demand. The world economy 
as  a  whole  is  expected  to  continue  recovering  moderately.2  Japan’s  exports  are  likely  to 
continue increasing, reflecting these economic conditions overseas.3 
It  should  be  remembered,  however,  that  the  situation  provides  little  grounds  for  optimism 
because the level of economic activity remains low. Although exports and production have 
continued  to  increase,  their  levels  in  the  January–March  quarter  of  2010,  the  most  recent 
quarter, were 16 percent below their peak levels reached in the January–March quarter of 
2008,  and  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  in  the  October–December  quarter  of  2009  was  also 
6 percent below its peak.4 The low level of economic activity indicates that the levels of firms’ 
profits and production are low and that firms consider their capital stock and employment to 
be  excessive.  Unfortunately,  under  these  circumstances,  firms  need  to  be  cautious  with 
respect to increasing their business fixed investment and employment. Private consumption, 
excluding  durable  goods  consumption  that  has  been  supported  by  the  effects  of  policy 
measures,  is  also  likely  to  remain  sluggish  amid  the  severe  employment  and  income 
situation.  In  other  words,  the  momentum  for  self-sustaining  recovery  in  domestic  private 
demand is still weak. 
Let  me  explain  the  view  of  the  Bank’s  Policy  Board  regarding  the  economic  outlook  as  of 
January  2010.  The  median  of  the  seven  Policy  Board  members’  forecasts  for  real  GDP 
growth was minus 2.5 percent for fiscal 2009, 1.3 percent for fiscal 2010, and 2.1 percent for 
fiscal 2011. In other words, the Bank’s baseline scenario projects that after two consecutive 
years of negative growth in fiscal 2008 and 2009, the economy will return to positive growth 
from fiscal 2010 to fiscal 2011.5 If we regard the level of GDP at its most recent peak marked 
in fiscal 2007 as 100, then the level of GDP is likely to be 94 in fiscal 2009, 95 in fiscal 2010, 
and still only 97 in fiscal 2011. 
                                                 
1   Global structural adjustments, rather than a passing phase of a regular business cycle, lie behind the current 
global  economic  downturn.  During  the  worldwide  boom  after  2002,  various  imbalances  or  excesses  were 
accumulated  on  a  global  scale,  and  the  difficulties  in  adjusting  these  imbalances  are  currently  stifling  the 
global economic recovery. For more details, see the speech “Recent Economic and Financial Developments 
and the Conduct of Monetary Policy” I delivered at a meeting with business leaders in Nagano in July 2009, a 
summary of which is available on the Bank’s web site. 
2   According to the World Economic Outlook released by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in January 2010, 
the year-on-year growth rate of the world economy decelerated to 3.0 percent in 2008, from much higher rates 
of around 5 percent a year between 2002 and 2007. Although the growth rate plunged to minus 0.8 percent in 
2009, the largest negative growth since World War II, it is projected to recover to a positive rate of 3.9 percent 
in 2010 and 4.3 in 2011. 
3   Japan’s exports depend on the situation in overseas economies. As mentioned later, it is highly uncertain as 
to  whether  they  will  continue  recovering.  However,  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and 
Development (OECD) composite leading indicator and the New Orders Index  within the Manufacturing ISM 
Report On Business released by the Institute for Supply Management in the United States, both of which are 
regarded as leading indicators of Japan’s exports, continue to show improvements. I believe that exports are 
likely to continue increasing, at least for the time being. 
4   Comparing  the  recent  levels  of  production,  the  real  GDP  growth  rate,  and  exports  with  those  before  the 
January–March quarter of 2008, they are at the levels reached in the first half of the 2002, 2005, and 2006 
calendar years, respectively. 
5   Every April and October, the Bank releases its Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (the Outlook Report), 
and  in  the  intervening  January  and  July  makes  interim  assessments  of  the  outlook  laid  out  in  the  Outlook 
Report. In the interim assessment made in January 2010, the Policy Board members took the view that growth 
prospects  remain  broadly  unchanged  compared  with  the  Bank’s  projections  presented  in  the  October  2009 
Outlook Report. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2010
Risk factors for Japan’s economy: downside risks have been moderating 
B.  
I  have  explained  the  baseline  scenario  of  the  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy.  I  will  now 
describe  the  risk  factors  or  uncertainties  involved  in  the  scenario  that  warrant  attention. 
Compared with the risk assessment presented in the October 2009 Outlook Report, upside 
and  downside  risks  have  started  to  become  more  balanced  as  a  whole  due  to  the  faster-
than-expected growth in emerging economies. 
Developments in overseas economies 
1.  
Exports  continue  to  be  the  driving  force  behind  Japan’s  economic  recovery,  and  if  the 
improvement in overseas economies is hampered, then the baseline scenario that Japan’s 
economy has picked up and will follow a sustainable recovery path might not be achieved. 
This suggests that the largest risk factor for Japan’s economy may well be developments in 
overseas economies. 
Growth in the U.S. and European economies, the main engine of overseas economies, has 
been dragged down by the situation in the household and banking sectors: households are 
reviewing their balance sheets and enduring firms’ severe employment adjustments, which 
are fundamental factors working to restrain household spending, while banks are reducing 
their lending as they hold impaired assets, which are still expanding, on their balance sheets. 
Situations  such  as  these  might  exert  downward  pressures  on  economic  activity  for  an 
extended period. In addition, there remains the risk that financial activity once again might be 
adversely affected by the sluggish economic activity. 
In  China  and  other  emerging  economies,  where  infrastructure  investment  had  been 
considerable  even  before  the  financial  crisis,  governments’  expansionary  macroeconomic 
policies  introduced  after  the  financial  crisis  have  stimulated  economic  activity  further.  In 
addition,  the  inflow  of  capital  has  become  aggressive  against  the  background  of  global 
investors’ increased appetite for risk-taking in the expectation that the low interest rate policy 
in industrialized countries will continue. The increase in capital inflow has pushed up growth 
in emerging economies through, for example, a rise in asset prices. These factors combined 
have  contributed  to  a  faster-than-expected  recovery  in  emerging  economies.  This  is 
reassuring  in  terms  of  supporting  economic  recovery  in  industrialized  countries  through 
improvement in exports, but there are growing concerns about upside risks such as the rise 
in  overall  prices  and  asset  prices  in  some  emerging  economies.  Moreover,  the  uptrend  in 
commodity  prices  is  continuing,  as  evidenced  by  the  fact  that  West  Texas  Intermediate 
(WTI), the benchmark for crude oil prices, rose to a level more than double the recent low of 
34  U.S.  dollars  per  barrel,  marked  at  the  end  of  2008,  partly  due  to  the  expectation  of 
increased  demand  in  emerging  economies.  This  suggests  that  an  acceleration  of  capital 
inflow to emerging economies is a warning sign of the upside risk. Also demanding attention 
is the possibility that a rapid unwinding of international capital flows might occur in a situation 
where global investors’ expectations change significantly due to certain shocks, and this in 
turn  could  cause  disruptions  in  financial  markets  and  financial  systems.  It  is  therefore 
important, in view of the situation in international capital flows, to carefully examine whether 
there has been growing pressure in the markets for future adjustments that could potentially 
lead to a crisis. 
Effects of policy measures taken worldwide 
2.  
The second risk factor for Japan’s economy is the uncertainty regarding the effects of various 
policy  measures  taken  by  countries  around  the  globe.  Economic  stimulus  measures  by 
governments have been one of the key driving forces behind the global economic recovery 
achieved so far, but if such policy effects wane before private demand starts a full-fledged 
self-sustaining recovery, it is possible that economic activity will deviate downward from the 
projected growth path. Japan and many industrialized countries are facing the difficult issue 
of  how  to  strike  a  balance  between  improving  fiscal  discipline  and  avoiding  economic 
BIS Review 47/2010 
 3
slowdown, as they suffer from deteriorating fiscal balances and have only limited capacity for 
further government spending.6 
The market has started to direct its attention to the risk that deterioration in fiscal balances 
might  push  up  long-term  interest  rates  and  thereby  reduce  the  effects  of  monetary  policy. 
The so-called sovereign risk is considered to be an extension of that risk. In fact, Greece, 
which is suffering the most serious fiscal deficit problem among the European Union member 
states,  has  experienced  a  sharp  rise  in  long-term  interest  rates.  This  is  an  illuminating 
example of how loss of confidence in fiscal sustainability might trigger a significant negative 
market response. Therefore, it is important that governments clearly show the future course 
of fiscal consolidation, or improvement of fiscal discipline, and steadily proceed with it at an 
appropriate time. 
Possible changes in firms’ medium- to long-term growth expectations  
3.  
The third risk factor for Japan’s economy is the possible changes in firms’ medium- to long-
term expectations of future economic growth. In the baseline scenario that Japan’s economy 
has picked up and will follow a sustainable recovery path, it is projected that firms again will 
increase  spending  on  fixed  investment  and  employment.  If  emerging  economies  are 
expected to maintain sustainable high growth while Japan’s economic growth is increasingly 
expected  to  remain  slow,  there  is  a  risk  that  investment  in  and  lending  to  emerging 
economies might escalate but domestic spending might continue to be suppressed. It is said 
that many firms are considering increasing the share of their overseas production. How such 
a  shift  to  overseas  production  might  affect  not  only  domestic  fixed  investment  and 
employment, but also the structure of imports and exports, warrants careful monitoring.7 
The Bank’s monetary policy: how is it conducted? 
II.  
So far, I have talked about the current situation and the outlook for Japan’s economy. Next, I 
will explain how the Bank has conducted monetary policy. 
Measures taken by the Bank: treading an unprecedented path 
A.  
Since  September  2008,  when  the  turmoil  in  global  financial  markets  and  the  financial 
systems  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  increased  in  severity,  the  Bank  has  undertaken 
various measures. These measures can be broadly divided into the following: (1) reductions 
in  the  policy  interest  rate;  (2)  provision  of  ample  funds;  and  (3)  restoring  the  proper 
functioning of financial markets. 
Reductions in the policy interest rate 
1.  
Let  me  begin  with  interest  rate  policy.  The  Bank  lowered  its  target  for  the  uncollateralized 
overnight  call  rate  –  that  is,  the  policy  rate  –  in  October  and  again  in  December  2008,  to 
                                                 
6  
In his State of the Union address on January 27, 2010, U.S. President Barack Obama proposed a three-year 
freeze on government spending – excluding that related to national security, Medicare, Medicaid, and Social 
Security – and emphasized the need to improve fiscal discipline, saying that “if we don’t take meaningful steps 
to rein in our debt, it could damage our markets, increase the cost of borrowing, and jeopardize our recovery”. 
At the same time, he gave due consideration to avoiding an economic slowdown by making this freeze take 
effect next year, not this year. 
In  cases  where  Japanese  firms  establish  their  production  bases  abroad,  there  would  be  an  increase  in 
Japan’s exports of capital goods and intermediate goods, which are needed for overseas production, and in its 
imports  of  consumer  goods  produced  by  Japanese  firms  abroad.  In  Japan,  although  the  ratio  of  overseas 
production  has  been  rising,  exports  of  intermediate  goods,  mainly  transport  equipment,  have  expanded. 
Recently,  however,  re-imports  of  information  and  communication  electronics  equipment  produced  abroad 
have started to increase. 
BIS Review 47/2010
7  
4 
 0.1 percent, or virtually zero percent. The policy interest rate has remained at that level since 
then. 
Provision of ample funds 
2.  
The  second  measure  involves  the  provision  of  ample  funds.  Financial  market  stability  is  a 
prerequisite for sustainable economic growth. It is therefore vital that a central bank provide 
ample funds to financial markets when they face a situation of extremely tight liquidity. 
Based on such thinking, the Bank has provided ample funds while guiding the policy interest 
rate in an appropriate manner to achieve the targeted level, through various money market 
operations that I will talk about later. Let us look at, for example, the amount outstanding of 
funds provided as at the calendar year-ends of 2007, 2008, and 2009. In 2007, during which 
we saw no particular market disruptions, the provision of funds as at year-end amounted to 
33 trillion yen. In contrast, the amount at the 2008 year-end reached nearly 40 trillion yen, 
reflecting  the  significant  instability  in  financial  markets  following  the  failure  of  Lehman 
Brothers,  or  the  “Lehman  shock”.  The  Bank  has  continued  to  provide  ample  funds  to 
maintain  the  extremely  accommodative  financial  environment,  even  after  financial  markets 
started to regain stability in the middle of 2009. The amount outstanding of funds provided as 
at the 2009 year-end amounted to 42 trillion yen. 
Restoration of the proper functioning of individual financial markets  
3. 
The third measure is aimed at restoring the proper functioning of individual financial markets. 
To this end, the Bank started outright purchases of CP and corporate bonds, both of which 
are unprecedented and exceptional measures for a central bank, from January and March 
2009, respectively. These measures were effective in restoring the functioning of the CP and 
corporate  bond  markets  while  markedly  improving  their  issuing  conditions.8  Given  that  the 
purpose to restore market functioning had been achieved, these measures were completed 
at the end of 2009. Issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds have remained favorable. 
Selection of policy measures: examining the positive and negative effects  
B.  
So far, I have outlined the measures taken by the Bank. Next, I will try to explain an issue 
about  which  I  am  often  questioned,  namely,  what  are  the  determinants  the  Bank  deems 
important  when  making  monetary  policy  decisions,  or  more  specifically,  when  choosing 
which measures to take? 
The Bank has been aggressive in its decision to take exceptional measures in response to 
the  sharp  economic  downturn  and  malfunctioning  of  some  financial  markets  after  the 
Lehman shock. At the same time, however, it has been cautious in deciding on measures 
that potentially could hurt Japan’s economy. In the deliberation process, I take great care, 
just as in corporate management, to carefully examine from a long-term perspective both the 
positive  and  negative  effects  of  various  policies,  and  select  the  optimum  measures  for 
Japan’s economy. 
                                                 
8   Outright purchases of corporate financing instruments such as CP and corporate bonds to facilitate corporate 
financing should be regarded as exceptional measures for a central bank, for the following reasons. First, they 
involve  directly  shouldering  a  greater  degree  of  individual  private  firms’  credit  risk  and,  consequently,  a 
relatively high probability of incurring losses that will ultimately be borne by the taxpayer. And second, they 
carry  the  risk  of  damaging  the  financial  health  of  the  Bank  and  ultimately  undermining  confidence  in  the 
currency and monetary policy. The Bank nevertheless decided to introduce such exceptional measures, with 
the conditions that the measures be temporary until the market functions again, and that upper limits to total 
purchases be set. 
BIS Review 47/2010 
 5
C.  
Reduction of interest rates on term instruments: the most effective way to 
support the economy 
The Bank’s policy rate is the uncollateralized overnight call rate. Since the Lehman shock, 
however, I have attached importance to the reduction of longer-term interest rates – that is, 
interest rates on term instruments. This is because corporate and household loans in many 
cases are based on these rates and, thus, I believe the most effective way to support the 
economy  is  to  lower  them.  The  Bank  introduced  a  new  means  of  providing  the  money 
markets  with  ample  longer-term  funds  with  three-month  maturity  at  a  fixed  rate  of 
0.1 percent,  which  is  equivalent  to  the  policy  rate  –  namely,  a  special  funds-supplying 
operation to facilitate corporate financing, and a fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against 
pooled  collateral.9  Interest  rates  on  term  instruments  by  nature  are  not  suitable  as  target 
policy  rates  with  specific  figures10;  however,  stabilizing  such  rates  at  low  levels  has  been 
effective in pushing down the interest rate burden for the country’s economic activity. 
D.  
Outright purchases of Japanese Government Bonds (JGBs): the risk of a rise 
in long-term interest rates warrants attention 
As an example of the policy measure to which possible negative side effects require careful 
attention,  I  would  like  to  put  forward  the  case  of  outright  purchases  of  JGBs.  The  Bank 
conducts  its  monetary  policy  through  market  operations  –  providing  funds  to,  and/or 
absorbing  them  from,  financial  markets  on  a  daily  basis.  At  the  same  time,  as  part  of  its 
objective  of  supplying  ample  funds,  the  Bank  purchases  21.6  trillion  yen  worth  of  JGBs  a 
year so as to reduce the burden of day-to-day  short-term operations by steadily supplying 
long-term funds. 
Will the Bank further increase outright purchases of JGBs as a means of monetary easing? 
This  is  another  question  that  I  am  often  asked.  It  is  necessary  to  consider  the  risk  that 
outright purchases might be misinterpreted as a means of facilitating government financing 
by monetizing public debt. This could cause adverse side effects, such as a rise in long-term 
interest rates that diverge from the outlook for economic activity. The benchmark long-term 
rate in Japan has been stable in the range of 1.0–1.5 percent, although the country’s ratio of 
public  debt  to  GDP  is  the  highest  among  industrialized  countries.11  However,  there  is  no 
guarantee that Japan will be able to continue to increase public debt over the long run while 
                                                 
9   The Bank introduced the special funds-supplying operation to facilitate corporate financing and the fixed-rate 
funds-supplying  operation  against  pooled  collateral  in  January  and  December  2009,  respectively.  Both 
operations  provide  longer-term  funds  with  three-month  maturity  at  a  fixed  rate  of  0.1  percent,  which  is 
equivalent to the policy rate. These operations differ over the range of eligible collateral: that eligible for the 
former operation is limited to corporate debt, as it aims to facilitate corporate financing, while in the latter case, 
the  Bank  accepts  collateral  that  includes  Japanese  government  securities.  The  former  operation  will  be 
completed at the end of March 2010, in view of the improvement in firms’ funding conditions and of the Bank’s 
intention to expand operation schemes by accepting a wider range of collateral. 
10   LIBOR  and  TIBOR  are  reference  rates  offered  by  reporting  banks  and  are  not  the  actual  rates  applied  to 
transactions;  therefore,  they  sometimes  fall  short  of  being  adequate  market  indicators.  For  details,  see 
“BOX 4: London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR)” in the January 2010 issue of the Financial Markets Report, 
which is available on the Bank’s web site. 
11   According to the OECD Economic Outlook published in November 2009 (No. 86), the ratio of government debt 
to GDP projected for 2009 was 189.3 percent in Japan, far exceeding that of the United States (83.9 percent), 
the United Kingdom (71.0 percent), and Greece (114.9 percent), with the average of the OECD countries at 
90.0 percent. Meanwhile, the rating agency Standard & Poor’s downgraded its outlook for Japan’s sovereign 
AA ratings from “stable” to “negative”. The IMF, in its Global Financial Stability Report Market Update released 
in  January  2010,  cited  Japan  and  the  United  Kingdom  as  countries  under  growing  market  pressure  for  an 
increase in their government debt issuance, as evidenced by the widening of sovereign credit default swap 
(CDS) spreads. 
6 
 BIS Review 47/2010
maintaining long-term rates at the current low levels.12 As I have mentioned when explaining 
the second risk factor for Japan’s economy, a rise in long-term interest rates is a major risk 
faced by many industrialized countries. It is important to bear in mind that, when the Federal 
Reserve  and  the  Bank  of  England  started  outright  purchases  of  government  securities  in 
2009, long-term interest rates in both economies soared after a temporary initial fall.13 The 
Bank  will  continue  purchasing  JGBs  in  order  to  ensure  provision  of  long-term  funds,  while 
making clear that the purchases are in no way intended for government financing.14 
E.  
The positive and negative effects of providing ample funds: alleviating market 
anxiety while maintaining market functioning 
Regarding the provision of liquidity to financial markets, it is also necessary to consider both 
the positive and negative effects. As I mentioned earlier, the Bank has continued to supply 
ample  funds.  However,  even  in  such  a  situation,  the  Bank  frequently  has  been  asked 
whether it will resume the quantitative easing policy15 it adopted in the past, and whether it 
will expand the size of its balance sheet. 
I  evaluate  the  positive  effects  of  quantitative  easing  as  follows:  it  is  effective  in  alleviating 
market  anxiety  and  stabilizing  financial  markets  when  the  financial  system  is  under  great 
strain, as was the case when the policy was adopted in Japan in 2001. But its effects are 
significantly  limited  in  terms  of  stimulating  the  spending  activities  of  economic  entities  and 
raising the level of prices. Regarding the size of a central bank’s balance sheet, I consider 
the  expansion  of  reserves  held  at  the  central  bank  to  be  the  by-product  of  various  funds-
supplying operations, and believe the total amount of reserves does not directly indicate the 
degree  of  monetary  easing.16  The  more  important  point  is  how  far  the  massive  amount  of 
                                                 
12   Long-term  interest  rates  in  Japan  are  stable  at  low  levels  in  spite  of  the  extremely  large  government  debt 
outstanding compared with other industrialized countries. This has been attributed to factors unique to Japan’s 
bond market, namely, that there are ample domestic surplus funds backed by high private-sector savings, and 
JGBs are mostly purchased and held by residents in Japan. However, in view of the fiscal burden that will be 
required to support the aging society, it is uncertain whether domestic sources of funds alone might continue 
to assume such a burden. The surplus in household funds is on a downward trend and firms might cease to 
hold surplus funds due to the changes in corporate investment behavior. 
13   For  more  information  concerning  empirical  studies  on,  and  overseas  examples  of,  the  effects  of  outright 
central  bank  purchases  of  government  securities  on  long-term  interest  rates,  see  the  speech  “Recent 
Economic  and  Financial  Developments  and  the  Conduct  of  Monetary  Policy”  I  delivered  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders in Nagano in July 2009, a summary of which is available on the Bank’s web site. Federal 
Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke has repeatedly commented that purchases of Treasury securities were 
not conducted with the aim of targeting a particular interest rate, nor monetizing federal debt. 
14   The Federal Reserve and the Bank of England completed their purchases of long-term government securities 
in October 2009 and January 2010, respectively. 
15   From  March  2001  to  March  2006,  the  main  operating  target  for  the  Bank’s  money  market  operations  was 
changed from a specific interest rate – the uncollateralized overnight call rate – to the amount of funds – the 
total outstanding balance of current accounts held by financial institutions with the Bank which include reserve 
balances. Specifically, the guideline for market operations was set as “The Bank of Japan will conduct money 
market operations, aiming at the outstanding balance of current accounts held at the Bank at around XX trillion 
yen”.  This  type  of  money  market  operations  was  called  a  “quantitative  easing  policy”  because  it  was 
conducted by achieving the target aimed at the financial quantitative indicator. At present, the Bank provides 
ample funds by conducting various operations, setting the operating target not at a quantitative indicator but at 
the policy interest rate. 
16   On  this  point,  the  research  paper  from  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  entitled  “Why  Are  Banks 
Holding  So  Many  Excess  Reserves?”,  written  by  Todd  Keister  and  James  J.  McAndrews,  and  released  in 
December  2009,  concludes  that  “the  liquidity  facilities  and  other  credit  programs  introduced  by  the  Federal 
Reserve in response to the crisis have created, as a by-product, a large quantity of reserves in the banking 
system”;  and  “The  total  quantity  of  reserves  in  the  banking  system  reflects  the  scale  of  the  Fed’s  policy 
initiatives, but conveys no information of the initiatives’ effects on the bank lending or on the economy more 
broadly”. 
BIS Review 47/2010 
 7
funds provided by the Bank to financial institutions is passed on to firms and households – in 
other  words,  to  what  extent  the  policy  has  effects  on  the  increase  in  bank  lending.  This 
depends on firms’ and households’ demand for funds and banks’ lending attitude. Currently, 
the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  bank  lending  is  negative  as  a  result  of  the  sluggish 
demand  for  funds.  Against  this  background,  the  abundant  funds  supplied  by  the  Bank  to 
financial institutions have been accumulating as excess reserves at the Bank, underlining a 
growing sense of an abundance of liquidity. At present, the Bank does not supply funds by 
setting its operating target at the outstanding balance of current accounts, as was the case 
with the past “quantitative easing policy”. The Bank, however, is providing a sufficient amount 
of liquidity to meet market demand, creating a sense of confidence regarding the availability 
of liquidity. Considering this, I believe that the current operations have effects similar to those 
of the “quantitative easing policy” conducted in the past. 
With  regard  to  negative  effects,  it  is  important  to  avoid  impairing  the  proper  functioning  of 
markets. If a central bank’s intervention is excessive and the markets become excessively 
dependent  on  funds  provided  through  the  Bank’s  market  operations,  the  intervention  itself 
may  impair  the  proper  functioning  of  markets,  thereby  defeating  its  intended  purpose.17  In 
this sense, the past “quantitative easing policy” may have had a negative impact on market 
functioning,  because  the  amount  of  funds  provided  by  the  Bank  was  set  as  the  operating 
target.  In  comparison,  the  Bank  provides  the  sufficient  amount  of  liquidity  that  markets 
require, while maintaining their proper functioning. 
The issue of deflation: what is the cause and remedy? 
III.  
Having  discussed  the  Bank’s  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  I  now  turn  to  the  third  topic  for 
today:  the  issue  of  deflation.  I  will  touch  upon  the  current  state  of  prices  in  Japan,  before 
moving on to the cause of and remedy for deflation. 
A.  
Price movements in Japan: deterioration in the supply and demand balance 
exerts downward pressure 
The year-on-year pace of decline in the consumer price index (CPI) excluding fresh food, or 
the core CPI, has been moderating due to the prices of petroleum products, which are lower 
than  their  high  levels  of  a  year  ago.  However,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  decline  in  the  CPI 
excluding food and energy – the core-core CPI, which is said to indicate the underlying trend 
in  prices  –  continues  to  accelerate.18  Households  are  curtailing  spending  due  to  the 
continued  decrease  in  household  income,  and  firms  are  responding  to  this  situation  by 
lowering the retail prices of their goods/services.19 Deterioration in the supply and demand 
balance in the economy as a whole, as well as the fundamental weakness in consumption  
–  except  in  the  case  of  a  small  number  of  certain  durable  goods  –  are  adding  downward 
pressure on the price formation process. 
                                                 
17   In Japan, the quantitative easing policy and zero interest rate policy resulted in a sharp decline in the volume 
of market transactions that did not involve the Bank. This caused a weakening in the infrastructure of money 
markets. More specifically, credit lines  were cut or terminated, the number of fund managers  was reduced, 
and trade expertise suffered a decline in proficiency. Considering the time and money it took to rebuild the 
market  infrastructure  and  increase  market  activity,  it  is  very  important  that  proper  market  functioning  be 
maintained. 
18   The CPI in the Tokyo metropolitan area for February 2010 showed a slight decrease in the number of items 
for which prices declined. However, data on a nationwide basis show a continued increase in the number of 
items for which prices declined. 
19   There has been a gradual increase in the number of firms adopting a strategy to avoid excessive price-cutting 
competition. 
8 
 BIS Review 47/2010
As of January 2010, the median outlook for the core CPI by the seven Policy Board members 
was minus 1.5 percent in fiscal 2009, minus 0.5 percent in fiscal 2010, and minus 0.2 percent 
in  fiscal  2011.  The  members  had  expected  that  the  downward  pressure  on  prices  would 
gradually  diminish  as  the  supply  and  demand  balance  improved  with  the  recovery  in  the 
economy,  but  prices  would  continue  to  decline  –  deflation  would  continue  –  even  in  fiscal 
2011, or the final fiscal year of the projection period.  
One  of  the  problems  with  deflation  is  that  nominal  debt,  wages,  and  interest  rates  do  not 
change in proportion to the decline in the price level, and therefore remain high in real terms. 
As  a  result,  spending  comes  under  pressure  from  several  angles,  adversely  affecting 
economic activity. Given that the pace of improvement in the aggregate supply and demand 
balance  is  expected  to  be  moderate,  it  is  important  to  pay  close  attention  to  future 
developments in the economy and prices. 
The fundamental cause of deflation: lack of demand 
B.  
I will now talk about the cause of deflation. Since the 1990s, inflation rates have been falling 
worldwide, reflecting the substantial decline in costs as planned economies joined the world 
of the market economies. During this worldwide trend, Japan’s inflation rate has been lower 
than that of other industrialized countries since the bubble period in the late 1980s. Until the 
mid-1990s, the high prices in Japan were pushed down by rationalization of the distribution 
system  and  deregulation.  Since  then,  prices  have  continued  to  decline  due  to  various 
additional factors, including: (1) the continuous decline in wages as a result of managers and 
workers  in  Japan  placing  priority  on  maintaining  employment  during  the  adjustment  phase 
following  the  bursting  of  the  economic  bubble;  and  (2)  restrained  demand  reflecting  the 
decline in expectations for future economic growth resulting from the aging and shrinking of 
Japan’s  population.  Ultimately,  these  factors  point  to  the  fundamental  cause  of  deflation  – 
lack of demand. 
Remedy for deflation: unlocking and capturing potential demand  
C.  
It is necessary that we confront and find a way to tackle this fundamental cause of deflation: 
the lack of demand. 
Deflation  cannot  be  solved  just  by  generating  sustainable  demand  that  is  large  enough  to 
close  the  output  gap,  as  the  problem  does  not  lie  solely  on  the  demand  side.  What  is 
important is where to unlock demand and how to capture it on the supply side. Given that the 
output gap has been historically large following the bursting of the global bubble, it would be 
unrealistic to expect that demand will recover to meet the existing supply capacity for goods 
and  services,  as  that  would  mean  a  reemergence  of  a  bubble  economy.  Looking  back  on 
Japan’s  history,  the  economy  has  grown  by  unlocking  and  capturing  potential  demand 
through various efforts and innovations undertaken by firms.20 Besides the rapidly expanding 
demand  in  neighboring  East  Asian  countries21,  potential  demand  in  Japan  is  not 
inconsiderable in areas such as medical and nursing care, environmental conservation, and 
tourism.22 
                                                 
20   Recently, for example, production of certain high-tech products – liquid crystal display (LCD) televisions, light 
emitting diode (LED) products, and solar cell modules – is exceeding levels seen before the Lehman shock. 
21   The number of visitors from China has hit a record high, helped in part by the July 2009 lifting of a ban on 
private tours to Japan, although the total number of foreign tourists is declining. 
22   For example, whereas the average ratio of job offers to applicants in Japan has been substantially below 1, 
that  for  health  and  medical  care,  social  welfare,  and  nursing  care  has  been  above  1.  Actively  working  to 
correct this mismatch will improve the situation in the labor market while at the same time unlocking potential 
demand. 
BIS Review 47/2010 
 9
Taking  policy  actions  to  support  firms’  efforts  to  unlock  and  capture  new  demand  is  also 
important, and in this regard, I believe the top priority is to eliminate uncertainty about the 
future.  For  example,  households  are  said  to  be  restraining  their  spending  in  an  effort  to 
increase savings because of anxiety about the future of social security and medical systems. 
I am particularly concerned about the weak consumption by the younger generation, which is 
a  sure  reflection  of  their  strong  sense  of  insecurity.23  The  success  of  the  child  allowance 
program included in the government’s budget for fiscal 2010, as well as its economic impact 
in  terms  of  the  marginal  propensity  to  consume,  hinge  on  the  extent  to  which  such 
uncertainty is alleviated. 
For Japan, more than any other country, it is of paramount importance to boost productivity 
given that the population has started to decline. Growth in productivity in the manufacturing 
sector  has  been  increasing  since  2000,  but  that  in  the  nonmanufacturing  sector,  which 
accounts for a large share of the economy, has been lackluster. There is no quick solution to 
improving  productivity,  but  a  key  move  is  to  create  actual  demand  by  reallocating  existing 
managerial resources – personnel, production capacity, and money – in such a way as to 
meet potential demand.24 In order to support such efforts, it is necessary to flexibly revise the 
existing  systems  and  frameworks  in  response  to  changes  in  the  economic  environment  at 
home and abroad, while securing a social safety net.  
If  demand  achieves  a  sustained  recovery  throughout  the  economy,  this  will  lead  to  an 
improvement in supply and demand conditions in the labor market. I mentioned earlier that a 
continuous decline in wages is one of the causes of deflation. A sustained recovery in the 
labor market would lead to a rise in nominal wages, thus having a positive effect on prices. 
Moreover,  were economic recovery accompanied by a rise in productivity to continue, real 
wages would increase, leading to higher living standards.  
D. 
Boosting demand and easing monetary conditions: monetary easing is one of 
the necessary conditions to overcome deflation 
The Bank’s statement released on December 18, 2009 shows its strong commitment: “The 
Bank recognizes that it is a critical challenge for Japan’s economy to overcome deflation and 
return to a sustainable growth path with price stability. To this end, the Bank will continue to 
consistently make contributions as central bank. In the conduct of monetary policy, the Bank 
will aim to maintain the extremely accommodative financial environment”. Furthermore, in the 
same statement, regarding the “understanding of medium- to long-term price stability” (the 
level  of  inflation  that  each  Policy  Board  member  understands,  when  conducting  monetary 
policy,  as  being  consistent  with  price  stability  over  the  medium  to  long  term;  hereafter 
“understanding”25),  which  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the 
                                                 
23   According  to  the  Family  Income  and  Expenditure  Survey,  a  breakdown  of  expenditure  by  householder  age 
group shows that, in 2009, people aged 60 years and over increased their spending from the previous year, 
while  spending  by  those  younger  than  60  decreased.  The  younger  the  age  group,  the  larger  the  rate  of 
decline. Furthermore, the results of the Survey of Household Economy show that purchases of durable goods, 
which have been increasing due to the effects of economic stimulus measures, are growing notably among 
people aged 50 and over. 
24   Some  economic  stimulus  measures  taken  since  the  1990s  might  have  blocked  economic  metabolism  and 
hindered productivity improvement by keeping managerial resources in inefficient sectors. For example, as a 
result  of  public  works  projects,  managerial  resources  stayed  in  the  construction  industry,  known  for  its  low 
productivity. 
25   Taking  into  account  the  “understanding”,  the  Bank  assesses  the  economic  and  price  situation  from  “two 
perspectives” and then outlines its thinking on the future conduct of monetary policy. The “first perspective” 
involves assessing the most likely outlook for economic activity and prices through fiscal 2011. The “second 
perspective” assesses the risks considered most relevant to the conduct of monetary policy, including risks 
that have a longer time horizon than the “first perspective”. 
10 
 BIS Review 47/2010
CPI,  the  Bank  made  clear  that  the  Policy  Board  does  not  tolerate  a  year-on-year  rate  of 
change in the CPI equal to or below 0 percent, and that the midpoints of most Policy Board 
members’ “understanding” are around 1 percent.26 
The Bank’s commitment to maintain the extremely accommodative financial environment, as 
well as its clarification of the “understanding”, have had an adequate effect on stabilizing the 
price expectations and shaping the interest rate expectations of market participants, thereby 
helping  to  reduce  interest  rates  on  term  instruments,  which,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  is  the 
Bank’s most effective way to support the economy. 
In summary, maintaining the extremely accommodative financial environment is one of the 
necessary conditions for overcoming deflation. Another is confronting the fundamental cause 
of deflation – that is, the lack of demand – and making steady efforts to unlock and capture 
potential demand, as well as to improve productivity. 
The  Bank  of  Japan  will  maintain  the  extremely  accommodative  financial  environment  to 
underpin  demand  from  the  financial  side.  In  my  view,  action  should  be  taken  swiftly  and 
decisively  when  deemed  necessary,  based  on  an  assessment  of  economic  and  financial 
activity and prices from the “two perspectives”. 
                                                                                                                                                      
In  the  same  December  18  statement,  the  Bank  made  clear  that  “in  order  to  realize  sustainable  economic 
 
growth  with  price  stability,  it  is  necessary  to  make  wide-ranging  assessments  of  risk  factors,  including 
accumulation  of  financial  imbalances  observed  in,  for  example,  asset  prices  and  credit  aggregates”.  This 
recognition is based on the experience of the recent global financial crisis that too much emphasis on price 
developments could result in overlooking other serious risks. This is a reconfirmation of the Bank’s view on the 
importance of assessing risks from the “second perspective”. 
26   The “understanding”, reviewed in April 2009, was expressed in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the 
CPI and fell in the range approximately between 0 and 2 percent, with most Policy Board members’ median 
figures at around 1 percent. 
BIS Review 47/2010 
 11
