Usha Thorat: Financial regulation and financial inclusion – working 
together or at cross-purposes 
Speech  by  Ms  Usha  Thorat,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Tenth  Annual 
International Seminar on Policy Challenges for the Financial Sector, co-hosted by the Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the International Monetary Fund and the World 
Bank, Washington DC, 4 June 2010. 
 1. 
The  case  for  financial  inclusion  is  not  based  on  the  principle  of  equity  alone  – 
access to affordable banking services is required for inclusive growth with stability. Achieving 
financial inclusion in a country like India with a large and diverse population with significant 
segments in rural and unorganised sectors requires a high level of penetration by the formal 
financial system. Even in areas that are well covered by banks, there are sections of society 
excluded from the banking system. Political and social stability also drive financial inclusion. 
In  the  recent  period,  in countries like  India,  government  has  been  encouraging  opening  of 
bank accounts by providing government benefits through such accounts. ICT solutions have 
made such initiatives possible at relatively low cost. 
2. 
Financial inclusion is not merely providing reliable access to an efficient payments 
system.  Many  discussions  –  especially  in  the  context  of  mobile  phone-led  retail  payments 
system – seem to focus on this aspect of financial inclusion. Financial inclusion is also not 
just micro finance. Financial inclusion represents reliable access to affordable savings, loans, 
remittances  and  insurance  services.  We  in  India  believe  that  financial  inclusion  primarily 
implies access to a bank account backed by deposit insurance, access to affordable credit 
and the payments system. 
The key question is – What is the kind of regulatory and supervisory mechanism that 
3. 
will  ensure  that  the  formal  financial  system  delivers  affordable  financial  services  to  the 
excluded  population  with  greater  efficiency  without  compromising  on  acceptable  levels  of 
safety and reliability? 
4. 
the Indian experience, I am going to focus on the following issues: 
 
Hence, in this session on financial inclusion and financial regulation, drawing from 
Is there a trade off between financial inclusion and financial regulation – are they at 
cross purposes or do they work in tandem? 
What  have  been  the  various  regulatory  interventions  in  India  to  facilitate  financial 
inclusion? 
What  has  been  the  approach  to  regulating  non-bank  intermediaries  and  entities 
providing innovative and low cost solutions for financial inclusion? 
What are the important consumer protection issues in the area of financial inclusion 
and what has been the regulatory approach? 
   Financial regulation and financial inclusion – is there a trade off? 
5. 
The last year was the platinum jubilee year of the Reserve Bank of India. As part of 
the  celebrations,  several  outreach  activities  were  undertaken  at  remote  unbanked  areas. 
During these visits, we were often asked by the people about “fly by night” operators who 
had  vanished  with  their  life  savings.  The  distress  to  people  and  the  damage  to  public 
confidence  caused  by  such  unscrupulous  operators  are  something  that  no  regulator  can 
ignore.  Sound  and  reliable  deposit  taking  entities,  backed  by  deposit  insurance  for  small 
deposits, accessible to all are, therefore, essential for financial inclusion. It is not possible to 
BIS Review 77/2010 
 1
have  sound  and  reliable  deposit  taking  entities  and  a  deposit  insurance  system  without 
financial  regulation.  Hence,  in  my  mind,  there  is  no  doubt  that  financial  regulation  and 
financial inclusion work together – the former is a must for the latter. 
6. 
Another reason why there is convergence between financial regulation and financial 
inclusion  is  that  if  financial  intermediaries  have  to  deliver  affordable  services  they  need  to 
take advantage of technology and economies of scale – this requires them to grow to some 
optimal  size.  Such  growth  is  not  possible  without  capital.  Investors  and  lenders  are 
comfortable  with  providing  more  funds  only  if  such  entities  are  regulated.  This  was  our 
experience with Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs) wanting to be registered as non-banking 
financial  companies  with  RBI,  but  wanted  us  to  reduce  the  minimum  capital  requirement 
below what we had prescribed for non banking financial companies in general. We allowed 
them  to  register,  on  fulfilling  the  prescribed  norms,  without  lowering  the  minimum  capital 
requirement.  The  dramatic  growth  of  MFIs  in  the  recent  period  on  account  of  support  by 
lenders and investors owes in no small measure to their being registered with RBI as Non 
Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs). 
7. 
More recently, in the context of the global crisis, it is observed that undue reliance 
on borrowed funds can be a source of risk and a more stable retail base of deposits is good 
for  both  the  bottom  line  and  resilience.  Similarly,  a  diversified  asset  portfolio  lends  to  less 
volatility in earnings. Thus financial inclusion which can promote such a retail and diversified 
portfolio – in assets and liabilities – also promotes financial stability. 
Regulatory interventions for facilitating financial inclusion 
8. 
In this section, I would like to highlight the various regulatory measures taken by the 
RBI  to  facilitate  financial  inclusion.  The  key  message  here  is  that  the  regulatory  approach 
has  not  compromised  with  prudential  norms  for  deposit  taking  entities.  We  are  of  the  firm 
view that only sound and strong institutions can deliver financial inclusion. Within the overall 
traditional prudential framework, what we have tried to do is to have a system of incentives 
and disincentives that further the financial inclusion objective and while doing so, we have 
tried to balance the degree of the risk with the ability to achieve greater penetration. 
Is small beautiful? 
9. 
Looking  at  the  success  of  credit  unions  and  community  banks  world-wide  in 
providing  financial  services  to  local  communities,  it  could  be  argued  that  smaller  regional 
banks could be the answer for financial inclusion. However, our experience with local entities 
such  as  cooperative  banks,  deposit  taking  non  banking  financial  companies  and  regional 
rural  banks  highlighted  the  risks  of  poor  governance,  connected  lending,  geographic 
concentration leading to vulnerability to natural calamities and downturns. Small entities also 
tend to absorb disproportionate share of supervisory resources. Besides, the adoption of ICT 
solutions  that  are  essential  for  accessing  mainstream  payments  system  requires  larger 
investments  and  these  often  prove  to  be  too  onerous  for  small  entities  and  render  them 
uncompetitive. We have encouraged merger of non viable entities and growth of banks that 
meet regulatory requirements. We have also followed a three tiered regulatory approach – 
“non-Basel”  approach  for  regional  rural  banks  and  rural  cooperatives  with  the  objective  of 
ensuring  positive  net  worth,  “Basel  I”  for  urban  cooperative  banks  and  “Basel  II”  for 
commercial banks. For non banking deposit taking entities, that don’t enjoy deposit insurance 
or offer savings/checking accounts, we have adopted a simpler regulatory framework albeit 
with higher capital ratios.  
Allowing banks to open accounts for Self Help Groups 
10. 
An  important  regulatory  dispensation  that  facilitated  financial  inclusion  was  given  
in  the  early  90s,  when  banks  were  allowed  to  open  savings  accounts  for  Self  Help 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2010
Groups (SHGs),  which  were  neither  registered  nor  regulated.  An  SHG  is  a  group  of  15  to 
20 members  from  very  low  income  families,  usually  women,  which  mobilises  savings  from 
members and uses the pooled funds to give loans to those members who need them, with 
the  interest  rates  on  deposits  and  loans  being  determined  entirely  by  members.  National 
Bank  for  Agriculture  and  Rural  Development  (NABARD)  launched  the  SHG-Bank  Linkage 
Program  in  1992  to  forge  the  synergies  between  formal  financial  system  and  informal 
sectors. Under this programme, banks provide loans to the SHGs against group guarantee 
and the quantum of loan could be several times the deposits placed by such SHGs with the 
banks.  The  recovery  rates  of  such  loans  have  been  good  and  banks  have  found  that  the 
transaction  cost  of  reaching  the  poor  through  SHGs  is  considerably  lower  as  such  cost  is 
borne by the SHG rather than the bank. Interest earned from group members is retained in 
the  group.  The  penetration  achieved  through  SHGs  has  been  very  significant.  As  per 
NABARD’s report on status of microfinance (2008–09), about 86 million poor households are 
covered under the SHG-Bank Linkage program with over 6.1 million saving-linked SHGs and 
4.2 million credit-linked SHGs as on March 31, 2009. 
11. 
The  initial  phase  of  SHG  movement  saw  concentration  of  SHGs  in  the  southern 
parts of the country, but now the SHGs have spread more to the eastern and north eastern 
regions where the extent of financial exclusion is greater. The Government of India has also 
been using the SHGs for subsidy linked credit schemes for the poor. NABARD offers grant 
assistance to NGOs that promote SHGs and link them to banks. 
Mandated priority sector lending 
12. 
Priority  sectors  broadly  include  agriculture  and  allied  activities,  micro  and  small 
enterprises,  education,  housing  and  micro-credit.  All  domestic  commercial  banks  are 
required to allocate 40 per cent of their lending to the priority sectors. For foreign banks, the 
requirement is 32 per cent and export credit is also included in their case. Credit extended by 
banks to SHGs, micro finance institutions, to NBFCs for on-lending to priority sector, and to 
regional rural banks for agriculture and allied activities have been included in the definition of 
priority  sector.  Investments  made  by  banks  in  securitised  assets,  representing  loans  to 
various categories of priority sector which are originated by banks and financial institutions, 
are  also  included  in  priority  sector.  A  bank  can  also  purchase  priority  sector  lending  from 
another bank though participatory notes. Any shortfall in priority sector lending is required to 
be  deposited  in  special  funds  maintained  by  NABARD/SIBDI/NHB,  which  are  used  for 
funding  rural  infrastructure/micro-enterprises/housing  sectors.  As  on  March  31,  2009,  the 
coverage under priority sector was to the tune of 51 million loan accounts. While it could be 
argued that mandated credit distorts allocative efficiency of the banking system, I would like 
to  emphasise  that  no  subvention  is  involved  as  interest  rates  are  deregulated  and  all  the 
usual prudential norms for income recognition, asset classification and provisioning, as also 
standard risk weights are applicable, which ensures that such loans do not add undue risk to 
the bank’s balance sheet. 
Linking branch licensing approvals to penetration in under-banked areas  
13. 
Under the current laws in India, every bank requires a license from RBI for opening 
a branch. This legal requirement has been used as a regulatory tool for furthering financial 
inclusion. Statutory approvals for branch licenses in more lucrative centres are linked to the 
number of branches opened in under-banked districts and States, as also other factors such 
as  fulfilling  priority  sector  obligations,  offering  no  frills  accounts  and  other  parameters  to 
gauge achievements in financial inclusion and in customer service. 
Opening of no frills accounts by banks 
14. 
Taking the view that access to a bank account can be considered a public good, in 
2005, RBI directed all banks to offer at all branches the facility of “no frills” account to any 
BIS Review 77/2010 
 3
person  desirous  of  opening  such  an  account.  These  accounts  have  nil  or  low  minimum 
balances  and  charges,  and  have  limited  facilities.  Since  2005,  over  39  million  no  frills 
accounts  have  been  opened.  However,  there  are  certain  barriers  that  inhibit  the  active 
operation  of  such  accounts  like  the  time  and cost involved  in  reaching  the  nearest  branch 
where the accounts have been opened. Hence, we have, as will be described below allowed 
branchless banking to ensure that these accounts are more accessible to their holders.  
KYC regulations for small value clients and transactions 
15. 
One  significant  area,  where  we  found  that  regulation  could  be  a  challenge  in 
achieving greater financial inclusion is in regard to Know Your Customer (KYC) norms. In a 
country where most of the low income and poor people do not have any document of identity 
or proof of address it is very difficult to have KYC norms that insist on such documents. At 
the same time, to ensure integrity of financial transactions, it is necessary that each customer 
is properly identified before accounts are opened. In rural areas, this is addressed by asking 
for identification by local officials and requiring a photograph of the account holder. Drives for 
financial inclusion locally have been achieved through active involvement of government in 
the identification process. In big towns and cities where there are a large number of migrants 
who do not have any documents, fulfilling KYC norms and opening a bank account continue 
to be a challenge. As a proportional regulatory dispensation having regard to the degree of 
risk, RBI has simpler KYC norms for small value accounts where the balances in the account 
do not exceed about $1000 and where the annual credits in the account do not exceed about 
$4000.  There  are  similar  dispensations  for  walk-in  clients  for  small  remittances  and 
payments not exceeding US$1,000.  
16. 
Recently, the Government of India constituted the Unique Identification Authority of 
India  (UIDAI)  to  issue  a  Unique  Identification  Number  (UID)  with  biometric  recognition  to 
every  resident  of  the  country.  It  is  expected  that  by  latter  part  of  this  year,  the  UIDAI  will 
begin issuing UIDs and roll out 600 million UIDs in a phased manner by 2014. UID enrolment 
would  be  done  with  the  help  of  State  Government  machinery  and  other  Registrars.  Banks 
could  benefit  by  synchronizing  opening  of  bank  accounts  for  those  who  will  be  enrolled 
through this exercise. Government is also looking into the possibility of converting food and 
fertilizer subsidies into cash payments which will flow through bank accounts. This project is 
a unique opportunity to leverage UID, bank accounts and mobile telephony services. Using 
UID for fulfilling KYC for small value accounts will facilitate financial inclusion. In a country 
with  deep  penetration  of  mobile  phones,  this  is  expected  to  give  a  boost  to  the  financial 
inclusion while ensuring the integrity of financial transactions. 
Branchless banking  
With 600,000 villages in the country, we realised that it was impossible to provide 
17. 
access to a bank account for every household through branch banking. At the same time, 
electronic banking for such a populace where cash forms the dominant payment mechanism, 
is unlikely to become a reality for quite some time. Keeping in view these ground realities, 
RBI  issued  the  business  correspondent  guidelines  in  2006,  which  paved  the  way  for 
branchless  banking  through  agents.  The  guidelines  allowed,  for  the  first  time,  commercial 
banks  to  offer  simple  savings  loan  and  remittance  products  through  agents,  who  were 
allowed  to  undertake  banking  transactions,  including  “cash  in  cash  out”  transactions  at 
locations close to the customer. Banks were advised as part of risk management to adopt 
ICT solutions including biometric identification of the customer. The agents are required to 
deposit bank’s cash balances beyond certain limits with the bank’s branches by end of day or 
the  next  day.  Initially,  the  regulations  restricted  the  entities  that  could  act  as  business 
correspondents to “not for profit” entities such as NGOs/ cooperatives / post offices etc. This 
was because we were concerned about the risk of reckless pushing of products by agents 
whose sole incentive was earning commission; it was also felt that local community based 
organisations and NGOs had the trust and confidence of the local population. Over the last 
4 
 BIS Review 77/2010
few years, the list of persons who can be appointed as business correspondents has been 
relaxed to include individuals such as retired government officials , school teachers, defence 
personnel  as  also  “for  profit”  local  “mom  and  pop”  shops,  petrol  pump/public  call  office 
operators etc entities that usually deal in cash in the villages. Another regulatory requirement 
was that the business correspondents appointed for direct contact with the customers should 
be within 30 km from a designated base branch of the bank to ensure proper oversight of 
such agents and minimise agency risk. The distance criteria can be increased in consultation 
with  the  district  consultative  committee,  a  forum  for  bankers  and  government  officials  that 
meets  each  quarter.  Initially  there  was  a  restriction  on  the  bank  in  recovering  any  charge 
from the customer for such doorstep service as it was expected that the savings in cost of 
setting up a branch would be sufficient incentive. Subsequently, following a comprehensive 
review of the business correspondent guidelines, we have relaxed this condition and banks 
are now allowed to recover reasonable charges from the customer for providing the service. 
Branchless banking illustrates an area where there have been progressive relaxations of the 
regulations for furthering penetration while ensuring consumer protection. 
Deregulation of interest rates for small loans 
18. 
Currently,  interest  rates  for  loans  up  to  Rs.200000  (about  $4200)  in  the  priority 
sector are capped at the prime lending rates of banks. RBI has taken a decision to free the 
interest rates, which will come into effect from July 1, 2010. Thus, these interest rates would 
soon  stand  deregulated  as  long  as  banks  ensure  that  the  rates  charged  by  them  are 
reasonable  and  transparent.  This  change  in  policy  was  based  on  the  view  that  financial 
inclusion can be viable  and sustainable only if pricing is freed to cover costs even though 
some cross subsidisation is possible.  
Approach towards non-banking entities involved in financial inclusion 
19. 
Non-Banking  entities  can  be  either  non-banking  non-financial  entities  or  non-
banking financial entities. In case of non-banking financial entities, we have had to deal with 
two  issues.  The  first  is  the  question  of  allowing  non-deposit  taking  financial  companies 
registered with the RBI, especially micro finance companies, to provide savings facilities and 
deposit products for their clients. The argument put forth is that these entities are innovative 
and  nimble  footed  and  have  shown  their  ability  to  provide  loan  products  to  the  poor. 
Considering the difficulties is ensuring effective supervision of large number of small deposit 
taking  entities  and  the  constraints  in  extending  deposit  insurance  to  such  entities,  the 
regulatory  approach  in  India  has  been  to  restrict  deposit  taking  activity  to  banks  while 
promoting  the  branchless  banking  model  for  areas  not  served  by  bank  branches.  Hence 
fresh approvals to NBFCs for accepting deposits are not considered, while capital, liquidity 
and leverage requirements have been tightened for those already permitted to do so. 
20. 
The  second  issue  is  that  of  allowing  non  banking  financial  companies  especially 
micro finance companies to act as business correspondents of banks for branchless banking. 
The argument put forward is that this would enable their clients to access insured deposits, 
national  payments  system  and  remittance  services.  There  have  also  been  demands  that 
large “for profit” companies having a wide network of outlets especially in rural areas could 
be  allowed  to  act  as  business  correspondents  of  banks  as  there  could  be  significant 
synergies  if  such  networks  are  leveraged  upon.  This  issue  is  currently  under  examination 
and  in  doing  so  the  possible  risks  such  as  conflicts  of  interest,  co-mingling  of  funds, 
misrepresentation and other agency related risks would need to be weighed against possible 
safeguards for consumer protection.  
21. 
Non-bank non-financial entities have emerged as active players in financial inclusion 
in that they have helped banks in offering customised payments and remittance services to 
their customers based on innovative ICT solutions. Any role enhancement of non-banks to 
become  principals  in  provision  of  financial  services  implies  that  these  non-bank  entities 
BIS Review 77/2010 
 5
would have to be brought under financial regulation and this could inhibit their other activities. 
Combining financial and non-financial business is also something the regulator may not be 
comfortable with as there could be conflicts of interest. Our concerns have also been on the 
access to and the use of float funds by such non-bank entities in the process of providing 
such payments services. Many jurisdictions have dealt with this issue by asking the service 
provider to maintain 100 per cent liquidity against float funds held by them and restricting the 
value of transactions. Whether the escrowed funds/investments will be protected in the event 
of  bankruptcy  of  the  service  provider  depends  on  the  legal  provisions  and  there  could  be 
risks in such arrangements. In addition, there has to be clear regulatory authority over such 
companies. Hence, our preference is to have a bank led system with non bank players as 
partners and service providers, so that regulatory resources are focused on banks. Banks in 
turn  take  responsibility  for  their  partners  and  agents  as  part  of  their  risk  management 
processes.  
22. 
Subsequent to the notification of Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007, the 
payment  services  have  been  opened  up  in  India  for  non-bank  service  providers  also.  The 
broad  regulatory  approach  of  RBI  towards  non-banks  has  been  to  permit  these  entities  to 
provide  payment  services  which  are  fee-based  without  access  to  funds  of  the  customers. 
Indian  regulations  clearly  spell  out  the  role  of  telecom  operators  as  service  providers. 
However, keeping in view the penetration of mobile telephony in the country, they have been 
permitted to enable “m-wallet” facilities up to Rs.5000 (about $ 100) in the interest of small 
retail payments. 
Consumer protection issues 
23. 
Amongst  the  various  objectives  of  regulation,  consumer  protection  should  take 
priority in the context of financial inclusion. In 2005, RBI took the initiative of setting up of the 
Banking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI) in order to ensure that comprehensive 
code of conduct for fair treatment of customers was evolved and adhered to. The BSCBI is 
registered  as  a  separate  society  and  functions  as  an  independent  and  autonomous  body. 
The BCSBI has evolved two voluntary codes – one which is a code of commitment setting 
out minimum standards of banking practices in dealing with individual customers. The other 
is  a  code  of  commitment  to  micro  and  small  enterprises.  Individual  complaints  about  non 
adherence  to  the  code  fall  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Banking  Ombudsmen  who  also 
investigate  individual  complaints  on  non  adherence  to  the  various  RBI  guidelines  on 
customer service. 
24. 
Other areas of consumer protection are related to excessive interest rates and harsh 
recovery  practices.  In  particular  the  high  rates  of  interest  charged  by  non  banking  micro 
finance  companies  have  attracted  attention.  Views  have  been  expressed  that  with  the 
lending to MFIs included in the priority sector, there should be a cap on the interest rates 
charged to the ultimate borrower. Efforts at financial inclusion can be sustained only if the 
delivery  models  are  viable  and  interest  rate  caps  can  be  a  deterrent.  From  a  regulatory 
perspective,  we  emphasise  transparency,  creating  better  awareness,  customer  education 
and effective grievance redressal systems. 
25. 
Financial  literacy  has  to  be  an  integral  part  of  financial  inclusion  and  consumer 
protection. In fact, it should accompany and even precede the provision of financial services. 
Several  countries  have  a  very  clearly  articulated  vision  and  programs  for  financial  literacy 
with initiative from the central banks and regulators. We too have a comprehensive financial 
literacy  program.  At  the  grass  root  level,  financial  literacy  and  grievance  redressal  is  best 
delivered by arranging regular meetings of communities with people’s representatives, local 
officials  and  bankers,  NGOs  and  other  stake  holders.  The  Banking  Ombudsman  for  the 
region  and  the  major  controlling  offices  of  banks  attend  such  meetings  and  perhaps  even 
hold  on-the-spot  conciliation  meetings  for  complaint  redressal.  Ultimately,  responsible 
6 
 BIS Review 77/2010
borrowing facilitated by financial literacy and responsible lending by financial institutions are 
essential for consumer protection and financial stability. 
Summing-up 
30. 
Financial inclusion primarily represents access to a bank account backed by deposit 
insurance,  access  to  affordable  credit  and  the  payments  system.  The  Indian  experience 
demonstrates that financial inclusion can work within the framework of mainstream banking 
within  a  sound  regulatory  framework.  Regulations  have  been  used  to  facilitate  financial 
inclusion  without  subventions  or  compromising  on  prudential  and  financial  integrity  norms. 
Regulations have been proportional to the risks. Innovative solutions like SHG bank linkage, 
branchless  banking  have  been  adopted  after  careful  assessment  of  risks  to  the  banks  as 
also to customers. The preference has been to restrict deposit taking to banks and non-bank 
financial companies are encouraged to focus on innovative approaches to lending under a 
lighter  regulatory  framework,  with  additional  regulations  for  systemically  important  NBFCs 
entities.  Non-banking  non-financial  players  are  encouraged  to  be  partners  and  agents  of 
banks  rather  than  principal  providers  of  financial  services.  Fair  and  transparent  code  of 
conduct enforced through an effective grievance redressal system and facilitated by financial 
literacy  and  education  are  the  cornerstones  for  ensuring  consumer  protection  which  is  an 
overarching objective of financial regulation in the context of financial inclusion  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 77/2010 
 7
