Hu Xiaolian: Exchange rate regime reform and monetary policy 
effectiveness 
Article  by  Ms  Hu  Xiaolian,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  Beijing,  
26 July 2010. 
 The  Chinese  economy  is  growing  rapidly,  and  is  becoming  increasingly  market-based  and 
more  open.  As  a  result,  China  needs  to  deal  with  a  much  more  complicated  economic 
situation.  In  this  context,  the  ability  to  conduct  macroeconomic  management  is  critical  for 
ensuring sound, rapid and sustainable growth, and the effectiveness of monetary policy has 
also  taken  on  greater  importance.  At  the  current  stage  of  development,  China  needs  to 
employ  monetary policy to accommodate four broad objectives, i.e., price stability, growth, 
full  employment  and  balanced  BOP  account.  Exchange  rate  policy  has  played  a  role  in 
achieving 
impact  on  China’s 
competitiveness, trade relations and resources allocation. Therefore, improving the managed 
floating  exchange  rate  regime  and  gradually  enhancing  exchange  rate  flexibility  will  help 
make  monetary  policy  more  flexible  and  effective,  and  strengthen  the  ability  to  conduct 
macroeconomic management. 
these  macroeconomic  objectives. 
It  also  has  an 
I. 
Monetary policy is an important means of macroeconomic management in 
China 
Monetary policy is one of the important means through which China manages the economy. 
Its  effect  is  transmitted  through  the  financial  system,  the  core  of  a  modern  economy.  The 
effect of monetary policy is not limited to one sector or one area. More broadly, it is felt in 
every part of the economy and affects individual economic behaviors at the micro-level. In 
this sense, monetary policy carries more system-wide implications and is more systemically 
important  than  exchange  rate  target.  Monetary  policy  flexibility  and  effectiveness  are 
particularly  important  under  China’s  unique  circumstances.  As  a  big  developing  country 
undergoing reform and transition, China has to deal with complicated and rapidly changing 
economic situation, and its macroeconomic policies are therefore designed to meet multiple 
objectives,  such  as  reform  and  development.  More  specifically,  monetary  policy  also  has 
various  objectives,  including  managing  inflation,  supporting  growth,  promoting  a  balanced 
BOP account, boosting employment and facilitating financial reform. This fact highlights the 
importance of making flexible and effective monetary policies.  
The Chinese economy was put under critical test since the global financial crisis began to 
unfold in the second half of 2008. To deal with the extremely complicated situation both at 
home  and  abroad,  the  Chinese  government  implemented  a  proactive  fiscal  policy  and 
relatively easy monetary policy, and adopted a comprehensive policy package. The economy 
was among the first to recover in the world. In response to the rapidly changing situation, the 
Chinese  government  decided  to  focus  on  making  substantial  progress  in  shifting  the 
development pattern, and make sure that progress in this front is in line with the objective of 
supporting sound and rapid economic development, so that the two facilitate and reinforce 
each  other.  Recently,  in  parallel  with  rapid  recovery,  China  observed  a  rapid  increase  in 
foreign exchange inflows and a substantial rise in liquidity, which remains abundant despite 
of  vigorous  sterilization  efforts.  This  leads  to  potential  risks  of  heightening  inflation 
expectation and asset speculation. In this context, economic policy makers need to carefully 
balance  the  relations  between  supporting  sound  and  rapid  growth,  restructuring  the 
economy, and managing inflationary expectation.  
Historical experiences from many countries show that inflation and inflation management is 
not only an important topic in the study of economics, but also a key issue that affects social 
BIS Review 102/2010 
 1
and political stability. Inflation, as put by Milton Friedman, the Nobel laureate in economics, is 
a dangerous disease that can be fatal and destroy the whole society if unchecked. In China, 
it is the low-income groups, especially over 40 million urban low-income groups and nearly 
100 million migrant workers that will be hit the hardest by inflation. Any mismanagement in 
this  issue  would  undermine  social  justice  and  stability.  For  the  central  bank,  this  means  it 
should  take  preserving  the  value  of  domestic  currency  as  the  primary  responsibility  and 
prevent  risks  of  high  inflation.  As  monetary  policy  proves  to  be  the  most  important  and 
effective  tool  in  managing  inflation,  the  central  bank  should  enhance  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy to ensure price stability and, by doing so, promote economic growth.  
Monetary policy effectiveness has faced challenges in recent years 
II. 
The  independence  and  effectiveness  of  China’s  monetary  policy  has  met  with  serious 
challenges from rapid expansion of RMB supply as a result of foreign exchange purchase. 
Prior to 1993, China ran current account surplus and capital and financial account surplus on 
an alternate basis. The situation changed in 1994 when China began to have twin surplus, 
and intensified following China’s accession to the WTO in 2001, as current account surplus 
widened  markedly  and  became  the  major  contributor  to  BOP  surplus.  In  the  context  of 
relatively stable exchange rate, the expansion of BOP surplus and inflow of foreign exchange 
forced the PBC to passively inject base money via foreign exchange purchase.  
In  recent  years,  the  PBC  has  strengthened  the  capability  of  macroeconomic  management 
according  to  the  overall  arrangements  of  the  central  government  in  line  with  the  country’s 
development strategy. In response to changes in economic and financial circumstances and 
foreign  exchange  flows  both  at  home  and  abroad,  management  of  the  banking  sector 
liquidity  has  become  an  important  part  in  the  PBC’s  monetary  policy  conduct.  Instruments 
such  as  open  market  operations  and  reserve  requirement  ratio  have  been  adopted  to 
sterilize the growth of RMB supply as a result of foreign exchange purchase, and to absorb 
excessive  liquidity  in  the  banking  system.  Nevertheless,  the  root  cause  of  the  liquidity 
problem  has  not  been  solved.  The  RMB  equivalent  to  foreign  exchange  purchase  has 
become  the  major  source  of  base  money  supply  while  central  bank  lending  to  financial 
institutions  accounts  for  a  smaller  share.  This  undermines  the  independence  of  monetary 
policy and makes money supply a more endogenous factor. In recent years, though CPI has 
remained  basically  stable  at  a  fairly  low  level,  broad  price  levels  such  as  PPI  and  asset 
prices such as housing prices have increased significantly. Moreover, the issuance of central 
bank bills and the frequent adjustments of reserve requirement ratio in the banking system 
have also affected the operational behaviour of commercial banks and even the efficiency of 
the financial system. The sterilization cost for the central bank has also been on a rise.  
III. 
A more flexible exchange regime helps enhance the effectiveness of monetary 
policy 
According to the argument of Impossible Trinity, capital and financial account convertibility, 
independent  monetary  policy  and  exchange  rate  stability  cannot  be  achieved  at  the  same 
time. It is feasible for a small and open economy to pursue exchange rate objectives at the 
expense  of  monetary  policy  independence.  The  Hong  Kong  SAR  is  such  an  example  by 
adopting a currency board system, where the Hong Kong dollar is strictly pegged to the U.S. 
dollar and the Hong Kong Monetary Authority follows the Federal Reserve in its adjustment 
of Hong Kong dollar interest rates. As for Singapore, exchange rate instruments, rather than 
interest rates, are used more frequently in macroeconomic management, as exchange rate is 
taken  as  the  intermediate  monetary  policy  target.  China  is  not  a  small  economy.  With  a 
population  of  1.3  billion,  China  cannot  afford  to  lose  monetary  policy  independence  and 
subject itself to economic policies of other countries. Adopting a more flexible exchange rate 
regime  serves  China’s  long-term  interests  as  the  benefits  of  long-term  price  stability  and 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2010
economic restructuring far exceed the cost in reorganizing certain industries and removing 
outdated capacities.  
At present, a more flexible exchange rate regime will help curb inflation and asset bubbles. 
When domestic inflationary pressures are heightened, a stronger domestic currency will help 
bring  down  the  price  of  imports.  The  role  played  by  exchange  rate  in  easing  imported 
inflationary  pressures  is  particularly  important  for  a  country  like  China  that  has  a  robust 
demand to import primary products due to unfavorable resource endowment. 
Economic restructuring and growth pattern upgrade, as urgent tasks of strategic importance, 
cannot be accomplished without persevering efforts. When doing so, it is desirable for China 
to  seek  more  balanced  trade  development.  Price  tools  such  as  exchange  rate  can  be 
adopted  to  adjust  trade  and  BOP  imbalances.  This  will  help  ease  pressure  of  inflows  of 
foreign  exchange  and  rapid  build-up  of  reserves,  promote  sound  and  sustainable 
development, and realize stable and orderly growth of money supply. 
According  to  international  experiences,  a  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  helps  mitigate 
impacts of external shocks and enhance macroeconomic resilience. Financial crises in the 
1990s have shown that a rigid exchange rate regime is vulnerable to speculation and may 
even trigger self-fulfilling currency crisis.  
Stronger  exchange  rate  flexibility  also  helps  improve  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary policy. Since 2005, the RMB exchange rate regime reform that has progressed in a 
self-initiated, gradual and controllable manner has enhanced market players’ awareness to 
adapt  to  exchange  rate  movements  and  made  them  more  responsive  to  market  changes. 
The  money  market  and  foreign  exchange  market  have  developed  both  in  breadth  and  in 
depth. Adapting to more flexible exchange rate, financial institutions have strengthened risk 
management, improved financial services and come up with more product innovation. These 
have helped improve the transmission of monetary policy at the micro and market levels and 
played a positive role in enhancing the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
BIS Review 102/2010 
 3
