Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The road to monetary union in East 
Africa 
Keynote address by Prof Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, 
at  the  validation  workshop  of  the  draft  final  report  of  the  monetary  union  study,  Kampala,  
18–20 January 2010.  
 Hon. Syda Bbumba, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development  
Ambassador Alloys Mulabingwa, Deputy Secretary General of the East African Community  
Distinguished participants  
Ladies and gentlemen 
The purpose of this workshop is to discuss what we, as policymakers in East Africa, have to 
do  to  realise  our  vision  of  East  African  monetary  union.  As  the  Hon.  Minister  of  Finance 
makes  clear  in  her  opening  remarks  to  this  workshop,  the  governments  of  the  five  East 
African  Community  Partner  States  are  committed  to  establishing  a  monetary  union,  to 
complement the East African customs union and the common market. It has already been 
decided, at the 2006 Extraordinary EAC Summit, that the EAC Partner States should move 
expeditiously to establish monetary union.  
Whether or not to pursue a monetary union is, therefore, not an issue for discussion. The 
issue we must address at this workshop is how to achieve the monetary union. We should, 
however, recognise that setting up a monetary union is a very challenging project that will 
require a lot of hard work and careful design. We will need to keep our nerves in the face of 
inevitable  setbacks.  But  I  believe  that  the  project  is  worthwhile  and  once  monetary  union 
comes  to  fruition,  it  will  be  one  of  the  most  important  institutional  foundations  for  the 
economic prosperity of East Africa in the 21st century.  
Why is monetary union essential for the future of East Africa?  
A monetary union is crucial for the future prosperity of East Africa for two reasons. The first 
reason  pertains  to  the  role  which  East  African  economic  integration  will  play  in  spurring 
economic growth and development in this region. The second pertains to how we, as East 
African countries, relate to the rest of the world. 
The need for monetary union can only be understood within the context of regional economic 
integration more broadly. The current drive towards economic integration in the East African 
Community  began  with  the  implementation  of  the  customs  union  in  2005.  This  will  be 
followed by the implementation of the East African common market, beginning in 2010, under 
which there will be free movement of goods, services, labour and capital within East Africa.  
The primary rationale for the monetary union is to reduce the costs and risks of transacting 
business across the national boundaries of those countries which comprise the members of 
the monetary union. For example, monetary union removes the costs of having to transact in 
different currencies and the risk of adverse exchange rate movements for trade within East 
Africa. Monetary union will, therefore, deepen the integration of East African economies and, 
in  doing  so,  enhance  the  benefits  which  can  be  derived  from  the  East  African  common 
market. A well functioning common market in East Africa will stimulate competition and help 
domestic  firms  to  realise  economies  of  scale,  thereby  raising  productivity,  which  will 
strengthen our competitiveness on world markets and raise living standards. Domestic firms, 
which  have  hitherto  concentrated  on  their  domestic  markets,  will  be  forced  to  extend  their 
horizons to the regional market. A larger, more integrated, market will also be much more 
attractive  for  foreign  investment  and  will  help  spur  the  advance  of  our  economies  towards 
“emerging market” status.  
BIS Review 12/2010 
 1
The  global  economy  is  changing,  at  an  ever  increasing  pace.  The  21st  century  global 
economy will be characterised by the emergence of major regional economic blocks, groups 
of countries whose economies are closely integrated, alongside the largest economies such 
as  those  of  China  and  the  United  States.  Multilateral  relationships  between  states  and 
regional economic blocks will play a key role in shaping the institutional rules which will affect 
the development of the global economy and the national economies within it, especially in 
multilateral institutions such as the World Trade Organisation and in international fora. The 
recent  global  economic  crisis  has  vividly  demonstrated  the  importance  of  multilateral 
solutions to economic problems which have a global dimension. 
Small  economies  will  find  it  very  difficult  to  make  their  voice  heard  and  ensure  that  their 
interests are taken into account when decisions which affect the global economy are made, 
unless they are prepared to join together and present a common front. This is a reality which 
the European Union has recognised. It is even more essential for the East African countries, 
with  far  smaller  economies  than  those  of  the  European  Union,  to  conduct  their  economic 
relations  with  the  rest  of  the  world  as  a  single,  united  entity.  Economic  and  monetary 
integration  in  the  East  African  Community  will  amplify  the  influence  which  individual  East 
African countries can exert on the international scene. Monetary union will send a powerful 
signal to the rest of the world that East Africa is united with a single market. It will thus signal 
that East Africa intends to be an important player in the global economy of the 21st century, 
and  that  each  of  the  member  states  is  prepared  to  put  aside  purely  parochial  interests  to 
achieve this.  
The road to monetary union  
Preparations  for  the  monetary  union  started  with  the  formation  of  the  East  African 
Community Monetary Affairs Committee (MAC). The MAC has made important progress in 
the areas of monetary policy coordination and harmonization, financial markets development, 
harmonization  of 
financial  sector  supervision,  payments  systems  development  and 
integration, and statistical harmonization. This is a valuable foundation on which the roadmap 
towards monetary union can be built.  
The road ahead will need to be carefully planned and implemented. We can learn important 
lessons  from  the  experience  of  the  European  Union  in  the  1990s,  some  of  which  are 
highlighted  in  the  study  by  the  team  from  the  European  Central  Bank  that  we  will  be 
discussing  at  this  workshop.  The  monetary  union  project  requires  radical  changes  in 
economic policies backed by reforms to institutions and legal changes. From the standpoint 
of macroeconomic policy, the most critical requirement is the gradual convergence of all the 
East  African  economies  during  the  transition  to  monetary  union,  especially  in  terms  of  the 
synchronisation of the economic (or business) cycles of the different member states. Without 
convergence, a monetary and exchange rate policy which is optimal for one member of the 
monetary union will not be optimal for the others. The greater is the degree of convergence 
of the economies of the member states before the monetary union takes effect, the lower will 
be the subsequent costs of adjustment to macroeconomic shocks which affect the member 
states asymmetrically.  
Monetary and exchange rate policy during the transition  
The most essential policy reform is the progressive locking together of the bilateral exchange 
rates  of  the  five  Partner  States.  This  process  will  begin  by  imposing  bands  within  which 
bilateral exchange rates will be constrained. The bands will then be progressively tightened 
until  the  bilateral  exchange  rates  of  the  East  African  Community  Partner  States  are 
irrevocably fixed as a prelude to the replacement of national currencies with a single regional 
currency. Some sort of external anchor for the exchange rate bands, to a major international 
currency or a basket of currencies, will be needed during the transition.  
2 
 BIS Review 12/2010
For the aligning of national exchange rates to succeed, it will have to be accompanied by an 
alignment  of  monetary  policies  in  all  the  East  African  Community  Partner  States.  This  is 
because, as the East African economies become more financially integrated, with money and 
capital able to flow freely across our common borders, significant differences in interest rates 
between  the  East  African  Community  Partner  States  will  cause  capital  flows  between 
member states which will destabilise their bilateral exchange rates. Hence as we align our 
exchange rates, we will also have to harmonise our monetary policies. This will tend to bring 
about  convergence  in  the  inflation  rates  of  the  Partner  States,  although  each  country’s 
inflation rate will not necessarily be equal to that of all the others.  
I  am  under  no  illusions  that  the  process  of  aligning  our  bilateral  exchange  rates  in  a 
sustainable manner, so that they can eventually be replaced with a single currency, will be 
anything other than very challenging for policymakers. There are important lessons are to be 
learned from the experience of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism in the 1990s, the 
precursor to the Euro. 
Some of you may recall the exchange rate crisis of the ERM in 1992, when the exchange 
rates  of  some  of  the  ERM  members  were  ripped  from  their  bands  by  a  whirlwind  of 
speculation  in  the  foreign  exchange  markets.  I  hope  that  our  colleagues  in  the  European 
Central  Bank  will  be  able  to  provide  useful  advice  on  how  we  can  mitigate  the  risks  of 
experiencing a similar exchange rate crisis during the transition to monetary union in the East 
African Community.  
In  recent  years  the  national  central  banks  of  the  East  African  Community  have  mostly 
pursued  flexible  exchange  rate  policies,  with  only  limited  intervention  in  foreign  exchange 
markets,  mainly  to  dampen  exchange  rate  volatility.  Therefore,  the  transition  to  monetary 
union will require radical changes to exchange rate policy as well as to monetary policy. The 
national central banks will have to devote more technical resources to understanding what 
the  optimal  levels  for  their  exchange  rates  are  and  how  to  manage  their  exchange  rates 
using  both  monetary  policy  instruments  and  intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  markets. 
Our  monetary  policy  frameworks  will  have  to  be  refocused primarily  on  our  exchange  rate 
objectives and each central bank will have to pay close attention to the monetary policies of 
its partners in the East African Community. At the regional level, the central banks will have 
to  determine  how  we  can  best  harmonise  our  exchange  rate  policy  objectives  with  the 
objective of maintaining low inflation within the East African Community. Clearly, very close 
collaboration  between  the  central  banks  in  setting  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy  is 
imperative, if the transition is to be successful.  
Fiscal policy  
Fiscal policy is the second pillar on which a successful monetary union rests. Fiscal policy is 
crucial  for  both  economic  convergence,  and  perhaps  even  more  importantly,  for  the 
credibility and sustainability of the Monetary Union.  
Fiscal policy  matters  for  economic convergence  because it  affects  aggregate  demand  and 
interest rates. Hence if there are major differences in the fiscal stances of the East African 
Community Partner States, this will undermine efforts to synchronise economic cycles, and 
may  also  create  pressures  on  bilateral  exchange  rates,  because  of  the  interest  rate 
differentials.  
The  success  and  sustainability  of  the  monetary  union  will  depend  at  least  partly  on  its 
credibility.  Crucial  to  its  credibility  will  be  fiscal  discipline  and  this  requires  fiscal  rules  to 
prevent free riding by any individual Partner State. In a monetary union, the costs of fiscal 
indiscipline by one member of the union are partly externalised to the other members. The 
possibility  that  the  profligate  sovereign  borrower  might  be  bailed  out,  directly  or  indirectly 
through higher inflation, by its partners, will drive up public borrowing costs for all members 
of the monetary union. The future of the monetary union itself could be thrown into doubt if 
BIS Review 12/2010 
 3
the financial markets and public believe that a member with serious fiscal problems cannot 
solve these problems within the monetary union, essentially because the solution would be 
too  deflationary,  and  hence  opts  to  leave  the  monetary  union.  This  is  the  concern  which 
many commentators have expressed in relation to the current economic and fiscal problems 
of Greece.  
To avoid these problems we must put in place binding, transparent fiscal rules covering fiscal 
deficits and public debt, which will operate both during the transition to monetary union and 
after  the  monetary  union  has  been  established.  I  trust  that  the  principle  of  fiscal  rules  is 
generally understood and accepted within the East African Community. However there are 
some who argue that these rules should be made less stringent – i.e. the fiscal deficit targets 
should be loosened – to allow for much higher public spending, on the grounds that there are 
large unmet demands for public investment within the East African Community. Unfortunately 
this misses the point. If the monetary union is to be successful, the targets for fiscal deficits 
and public borrowing must be tight enough to ensure that the Partner States of the monetary 
union run fiscal policies which are sustainable, and are perceived to be sustainable by the 
markets, even in the face of adverse fiscal shocks, such as a cyclical downturn in the tax 
base or a cutback in donor aid. 
Conclusion  
The 21st century global economy will present enormous opportunities for East Africans to lift 
their economies to middle income status, raise living standards and eradicate mass poverty. 
We will be much better placed to take advantage of these opportunities and to face up to the 
challenges if we can achieve deep and meaningful integration of the East African economies. 
Monetary union is an essential component of regional economic integration.  
Establishing a monetary union in East Africa will be difficult and will pose risks. It will require 
an  enormous  amount  of  work  to  reform  institutions,  change  legislation  and  revise 
macroeconomic policies. It is a long term undertaking, whose benefits will be realised over 
many decades. Support for this project, among the public, politicians and technocrats, has 
started  to  gather  momentum  alongside  a  more  widespread  appreciation  of  its  long  term 
benefits. We must use this momentum of support to make monetary union in East Africa a 
reality. To quote the words put into the mouth of Brutus by Shakespeare: “There is a tide in 
the affairs of men, which taken at the flood, leads on to fortune”. If we have the courage and 
foresight  to  grasp  this  opportunity  to  create  a  monetary  union  we  can  make  a  huge 
contribution to the future prosperity of our people in East Africa. 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2010
