Durmuş Yılmaz: Global crisis, restructuring and national transformation 
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yılmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the Forum Istanbul, Istanbul, 20 May 2010.  
 His Excellency Deputy Prime Minister Babacan, 
Distinguished Guests, 
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Canevi for his kind invitation. It is a great pleasure for 
me to participate in this conference where we  will discuss the future of Turkey in a global 
context. 
I  will  start  my  talk  with  a  brief  review  of  imbalances  in  the  global  economy,  which  have 
ultimately  led  to  the  recent  global  crisis.  Then  I  will  discuss  the  evolution  of  the  main 
mandates of central banks from a historical perspective. Finally, I will conclude my speech 
with some remarks on the future of central banking in the post crisis period.  
Dear Participants, 
Any elaboration on a new global story must start with an understanding of the roots of the 
current crisis. I believe it would be appropriate to analyze these factors under three headings. 
The  first  one  is  the  global  macroeconomic  imbalances.  In  the  pre-crisis  period,  the 
consumption in the US and several advanced economies was excessively high, which was 
matched by high savings rate in the South East Asia (due to capital controls and downward 
pressure  on  wages)  and  also  in  oil  rich  countries  (due  to  low  public  investment  on 
infrastructure).  One  striking  consequence  of  these  macro  imbalances  was  the  financing  of 
the private spending in rich countries by households in relatively poor emerging economies. 
To put it another way, excessive reserves accumulated in emerging economies through high 
current account surpluses flowed back to financial markets of advanced economies, which 
enabled households in these countries borrow beyond their means. 
Despite  rapid  growing  domestic  demand  and  acceleration  of  commodity  prices,  global 
inflation  remained  subdued  for  a  considerable  period  of  time  since  surplus  countries  kept 
their labor cost under control to sustain their competitiveness in global markets. Therefore, 
price  stability  oriented  central  banks  in  advanced  economies  saw  no  reason  for  a  strong 
monetary tightening and stayed idle as their economies dangerously overheated. 
Second reason for the global crisis was the unprecedented amount of liquidity created in the 
global  financial  system.  Innovations  in  financial  engineering  and  technological  advances 
facilitated  the  emergence  of  new  and  complex  financial  products,  which  in  turn  led  to  a 
massive growth in liquidity in advanced economies, well beyond the intention or control of 
central  banks.  High  leverage  ratios  in  financial  institutions  also  played  a  significant  role, 
thanks  to  creative  accounting  practices  and  lax  regulations.  Ample  global  liquidity  coupled 
with  low  interest  rates  and  excessive  rise  in  asset  prices  fueled  the  rapid  growth  in  the 
indebtedness of households. 
As  a  final  element,  the  institutions  responsible  for  regulation  and  supervision  of  financial 
institutions failed to keep up with the extremely innovative, deep and complex nature of the 
financial  markets.  Ineffective  regulation  of  financial  markets  led  to  unrestrained  growth  in 
global  liquidity,  rising  indebtedness  ratios  and  formation  of  systemic  risks  in  financial 
markets. Lack of transparency in financial transactions blurred the boundaries of who owes 
what  to  whom,  preventing  the  proper  valuation  of  risks.  Failure  of  credit  rating  agencies, 
inadequacy  of  risk  assessment  methods  in  addressing  systemic  risks  and  pro-cyclical 
accounting standards overtook prudential measures.  
BIS Review 73/2010 
 1
To put a long story short, if you look for a snapshot of the roots of this crisis in one simple 
statement,  it  is  nothing  but  “households  consuming  the  present  value  of  their  future 
wealth, which they do not actually possess in the first place”. 
In  the  aftermath  of  this  crisis,  households  have  increased  precautionary  savings  to  cover 
their debts and clean their balance sheets. This has caused a very sharp negative demand 
shock, especially in advanced economies. Furthermore, a significant part of the real sector 
was not able to pay off their debt leading to large-scale write-offs in the financial sector. In 
response,  governments  have  both  increased  public  spending  to  offset  the  fall  in  domestic 
demand and bailed out troubled financial institutions to prevent the collapse of the financial 
system. In other words, they have acted as both “consumer-of-last-resort” and “lender-of- 
last-resort” at the same time. 
By  doing  so  governments  have  prevented  a  repeat  of  the  Global  Depression  that  we 
experienced  in  the  1930s.  As  you  may  remember,  at  that  time  governments  and  central 
banks stood back as the private demand collapsed, leading to a downward spiral in the world 
economy, “beggar-your-neighbor” type of economic policies and protectionism that prolonged 
the depression well into the 1940s. 
We did not repeat the same mistakes, but maybe we have committed in new ones. Fiscal 
stimulus packages and bailouts of financial institutions have caused budget deficits of epic 
proportions,  skyrocketing  the  public  debt  ratios.  The  events  of  the  last  few  weeks  have 
demonstrated  that  governments,  especially  in  advanced  economies,  face  the  risk  of 
contagion of the financial crisis to public finances in the form of sovereign default. 
In other words, the global crisis, which started as a financial crisis in mid 2007 has evolved 
into a sovereign debt crisis in 2010.  
Today, there is a consensus among policy makers that in order to put the global growth on a 
strong,  sustainable  and  balanced  path,  high  debt  economies  should  implement  fiscal 
consolidation, which is both financially ambitious and politically feasible, while countries with 
low debt should implement policies that stimulate domestic consumption to offset the fall in 
global demand. One fundamental reason of high savings rate in developing countries is the 
weakness  of  safety  nets  (in  employment,  retirement  and  healthcare)  and  the  lack  of  
well-established  financial  institutions  that  serve  the  needs  of  households  facing  budget 
constraints.  If  safety  nets  and  credit  markets  in  developing  countries  were  established, 
households would be able to raise their consumption.  
There  are  also  calls  for  establishing  new  global  mechanisms  to  address  the  concerns  of 
emerging  market  economies  regarding  FX  liquidity,  which  has  led  to  accumulation  of  high 
amount of FX reserves through capital controls and intervention on exchange rates to keep 
local currency undervalued. Of course, relaxing capital controls and gradual adoption of more 
flexible  exchange  rate  systems  should  also  be  part  of  this  package  to  achieve  successful 
reorientation  of  global  demand  from  advanced  economies  to  emerging  market  economies. 
Last but not least, all countries should undertake necessary actions to repair, restructure and 
reform  their  financial  system.  Necessary  structural  reforms  in  product  and  labor  market 
should  also  be  a  top  priority  to  increase  potential  growth  rates  and  reduce  permanent 
unemployment.  
Dear Guests, 
Now  let  me  turn  to  responsibilities  of  central  banks  and  elaborate  on  their  evolution  over 
time. 
Until recently when  you asked the primary  mandate of central banks, the typical response 
would  be  price  stability.  However,  the  history  tells  us  that  central  banks  were  founded  for 
quite different reasons in many countries. For instance the Bank of England was founded in 
the 17th century to cover the financing need of the British Government during its war against 
France. Likewise, Bank de France was created in the 19th century during the Napoleon Wars 
against  the  Great  Britain.  These  institutions  had  the  privilege  of  issuing  banknotes  in 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2010
exchange for providing funds for treasuries. In other countries providing stability in financial 
markets  was  the  paramount  concern.  For  example,  the  need  for  a  lender  of  last  resort 
following  panics  and  crashes  during  the  early  20th  century  led  to  creation  of  the  Federal 
Reserve system in the US. The Central Bank of Turkey, on the other hand, was founded both 
as  a  symbol  of  national  independence  and  to  stabilize  seasonal  fluctuations  in  financial 
markets due to nature of agriculture-based economy.  
The concept of price stability was not brought to the foreground during the initial stages of 
central  banking,  because  there  was  not  much  concern  for  inflation  in  many  advanced 
economies. The value of money was well-protected thanks to the use of gold standard. As 
Friedman  once  said,  “Inflation  is  always  and  everywhere  a  monetary  phenomenon.” 
Therefore,  there  would  be  no  permanent  inflation  as  long  as  long  term  money  supply 
expands in parallel to long term money demand. In this context, inflation concerns were kept 
in the background in many countries under the gold standard during the 19th and most of the 
20th century. With the collapse of gold standard after the Great Depression and its successor 
(the Bretton Woods System) in 1973, we have entered the era of fiat money. In the absence 
of a solid anchor like gold, the only mechanism left behind to support the value of the fiat 
money was the credibility of central banks. This brought out the issue of price stability in the 
foreground of central banking. 
Our  initial  experience  with  fiat  money  was  not  promising.  In  the  late  70s,  many  countries 
including advanced economies experienced rapid monetary expansion and as a result very 
high inflation rates, in many instances in double digits. 1981 was the turning point of central 
banking. The Federal Reserve, under the leadership of its chairman Paul Volcker, engaged 
in  a  very  tight  and  painful  monetary  tightening,  despite  the  harsh  criticism  from  the 
US administration and the real sector. As inflation rate in the US gradually declined to low 
single  digits,  the  Federal  Reserve  earned  the  reputation  of  an  uncompromised  inflation 
fighter, which gradually extended to other central banks in advanced economies as well. This 
was  also  the  period  in  which  many  central  banks  gained  operational  independence.  Over 
time  it  became  a  conventional  wisdom  among  policy  makers  that  the  most  important  and 
long  lasting  contribution  of  central  banks  to  long  term  growth  and  financial  stability  is  to 
establish and sustain price stability. 
As the issue of financial stability has gained critical importance during the recent global crisis, 
central banks are asked to address directly not only price stability but also financial stability 
as  well.  As  I  explained  before,  to  maintain  smooth  functioning  of  the  financial  system  has 
been a concern of many central banks since their foundation. 
In  fact,  that  is  the  reason  we  are  called  as  “the  bank  of  banks”  or  “the  lender  of  last 
resort”  for  financial  institutions.  However,  over  time  as  the  financial  system  get  more 
complicated  and  expanded  exponentially,  its  supervision  and  regulation  has  been  partially 
transferred to other institutions, which is also the case in Turkey. 
The challenge faced by central banks is to establish a framework that combines both price 
stability  and  financial  stability  as  primary  mandates  even  at  times  they  conflict  with  each 
other  and  identify  the  policy  instruments  to  target  both.  As  you  know  central  banks  have 
typically  used  short-term  interest  rates  as  their  primary  policy  instrument.  However,  the 
“Tinbergen Rule” suggests that this one instrument could be deployed to achieve only one 
target,  which  is  conventionally  recognized  as  price  stability.  Addressing  both  price  stability 
and financial stability simultaneously necessitates a second set of policy tools. This second 
instrument may be in the form of the supervision and regulation of financial activities. The 
question is that whether these responsibilities should be assumed solely by central banks. 
The downside of this option is that central banks may turn out to be too big, inflexible and in 
conflict with themselves, which eventually led to failure in both objectives. 
Dear Participants, 
Prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis,  central  banks  were  conducting  monetary  policy  through 
conventional  banks  and  use  government  bonds  in  open  market  operations.  However  the 
BIS Review 73/2010 
 3
financial crisis led central banks employ a wider range of securities, ranging from corporate 
bonds to asset backed securities and mortgages. The reason behind this transformation was 
obvious.  Thanks  to  financial  engineering  and  innovative  products,  only  a  small  portion  of 
financial  institutions’  assets  is  in  government  securities.  Therefore,  asking  for  government 
securities as collateral in open market operations would no longer provide enough liquidity to 
the financial system. In the meantime, as banks have lost their dominance in the financial 
system, corporations and non-bank financial institutions have joined the conventional banks 
as the counter parties of central banks in market transactions. 
The question in this context is (1) whether the innovative policies we have seen in the last 
year will lead to longer-term changes in central banking doctrine and behavior, (2) whether in 
parallel to new developments in financial structure central banks will adopt a more flexible 
approach in operational practices, and (3) maybe more importantly whether central banks will 
maintain their influence in the financial markets, which has grown rapidly due to extraordinary 
actions during current crisis? 
These  are  important  questions  to  discuss  and  I  hope  this  conference  would  provide  new 
insights to policy makers as we sail through uncharted waters. 
While concluding my remarks, I would like to extend my thanks to the members of the Forum 
Istanbul, who have contributed to the constitution of constructive criticism environment that I 
perceive as an important element in building the future of Turkey.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 73/2010
