Prof. Njuguna Ndung’u: “Being a driver of change to invest differently in 
women” 
Keynote address by Prof. Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 
dinner hosted by the African Development Bank and new faces new voices network gender 
equality  and  financial  inclusion,  Restaurant  les  Quatre  Coins  du  Monde,  Abidjan,  Côte 
d’Ivoire, 25 May 2010. 
 Dr.  Donald  Kaberuka,  President,  African  Development  Bank;  Madame  Graça  Machel, 
Founder, New Faces New Voices Network; Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It  is  indeed  an  honour  and  privilege  for  me  to  address  this  gathering  tonight  following  the 
fruitful  discussions  during  the  African  Women’s  Economic  Summit  held  in  March  2010  in 
Nairobi, Kenya. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the African Development Bank 
and the New Faces New Voices Network for organizing tonight’s dinner. This event provides 
a  platform  to  raise  awareness  about  commitments  made  at  the  Summit  and  the  need  to 
invest  differently  in  women.  It  also  offers  us  the  opportunity  to  review  the  various  pledges 
made at the summit and to recommend concrete actions for the way forward. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  women  form  a  big  proportion  of  the  population  and  command  a 
sizeable role in our societies’ socio-economic activities and are therefore important economic 
and social change agents. In Africa, women constitute more than half of the population and 
form  the  majority  of  our  labour  force,  especially  in  agricultural  activities  and  household 
welfare,  which  remain  the  backbone  of  our  economies.  A  large  number  of  them  also  run 
micro,  small  and  medium  enterprises  (MSMEs)  that  constitute  a  significant  share  of 
economic  activity  in  our  economies.  It  cannot  be  doubted,  therefore,  that  women  play  a 
critical role in the process of economic development in the African Continent. Despite this, 
women have remained largely marginalized in terms of access to, and control of resources 
that are crucial in wealth creation, welfare and the development process. 
An  example  from  my  own  country,  Kenya,  in  terms  of  access  to  finance  illustrates  this 
clearly.  Although  two  national  financial  access  surveys  conducted  in  2006  and  2009  have 
shown  general  improvements  in  financial  access  with  access  to  formal  finance  improving 
from 19 to 23 percent; semi-formal improving from 8 to 18 percent; informal declining from 35 
to  27  percent;  and  the  excluded  falling  from  38  to  33  percent;  access  to  finance  has 
remained worse for women with 66 percent of women not accessing formal financial services 
and 33 percent being excluded altogether from any form of financial services. You will agree 
with me that without financial access, the poor cannot save or build their assets – we will, 
therefore, have no hope of eradicating poverty from the Continent. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The Government of Kenya has played a pivotal role in the promotion 
of  women  empowerment  and  gender  equality.  The  Women  Enterprise  Fund,  a  flagship 
project created by the Government of Kenya in 2007, has been mandated to economically 
empower  women  by  providing  them  access  to  affordable  credit.  Through  the  Fund, 
subsidized  credit  for  business  start-ups  or  expansion  is  provided  and  so  are  business 
training, market linkages and other infrastructure support to women-run businesses. 
Through  the  revolving  Fund,  women  have  been  able  to  access  loans  and  venture  into  a 
variety  of  productive  economic  activities  and  employment,  which  have  triggered  positive 
multiplier effects. These businesses have created jobs for the women themselves as well as 
thousands  of  other  Kenyans.  Increases  in  their  disposable  incomes  have  translated  into 
better nutrition for their families, better clothing, healthcare, food security and education. The 
Fund is also strengthening women voices and their decision-making, bargaining power in the 
BIS Review 77/2010 
 1
the 
through 
further  bridged 
the  Central  Bank 
financial  exclusion  gap 
household as well as within the community and the nation. The Women Enterprise Fund’s 
motto that “if you empower a woman, you have empowered a family and a whole nation”, 
captures it all. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Given this scenario of access to finance for women, the timing of the 
African Women Economic Summit was very timely. At the Summit, we sought to explore the 
barriers to mainstreaming women in accessing finance and decision-making in the financial 
sector.  More  importantly,  we  sought  to  identify  pragmatic  approaches  to  breaking  these 
barriers.  At  the  end  of  the  Summit,  various  pledges  were  made  by  financial  institutions, 
development  finance  institutions,  network  organisations  and  regulators.  As  regulators,  we 
committed to identifying and addressing barriers to women accessing finance in the legal and 
regulatory  framework.  We  would  then  identify  innovative  ways  of  mitigating  these  barriers. 
I therefore wish tonight to outline the progress made by the Central Bank of Kenya. 
(CBK) in enhancing access to finance by women since the Summit. The first landmark was 
on 31st March 2010 – barely two weeks after the Summit – when CBK licensed the second 
deposit-taking  nationwide  microfinance  institution,  Kenya  Women  Finance  Trust  Deposit 
Taking  Microfinance  Limited  (KWFT).  With  a  customer  base  of  close  to  400,000  female 
clients,  it  is  safe  to  say  that  Kenya  Women  Finance  Trust  Deposit  Taking  Microfinance 
Institution  is  women-centric.  Thus  the  transformation  to  a  deposit-taking  microfinance 
institution  will  enable  KWFT  to  offer  a  wider  range  of  appropriate  products  and  services 
targeting low-income women entrepreneurs. Ladies and Gentlemen: At the beginning of this 
month, 
the 
operationalization of Agent Banking Guidelines. The guidelines allow banks to extend their 
outreach to approximately 78 percent of the Kenyan population, majority of who are women 
residing in the rural areas. This will be through the use of third party agents such as retail 
outlets,  Microfinance  Institutions  and  Savings  and  Credit  Cooperative  Societies  by  banks. 
The Agent Banking model will enable banks extend their outreach cost effectively particularly 
in  the  rural  areas.  In  these  areas,  significant  transaction  costs  and  time  are  incurred  in 
accessing the nearest bank branches. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The Central Bank of Kenya together with sister Central Banks of the 
East African Community (EAC): Uganda, Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi, on May 10th 2010, 
committed  to  conducting  diagnostic  surveys  to  clearly  identify  the  demand  and  supply 
constraints  in  accessing  financial  services.  This  commitment  was  made  during  the 
13th Governors’  Meeting  of  the  Monetary  Affairs  Committee  (MAC)  of  the  EAC.  MAC  is 
tasked with the creation of a Monetary Union for the EAC. These diagnostic studies will play 
a key role in providing an empirical analysis of the constraints that women face in accessing 
financial  services.  The  surveys  are  then  expected  to  inform  the  formulation  of  targeted 
policies to address the identified constraints. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Last week, in an affirmative move to expanding access to finance, 
Equity  Bank,  a  leading  Kenyan  bank  partnered  with  Safaricom,  a  leading  Kenyan  telecom 
operator, to provide an integrated banking and telecommunication financial services product. 
This  product  known  as  M-Kesho  is  accessible  through  a  mobile  phone  alongside  the 
internationally  celebrated  money  transfer  service,  MPesa.  M-Kesho  will  offer  a  low  cost 
savings,  micro-credit  and  micro-insurance  product.  Customers  will  be  able  to  transfer 
amounts as little as Ksh.100 (USD 1.5) from their M-Pesa account to an Equity Bank interest 
earning  account  at  no  cost.  Customers  will  also  be  able  to  complete  the  account  opening 
documentation  not  just  at  Equity  Bank  branches  but  also  at  M-Pesa  Agents  spread 
throughout Kenya. Innovative technological products such as M-Kesho will ultimately extend 
the  distribution  of  financial  services  to  the  unbanked  population  who  are  not  reached  by 
traditional  banking  networks  while  reducing  the  distances  travelled,  the  transactions  cost, 
and  improved  security  for  both  the  banks  and  clients.  At  present,  the  Central  Bank  has 
approved 500 M-Pesa agents, which is half the total number of commercial bank branches to 
serve as account origination points for the product. We expect to approve over 5,000 agents 
by  the  end  of  July  2010.  M-Kesho  goes  beyond  urbanrural  money  transfer.  It  attracts 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2010
recipients to save the funds received for intermediation. This in turn enhances a culture of 
saving which will promote growth and wealth creation. 
Finally,  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  and  the  Association  of Microfinance  Institutions  (AMFI) 
are looking for ways to hasten the speed of rolling out microfinance institutions. The MFIs are 
an important vehicle for reaching out to the rural economy where most women in Kenya are 
found.  One  bottleneck  has  been  the  branch  network  requirements  and  the  investments 
required. The Central Bank is studying ways of overcoming these bottlenecks. 
Ladies  and Gentlemen:  As  I  draw  to  a  close,  I  urge  fellow  regulators and  policymakers  to 
seek to understand the barriers to accessing finance by women. It is only by understanding 
these barriers that effective policies can be formulated to extend financial inclusion frontiers 
for women. Financial institutions including banks, Microfinance Institutions and Savings and 
Credit Cooperative Societies also have a critical role to play. With a critical mass of women 
entrepreneurs, they will find a ready market form the women fraternity. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: As a driver of change, I would like to reiterate the commitment of the 
Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  as  declared  during  the  African  Women’s  Economic  Summit,  to 
improving financial access to women and enhance their opportunities to become key actors 
towards change and, ultimately, the development of our economies. I look forward to fruitful 
deliberations tonight and wish you a pleasant stay in Abidjan. 
Thank You. 
BIS Review 77/2010 
 3
