Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Microfinance – from best practice to next 
practice 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, at the 
Rural  Bankers’  Association  of  the  Philippines  Microenterprise  Access  to  Banking  Services 
(RBAP-MABS) Annual National Roundtable Conference, Manila, 2 June 2010. 
 RBAP President Omar Andaya, RBAP-MABS chief of party John Owens, fellow advocates of 
microfinance, colleagues in the banking community, good afternoon. 
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  join  you  once  again  in  your  Annual  National  Roundtable 
Conference.  Last  year,  I  had  the  opportunity  to  discuss  microfinance  as  the  “bright  spot 
during  challenging  times”.  This  year,  I  am  happy  to  note  that  indeed  that  bright  spot 
continues  to  shine…  and  we  can  move  on,  so  to  speak,  “From  Best  Practice  to  Next 
Practice”. 
Ladies and gentlemen. It was not too long ago when microfinance was limited to microcredit 
provided by leading non-governmental organizations (NGOs), cooperatives and a handful of 
banks.  Since  then,  the  number  of  microfinance  players  has  increased  significantly,  while 
available services have noticeably diversified. 
And  this  trend  continues.  Today,  MFI  clients  are  able  to  access  savings  products,  micro-
enterprise loans, housing microfinance, micro-agri loans, and most recently, microinsurance. 
At  the  same  time,  more  banks  now  see  the  viability  of  providing  meaningful  microfinance 
services to our country’s entrepreneurial poor. Of course, MABS-participating banks lead this 
pack. 
We  are  also  seeing  commercial  banks  escalate  their  engagement:  from  simply  providing 
wholesale funds… to directly engaging in microfinance operations through their subsidiaries 
or affiliates. 
Certainly, this has intensified competition that benefits clients in terms of better-designed and 
more appropriately-priced products. 
Ladies and gentlemen. These product innovations increase the value of your services to your 
clients’ households and business. At the same time, you are able to diversify your portfolio 
and target specific customer needs with the right products. 
Much  has  also  changed  in  the  way  microfinance  services  are  delivered.  For  some  time, 
having a computerized management information system to track loans was considered the 
primary technological innovation for microfinance institutions. And having loan officers using 
palm pilot during client visits was already considered cutting edge. 
Who  could  have  imagined…  that  in  just  a  few  years…  clients  can  pay  their  loans,  make 
withdrawals or deposits using their mobile phones and a simple text message? Who could 
have predicted that an ordinary village merchant can serve as a channel to access financial 
services?  Indeed,  technology  has  created  transformative  solutions  for  increasing  efficiency 
and lowering costs for both the microfinance institutions and their clients. 
These developments… or what we can call “next practice”… mean only one thing: greater 
opportunities for microfinance practitioners. 
You now have the ability to offer a wide range of products to a much bigger market. With 
innovations in technology, you are now able to extend your services to areas that traditionally 
could not be reached from your brick and mortar offices. It is clear….the opportunities ahead 
are limitless, particularly for strong and stable institutions. 
BIS Review 77/2010 
 1
It is in this context that I commend the RBAP-MABS leadership and participating banks for 
your  unwavering  commitment  to  prudential  standards  and  best  practices.  Let  us  celebrate 
your accomplishments with a well-deserved round of applause. 
Your  clear  methodology  and  underwriting  standards…  coupled  with  strict  adherence  to 
maintaining portfolio quality … have enabled you to enjoy much of the gains of the sector. 
The challenge is for you to continue on this path of good governance and to constantly strive 
to do better. 
It is important that banks continue to work on improvements in your capital positions, as well 
as in increasing capacity to better manage risks. Adhering to sound management practices 
should  be  a  priority.  With  these  in  place,  I  am  certain  that  rural  banks,  particularly  those 
reaching out to the unbanked, can fully realize their potential as catalysts for sustainable and 
balanced grassroots economic growth. 
We at the BSP recognize this important role. Therefore, we have been working continuously 
to provide a supportive environment that will further promote the growth and development of 
microfinance, in accordance with our inclusive finance objectives. You see this in our most 
recent Circulars related to microfinance. 
For instance, Bangko Sentral’s Circulars 678, 680 and 683 allow you to diversify your product 
offerings  to  include  housing  microfinance  loans,  micro-agri  loans  and  microinsurance, 
respectively. On the other hand, Circular 685 supports the commercialization of the industry 
by  recognizing  the  importance  of  independent,  3rd  party  ratings  provided  by  Microfinance 
Institution Rating Agencies or MIRAs. 
At  the  same  time,  we  are  reviewing  our  earlier  regulations  that  define  microfinance  and 
microfinance loans. As I mentioned earlier, much has changed in the practice of microfinance 
and we want our regulations to be in step with the times. 
Our  objective  is  to  craft  regulations  that  will  enable  microfinance  practitioners  to  provide 
services to an even wider range of clients and to deliver financial services to more unserved 
markets…  including  those  who  fall  in  the  so-called  “gray  area”  of  microfinance  who  need 
loans above P 150,000.00. These are the microenterprises that are ready to scale up their 
operations as small… or even medium… enterprises. 
In addition, we have recently engaged the consultancy services of SME lending experts to 
further  strengthen  the  capacity  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  in  supervising  SME  lending 
technologies. 
Parallel to these, we continue to expand and deepen the reach of Bangko Sentral’s financial 
education  and  consumer  protection  program.  We  want  to  have  a  truly  inclusive  and 
empowering  financial  system  that  will  mainstream  the  previously  unserved  or  unbanked. 
Typically,  they  are  more  economically  vulnerable  and  stand  to  benefit  the  most  from 
information  and  capacity  building  that  will  give  them  access  to  financial  services.  Our 
financial  inclusion  efforts  are  therefore  intrinsically  linked  to  our  financial  learning  and 
consumer protection efforts. 
We  have  a  Comprehensive  Economic  and  Financial  Learning  Program  which  provides 
important economic and financial information to identified segments of the population. This is 
because  we  believe  that  a  well-informed  populace  make  better  economic  and  financial 
decisions that make them effective channels of economic development. 
Aside from our financial education efforts, we have created a Financial and Consumer Affairs 
Group to strengthen consumer protection for bank customers. 
Indeed, we have accomplished much… together. Yet there is always so much more that can 
be  done.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  for  as  long  as  more  than  30  million  Filipinos  still  live  in 
poverty, we cannot… and should not…be complacent. 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2010
We have found microfinance to be an effective and empowering force in getting people out of 
poverty,  in  improving  lives.  Let  us  therefore  continue  to  work  together  to  strengthen  our 
microfinance sector and bring it to its full potential. I believe…for microfinance, the best is yet 
to come. 
Mabuhay ang RBAP-MABS! Mabuhay ang microfinance! Mabuhay ang Pilipinas! 
Thank you all and good afternoon. 
BIS Review 77/2010 
 3
