Duvvuri Subbarao: Some issues in currency management 
Remarks by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Foundation 
Stone laying function for the Bank Note Paper Mill, at Mysore, 22 March 2010. 
 1. 
It is my pleasure and privilege to participate in this function for laying the foundation 
stone for the Bank Note Paper Mill. A special and hearty welcome to the Hon’ble Finance 
Minister, Shri Pranab Mukherjee, but for whose active support, the launch of this vital and 
prestigious project would not have been possible. 
2. 
I want to use this opportunity to speak on this occasion to highlight the significance 
of  paper  currency,  touch  on  the  history  of  production  of  currency  notes  in  India  and  then 
address certain issues in currency management. Importantly, I would also like to outline the 
importance of this paper mill that we are launching today. 
3. 
Currency  notes  in  circulation  have  increased  significantly  since  the  time  RBI  was 
established 75 years ago. The value of notes in circulation in the country has increased from 
about Rs.172 crore in 1935 to more than Rs.7,00,000 crore in 2009. In terms of volume, the 
notes in circulation have increased from 124 million pieces in 1935 to more than 51 billion 
pieces in 2009. In fact, after China, India is the largest producer and consumer of currency 
notes. 
4. 
As the economy grows, people need more currency and other payment instruments 
to settle their transactions. Notwithstanding several innovations in the field of payment and 
settlement,  common  people  in  our  country,  as  indeed  in  many  other  developing  countries, 
still use paper currency for their routine financial transactions. The ratio of currency with the 
public to GDP which was 12 per cent in 1951 is currently around 13 per cent demonstrating 
that currency still remains an important mode of payment in the country. It is the  Reserve 
Bank’s responsibility, as the sole issuer of notes, to make available good and clean notes in 
adequate quantity to the public. 
History and evolution of production of notes in India 
5. 
Currency/bank notes are among the most mass-produced commodities in the world. 
The genesis of paper money is generally attributed to the token money that evolved around 
the 10th century in China. In India, the enthusiastic experiment by Muhammed Bin Tughlaq 
in  the  14th  century  to  issue  token  money  and  replace  silver  taka  with  copper,  though  a 
genuine monetary experiment, ended in disaster.  
6. 
Use  of  paper  money  started  in  the  West  in  the  17th  century.  However,  paper 
currency did not catch on in India because of the political turmoil following the collapse of 
Mughal  Empire  in  the  17th  century.  Early  currency  in  the  form  of  “I  owe  you  /  promissory 
notes” issued by banks or royal courts made appearance in India only in late 18th century. 
Among  the  early  issuer  of  bank  notes  in  India  were  Bank  of  Hindostan  (1770–1832),  the 
General Bank of Bengal and Behar (1773–75), the Bengal Bank (1784–91), the Commercial 
Bank, etc. Use of bank notes, however, became widespread only after the semi-government 
Presidency Banks started issuing notes, notably the Bank of Bengal which was established 
in 1806. These banks were established under a Government Charter and were required to 
observe  some  prudential  norms  like  cash  reserve,  maximum  exposure  limit,  limit  for  note 
issue, etc.  
Use  of  official  Government  of  India  paper  currency  commenced  in  1861  with  the 
7. 
enactment  of  the  Paper  Currency  Act.  The  management  of  currency  across  the  Indian 
sub-continent  was  evidently  a  huge  task,  requiring  creation  of  currency  circles.  The 
Presidency  banks  were  made  agents  for  issue  and  redemption.  In  1913,  the  Office  of 
BIS Review 35/2010 
 1
Controller  of  Currency  was  established  replacing  the  Currency  Department  in  the 
Government.  In  1935,  Reserve  Bank  of  India  was  created  which  took  over  the  function  of 
note issue from the Controller of Currency.  
8. 
Indian  Currency  notes  were  printed  in  England  till  late  1920s.  Recognising  that 
production  of  currency  notes  is  a  strategically  important  activity,  the  then  Government  of 
India set up a currency printing press at Nashik in Maharashtra in 1928. This was followed by 
the setting up of another press at Dewas in Madhya Pradesh nearly fifty years later in 1975. 
Meanwhile, in 1967, a security paper mill with a capacity of 1500 metric tonnes per year was 
established  at  Hoshangabad  in  MP.  By  the  late  1980s,  the  demand  for  currency  notes 
exceeded  the  capacity  of  the  two  Government  note  presses.  To  meet  the  demand-supply 
gap,  at  the  instance  of  Government  of  India,  the  Reserve  Bank  established,  in  1996,  two 
currency presses – this one here in Mysore and the other at Salboni in West Bengal. These 
were set up through a wholly owned subsidiary of RBI viz. the Bharatiya Reserve Bank Note 
Mudran Pvt. Ltd. (BRBNMPL). By 1999, the BRBNMPL’s two new presses started working to 
their full capacity making the country self reliant once again in currency note printing.  
things.  We  mechanized 
Clean note policy and its implementation 
9. 
In 1999, after sufficient printing capacity has been firmly established, the Reserve 
Bank  adopted  the  “Clean  Note  Policy”  for  circulation  of  fairly  good  quality  banknotes  and 
withdrawal of unfit/soiled banknotes from circulation and their destruction. In pursuit of this 
clean  note  policy,  RBI  did  several 
the  process  of  note 
sorting/processing  and  destruction  of  unfit  notes  starting  in  2000-01.  Recognizing  that  the 
practice  of  stapling  of  notes  was  resulting  in  disfiguration  of  notes,  impeding  machine 
processing and reducing their longevity, RBI issued a directive to banks under Section 35A 
of  the  Banking  Regulation  Act  to  stop  stapling of  currency notes  and  instead  secure  them 
with  paper  bands.  RBI  advised  banks  to  sort  notes  into  re-issuable  and  non  issuable 
categories and reissue only clean notes to the public. Finally, RBI launched an awareness 
campaign  exhorting  public  to  desist  from  writing  on  the  watermark  window  of  the notes  or 
folding or stapling the notes.  
As part of the mechanization and systems improvement drive, we have installed as 
10.  
many as 54 high speed currency verification and processing machines and 27 shredding and 
briquetting machines in 19 offices across the country. We have advised bank branches with 
currency chests to equip all their chests with Note Sorting Machines and to ensure that only 
clean notes are reissued to the public over the counter and through ATMs. Currently, there 
are  over  4300  currency  chests  well  equipped  with  Note  Sorting  Machines.  We  also  did  a 
systems overhaul to improve productivity, reinforce safeguards and minimize errors. 
11.  
The above efforts resulted in credible improvements. In the two year period between 
September 2007 and September 2009, the accumulation of soiled notes at currency chests 
and issue offices has been brought down from 190 days of processing capacity to 68 days. 
The disposal of soiled notes increased from 7.3 billion pieces to 11.9 billion pieces. Fresh 
notes issued to currency chests and the public increased from 10.7 billion pieces in 2006/07 
to 13.8 billion pieces in 2008/09. 
Fake currency/counterfeit notes 
12.  
Counterfeiting of money is almost as old as printing of currency. At some period in 
history, it was considered treasonous enough to warrant punishment by death. It was in 1650 
AD that paper money was developed and counterfeiting flourished, especially within America 
where  counterfeit  money  was  more  common  than  genuine  money.  Counterfeiters  had 
become so skilled that when the first federal coins were issued by the US Government in the 
1780s,  they  had  the  dies  cut  by  an  ex-counterfeiter.  However,  it  was  the  advent  of  colour 
copiers and other electronic devices in late twentieth century that made counterfeiting easier. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2010
Around the world, governments are locked in a fierce race with counterfeiters to keep that 
one crucial step ahead in terms of technology and security features. Governments are also 
tightening measures to check counterfeiting, apprehend counterfeiters and impose deterrent 
and harsher punishments. 
13.  
Data  available  in  the  public  domain  suggests  that  the  incidence  of  counterfeiting 
varies across different countries. While in Australia, counterfeit notes detected were around 
seven pieces per million notes in circulation (2008-09), in Canada it was 76 (2008). In New 
Zealand, the number was a low of 0.71 counterfeits per million notes in circulation (2008-09), 
whereas in Switzerland it was ten. As for the euro, there was roughly about one counterfeit 
per 14,600 bank notes in circulation (2008). At home here in India, fake notes reported as 
detected  by  banks  and  fake  notes  found  in  remittances  received  by  RBI  during  2008-09 
amounted to eight per one million notes in circulation. The data however does not include the 
counterfeits that are seized by police. The above data shows that, by an international metric, 
the incidence of counterfeit notes in India is not alarming. Nevertheless, counterfeiting per se 
is a matter of serious concern for the Government and the Reserve Bank.  
14. 
While on the subject of estimate of fake notes, I want to make a clarification. Last 
year, some newspapers had erroneously quoted a figure from the Nayak Committee Report 
for estimates of forged currency notes in circulation. The Nayak Committee, which was set 
up in 1988 to go into the dynamics of currency management, did not make any estimate of 
fake currency. What it estimated was the projected value of notes in circulation in the year 
2000  which  has  Rs.  1,69,000  crore.  The  media  incorrectly  reported  this  as  the  number  of 
fake notes in circulation. 
The  Reserve  Bank’s  role  in  addressing  the  problem  of  counterfeiting  lies  in 
15. 
improving  the  security  features  of  the  currency  notes,  putting  in  place  a  system  where  all 
fake notes making entry into the banking channel are promptly detected, and raising public 
awareness  levels.  For  the  sake  of  completeness,  let  me  list  the  measures  initiated  by 
Reserve Bank for addressing the menace of counterfeiting:  
 
 
Awareness and publicity campaigns.  
Augmenting the security features. Non disruptive withdrawal of notes in old series by 
replacement with notes in new series.  
Use  of  note  sorting  machines  in  all  large  cash  handling  branches  in  a  phased 
manner so that all notes are sorted before reissuing to customers. To start with, all 
branches,  where  the  daily  average  cash  receipts  are  more  than  Rs.  1  crore,  will 
have to do this by March 2010, and those where the daily average cash receipts are 
between Rs. 50 lakh and Rs. 1 crore, by March 2011.  
Installation of note sorting machines at select non-chest bank branches (210) by RBI 
on a mix of criteria viz. volume of cash handling, counterfeit detection and proximity 
to international border.  
ATMs to be equipped with sensors for detecting counterfeit notes. Till then, banks 
are to ensure that the ATMs are filled only with notes that have been sorted through 
Sorting Machines.  
Creation of Forged Notes Vigilance Cells in banks.  
Formation of security committees in each state including representatives of police, 
banks, etc. to deal with the problem of counterfeiting.  
Strengthening security systems at currency chests and more intensive supervision 
of chests by RBI.  
16. 
RBI’s  efforts  at  checking  counterfeiting  will  be  effective  only  if  there  are  equally 
effective efforts by banks. Banks should ensure that counterfeit notes are promptly detected 
once they enter the banking system, and that there is prompt and accurate reporting. They 
     BIS Review 35/2010 
 3
should ensure that only clean and genuine notes are issued through their ATMs and over the 
counters.  As  currency  notes  are  an  integral  part  of  our  daily  life,  we,  as  users,  should 
understand the various security features of the notes. These features are prominent, and can 
be easily identified. Enhanced public awareness will by far be the most effective deterrent to 
counterfeiting. 
Polymer notes 
17.  
Cost  and  longevity  are  important  issues  in  currency  management.  After  due 
consideration, and in consultation with the Government, the Reserve  Bank has decided to 
introduce one billion pieces of Rs 10 banknotes on polymer substrate on a field trial basis in 
a  limited  launch  in  five  cities.  While  cleanliness  and  durability  are  seen  as  the  major 
advantages of polymer, the carbon footprint associated with production, use and disposal of 
polymer notes is an important issue. Available information indicates that polymer banknotes 
(and the waste from production) can be granulated and recycled into useful plastic products 
such  as  compost  bins,  plumbing  fittings  and  other  household  and  industrial  products. 
Considering the relatively longer life of polymer notes and their amenability to re-cycling, the 
“carbon footprint” of polymer notes vis-à-vis paper banknotes is likely to be on the plus side. 
Regardless, this is one of the issues that we will study during the pilot phase, and will embark 
on polymer notes on a long term basis only if the cost-benefit calculus is decidedly positive in 
all dimensions.  
Why we need this paper mill 
18. 
It should be a matter of pride for all of us that the entire requirement of the country’s 
currency needs – this year’s estimate is of 17 billion pieces – is printed within the country. 
However, for the main raw material required for this – the banknote paper – we are heavily 
dependent  on  imports.  The  existing  facility  at  Hoshangabad  meets  just  5  per  cent  of  our 
requirement. We need to significantly increase our self-sufficiency in this regard for a number 
of  operational,  economic  and  strategic  reasons.  Producing  our  own  paper  is  decidedly 
cheaper,  and  importantly  a  check  against  counterfeiting.  The  banknote  paper  market  is  a 
strong  oligarchy.  India’s  demand  for  banknote  paper  –  18000  MT  per  year  –  is  huge  in 
international terms, and on the supply side there are just 3/4 large producers. This situation 
exposes us to vulnerabilities of a suppliers market in terms of price, quantity and timelines, 
something that we should avoid or at any rate minimize.  
19. 
It  would  be  pertinent  to  note  that  major  countries  viz.  USA,  Japan,  China,  Brazil, 
Russia  and  countries  in  the  euro  area  and  even  smaller  countries  like  South  Korea, 
Indonesia, Iran and Pakistan make their own bank note paper.  
20.  
It  was  in  this  background  that  the  Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India 
decided to set up a banknote paper mill with an annual production capacity of 12,000 MT as 
a backward linkage in the process of note printing. The proposed paper mill is a joint venture 
between the Bharatiya Reserve Bank Note Mudran Private Ltd. (BRBNMPL) and the Security 
Printing  and  Minting  Corporation  of  India  Ltd.  (SPMCIL),  the  two  agencies  which  are 
collectively responsible for printing of all currency notes in the country. 
21. 
This plant in Mysore for which the Finance Minister is laying the foundation stone 
today will be a state of the art production unit that will showcase to the world India’s capacity 
to  produce  banknote  paper  conforming  to  the  best  international  quality  and  security 
standards.  
22. 
a very warm welcome all of you to this foundation stone laying function. 
I wish the project and the people behind its implementation all success. Once again, 
4 
 BIS Review 35/2010
