Patrick Honohan: Investigating banking failures in Ireland 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  &  Financial 
Services Authority of Ireland, to the Joint Oireachtas Committee on Finance and the Public 
Service, Dublin, 15 June 2010. 
 Following publication of my report to the Minister for Finance I promised to come back to the 
Committee  to  discuss  the  report  and  the  question  of  the  further  stages  envisaged  for 
investigating the banking failures. In preparing my report, I had the benefit of a very effective 
team which was rapidly assembled to make sure that the job could be adequately addressed 
in the limited time available. The members of the team are listed in the report and I would just 
like to mention here the contribution of Rafique Mottiar, who is with me here today, Donal 
Donovan  and  Paul  Gorecki,  who  led  the  team,  as  well  as  Nodhlag  Cadden  and  Suzanne 
Pepper (also with me today) who organised the logistics and background work.  
I  can  remind  the  Committee  that  the  context  for  these  reports  is  that  “the  Government 
considers  it  essential  to  thoroughly  examine  the  conduct  of  the  banking  sector  in  recent 
years in order to arrive at a fuller understanding of the root causes of the systemic failures 
that led to the need for extraordinary support from the State to the domestic banking system.” 
The Government has envisaged a two stage approach to the investigation, the first stage of 
which involved “preliminary reports” potentially providing a basis for the Government and the 
Oireachtas  to  prepare  the  terms  of  reference  for  the  second  stage,  to  involve  the 
establishment of a statutory commission of investigation.  
The  report  I  have  prepared  in  response  to  the  Minister  for  Finance’s  request  is  on  “the 
respective  functions  of  the  Central  Bank  and  Financial  Regulator  …  in  assessing  and 
responding to risks to the stability of individual institutions as well as to the banking system 
as a whole”. Although the report was described as “preliminary” I believe with my team, it has 
been possible to establish a fairly clear and comprehensive understanding of the matters in 
question. I believe that clear and unambiguous conclusions have been reached on most of 
the issues on which I was asked to comment, and I feel that there will not be any substantial 
need  for  further  factual  investigations  regarding  the  performance  of  the  Central  Bank  and 
Financial Regulator in these matters.  
In  preparing  the  Report,  an  in-depth  review  of  the  powers,  responsibilities,  philosophy, 
mandate, resources, policies and actions of the Central Bank and Financial Regulator was 
first  carried  out  on  the  basis  of:  (i)  publicly  available  sources  such  as  Annual  Reports, 
Strategy  Statements,  Financial  Stability  Reports,  proceedings  of  the  Oireachtas,  and 
speeches; and (ii) minutes and Board papers of the Central Bank and Financial Regulator as 
well as extensive internal files, principally of the Financial Regulator.  
Documentary  material  only  takes  one  so  far.  In  order  to  obtain  additional  background 
information  as  well  as  elicit  views  of  key  officials,  an  extensive  series  of  interviews  were 
undertaken running to about 120 hours; all persons requested to attend an interview did so. 
All  of  the  directors  of  the  CBFSAI  and  the  Regulatory  Authority  as  well  as  all  senior 
management, managers and deputy managers in relevant units of the CBFSAI during 2003–
2008 were interviewed. In addition, several other officials of the CBFSAI provided invaluable 
assistance on a number of important issues. In addition, to obtain a fuller picture, interviews 
were  also  conducted  with  a  number  of  senior  officials  of  the  Department  of  Finance,  the 
NTMA, the former Financial Services Ombudsman and three former bankers.  
There  are  legal  constraints  on  the  detail  which  can  be  published  on  individual  credit 
institutions, but I have sought to disclose as much detail as possible within these constraints. 
That has meant concealing or scrambling the identities of individual banks in many places, 
BIS Review 83/2010 
 1
but I do not think that this has materially hampered the presentation or interfered with the 
possibility of explaining what went wrong. 
The  committee  already  discussed  last  week  the  work  of  Klaus  Regling  and  Max  Watson. 
Their  report  overlapped  to  some  extent  with  mine,  in  that  they  devoted  some  attention  to 
bank  regulation  and  financial  stability  policy.  They  also  discussed  at  some  length 
macroeconomic and fiscal policy on which my report had relatively little to say. There was, I 
feel a substantial degree of concordance between the two reports.  
To  repeat  the  main  conclusions  of  my  report,  it  points  first  and  foremost  to  prima  facie 
evidence of a comprehensive failure of bank management and direction to maintain safe and 
sound banking practices.  
This failure of bank management was not sufficiently countered by regulatory and financial 
stability policy, for three main reasons.  
First,  a  regulatory  approach  which  was  excessively  deferential  and  accommodating; 
insufficiently challenging and not persistent enough.  
Second,  under-resourced  bank  supervision  that,  by  relying  on  good  governance  and  risk-
management  procedures,  neglected  quantitative  assessment  and  the  need  to  ensure 
sufficient capital to absorb the growing property-related risks.  
Third, an unwillingness by the CBFSAI to take on board sufficiently the real risk of a looming 
problem and act with sufficient decisiveness and force to head it off in time.  
The  report  also  points  to  the  contributory  role  of  macroeconomic  and  budgetary  policies 
which contributed significantly to the economic overheating, relying to a clearly unsustainable 
extent on the construction sector and other transient sources for Government revenue (and 
encouraging the property boom via various incentives geared at the construction sector). A 
less  accommodating  and  procyclical  policy  would  have  greatly  reduced  the  need  for 
preventive action from the CBFSAI. 
When I appeared before another Oireachtas committee in December I said, “We understand 
some of what happened, but some of it is still hard to understand”. I think that we now know 
a  lot  more  about  the  dimensions  of  the  crisis  on  which  my  report  has  focused,  leaving 
relatively  little  to  be  explored  at  the  factual  level  by  the  proposed  statutory  commission  of 
investigation.  
As  far  as  other  areas  which  deserve  further  study  are  concerned,  in  the  same  general 
territory, but just outside the terms of reference for my report, I feel that we still don’t know 
enough  about  the  risk  management  and  decision  processes  in  the  major  banks,  and  how 
they failed to avoid disaster. I believe it would be useful to commission independent reviews 
of risk management and governance of these matters for at least the two big banks – this 
can be a useful exercise on a forward looking basis anyway, but looking at the period 2003–
2008 would be key for the present purposes.  
The potential role of accounting and auditing professionals is another matter that deserves 
additional  factual  exploration.  It  may  be  that  this  particular aspect  should  be  deferred  until 
after  more  of  the  NAMA  purchases  have  been  completed,  as  (judging  from  the  evidence 
provided  to  this  committee  in  April  by  Brendan  McDonagh)  the  due  diligence  for  these 
purchases seems to have revealed some issues around loan documentation.  
Finally there may also be a case for commissioning a study of the operations of the mortgage 
intermediaries in loan origination during the boom period.  
At  the  Central  Bank,  we  have  learnt  our  lesson  and  are  already  putting  in  place  new 
procedures  and  arrangements  that  take  account  of  that,  and  we  will  be  making  further 
announcements on this in the coming weeks. 
2 
 BIS Review 83/2010
Ric Battellino: Aspects of Australia’s finances 
Address by Mr Ric Battellino, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to Financial 
Executives International of Australia, Sydney, 15 June 2010. 
 Given  the  financial  orientation  of  this  group,  I  thought  I  would  focus  my  remarks  today  on 
some aspects of Australia’s finances. In particular, I want to deal with three questions that 
often come up when I talk to analysts and bankers from overseas. These are: 
 
 
 
Before I move on to these questions, I should note that, in my experience, foreigners never 
ask about government debt in Australia, or corporate debt for that matter. It is not hard to 
understand why, as both government and corporate debt in Australia are low by international 
standards. 
are Australian households over-geared?  
does Australia have too much foreign debt? and  
do Australian banks rely too much on foreign wholesale funding? 
Household debt 
Let me then start with household debt. 
The  Reserve  Bank  monitors  developments  in  household  debt  very  closely  as  they  have 
significant implications for the economy. 
Glenn  Stevens  summarised  the  Bank’s  view  on  this  last  week  when  he  noted  that,  while 
households had coped well with current levels of debt, it would not be wise for there to be 
further big increases in household indebtedness. 
As you know, household debt has risen significantly faster than household income since the 
early 1990s. At that time, households on average had debt equal to half a year’s disposable 
income;  by  2006,  debt  had  risen  to  around  one  and  a  half  years’  income.  Since  then, 
however, the ratio of debt to income has stabilised (Graph 1). 
BIS Review 83/2010 
  3
Most of the rise was due to housing debt, including debt used to fund investment properties. 
Other household debt, which includes credit card debt, car loans, margin loans and so on, 
has not changed much relative to income over the period. 
The current household debt ratio in Australia is similar to that in most developed countries 
(Graph 2).1 Significant exceptions are Germany and France, where the ratios are lower, at 
around  one  year’s  income,  and  the  Netherlands,  where  the  ratio  is  much  higher  –  almost 
2½ years’ income – due to the tax incentives for households to stay geared up. 
 All countries have experienced rises in household debt ratios over recent decades. Clearly, 
therefore, the forces that drove the rise in household debt ratios were not unique to Australia. 
The two biggest contributing factors were financial deregulation and the structural decline in 
interest rates. 
One  of  the  consequences  of  financial  deregulation  was  that  the  availability  of  credit  to 
households greatly increased. Up to the 1980s, the various controls on the financial sector 
meant  that  the  ability  of  households  to  obtain  credit  was  constrained.  Even  obtaining  a 
housing loan was relatively difficult. However, after financial regulations were eased around 
the  globe,  many  new  financial  products  were  developed  specifically  for  households,  and 
particularly relating to housing finance. Households found it was much easier to get a loan. 
Most loans products have worked well, though some have caused significant problems; sub-
prime loans in the United States are the clearest example. 
The level of interest rates in most developed economies in the past decade has been about 
half  that  in  the  decade  to  1995.  This  structural  decline  in  interest  rates  has  facilitated  the 
increase  in  household  debt  ratios  because  it  reduced  debt-servicing  costs  (Table  1). 
Households have therefore found that they can now service more debt than used to be the 
case. 
                                                 
1   Note that there is no particular reason why household debt ratios should be the same across countries. 
4 
 BIS Review 83/2010
 Has the rise in household debt left households over-exposed financially? In trying to judge 
this, there are a few considerations to take into account. 
First, at the same time as the household debt ratio has risen, so too have the assets held by 
households.  Some  commentators  might  dismiss  this  as  simply  reflecting  the  fact  that  the 
additional debt has been used to inflate asset values. There is some basis for this in relation 
to housing assets but, even if we exclude housing and focus only on households’ financial 
assets,  the  statement  is  still  true.  Financial  assets  held  by  households  have  risen  to  the 
equivalent of 2.75 years of household income, up from 1.75 years’ income in the early 1990s. 
Second,  the  available  data  suggest  that  the  increased  debt  has  mostly  been  taken  on  by 
households which are in the strongest position to service it. For example, if we look at the 
distribution of debt by income, we can see that the big increases in household debt over the 
past decade have been at the high end of the income distribution (Graph 3). Households in 
the top two income quintiles account for 75 per cent of all outstanding household debt (Graph 
4). In contrast, households in the bottom two income quintiles account for only 10 per cent of 
household debt. 
 BIS Review 83/2010 
 5
 If we look at the distribution of debt by age of household, we see that the increased debt has 
mainly been taken on by middle-aged households. The proportion of 35–65 year olds with 
debt increased significantly through to 2008, as households have been more inclined to trade 
up to bigger or better located houses, and to buy investment properties. Households under 
35  years  of  age  (i.e.  the  group  that  would  typically  encompass  first-home  owners),  in 
contrast, have seen a fall in the proportion with debt (Graph 5). 
 Another  factor  that  has  contributed  to  the  resilience  of  household  finances  is  that,  by  and 
large, the debt has not been used to increase consumption. Apart from some brief periods, 
household  consumption  has  not  been  unusually  elevated  during  this  period  of  rising  debt. 
Rather, the debt has mainly been used to acquire assets. 
Perhaps the best, and most direct, indicator of households’ capacity to support the increase 
in debt is the arrears rates on loans. This remains very low in Australia. The current arrears 
rate  is  around  0.7  per  cent.  This  is  one  of  the  lowest  rates  among  developed  economies 
(Graph  6).  Other  data  also  suggest  that  households’  aggregate  debt-servicing  capacity  is 
6 
 BIS Review 83/2010
quite strong: in recent years more than half of owner-occupiers have been ahead of schedule 
on the repayments on the loan they took out to buy their property. 
 Within this relatively benign aggregate figure, pockets of stress have emerged from time to 
time. We saw this clearly in the south-western suburbs of Sydney following the sharp run-up 
in  Sydney  house  prices  over  2002  and  2003.  More  recently  there  are  some  signs  of 
increased housing stress in south-east Queensland and Western Australia, again following 
sharp rises in house prices in these areas. 
Another segment of the market that will bear close watching is first-home owners. They have 
accounted  for  an  unusually  high  proportion  of  housing  purchases  over  the  past  couple  of 
years – around 40 per cent. This has reflected the incentives created by various first-home 
owner concessions. Most of these purchases have been funded by floating rate mortgages, 
and the average loan to valuation ratio is relatively high, at around 90 per cent. Clearly, this 
group will be very sensitive to changes in interest rates. 
In summary, if we look at the way the increase in household debt has been distributed, what 
households have done with the money, and the arrears rates on loans, it is reasonable to 
conclude  that  the  household  sector  has  the  capacity  to  support  the  current  level  of  debt. 
Having said that, the higher the level of debt the more vulnerable households are to shocks 
that might affect the economy. We at the Reserve Bank therefore welcome the fact that the 
household debt ratio has flattened out in recent years and, as Glenn Stevens remarked last 
week, there would be benefits in that stability continuing. 
Foreign debt 
Let me now turn to the question of Australia’s foreign debt. 
Following the floating of the exchange rate and the removal of capital controls in the early 
1980s,  both  foreign  investment  in  Australia  and  Australian  investment  abroad  increased 
sharply as the Australian economy became more integrated into the global financial system 
(Graph 7). In net terms, capital inflows increased from around 2 per cent of GDP to around 
4 per cent, and, in the latest decade, to an average of almost 5 per cent of GDP. The current 
account  deficit  widened  correspondingly,  since  with  a  floating  exchange  rate  the  current 
BIS Review 83/2010 
 7
account and capital account balances must be equal and offsetting, both being determined 
simultaneously through the interaction of a wide range of economic and financial forces. 
The  pick-up  in  net capital  inflow  meant  that  the  ratio  of  net  foreign  liabilities  to  GDP  rose. 
From around 20 per cent in 1980, it rose to around 50 per cent by 1995. It then flattened out 
for  a  decade,  but  in  recent  years  the  further  increase  in  net  capital  inflow  has  seen  the 
foreign debt ratio rise again (Graph 8). 
  Expressing  foreign  liabilities  relative  to  GDP  is,  perhaps,  the  most  common  way  in  which 
people analyse them. For emerging markets, this measure has been shown to have some 
association  with  vulnerability  to  balance  of  payments  crises.  This  is  because  emerging 
market economies often have a fixed or managed exchange rate and their foreign liabilities 
tend to be denominated in foreign currency, rather than domestic currency. In such instances 
a  rise  in  the  ratio  of  foreign  liabilities  to  GDP  does  indicate  increased  vulnerability  as  it 
signals an increase in the country’s foreign exchange risk and liquidity risk. 
8 
 BIS Review 83/2010
For a developed economy that can borrow overseas in its own currency, and which has a 
floating exchange rate, the significance of a rise in the ratio of foreign liabilities to GDP is less 
clear. It also needs to be kept in mind that, as economies develop, most financial variables 
rise relative to GDP. This seems to be a consequence of financial deepening. Expressing net 
foreign  liabilities  as  a  percentage  of  the  total  financing  in  the  economy  is,  perhaps,  more 
relevant,  since  it  gives  some  indication  of  the  proportion  of  the  economy’s  funding  that  is 
coming  from  offshore.  In  Australia,  this  ratio  has  remained  relatively  steady  since  the  late 
1980s, at a little over 20 per cent. 
Foreign liabilities can also be measured relative to the physical capital stock of the country, 
giving  an  indication  of  the  proportion  of  the  capital  stock  being  funded  by  foreigners.  This 
ratio, too, has been relatively steady in Australia since the late 1980s, at around 10 per cent. 
One  could  argue  that  housing  assets  should  be  excluded  from  this  latter  measure,  since 
foreigners’  participation  in  the  housing  market  is  relatively  limited.  On  that  basis,  the  ratio 
rose somewhat in the early 1990s, but has been relatively steady since. 
In short, these measures do not suggest the build-up of any significant disequilibrium in the 
economy resulting from foreign liabilities. 
For developed economies with a floating exchange rate and the capacity to borrow offshore 
in  their  own  currency,  the  risk  from  rising  foreign  liabilities  is  not  that  they  will  cause  a 
traditional  balance  of  payments  crisis,  but  that  they  will  undermine  financial  stability.  The 
process by which this can happen typically starts with a country, for one or more reasons, 
becoming attractive to foreign investors. Capital floods in, overwhelming the capacity of the 
economy to use it productively. Credit is misallocated and eventually there is some form of a 
domestic  financial  crisis.  This  type  of  crisis  can  occur  even  in  highly  sophisticated 
economies, as illustrated by the recent sub-prime crisis in the United States. 
The policy challenge for countries in this situation is to ensure that the ready availability of 
offshore funds does not end up distorting or weakening the financial side of the economy. 
As the recipient of large amounts of offshore funds for much of the post-float period, Australia 
has had to remain alert to these challenges. By and large, it has been able to successfully 
absorb  significant  amounts  of  offshore  capital  over  many  years.  There  are  several  factors 
that have contributed to this: 
 
First,  the  country’s  foreign  liabilities  are  virtually  all  either  in  Australian  dollars  or 
hedged  back  to  Australian  dollars.2  Australia  is  able  to  do  this  because  foreign 
investors  are  happy  to  hold  a  certain  proportion  of  their  assets  denominated  in 
Australian  dollars.  This  means  that  Australian  borrowers  do  not  face  foreign 
exchange risk on the capital sourced from overseas. Therefore, if sentiment turns 
and the exchange rate falls, domestic borrowers are largely unaffected. The large 
swings in the exchange rate of the Australian dollar that have occurred over the past 
couple of decades in no way threatened the corporate and financial sectors.  
Second, the offshore capital that has flowed into Australia has been used essentially 
to  fund  high  levels  of  investment.  Australia  uses  foreign  capital  not  because  its 
national saving ratio is low, but because its investment ratio is high by the standards 
of  developed  economies  (Table  2).  In  the  past  decade,  for  example,  the  national 
savings rate in Australia has averaged 22 per cent, much the same as in Europe 
and well above the figure of 15 per cent in the US and UK. Over the same period, 
the investment ratio in Australia averaged 27 per cent, whereas in most developed 
economies it has averaged around 20 per cent. This high ratio of investment to GDP 
                                                  
2   D’Arcy  P,  M  Shah  Idil  and  T  Davis  (2009),  “Foreign  Currency  Exposure  and  Hedging  in  Australia”,  RBA 
Bulletin, December, pp 1–10. 
BIS Review 83/2010 
 9
is,  I  believe,  an  indication  that  Australia  is  using  foreign  capital  productively,  and 
sustaining the capacity of the country to service that capital. 
  Third,  credit  standards,  by  and  large,  have  remained  robust  and  the  amount  of 
capital wasted through bad loans has remained limited. 
Foreign borrowing by banks 
Within  Australia’s  total  foreign  liabilities,  the  proportion  accounted  for  by  the  foreign 
borrowing  of  Australian  banks  has  increased.  Virtually  all  this  rise  took  place  through  the 
decade  of  the  1990s.  Banks  accounted  for  a  little  over  20  per  cent  of  Australia’s  foreign 
liabilities in 1990 but, by 2001, this had risen to around 40 per cent. It has not changed much 
in the past decade (Graph 9). 
Part of this trend was the result of banks adjusting their balance sheets following financial 
deregulation  and  the  growth  of  financial  markets.  These  developments  gave  banks  the 
opportunity to move from deposit funding to various forms of funding through markets, as a 
way of diversifying funding sources or reducing funding costs (Graph 10). 
 10 
 BIS Review 83/2010
 The  growth  of  the  superannuation  industry,  following  government  decisions  to  promote 
compulsory superannuation, probably contributed to this trend. Firstly, it meant households 
became less inclined to hold their savings as bank deposits, and second, the pool of funds 
created by superannuation increased demand for securities such as bank securities. 
Within this trend away from deposits to funding through securities markets, there were also 
forces  that  resulted  in  banks  increasing  their  use  of  offshore  funding.  As  an  example,  a 
substantial proportion – about 20 per cent – of superannuation savings flow offshore, mainly 
into foreign equities. This reduces the pool of savings available domestically to banks and, 
other things equal, increases the amount of offshore funding banks need to undertake. 
It  is  also  an  inescapable  fact  that,  with  Australia  running  a  current  account  deficit,  some 
funding  for  the  economy  needs  to  come  from  offshore.  Households,  by  and  large,  cannot 
borrow  offshore  and  the  government  sector  has  not  had  much  need  for  offshore  funding. 
That  leaves  the  corporate  and  the  financial  sectors.  Of  these,  the  financial  sector  has  a 
comparative advantage in offshore borrowing, because of the relatively high credit rating of 
Australian  banks,  both  compared  with  Australian  corporations  and,  in  recent  years,  with 
banks in other countries. 
Banks in Australia have therefore established a significant role in intermediating the flow of 
funds from overseas to Australia. Banks in countries where there are surplus savings, such 
as those in Europe, play a similar role, though in reverse; they channel funds from domestic 
savers to offshore. 
There is a natural tendency to believe that it is riskier for banks to borrow offshore than to 
lend offshore. Events over the past few years, however, have shown that one activity is not 
intrinsically more risky than the other. It is a matter of how the risks are managed. In the lead 
up  to  the  financial  crisis,  for  example,  European  banks  were  running  very  significant  risks 
through their offshore lending, not only in terms of the credit quality of the US assets they 
were buying, but also in terms of the short-term nature of some of the funding transactions 
that supported those assets. The US dollar shortages that keep recurring in global money 
markets are manifestation of those funding risks. These risks were largely unrecognised and, 
it seems, not very well managed. 
The Australian banks have long recognised the risks that come from their business model, 
and, in my experience, are very focused on understanding those risks and managing them. 
This contributed to their relatively good performance through the global financial crisis. 
BIS Review 83/2010 
 11
Conclusion 
You  may  have  noticed  that  I  have  not  given  categorical  answers  to  the  three  questions  I 
listed at the start of my talk. This is because I don’t think it is possible to give simple “yes” or 
“no” answers to these questions. 
However,  looking  at  a  broad  range  of  financial  data,  and  considering  the  fact  that  the 
Australian economy and financial system have exhibited a high degree of stability over many 
years, despite the many global events that have tested their resilience, is, I think, grounds for 
confidence  that  the  economic  and  financial  structure  that  has  evolved  in  Australia  is 
sustainable. 
12 
 BIS Review 83/2010
