Nout Wellink: Lessons to be learned from the crisis 
Introduction  by  Dr  Nout  Wellink,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank  and  Chairman  of  the 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  press  conference  on  the  Bank’s  Annual 
Report 2009, Amsterdam, 25 March 2010. 
 A  few  words  by  way  of  introduction.  We  are  facing  extraordinary  challenges  and  painful 
adjustments. Moreover, many lessons can be drawn from the crisis: by bank managements, 
regulators, supervisors, but also by customers of financial institutions. 
By pursuing an extremely expansionary monetary and fiscal policy, monetary authorities and 
governments have prevented the world economy from moving into a downward spiral. But 
the remedy also carries risks. To ward off a future wave of inflation, central banks need to 
return to more normal monetary conditions. Furthermore, in a great many countries, the huge 
budget  deficits  run  up  must  be  resolutely  scaled  back  to  avoid  generating  such  a  strong 
upward pressure on inflation rates as to stunt economic recovery. Decisive and rapid scaling-
back of budget deficits is also essential to avert an explosion in governments’ debt positions. 
Monetary  authorities  worldwide  have  taken  the  first  steps  towards  normalising  monetary 
conditions. So has the ECB. 
The restoration of confidence is key to economic recovery. A government that convincingly 
tackles its budgetary problems is an overriding factor in rebuilding confidence. A recent DNB 
survey shows that Dutch citizens acknowledge this necessity. The European agreement to 
narrow the deficit back to below 3% of GDP by 2013 enjoys broad support. But that alone is 
not  enough.  In  addition,  the  Netherlands  should  at  least  aim  to  bring  the  budget  close  to 
balance by the end of the new cabinet period. Also, the rules under the Stability and Growth 
Pact  must  be  tightened.  The  experiences  with  the  Greek  fiscal  deficit  have  made  this 
painfully clear. 
The badly-hit financial sector faces a fundamental adjustment over the next few years. It is in 
everyone’s  interest  that  the  sector  emerges  stronger  from  this  process.  The  timing  and 
method of the government’s retreat from the banking and insurance world is crucial. But it is 
equally  important  that  the  sector  regains  the  confidence  of  society.  Adjustments  in  the 
pension system are needed too. The more difficult it becomes to increase contributions, the 
more uncertain the pension results and the greater the incentive to lower the pension target. 
Raising the retirement age would significantly advance the sustainability of the system. The 
delay arisen is therefore regrettable. 
Financial stability hinges on international agreements and coordination. Major progress has 
been realised both globally and within Europe. Nonetheless, plenty of room for improvement 
remains.  Authorities  need  wider  powers  to  acquire  or  relaunch  flailing  institutions. 
Supervision should be tightened too, to ensure that a closer watch is kept on the strategy 
and corporate culture of supervised institutions, but also that more account is taken of the 
macro-environment in which financial institutions operate.  
Let me conclude. People are understandably disappointed that, nationally and internationally, 
the supervising central banks were unable to protect financial institutions from the storm in 
the  financial  markets  that  blew  up  in  August  2007.  The  recognition  that  the  world  is  less 
formable than commonly thought, and that supervision can provide no guarantee that a bank 
will never fail, cannot allay this disappointment; nor can the notion that we were not dealing 
with  a  typically  Dutch  phenomenon,  but  that  there  were  banks  all  over  the  world  that 
collapsed in the wake of the credit crisis. Our response at DNB can only be that we will in 
future intensify our efforts to prevent misfortunes in the financial sector. And that, along with 
our colleagues in other countries, we will to this end do all that is humanly possible to draw 
every last lesson from the credit crisis. 
BIS Review 40/2010 
 1
