Daniel K Tarullo: International cooperation and financial regulatory 
modernisation 
Testimony  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Security  and  International  Trade  and  
Finance, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, Washington DC, 
20 July 2010. 
 Chairman Bayh, Ranking Member Corker, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate 
the  opportunity  to  testify  today  on  developments  in  international  regulatory  reform  and 
U.S. government priorities for international regulatory cooperation. 
When you held a hearing on this topic in the fall, I gave an overview of the Federal Reserve’s 
role in international cooperative activities and reviewed some pertinent recent developments. 
In  my  testimony  today,  I  will  begin  by  enumerating  the  goals  that  should  inform 
U.S. participation  in  international  regulatory  and  supervisory  activities.  Then  I  will  turn  to 
some  of  the  issues  you  identified  in  your  invitation  letter  as  being  of  interest  to  the 
Subcommittee in this hearing: the Federal Reserve’s role in the international financial reform 
efforts  –  including  our  work  on  the  Basel  III  reforms,  cross-border  crisis  management  and 
resolution, and incentive compensation – and a preliminary assessment of the likely effect of 
the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010 on international financial reform. Finally, I will close with a few 
thoughts  on  the  future  role  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  and  other  international 
regulatory  bodies  as  we  move  from  the  design  of  financial  regulatory  reforms  to 
implementation of the new framework. 
Goals for international cooperation in financial regulation and supervision 
Before  discussing  some  of  the  very  important  initiatives  that  are  under  way,  I  think  it 
important  to  specify  what  I  believe  should  be  the  U.S.  goals  for  international  cooperative 
efforts. 
First,  to  increase  the  stability  of  our  financial  system  through  adoption  of  strong,  common 
regulatory standards for large financial firms and important financial markets. As events of 
the  past  few  years  have  shown,  financial  stresses  can  quickly  spread  across  national 
borders. Global financial stability is a critical shared goal. 
Second,  to  prevent  major  competitive  imbalances  between  U.S.  and  foreign  financial 
institutions. A core set of good common standards will reduce opportunities for cross-border 
regulatory  arbitrage,  even  as  it  promotes  financial  stability.  This  goal  is  particularly 
noteworthy as the United States tightens its domestic prudential standards. 
Third,  to  make  supervision  of  internationally  active  financial  institutions  more  effective 
through a clear understanding of home and host country responsibilities and adequate flows 
of information and analysis. 
Fourth,  beyond  the  supervision  of  individual  institutions,  to  exchange  information  and 
analysis in an effort to identify potential sources of financial instability and to take action to 
help  mitigate  the  buildup  of  risks  in  international  financial  markets,  particularly  those 
potentially posing systemic risks. 
Embracing these goals does not, of course, answer the often complex questions raised in 
specific initiatives, such as the degree to which rules should be standardized and the degree 
to which national variation or discretion is warranted in pursuing shared regulatory ends. But 
I do think it is useful to keep all of these goals in mind as we pursue our international agenda. 
BIS Review 99/2010 
 1
Our  task  as  U.S.  regulators  is  to  work  to  ensure  that,  together,  the  various  international 
financial organizations produce reforms and practices that are consistent with U.S. interests 
and legal requirements. 
The Federal Reserve’s role in international financial reform efforts 
As a central bank with significant supervisory responsibilities, the Federal Reserve actively 
participates  in  both  (1)  central-bank-focused  groups  that  monitor  developments  in  global 
financial  markets  and  promote  sound  and  efficient  payment  systems  and  (2)  supervisory 
forums,  such  as  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (Basel  Committee),  which 
promotes  high  global  standards  for  banking  supervision  and  regulation.  We  also  actively 
participate in the FSB, which is coordinating many of the initiatives undertaken in response to 
the financial crisis and is directly communicating with the Group of Twenty (G20). 
Our  contributions  to  these  groups  take  advantage  of  the  synergies  between  our  central 
banking  functions  and  our  supervisory  responsibilities.  Our  contributions  combine  our 
economic  research,  knowledge  of  financial  markets,  and  regulatory  policy  experience. 
Interestingly,  in  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis,  we  see  some  other  countries,  notably  the 
United Kingdom, moving back toward a more significant involvement of the central bank in 
supervision, presumably for these same reasons. 
Basel III 
The  Basel  Committee  is  working  toward  new  global  standards  for  minimum  bank  capital 
levels and a new liquidity requirement – a project that has become known as Basel III. This 
undertaking is central to the first and second goals for international cooperation that I noted 
earlier.  The  Basel  Committee  aims  to  complete  this  task  by  the  November  G20  leaders 
meeting in Seoul. The Federal Reserve has devoted considerable resources to this important 
global initiative, and we note that international bank supervisors continued to make progress 
at the Basel Committee meeting last week. 
We  agree  with  the  yardstick  set  forth  last  month  by  the  G20  leaders  in  Toronto  –  that 
minimum  capital  requirements  should  “enable  banks  to  withstand  –  without  extraordinary 
government support – stresses of a magnitude associated with the recent financial crisis.”1 
Our view is that large institutions should be sufficiently capitalized so that they could sustain 
the losses associated with a systemic problem and remain sufficiently capitalized to continue 
functioning  effectively  as  financial  intermediaries.  Meeting  this  standard  will  require  a 
considerable  strengthening  of  existing  requirements,  both  with  respect  to  the  amount  of 
capital held and to the quality of that capital. As to the former, it is particularly important that 
the risk weightings associated with traded instruments be substantially increased. As to the 
latter, the crisis confirmed what many of us have long believed – that common equity is by far 
the  best  measure  of  a  firm’s  loss  absorption  capacity.  During  the  crisis,  regulators, 
counterparties,  and  market  analysts  all  looked  to  levels  of  common  equity  as  the  key 
measure of a firm’s durability in the face of extraordinary financial stress. We have conducted 
extensive  analysis  to  inform  our  judgments  on  the  specific  rules  needed  to  implement  this 
standard. In this respect, the stress tests we conducted last year as part of the Supervisory 
Capital  Assessment  Program  have  been  very  useful  in  assessing  the  amount  of  capital 
needed to survive a financial crisis without unusual government support. 
Since the Basel Committee published its proposals in a number of consultative documents, 
the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  other  U.S.  federal  banking  agencies  have  been  working 
together  for  a  Basel  III framework  that  produces  a strong  set  of  globally  consistent  capital 
                                                 
1   G20 (2010), “The G20 Toronto Summit Declaration,” Financial Sector Reform, item 18, G20 Toronto Summit 
held June 26–27 in Toronto, Canada. 
2 
 BIS Review 99/2010
and  liquidity  requirements  that  will  promote  financial  stability  and  a  level  playing  field  for 
internationally active banks. We have assessed how various proposals would, or would not, 
achieve  that  aim.  We  have  also  considered  carefully  how  to  structure  the  transition  to  the 
new  requirements  so  as  to  minimize  their  effect  on  the  economy  as  a  whole  and  to  allow 
adequate time for firms to adjust their capital accounts. 
Although adopting a robust, common set of capital and liquidity rules for internationally active 
banks  is  critical,  it  is  neither  practical  nor  desirable  to  negotiate  all  details  of  financial 
regulation  internationally.  It  is  important  that  the  United  States  preserves  the  flexibility  to 
adopt prudential regulations that work best within the U.S. financial and legal systems. Within 
a common set of agreed-upon global standards, each jurisdiction will want to tailor some of 
its rules and supervisory practice to national conditions and preferences. Along these lines, 
there  have  been  recent  discussions  within  the  FSB  on  the  possibility  of  formalizing 
consultations among member countries to examine how each member is using its own mix of 
instruments to achieve particular safety and soundness ends. 
The  Basel  Committee  has  a  number  of  initiatives  and  work  programs  related  to  capital 
requirements that go beyond the package of measures that we expect to be completed by 
the  fall.  These  efforts  include,  among  others,  ideas  for  countercyclical  capital  buffers, 
contingent  capital,  and  development  of  a  metric  for  capital  charges  tied  to  systemic  risk. 
Each  of  these  ideas  has  considerable  conceptual  appeal,  but  some  of  the  difficulties 
encountered in translating the ideas into practical rules mean that work on them is likely to 
continue into next year. 
Cross-border crisis management and resolution 
Like stronger capital and liquidity requirements, improved resolution regimes for both banks 
and  systemically  important  nonbank  financial  companies  are  a  critical  element  of  the 
domestic  and  international  agenda  to  contain  systemic  risk.  Internationally,  the  FSB  is 
seeking  to  enhance  cross-border  cooperation  both  in  making  advanced  preparations  for 
handling severe stress at specific firms and in dealing with financial crises when they occur. 
The FSB is developing concrete policy recommendations for the G20 Summit in November. 
Specifically, the FSB is working to identify common principles and key attributes for effective 
national resolution regimes, including a menu of resolution tools for authorities to draw upon 
in light of the varying circumstances that may be associated with distress at a particular firm. 
Among these are restructuring and wind-down measures for firms that will be closed down, 
such  as  arrangements  for  providing  temporary  funding  or  the  ability  to  establish  a  bridge 
bank  to  take  over  essential  functions.  There  is  also  considerable  interest  at  the  FSB  in 
developing  a  resolution  tool  that  could  facilitate  a  restructuring  of  a  firm’s  own  capital  and 
liquidity that would allow it to continue operating as a going concern. Specifically, the FSB is 
exploring whether there could be a viable mechanism for converting debt into equity through 
terms set out in the debt instruments. 
Another  aspect  of  the  FSB’s  work  focuses  on  four  technical  areas  that  may  affect  cross-
border  recovery  or  resolution:  (1)  practices  for booking  trades  in  one  legal  entity and  then 
transferring the market or credit risk of the trade to a different location or legal entity; (2) the 
use of intra-group guarantees and related cross-border implications; (3) the critical nature of 
global  payments  operations,  such  as  cash  payments  or  securities  settlement;  and  (4)  the 
adequacy of a firm’s management information  systems and service level agreements. The 
FSB is exploring ways to mitigate challenges related to these four areas. 
Firm-specific  crisis  management  working  groups  composed  of  home  and  host  supervisory 
authorities  are  working  to  identify  specific  issues  and  barriers  to  coordinated  action  that 
may  arise  in  handling  severe  stress  at  identified  firms.  This  process  should  culminate  in 
recovery plans – developed by the individual firms – that outline options for an institution to 
recover from a severe distress without extraordinary official sector actions, and resolution 
BIS Review 99/2010 
 3
plans – developed by the official sector – intended to identify options that would result in an 
orderly wind-down. 
Domestically,  we  have  formed  crisis  management  groups  to  cover  the  key  internationally 
active  U.S.  banking  organizations.  In  addition  to  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  groups  include 
representatives  from  the  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  Federal  Deposit 
Insurance  Corporation,  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  and  relevant 
foreign 
supervisors and central banks. The firms are each internally identifying and assessing their 
options  and  strategies  to  lower  risk  in  the  event  of  stress,  including  selling  portfolios  or 
business  lines,  restructuring  liabilities  and  implementing  contingency  funding  plans.  The 
objective  is  to  ensure  that  each  firm  has  a  concrete  and  viable  plan  to  reduce  riskiness, 
ensure the continuity of critical financial services, preserve liquidity, and make up cash flow 
shortages  under  severely  adverse  conditions.  They  are  individually  working  with  their  own 
crisis management group to isolate key impediments to recovery and are focusing on work 
that  should be  undertaken  in  the  near  term  to enhance  recovery  options.  These  plans  will 
have  to  be  dynamic  to  ensure  they  remain  relevant  and  appropriate  in  light  of  changing 
business and economic conditions. 
Despite  the  progress  that  is  being  made  through  the  FSB  work  and  domestic  efforts, 
comprehensive  solutions  to  cross-border  crisis  management  difficulties  will  not  be  easy  to 
achieve.  Enhancing  cross-jurisdictional  synchronization  of  resolution  options  and  recovery 
processes  would  be  a  meaningful  step  in  the  right  direction.  At  least  for  the  foreseeable 
future, a focus on regulatory coordination and supervisory cooperation and planning before a 
large firm’s failure becomes a real possibility is likely to yield the greatest benefit. 
Incentive compensation 
In the last two years, compensation has been a regular topic of discussion at meetings of 
international regulatory groups, culminating in the FSB’s agreement last year on principles to 
guide incentive compensation.2 The principles specify that compensation practices at major 
financial  institutions  should  properly  account  for  risk,  that  boards  of  directors  and  risk 
managers at such firms should ensure they do so, that supervisors should provide effective 
oversight,  and  that  firms’  disclosures  should  be  sufficient  to  inform  stakeholders  about 
compensation and risk. 
In addition to these principles, a number of specific projects are in progress or have recently 
been  completed  by  international  regulatory  working  groups.  The  FSB  conducted  a  peer 
review  of  G20  nations’  progress  toward  implementing  the  principles,  which  found  that 
progress is being made but more work is needed. Other projects include work by the Basel 
Committee, expected by end-2010, on practices that would improve the soundness of risk-
taking incentives, and a proposal for disclosure of compensation information under Pillar 3 of 
Basel 2. 
While the views of national supervisory authorities have in many respects converged on such 
matters  as  the  sources  and  effects  of  incentive  problems  and  some  methods  for  better 
aligning  the  risk-taking  incentives  of  employees  at  major  financial  institutions  with  the 
interests  of  shareholders  and  the  financial  system,  different  nations  have  taken  different 
approaches in implementing the FSB principles. 
We  have  adopted  an  approach  that  requires  large  financial  organizations  to  establish  and 
maintain internal governance and management systems to implement principles for assuring 
that  incentive  compensation  arrangements  are  risk-appropriate.  These  principles,  and  the 
process  by  which  we  proposed  that  they  be  implemented,  were  issued  by  the  Federal 
                                                 
2   See Financial Stability Board (2009), FSB Principles for Sound Compensation Practices (87 KB PDF) (Basel, 
Switzerland: FSB, September). 
4 
 BIS Review 99/2010
Reserve  for  public  comment  in  October.  The  final  supervisory  guidance,  which  was  jointly 
issued with the other banking agencies, was released last month.3 We chose a principles-
based  approach  because  of  the  substantial  variation  in  the  actual  incentives  and  risks 
associated with the thousands of executives and other employees within and among banking 
organizations.  Our  view  continues  to  be  that  a  uniform  or  formulaic  approach  to  all  such 
employees  would  be  neither  efficient  in  motivating  and  compensating  employees  nor 
effective in preventing excessively risky activity, particularly among non-executives such as 
traders. 
In contrast, this month the European Parliament approved a directive that has the potential to 
lead  to  a  number  of  formula-based  restrictions  on  employee  compensation  at  financial 
services firms operating in the European Union (EU).4 This approach is consonant with views 
expressed by some EU members to the effect that formula setting – for example, putting a 
floor  on  the  portion  of  an  employee’s  salary  that  must  be  deferred  –  is  the  surest  way  to 
produce  changes  in  bank  practice.  However,  many  of  the  details  are  left  to  be  set  by  the 
European Commission, the Committee of European Bank Supervisors, and other entities. 
While both approaches have merit, we believe the option we have chosen is likely to be more 
successful in promoting risk-appropriate compensation practices. As already noted, we fear 
that  a  formula-based  approach  applicable  to  all  covered  employees  may  spawn  efforts  to 
circumvent the rules through creative new compensation practices, whereas our requirement 
that the banks internalize sound principles for incentive compensation and apply them to all 
such  arrangements  places  a  continuing  responsibility  on  the  firms  themselves.  Of  course, 
considerable oversight is needed to ensure that a principles-based approach is implemented 
rigorously.  We  have  already  conducted  an  extensive  horizontal  review  of  compensation 
practices at 25 large U.S. financial holding companies and have sent detailed assessments 
to each firm commenting on their proposals for implementing the principles. 
It may well be that over time the two approaches will converge somewhat. For example, we 
may  determine  on  the  basis  of  experience  with  many  firms  that  there  are  certain  best 
practices that should at least presumptively be applicable to certain classes of employees. 
Similarly,  the  EU  may  find  that  more  attention  to  internalization  of  the  principles  and 
customization of appropriate practices is necessary, particularly as applied to non-executive 
employees. We intend to continue information sharing and discussions through the FSB and 
the  Basel  Committee.  For  now,  though,  there is  indeed  a difference in  approach, one  that 
illustrates  the  point  I  made  earlier  that  there  need  not  be  complete  harmonization  in  all 
prudential regulation and supervision, even where there is agreement on basic goals. 
Effect of the Dodd-Frank Act 
Of  course,  concurrent  with  the  efforts  of  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  U.S.  agencies  to 
advance  the  goals  of  international  regulatory  reform,  the  U.S.  Congress  has  debated  and 
passed  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  creating  a  comprehensive  package  of  domestic  financial 
reforms. 
Many elements of the Dodd-Frank Act align closely with the efforts of the G20 leaders, the 
FSB, and the Basel Committee. For example, the act provides the federal government with 
the authority to subject all financial firms that present outsized systemic risks – regardless of 
whether they own an insured depository institution – to a common framework of supervision 
                                                 
3   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the 
Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  and  Office  of  Thrift  Supervision  (2010),  “Federal  Reserve,  OCC,  OTS,  FDIC 
Issue Final Guidance on Incentive Compensation,” joint press release, June 21. 
4   More 
information  on 
this  directive 
is  available  on 
the  European  Parliament  website  at 
www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?type=TA&reference=P7-TA-2010-0274&language=EN. 
BIS Review 99/2010 
 5
and  regulation  by  the  Federal  Reserve.  In  addition,  the  act  creates  a  special  resolution 
regime  that  gives  the  government  the  capacity  to  unwind  or  break  apart  major  non-bank 
financial firms in an orderly fashion with less collateral damage to the system. Moreover, the 
act strengthens the resiliency of the financial market infrastructure by mandating increased 
central  clearing  and  transparency  for  over-the-counter  derivative  transactions  and  stronger 
prudential regulation of bank and nonbank derivatives dealers. The act also provides for the 
registration  of  advisers  to  hedge  funds  and  other  private  investment  funds,  improved 
regulation of credit rating agencies, and more-consistent oversight of systemically important 
financial market utilities. 
At the same time, there are aspects of the Dodd-Frank Act that are unlikely to become part of 
the  international  financial  regulatory  framework.  For  example,  the  act  generally  prohibits 
U.S. banking  firms  (and  the  U.S.  operations  of  foreign  banking  firms)  from  engaging  in 
proprietary trading and from investing in or sponsoring private investment funds. The act also 
prohibits U.S. depository institutions from entering into certain types of derivatives transactions. 
In the United States, activity restrictions have long been a part of the bank regulatory regime, 
serving to constrain risk-taking by banking firms, prevent the spread of the market distortions 
caused by the federal bank safety net to other parts of the economy, and mitigate potential 
conflicts of interest generated by the combination of banking and certain other businesses 
within a single firm. Many other countries follow a universal banking model and are unlikely 
to adopt the sorts of activity restrictions contained in the act. 
Similarly,  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  expands  the  existing  10  percent  deposit  cap  in  U.S.  law  by 
preventing the Federal Reserve from approving a material acquisition by a financial firm if the 
resulting firm would have liabilities that exceed 10 percent of the total liabilities of the broader 
U.S. banking system. Other countries with more concentrated banking systems are unlikely 
to impose this type of concentration limit on financial firms in their jurisdiction. 
Again, not all elements of financial reform can be designed on a national level in a way that is 
perfectly consistent across countries. The characteristics of each country’s financial system 
differ, sometimes significantly. Our challenge is to strike the right balance between achieving 
global consistency on the core reforms necessary to protect financial stability and provide a 
workably  level  playing  field,  and  at  the  same  time  providing  the  flexibility  necessary  to 
supplement the common standards with elements tailored to national financial systems, legal 
structures, and policy preferences. 
Current and future focus of international regulatory groups 
As  my  testimony  makes  clear,  the  international  regulatory  groups  remain  focused  on 
responding to the crisis. The FSB is pursuing financial reform and working with the relevant 
standard-setting bodies to ensure that detailed proposals are developed in a timely manner. 
In some cases, the importance of the issues and the drive to respond quickly to the crisis 
have  led  to  a  proliferation  of  international  working  groups  whose  mandates  may  overlap. 
While this reaction is natural in the wake of a crisis, we will need to rationalize the activities of 
these groups as our focus shifts from policy development to implementation. So, too, we will 
need  to  ensure  that  the  relatively  new  members  of  these  groups  are  fully  and  effectively 
integrated into their activities, including in leadership positions. 
It is also important that we not lose sight of the third and fourth goals I suggested for our 
international  cooperative  efforts.  While  much  of  the  effort  in  the  international  groups  has 
recently  been  focused  on  negotiating  rules  and  principles  to  reform  financial  regulation,  it 
would  be  unfortunate  going  forward  if  negotiations  were  to  become  the  dominant  mode  of 
international  financial  cooperation.  We  would  not  want  to  crowd  out  the  other  valuable 
aspects  of  international  regulatory  cooperation,  including  sharing  supervisory  perspectives 
on internationally active financial institutions and analyzing latent risks to financial stability. 
6 
 BIS Review 99/2010
The  FSB  itself  has  a  valuable  role  to  play  by  bringing  together  the  international  standard-
setting  bodies  and  key  national  authorities  responsible  for  financial  stability  in  the  G20 
member jurisdictions. Its role might usefully be conceived as roughly paralleling the role to be 
played  by  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  in  the  United  States  under  the  Dodd-
Frank  Act.  The  FSB  can  facilitate  discussion  and  analysis  of  emerging  risks  to  financial 
stability that cut across sectors or across the jurisdiction of more than one regulator. Because 
it consists of senior officials from finance ministries, regulatory agencies, and central banks, it 
is well positioned not only to identify cross-cutting risks or regulatory gaps, but also to take 
action to address those risks. 
Finally,  I  believe  that  it  will  be  important  for  standard-setting  bodies  such  as  the  Basel 
Committee  to  enhance  monitoring  of  the  implementation  of  the  sometimes  complex 
agreements reached internationally. Where it is difficult for market analysts and other outside 
observers  to  determine  if,  for  example,  Basel  III  capital  rules  are  being  vigorously 
implemented  and  enforced,  the  international  standard  setters  must  themselves  develop 
appropriate monitoring mechanisms. These mechanisms must go beyond examining whether 
international standards have been duly incorporated into domestic law to consider whether 
financial institutions are complying with those standards. 
Thank you for again giving me the opportunity to share our thoughts on the evolving issues in 
international  financial  cooperation.  I  would  be  pleased  to  answer  any  questions  you  may 
have. 
BIS Review 99/2010 
 7
