Axel A Weber: Germany and the financial crisis – challenges and 
opportunities 
Luncheon speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
American Council on Germany, New York, 26 April 2010. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
to this day, the Berlin airlift of the years 1948/49 continues to be an impressive monument of 
the solidarity between the United States and Germany which started after World War II. For 
this friendship to prosper, the intellectual and cultural exchange between the two countries 
has  been  very  important.  The  American  Council  on  Germany  in  New  York  as  well  as  its 
German counterpart the Atlantik-Brücke have, since their incorporation in 1952, contributed 
largely to a better understanding between the two countries both in political and in economic 
affairs. Therefore, I am very honoured by the invitation of the American Council on Germany 
to  give  a  speech  about  challenges  and  opportunities  facing  the  German  economy  in  the 
aftermath of the financial crisis. 
In order to explain the background of the current economic situation in Germany, I would first 
like to take a brief look back to the past. 
How would I have assessed the economic situation in Germany, had I given this speech six 
years ago? In fact, my assessment would have been quite dire. In spring 2004, the German 
economy was just about to turn the corner after three years of stagnation. However, the relief 
about  the  first  signs  of  economic  recovery  was  clouded  by  obvious  structural  problems. 
Whereas the cyclical upturn was sustained primarily by stimuli to German exports stemming 
from  a  buoyant  world  economy,  there  were  hardly  any  signs  of  a  broadly  based  and  self-
sustaining upswing, not least owing to high structural unemployment and depressed private 
consumption. In addition, the fiscal deficit was expected to exceed the Maastricht Treaty’s 
deficit ceiling of 3% for the third year in succession, hence limiting the scope for fiscal action. 
Policymakers were well aware of the seriousness of the situation, and economic and social 
policy  reforms  had  been  already  initiated.  However,  strong  headwinds  in  pushing  through 
those reforms were to be expected. 
Three  years  later,  in  spring  2007,  my  take  on  the  situation  would  have  been  much  more 
positive.  At  that  time  the  German  economy  was  on  a  sound  upward  path.  Although  the 
strongest impulses still came from the export sector, domestic economic conditions had very 
much  improved.  In  particular,  a  strong  recovery  in  the  labour  market,  breaking  the  ratchet 
effect of ever persistently rising unemployment, and a greater employment intensity pointed 
to improved longer-term growth fundamentals. In addition, a nearly balanced budget was to 
be  expected  for  2007.  What  had  happened?  First  of  all,  important  structural  reforms  had 
been successfully implemented. These were bold labour market reforms, which modernised 
the labour market structure and lowered the employment threshold of economic growth, as 
well  as  adjustments  in  the  social  security  systems,  in  particular  the  pension  system.  The 
structural  reforms  paved  the  way  for  further  necessary  market-based  corrections,  for 
example  in  wage  setting  and  intra-plant  working-time  flexibility.  Secondly,  the  improved 
economic situation was used for serious fiscal consolidation.  
To sum up: The German economy was quite strong, when the first harbingers of turmoil were 
witnessed on the US housing market. In the meantime, we have experienced a very severe 
global  financial  crisis  which  caused  the  deepest  global  recession  since  World  War  II. 
Therefore, I would like to talk about the following two questions:  
BIS Review 57/2010 
 1
1. 
2. 
Where does the German economy currently stand, now that tensions on the global 
financial markets have eased and the global economy is gradually recovering?  
What  are  the  economic  and  fiscal  policy  challenges  to  which  Germany  has  to 
respond in order to enhance the framework for economic growth?  
Where do we stand? 
2. 
The  German  economy  is  clearly  in  the  process  of  recovering  from  the  deep  downturn  it 
experienced in the winter 2008/09. As in most other industrialised economies the recovery 
process  started  in  spring  2009,  driven  mainly  by  a  massive  fiscal  and  monetary  stimulus. 
Still, GDP contracted by 5% compared to 2008 and hence by much more than in the United 
States. Around the turn of the year, economic activity was dampened as the fiscal stimulus 
wore off and also owing to the inventory cycle. The relatively cold and snowy winter weather 
was  an  additional  burden  for  the  recovery  process.  However,  trend  recovery  remained 
basically  intact  and  the  recovery  process  is  expected  to  regain  momentum  in  the  second 
quarter of 2010. As a typical mainstay of the German economy, exports will once again play 
an  important  role  in  the  recovery.  However,  unlike  earlier  economic  downturns,  the  labour 
market  stayed  surprisingly  robust  throughout  the  crisis.  As  a  consequence,  consumption 
activity is this time comparatively stable, therefore supporting the economic growth process. 
Nonetheless, there are obvious footprints of the financial turmoil and economic downturn in 
Germany. These are most obvious in the banking sector. Total write-downs of German banks 
have so far accumulated to roughly US$ 98.9 billion during the financial crisis. And further 
losses, especially in the form of write-downs on loans, are still to be expected. Those losses 
are  mainly  straining  the  financial  institutions  themselves,  necessitating  huge  consolidation 
efforts. However, where banks have taken advantage of the banking stabilisation measures 
provided by the government and coordinated by the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin), 
these losses either have already burdened the fiscal budget or might do so in future. 
This leads me to the next footprint of the financial crisis. Public debt has risen sharply. As in 
almost all industrialised countries, this was a consequence of the sharp economic downturn 
as  well  as  the  extensive  fiscal  support  measures  necessary  in  order  to  stabilise  the 
economies.  Starting  from  an  almost  balanced  budget  in  the  years  2007  and  2008,  public 
finances in Germany worsened significantly in 2009. At 3.3% of GDP the public deficit went 
back above the EU reference value of 3%. As the majority of the revenue losses caused by 
the economic downturn will accrue with a time lag to the business cycle, the prospects for 
public finances in this year are even more dire, with the public deficit expected to hit 5% of 
GDP. 
Finally, we have to bear in mind that the financial crisis brought to an end a period of very 
prosperous but ultimately unsustainable global economic growth. And it may well take some 
time before global output and world trade return to a solid growth path. This development will 
also  affect  the  German  economy,  most  obviously  through  lower  foreign  demand.  But 
potential  output  is  also  likely  to  be  significantly  lower  for  some  time  than  in  the  years 
preceding the financial crisis. Whether this reflects a temporary adjustment process towards 
a new equilibrium potential output level or whether potential output growth will stay impaired 
for a protracted period of time will largely depend on the capacity of the German economy to 
adjust to the new global economic environment. 
To  sum  up,  some  of  the  gains  from  the  last  upswing  have  clearly  been  lost  due  to  the 
financial crisis. Compared with other countries – especially some euro-area member states – 
Germany  is  in  a  relatively  good  position,  as  its  economy  and  public  finances  were  in 
comparatively good shape when the financial crisis broke out. In a sense, Germany reaped 
the fruits of previous reforms also during the crisis. In addition, the German economy was 
spared additional burdens encountered due to lack of structural imbalances in the domestic 
economy,  such  as  a  pre-crisis  boom  in  the  construction  sector  or  a  housing  price  bubble 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2010
bursting  during  the  financial  crisis.  Still,  the  deterioration  in  public  finances  as  well  as  the 
altered  conditions  for  global  economic  growth  pose  substantial  challenges  in  the  coming 
years. 
3. 
The “business model debate” and challenges in the fields of economic and 
fiscal policy 
The  debate  about  those  challenges  and  the  discussion  surrounding  possible  solutions  are 
currently  closely  linked  to  critical  statements  about  the  German  “business  model”.  This 
criticism is voiced in the context of global imbalances as well as divergences among EMU 
member  states.  It  is  argued  that  Germany’s  pre-crisis  export  strength  had  been  fuelled  by 
excessive  wage  moderation  and  had  been  built  up  at  the  expense  of  other  countries. 
Moreover, the export strength is held responsible for Germany’s current account surpluses, 
which  in  turn  are  said  to  have  aggravated  the  financial  crisis.  In  my  view,  this  debate  is 
misleading,  the  reasoning  is  flawed  and  the  resultant  policy  suggestions  are  harmful.  We 
would  be  ill-advised  to  deduce  from  the  recent  experience  a  need  to  actively  prop  up 
domestic  demand,  be  it  via  encouraging  higher  negotiated  wages  or  via  fiscal  policy 
measures. 
First of all, export strength and current account deficits have been unjustifiably linked. High or 
growing export shares are not necessarily associated with current account surpluses. In the 
case of Germany, there are different drivers for both developments. The export strength was 
mainly a result of the high quality of the products and the strong world trade growth during 
the  last  upswing.  The  current  account  surpluses  stemmed  from  relatively  weak  domestic 
demand, but this weakness was not due to macroeconomic demand management or general 
unwillingness  of  Germans  to  spend.  Rather,  it  was  a  by-product  of  the  correction  of  the 
structural  problems  mentioned  before:  Wage  growth  remained 
low  even  as  rising 
employment  reduced  structural  unemployment,  and  fiscal  policy  was  restrictive  in  order  to 
bring down excessive public deficits. Normally, domestic demand could have been expected 
to  accelerate  as  the  correction  proceeded  and  the  upswing  matured,  but  before  that  the 
global financial crisis intervened. 
Secondly,  the  expression  “business  model”  is  misleading,  as  it  gives  the  impression  that 
German export strength is the result of an active policy strategy. However, that was not the 
case. Wage moderation, corporate restructuring and policy measures, which were favourable 
for  Germany’s  price  competitiveness,  were  not  explicitly  aimed  at  promoting  export 
performance  but  the  response  to  structural  problems  which  became  more  and  more 
pressing. Consequently, direct measures to counter Germany’s export strength are neither 
possible nor advisable – all the more so as the high export share reflects, first and foremost, 
the comparative advantages of German firms stemming from their specialisation in consumer 
durables and high-end capital goods which were largely in demand during the last upswing. 
The  impact  of  price  competitiveness  on  Germany’s  export  strength,  by  contrast,  is  often 
overestimated. 
Finally, the external surpluses by definition also imply that total investment in Germany was 
lower  than  total  saving.  Given  that  Germany’s  population  is  shrinking  and  growing  older, 
persistent  current  account  surpluses  leading  to  an  increase  in  net  foreign  assets  are  a 
rational reaction to smooth the burdens of aging over time. 
Therefore, the problem has been less about the emergence of current account surpluses in 
Germany  and  more  about  how  they  have  been  used  abroad.  In  some  euro-area  member 
states  and  in  particular  those  with  large  pre-crisis  current  account  deficits,  the  benefits  of 
monetary union, such as lower interest rates and the elimination of exchange rate risk, have 
not always been used wisely, and have tempted some countries to live beyond their means. 
Now that the financial crisis has revealed the unsustainability of this development, the need 
for  domestic  adjustments  is  becoming  more  and  more  apparent.  Given  this,  attempts  to 
blame Germany for problems in those countries and policy recommendations of symmetrical 
BIS Review 57/2010 
 3
adjustment  needs  are  questionable.  Rather,  the  adjustment  process  that  Germany 
underwent  in  the  decade  preceding  the  financial  crisis  and  which  I  described  earlier  may 
serve as an example. 
This is not to deny that major challenges for economic and fiscal policy in Germany remain. 
But instead of artificially propping up demand, economic policy should strive to enhance the 
framework  for  economic  growth.  To  that  end,  obstacles  to  a  market-induced  and  smooth 
reallocation  of  resources  have  to  be  removed,  which  would  facilitate  the  necessary 
adjustments to the changed external environment. Three areas of policy action are key going 
forward:  Firstly,  deregulation  to  abolish  barriers  in  the  services  sector  might  strengthen 
domestic demand and thus broaden the basis for German economic growth. Secondly, with 
respect to the labour market, important adjustments in the area of temporary and short-term 
contracts have already been implemented in order to combat high structural unemployment 
after  the  last  recession.  This  success,  however,  should  not  be  jeopardised  by  a  partial 
reversion  of  past  labour  market  adjustments.  On  the  contrary,  broader  labour  market 
flexibility is desirable in order to facilitate domestic reallocation of workers to more profitable 
sectors. 
Thirdly,  the  contribution  fiscal  policy  can  deliver  to  enhancing  the  framework  of  economic 
growth – the rapid consolidation of public finances – is undisputed and without alternative. It 
is not least the financial crisis and most recent events which have highlighted the importance 
of fiscal scope of maneuver in times of crisis and the risks of unsustainable public deficits. 
Therefore,  it  is  of  utmost  importance  that  fiscal  policy  makers  use  the  improved  economic 
outlook  to  regain  their  scope  of  action.  In  addition,  confidence  in  the  soundness  of  public 
finances  is  an  important  prerequisite  for  the  anchoring  of  stable  and  moderate  inflation 
expectations. 
The European stability and growth pact as well as the new “debt brake” (“Schuldenbremse”) 
bill in Germany have set out necessary and passable consolidation paths in order to reverse 
the  persistent  trend  towards  ballooning  debt  and  prevent  further  delays  in  the  structural 
consolidation of public finances. Germany has to stay the course in order to regain its fiscal 
scope of action, to be prepared for the future fiscal burden of an ageing population and, last 
but not least, to set an example for consolidation in Europe. In my view, the failure to initiate 
a credible and ambitious consolidation process soon could be at least as great a risk to the 
recovery as removing the stimulus measures too early. 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
the challenge the German economy faces by the financial crisis is well known: adjusting to 
an  external  environment  characterised  by  flatter,  but  hopefully  healthier,  expansion,  and 
fiscal consolidation. The success Germany had in economic adjustment prior to the financial 
crisis is a particular example of how unfavourable economic conditions can also contain the 
seeds  of  positive  change.  The  lesson  we  can  learn  from  this  is  that  market-based 
corrections,  even  of  severe  domestic  structural  problems,  are  possible  if  the  necessary 
reforms  are  implemented.  This  should  encourage  fiscal  and  economic  policy  makers  in 
Germany  and  in  other  euro-area  member  states  alike  to  undertake  the  necessary  reforms 
and  to  swiftly  reduce  fiscal  deficits.  The  effort  and  inconvenience  associated  with  those 
adjustments will pay off in the end by leading to a stronger economy in the individual member 
states and the euro area as a whole. 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2010
