Njuguna Ndung’u: The advantages of mobile phone banking services 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch of 
the Family Bank’s mobile phone banking services, Nairobi, 3 June 2010. 
 Mr. Titus K. Muya, Chairman of the Board of Directors, Family Bank Ltd., 
Mr. Peter Kinyanjui, Chief Executive Officer, Family Bank Ltd., 
Board Members, Family Bank Ltd, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am privileged to be here this morning on the occasion of the launch of Family Bank’s mobile 
phone  banking  services.  Today  marks  yet  another  milestone  on  Family  Bank’s  growth 
trajectory  and  also  another  important  innovation  in  the  banking  products  that  enlarge  the 
range  of  financial  services.  I  therefore  feel  honoured  to  have  been  invited  to  launch  this 
product.  
It would not have been possible for us to assemble here and witness the rolling out of this 
product into the market without the wise stewardship of the Board and Management of the 
bank. I therefore salute the Board, management and staff of Family Bank on the introduction 
of the mobile phone banking services that we shall be launching this morning. 
I  have  been  informed  that  these  mobile  banking  services  dubbed  “PESA  PAP”  have  been 
made  possible  through  the  use  of  the  Safaricom  M-Pesa  Platform.  On  this  note,  I  salute 
Safaricom for having partnered with several banks in providing innovations that will not only 
enhance access to financial services but also the growth of commerce in both the rural and 
urban markets. In his Madaraka Speech to the Nation, H.E. the President, Hon. Mwai Kibaki 
particularly  singled  out  the  innovation  in  Information  Technology  and  the  support  it  has 
provided to mobile phone money transfer services – as leading innovations in the world. The 
World  Bank’s  Doing  Business  Report  on  Access  to  Credit  places  Kenya  at  4th  position  of 
183 countries. 
Allow me to mention that the PESA PAP product being rolled out today is a consolidation of 
three products with key distinct features as follows: 
 
The  M-Pesa  Super-Agency  providing  electronic  value  to  Safaricom  Agents 
countrywide will be of benefit in terms of improving M-Pesa availability in the market 
and ensuring M-Pesa Agents maintain optimum levels of float. 
Bulk  Value  Payments  through  M-Pesa  will  allow  bulk  remittance  of  payments 
including salaries and loan disbursements to employees, borrowers and agricultural 
farmers and the; 
M-Pesa  Paybill  for  the  acceptance  of  deposits  will  enable  the  transfer  of 
electronic value from Safaricom’s M-Pesa money transfer platform to a customer’s 
bank account. 
  The benefits of the PESA PAP products just like other mobile products already existing in the 
industry  cannot  be  gainsaid.  This  product  is  a  technological  solution  that  will  provide  the 
following key benefits: 
 
Build up of savings: With the transfer of electronic value from Safaricom’s M-Pesa 
money transfer platform to a customer’s bank account, a synergetic relationship is 
created in terms of deposit mobilization for the bank while the customers benefit in 
building up their savings for future investment. 
BIS Review 78/2010 
 1
   Convenience: Access to financial services on the mobile phone will certainly lower 
the  cost  of  transfer  of  remittances,  improving  the  safety  and  security  of  cash  and 
make payments more convenient. 
Serving  the  unbanked  and  the  under-banked:  With  32  percent  of  Kenya’s 
bankable population being excluded from formal and informal financial services as 
indicated by the National Financial Access Survey in 2009, mobile phone banking 
services  will  reduce  the  cost  of  running  banking  operations  in  order  to  enhance 
access to affordable, flexible and faster services to customers and by and large the 
“unbanked” population in Kenya. Part of this exclusion has been due to costs and 
physical distance. These twin problems have been solved by PESA PAP products. 
Supporting Vision 2030: The rolling out of such innovative products will bring about 
immense  contribution  in  deepening  the  financial  sector.  It  is  through  financial 
deepening  that  a  majority  of  the  Kenyan  population  will  access  financial  services 
easily  and  affordably.  This  will  increase  savings  and  build  up  of  assets  through 
affordable  credit,  and  through  increased  savings  and  investment  we  will  walk  the 
path determined by Vision 2030.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: I am delighted and encouraged by the way the banking sector is 
embracing  technology  and  demystifying  the  mobile  and  internet  banking  services  from  the 
perception  that  it  is  suited  for  the  rich  and  well-educated  but  that  the  poor  and  the 
marginalized  can  as  well  be  brought  on  board.  Markets  are  developed  by  increased 
participation. Increased participation reduces unit costs. That is why cost of credit, via base 
lending rates are declining.  
As I conclude my remarks, let me reiterate that the Central Bank appreciates the initiatives 
and  innovations  by  the  banking  sector  in  coming  up  with  new  products  targeted  at  niche 
consumers and is committed to the creation of an enabling regulatory environment. We shall, 
on a continuous basis, revise relevant regulations that will ensure that the dynamic banking 
environment  is  adequately  served  as  we  gather  more  knowledge  through  innovations  and 
market demands.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: It is now my honour and privilege to launch the Family Bank 
“PESA PAP”, I am sure the market is anxious for uptake of this product. 
Thank You. 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2010
