Zamani Abdul Ghani: Sound risk management to boost bottom line and 
strengthen resilience 
Keynote  address,  by  Mr  Zamani  Abdul  Ghani,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia,  at  the  MII  International  Risks  and  Risk  Management  Conference  (IRRMC) 
for Insurance Sector 2010, Kuala Lumpur, 1 June 2010. 
 I am most pleased to be here today to officiate this International Risks and Risk Management 
Conference  for  Insurance  Sector  2010.  This  conference  is  organized  by  the  Malaysian 
Insurance  Institute,  with  the  theme  “Sound  Risk  Management  to  Boost  Bottom  Line  and 
Strengthen  Resilience”.  It  surely  provides  an  important  platform  to  discuss  emerging  risks 
faced by the insurance industry and to share the latest developments  in risk management 
standards and techniques in managing insurance business.  
Global economic developments and outlook 
The past two years have been a tumultuous journey for financial players in the global arena. 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  tested  the  robustness  and  resilience  of  financial  systems 
around the world, the after-effects of which are still being felt today. The implications of the 
financial  crisis  have  shaken  the  foundations  of  the  entire  international  financial  system. 
Malaysia  was  most  fortunate,  however,  to  be  mildly  affected  by  the  global  financial  and 
economic crisis. This is due to the swift and concerted policy responses by the Malaysian 
Government and the existence of a robust and resilient financial sector in the country. The 
dynamism and strong fundamentals of most Asian economies are also contributing factors. 
The Malaysian insurance sector is also fortunate that the global insurance sector has also, to 
a certain extent, been insulated from the worst aspects of the global crisis. 
The above not withstanding, we must always bear in mind that as institutions grow bigger 
and  become  more  complex,  they  are  more  vulnerable  to  contagion  risks  and  spill-over 
effects. A pertinent example is that of the American International Group (AIG). AIG suffered a 
liquidity crisis when its credit ratings were downgraded due to the mounting losses arising 
from  its  Financial  Products  division  during  the  sub-prime  crisis  beginning  in  2008.  More 
recently, the European Union faced one of its gravest crisis as Greece’s ballooning sovereign 
debts spiraled and threatened to unravel both the European Union and the Euro currency. 
What  are  the  lessons  from  these  examples?  A  fundamental  point  is  to  realize  that  the 
financial world is now a web of risks, with complex inter-linkages between different financial 
markets and sectors. The highly contagious effects of a failure of a single entity in one part of 
the world on all other connected parties illustrate the tremendous importance of sound and 
effective risk management in today’s financial world. 
Due to the inter-connected economies around the world, Asia has not been isolated from the 
spill-over  effects  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  The  Western  economies  continued  to  be 
bogged  down  by  slow  and  hesitant  recovery  with  weak  economic  growth  and  high 
unemployment rates. Emerging economies, particularly in Asia, however, have been resilient 
through  these  financial  challenges.  This  is  attributable  to  various  policies  and  practices 
adopted  in  the  region  following  the  lessons  learned  from  the  Asian  financial  crisis  in  
1997–98. 
On  the  local  front,  Malaysia  has  been  largely  successful  in  dealing  with  the  challenges 
brought  about  by  the  global  crisis.  The  economy  has  recovered  beginning  from  the  fourth 
quarter of 2009. Prompt government responses and initiatives, as well as the existence of 
strong macroeconomic fundamentals and a sound financial system are the principal factors. 
In the first quarter of 2010, most Asian economies registered robust growth, with Malaysia 
BIS Review 76/2010 
 1
recording a 10.1% real GDP growth. Another recent measure of Malaysia’s resilience is its 
rating in the IMD World Competitiveness Yearbook 2010. Malaysia’s global competitiveness 
ranking  improved  significantly  from  18th  place  in  2009  to  10th  place  in  2010,  out  of 
58 economies. Malaysia has successfully issued a US$1.25 billion sovereign Sukuk (Islamic 
bonds) last Friday with large international demand even during a period of volatile financial 
markets.  This  further  attests  to  Malaysia’s  success  as  well  as  international  acceptance  of 
Malaysia’s standing as a major international Islamic financial centre. 
Although Malaysia fared relatively well during this crisis, we should not be complacent. We 
should  leverage  on  the  lessons  learnt  from  this  and  the  late  1990s  crises  to  improve  our 
resilience  to  any  future  shocks.  There  is  at  present  obvious  optimism  among  financial 
institutions  following  the  improved  economic  outlook  and  market  sentiment.  It  is  crucial  to 
ensure,  however,  that  this  does  not  result  in  unchecked  increases  in  risk  appetite  or 
compromises the quality of risk management practices. What was once a “black swan” event 
has increasingly become more common due to the high inter-linkages between international 
economies. As such, we need to be vigilant and ensure all potential risks are addressed and 
comprehensive risk management measures are adopted, both at the macro and micro levels 
of the economy. 
the 
Regulatory reforms in line with risk management 
Let me turn now to the regulatory reforms in line with the risk management practices. The 
global  financial  crisis  has  exposed  weaknesses  in  the  existing  international  financial 
architecture  and  highlighted 
fragmentation  of  regulatory  rules  across  different 
jurisdictions.  It  has  been  a  wake-up  call  for  the  world  to  come  together  to  implement 
regulatory reforms to strengthen the foundations of financial stability and address the issues 
in the international financial system. For  Malaysia, the recent global developments  will not 
alter much the fundamental tenets of Bank Negara Malaysia’s approach to the regulation and 
supervision  of  the  financial  institutions.  During  the  past  decade,  we  have  developed  and 
implemented  our  Risk  Based  Supervisory  Framework  and  our  Risk  Based  Capital  regime. 
Under these benchmarks, regulatory capital requirements and Bank Negara’s expectations in 
terms  of  governance  and  risk  management  are  already  well  aligned  with  the  specific  risk 
profiles  of  individual  institutions.  The  risk  assessment  and  supervision  of  individual 
institutions are also further complemented with macro-prudential assessments to monitor the 
aggregation of risks in the financial system. 
In 2009, i.e., during the height of the global financial crisis, Bank Negara continued to focus 
on developing and consolidating a comprehensive set of standards on corporate governance 
and risk management practices. These standards encompass overarching principles on risk 
governance  with  more  specific  guidance  on  the  management  of  market,  credit,  liquidity, 
operational  and  insurance  risks.  Further  efforts  of  Bank  Negara  include  organizing  the 
Financial Industry Conference on risk management. This Conference has encouraged further 
dialogue on key risk challenges facing the financial institutions and how financial institutions 
can  further  enhance  their  resilience  to  these  challenges.  A  major  milestone  was  the 
enactment of the new Central Bank of Malaysia Act 2009. This Act, which came into force on 
25  November  2009,  has  further  strengthened  the  ability  of  Bank  Negara  to  undertake 
surveillance and prompt resolution to avert risks to financial stability. 
The existing Financial Sector Master Plan is currently in the final phase of its implementation. 
The  measures  under  the  Plan,  which  were  undertaken  during  the  past  decade,  have 
contributed towards achieving a more efficient, effective, stable and resilient financial sector. 
This  has  in  turn  resulted  in  more  developed  financial  markets,  broader  and  better  product 
offerings,  as  well  as  higher  levels  of  insurance  and  Takaful  penetration.  This  trend  of 
liberalization is expected to continue, whilst the banking and insurance sectors could possibly 
see further consolidation, convergence, and competition within the region.  
2 
 BIS Review 76/2010
Development of insurance sector in Malaysia 
Despite the challenging external conditions posed by the global financial crisis, the Malaysian 
insurance  industry  has,  on  the  whole,  remained  resilient.  The  industry-wide  Capital 
Adequacy  Ratio  stood  at  242%  at  the  end  of  the  first  quarter  of  2010,  well  above  the 
benchmark supervisory target of 130% set under the RBC framework. Total net premiums 
and  contributions  for  insurers  and  Takaful  operators  grew  by  8.2%  during  2009.  This  was 
driven by growth in the ordinary life segments of the life and family Takaful industry, and a 
broad-based demand in the general sector. Also of significance is that insurers in Malaysia 
have  performed  considerably  well  in  managing  and  responding  to  the  challenges  of  lower 
investment  returns  and  the  lower  interest  rate  environment  following  the  global  financial 
crisis. 
Also notable is the rapid progress of Malaysia’s Islamic financial industry which has become 
a  competitive  sector  and  one  of  the  key  drivers  of  economic  growth  in  the  country.  As 
Malaysia evolves and emerges as a major international Islamic financial hub, Bank Negara 
will  continue  to  play  an  active  role  in  promoting  Islamic  financial  products  and  services, 
supporting the enhancement to the payment infrastructure and progressively deregulate and 
liberalize  the  financial  system.  More  recently,  the  liberalization  to  allow  for  greater  foreign 
participation  in  the  domestic  financial  markets  will  create  further  international  linkages  for 
Malaysia’s Islamic banking and Takaful industries. 
As  Malaysia  moves  into  the  next  stage  of  economic  development,  by  transforming  from  a 
mainly  production-based  economy  to  a  more  innovation-driven  and  knowledge-based 
economy, the financial services sector will play a prominent role in this evolution. In support 
of this transformation, Bank Negara Malaysia is developing a new blueprint for the financial 
services sector. This blueprint will chart the next phase of the development of the financial 
sector, position the financial sector as one of the main catalysts for the transformation of the 
Malaysian economy and ensure our economy remains robust and resilient to respond to any 
emerging risks.  
Risk management for insurance institutions 
It  is  expected  that  the  financial  sector  in  Malaysia  will  expand  and  become  more  complex 
and inter-connected over time. Therefore, the corporate governance and risk management 
practices  in  insurance  institutions  will  also  need  to  evolve  to  keep  pace  with  the  fast-
changing  environment.  It  is  a  fact  that  institutions  which  performed  better  during  the  crisis 
were consistently differentiated by more robust governance and risk management practices. 
According  to  a  recent  Towers  Perrin  survey  of  major  U.S.  corporations,  failure  in  risk 
management has been cited to be the key characteristic of financial institutions that suffered 
large losses during the global financial crisis. Thus, improving risk management was the top 
priority of CFOs in reaction to the global financial crisis. Prioritizing risk management is even 
more important for insurance companies. This is due to the fact the core activity of insurance 
involves risk-taking and risk-transfer, and that insurance risks are usually long-tailed. 
Under the Risk Based Supervisory Framework, corporate governance and risk management 
has  always  been  an  integral  part  of  Bank  Negara’s  supervisory  assessment  of  insurance 
institutions.  To  form  a  supervisory  view  of  an  institution,  Bank  Negara  evaluates  how  an 
institution manages the inherent risks within its significant areas of activity. The Bank also 
assesses  the  quality  of  the  oversight  and  control  functions  and  tests  the  resilience  of  the 
institutions to different risks under stress conditions. Therefore, it is critical for an insurance 
company’s internal policies and control mechanisms to be effective in shaping the desired 
risk profile. This risk profile should commensurate with the level of capital and capabilities of 
the company. 
The  Bank  also  initiated,  in  2008,  the  Financial  Institutions  Directors’  Education  (FIDE) 
program to promote good corporate governance and risk management practices. Feedback 
BIS Review 76/2010 
 3
from  the  directors  who  attended  the  program  revealed  a  deeper  appreciation  of  the 
importance  of  sound  corporate  governance  and  active  engagement  of  the  Board  in  risk 
management  and  strategic  issues.  We  have  also  observed  that  the  practices  of  financial 
institutions  in  Malaysia  showed  evidence  of  strengthened  risk  governance  culture.  In 
particular, we observed higher commitment by Board members, strengthened authority of the 
Chief Risk Officer (CRO), and more comprehensive oversight of risks. 
It is important to recognize that risk management should not be a “black-box” discussion that 
is  confined  to  high  level  management.  Risk  management  should  be  an  enterprise-wide 
process involving all levels of business functions. The top level management is responsible 
for putting in place a well-defined risk governance framework and formulating the appropriate 
risk strategies. At the operational level, the roles of the business units are to ensure that key 
risks are appropriately identified, assessed and mitigated. 
We are all aware, therefore, that risk management is a dynamic and iterative process. Risk 
management is not a one-off exercise. Instead, it is a continuous cycle. Hence, there should 
be genuine awareness, ownership and accountability of risks throughout the company. Every 
employee should see himself or herself as a risk manager! 
It  is  exciting  to  see  the  breath  of  the  topics  for  this  Conference.  And  it  is  even  more 
encouraging to see risk experts from different countries like the United Kingdom, Hong Kong, 
Singapore,  Philippines  and  Malaysia  coming  together  to  exchange  information  and 
experience.  I  am  also  pleased  to  note  that  some  of  the  discussions  will  cover  the  Takaful 
perspective. This will include discussions on the impact of Shariah requirements, as well as 
sessions  on  financial  management  and  business  continuity  management  for  Takaful 
business. 
In  closing,  let  us  remind  ourselves  again  that  risk  management  is  a  corporate  culture  and 
everyone plays a role in the process. Your roles are critical in ensuring that the key risks, 
both present and foreseeable, are identified and effectively mitigated. With concerted efforts 
from  all  parties,  an  effective  risk  management  process  will  enable  companies  to  minimise 
financial  losses,  and  optimize  business  practices,  in  order  to  respond  to  the  changing 
business environment. 
I am very confident that this Conference will be a great platform to catalyze open discussions 
among  market  players  on  the  key  issues  relating  to  risk  management.  It  will  also  provide 
good opportunities for business networking. On this note, it is my pleasure to declare open 
the International Risks and Risk Management Conference for Insurance Sector 2010. 
4 
 BIS Review 76/2010
