Vitor Constâncio: Regulation and financial stability 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Vitor  Constâncio,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Portugal  and 
candidate  for  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB),  to  the  Economic  and 
Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament, Brussels, 23 March 2010. 
 I am honoured to appear before your Committee for this hearing which is part of the process 
of  my  nomination  to  the  Vice-Presidency  of  the  European  Central  Bank.  On  my  recent 
appearance before your Committee for an informal exchange of views I had the occasion to 
summarize  in  my  introductory  statement  my  positions  on  some  of  the  more  important 
problems  related  to  monetary  policy.  I  expressed  my  views  on  the  nature  of  the  ECB’s 
mandate; the meaning of the secondary objective as stated in the Treaty; the main points of 
our monetary strategy, the role of financial stability and asset prices in monetary policy and, 
finally, I discussed my assessment of inflationary risks in the present situation. It is not my 
intention to cover these subjects in my statement today but in view of their importance I want 
to  suggest  that  my  written  introductory  text  to  the  previous  informal  session  could  be 
annexed to the present proceedings. 
Today I would like to concentrate my initial comments on matters of regulation and financial 
stability. As I mentioned last time, “the need to avoid disruption to the proper functioning of 
the financial system also confronts monetary policy. It is a problem that cannot be ignored by 
central banks as financial institutions are essential for the economy and for the transmission 
of monetary policy itself”. 
The recent crisis is an example of the massive turbulence that the financial sector can create 
endogenously  with  devastating  consequences  to  the  economy.  We  must  be  aware  of  the 
main lessons to be drawn from the crisis: a) the financial sector is not self-equilibrating or 
self-correcting; b) an unfettered financial sector can generate crisis on its own; c) extended 
periods of high growth of credit and debt generate asset price booms that always end in a 
crisis;  d)  low  inflation  in  the  market  of  goods  and  services  is  not  enough  to  guarantee 
financial stability. 
Human societies have learnt and forgotten these lessons several times throughout history. 
Misbehaviour of big financial institutions, deregulation and perverse incentives created this 
time the perfect storm that will continue for a protracted period of time to cause slow growth 
and  severe  unemployment.  So,  the  question  now  is  the  following:  can  we  devise  the 
instruments and institutions necessary to tame the excesses of finance without jeopardizing 
its much needed role? 
An optimistic view about this possibility may rely on a positive assessment of all the solutions 
that  have  been  put  forward  in  several  reports  and  proposals  that  have  flooded  our  desks, 
many of which have been adopted in various legislative projects that are now being debated. 
Let  me  go  through  several  of  those  proposals  with  brief  comments  as  many  of  them  are 
widely known. I just want to provide you with my own sense of their relative importance and 
later on I will dwell upon a few that I think have not been fully developed or considered. 
1. 
Creation  of  a  macro-prudential  responsibility  explicitly  attributed  to  an  existing  or 
newly  created  institution.  This  is  very  important  as  the  crisis  showed  that  micro 
supervision  is  not  sufficient  when  the  risks  come  from  the  overall  situation  of  the 
economy or the financial markets. Doubts remain about the exact competences to 
be given to the institutions in charge of this new role. 
Introduction of new standards demanding more and better capital along the lines of 
the  Basel  Committee  proposals  (the  increase  in  capital  against  trading  book  risks 
has already been the subject of legislation in Europe). 
2. 
BIS Review 54/2010 
 1
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
Reduction  of  the  pro-cyclicality  of  the  regulatory  framework,  through  a  system  of 
capital  buffers  or  dynamic  provisions  (or  reserves)  changeable  with  the  economic 
cycle. In the first method, required capital would increase in good years, when loan 
losses are below long-run averages, creating capital buffers which would be drawn 
down in recession years as losses increase. Personally, I prefer dynamic provisions 
but any of the methods is preferable to the existing situation. 
Correction  of  the  pro-cyclical  bias  of  present  accounting  standards,  which  allow 
profits  to  be  increased  with  unrealized  capital  gains  in  periods  of  booming  asset 
prices, and exaggerate declining profits in bad times through the effect of unrealized 
capital losses. Besides the changes in standards to permit a more flexible treatment 
of  asset  prices  in  periods  of  market  stress  and  illiquidity,  there  is  the  need  to 
introduce a concept of an Economic Cycle Reserve, along the lines proposed in the 
Turner Review, calculated with the same method used in the previous item (3), in 
order  to  set  aside  profit  in  good  times  to  reduce  losses  in  depressed  economic 
cycles of the future. It is indeed necessary to affect the accounting reports in order 
to  avoid  that  volatile  unrealized  gains  influence  share  prices  and  consequent 
behaviour of financial institutions. 
Introduction of a new maximum absolute leverage ratio (risk unweighted total assets 
over total capital). 
Introduction  of  new  regulations  about  liquidity  ratios  as  proposed  by  the  Basel 
Committee. 
Prevention  of  the  development  of  a  “shadow  banking”  sector  by  enlarging  the 
perimeter  of  regulated  institutions,  like  hedge  funds,  and  reinforcing  consolidation 
accounting rules. 
Tightening  securitization  regulations  to  avoid  its  misuse,  its  complexity,  and 
opaqueness  that  prevented  it  from  performing  as  predicted  to  diversify  and  dilute 
risk.  What  happened  with  subprime  mortgage  bonds,  CDOs  and  Credit  Default 
Swaps was appalling and should not happen again. 
Reduction  of  the  reliance  for  official  regulatory  purposes  on  Rating  Agencies  that 
have  contributed  to  the  pro-cyclicality  of  the  financial  sector  and  played  a  very 
negative  role  in  the  subprime  crisis.  The  mere  registration  and  monitoring  of  their 
activity  and  the  elimination  of  conflicts  of  interest  may  not  be  sufficient  to  correct 
their performance. 
Introduction  of  new  principles  regarding  risk  management  and  remuneration 
guidelines  to  correct  prevailing  perverse  incentives  with  an  excessive  short-term 
perspective. 
With the exception of points 4 and 9, most of these aspects of a new regulatory environment 
are being developed by European Union institutions or the Basel Committee, subsequently to 
general  guidelines  prepared  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  approved  by  the  G20.  It 
would seem then that the work has been progressing in the right direction to create a more 
resilient  and  efficient  financial  system.  Nevertheless,  I  want  to  make  a  few  comments  on 
aspects that I consider more important or are being insufficiently addressed. 
The first point refers to the assessment of whether the new rules are sufficient to prevent the 
excesses  of  finance  and,  in  particular,  whether  the  macro-prudential  function  is  being 
implemented in a really efficient way for the same purpose. My answer tends to be positive 
because instruments like the gross leverage ratio, the capital buffers, the liquidity ratios and 
the  discretionary  use  of  Pillar  II  may  be  enough  for  the  task.  The  remaining  necessary 
instruments  are  related  with  the  “too  big  to  fail”  problem  that  I  address  bellow.  Regarding 
macro-prudential policy, it looks as if in all countries the institution in charge will be limited to 
making  warnings  and  recommendations.  In  Europe,  the  proposed  composition  of  the 
European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) with the inclusion of the Commission and the 3 ESA 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2010
representatives  should  ensure  that  this  may  not  become  a  problem,  guaranteeing  at  the 
same time the necessary coordination between the micro and macro levels. The whole setup 
may work well enough for us to hope that the macro-prudential function will not be reduced to 
warnings, sermons and regrets... 
I have been following with great interest the debate in your Committee about the ESRB and if 
you permit me I would like to stress two points that I consider very important for the efficient 
functioning  of  the  new  entity.  The  first  regards  the  need  for  the  Steering  Committee  to 
accurately  reflect  the  composition  of  the  General  Board  in  order  to  avoid  unnecessary 
tensions. The second refers to the importance of keeping the proposed composition of the 
Advisory Technical Committee since its main role will be to prepare the work of the General 
Board and it will be more efficient if composed of people who work in the institutions actually 
in  charge  of  regulation  and  supervision.  If  you  consider  that  a  scientific  committee  is 
necessary  it  can  always  be  added  to  the  whole  setup  without  eliminating  a  necessary 
component of the preparatory work for the General Board. 
The  second  point  I  wish  to  comment  upon  relates  to  the  need  to  move  trade  in  credit 
derivatives, especially trade in credit default swaps (CDSs), to organized exchanges. CDSs 
were at the centre of the crisis and were responsible for the demise of important institutions. 
They  are  obscure  products,  as  they  are  transacted  “over  the  counter”  (OTC)  and  the 
premiums so widely quoted are not prices of actual transactions but mere “quotations” sent 
to a private firm that started to publish indexes in 2001. The exact way these indexes are 
built,  the  “players”  sending  the  quotations  are  not  publicly  known  and,  finally,  as  they  are 
“quotations” in a non-organized market, the institutions providing these “quotations” are not 
compelled to make transactions at these levels. Myron Scholes, the Chicago Professor and 
Nobel  Prize  of  Economics,  the  co-author  of  the  Black-Scholes  formula  for  option  pricing 
and a kind of godfather to derivatives, said last year: “the solution is really to blow up or 
burn the OTC market, the CDSs and swaps and structured products and let us start over”. 
Serious thought should also be given to the possibility of forbidding “naked short selling” of 
these  instruments,  allowing  only  market-maker  institutions  to  do  such  transactions  as 
hedging  activity  when  they  already  have  transactions  with  agents  who  possess  a  real 
insurable interest. 
The third aspect I want to address is the “too big to fail” problem. The existence of large and 
complex  financial  institutions  (LCFI)  whose  bankruptcy  is  “impossible”  to  allow,  creates  a 
huge  problem  of  moral  hazard  that  may  lead  to  unduly  risky  behaviour.  It’s  an  intricate 
question and there is still no international consensus on how to deal with it. The problem is 
even becoming potentially worse by the increase in size of surviving institutions a situation 
that is common after a crisis. Without dwelling upon the arguments, let me state that I do not 
believe that the problem can be solved by a policy of systematic break-up of big institutions 
or  by  adopting  a  solution  of  protecting  only  marrow  banks”  and  distinguishing  between 
“utility”  and  “investment”  banks.  This  means  that  I  only  believe  in  solutions  that  may 
contribute  to  transform  the  concerned  entities  in  institutions  “too  good  to  fail”  or  that  can 
organize,  with  special  powers,  an  orderly  resolution  that  avoids  the  more  negative 
consequences  of  insolvency.  The  following  proposals,  not  mutually  exclusive,  have  been 
discussed or are already included in legislative projects: 
(a) 
intense  and  special  supervision, 
from  a  macro-prudential 
More 
perspective. 
Higher capital requirements. This idea includes several possibilities: from a simple 
capital  surcharge  according  to  size  and/or  related  to  the  bank’s  contribution  to 
systemic risk. In some schemes, these additional capital requirements can be in part 
satisfied  through  contingent  capital  securities  (bonds  automatically  converted  into 
equity when certain conditions are met). 
Insurance premiums. On top of higher capital, big institutions should pay insurance 
costs related to their size or contribution to systemic risk, with the proceeds of the 
(b) 
(c) 
including 
BIS Review 54/2010 
 3
3 
(d) 
(e) 
insurance  in  case  of  insolvency  reverting  to  the  authorities  in  charge  of  the 
resolution of the crisis. A variant of these idea, already adopted in the US House of 
Representatives,  consists  in  demanding  from  the  banks  contributions  to  a 
Resolution  Fund  to  support  the  costs  of  insolvency  problems  in  “systemically 
important financial institutions” (SIFIs). 
Living  wills.  This  consists  in  compelling  the  SIFIs  to  have  permanently  prepared 
plans for a orderly resolution. 
Creation of a special resolution regime, giving an institution like the American FDIC 
(Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation)  wide  powers  to  take  over  a  troubled 
institution  and  restructure  and  sell  or  liquidate  it.  In  some  proposals,  the  special 
powers  should  include  the  possibility  of  compulsory  transformation  of  bonds  into 
equity to recapitalize the institution. The institution responsible for this role will need 
to have access to a Restructuring or Resolution Fund. 
Elements  of  these  five  types  of  measures  can  be  found  in  existing  legislative  proposals, 
although  there  is  no  international  consensus  to  achieve  a  more  harmonized  regime  that 
could  be  relevant  for  cross-border  institutions.  All  these  measures  seem  to  be  useful  and 
complement the other instruments already mentioned to rein in excessive growth and unduly 
risky behaviour of major institutions. 
The  fourth  and  final  problem  that  is  not  yet  completely  solved  refers  to  crisis  resolution  of 
cross-border institutions in the European Union. The creation of colleges of supervisors and 
the  possible  role  of  the  ESAs  in  acting  as  mediators  will  make  a  contribution  to  find 
coordinated solutions to the problem. The main obstacle is related to the problem of burden-
sharing  of  costs  in  dealing  with  crisis  resolution.  As  I  wrote  in  my  answers  to  your 
questionnaire: “In my view, any potential move towards an even more integrated supervisory 
architecture in Europe will therefore have to be preceded by the establishment of a European 
safety net (including an ex-ante funded Resolution Fund)”. The Commission has been doing 
good  work  in  this  area  and  the  announcement  made  last  Friday  by  Commissioner  Barrier 
goes in that direction and is very important. Nevertheless, let me point out that a full solution 
and the operation of such a fund requires higher harmonization of national resolution regimes 
including bankruptcy laws, and this will prove to be difficult. Nevertheless, I believe that full 
European financial integration requires a common European resolution regime. 
A  final  thought  about  the  overall  impact  of  all  the  envisaged  regulatory  reforms.  Some 
commentators make the criticism that all the measures at stake could amount to a sort of 
overkill that may possibly choke financial activity. In view of the extreme seriousness of the 
financial crisis engineered by the financial sector I think that there is no exaggeration in the 
re-regulating efforts being prepared even if they were fully implemented – something about 
which  one  may  have  doubts.  There  is  nevertheless  a  risk  to  be  avoided  concerning  the 
timing of the implementation. An immediate or quick implementation of all the measures, in 
particular  those  related  with  higher  capital  requirements,  could  generate  credit  supply 
restrictions  detrimental  to  economic  recovery.  This  implies  that  all  authorities  concerned 
should be as clear-headed and resolute regarding content of the reforms as they must be 
wise and prudent in timing their implementation. 
4 
 BIS Review 54/2010
