Jean-Claude Trichet: Central bank cooperation after the global financial 
crisis 
Video address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Bank of Korea International Conference 2010 “The changing role of central banks”, Seoul, 
31 May 2010. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First, let me congratulate the Bank of Korea on its 60th anniversary. 
The bank has made essential contributions in Korea’s economic development, the reform of 
the country’s financial system and its integration into the global financial system. The clear 
focus on controlling inflation and the strengthened independence further buttressed the role 
of  Bank  of  Korea  in  the  economy.  And  recently,  the  Bank’s  timely  and  decisive  measures 
helped  Korea  weather  the  global  financial  crisis.  Hence,  there  are  many  reasons  to 
congratulate and wish Bank of Korea a very happy birthday! 
 Let  me  now  say  a  few  words  about  central  bank  cooperation  during  and  after  the  crisis, 
which the Bank of Korea is so closely involved in. 
The  cooperation  among  central  banks  has  recently  taken  numerous  forms,  such  as 
information  sharing  and  the  setting  of  general  standards  and  rules.  Such  cooperation  has 
been  mainly  channelled  through  the  various  fora  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements 
(BIS)  in  Basel.  These  include  the  Governors’  Global  Economy  Meeting  and  the  other 
committees that meet under the aegis of the BIS as well as the Financial Stability Board. The 
Global  Economy  Meeting  comprises  the  esteemed  Governor  Kim  and  some  30  other 
governors  from  all  systemically  important  economies.  It  is held  every  two  months  in  Basel 
and provides a unique opportunity to discuss the global economic outlook, policy challenges 
as well as any other topics of mutual interest. 
Until January this year, the Global Economy Meeting was primarily concerned with assessing 
global  economic  and  financial  conditions.  Since  then,  it  was  entrusted  with  an  additional 
assignment: it now provides guidance to, and formally decides on, issues discussed by the 
various Basel-based central bank committees. This responsibility had been in the hands of 
G10 Governors for decades. I have the privilege to chair the Global Economy Meeting and 
find the frank and in-depth discussions of invaluable importance for my own work and for the 
central bank community at large. 
Central bank cooperation is part of a more general trend that is reshaping global governance, 
and which has been spurred by the global financial crisis. One distinctive aspect of this crisis 
has been its originating in industrial economies. Emerging countries have also been severely 
affected, but as a group remained a source of strength for the world economy. It is therefore 
not surprising that the crisis has led to even better recognition of their increased economic 
importance  and  need  for  full  integration  into  global  governance.  The  enhanced  role  of  the 
Global Economy Meeting I just described reflects exactly this recognition. 
 Optimal arrangements for global governance are difficult to find. Global governance –like all 
collective  decision-making  –  always  faces  a  trade-off  between  efficiency  and  legitimacy. 
Therefore, devising institutions for collective decision making is always a delicate balancing 
act, even more so at the global level. 
BIS Review 74/2010 
 1
The  international  community  has  identified  the  G20  as  the  premier  forum  for  international 
economic  cooperation.  The  G20  includes  11  emerging  economies  and  Korea  holds  the 
presidency this year. The G20 has already been in existence for over a decade. But the main 
innovation at this point is to set it up as the key forum for strategic global impulse at the level 
of the leaders, as well as at the level of Ministers of Finance and Governors of central banks. 
I therefore wish the Korean presidency a successful steering of this body during the course 
of this year. 
 Let me express my profound gratitude to Mr Lee, former Governor of the Bank of Korea, for 
the fruitful cooperation between our central banks during his tenure, for his contributions to 
the Global Economy Meeting and, above all, for his friendship. 
I would like to once again congratulate Mr Kim on his appointment as new Governor. I am 
very much looking forward to working with him. 
I  am  confident  that  we  will  continue  to  build  on  the  cordial  relations  between  the  Bank  of 
Korea  and  the  ECB,  not  only  in  the  context  of  the  aforementioned  multilateral  policy 
meetings, but also on occasions such as bilateral meetings and the annual Bank of Korea 
Central Banking Seminar, which ECB staff always find very constructive and enjoyable. 
Best wishes from the ECB and, once again: happy birthday! 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2010
