Masaaki Shirakawa: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Osaka, 27 September 2010. 
 Introduction 
I am privileged to be here today to speak and exchange views with business leaders from the 
Kansai region. I would like to take this opportunity to express my deep gratitude to you for 
your cooperation with the Bank of Japan’s branches in Osaka, Kobe, and Kyoto. 
At present, the greatest concern for the time being for you as business leaders must be the 
recent  appreciation  of  the  yen  and  its  impact  on  Japan’s  economy.  Before  we  exchange 
views, I will first outline developments in the global economy and associated trends in the 
foreign exchange markets. I will then speak about Japan’s economic situation and the Bank’s 
thinking on monetary policy. 
Developments in the global economy 
I. 
I will start with developments in the global economy. 
Since  the  spring  of  2009,  the  global  economy,  driven  particularly  by  emerging  economies, 
has continued to grow at about 5 percent on an annual basis. While it is natural to have high 
growth  rates  as  the  global  economy  has  been  recovering  from  the  plunge  following  the 
Lehman  shock,  the  growth  rate  figures  have  substantially  exceeded  the  average  annual 
growth rate of 3.9 percent over the 10 years prior to the Lehman shock. However, the pace 
of  growth  has  slowed  somewhat  recently,  partly  because  the  effects  of  various  demand-
boosting  policy  measures  introduced  in  response  to  the  financial  crisis  in  the  advanced 
economies of the United States and Europe have started to recede and emerging economies 
have been shifting away from accommodative monetary policies. 
In the United States, while production continues to increase on the back of buoyant exports, 
concern has increased about a possible slowdown in the U.S. economy as many indicators 
related to domestic demand, especially indicators of private consumption and housing, have 
been pointing since the second half of July to a slower economic recovery. Economic activity 
in the euro area is recovering moderately as a whole, but economic disparities in the area 
have  widened:  while  exports  and  production  in  the  main  economies,  especially  Germany, 
have been boosted by the depreciation of the euro, economic growth in peripheral countries 
such  as  Greece  has  been  sluggish  as  both  the  public  and  private  sectors  are  mired  in 
excessive  debt.  Meanwhile,  emerging  economies  are  growing  robustly.  In  this  situation, 
many emerging countries have been moving away from  accommodative monetary policies 
as they seek to contain economic overheating and follow more sustainable economic growth 
paths. 
Although  the  rate  of  global  economic  growth  is  still  at  a  high  level,  it  has  been  slowing. 
Nevertheless,  the  global  economy’s  recovery  trend  appears  to  remain  intact.  The 
International  Monetary  Fund  forecasts  that  the  global  economy  will  continue  to  achieve 
growth rates of over 4 percent in the coming years, projecting growth of 4.6 percent in 2010 
and 4.3 percent in 2011. Nevertheless, the Bank considers that, regarding the outlook, the 
downside risks to the U.S. and European economies and their potential impact warrant more 
attention.  The  U.S.  economy  is  burdened  by  balance-sheet  adjustments  similar  to  those 
experienced in Japan following the collapse of the bubble. Therefore, it has become more 
difficult  for  it  to  grow  but  easier  for  it  to  deteriorate.  Federal  Reserve  Board  Chairman 
Ben S. Bernanke  has  also  expressed  the  view  that  the  U.S.  economy  would  continue  to 
expand in the second half of 2010, albeit at a relatively modest pace, and it was reasonable 
BIS Review 123/2010 
 1
to  expect  some  pickup  in  growth  in  2011.  He  also  stated  that  macroeconomic  projections 
were  inherently  uncertain,  and  the  U.S.  economy  remained  vulnerable  to  unexpected 
developments. 
Developments in the foreign exchange markets 
II. 
Bearing  these  global  economic  developments  in  mind,  we  can  now  turn  to  the  recent 
developments in the foreign exchange markets. 
Looking back at movements in the U.S. dollar-yen exchange rate, the yen traded at around 
90 yen against the U.S. dollar until the middle of 2010, but then appreciated since August 
and  temporarily  reached  the  range  of  82–83  yen.  The  key  factor  behind  the  appreciation 
appears to be heightened uncertainty about the outlook for the global economy, particularly 
the  U.S.  economy.  Until  around  the  spring  of  2010,  there  were  discussions  in  the  United 
States  on  how  to  make  the  shift  away  from  the  accommodative  monetary  policies  put  in 
place after the financial crisis. However, as indicators suggesting the weakness in the U.S. 
economy  have  been  released  successively  since  the  summer,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  the 
discussions  about  monetary  policy  exit  strategies  have  been  put  on  hold.  In  these 
circumstances of heightened uncertainty over the global economy, investors worldwide have 
increasingly avoided risks and purchased currencies that are considered to be relatively safe. 
For example, since July, the yen has risen by 3 percent, and the Swiss franc by 8 percent, 
against the U.S. dollar. Moreover, the yen has appreciated not only against the U.S. dollar 
and  the  euro  but  also  against  fellow  East  Asian  currencies:  for  example,  it  has  traded  at 
levels close to its record high against the Korean won. 
Needless to say, the appreciation of the yen weighs directly on the profits and profitability of 
exporting firms. And in the current situation, it can also significantly affect business sentiment 
and consequently the outlook for Japan’s economy, by increasing uncertainty over the global 
economy. 
In these circumstances, an intervention was conducted in the currency markets for the first 
time in six and a half years. The Japanese government has made it clear that it will continue 
to pay due attention to developments in the foreign exchange markets, and will take decisive 
actions, including interventions, if it deems it necessary. Likewise, the Bank also has great 
interest in and will pay close attention to developments in the foreign exchange markets and 
their impact. 
III. 
Developments in and medium- to long-term challenge for Japan’s economy 
Developments in Japan’s economy 
I will now move on to economic activity and prices in Japan. 
The  Bank  assesses  that  Japan’s  economy  shows  further  signs  of  a  moderate  recovery. 
Exports and production continue on an increasing trend, albeit at a slower pace compared 
with the pace of increase of more than 20 percent per year that had been seen since the 
spring of 2009. As for domestic private demand, business fixed investment is showing signs 
of  picking  up,  albeit  at  a  low  level,  as  corporate  profits  continue  to  steadily  improve.  The 
employment  and  income  situation  remains  severe,  but  the  degree  of  severity  has  eased 
somewhat  as  the  number  of  employees  and  wages  have  increased  slightly.  Private 
consumption  has  been  picking  up.  Particularly,  buoyed  by  the  effects of  the  extremely  hot 
summer  this  year,  sales  at  convenience  stores,  especially  of  beverages,  have  been 
increasing recently, as have sales of air conditioners supported by the eco-point system. And 
as you know, there was also a last-minute increase in demand for automobiles ahead of the 
expiration of subsidies for purchasing energy-efficient cars. 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2010
As for the outlook, the pace of economic improvement is likely to slow for the time being due 
to the ending of the boost from the extremely hot summer and to the absence going forward 
of  the  recent  last-minute  increase  in  demand  for  durable  consumer  goods.  Looking  back, 
partly  because  Japan  experienced  the  sharpest  economic  downturn  among  advanced 
economies  following  the  financial  crisis  in  the  fall  of  2008,  Japan’s  economy  subsequently 
recovered at the fastest pace. In any event, as factored into the forecasts presented in the 
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices released in April, the Bank has been fully aware 
that the pace of economic recovery is likely to slow over the second half of fiscal 2010 as 
inventory  restocking  runs  its  course  and  the  effects  of  policy  measures  wane.  However,  it 
should  be  noted  that  in  Japan,  unlike  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  balance-sheet 
adjustments are not weighing on the economy and both financial markets and the financial 
system are stable. This suggests that an accommodative financial environment has been in 
place  to  support  the  economic  activity  of  firms  and  households.  Given  this,  assuming  that 
overseas economies maintain their moderate recovery, the trend of recovery itself in Japan is 
not likely to be interrupted. 
On  the  price  front,  the  year-on-year  decline  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  reached  a 
record  level  of  2.4  percent  in  the  summer  of  2009  and  has  been  moderating  gradually 
thereafter. The decline has recently slowed to around 0.6 percent, if the effects of subsidies 
for high school tuition are excluded. The pace of decline is expected to continue to slow as 
the  economy  follows  a  recovery  path  and  the  aggregate  supply  and  demand  balance 
improves. 
The outlook I have just described is the Bank’s baseline scenario for economic activity and 
prices, but the Bank fully recognizes that this scenario contains a high degree of uncertainty. 
There is increasing uncertainty about the outlook for the global economy, especially the U.S. 
economy, and the foreign exchange and stock markets have been unstable. There is also a 
possibility that private consumption and production could decline substantially if the effects of 
the ending of the boost from the extremely hot summer and the absence going forward of the 
recent last-minute increase in demand for durable consumer goods such as automobiles are 
larger than expected. Based on these points, the Bank deemed it necessary to pay attention 
to the downside risks to Japan’s economic activity and prices. 
Medium- to long-term challenge confronting Japan’s economy 
I have outlined the current situation of Japan’s economy. At present, it shows further signs of 
a moderate recovery. But putting aside such short-term economic developments, what many 
people see as the greatest problem for Japan’s economy is that they do not have confidence 
in Japan’s medium- to long-term growth potential, or in other words, that they are finding it 
difficult to envisage a blueprint for growth. 
In fact, Japan’s economic growth rate is on a declining trend. Aside from the high-growth era 
when  the  average  annual  rate  of  economic  growth  was  slightly  below  10  percent,  in  the 
1980s the average annual growth rate was around 4.5 percent, which exceeded the growth 
rates of other advanced economies. However, following the collapse of the bubble, Japan’s 
annual  growth  rate  declined  significantly  to  around  1.5  percent  in  the  1990s.  It  has  then 
increased somewhat since the turn of the millennium, but the trend decline in the growth rate 
continues.  In  this  situation,  people  will  have  lower  expectations  concerning  future  income 
growth and their spending and investment will be restrained, which will in turn lead to price 
declines. The deflation in Japan should be understood as a manifestation of the fundamental 
problem facing the economy, namely the decline in growth expectations. 
Even though Japan’s economic growth rate is trending downward, the GDP growth rate per 
worker,  or,  in  other  words,  the  productivity  growth  rate,  has  been  1.6  percent  per  year  on 
average  over  the  past  decade.  The  rate  has  declined  from  earlier  levels  but  exceeds  the 
0.8 percent level in European countries and is still comparable to the 1.8 percent level in the 
United  States.  At  present,  the  percentage  of  the  population  aged  15  or  older  that  is  in 
BIS Review 123/2010 
 3
employment, that is, the employment rate, is about 60 percent. If this rate declines further 
with  the  aging  of  the  population,  raising  productivity  will  become  an  even  more  critical 
challenge. In attempting to raise productivity, it is important to recognize that, given the fierce 
global competition, doing so by cost reduction and improvement in cost structure alone has 
its own limits for the economy as a whole. For example, about 90 percent of the CPI inflation 
differential between Japan and the United States in the past 10 years was attributable to the 
difference  in  the  rate  of  decline  in  service  prices.  This  appears  to  reflect  the  fact  that,  in 
Japan, nominal wages have been adjusted flexibly. Of course, cost reduction should be an 
important  part  of  firms’  strategies  to  enhance  competitiveness,  and  Japanese  firms  have 
achieved productivity rises through their drastic efforts to cut costs. However, in a situation 
where the population is declining and existing domestic markets are starting to shrink, it is 
essential to create new markets that can enable firms to enjoy high profits, in order to raise 
the productivity of Japan’s economy as a whole. On this point, one view is that exploring new 
areas  and  creating  new  added  value  should  be  part  of  firms’  growth  strategies.  These 
strategies  of  exploring  new,  uncontested  market  places  are  known  as  “blue  ocean” 
strategies. The search for such “blue oceans” is essential for sustainable productivity growth. 
This can be achieved by private firms’ innovative efforts and financial institutions’ support in 
the form of providing funds for such efforts. The policy authorities also play an important role 
in creating such an environment. The Japanese government is making efforts to achieve its 
growth strategies for Japan’s economy and I expect that they will be implemented steadily in 
the future. 
At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  has  been  considering  ways  to  contribute  to  raising  Japan’s 
growth potential by making use of the central bank’s functions. As a result, in June 2010 the 
Bank decided to introduce a new fund-provisioning measure to support efforts to strengthen 
the foundations for economic growth. 
Thinking behind monetary policy 
IV. 
Let  me  now  explain  the  Bank’s  thinking  behind  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  As  I 
mentioned earlier, Japan’s economy faces the cyclical challenge of returning to a sustainable 
growth path with price stability and the medium- to long-term challenge of overcoming the 
trend  decline  in  the  growth  rate.  The  Bank,  while  keeping  in  mind  these  two  challenges, 
conducts monetary policy with a focus on the following three points. 
First, pursuing powerful monetary easing. The Bank has lowered the policy interest rate to 
0.1 percent, virtually zero. It also introduced a new funds-supplying operation, which is called 
the  “fixed-rate  operation,”  and  by  substantially  increasing  the  amount  of  funds  provided 
through the operation, has been encouraging a decline in market interest rates and further 
enhancing and spreading accommodative monetary conditions. 
Second, ensuring financial market stability. If financial institutions face difficulty in smoothly 
raising  funds  from  the  markets,  they  excessively  restrain  their  lending  and  other  financial 
activities, and this in turn seriously affects economic activity. The Bank will continue to fulfill 
its critical role of ensuring financial market stability. 
And  third,  supporting  efforts  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for  economic  growth.  As  I 
mentioned  before,  in  June  2010  the  Bank  introduced  a  new  fund-provisioning  measure 
through  which  it  will  provide  long-term  funds  at  a  low  interest  rate  to  private  financial 
institutions  that  are  making  efforts  in  terms  of  lending  and  investment  to  strengthen  the 
foundations  for  economic  growth.  At  the  beginning  of  September,  the  Bank  conducted  the 
first loan disbursement through the measure, providing 47 financial institutions with a total of 
462.5  billion  yen.  The  Bank  anticipates  that  the  measure  will  act  as  a  catalyst  to  further 
stimulate  private  firms’  efforts  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for  economic  growth.  The 
number of financial institutions that intend to participate in the fund-provisioning measure to 
make  efforts  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for  economic  growth  has  exceeded  100.  In 
4 
 BIS Review 123/2010
addition, with the introduction of the measure, a considerable number of financial institutions 
established new dedicated funds as well as investment and lending schemes. 
The  Bank  recognizes  that  Japan’s  economy  faces  the  critical  challenge  of  overcoming 
deflation and returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability. To this end, the Bank 
will continue to consistently make the utmost contributions as a central bank with a focus on 
the  three  points  that  I  have  just  mentioned:  pursuing  powerful  monetary  easing,  ensuring 
financial market stability, and supporting efforts to strengthen the foundations for economic 
growth. 
From the second half of 2009 to the first half of 2010, during which time the global economy 
posted  relatively  high  growth,  based  on  the  experience  after  the  collapse  of  the  bubble  in 
Japan  the  Bank  made  a  very  conservative  judgment  that,  as  balance-sheet  adjustments 
were  weighing  on  the  U.S.  and  European  economies,  the  pace  of  recovery  in  the  global 
economy was likely to remain moderate and downside risks were prone to increase. As such, 
the  Bank  is  the  only  central  bank  among  advanced  economies  that  has  further  enhanced 
monetary  easing  since  December  2009.  The  Bank  has  also  introduced  a  new  measure  to 
support  efforts  to  strengthen  the  foundations  for  economic  growth.  As  these  initiatives 
suggest, the Bank has been actively introducing various new measures to support Japan’s 
economy from the financial side, aiming to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable 
growth path with price stability. The Bank will continue to carefully consider the outlook for 
economic activity and prices, and, if it deems it necessary, will take policy actions in a timely 
and  appropriate  manner  upon  considering  the  effects  and  side-effects  of  various  policy 
measures. 
BIS Review 123/2010 
 5
