Tarisa Watanagase: Strengthening the banking and financial sector – 
what needs to be done? 
Speech by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at Finance Thailand, a 
seminar  organised  by  The  Banker  Magazine  and  Financial  Times  Business,  Bangkok, 
22 February 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  thank  The  Banker  Magazine  and  The  Financial  Times  for  the 
invitation. It is an honour, and indeed an opportunity, to join all of you here at this conference, 
and to share with you my thoughts at this very challenging juncture, not only for the global 
economy and financial system, but also at an important stage for development of Thailand’s 
economic and financial sector.  
The  past  three  years  have  been  one  of  the  most  turbulent  periods  in  global  economic 
development.  
On the global economy front, despite the signs of green shoots in the global economy, we 
are  constantly  reminded  of  the  remaining  fragility  and  vulnerability  of  such  recovery  in 
various hot spots around the world, with emerging new paradigm of risk, namely sovereign 
risk.  
For  the  global  financial  system,  risk  and  challenges  remain  abound.  The  key  challenge 
strikes at the heart of the global financial system – regaining trust.  
Trust in market mechanism, as well as its regulator, has been severely tested. The task of 
setting a right balance in regulation, going forward, is still a global debate, in which the Bank 
of Thailand is closely engaged in our role in various working groups of the Basel Committee 
for  Banking  Supervision.  On  the  one  hand,  it  is  critical  that  the  global financial system  re-
establishes such trust, and ensures stability, integrity, and fair consumer treatment. On the 
other  hand,  the  crisis  has  highlighted  the  complexity  of  the  financial  system,  and  the 
globalness  of  financial  contagion.  Thus,  there  is  a  critical  need  for  the  authorities  and  the 
financial  market  to  work  together  to  ensure  that  the  emerging  global  standards  and 
regulations  can  handle  such  complexity,  and  remain  risk-focused  at  the  economic  and 
financial  system,  both  in  the  national  and  global  contexts.  It  is  also  important  to  avoid 
introducing  distortion  and  risk  of  regulatory  arbitrage  between  financial  markets,  products, 
and strategies, and most importantly, arbitrage between countries. Thus, the strong impetus 
on supervisory coordination, cross-border risk and coordination, as well as macro-prudential 
aspects are the new challenges.  
Turning to the situation in Thailand, thus far, despite some set-back in terms of economic 
contraction  in  the  past  year,  both  the  Thai  economy  and  financial  system  have  shown 
resiliency  and  robustness.  This  helps  to  stand  us  in  good  stead,  and  provide  a  strong 
grounding to forge our strategy to handle coming challenges.  
Nevertheless, looking ahead into the longer term, Thailand’s economic and growth potential 
is still not fully and efficiently harnessed. Economic efficiency, international competitiveness, 
and economic stability are keys to sustainable growth. A robust and stable financial system, 
that  we  have  managed  to  ensure  so  far,  is  a  necessary,  but  not  sufficient  condition  for 
achieving sustainable growth. Financial system efficiency needs to be upgraded, so that it 
serves to lift economic efficiency, not least by harnessing the hitherto untapped strength of 
the  grass-root  economies,  where  the  emerging  organic  social-economic  network  has 
increasingly highlighted the potential contribution to growth and welfare improvement. For the 
banking  system,  the  strategy  to  harness  this  potential  is  set  out  in  the  Financial  Sector 
Master Plan Phase 2, which is a continuation from Phase 1.  
BIS Review 20/2010 
 1
Ladies and gentlemen,  
The challenges I have raised, together, pose a tall order. So in today’s talk, let me set out our 
strategy and policy priority in three parts.  
First, the SWOT analysis of the banking system and the challenges we face;  
Second, the key strategies in the Financial Sector Master Plan Phase 2; and  
Third, the key measures in risk-based supervision to ensure stability.  
First,  the  strength  of  our  banking  system  is  evident  in  its  continuous  solid  performance. 
During the toughest times, our banks remained strong and resilient against the backdrop of 
economic slowdown. Loan decelerated, partly due to contraction in corporate portfolio and 
deceleration in household portfolio, as a result of more cautious business undertaking and 
household spending, and partly due to tightened loan underwriting standard. The good news 
is the figures are already starting to pick up again. Meanwhile, NPL and delinquency have 
continued to decline, as the ratio of NPL, net of provisions, to total loans has declined further 
to 2.7 percent as banks attentively monitored their asset quality. Moreover, profit continued 
to  be  recorded  for  nine  consecutive  years,  and  the  overall  capital  position  of  the  banking 
system strengthened further, with BIS ratio at 16.1 percent, of which 12.6 percent is Tier 1 
capital.  
Much of the current strength and resiliency of our banking sector owes a great deal to the 
reform  groundwork  laid  during  the  past  decade.  On  prudential  supervision,  as  apart  from 
requiring  banks  to  conform  to  international  best  practices  on  risk-based  supervision  under 
Basel  I  and  now  Basel  II,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  also  moved  to  strengthen  our  supervisory 
function, utilising both on-site and off-site supervision as well as asking banks to carry out 
stress tests on a regular basis.  
The key here was to strengthen banks’ own risk management culture and system. Works on 
strengthening the financial infrastructure were started and are still on-going. In this regard, 
various  initiatives  were  introduced,  including  the  long-term  effort  to  reshape  the  financial 
system, and address inherent structural weaknesses, that was the mission of the Financial 
Sector  Master  Plan  Phase  I.  The  establishment  of  the  National  Credit  Bureau  to  improve 
credit  information,  and  improvements  in  financial  legislations,  including  the  new  Financial 
Institutions Business Act, the Bank of Thailand Act and the Deposit Protection Agency Act.  
Today,  our  banking  sector  fundamentals  continue  to  be  strong,  serving  as  a  dependable 
pillar for our economy. Despite this advantage, the Bank of Thailand is not complacent and 
we will continue to prepare our banking sector for future challenges.  
In this regard, a SWOT analysis of our current financial institutions system reveals that while 
there was overall improvement in efficiency and soundness, operating costs remained high 
and  financial  access  gaps  remained.  Furthermore,  there  was  still  inadequate  financial 
infrastructure  to  support  risk  management  of  financial  institutions.  Meanwhile,  future 
challenges of the next five years would likely come from more intensified competition – not 
only among banks, but from capital market, both local and overseas. It would also come from 
more complex and varied needs for financial services, as a result of globalizations and aging 
population,  the  shift  in  resource  allocation  with  greater  role  of  domestic  demand  vis-à-vis 
external  demand  as  engine  of  growth,  and  finally,  capital  inflows  and  external  challenges 
from the global economic crisis. Taken together, these remaining areas of improvement and 
the need to tackle future challenges have led to the recent launch of the second phase of 
financial sector reform.  
This brings me to the second part of my talk: key strategies in the Financial Sector Master 
Plan Phase 2. 
When  thinking  about  characteristics  that  our  future  financial  system  is  envisioned  to  have, 
several keywords come to mind: efficiency, strength and resiliency, diversification, fairness 
and transparency. With all of these keywords in mind, measures under the Financial Sector 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2010
Master Plan Phase 2 are grouped into three main pillars, aimed to tackle the following tasks: 
first,  reducing  system-wide  operating  costs,  namely  regulatory  and  legacy  NPL  and  NPA 
costs; second, promoting competition and financial access; and third, strengthening financial 
infrastructure.  
On  the  first  pillar.  In  any  business  undertaking  including  banking  business,  operating  cost 
reflects efficiency and while this translates to cost of consumers through pricing of services, it 
also  affects  competitiveness  of  the  industry.  The  latter  point  is  particularly  true,  given  the 
trend  toward  further  financial  globalization  and  liberalization.  As  such,  the  first  pillar  would 
focus  on  reducing  two  important  operating  costs  for  the  whole  financial  system,  namely 
regulatory cost and legacy NPL and NPA cost.  
Next, on the second pillar. It is envisaged that competition would be strengthened through 
new  entries  and  expansion  of  existing  service  providers’  business  scope.  In  so  doing, 
efficiency  would  be  enhanced  through  more  competitive  pricing  and  service  quality  and 
greater opportunities for broader financial access would be introduced.  
As  for  financial  access,  the  idea  is  to  encourage  and  facilitate  the  market  mechanism  by 
commercial service providers. To achieve this, we will help banks identify where the unmet 
demand is and encourage them to explore and adopt suitable microfinance business models.  
For new service providers, we will consider providing opportunities for those with business 
model and expertise that can help further enhance market completeness, to enter the market 
under  a  restricted  license.  This  may,  for  example,  include  microfinance  bank,  custodial  or 
trust bank, Islamic bank, and investment bank. Such entry would depend on the value added 
generated  for  the  economy,  in  terms  of  increased  efficiency  in  services,  and  expanded 
access to underserved segments. In the last year of the Plan, 2014, we may also consider 
entry  in  terms  of  full  commercial  bank  license,  if  this  adds  value  to  the  economy,  through 
serving  Thailand’s  international  trade  and  investment  interest,  including  trends  in  regional 
integration.  
We will also work on improving and developing necessary financial infrastructure to support 
banks and other microfinance service providers in reaching this untapped market. And for the 
still missing pieces of the jig-saw, SFIs will take the lead.  
On the third pillar. There are five key areas of financial infrastructure improvement. First, in 
response to changes in customer needs that are becoming more complex, efforts would be 
made  to  enhance  the  capability  and  tools  for  risk  management  of  financial  institutions, 
including credit, market, liquidity, and settlement risks.  
Secondly, there needs to be improvement in the information system for risk management of 
financial  institutions  to  help  them  in  strategic  planning  and  service  expansion,  while  of 
course, ensuring appropriate protection of client confidentiality.  
Thirdly, financial laws that support risk management of financial institutions in dealing with 
credit risk and NPL and NPA management would be reviewed.  
Fourthly, the information technology infrastructure and capacity of financial institutions would 
be  strengthened,  thus  allowing  more  efficient  utilization  of  technology  to  serve  increasing 
customer needs, while supervisory standards would focus on ensuring security of services.  
Finally, there is the need to enhance the capacity of human resource in the banking sector.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
In any financial system development and reform, regulation must be able to keep up. Let’s 
now  turn  to  the  third  and  final  part  of  my  talk:  key  measures  in  risk-based  supervision  to 
ensure stability.  
In  this  regard,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  continues  to  work  closely  with  the  Basel  Committee, 
through our participation as member of the Standard Implementation Group, or the SIG, and 
Basel Consultative Group, or the BCG, as well as work with other regulators in the EMEAP 
BIS Review 20/2010 
 3
important 
institutions,  calibrating  regulations,  such  as  Basel 
region  to  reform  the  global  financial  system.  Through  these  forums,  we  participate  in  key 
reform  areas  such  as  refining  of  risk  measurement,  formulating  measures  in  handling 
systemically 
II  capital 
requirements, stress-testing, and accounting rules to alleviate such problems.  
Our role in these forums helps us to steer much reform in ways that are consistent with our 
own  national  context,  and  would  be  key  to  ensure  proper  matching  of  risk  profile  in  our 
system with emerging regulations. 
At  home,  empowered  with  the  recent  improvement  in  the  legal  framework,  namely  the 
Financial  Institutions  Business  Act,  we  will  remain  committed  to  performing  risk-based 
supervision and ensuring proper governance within individual financial institutions.  
There has also been increasing recognition of the need for macro-prudential policy in dealing 
with  the  problem  of  systemic  risk  as  well  as  coordination  between  monetary  policy  and 
financial system policy, given that such measures could likely have a macroeconomic impact. 
The  idea  is  not  new  to  us  as  you  may  recall  our  prior  uses  of  loan-to-value  ratios  and 
tightening of credit card rule to prevent the build-up of vulnerabilities in the real estate and 
household sectors.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
When  all  things  considered,  though  regulatory  weakness  was  partly  to  be  blamed  for  the 
recent global financial crisis, it is not that the tenet of risk-based supervision is flawed, but 
rather  failures  occurred  where  there  was  complacency  in  overestimating  the  ability  to 
understand and manage such risks.  
Therefore, I believe one of the key lessons to be drawn from this global crisis is that we must 
put great focus and vigilance on supervisory process, rather than just redrafting the 
written regulation.  
Finally,  there  is  pressing  call  for  stronger  international  cooperation  and  dialogue  among 
supervisors.  This  is  so  because  the  complexity  and  cross-border  linkages  of  financial 
systems  will  continue  to  increase  and  while  we  are  still  grappling  with  the  appropriate 
supervisory structure to handle cross-border issues, information flows, at this time, continue 
to  be  limited.  Thus,  without  effective  communication  and  cooperation,  it  will  be  difficult  to 
prevent or contain future financial crisis spillovers effectively.  
While  we  welcomed  greater  engagement  of  emerging  economies  in  the  global  regulatory 
reform process, such as in Basel Committee and various working groups, the key success 
factors  are  these:  First, our  inclusiveness  at  the  policy  development  stage  rather  than  just 
implementation  stage,  and  secondly,  on  the  inclusiveness  in  the  supervisory  colleges  of 
global banks which are systemically important to our domestic financial system.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
In closing, I would like to iterate that, the success in meeting these challenges, rests as much 
with  us,  as  with  the  banking  sector.  Thus  far,  we  are  pleased  with  their  efforts  in 
strengthening risk management, not only in the process, but more importantly, the culture. 
Often, we are asked why our banking system has managed to remain resilient, while those 
with more sophisticated risk management system have suffered. I believe the key is, first of 
all, there is no gap between the risk profile of our banks and their risk management system, 
as well as our risk-based supervision. Our banks business model is less complex, mobilizing 
local  and  stable  deposit,  for  on  lending  to  domestic  borrowers,  with  small  investment 
portfolios,  mostly  in  plain  vanilla  Thai  government  bond.  They  have  very  little  exposure  to 
less familiar risk such as overseas assets and complex products. 
But looking ahead, things will not stay this safe if both banks and the Bank of Thailand do not 
work  closely  to  continuously  strengthen  risk  management.  This  is  because  the  banking 
system  must  serve  the  need  of  the  real  economy,  which  will  become  more  complex  with 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2010
economic  globalizations,  aging  population,  and  increasing  demand  from  corporate  and 
households.  
Thus, our banking system is interdependent with the real sector, and must evolve with this 
awareness, recognition, and impending responsibility.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 20/2010 
 5
