Subir Gokarn: Managing inflation in the post-crisis environment 
Article by Dr Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, contributed to the 
journal “Yojana” (August 2010 issue), New Delhi, 12 August 2010. 
Assistance provided by Muneesh Kapur is gratefully acknowledged. 
 The growth backdrop 
The Indian economy weathered the global crisis of 2008–09 quite well. Even as much of the 
developed world is still quite some distance from its pre-crisis growth rate, several emerging 
market economies (EMEs) have made up the lost ground relatively quickly. As indicated in 
Chart  1,  India  saw  its  growth  rate  decline  from  9.2  per  cent  in  2007–08  to  a  trough  of 
6.7 per cent in 2008–09. There was a modest recovery in 2009–10 to 7.4 per cent, with the 
second  half  of  the  year  showing  a  slight  improvement  over  the  first.  The  outlook  for  the 
current  year  is  generally  more  positive,  with  several  forecasters  projecting  growth  to  be 
around 8.5 per cent. While this is still somewhat short of the pre-crisis performance, there is 
a widespread perception that, with the several capacity constraints that the economy faces, 
more rapid growth than this would quickly trigger strong inflationary pressures.  
 Inflationary pressures  
Regrettably,  though,  inflationary  pressures  have  been  visible  in  the  economy  even  in  the 
early stages of the recovery. Chart 2 indicates that the turnaround in headline inflation, as 
measured by the overall Wholesale Price Index (WPI) began in June 2009. This was clearly 
a period in which the recovery was in its very early stages, with the economy growing at an 
BIS Review 106/2010 
 1
annual  rate  of  around  7.5  per  cent,  significantly  below  the  pre-crisis  rate.  It  was  logical  to 
attribute the rise in the inflation rate to supply-side factors.  
 The validity of this inference is evident from the same chart. The prices of primary articles 
began to rise in March 2009 but the rate of increase accelerated sharply around August. A 
significant contributor to this was the rapid escalation in food prices as a consequence of a 
weak  monsoon.  Later  in  the  year,  as  prospects  of  a  global  recovery  looked  brighter, 
commodity prices continued to rise. The combination of rising global commodity prices and 
domestic  food  prices  contributed  to  a  sustained  increase  in  the  inflation  rate  for  primary 
articles until April 2010. There has been a plateauing since then. This is partly attributable to 
a  global  softening  of  commodity  prices,  as  uncertainties  about  the  sustainability  of  the 
recovery have arisen. If this continues, it will help to reverse the trend in this component of 
the  index.  But,  the  most  significant  cause  of  reversal  is  likely  to  be  a  moderation  in  food 
prices over the next few months in response to a reasonably good monsoon.  
The other supply-side driver of inflation in recent months has been energy. The inflation rate 
for the fuel component of the WPI began rising in June 2009. Though it remained in negative 
territory  until  October  2009,  the  rise  itself  contributed  to  a  rise  in  the  overall  inflation  rate. 
From October 2009 onwards, fuel inflation has been positive and rising quite rapidly.  
In  short,  the  Indian  economy  has  clearly  seen  a  spurt  of  inflation,  significantly  driven  by 
supply-side factors in a period during which growth was relatively slow. Prevailing wisdom on 
monetary  policy  suggests  that  supply-side  pressures,  particularly  if  they  are  temporary  in 
nature,  are  not  effectively  tackled  by  conventional  monetary  measures,  which  are  more 
directly  aimed  at  reining  in  demand.  Apart  from  the  temporariness  of  these  supply-side 
factors,  the  overall  state  of  the  economy  should  also  be  considered.  The  same  wisdom 
argues  that,  if  the  economy  is  at  or  close  to  full  capacity  utilization,  monetary  actions  in 
response  to  supply-driven  inflationary  pressures  may  be  appropriate.  While  they  will  not 
directly address the cause of the inflation, by signaling a willingness to compress demand, 
they will rein in expectations of inflation spiraling out of control.  
The fact that the economy was still growing at a relatively slow pace in the second half of 
2009–10 implied that there was some slack still available in capacities across sectors and 
that the threshold for strong monetary actions had not yet been reached. However, monetary 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2010
assessments at that time could not be made independently of the very drastic measures that 
had been taken when the global crisis precipitated in September 2008. Those actions took 
the monetary position, as reflected in the repo and reverse repo rates and the cash reserve 
ratio (CRR) quite some distance from what would be considered normal levels. Even in the 
early stages of recovery, therefore, every opportunity to revert these instruments to normal 
needed to be exploited. I shall return to this point a little later in the article.  
The rising significance of demand  
Coming  back  to  the  inflationary  situation,  while  a  significant  proportion  of  the  rise  in  the 
inflation rate over the past year can be attributed to supply-side factors, demand pressures 
became visible in early 2010. While it is difficult to identify a perfect measure of demand-side 
inflation  –  what  is  conventionally  referred  to  as  “core”  inflation  –  a  practical  measure  that 
reflects  the  underlying  forces  to  an  extent  is  the  sub-component  of  the  manufacturing 
component  of  the  WPI,  which  excludes  food  products.  Chart  3  displays  the  pattern  of  this 
sub-component “Non-food Manufacturing Inflation”.  
 As  growth  slowed  in  2008–09,  this  indicator  also  moved  downwards.  It  actually  went  into 
negative  territory  for  a  few  months,  before  turning  marginally  positive  in  December  2009. 
While this turnaround was clearly not indicative of any rapid build-up of demand pressures, 
the  fact  that  it  had  happened  was  a  signal  that  the  business  cycle  had  bottomed  out  and 
growth was on its way back up. However, after that rather sedate start, this indicator began 
to  accelerate  rather  rapidly  in  the  early  months  of  2010.  At  the  time  that  this  article  was 
written,  the  numbers  for  June  2010  had  just  been  released;  this  indicator  had  risen  to 
7.3 per cent.  
The  inflation  rates  that  the  economy  is  now  experiencing,  both  from  the  supply  and  the 
demand sides, are clearly a matter of great concern. It is incumbent on the government and 
the  central  bank  to  use  all  the  means  at  their  disposal  to  rein  inflation  in.  In  this  effort, 
monetary  policy  has  two  specific  objectives:  (i)  to  prevent  the  spillover  of  supply-side 
pressures  into  a  more  broad-based  inflationary  process  and  (ii)  to  moderate  demand  to 
levels  consistent  with  the  capacity  of  the  economy  to  meet  it  without  provoking  price 
increases.  
BIS Review 106/2010 
 3
Monetary policy: thought and action 
Let us look at the thinking and actions on the monetary front against the backdrop laid out 
above. As already indicated, drastic monetary actions were taken during the last quarter of 
2008, sharply bringing down both the policy rates and the CRR. Looking back on this period, 
it  can  be  reasonably  argued  that  these  measures  contributed  to  the  stabilization  of  the 
economy and the relatively small impact of the crisis by infusing massive amounts of liquidity 
into the system. The fiscal stimulus, which came in various forms during the same period, 
helped  by  directly  creating  demand  in  a  situation  in  which  private  demand  was  sluggish. 
Without  these  combined  interventions,  the  outcome  would  almost  certainly  have  been  far 
worse.  The  monetary  stance  remained  in  a  critically  supportive  mode  until  October  2009, 
when  the  first  steps  to  move  towards  a  normal  position  were  taken.  Table  1  lists  all  the 
monetary actions taken from then until end-July 2010. 
 Four  key  concerns  have  influenced  the  sequence  and  magnitude  of  the  monetary  actions 
listed in the table. First, even while the Indian economy has recovered quite rapidly from the 
slowdown,  there  is  persistent  global  uncertainty.  EMEs  have  generally  done  quite  well  in 
coming out of the crisis, but a major part of the global economy – the US, the UK, the Euro 
zone  –  is  not  only  showing  only  very  modest  signs  of  recovery,  it  is also  manifesting  new 
stresses, partly as a result of the huge build-up of sovereign debt, which governments used 
to support their various fiscal stimulus packages. Over the past few weeks, optimism about a 
sustained, even is slow, global recovery, has been giving ground to concerns about another 
imminent slowdown. One thing that we learnt from the events of 2008–09 was that India is 
not  immune  to  global  turbulence.  Be  it  through  trade,  capital  flows  or  a  general  sense  of 
confidence about  economic  prospects,  a  global  problem  quickly  becomes  a  domestic  one. 
Given these linkages, the risks from the global economy need to be taken into consideration 
while formulating domestic policy.  
Second, the reality is that the policy instruments are far from being in a normal position. As 
the  economy  recovers,  it  is  imperative  that  policy  instruments  be  brought  as  quickly  as 
possible back to a position consistent with the state of the economy. This is essential for the 
management of expectations as well as to re-create the capacity to respond, should another 
shock  hit  the  economy.  But,  as  important  as  it  is  to  return  to  normal  quickly,  it  is  equally 
necessary  to  do  so  non-disruptively.  The  kind  of  rapid  and  massive  reductions  that  were 
made  to  instruments  during  the  crisis  simply  cannot  be  replicated  in  the  reverse  direction. 
Growth is picking up and confidence gradually returning to businesses and consumers, but 
4 
 BIS Review 106/2010
given the vividness of the crisis, the process is still likely to be vulnerable to both external 
shocks and domestic ones. Rapid transitions in the policy regime might constitute one such 
shock.  In  essence,  on  this  consideration,  while  rapid  and  drastic  actions  are  entirely 
warranted  when  dealing  with  a  crisis,  managing  a  return  to  normalcy  requires  a  more 
gradualist and calibrated approach.  
Third,  notwithstanding  the  above  two  issues,  the  fact  is  that  inflation  has  taken  hold,  with 
both  supply  and  demand  pressures  contributing  to  it.  Monetary  policy  must  respond.  The 
table indicates that it indeed has. Action on rates and liquidity, through the CRR, began in 
January and has continued at the measured pace indicated earlier over the past six months. 
One strong criticism of the Reserve Bank’s approach has been that has been “too little, too 
late”. I would submit that the test of this is yet to come. It is well-known that monetary policy 
acts with a lag. It could be anywhere between 6 and 12 months, even longer before demand 
side pressures abate in response to an action. Given this, actions taken during January–July 
2010 should start to show their impact on inflation over the next 6 to 12 months.  
The fact that the non-food manufacturing inflation rate went up sharply during the first half of 
the year is in and of itself cannot be attributed to the absence of monetary actions during this 
year. To address that, actions would have had to be taken in the second half of 2009. But, at 
that point even the domestic recovery was at best in its early stages and its trajectory was 
quite uncertain. An anti-inflation stance in those conditions would have been rather risky.  
Finally, as I have already mentioned, an important lesson from the crisis was the critical role 
of liquidity in the financial system in maintaining economic stability. The policy approach over 
the  past  few  months  has  been  very  conscious  of  the  need  to  balance  the  exit  from  an 
abnormally high liquidity situation, which the response to the crisis created with the current 
liquidity requirements of both the public and private sectors.  
Conclusion 
To conclude, the management of current inflation requires both supply-side and demand-side 
approaches.  Monetary  policy  has  addressed  the  latter  with  a  gradual,  calibrated  set  of 
actions  on  both  interest  rates  and  liquidity  management.  The  pace  and  sequencing  of  the 
actions has been influenced by both persistent global uncertainties and the need to support 
the  domestic  recovery.  This  has  required  a  balancing  act  between  reining  in  inflationary 
expectations and adequate liquidity in the domestic financial system. While the current rate 
of  inflation  is  a  legitimate  concern,  the  results  of  this  policy  stance  should  become  visible 
over the next few months. 
BIS Review 106/2010 
 5
