Deepak Mohanty: The global financial crisis – genesis, impact and 
lessons 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
international conference on “Frontiers of interface between statistics and science”, organised 
in honour of Prof C R Rao on the occasion of his 90th birthday by the C R Rao Advanced 
Institute of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science and the University of Hyderabad 
Hyderabad, 30 December 2009. 
The assistance provided by Dr Rajiv Ranjan and Shri Binod B Bhoi is acknowledged. 
 Respected Dr. Reddy, Prof. T. N. Srinivasan, Prof. S. D. Tendulkar, Prof. T. Krishnakumar, 
distinguished invitees and friends. I thank the C. R. Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics, 
Statistics and Computer Sciences and the University of Hyderabad for giving this opportunity 
to share my thoughts on the global financial crisis. I am humbled speaking on this subject in 
the presence of Dr. Reddy, the distinguished former Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, 
who is widely credited for having put in place prudential policies which shielded India from 
the worst effects of the global financial crisis. 
The  world  economy  today  seems  to  be  recovering  from  the  most  severe  crisis  since  the 
Great Depression of the 1930s. As you know, it surfaced in the subprime mortgage sector in 
the US in August 2007 and took the character of a global crisis in September 2008 following 
the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers.  It  is  also  dubbed  as  the  greatest  crisis  in  the  history  of 
financial capitalism because of the way it simultaneously propagated to other countries. 
The impact of the crisis can be gauged from the sharp upward revisions to the estimates of 
possible write-downs by banks and other financial institutions from about US$ 500 billion in 
March  2008  to  about  US$  3.5  trillion  in  October  2009.  More  than  the  financial  cost,  the 
adverse impact on the real economy has been severe: in 2009, the world GDP is estimated 
by the IMF to have contracted by 0.8 per cent and the world trade volume is estimated to 
have declined by 12 per cent. 
The expanse of the crisis has tested all the limits of conventional and unconventional policy 
options  available  to  policymakers  around  the  world.  In  fact,  the  speed  and  intensity  with 
which  the  US  subprime  crisis  turned  into  a  global  financial  crisis  and  then  into  a  global 
economic crisis has led to a whole new debate on dominant tenets in macroeconomics. It 
has challenged the conventional views on the self-correcting nature of financial markets. The 
debate on the role of finance in economic growth has again come to the centre stage.  
Against this backdrop, I will reflect on the following set of questions. How similar or different 
is  the  recent  crisis  from  the  past  crises  in  terms  of  its  cause  and  manifestation?  How  did 
policies in different countries respond to the crisis? How and why was India impacted and 
how did we respond? What are the key lessons from the crisis? I will conclude with a focus 
on India. 
the 
Genesis of the crisis 
I. 
interplay  between  both  macroeconomic  and 
The  crisis  was  an  outcome  of 
microeconomic factors. From a macroeconomic perspective, the crisis has been attributed to 
the persistence of global imbalances, excessively accommodative monetary policy pursued 
in major advanced economies and lack of recognition of asset prices in policy formulation. 
From  a  microeconomic  perspective,  the  crisis  has  been  attributed  to  the  rapid  financial 
innovations without adequate regulation, credit boom and the lowering of credit standards, 
inadequate corporate governance and inappropriate incentive system in the financial sector 
and overall lax oversight of the financial system. 
BIS Review 15/2010 
 1
Global imbalances 
It is argued that while the subprime problem was the trigger, the root cause of the crisis lies 
in the persistence of the global imbalances since the start of the current decade (BIS, 2009). 
Large current account deficits in the advanced countries mirrored by large current account 
surpluses  in  the  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  implied  that  excess  saving  flowed 
uphill  from  developing  countries  to  developed  countries  (Chart  1  and  Table  1).  Bernanke 
(2005)  considered  this  “saving  glut”  as  one  of  the  factors  leading  to  the  crisis.  Among  the 
advanced countries, it is the US which has a large saving-investment gap. Among the EMEs, 
it is China, which has the largest saving surplus. The causation, however, is not very clear: 
whether it is excess saving in China or excess consumption in the US that contributed to the 
crisis. 
 2 
 BIS Review 15/2010
 Apart  from  the  saving-investment  imbalances,  there  has  been  concurrent  accumulation  of 
large  foreign  exchange  reserves  by  the  EMEs,  particularly  China,  also  as  self  insurance 
against sudden reversal of capital flows (Table 2). It is argued that accumulation of reserves, 
particularly from trade surplus, resulted in misalignment of exchange rates. This prevented 
the  global 
the  burden  of  adjustment  was  borne 
disproportionately by countries with flexible currencies. While there is merit in this argument, 
it  is  not  clear  whether  movement  in  exchange  rates  by  itself  could  have  prevented  global 
imbalances without an adjustment in aggregate demand – lower consumption in the US and 
higher consumption in China.  
to  adjust.  Moreover, 
imbalances 
BIS Review 15/2010 
  3
Monetary policy 
In a number of advanced countries, policy rates remained below what could be considered 
as neutral rates. Monetary policies in the US and Japan were too easy for too long (Truman, 
2009). The US federal funds rate was lowered to 1 per cent by June 2003 while the Bank of 
Japan’s discount rate reached 0.1 per cent by September 2001. Subsequently, though policy 
rates  were  raised,  they  have  been  brought  down  again  to  their  lowest  levels  following  the 
crisis (Chart 2). 
 Many critics argue that the current low levels of policy rates may well be sowing the seeds for 
the  next  crisis.  Notwithstanding  the  arguments  on  both  the  sides,  one  aspect  is  clear  that 
monetary policy in advanced countries has spillover effect on the EMEs. Monetary Policy is 
generally  conducted  with  the  domestic  objectives  in  view  but  the  international  spillover 
effects  are  not  inconsequential.  For  example,  increase  in  interest  rate  differential  could 
engender excessive capital flows from developed countries to developing countries with an 
increasing  risk  of  reversal  unrelated  to  the  fundamentals  of  the  capital  recipient  countries. 
This can accentuate asset prices, put upward pressure on exchange rate, and could have 
destabilizing effects. 
Excess leverage 
A comparison of the current crisis with various episodes of past crises reveals considerable 
similarity with regard to the underlying causes – excessive use of credit, lowering of credit 
standards, and heavy reliance on leverage. Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) find that the global 
dimension of the current crisis is neither new nor unique to this episode. 
Apart from perpetuating global imbalances, the easy monetary policy pursued in advanced 
economies encouraged excessive leveraging on the part of investors as well as banks and 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2010
financial institutions. The sharp rise in the leverage of financial institutions in the first decade 
of this century has been particularly striking (Chart 3). 
Source: Global Financial Stability Report, April 2009, IMF. 
 Search for yields 
The low levels of interest rates led to the search for yields. This encouraged rapid financial 
innovations  in  terms  of  complex  derivative  instruments  and  structured  finance  products 
created  through  the  process  of  securitization.  Easy  credit  combined  with  under  pricing  of 
risks  created  speculative  asset  bubbles,  especially  in  real  estate.  However,  domestic 
macroeconomic policies in many cases could not take into account the build-up of systemic 
risks  in  the  financial  system  arising  from  leverage  and  asset  price  bubbles,  thereby 
contributing to the crisis. 
The  financial  system  also  was  enlarged  with  the  growth  in  off-balance  sheet  activities  of 
banks  through  the  process  of  “originate-to-distribute”  model.  This  shadow  banking  sector, 
however,  remained  beyond  the  pale  of  regulation.  Consequently,  both  the  investors  and 
regulators  increasingly  relied  on  the  assessment  of  rating  agencies  and  independent 
auditors,  who  are  supposed  to  provide  a  third-party  evaluation  of  the  risks  embedded  in 
various financial transactions. However, due to the existing flaws in the financial system and 
distorted incentive structures, the rating agencies issued unrealistically high ratings to new 
issuances, thereby contributing to the build-up of systemic risks. 
The crisis shows that the systemic risks posed by the immensely complex financial system 
were  masked  by  the  benign  macroeconomic  outcomes  characterized  as  the  “great 
moderation”. This prolonged period of high output growth  and low inflation was essentially 
attributed  to  free  markets  and  successful  globalisation.  During  the  golden  years,  financial 
economists believed that free-market economies could never go astray which is belied by the 
crisis (Krugman, 2009). The financial system, however, remained vulnerable to the risks of 
reversal  in  easy  monetary  policy  on  the  one  hand  and  disorderly  unwinding  of  global 
imbalances on the other. It is argued that the “great moderation” carried the seeds of its own 
destruction. This stability bred complacency, excessive risk taking and, ultimately, instability 
(Minsky,  2008).  Furthermore,  multilateral  institutions  like  the  IMF  which  were  charged  with 
BIS Review 15/2010 
 5
the  responsibility  of  surveillance,  failed  in  diagnosing  the  vulnerabilities  both  at  the  global 
level and at the level of systemically important advanced economies (Reddy, 2009). 
Manifestation of the crisis 
II. 
Interbank  markets  in  advanced  economies  were  the  first  to  be  affected  by  severe  liquidity 
crisis as banks became reluctant to lend to each other on fear of counterparty risks. This was 
manifested in abnormal level of spreads, shortening of maturities, and contraction, or even 
closure, of some market segments (Table 3). 
 Transmission to the real sector 
With  money  markets  witnessing  a  squeeze,  equity  prices  plummeting  and  credit  spreads 
rising, banks and other financial institutions experienced erosion in their access to funding 
and capital. The tightening of credit conditions combined with deleveraging and risk aversion 
by banks and financial institutions led to a sharp slowdown in private sector credit growth, 
particularly in the advanced economies, which worked as a channel for transmitting the crisis 
from financial institutions to the real economy (Chart 4). At the same time, the deteriorating 
macroeconomic  conditions  affected  profitability.  Consequently, 
liquidity  problem 
transformed into a solvency problem leading to bank failures in the US and other advanced 
economies in Europe. The attendant wealth loss on account of collapsing asset prices further 
accentuated the problem in the real sector.  
the 
6 
 BIS Review 15/2010
 Transmission to EMEs 
The  crisis spread  to  the  EMEs  through  all  the  three  broad  channels –  confidence,  finance 
and  trade  –  reflecting  increased  global  integration.  The  confidence  channel  worked  in  two 
ways. First, although the epicenter of crisis was in advanced markets, exposures to emerging 
markets  were  reduced  sharply  with  the  return  of  risk  aversion.  Second,  with  increase  in 
deleveraging,  there  was  a  widespread  shortage  of  US  dollar.  Consequently,  reversal  of 
capital flows led to equity market losses and currency depreciations (Table 4). The slump in 
export  demand  and  tighter  trade  credit  caused  deceleration  in  aggregate  demand.  The 
banking system in the EMEs, however, showed relative resilience during the crisis because 
of their limited exposure to the toxic assets as also improved regulation and supervision in 
the aftermath of the East Asian crisis. 
BIS Review 15/2010 
 7
 Policy response 
The  crisis  evoked  unprecedented  policy  response,  both  nationally  and  internationally.  The 
resolution mechanisms that came to the fore had to contend with new and complex web of 
the financial world involving credit default swaps (CDS), special investment vehicles (SIVs) 
and credit ratings. Monetary authorities in the advanced economies were the first to resort to 
an aggressive monetary easing first by reducing policy rates and then by using their balance 
sheets in unconventional ways to augment liquidity. 
The large scale economic downturn accompanying the financial crisis also led to activation of 
counter-cyclical fiscal policy of unprecedented magnitudes. The fiscal measures focused on 
improving the balance sheet of the financial and corporate sectors as reflected in large scale 
bailouts in the US and other advanced economies. 
The EMEs also undertook various policy measures to limit the adverse impact of contagion 
and  their  policy  responses  became  more  coordinated  with  global  efforts.  A  distinguishing 
feature, however, is that while for the advanced countries the policy priorities were to restore 
normalcy  and  strengthen  financial  regulation  and  supervision,  dealing  with  the  reversal  of 
capital 
the  EMEs. 
Notwithstanding  such  differences,  restoring  growth  emerged  as  the  overriding  objective 
among both the set of countries. It was for the first time that EMEs turned out to be active 
partners in finding meaningful resolution mechanisms to a global problem. 
flows  and  collapse  of 
the  policy  attention 
trade  occupied 
in 
III. 
Impact and policy responses in India 
Why was India impacted? 
In the initial phase of the crisis, the impact on the Indian financial markets was rather muted 
as the direct exposure of banks to subprime assets was negligible. Nonetheless, India could 
8 
 BIS Review 15/2010
not  remain  unscathed  for  long.  As  the  crisis  intensified  in  the  aftermath  of  collapse  of 
Lehman Brothers, the global shocks first impacted the domestic financial markets and then 
transmitted  to  the  real  economy  through  the  finance,  trade  and  confidence  channels.  This 
could be attributed to the global nature of the current crisis on the one hand and accelerated 
trade  and  financial  integration  of  the  Indian  economy  with  the  world  since  the  1990s. 
Consequently, there has been a shift in the degree of synchronisation of the Indian trade and 
business cycles with the global cycles, which along with increased financial integration in the 
recent  period  indicate  that  India  cannot  remain  immune  to  global  trends.  Thus,  global 
economic developments now have a greater influence on the domestic economy (Mohanty, 
2009). 
How was India impacted? 
Post-Lehman, the impact of the global financial crisis was first felt through reversal of capital 
flows and fall in equity prices in the domestic stock markets on the back of large scale sell-off 
by  the  foreign  institutional  investors  (FIIs)  as  a  part  of  the  global  deleveraging  process. 
Simultaneously, there was reduced access to external sources of funding by Indian entities 
due  to  the  tightening  of  credit  conditions  in  international  markets.  This  shortage  of  dollar 
liquidity  put  significant  pressures  on  the  domestic  foreign  exchange  market,  which  was 
reflected  in  downward  pressures  on  the  Indian  rupee  along  with  its  increased  volatility. 
Simultaneously, there was a substitution of overseas financing by domestic financing, which 
brought both money market and credit market under pressure.  
The  transmission  of  this  external  demand  shocks  was  swift  and  severe  on  India’s  export 
growth, which turned negative in October 2008. Imports too started declining by December 
2008  as  domestic  activity  slowed.  The  overall  impact  was  reflected  in  a  fall  in  investment 
demand  and  sharp  deceleration  in  the  growth  of  Indian  economy  in  the  second  half  of  
2008–09 which persisted through the first quarter of 2009–10. 
Policy response 
In order to limit the adverse impact of the contagion on the Indian financial markets and the 
broader  economy,  the  Reserve  Bank,  like  most  other  central  banks,  took  a  number  of 
conventional  and  unconventional  measures.  These  included  augmenting  domestic  and 
foreign exchange liquidity and sharp reduction in the policy rates. The Reserve Bank used 
multiple instruments such as the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF), open market operations 
(OMO),  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR)  and  securities  under  the  market  stabilization  scheme 
(MSS) to augment the liquidity in the system. In a span of seven months between October 
2008 and April 2009, there was unprecedented policy activism. For example: (i) the repo rate 
was reduced by 425 basis points to 4.75 per cent, (ii) the reverse repo rate was reduced by 
275 basis points to 3.25 per cent, (iii) the CRR was reduced by a cumulative 400 basis points 
to 5.0 per cent, and (iv) the actual/potential provision of primary liquidity was of the order of 
Rs. 5.6 trillion (10.5 per cent of GDP). These measures were effective in ensuring speedy 
restoration  of  orderly  conditions  in  the  financial  markets  over  a  short  time  span.  These 
measures  were  supported  by  fiscal  stimulus  packages  during  2008–09  in  the  form  of  tax 
cuts,  investment  in  infrastructure  and  increased  expenditure  on  government  consumption. 
The  expansionary  fiscal  stance  continues  during  2009–10  to  support  aggregate  demand. 
While the magnitude of the crisis was global in nature, the policy responses were adapted to 
domestic growth outlook, inflation conditions and financial stability considerations. 
Until  the  emergence  of  global  crisis,  the  Indian  economy  passed  through  a  phase  of  high 
growth  driven  by  domestic  demand:  growing  domestic  investment  financed  mostly  by 
domestic  savings  and  sustained  consumption  demand.  This  overall  improvement  in 
macroeconomic  performance  in  India  could  mainly  be  attributed  to  the  sequential  financial 
sector  reforms  that  resulted  in  an  efficient  system  of  financial  intermediation,  albeit  bank-
based; the rule-based fiscal policy that reduced the public sector’s drag on private savings; 
BIS Review 15/2010 
 9
and forward looking monetary policy that balanced the short-term trade-off between growth 
and inflation. 
Lessons from the crisis 
IV. 
The  crisis  has  shown  that  irrespective  of  the  degree  of  globalisation  of  a  country  and  the 
soundness of domestic policies, it can be impacted by a crisis in any other economy due to 
the interlinkages in the global economy. With the benefit of hindsight, a number of important 
issues have emerged which allows us to draw lessons. I will highlight four key lessons. 
First, the policy objectives of central banks would have to be broader than price stability as 
conventionally  defined.  The  lesson  for  central  banks  that  emerged  from  the  crisis  is  that 
financial  stability  can  be  jeopardised  even  if  there  is  price  stability  and  macroeconomic 
stability  (Subbarao,  2009).  Moreover,  the  success  in  stabilising  goods  and  services  prices 
may not preclude inflation in asset prices, causing unsustainable speculation leading to asset 
booms. Thus, apart from price stability, the central banks would have to take into account 
asset prices and focus on financial stability as an explicit objective of policy. While there is 
more  of  an  agreement  to  recognise  financial  stability  as  an  objective,  there  is  less  of  an 
agreement  about  the  instrumentalities  for  achieving  this  objective.  There  is  a  broader 
acceptance  of  macroprudential  tools  for  asset  prices.  It  is,  however,  not  apparent  at  this 
stage as to what extent policy interest rates could be used to address asset price inflation. 
Second,  there  is  a  need  for  fiscal  consolidation  to  generate  the  fiscal  space  for  macro 
management. During the crisis, fiscal policy responses have been unprecedented, although 
they  were  conditioned  by  country-specific  factors.  But  the  massive  fiscal  support,  though 
appropriate  as  a  crisis  response,  has  raised  questions  about  debt  sustainability.  This  is 
reflected  in  increase  in  sovereign  CDS  spreads  even  for  advanced  countries  which  has 
implications  for  macro-financial  stability  going  forward.  It  is,  therefore,  important  that  fiscal 
buffers  are  established  in  good  times  to  provide  the  necessary  fiscal  space  for  counter-
cyclical fiscal measures in bad times. 
Third,  financial  institutions  would  have  to  be  less  leveraged  and  better  regulated.  This 
financial  crisis  brought  into  sharp  focus  the  interlinkages  among  the  financial  institutions, 
markets and the payment and settlement systems. It has shown that market self regulation 
has  limits.  Hence,  all  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  markets  and  instruments 
should be subject to an appropriate degree of regulation and oversight depending on their 
relative importance for overall financial stability. At the same time, it needs to be recognised 
that  regulation  in  itself  can  act  to  magnify  cycles.  In  order  to  address  the  issue  of  pro-
cyclicality, regulators need to focus on: identifying factors that amplify cycles; improving and 
diversifying market risk management models; undertaking more rigorous stress testing; and 
adopt forward-looking procedures to capital calculations. 
Fourth,  the  international  financial  architecture  needs  to  be  strengthened  to  address  the 
challenges of the global economy of the 21st century. The crisis has exposed fundamental 
problems,  not  only  in  national  regulatory  systems  affecting  finance,  competition  and 
corporate governance, but also in the international institutions and arrangements created to 
ensure financial and economic stability. The IMF, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and the 
G-20  should  provide  the  effective  platform  for  addressing  global  issues  in  a  more  credible 
manner. The IMF would have to play a more  active role in crisis prevention, management 
and  resolution.  It  needs  to  strengthen  its  multilateral  surveillance  with  a  greater  macro-
financial  focus.  In  this  context,  the  G-20  emphasis  on  modernizing  the  IMF’s  governance 
process is a welcome step which should improve its credibility, legitimacy and effectiveness. 
The  G-20  can  provide  the  necessary  political  support  for  implementation  of  policies  which 
need a coordinated effort at the global level. 
10 
 BIS Review 15/2010
Conclusions 
V. 
India  was  relatively  less  impacted  by  the  crisis  despite  increased  global  integration  of  the 
Indian  economy  in  recent  years.  This  could  be  attributed  mainly  to  the  structure  of  the 
economy, cautious policies, prudent regulation and effective supervision.  
First, India’s economic growth is largely domestic driven – high investment financed by high 
domestic saving.  
Second, de-regulation and opening up of the economy was sequenced appropriately. Along 
with the opening up of the economy, the financial markets were also developed to improve 
efficiency in financial intermediation. 
Third,  the  Reserve  Bank  also  being  the  regulator  and  supervisor  of  the  financial  system, 
information related to financial system always flowed to the central bank, which helped in fine 
tuning the monetary policy. In fact, financial stability as a monetary policy objective in India 
emerged much before the unraveling of the current crisis. 
Fourth, the multiple indicator approach to the conduct of monetary policy in India helped in 
identifying  credit  market  excesses  and  undertaking  counter-cyclical  monetary  policy 
measures in a pre-emptive manner.  
Fifth,  monetary  policy  was  well  supported  by  macroprudential  measures  to  ensure  that  it 
does  not  impinge  on  financial  stability.  Pro-cyclical  measures  in  respect  of  capital  and 
provisioning were tried in 2005, much before the crisis.  
Sixth,  in  view  of  systemic  implications  of  non-banks,  they  have  been  brought  within  the 
regulatory  framework  in  terms  of  prescriptions  of  capital  adequacy  and  exposure  norms. 
Banks’ exposures to these entities are subject to prudential regulations. 
Seventh,  the  liquidity  risks  are  contained  by  restricting  the  overnight  unsecured  market  to 
banks and primary dealers (PDs), with prudential limits. The requirement of statutory liquidity 
ratio (SLR) for banks acts as a buffer for both liquidity and solvency of banks. 
Although cautious macroeconomic policies coupled with macroprudential regulations helped 
limit  the  adverse  impact  on  the  Indian  economy,  there  is  no  room  for  complacency.  As 
highlighted by Governor Dr. Subbarao, there are lessons from the crisis for India too, which 
include: (i) further strengthening regulation at the systemic and institutional levels; (ii) making 
our  supervision  more  effective  and  value  adding;  and  (iii)  improving  our  skills  in  risk 
management. India has been an active participant at the global discussions, the task for us 
will  be  to  reflect  our  point  of  view  in  the  global  debate  and  adapt  the  global  policies  and 
guidelines  to  the  Indian  situation  on  a  dynamic  basis.  Furthermore,  we  need  to  actively 
pursue the challenge of financial inclusion. 
The functioning of global economy in the past three decades suggests that the process of 
financial development and globalisation is susceptible to crisis. Nevertheless, the recurrence 
of financial crisis has not changed the positive relation between financial development and 
growth  (Lipsky,  2009).  As  the  current  crisis  shows,  the  problems  in  finance  and  financial 
regulation  need  to  be  addressed  at  a  national  as  well  as  global  level  to  ensure  that  the 
benefits of financial developments become more widespread and enduring in nature. Thus, 
what  is  needed  is  not  more  regulation  but  sharper  regulation  of  the  financial  system  to 
ensure sustained financial development with stability. 
Select references 
Bank for International Settlements (2009), 79th Annual Report, June. 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2004), “The Great Moderation”, Remarks at the Meetings of the Eastern 
Economic Association, Washington, DC.  
BIS Review 15/2010 
 11
_____ (2005), “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit”, Remarks at 
the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia.  
Calomiris, Charles W. (2009). “Financial Innovation, Regulation, and Reform”, Cato Journal, 
Vol. 29, No. 1.  
Global Financial Stability Report (2009), International Monetary Fund, April and October.  
Krugman,  Paul  (2009),  “How  Did  Economists  Get  It  So  Wrong?”  The  New  York  Times, 
September 2. 
Lipsky,  John  (2009),  “Finance  and  Economic  Growth”,  Remarks  at  the  Bank  of  Mexico 
Conference, Mexico City. 
Minsky, Hyman P. (2008), Stabilizing an Unstable Economy, McGraw-Hill Publications. 
Mohanty, Deepak (2009), “Global Financial Crisis and Monetary Policy Response in India”, 
Speech delivered at the 3rd ICRIER-InWEnt Annual Conference on 12th November, 2009 in 
New Delhi. 
Reddy, Y.V. (2009), “Epilogue” in India and the Global Financial Crisis: Managing Money and 
Finance, Orient Blackswan, New Delhi. 
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009), This Time is Different: Eight Centuries 
of Financial Folly, Princeton University Press. 
Subbarao, D. (2009), “Financial Stability: Issues and Challenges”, Valedictory address at the 
FICCI-IBA  Annual  Conference  on  “Global  Banking:  Paradigm  Shift”  organised  jointly  by 
FICCI and IBA on September 10. 
The Turner Review (2009), “A Regulatory Response to the Global Banking Crisis”, Financial 
Sector Authority, UK, March. 
Truman,  Edwin  M.  (2009),  “Lessons  from  the  Global  Economic  and  Financial  Crisis”, 
Keynote  address  at  the  conference  “G-20  Reform  Initiatives:  Implications  for  the  Future  of 
Regulation”,  co-hosted  by  the  Institute  for  the  Global  Economics  and  the  International 
Monetary Fund, Seoul, Korea, November 11. 
12 
 BIS Review 15/2010
