Kwesi Bekoe Amissah-Arthur: Risk management in well-capitalized banks 
Speech by Dr Kwesi Bekoe Amissah-Arthur, Governor of the Bank of Ghana, at the launch of 
the PricewaterhouseCoopers Ghana Banking Survey, Accra, 10 June 2010. 
 Country Director and Staff of PriceWaterhouse Coopers (PwC), 
Chief Executives of Banks, 
Invited Guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is a pleasure to be part of the launch of the 2009 Banking Survey. The publication of the 
Survey  is  valuable  and  contributes  to  the  process  of  providing  a  better  appreciation  of 
developments  in  our  banking  institutions.  PwC  deserves  commendation  for  producing  this 
document consistently over the last ten years. 
I am told that investors have found it a useful source of information for making investment 
decisions;  and  in  deciding  which  banks  they  should  do  business  with.  The  methodology 
analyzes the published financial statements of banks (i.e. information already in the public 
domain) and draw conclusions based on parameters such as asset size, deposit liabilities, 
profitability and capital adequacy. 
PriceWaterhouse  Coopers  gave  me  absolute  liberty  to  choose  my  topic.  Since  we  are 
launching a report on banking sector developments and performance, I have chosen to focus 
on the subject of risk management. From as far away as the United States of America we 
know the recent financial sector crisis originated from the sub-prime mortgage sector of the 
banking system. The impact has been felt around the globe and has left, in its wake, major 
financial  institutions  on  their  knees.  The  developments  have  affected  hitherto  remotely 
related economies and have left lessons for policy makers and bankers. 
Not very far from here, Nigeria averted a major crisis in its banking sector in 2009, requiring 
the  central  bank  injecting  liquidity  into  a  number  of  banks  and  installing  turnaround 
management teams to steer these banks out of trouble. 
What lessons are there to learn from financial crisis especially as we re-capitalize our banks 
to make them stronger and therefore better endowed for effective financial intermediation? 
Are  well-capitalized  banks  necessarily  a  good 
is  not 
complemented by strong risk management? 
I propose to share with you some perspectives on these issues. 
thing,  especially  where 
this 
Rationale for well-capitalized banks 
The banking system has three major functions: taking deposits, making loans and investing 
in securities. Through its financial intermediation function, banks facilitate capital formation 
and promote economic growth. However, the ability of banks to engender economic growth 
and  facilitate  development  depends  on  the  health,  soundness  and  stability  of  the  system. 
The  need  for  strong,  well-capitalized  and  viable  banks  is  underscored  by  the  fact  that  the 
banking  industry  is  one  of  the  few  sectors  in  which  shareholders’  funds  are  only  a  small 
proportion  of  the  liabilities  that  banks  hold.  This,  therefore,  provides  the  necessity  for  the 
strong regulation of the banking sector. 
As  is  well  known  in  the  country,  in  2007  the  Bank  of  Ghana  determined  new  capital 
requirements for banks operating in the country. 
Globally,  size  has  become  an  ingredient  for  success.  All  things  being  equal,  an enhanced 
capital-base should improve the competitive edge of a bank as it enables the bank to acquire 
BIS Review 92/2010 
 1
    appropriate, modern technology, engage suitably qualified personnel and capacity to absorb 
shocks. It also positions the bank to offer better value-added services more profitably. 
There  are  many  other  benefits  attached  to  the  appropriate  capitalization  of  the  banking 
sector, and the Ghanaian banks stand to gain a lot from them. Some of these benefits are: 
 
Strong capital is a basic indication of solvency, and provides a good cushion against 
loss; an insurance against insolvency; 
Recapitalization provides an opportunity for eliminating weak banks from the system 
in an orderly manner; 
Well  capitalized  banks  have  better  prospects  for  profitability  and  operational 
efficiency; 
Recapitalization provides an avenue for broadening the shareholder base of banks, 
especially  through  public  listing,  thereby  improving  prospects  for  good  corporate 
governance; 
Well  capitalized  banks  are  better  placed  to  finance  the  long  term  development 
needs of the Ghanaian economy and businesses; and 
Banks are able to invest more in training and development of manpower. 
 
While there are potential upside benefits to be derived from well capitalized banks, there are 
equally  downside  risks,  especially  where  risk  management  is  not  given  the  requisite 
attention. The activities of banks are inherently risky and capital is not a complete panacea 
for risk taking. Boards and senior management of banks must ensure that their risk appetite 
is held in check and that the quality of risk management practices is not compromised. 
In  this  regard,  risk  management  should  not  be  a  discussion  confined  to  only  senior  level 
management. Risk management should be an enterprise-wide process, involving all levels. 
Top  management  is  responsible  for  putting  in  place  a  well-defined  risk  governance 
framework and formulating the appropriate risk strategies. At the operational level, the roles 
of the business units are to ensure that key risks are appropriately identified, assessed and 
mitigated. Risk management is a dynamic and iterative process, not a one-off exercise. It is a 
continuous cycle; hence there should be genuine awareness, ownership and accountability 
for risks throughout the organization. 
Lessons for banks from experiences elsewhere 
There is no doubt that Ghanaian banks have many lessons to learn from developments in 
Nigeria  and  in  the  West.  The  first  lesson  is  that  poor  risk  analysis  can  have  a  debilitating 
effect on banking operations. Ignoring the dangers of credit, market, operational risks, even 
in a situation of high capital, can be problematic. Banking is not simply deposit mobilization 
and  lending.  Banking  is  about  risk  analysis  and  strategic  deployment  of  funds  to  earn 
commensurate  returns at  minimal  risk.  It  is  not  about  bigger  balance sheets  or  the  fastest 
growing banks, although size and growth rate are important dynamics in banking. 
An area Ghanaian banks will have to focus their attention is the need to increase their in-
house capacity for risk analysis in the emerging oil and gas sectors. This is because the two 
sub-sectors  that  created  problems  for  the  five  banks  taken  over  by  the  Central  Bank  of 
Nigeria  were  in  the  oil  and  gas  sector  and  the  capital  market  (specifically  margin  loans). 
Incidentally the affected banks were opening their books to these sectors for the first time. 
Obviously,  from  the  benefit  of  hindsight  it  is  obvious  that  there  was  poor  risk  analysis  of 
exposures to these sectors. 
I have heard the suggestion that the banks lacked expertise in these areas. My response is 
that  it  is  not  enough  to  place  the  blame  on  the  lack  of  expertise.  Banks  must  invest  in 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2010
capacity  building  in  risk  management  especially  for  emerging  sectors  of  the  Ghanaian 
economy. 
As  I  suggested  earlier,  the  culture  of  risk  management  is  not  well  rooted  in  our  banking 
system. Boards of banks need to establish Risk management functions at senior levels with 
direct reporting to a Committee of the Board to ensure that all risk aspects in the operations 
of banks are monitored and controlled. As banks in Ghana grow bigger and go international 
because  of  the  capital  injection,  they  are  likely  to  take  on  several  risks  that  they  have 
previously  been  unfamiliar  with.  Banks’  ability  to  manage  cross  border  regulatory  risks, 
currency risks, and other market risks will become critical going forward. 
For banks to be effective in the new environment, they have to restructure their targets to 
reduce unnecessary risk taking, and reduce the motivation for fraud. Banks need to realize 
that high targets lead to higher risk taking which can result in higher profits but this may not 
necessarily result in better performance. Undue risk taking, buoyed by unrealistic targets or 
the wrong incentives, exposes depositors and creditors to unnecessary risk and can wipe out 
capital  very  rapidly.  Banks  should  therefore  evolve  strategies  to  attain  high  performance 
within acceptable risk levels. 
Lessons for the regulatory bodies 
Did  the  regulatory  bodies  go  to  sleep  while  the  Nigerian  banks  and  their  American 
counterparts  went  on  the  lending  spree?  I  really  do  not  think  so  although  I  believe  that 
regulators could have done better. The implication is that this crisis may have been due more 
to  a  knowledge  gap  in  the  regulatory  regime  rather  than  lax  regulation.  Recently,  Alan 
Greenspan, former Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, noted that “you cannot legislate 
against greed, neither can you regulate greed”. When greedy people see an opportunity to 
make money that looks “easy” it is difficult to stand in their way. This may be comforting but it 
does not relieve the regulator of the responsibility of being the “guard dog” of the public. 
Regulators  therefore  have  to  sit  up  and  become  more  proactive  in  the  discharge  of  their 
regulatory functions. It is not enough to react to crisis; the aim must be to pre-empt them. 
The BoG is focused to deal with any potential crisis in the banking sector. We expect our 
counterparts,  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  and  the  National  Insurance 
Commission  to  also  re-position  themselves  for  the  challenges  that  lie  ahead  for  a  well 
capitalized financial system. 
Association of Regulators 
Conclusion 
There is no doubt that the recapitalization programme is the right step to take by the BoG as 
this will make banks more resilient and thereby engender healthy competition among them. 
Re-capitalized banks also have the potential to accelerate the rate of economic growth and 
development of the country. However, to ensure that the synergy it promises is fully realized, 
and to mitigate post-recapitalization challenges, adequate steps should be taken to entrench 
good risk management practices in banks. 
In conclusion, let us remind ourselves again that risk management is a corporate culture and 
everyone has a role to play in the process. The role of boards and senior management is 
critical  in  ensuring  that  the  key  risks,  both  present  and  foreseeable,  are  identified  and 
effectively  mitigated.  With  concerted  efforts  from  all  parties,  an  effective  risk  management 
process will enable banks to minimize financial losses, and optimize business practices, in 
order to respond to the changing business environment. 
Thank you all for the attention. 
BIS Review 92/2010 
 3
