Lim Hng Kiang: Seeking new growth horizons 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Lim  Hng  Kiang,  Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry  and  Deputy 
Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the 1st Annual World Islamic Banking 
Conference: Asia Summit 2010, Singapore, 14 June 2010. 
 H.E. Governor Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Central Bank of Bahrain, 
H.E. Governor Sultan Bin Nasser Al Suwaidi, Central Bank of the United Arab Emirates, 
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Introduction 
1. 
Good morning and a warm welcome to our overseas guests. First of all, let me thank 
Governor  Rasheed  and  Governor  Sultan  for  joining  us  at  this  inaugural  World  Islamic 
Banking Conference: Asia Summit (WIBC Asia). Your presence here today is testimony to 
the strong and long-standing ties that Singapore enjoys with the Gulf  Cooperation Council 
(GCC) countries and warm relationships between MAS and your respective central banks. 
2. 
The  World  Islamic  Banking  Conference  has  been  held  successfully  in  Bahrain  for 
the past sixteen years. We are honoured that WIBC Asia is now anchored in Singapore. We 
hope that the Summit will become an important event on the Islamic finance calendar over 
time and catalyse even greater engagement between the Middle East and Asia. Hence, the 
theme: “Seeking New Growth Horizons” is highly appropriate for this inaugural Summit. 
Strengthening Asia-Middle East engagement 
Uncertainty and fear from the financial crisis have abated somewhat, but risks 
3. 
still remain. Global economic output had begun to pick up from the second quarter of 2009. 
The  pace  of  recovery  however  varies  across  regions.  Though  global  conditions  have 
improved,  recent  developments  in  Europe  have  once  again  unsettled  financial  markets  as 
doubts have arisen over the fiscal sustainability of several countries in the Euro zone. These 
episodic  concerns  serve  as  broad  reminders  that  the  world  economy  still  faces  serious 
challenges as governments, financial institutions and corporations adjust to the new realities 
of greater prudence, tighter market conditions and lower tolerance for weak governance and 
excessive leverage. 
In Asia, economic growth has rebounded strongly above pre-crisis levels and 
4. 
become  more  broad-based.  Fundamentals  in  Asia  continue  to  be  strong,  boosted  by 
robust  domestic  demand,  healthy  balance  sheets  and  strong  resurgence  in  intra-regional 
trade. According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Asia is expected to grow by an 
average of 7.1% in 2010 and 2011, up from 3.4% in 2009. Having reformed and restructured 
their economies following the Asian Crisis a decade ago, Asia was better positioned with less 
fiscal imbalances or corporate excesses to emerge faster from the downturn. Prospects for 
sustained growth in ASEAN are also good. Its outlook is enhanced by continuing efforts to 
create  an  integrated  single  market  by  2015.  With  improved  trade  links  with  the  two  Asian 
giants  –  China  and  India,  ASEAN  will  become  an  even  more  dynamic  and  vibrant  region 
within Asia. 
The GCC countries too enjoy solid growth prospects, and look set to achieve 
5. 
around 5% GDP growth in 2010 and 2011, according to the IMF. They have implemented 
broad-based  development  strategies  to  diversify  their  economies  away  from  hydrocarbons 
and  harness  new  growth  drivers.  While  the  energy-related  sector  will  remain  an  important 
BIS Review 84/2010 
 1
pillar in Asia-Middle East relations, we should develop other complementarities between the 
two  regions  such  as  in  financial  and  business  services,  infocomm  technology  and  media, 
infrastructure development, tourism as well as green technology and life sciences. 
In this respect, the linkages between Singapore and the GCC have deepened. 
6. 
We  have  signed  the  milestone  GCC-Singapore  Free  Trade  Agreement  (FTA).  Singapore 
companies, such as Capital and in Bahrain and UAE, Changi Airport International in Saudi 
Arabia,  Keppel  Corp  in  Qatar  and  SembCorp  in  UAE  and  Oman,  have  secured  about 
S$26 billion of projects in the GCC. In addition, a strong cluster of Middle Eastern banks, 
such  as  Arab  Bank,  Emirates  NBD,  First  Gulf  Bank,  National  Bank  of  Kuwait  and  Qatar 
National  Bank,  is  already  based  in  Singapore.  Quite  a  few  are  looking  to  expand  their 
operations  in  trade  finance  and  wealth  management  to  capitalize  on  new  growth 
opportunities in the Asia-Pacific region. 
By  strengthening  linkages  at  all  levels,  the  Middle  East  and  Asia  can  then 
7. 
complement  each  other’s  development  and  seek  out  new  growth  areas  for  mutual 
benefit.  Inter-regional  platforms  have  been  established  to  achieve  this;  for  example,  the 
Asia-Middle  East  Dialogue  (AMED)  and  the  ASEAN-GCC  Ministerial  Meeting,  which  was 
held in Singapore recently. Growth in trade between ASEAN and GCC have resumed post-
crisis and is expected to receive a further boost with the ASEAN-GCC trade and investment 
framework  agreement  and  FTA.  I  therefore  urge  all  parties  to  work  swiftly  towards  a 
mutually-beneficial conclusion. 
Reforming finance to sustain growth 
The  financial  sector  has  encountered  major  turbulence  and  headwinds  as  a 
8. 
result of the financial crisis and has de-leveraged extensively in response to a more 
risk-sensitive  environment.  Significant  changes  in  financial  regulation  are  underway. 
Global regulators under the auspices of the Financial Stability Board, the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, are working to put fractured financial markets back on a sounder 
footing.  These  changes  include  increasing  the  quality  and  quantity  of  risk-based  capital, 
introducing  new  global  liquidity  requirements,  and  developing  a  fresh  regulatory  approach 
towards systemically important financial institutions. Such reforms should bring about greater 
stability to the global financial system. 
9. 
These  changes  will  not  be  dramatic  for  Singapore-based  financial  institutions 
because MAS’ regulation and supervision have been sound, prudent and effective. This has 
helped  our  financial  system  to  remain  resilient  through  the  crisis.  Last  week,  MAS 
communicated  our  long-standing  approach  in  the  latest  monograph  –  “Tenets  of  Effective 
Regulation”  where  we  reiterated  that  our  approach  to  regulatory  development  is  outcome-
focused, risk appropriate and impact sensitive. MAS’ policies and actions need to be clear 
and consistent as well as responsive to industry and market changes and economic cycles. 
We believe that a stable and dynamic financial system that serves the needs of the economy 
and the public cannot be built on regulation alone. Responsible and competent board and 
senior management who manage the risks of their financial institutions well are also critical. 
Growing interest in Islamic finance 
The general outlook for Islamic finance remains positive despite the negative 
10. 
spillover  from  the  financial  crisis.  As  a  basic  tenet,  Islamic  finance  emphasizes  that 
financing  activities  should  underpin  real  commercial  activities.  Due  to  its  widening 
acceptance  and  its  appeal  as  a  means  for  ethical  investment,  the  industry  is  expected  to 
continue growing at twice the pace of its conventional counterpart. As such, surveys estimate 
that the industry will soon cross the US$1 trillion mark in total assets. 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2010
But  similar  to  conventional  banks,  Islamic  financial  institutions  have  been 
11. 
impacted by the economic slowdown and resulting weaker asset prices. Some financial 
institutions have been badly affected by the over-concentration in illiquid assets and overly-
optimistic business plans. The Islamic industry therefore needs to take heed of the lessons 
learnt from the current crisis and pay greater attention to issues related to capital adequacy, 
market  liquidity  and  risk  management.  Overcoming  these  challenges  will  require  strong 
cooperation within the industry and across different jurisdictions. MAS, as a full and Council 
member of the Islamic Financial Services Board (IFSB) since 2005, will continue to advocate 
and support multi-national initiatives that would bring about such improvements. 
Singapore as a global city for business and finance 
12. 
As we have seen in recent times, financial centres are important nodes in ensuring 
that  the  world  economy  continues  to  function  well.  They  need  to  be  responsive  to  the 
dynamic  market  place  in  order  to  perform  their  critical  roles  to  sustain  growth  by  ensuring 
that capital is channeled to the most productive uses.  
Singapore  as  a  vibrant  and  cosmopolitan  Global  City  is  well-positioned  for 
13. 
businesses  to  connect  to  Asia  and  international  markets.  Over  time,  we  have 
established  the  necessary  infrastructure,  global  connectivity  and  pool  of  expertise  with  the 
requisite knowledge, understanding and experience of local conditions in Asia that can add 
value to companies entering the region. 
As  a  financial  centre  offering  a  full  suite  of  financial  services,  Singapore 
14. 
stands  ready  to  play  a  wider  developmental  role  in  promoting  Islamic  finance  in 
response to rising regional demand for Shariah-compliant products and services. MAS 
has  worked  closely  with  the  industry  and  other  government  agencies  to  ensure  a  level-
playing  field  between  Islamic  and  conventional  finance  such  that  Islamic  finance  is  not 
disadvantaged for tax and regulatory purposes where the economic substance and risks are 
similar. 
Many  market  players  are  already  leveraging  on  Singapore’s  strengths  and 
15. 
capabilities  to  raise  capital,  create  infrastructure  and  real  estate  funds  and  conduct 
wealth and asset management activities. For instance, the Islamic Development Bank and 
City Development Ltd have tapped our capital markets to raise Shariah-compliant Singapore-
dollar funding. Another notable development is the joint venture by Singapore’s Keppel T&T 
and Saudi Arabia’s Al Rajhi Group to create the world’s first Shariah-compliant data centre 
fund.  Last  week,  the  fund  managed  to  secure  an  initial  US$100  million  from  institutional 
investors in Asia and Middle East. We also understand that various market players are in the 
midst of preparations to launch and list Islamic Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs), which 
will further boost Singapore’s position as the largest REIT market in Asia ex-Japan. 
16. 
In talent development, several credible players have initiated training courses and 
programmes  to  enhance  the  financial  sector’s capabilities in  Islamic  finance.  For example, 
the  Singapore  Management  University  has  started  an  International  Islamic  Law  &  Finance 
Centre  to  promote  high-quality  research,  training  and  professional  education.  Such  efforts 
will further support the growth and innovation of Islamic finance in the region. 
Conclusion 
I am therefore pleased to launch the inaugural WIBC Asia Summit today. Such 
17. 
events serve to bring industry leaders together to explore and create business partnerships 
to capitalize on new opportunities in the Middle East and Asia. The financial crisis has not 
diminished  the  Asian  growth  story;  in  fact  Asia  has  emerged  even  more  compelling  with 
growing exports and investment spending. Singapore is well-positioned to be the launch pad 
BIS Review 84/2010 
 3
for  GCC  businesses  entering  and  investing  in  Asia.  The  Middle  East  also  offers  plenty  of 
opportunities for Asian businesses to participate in its growth. 
With  greater  awareness  and  adoption  in  more  financial  centres,  Islamic 
18. 
finance  is  poised  to  play  a  bigger  and  more  central  role  in  global  finance.  We  look 
forward to WIBC Asia as a key platform that will buttress the development of Islamic finance 
as it takes root in the region. The industry, which is open to all participants, can only reach 
greater  heights  with  your  commitment  and  support.  I  therefore  wish  you  a  productive 
conference as you seek exciting new horizons for Islamic finance. 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2010
