Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Sustainable financial inclusion 
Closing  remarks  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia,  at  the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  (AFI)  Data  Workshop,  Lanai  Kijang, 
Kuala Lumpur, 22 June 2010. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  deliver  the  closing  remarks  for  the  AFI-BNM 
Financial Inclusion Data Workshop. Bank Negara Malaysia is honored to co-host this event 
with the Alliance for Financial Inclusion. 
The  pursuit  of  sustainable  financial  inclusion  has  become  a  matter  of  priority  as  well  as 
urgency in many countries, and is relevant to both the developed and developing economies. 
The  need  for  financial  inclusion,  especially  for  the  developing  countries,  is  undeniable. 
Beyond the potential of being able to uplift the millions of financially underserved poor from 
the  unending  cycle  of  poverty,  an  inclusive  financial  system  contributes  towards  greater 
social,  economic,  and  political  stability,  a  vital  ingredient  for  growth.  At  the  same  time,  we 
must  also  be  wary  of  the  increase  in  situations  where  access  to  finance  leads  to  over-
indebtedness. Over-indebtedness can be the cause of much emotional hardship and stress, 
and  might  result  in  social  exclusion.  Hence,  financial  inclusion  must  take  into  account 
sustainability, and in this respect a balanced approach is important. It is this trade off that 
pose challenge to regulators or oversight authorities. 
Malaysian experience on the financial inclusion agenda 
Allow me to reflect on the Malaysian experience for financial inclusion. In Malaysia, financial 
inclusion is a national agenda. It is key in formulating socio-economic programs including the 
Government  Transformation  Plan,  the  New  Economic  Model  and  the  10th  Malaysia  Plan. 
This commitment towards financial inclusion is reflected in the Central Bank Act 2009, where 
financial inclusion is legislated as an objective of Bank Negara Malaysia. 
The efforts to develop a more inclusive financial system have been fruitful. More than 80% of 
the  Malaysian  population  currently  has  some  form  of  savings  account.  Compared  to  the 
global median of 8.4 bank branches per 100,000 individuals, Malaysia has 15.5 branches per 
100,000 individuals (31 March 2010) with the number of ATM cards in circulation increasing 
from 19.8 million (Dec 2006) to 28 million (April 2010), with an average annual growth rate of 
11%  in  the  last  four  years.  Another  important  indicator  is  the  total  microfinance  loans 
outstanding, which has increased from USD 45 million (RM 151 million) as at end-2000 to 
USD 757 million (RM 2.5 billion) as at end-March 2010, a compounded annual growth rate of 
35.5%. While such positive trends are encouraging, we are also mindful of the associated 
risks,  such  as  non-performing  loans,  over-indebtedness  and  consumption  of  financial 
products  and  services  that  are  not  suitable  for  the  user.  In  this  regard,  efforts  towards 
financial  inclusion  are  always  conducted  within  the  framework  of  sound  banking  practices, 
risk management and adequate consumer protection.  
Importance of financial inclusion data in the growth and development of an inclusive 
economic system 
Policy formulation for financial inclusion is complex for a number of reasons. First, it requires 
the  active  involvement  of  many  different  stakeholders,  in  particular  Government  agencies 
and very often a variety of NGOs, as well as financial institutions with specialized skills and 
knowledge.  Second,  the  state  of  economic  and  social  development  of  a  society  is  an 
BIS Review 88/2010 
 1
important determinant on the level and quality of financial inclusion. Third, what constitutes 
acceptable level of inclusion, in terms of access to finance, protection of personal rights and 
liberties, or assurance of retirement and healthcare benefits varies from one jurisdiction to 
another. 
For the reasons that I mentioned, there is no uniform global benchmark that can be used as 
a  successful  model  for  financial  inclusion  programs.  Success  stories  and  experiences  are 
dispersed and often go unrecorded and to further the cause we need to reveals this situation. 
The  financial  inclusion  agenda  requires  a  systematic  and  internationally-recognized  set  of 
financial  inclusion  indicators  that  is  meaningful  and  capable  of  assisting  us  in  formulating 
developmental policies. Furthermore, enormous efficiency gains from the availability of such 
indicators can both reduce the cost of research and implementation as well as increase the 
effectiveness of the delivery and execution of the policies. 
Lessons learned in using financial inclusion data in the Malaysian context 
Let me to briefly share some of the lessons we have learnt in terms of using data to improve 
the policy formulation process, and develop a more efficient and inclusive financial sector. 
Perhaps  the  most  interesting  example  is  the  development  of  quality  credit  data  which  has 
enabled financial institutions to make informed and responsible lending decisions in a timely 
manner  and  to  be  able to  mitigate  serious  problems  such  as  fraud.  These  data  have  also 
assisted Bank Negara Malaysia in performing its macro- and micro-surveillance duties and in 
its policy-making role. The data in this case came from the development of a comprehensive 
credit registry system. The availability of such data also allows individuals with good payment 
track  records  to  make  a  more  credible  case  for  access  to  credit,  and  helps  overcome  the 
limitation of inadequate collateral. 
Another  example  is  the  collaborative  project  with  the  Department  of  Statistics  Malaysia  to 
conduct the Baseline Census of Establishments and Enterprises in 2005. The data gathered 
from  this  initiative  enabled  the  policy-makers  to  have  a  much  more  detailed  profile  of  the 
SME  and  micro-enterprise  segments  of  the  economy.  The  insights  gained  led  to  a  new 
understanding of the SME business landscape, and the launch of a national strategy for SME 
development. Specific strategies could be developed, and the availability of data helped in 
having more constructive dialogue between different stakeholders. 
We also note that relatively new policy areas for financial inclusion require better data that 
enable validation of policy stance, or in some cases change in policy direction. Inadequate or 
inconclusive  data  in  areas  such  as  measuring  financial  literacy,  consumer  awareness  and 
financial education means that it is difficult to assess the cost and benefit of the proposed 
policy framework and its impact on financial inclusion.  
Conclusion 
Allow me to now conclude my remarks. The successful implementation of policy work in the 
area of financial inclusion requires the availability of quality data. The fact that this area still 
remains  relatively  unexplored,  compared  to  the  availability  of  data  for  corporate  business, 
financial  markets  and  other  more  sophisticated  aspects  of  finance,  clearly  suggests  that 
much  work  remains  to  be  done.  The  magnitude  and  scope  of  the  topic  also  requires  a 
diverse group of policymakers to collaborate on a long-term basis. The establishment of a 
working group to improve the quality of financial inclusion data is therefore most timely, and 
will benefit policymakers in making better and more informed policies, as well as tracking the 
outcome of policy initiatives. In addition, it may also serve to increase the visibility new issues 
areas which are currently not being given sufficient priority by policymakers. 
I  would  also  like  to  encourage  the  working  group  to  consider,  in  the  longer  term,  the 
development of some form of a composite financial inclusion index. The composite index will 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2010
benefit  everyone  by  providing  a  broad  measure  of  trends,  facilitate  comparisons  between 
distinct  segments  and  create  a  benchmark  for  policy  work  in  financial  inclusion.  It  can 
eventually help to popularize the notion of financial inclusivity, and in that way help garner 
more global support for financial inclusion initiatives the world over. 
Finally, on behalf of Bank Negara Malaysia, I would like to thank the participants who have 
come here from many countries and institutions to contribute their ideas and knowledge to 
this  workshop.  I  also  would  like  to  thank  the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  for  their 
leadership and support in managing this initiative. I trust that the working group will be able to 
contribute towards the global agenda for a more inclusive financial system, and look forward 
to the fruits of your work in the months ahead. 
BIS Review 88/2010 
 3
