Njuguna Ndung’u: Talking notes on the state of Kenya’s economy 
Talking  notes  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
American Chamber of Commerce of Kenya monthly luncheon, Nairobi, 20 July 2010. 
 Distinguished members of the American Chamber of Commerce and invited guests:  
1. 
2. 
It is my pleasure to join you at this monthly luncheon and I thank you for inviting me.  
This Luncheon has an important timing: First, it comes after the visit of the American 
Vice President to this country, an important visit for Kenya. Second, it comes soon 
after  the  Minister  for  Finance  put  forward  the  budget  proposals  and  policies  to 
achieve  them.  Finally,  it  comes  at  a  time  when  Kenyans  are  debating  and 
campaigning for a positive vote to a new constitution. I am very sure that since I am 
addressing  an  audience  comprising  mainly  investors,  entrepreneurs  and  business 
people  who  wish  to  live  in  an  environment  of  high  economic  growth  and  low  and 
stable  prices,  I  am  certain  that  the  superior  law  is  important.  The  Constitution 
protects  and  safeguards  their  interests.  This  is  how  markets  work  –  that  is  how 
development of markets and institutions takes place.  
 
The  government  economic  agenda  is  guided  by  the  strategic  framework  for 
faster development underpinned by a stable macroeconomic environment and 
structural  reforms  aimed  at  raising  productivity  and  improving  business 
climate.  This  is  key  to  enhancing  Kenya’s  competitiveness  and  accelerating 
private sector development.  
Personally,  I  do  believe  that  for  growth  to  be  achieved,  it  depends  on 
investments. Investments in turn depend on incentive mechanisms and legal 
safeguards to protect them.  
I believe also in strong institutions. Strong institutions define the appropriate 
incentives that encourage prudent behaviour.  
This is what the superior law – the New Constitution will do to institutions and 
give confidence to markets.  
   3. 
4. 
The  Kenyan  economy  has  undergone  a  turbulent  time  from  2008  stemming  from 
multiple shocks: the domestic political crisis; the drought; high petroleum and food 
prices as well as the global financial crisis. However, we have started to see some 
recovery.  From  the  steep  decline  to  1.6  percent  growth  in  2008  the  economy 
recovered to post 2.6 per cent growth in 2009. This growth was mainly supported by 
a  resurgence  of  activities  in  the  tourism  sector  and  resilience  in  the  building  and 
construction industry. We do hope the Greek crisis will not prolong the recession in 
Europe – that may produce further knock-on effects in the Kenyan economy.  
Economic  prospects  for  2010  and  medium  term  prospects  are  quite  optimistic. 
Growth  is  forecast  at  4–5  percent  for  2010.  This  is  a  conservative  forecast  as 
various  indicators  point  to  a  higher  growth  rate.  Growth  will  be  driven  mainly  by 
increased  investment  in  key  sectors  including  agriculture,  services,  infrastructure, 
health and education. After this recovery, Kenya will be in a good position to refocus 
its efforts towards achieving vision 2030 goals. The government has identified the 
binding  constraints  whose  resolutions  will  lower  the  cost  of  doing  business 
substantially and propel the growth forecast higher;  
 
Kenya’s  growth  diagnostic  studies  have  identified  a  lack  of  complementary 
factors:  They  include  infrastructure  gaps  and  poor  private  appropriability 
factors that prevent the private sector to reap full returns to their investment 
BIS Review 101/2010 
 1
  such  as:  crime,  corruption  and  relics  of  political  instability.  The  proposed 
constitution  once  adopted  will  herald  institutional  changes  of  unprecedented 
proportions for this great nation.  
To  ease  infrastructural  constraints  the  2010/11  national  budget  continues  to 
allocate more funds for infrastructure. The infrastructure budget for FY 2010/11 
is  equivalent  to  23.3  percent  of  total  expenditure  reflecting  the  critical  role 
infrastructure is expected to play towards reducing cost of doing business to 
improve domestic production competitiveness.  
The  Central  Bank  has  developed  an  effective  instrument  for  this;  the 
Infrastructure  Bonds  –  they  have  been  very  successful  in  the  market.  They 
have  a  further  dimension  of  enhancing  a  savings-investment  platform  for 
Kenyans and a strong stimulus to crowd-in rather than crowd out the private 
sector.  
As a central banker, I want to reiterate the importance the Government attaches to 
macroeconomic stability. You might have heard some assertions in some sections 
of the media that Kenya’s debt position might be a problem in the future. Given the 
developments  in  the  Euro  zone  where  investors  have  punished  countries  for  their 
fiscal  position  (we  call  this  debt  overhang  problem  or  risk  –  the  private  sector 
believes taxes will be increased in future to affect resource transfers from the private 
sector  to  the  Government  to  pay  for  high  debt).  It  is  imperative  that  I  parade  the 
Kenyan case to this esteemed audience. As of May 2010, Kenya’s debt level stood 
at 44 per cent of GDP, external debt to GDP is at 28 per cent – a level much lower 
than  for  most  countries  in  this  region  (it  has  moved  from  60  percent  in  2003  to 
40 percent in 2009 and to 44 percent as at May 2010). You will agree with me that 
this  is  commendable  for  a  country  which  has  not  been  a  beneficiary  of  the  HIPC 
initiative. The overriding fiscal thrust of the Government, is to contain the stock of 
debt to a sustainable level of 40 percent of GDP. Debt sustainability analysis carried 
out  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  have  not  found  any 
significant  risk  posed  by  our  debt  levels.  To  demonstrate  this  commitment  of 
reducing the domestic debt, the government will reduce its domestic borrowing from 
5.1  percent  of  GDP  in  2009/10  to  3.8%  in  2010/11.  This  fiscal  space,  as  was 
demonstrated  during  the  drought  and  global  financial  crises  is  important  for 
propelling growth even in times of crisis – the fiscal stimulus would not have been 
possible – Gives room for monetary policy to perform.  
It is the Central Bank’s belief that the fiscal and monetary policies currently in place 
will enhance investor confidence by increasing expectations of economic recovery 
or  reducing  tail  risks  associated  with  the  exogenous  shocks  that  have  buffeted 
Kenya’s  economy  in  the  recent  past.  In  particular  the  government  expenditure 
programs  and  the  current  monetary  policy  stance  are  likely  to  have  larger  than 
normal positive impacts on demand and benefits that may persist for a significant 
period of time.  
For us in the Central Bank, our pre-occupation is to align monetary policy with the 
growth and development goals while at the same time maintaining low and stable 
inflation  –  a  target  of  5%.  In  addition,  a  stable  and  market  driven  exchange  rate, 
increased  efficiency  in  the  financial  system,  financial  stability,  and  a  reliable  and 
efficient national payment system. To give you some indication:  
 
Inflation  was  provisionally  3.2  percent  for  the  month  of  June  2010.  Inflation 
expectations as indicated in the MPC Market Surveys are anchored at a lower 
level.  The  current  exchange  rate  movements  of  the  Kenya  shilling  against 
other  major  currencies  is  largely  a  response  to  external  developments 
especially the uncertainty in the Euro zone market. The exchange rate in this 
case works as an automatic stabilizer via relative price movements.  
BIS Review 101/2010
5. 
6. 
7. 
2 
  Interest rate structure that carries with it cost of investment as well as inflation 
expectations have declined drastically since the middle of 2009.  
Distinguished members, ladies and gentlemen  
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
Let me note that the current economic environment in Kenya is based on policies 
that are market leaning and offer a level playing field for potential investors.  
In  the  banking  sector,  our  vision  is  to  build  a  strong  financial  sector  and  be  the 
financial hub of the East African Community. The strength and presence of Kenyan 
banks is now being felt in the region, specifically within the East African Community 
where some of our banks have opened branches.  
One  of  the  more  recent  reforms  is  the  licensing  of  credit  reference  bureaus.  The 
credit  information  sharing  mechanism  is  now  fully  operational  and  as  a  result  we 
expect to subsequently see a reduction in costs as banks pass the resultant benefits 
to their customers.  
As  a  Researcher,  I  would  like  at  some  point  in  future  when  doing  my  economic 
analyses  on  the  Kenyan  economy,  to  find  a  very  significant  “Obama  Effect”  on 
Kenya’s  growth  and  development.  That  “Obama  Effect”  together  with  a  renewed 
political  leadership  able  to  undertake  political  and  social  reforms  supported  by  a 
Superior  Law  –  the  Constitution  –  will  be  noticed  in  our  econometric  studies  in 
future. But this will only be realised if all of you in this room and elsewhere scale-up 
your investments in Kenya.  
Finally, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, I conclude by wishing you fruitful 
discussions.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 101/2010 
 3
