K C Chakrabarty: Talent management in the Indian banking system 
Address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Silver 
Jubilee function of the Institute of Banking Personnel Selection (IBPS), Mumbai, 2 April 2010. 
 The assistance provided by Shri Suddhasatva Ghosh in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
Shri M. Balachandran, Director, IBPS, Shri Alok K. Mishra, CMD, Bank of India, Shri D. P. 
Sharda  and  Shri  R.  K.  Chaudhury,  ex-Directors,  IBPS,  Executive  Directors  of  banks, 
distinguished  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen;  I  am  indeed  very  happy  to  be  in  your  midst 
today for the Silver Jubilee function of IBPS. April 1 has special significance for both RBI and 
IBPS. It is the day RBI was established 75 years ago and it is also the foundation day for 
IBPS.  Yesterday,  we  celebrated  the  grand  finale  event  of  our  platinum  jubilee  year  and, 
today, IBPS is celebrating its silver jubilee year. So, first of all a very hearty congratulations 
to all the employees, governing council members and all the stakeholders on this day. 
Reaching such a significant milestone in the life of an institution is always very special. It is 
not only a day to feel proud, it is a day to reflect, a day to share, and a day to celebrate. It is 
also an opportunity to reemphasize what the institution stands for, to renew its values. Such 
a moment constitutes one of the few opportunities for collective sharing in an institution. The 
coming together and the camaraderie that this day evokes is also perhaps the appropriate 
moment  for  introspection  and  reflection  on  the  evolution  of  the  institution,  its  current  and 
future challenges, and how the institution can fulfill its objectives even better. 
Over  these  years,  the  IBPS  has  made  a  mark  as  a  premier  national  level  Institute  for 
recruitment, training and research related to selection and management of human resources. 
Since its inception, the Institute has provided commendable services to various organizations 
for  recruitment,  internal  promotions,  placement  and  admissions.  It  has  also  been  assisting 
the financial sector towards employees’ selection, promotion and placement. In recent years, 
the Institute has also engaged itself in a variety of extension services related to personnel 
selection and human resource development/human resource management. 
Far-reaching  developments  in  the  roles  and  activities  of  banks  and  financial  institutions  in 
recent  years  have  put  a  premium  on  appropriate  manpower  planning  and  personnel 
development,  indeed  the  human  resource  function  generally.  Ensuring  that  the  banks  can 
recruit  and  retain  appropriately  qualified  and  experienced  staff  is  at  the  heart  of  this 
challenge.  This  is  made  increasingly  difficult  by  developments  outside  the  financial  sector 
and competition for key personnel even from international agencies. 
In  India  too,  banks  and  banking  have  changed  substantially  over  the  years.  As  we  view 
matters in retrospect, one of the major landmark events which constituted strategic inflexion 
points  in  the  history  of  Indian  financial  sector  has  been  the  reforms  process  that  gained 
momentum  in  the  early  1990s.  These  reforms  have  heralded  a  dramatic  shift  in  the  way 
banks functioned and operated in India. The changed overall environment and the internal 
compulsions to generate and sustain faster policy responses have given rise to the quest for 
greater efficiency and the need to reorient the banking practices. This unmistakable urgency 
of  realigning  our  organizational  resources  has  indeed  altered  the  way  we  view  the  whole 
gamut of key issues relating to our human resources. 
In such an environment, sometimes somewhat stylistically termed as “war for talent”, even 
public sector banks can perhaps no longer take a life time employment for granted. Issues 
relating to how to attract talented people, how to nurture them, how to develop them and give 
them  the  necessary  space  have  now,  therefore,  moved  to  the  centre  stage  and  today 
constitute  the  major  concerns  that  we  may  need  to  address  adequately  in  the  near  and 
medium term. 
BIS Review 44/2010 
 1
While  these  issues  have  always  been  important,  it  is  just  that  the  imperatives  to  address 
them  squarely  in  substance  were  never  so  compelling.  There  have  been  broadly  three 
catalytic forces that have brought about this changed perception of human resources: First, 
as the widespread use of the personal computer and the advent of the internet in the 1990s 
attained  a  critical  mass,  it  marked  a  specific  game-changing  point  which  ushered  in  the 
Information Age. In this age, the intangible assets such as intellectual capital and talent have 
in  a  sense  supplanted  hard  assets  of  the  Industrial  Age  such  as  capital,  factories  and 
inventories.  The  new  reality  is  that  people  are  increasingly  the  principal  assets  of  any 
organization and institutions are dependent not just on the sum total of their individual human 
capital, but also on how effectively they are able to draw out the best from their talent bank. 
Secondly,  in  India  as  elsewhere,  a  host  of  new  industries,  some  sector-specific  like  new 
generation  Indian  private  sector  banks  and  foreign  banks  and  other  sector-neutral  like 
companies  in  the  fields  of  information  technology  and  media,  have  given  rise  to  a  supply 
demand imbalance. Today, these new industries are competing with the old for talent and 
have triggered the need for banks to look afresh not only at their recruitment strategies but 
also how to develop and retain their talent. 
Thirdly,  there  is  the  issue  of  ownership.  While  organizations  own  physical  and  financial 
assets, their ownership rights, however, do not extend to people. In Indian financial sector, in 
the pre-reforms days, employment bonding, especially in the public sector, worked on what 
was  termed  the  “psychological  contract”  or  the  “loyalty  contract”  wherein  long-term 
employment  was  co-terminus  with  employee  loyalty.  This,  in  today’s  world,  has  been 
seriously undermined, spurred not in the least by a spurt in job opportunities. The old values 
of loyalty have eroded and greater demand for talent has changed the playing field for the 
search  and  retention  of  personnel.  This  is  the  new  reality  that  the  banks  in  India,  among 
others, have to contend with.  
Importantly,  effective  recruiting  is  the  beginning  of  effective  retention.  Matching  between 
tasks and talents is a challenging problem and it is essential for allocational efficiency that 
people  get  allocated  to  right  occupations.  Refashioning  the  recruitment  process  may  well 
therefore  be  the  precursor  of  an  effective  talent  management  strategy.  This  may  include 
identification  of  key  positions  and  turnover  risks  associated  with  these  positions,  and 
competency/behavioural-based  selection  criteria  that  support  the  retention  strategy  and 
business drivers. 
Only  a  carefully  designed  and  integrated  set  of  initiatives  that  allow  the  employee  to  align 
himself  with  the  organisational  goals  and  objectives,  map  competencies  for  diverse  work 
areas, build up capacities through a well-crafted and sustained strategy and draw out latent 
possibilities  optimally  would  ensure  emergence  of  leadership  talent  that  is  critical  to  any 
organisation’s prosperity and is therefore a central element of talent management. 
The aim is to align the current and future talents of individuals with the strategic challenges of 
our  business.  So  while  employees  need  to  understand  how  to  be  more  effective  in  their 
current roles, deliver specific business challenges, and pull together a personal development 
plan for shaping future careers, organizations too have to strategize how best to utilize the 
people’s  talents  and  identify  areas  for  internal  development  necessary  for  ensuring  future 
success. 
Engaged  as  it  is  in  the  critical  exercise  of  getting  the  right  people  for  the  right  job  for 
organizations across the banking sector, the IBPS therefore has a central role to play in the 
broad  mandate  of  talent  management  in  the  Indian  banking  system.  Not  only  would  the 
Institute need to develop appropriate methodology to carry out its prime task of conducting 
recruitment  tests  for  increasingly  demanding  clients,  but  it  would  also  require  to  have  on 
board  dynamic  professionals  on  its  faculty  to  handle  the  core  functions  and  emerging 
challenges as well as other administrative support systems staff to support the handling of 
these functions to precision. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2010
Apart from its core task of assisting in recruitment of personnel, the Institute has to widen its 
services  and  engage  itself  more  and  more  in  other  emerging  areas  like  providing  training 
workshops  for  executives  on  “interviewing  skills”,  training  programmes  in  the  fields  of 
performance  appraisal,  counseling  services,  performance  counseling,  team-building  and 
organization  development,  manpower  planning  and  organization 
restructuring  and 
undertaking sponsored Research Projects, just to name a few.  
We in RBI have had the pleasure of associating with your Institute for a number of years for 
the  recruitment  of  our  personnel  through  written  examinations  conducted  in  co-ordination 
with you as part of our selection process. As our Bank understandably attaches a lot of value 
to taking in bright, young professionals as Direct Recruits, your Institute’s role in helping us in 
building up our human resource pool has been substantial. More recently, your Institute has 
been providing us valuable support in implementing our initiative to select “Young Scholars” 
under the RBI Young Scholars Scheme which seeks to effectively carry forward our efforts to 
afford  greater  access  to  financial  services  to  the  vast  hitherto  unreached  segment  of  our 
population, as well as the associated issue of bridging the extant knowledge gap in financial 
education and literacy in our country.  
As we pause and introspect, let me draw your attention to some of the future challenges that 
IBPS would face. IBPS should look into these issues so that it is able to compete globally.  
(a) 
It  is  generally  accepted  that  the  processes  followed  by  IBPS  for  selection  are  fair 
and  transparent.  IBPS  endeavours  to  select  the  best  people  from  among  the 
universe of applicants. However, for its continued relevance for the next 25 years, 
IBPS must not only endeavour to select the best people but the most appropriate 
people for a job. Out of my own experience as a bank chairman, I can tell you that I 
found  very  few  people  willing  to  undergo  rural  postings.  As  the  Indian  banking 
system  embarks  on  the  massive  goal  of  financial  inclusion,  IBPS  would  have  to 
ensure that candidates having compassion for poor and underprivileged, willing to 
work in rural areas, etc. are selected for the banking industry. The key challenge, 
thus, is how to integrate such requirements into the selection process itself so that 
the most appropriate and not just the best people are selected. 
The second challenge is to meet the growing needs of an ever expanding financial 
sector. It is heartening to note that during 2009–10, IBPS would be clocking close to 
10  million  candidates  in  screening  for  various  assignments.  In  a  globalised  world, 
everyone would be competing to attract the best people and the requirement is only 
going  to  go  up.  IBPS  would  have  to  upscale  itself  with  appropriate  methodology, 
technology,  manpower,  etc.  to  be  able  to  effectively  deliver  on  its  clients’ 
requirements.  
The  third  challenge  is  bracing  for  possible  competition  in  future.  Today,  IBPS  is 
alone in this field. As the number of institutions and the services desired increases, 
newer institutions providing similar services may come up. Thus, IBPS must strive to 
move  up  the  value  chain.  It  should  not  only  upscale  itself  but  widen  its  basket  of 
services and engage itself more in newer areas like banks’ internal promotions and 
other areas. It should strive for greater utilization of its services so that it can face 
competition if and when it comes.  
(b) 
(c) 
To  conclude,  I  once  again  congratulate  all  of  you  and  your  families  on  this  landmark 
occasion. I am sure that in the years to come IBPS will grow from strength to strength and 
attain greater glory, and the next 25 years will be even better than the past 25! I wish the 
Institute all success in its future endeavours. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 44/2010 
 3
