Andrew G Haldane: The debt hangover 
Speech by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, at 
a Professional Dinner, Liverpool, 27 January 2010. 
 I am grateful to Marnoch Aston, Simon Brennan, John Carmichael, Geoff Coppins, Sebastiano Daros, Richard 
Davies, John Elliott, Simon Hall, Salina Ladha, Jack McKeown, Laura Piscitelli and Nick Vause for comments and 
contributions. 
Economists  have  not  covered  themselves  in  glory  recently  when  it  comes  to  forecasting. 
Tonight  I  want  to  put  that  right  by  making  a  prediction  that  is  big,  bold  and  frighteningly 
precise. Liverpool Football Club will finish this season third in the league. Manchester United 
will  top  the  table  followed  by  Arsenal.  Having  been  top  for  most  of  last  year,  Chelsea  will 
finish the season near the foot of the table. Newcastle United, meanwhile, will finish fourth. 
I  know  what  you  are  thinking.  Even  by  economists’  standards,  some  of  those  predictions 
sound implausible. Liverpool third? So let me explain. The season I have in mind is not the 
English football season; it is the financial reporting season. And the table to which I refer is 
not the Premiership points table; it is the league table of English football club debt1. Rarely 
has securing a slot in the top four held less allure. Debt is the subject of my talk tonight. 
We are living through an extraordinary period for the economic and financial system. Events 
of recent years will be seen by financial historians as among the most significant in the past 
millennium.  At  the  worst  point  of  the  crisis,  savers  and  borrowers  around  the  world  came 
close  to  losing  confidence  in  financial  institutions.  The  resulting  panic  has  had  deep  and 
long-lasting consequences for global activity. The statistics are striking. 
Between July 2007 and March 2009, the equity prices of global banks fell by 75%. That is a 
loss of market capitalisation of around $5 trillion. In the UK, banks’ equity prices fell by over 
80%. Taken alongside falls in other asset prices, the loss of global wealth peaked at over 
$25 trillion, or almost 45% of global GDP. At that point, asset price falls in the UK and US 
were as large as during the Great Depression (Chart 1). 
Knock-on effects to the real economy were no less dramatic. Peak to trough, output in OECD 
economies has fallen by around 4%. In the UK, output is likely to have fallen by around 6%, 
peak to trough. The present value of those losses, carried forward across generations, would 
be  a  significant  multiple  of  those  falls.  Today’s  Great  Recession  is  the  most  significant 
economic event since the Great Depression. 
That this Great Recession did not become a second Great Depression is in large part the 
result  of  policy  actions.  These  have  been  unprecedented  in  speed  and  scale.  Monetary 
policy around the world has been loosened dramatically. And direct support for the financial 
system has been equally swift and large, at around a quarter of global GDP. In the US and 
UK, it is nearer three-quarters of GDP (Chart 2). 
The road to recovery 
The good news is that these measures appear to be working. The recovery in global financial 
markets and the world economy over the past year has been almost as remarkable as the 
preceding  fall.  Certainly,  it  has  been  far  earlier  and  far  sharper  than  during  the  Great 
Depression  (Charts  1  and  3).  Having  fallen  off  a  cliff,  the  bounce  in  financial  markets  has 
been more startled bunny than dead cat. 
                                                 
1   Deloitte (2009), “Safety in numbers: Annual Review of Football Finance”. 
BIS Review 10/2010 
 
1
From their trough almost a year ago, global banks’ equity prices have risen by over 130%, 
recovering more than half of their losses. For UK banks, the recovery has been even more 
dramatic, rising 140%. Since 1900, there has been only one 9-month period when the rally in 
UK financial sector equity prices has been greater (Chart 4). 
This rebound in asset prices has been broad as well as steep, spanning the maturity and risk 
spectrum. Yields on safe securities have fallen across all maturities. Policy rates in the UK 
fell  to  their  lowest  levels  since  the  founding  of  the  Bank  of  England.  And  long-term  real 
interest rates in the US and UK, at around 1%, are around half their average level over the 
past decade. 
Moving  up  the  risk  spectrum,  the  price  of  both  investment  and  sub-investment  grade 
corporate  bonds  has  risen  since  March  last  year,  by  20%  and  60%  respectively.  Global 
equity prices have risen by over 70% over the same period. The rise in UK equity prices is 
one of the largest in the 316-year history of the Bank of England (Chart 4). Residential and 
commercial property prices in the UK have turned. And global wealth losses on private sector 
securities, at around $6 trillion, have fallen by a factor of four over the past year alone. 
What explains this remarkable recovery in risky asset prices? Three factors seem to have 
been important, all of which can be traced to policy actions by the authorities: 
 
First, the rate at which the future cashflows on risky assets are discounted has fallen 
due to lower short and long-term global real interest rates. Using a standard asset 
pricing model, this discount rate effect accounts for perhaps around one fifth of the 
rise in UK and euro-area equity prices and one third of the rise in US equity prices 
since March last year (Chart 5). 
Second, as fears of a repeat of the Great Depression have abated, the premium that 
investors  require  to  compensate  for  this  risk  –  the  risk  premium  –  has  fallen, 
boosting expected future cashflows on risky assets. This more than accounts for the 
rise in UK and US equity prices over the past year (Chart 5). It also accounts for a 
significant  proportion  of  the  rise  in  risky  debt  prices:  a  year  ago,  corporate  debt 
prices  were  signalling  larger  losses  on  company  securities  than  seen  during  the 
Great Depression (Chart 6). 
Third,  improved  liquidity  in  financial  markets  has  lowered  decisively  uncertainty 
about future market prices. This has lowered the compensation investors require for 
such risk – the liquidity premium – boosting asset prices. This accounts for around a 
half of the fall in spreads on sterling investment grade corporate bonds since March 
last year (Chart 7). 
  Mirroring  the  recovery  in  asset  prices,  there  is  now  convincing  evidence  of  global  output 
having turned in the second half of 2009. The IMF projects that the global economy will grow 
by 3.9% in 2010, having contracted by 0.8% in 2009. Surveys of manufacturing in the major 
economies are at levels last seen prior to the crisis. 
This combination of a stronger real economy and buoyant financial markets has generated a 
dramatic turnaround in fortunes of the banking system. Global banks’ net income in 2009 is 
expected  to  be  around  $60  billion,  compared  to  a  loss  of  roughly  that  amount  in  2008. 
Income from market-making in various financial products has been especially lucrative, given 
higher bid-ask spreads and client activity (Chart 8). 
This  windfall  gain  has  helped  repair  banks’  over-extended  balance  sheets.  Global  banks 
have boosted their Tier 1 capital ratios by almost 3 percentage points since the start of 2009. 
UK  banks’  Tier  1  ratios  have  increased  by  around  3.4  percentage  points.  Liquidity  ratios 
among global banks have also risen, with sterling liquid assets relative to total asset holdings 
more than trebling among UK banks. 
On the back of this positive news, the authorities in some countries have begun withdrawing 
extraordinary  levels  of  support.  More  than  half  of  the  capital  provided  to  the  US  banking 
2 
 
BIS Review 10/2010
system was repaid in 2009. The US authorities have also announced their intention to wind 
down  several  special  liquidity  facilities,  as  has  the  European  Central  Bank.  This  exit  is  far 
sooner  than  might  have  been  expected  six  months  ago.  Stability,  if  not  normality,  is 
beginning to return. 
Debt overhangs and debt hangovers 
If that were the end of the story, it would be a happy ending. But there are good reasons for 
believing this story has some way to run. For while the flow of news over the past year has 
been positive, some of  the  stock problems which were the root cause of the crisis remain 
intact. The lasting legacy of this crisis is too much debt held by too many sectors against too 
little capital. 
Economists have a special word for this type of problem – a debt overhang. Its economic 
effects are fairly well understood. Debt operates rather like a tax. Debt servicing costs, like a 
tax, reduce the disposable income of the borrower. Too much debt means a higher debt “tax” 
and  a  greater  drag  on  activity  –  lower  lending  by  banks  and  spending  by  households  and 
companies. Debt and taxes also affect incentives. Set too high, they may dissuade people 
from working and investing. 
These effects are often captured in a relationship called the Laffer curve. Higher tax rates 
may boost tax revenues, but only up to a point. After that point, the tax take could actually fall 
due  to  the  disincentive  effects  of  higher  tax.2  In  that  event,  both  the  taxpayer  and  the  tax 
collector  are  worse  off.  The  same  applies  to  debt.  There  is  a  debt  Laffer  curve.  If  a  debt 
overhang is sufficiently severe, the  interest  burden weakens debtor incentives to repay. In 
the event borrowers and lenders find themselves on the wrong side of the debt Laffer curve, 
both are worse off.3  
Non-economists  sometimes  have  a  different  word  for  an  overhang.  Conveniently,  this  is 
found  by  simply  transposing  the  syllables.  What  we  face  today  may  be  called  a  debt 
overhang, but what it will feel like is a debt hangover. Like a hangover, it will slow activity in 
the period ahead. If it is severe enough, it may diminish incentives to work and invest. Too 
wild a financial party risks borrowers finding themselves on the wrong side of the Laffer curve 
the morning after. 
The McKinsey Global Institute has recently looked at the debt accumulated by ten developed 
economies over the past decade, including the UK and US.4 Since 2000, gross debt in these 
ten economies has increased by around $40 trillion, a rise of 60%. The sectoral contributions 
to  this  rise  in  debt  are  roughly  equally  split  between  households,  companies,  the  financial 
sector and governments. 
The accumulation of debt has perhaps been greatest within the financial system. Among UK 
and US banks, leverage has increased dramatically over the past century. The ratio of assets 
to equity rose from single digits at the start of 20th century to over twenty by its end.5 Despite 
recent  capital  raising,  banks’  leverage  remains  high  absolutely  and  relative  to  the  past,  at 
between 20 and 50 times equity (Chart 9).  
                                                 
2  Laffer, A (2004), “The Laffer Curve, Past, Present and Future”, available at www.heritage.org. 
3  Krugman,  P  (1989),  “Market-based  Debt  Reduction  Schemes”,  in  J  Frenkel  (ed.),  Analytics  of  International 
Debt, IMF. 
4  McKinsey’s  Global  Institute  (2010),  “Debt  and  Deleveraging:  the  Global  Credit  Bubble  and  its  Economic 
Consequences”. 
5  Haldane A G (2009), “Banking on the State”, available at www.bankofengland.co.uk. 
BIS Review 10/2010 
 
3
Among households, debt-to-income ratios have risen materially over the past twenty years. 
In  the  UK,  household  debt-to-income  ratios  rose  from  around  100%  in  1988  to  a  peak  of 
around 170% in 2008. In the US over the same period, the household debt-to-income ratio 
rose from 80% to 135%. From different starting points, similar trends are evident in Spain, 
Canada  and  South  Korea.  Most  households  in  these  countries  still  have  significant  net 
wealth, however; in the UK, total assets are five times household debt. 
Those debt trends are repeated in parts of the corporate sector. Among UK companies, debt 
as  a  fraction  of  companies’  total  financial  liabilities  has  risen  from  around  20%  in  1988  to 
around  34%  today.  In  certain  sectors,  the  run-up  in  debt  has  been  more  dramatic  –  for 
example, among US and UK commercial property companies whose leverage has more than 
doubled in the past decade. It is also true of some companies subject to leveraged buy-outs 
including, of course, Liverpool Football Club.  
Finally among sovereigns, the picture up until recently has been benign with public debt flat 
relative to GDP. But the crisis means that picture is set to change dramatically. Among the 
G7 countries, the IMF forecast that public debt ratios will rise from around 80% of GDP in 
2007 to around 125% by 2014. In the UK and US, public debt ratios are forecast by the IMF 
to double, mirroring the pattern following past financial crises.6 
Taking  together  the  debt  position  of  the  financial  sector,  households,  companies  and 
sovereigns paints a sobering picture. Total debt ratios relative to GDP rose significantly in all 
ten countries studied by McKinsey’s, from an average of around 200% in 1990 to over 330% 
by 2008.7 Over the same period, UK debt ratios more than doubled, from just over 200% to 
around 450% of GDP. 
To  date,  servicing  these  debts  has  been  cushioned  by  policymakers’  actions.  Government 
debt and equity have substituted for private debt and augmented private equity to support 
impaired balance sheets, especially among financial firms: a third of capital raised by banks 
since the crisis began has come courtesy of government. And through monetary measures, 
interest costs have been lowered dramatically: debt servicing has fallen, often dramatically, 
across many sectors. 
These  extraordinary  policy  measures  have  acted  like  a  painkiller  for  debt  problems.  But 
painkillers offer only temporary relief. Loans from government to repair balance sheets need 
ultimately to be repaid. And monetary stimulus will need ultimately to be withdrawn. Public 
policy can act as a balm for debt problems, not a long-run cure. So how severe might the 
hangover be once the painkillers have worn off?  
As a thought experiment, consider the impact on debt servicing costs of long-term interest 
rates reverting to a more normal level (say, 5%) assuming debt levels remained as they are. 
At current mortgage spreads, UK households’ long-term debt servicing costs would almost 
double  relative  to  income,  rising  to  over  13%.8  In  other  words,  income  gearing  would  be 
close to levels reached in the early 1990s recession. 
Aggregate numbers may under-estimate the burden on deeply indebted households. Around 
a third of UK households have debt servicing costs which exceed 20% of income. For those 
households,  debt  servicing  appears  not  to  have  fallen  in  the  past  two  years,  with  higher 
mortgage spreads offsetting the effects of lower interest rates (Chart 10). 
For  companies  the  picture  is  similar.  A  normalisation  of  long-term  interest  rates  would 
increase UK companies’ debt servicing costs from 17% of profits currently to around 33%. 
                                                 
6  Reinhart,  C  M  and  K  Rogoff  (2009),  This  Time  is  Different  –  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly,  Princeton 
University Press.  
7  Data are not available for all ten countries, so period averages are based on slightly different samples.  
8   Bank of England Financial Stability Report, December 2009.  
4 
 
BIS Review 10/2010
That is significantly below the levels reached in the early 1990s, when debt servicing peaked 
at 58% of profits. But the distribution of debt across companies again paints a less promising 
picture.  In  2007,  around  25%  of  UK  firms  made  insufficient  profits  to  cover  their  interest 
payments (Chart 11). This is a long tail.  
For sovereigns, debt servicing costs among the G7 economies are currently low, at around 
3% of GDP. But were medium-term interest rates to normalise, against a backdrop of rising 
debt ratios, the combined effect would be significant. Over the medium term, debt servicing 
relative to GDP in the G7 economies would double. 
Finally, banks’ refinancing burden in the next few years has grown as a result of a shortening 
of  debt  maturities  during  the  crisis.  The  average  maturity  of  US  banks’  rated  debt  is 
estimated  by  Moody’s  to  have  fallen  from  6.7  years  to  3.2  years  since  2005.  Among  UK 
banks, it has fallen from 6.8 years to 4.3 years. The resulting near-term refinancing schedule 
is  estimated  by  Moody’s  at  $7  trillion  over  the  next  three  years.  Among  UK  banks,  it  is  in 
excess  of  £1  trillion  between  now  and  2014.  As  hangovers  go,  this  one  is  large  and  will 
linger. 
Dealing with today’s debt hangover 
The road to balance sheet repair is likely to be long and winding for both the real economy 
and  financial  system.  Adjustment  needs  to  be  neither  too  fast  nor  too  slow.  Too  fast  and 
lending  and  spending  fall,  jeopardising  today’s  recovery.  Too  slow  and  balance  sheet 
fragilities  persist,  jeopardising  tomorrow’s  stability.  So  what  principles  should  guide  the 
transition? Let me highlight two drawn from the past. 
The first comes from monetary policy. Over the past 30 years, many economies have sought 
to bring down inflation – so-called disinflation. The optimal rate of disinflation is usually felt to 
be gradual to limit damage to short-run growth. But there is an important exception to this 
gradualist  rule.  If  a  downward  inflation  surprise  comes  along,  it  is  optimal  to  pocket  this 
windfall  as  this  accelerates  the  path  to  low  inflation  without  harming  growth.  Disinflation  is 
“opportunistic”.9 
The  same  general  principles  apply  to  the  repair  of  indebted  balance  sheets.  Take  banks. 
Over the  medium-term, their capital ratios are likely to need to rise. If this is achieved too 
fast, by constraining lending, it poses a risk to growth. As with disinflation, there is a strong 
case  for  gradualism.  But  if  a  positive  profit  surprise  comes  along,  this  windfall  should  be 
pocketed, front-loading the path to higher capital without harming lending and growth – an 
opportunistic approach to stabilisation. 
Global  banks  have  recently  received  just  such  a  profit  windfall,  as  full-year  results  for  the 
main  banks  are  beginning  to  attest.  There  is  a  strong  case  for  banks,  in  the  UK  and 
internationally, pocketing this windfall rather than distributing it to either staff or shareholders. 
This would allow banks’ balance sheets to be repaired while supporting lending to the real 
economy. It is prudential opportunism. 
So  far  during  this  crisis,  there  has  been  little  evidence  of  such  prudential  opportunism. 
Among global banks, net income fell by over 20% between 2006 and 2007. Over the same 
period, dividends grew by 20%. In 2008, global banks made losses totalling $60 billion, but 
on average still made dividend payouts of over $60 billion.  
                                                 
9  Orphanides, A and Wilcox, D W (1996), “The Opportunistic Approach to Disinflation”, Board of Governors of 
the Federal Reserve System.  
BIS Review 10/2010 
 
5
Although it sounds peculiar, this behaviour appears to be deeply rooted. Table 1 summarises 
payouts to shareholders by companies in the UK and US since 1965, both banks and non-
banks. Five features are notable: 
 
First, payout ratios to shareholders from banks’ profits have consistently been high. 
Since the mid-1960s, the payout ratio has generally exceeded 50%. At times in the 
distant  past  it  has  been  higher  still:  the  average  payout  ratio  to  Bank  of  Scotland 
shareholders over the period 1800 to 1995 was around 70%.10 
Second,  there  is  little  evidence  of  payout  ratios  being  higher  for  financial  than  for 
non-financial companies. Such high payouts are themselves something of a puzzle 
because, at least in theory, the payout ratio ought not to affect the value of a firm.11 
This  may  be  a  collective  action  problem,  with  firms  fearful  of  sending  an  adverse 
market signal through lower payouts. 
Third, for both financials and non-financial firms, the flow of dividend income is much 
less volatile than firms’ stream of profits. In other words, there is evidence of firms 
systematically smoothing dividend payouts to shareholders.12 This may also reflect 
a problem of collective action.  
Fourth, the profits stream of the financial sector is significantly more volatile than for 
non-financial companies. That appears largely to be the result of large-scale, one-off 
losses by banks. This is as we would expect, given their greater leverage. 
Fifth, as a result, the dividend payout ratio for banks is more volatile than for non-
banks. 
    This  behaviour  is  unlikely  to  support  banking  stability.  It  risks  profits  being  distributed  as 
dividends  when  they  are  most  needed  to  augment  capital  ratios  and  boost  confidence.  In 
1996,  the  Chief  Executive  of  a  famous  company  observed:  “We  are  an  old-fashioned 
business,  not  a  quoted  plc,  and  we  don’t  pay  dividends  to  shareholders”.  The  chief 
executive?  Peter  Robinson.  The  company?  Liverpool  FC.  Perhaps  banks  should  have 
heeded the message. 
If  they  had,  this  crisis  might  have  felt  rather  different.  If  UK  banks  had  reduced  dividend 
payouts ratios by a third between 2000 to 2007, £20 billion of extra capital would have been 
generated.13 Had payouts to staff been trimmed by 10%, a further £50 billion in capital would 
have been saved. And if banks had been restricted from paying dividends in the event of an 
annual  loss,  £15  billion  would  have  been  added  to  the  pot.  In  other  words,  three  modest 
changes in payout behaviour would have generated more capital than was supplied by the 
UK government during the crisis.  
Opportunistic behaviour is also needed to repair banks’ liquidity positions. Reversing the fall 
in the maturity of banks’ balance sheets will require a front-loaded terming out of their debt 
liabilities. There is some evidence of banks doing so. But given the scale of the refinancing 
mountain, this will be an uphill struggle. 
There is also some evidence of companies tapping capital markets opportunistically to help 
repair  their  balance  sheets.  Corporate  bond  issuance  by  non-financial  companies  during 
2009  was  around  $1.2  trillion  globally,  the  highest  on  record.  Manchester  United  have 
                                                 
10  Cameron, A (1995), “Bank of Scotland 1695-1995”, Mainstream Publishing.  
11  Modigliani F and Miller M (1961), “Dividend Policy, Growth and the Valuation of Shares”, Journal of Business, 
411–33. 
12  For  some  of  the  earliest  evidence,  see  Lintner,  J  (1956),  “Distribution  of  incomes  of  corporations  among 
dividends, retained earnings and taxes”, American Economic Review, 97–113. 
13  Bank of England Financial Stability Report (op.cit.). 
6 
 
BIS Review 10/2010
recently become one of the first firms to do so in 2010. Surveys of households suggest some 
of the windfall of lower interest costs is being used to repay debt. Opportunistic repayment or 
refinancing is the financial stability equivalent of repairing the roof while the sun is shining 
and it is important it continues. 
The second lesson comes from past debt crises, in particular among developing countries. If 
a borrower has a large debt overhang, there is a case for restructuring the claim from debt 
into  equity  –  a  debt-for-equity  swap.14  In  some  cases,  such  swaps  are  no  more  than 
recognition that an impaired debt is, in substance, an equity claim. But more than that, debt-
for-equity swaps can potentially benefit both lender and borrowers by airlifting a debtor to the 
safer side of the debt Laffer curve.15 
A  number  of  global  banks  have  begun  putting  such  a  strategy  into  practice.  Around  a 
hundred debt exchanges were carried out by global banks during 2009, typically converting 
debt  instruments  into  equity  or  retiring  debt  below  face  value,  so  reducing  leverage  in  the 
financial  sector.  That  these  swaps  were  voluntary  and  market-based  is  evidence  of  their 
benefit to both lender and borrower. 
Debt-for-equity swaps could be used to tackle the debt overhang in other sectors. There are 
already  some  examples  of  voluntary  debt-for-equity  exchanges  among  companies.  For 
example, Chelsea Football Club recently announced a large-scale swap, which accounts for 
their  plummit  down  the  debt  league  table.  In  principle,  mortgage  contracts  could  also  be 
adapted  to  lessen  the  burden  on  over-indebted  households by  allowing  lenders  to  convert 
their loan into an equity stake, as suggested, for example, by the charity Shelter.16 
Preventing tomorrow’s debt hangover 
Once today’s debt hangover is solved, how is tomorrow’s to be prevented? As debt crises 
have been with us for a millennium, it is fanciful to think they could be eliminated. But could 
the  party  be  moderated  in  frequency  and  scale?  In  seeking  new  ways  to  tackle  this  old 
problem, two possible avenues would be the re-orientation of  regulatory policy on the one 
hand and better designed debt contracts on the other.  
First,  regulatory  policy.  Since  at  least  the  1970s,  public  policy  has  not  sought  actively  to 
moderate  fluctuations  in  the  credit  cycle  in  most  G7  economies.  Moderating  the  business 
cycle was believed sufficient to hold credit in check. The experience of the past decade, in 
the UK and elsewhere, has called that into question. In the UK, credit grew at three times the 
rate of money spending over that period, sowing the seeds of the credit crisis, while inflation 
and growth remained remarkably stable. 
In tackling this problem, one option is a re-orientation of regulatory policy towards curbing the 
cycle in credit supply. For example, regulatory requirements on banks could be raised to lean 
against a credit boom and lowered in the teeth of a credit downturn. In the public houses for 
credit, intake would be monitored, opening hours restricted and the Happy Hour abolished. 
This approach has become known in policy circles as macro-prudential policy.17 Although the 
name is new, it is in the time-honoured policy tradition of “removing the punchbowl” from the 
party as it is getting started – a fitting analogy if the aim is to prevent a debt hangover. Had 
such  a  party-pooper  been  in  place  over  the  past  decade,  today’s  debt  headache  would 
plausibly have been less acute. 
                                                 
14  Krugman (op.cit). 
15  For example, Zingales, L (2008), “Plan B”, Economists’ Voice. 
16  See, 
example, 
for 
_arrears/mortgage_to_shared_equity. 
17  Bank of England (2009), “The Role of Macro-Prudential Policy”, available at www.bankofengland.co.uk. 
http://scotland.shelter.org.uk/getadvice/advice_topics/paying_for_a_home/mortgage 
BIS Review 10/2010 
 
7
Regulation  might  also  be  used  to  lean  against  the  collective  tendency  of  banks  to  payout 
high  even  when  profits  are  low.  Among  regulators  internationally,  there  are  proposals  to 
introduce  capital  conservation  rules,  requiring  banks  to  distribute  less  of  their  profits  in 
adverse states of the world. By ensuring prudent profit retention on a collective basis, these 
rules ought to be in the long-term interests of banks and their shareholders, as well as the 
authorities. 
A  second,  complementary,  approach  for  containing  or  cushioning  fluctuations  in  the  credit 
cycle would be to rethink the design of contracts – if you like, lowering the alcohol content of 
debt instruments. Some debt contracts are ill-suited to the needs of their customers, with the 
debt servicing burden rising at just the point borrowers are least able to pay. For example, 
the  “teaser  rate”  mortgages  offered  to  households  in  the  US  generated  an  automatic  and 
correlated spike in income gearing as rates were reset. This amplified repayment and default 
risk. 
A  better-designed  debt  contract  would  automatically  adjust  repayment  terms  when  the 
borrower found the going getting tough. Debt would become, in the language of economics, 
state-contingent  –  contingent  on  the  borrower’s  state  of  financial  health.  By  cushioning 
fluctuations,  these  instruments  have  the  potential  to  stabilise  automatically  debt  dynamics. 
And by averting costly default, they potentially benefit both creditors and debtors. 
There  has  been  recent  interest  among  banks  in  issuing  state-contingent  instruments  –  so-
called contingent capital. These instruments convert into equity in the event of a pre-defined 
stress trigger being breached. So these instruments offer repayment insurance to banks at 
the point it is most valued. They are, in effect, a contractually pre-committed form of debt-
equity swap. 
The design of contingent capital needs further consideration – for example, the definition and 
calibration of the trigger thresholds. Nonetheless, experience to date offers encouragement. 
The contingent capital instruments issued at the end of last year by Lloyds Banking Group 
have risen in price since being issued. If contingent capital became more widespread, banks’ 
capital ratios would be automatically stabilised over the cycle, lowering the chances of future 
banking crises. 
As several academics have argued, the same basic principles could be applied to the debt 
contracts issued by households, companies and even sovereigns. Take a typical mortgage 
contract.  A  rise  in  the  value  of  a  property  relative  to  the  loan  gives  the  borrower  equity 
against which they can borrow. This provides an incentive to trade-up, raising house prices 
and  generating  further  equity.  This  amplifier  operates  symmetrically,  as  falling  collateral 
values  reduce  refinancing  options  and  drive  down  prices.  Economists  call  this  effect  the 
financial accelerator.18 It adds to cyclicality in credit provision and asset prices. 
US  economist  Robert  Shiller  has  suggested  it  might  be  possible  to  devise  mortgage 
contracts  that  slow,  or  even  reverse,  this  financial  accelerator19.  Instead  of  being  fixed  in 
money terms, imagine a mortgage whose value rose with house prices. So the repayment 
burden  would  rise  automatically  with  asset  prices  to  slow  a  credit  boom  and  fall  in  a 
recession  to  reduce  the  chances  of  mortgage  default.  Mortgages  would  operate  like  a 
contractually pre-committed debt-equity swap between households and banks. They would 
automatically stabilise household loan-to-value ratios. By reducing the amplitude of the credit 
cycle, they ought to benefit both borrower and lender. 
Governments cannot issue equity. But this does not prevent them issuing debt with equity-
like  characteristics.  For  example,  Robert  Shiller  has  also  suggested  governments  should 
                                                 
18  Bernanke, B and Gertler, M (1989), “Agency costs, net worth and business fluctuations”, American Economic 
Review, 14–31. 
19  Shiller, R J (1993), Macro Markets, Oxford University Press.  
8 
 
BIS Review 10/2010
issue  GDP bonds,  with  coupons  which  vary  with  GDP.  These  would  lower  the  public  debt 
servicing burden at the point in the cycle when public deficits are likely to be largest. In this 
way, they would help smooth public expenditure and taxation over time. To date, GDP bonds 
have only been issued by some emerging markets. But in principle, they could serve as a 
quasi-automatic  stabiliser  for  any  country  whose  public  debt  experiences  cyclical  or  crisis-
related fluctuations.20 Given recent events, perhaps their day is nearing. 
Conclusion 
It is said that the longest journey begins with a single step. Events of the past twelve months 
have  been  a  first  step  –  and  a  big  one.  But  they  are  just  the  start  of  the  journey  for  the 
financial system and economy as balance sheets are repaired. This adjustment needs to be 
fast  enough  to  repair  balance  sheets,  but  not  so  fast  as  to  risk  a  setback  for  the financial 
system or real economy. What a hangover requires is neither a day in bed nor a night on the 
tiles. Having taken one big step forward, we should guard against taking two steps back. 
Annex 
Chart 1 
Equity indices during crises 
S&P 500 equity index  
FTSE All-share equity index  
Cumulative decline from peak (per cent)
1929 crash
1973 oil crisis
Current crisis
0
6
12
18
Months from peak
24
30
36
0
-
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
6
Cumulative decline from peak (per cent)
1929 crash
1973 oil crisis
Current crisis
0
-
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
12
18
Months from peak
24
30
36
Sources:  Global Financial Data Inc. and Bank calculations.
(a)  Previous peaks taken as: 1929 crash = 7 September 1929;  
1973 oil crisis = 11 January 1973 and current crisis = 9 October 
2007.
 Sources:  Global Financial Data Inc. and Bank calculations.
(a)  Previous peaks taken as: 1929 crash = 30 September 1929;  
1973 oil crisis = 12 December 1972 and current crisis = 10 
October 2007.
                                                    
20  Kamstra, M and Shiller, R J (2009), “The Case for Trills: Giving People and their Pension Funds a Stake in the 
Wealth of a Nation”, Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No.1717. 
BIS Review 10/2010 
 
9
Public sector interventions during the financial crisis(a)(b) 
Chart 2 
UK total
UK investment
US total
US investment
Euro area(c) total
Euro area(c) investment
Per cent of GDP
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
08
Aug.
Aug.
Nov.
Nov.
Feb. May.
Feb. May.
09
Aug.
2007
Sources: Bank of England, BIS, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 
ECB, FDIC, HM Treasury, IMF World Economic Outlook  (October 2009), US Treasury 
and Bank calculations.
(a) End-of-month data expressed as percentages of 2007 nominal GDP.
(b)  Scale of interventions = potential size of packages when announced
(c)  Original euro area 11 countries plus ECB interventions.
Nov.
 Chart 3 
GDP developments during recent crises 
UK 
US 
 30 
 
  BIS Review 10/2010
Recent decline and rally in UK equity prices in an historical context 
Chart 4 
UK Financial equity prices 
UK Equity prices 
Sources: Bloomberg, Global Financial Data and Bank calculations. 
  Chart 5 
Changes in international equity  
indices since trough(a) 
Chart 6 
European corporate bond spreads 
Interest rates
Expected earnings
Implied risk premium
Total
Per cent
100
80
60
40
20
+
0
-
20
40
 0
0
1
E
S
T
F
0
0
5
P
&
S
x
x
o
t
S
o
r
u
E
Sources:  Bloomberg, IBES, Thomson Datastream and Bank 
calculations.
(a)  Based on a three-stage dividend discount model.  See 
Panigirtzoglou, N. and Scammell, R. (2002), 'Analysts' earnings 
forecasts and equity valuations', Bank of England  Quarterly 
Bulletin  (Spring), pages 59-66.
(b)  Taken as 9 March 2009.
Illiquidity premium (a)
Compensation for credit risk (b)
Great Depression (c)
Current (d)
Basis points (log scale)
10,000
1,000
100
10
M
a
r
c
h
C
u
r
r
e
n
t
M
a
r
c
h
C
u
r
r
e
n
t
M
a
r
c
h
C
u
r
r
e
n
t
M
a
r
c
h
C
u
r
r
e
n
t
M
a
r
c
h
C
u
r
r
e
n
t
Sources: Citigroup, Moody's Investors Service, UBS Delta and 
Bank calculations.
(a)  Spread of iBoxx € corporate bond index over iTraxx Europe 
credit default swap index.
(b)  iTraxx Europe five-year credit default swap index.
(c)  Credit risk premium for realised default rates on US corporate 
bonds issued in 1931. 
(d)  Credit risk premium for Moody's current default probability 
forecast for European corporates.
BIS Review 10/2010 
 
 31
Chart 7 
Decomposition of sterling-denominated investment-grade  
corporate bond spreads 
Residual (including compensation for illiquidity)
Compensation fo r uncertainty ab out default losses
Compensation for expected default losses
Actual
Basis points
750
700
650
600
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
97
98
99
00
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
 Chart 8 
Chart 9 
Bid-ask spreads on selected assets 
Major UK banks’ and LCFI’s leverage ratios(a)(b) 
 BIS Review 10/2010
 32 
 
Chart 10 
Mortgage repayment gearing(a)(b)(c) 
  Chart 11 
Distribution of income gearing (2007 and 2008) 
Source: Bureau van Dijk and Bank calculations 
1  Solid  bars  show  distribution  of  income  gearing  in  2007.  Shaded  bars  show  distribution  of  income  gearing  in 
2008. Income gearing is defined as interest paid divided by earnings before interest payments. 
 BIS Review 10/2010 
 
33
 Table 1 
Dividends and earnings in the UK and US 
Source: Thomson Datastream and Bank calculations. 
 34 
 
BIS Review 10/2010
