Durmuş Yılmaz: Evaluation of global financial developments and 
structrual reforms 
Speech by Mr Durmuş Yılmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the 19th Annual World Business Congress, Konya, Central Anatolia, 21 July 2010. 
 Honorable Rector, Esteemed Academicians, Distinguished Guests, 
We  are  gathered  here  today  for  the  19th  Annual  World  Business  Congress  of  the 
International Management Development Association (IMDA), where the lessons learned from 
past experiences in the global business world, current issues and future tendencies will be 
discussed. I would like to congratulate everyone, notably Prof. Dr. Mehmet Babaoğlu, Rector 
of Karatay University, and distinguished members of the University for their Contributions to 
organizing this esteemed Congress, which is held in a different country each year. 
I would like to start my speech with a brief evaluation of global financial developments. Then 
I  will  address  structural  reforms,  which  we  deem  essential  for  raising  Turkey’s  potential 
growth rate, when considering the Turkish economy on a macro scale and from in a long-
term perspective. 
Global developments: 
1. 
As is known, problems, which emerged in the global financial markets about two years ago 
and spread across the corporate sector over time, affected the Turkish economy as well as 
other  economies.  We  see  that  the  impact  of  global  turmoil  on  economies  mainly  emerged 
through  three  channels:  (1)  Foreign  Trade,  (2)  Capital  Flows  and  (3)  Expectations.  The 
Turkish economy has been affected by global turmoil through all these three channels due to 
its structural features. 
Low  level  of  domestic  savings  in  the  Turkish  economy,  significant  share  of  advanced 
economies  in  our  exports,  sensitivity  of  our  exports  to  global  economic  cycles  and 
deterioration  in  expectations  of  the  private  sector  have  caused  a  sharp  slowdown  in 
economic activity. However this contraction did not last long and Turkey has become one of 
the countries that have rapidly recovered from global turmoil. In other words, unlike previous 
crises,  the  Turkish  economy  has  resisted  global  turbulence  well  owing  to  its  structural 
transformation and policy implementations that have been underway since 2001. 
The main reasons for this resistance are the resilience gained from the implementation of a 
floating exchange rate regime, the robust structure of our banking system, counter-cyclical 
monetary  policy  implemented  before  and  during  the  crisis  and  the  room  for  maneuver 
provided  to  public  finance  by  the  fiscal  discipline  observed  in  the  pre-crisis  period.  These 
factors,  coupled  with  the  subduing  effects  of  the  crisis,  have  promoted  an  earlier  and 
stronger recovery in the Turkish economy, compared to that of the global economy. 
Accordingly,  since  the  height  of  the  crisis,  by  mid-2009  Turkey’s  GDP  and  industrial 
production  have  increased  by  11  percent  and  21  percent,  respectively,  while  the 
unemployment rate has dropped by approximately 3 percentage points. Although the level of 
production is still below its pre-crisis level, we expect that it will exceed this level in 2010. 
Meanwhile, we envisage that it will take an extended period for the labor market to recover. 
The  global  economy  has  displayed  a  mild  recovery  since  the  second  half  of  2009.  Yet, 
European economies have recently shown signals of deceleration. Although problems in the 
credit  markets  of  advanced  economies  have  attenuated,  they  have  not  been  completely 
eliminated  yet.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  credit  developments  in  the  USA  and  the  Euro  area 
suggest no significant increase in credit volume. The unresolved issue of troubled assets in 
BIS Review 104/2010 
 1
the  banking  sector  of  advanced  economies  impedes  proper  functioning  of  the  credit 
mechanism. Meanwhile, soaring and persisting high unemployment rates in many countries 
reduce household expenditures and negatively affect the aggregate demand. Soaring budget 
deficits and public debt stocks stemming from loose fiscal policies implemented in developed 
countries are an important risk factor that may adversely affect private demand by increasing 
long-term interest rates in the years ahead. 
The risks that I have mentioned above also have the potential to affect the Turkish economy 
in  a  negative  way.  Considering  that  our  largest  exports  market  is  the  European  Union, 
problems prevailing in European economies pose an important risk for our economy, too. As 
a  matter  of  fact,  external  demand  indicators  have  recently  indicated  a  partial  slowdown. 
Global turbulence also has the potential to affect the Turkish economy negatively through the 
channel  of  expectations.  Problems  in  the  global  financial  markets  are  likely  to  restrain  the 
accessibility of external financing. 
In conclusion, in an environment where the resource utilization has yet not reached pre-crisis 
levels and no demand pressure is observed, we anticipate that core inflation indicators will 
remain  consistent  with  medium-term  targets  and  economic  recovery  will  be  slow  and 
protracted. 
Turkey’s long-term growth performance and potential growth rate 
Capital deepening 
Employment growth and 
Total factor productivity 
2. 
In the second part of my speech, I would like to share with you my views on the necessary 
reforms for the establishment of strong and sustainable growth in Turkey as well as those to 
increase its long-term potential growth rate. 
The growth rate of a country is determined by three factors. 
These factors can be summarized as: 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
When we look at the last fifty years in the Turkish economy, we see that Turkey’s average 
growth rate has been around 4.5 percent. A study carried by staff members of the Central 
Bank of Turkey, Dr. Seref SAYGILI and Dr. Cengiz CĐHAN, suggests that capital deepening 
has a large share, as much as 75 percent, in this growth rate. According to the same study, 
the contribution of employment growth and the increase in productivity remained very limited, 
at 20 percent and 5 percent, respectively. 
There  is  no  doubt  that capital  accumulation  plays  a  leading  role  in  the  development  of  an 
emerging  economy,  as  expected.  Other  country  cases  also  present  a  similar  outlook. 
However, given the economic transformation of fast-growing countries, such as Japan and 
South  Korea,  we  see  that  the  contribution  of  capital  accumulation  to  growth  in  these 
countries  has  been  moderate  (at  around  50  percent),  whereas  the  contributions  of 
employment  growth  and  the  increase  in  total  productivity  have  been  higher  (at  around 
25 percent),  as  compared  to  Turkey.  In  other  words,  Turkey’s  efforts  for  development  are 
mostly based on increasing the current sources of production rather than using them more 
effectively and efficiently. In a country, where the propensity to save is low, any attempt at 
development through capital deepening would cause a high level of current account deficit 
and a restricted increase in employment. 
At  this  point,  I  would  like  to  annotate  that  the  contribution  of  total  factor  productivity  to 
economic growth climbed significantly to 30 percent on the back of the reforms and structural 
transformation implemented in the post-2001 period. I believe that the labor market and total 
factor productivity are crucial for improving the potential growth rate of Turkey. In the next 
part of my speech, I will cover these two issues, respectively. 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2010
Labor market 
3. 
As  I  have  already  mentioned,  the  contribution  of  the  employment  increase  in  the  growth 
composition of the Turkish economy is very limited. Although it is often voiced that Turkey’s 
younger population structure compared to other countries constitutes demographic window 
of opportunity, non-participation of this young population in the labor market is an important 
problem that should be addressed. 
According  to  2009  figures,  labor  force  participation  rate  in  developed  economies  is  above 
70 percent.  This  rate  is  hovering  at  around  60  percent  in  Eastern  European  countries. 
Although the labor force participation rate has surged by 3 percentage points in Turkey, it still 
remains  low,  at  49  percent.  We  see  that  the  limited  increase  in  this  period  was  mostly 
attributable to the rising trend of labor force participation among the female population. 
Government  incentives  for  social  security  contributions  oriented  towards  newly  recruited 
women and young people, which have been in place since 2009, are very influential in this 
development. Nevertheless, at 28 percent, the female labor force participation rate in Turkey 
is  very  low  compared  to  European  countries.  While  the  labor  force  participation  among 
females  with  a  university  degree  converges  towards  the  EU  average,  with  a  ratio  of 
71 percent, only 23 in every 100 women with a high school or lower education participate in 
the labor market. 
Regulations to be implemented in the labor market in the forthcoming period will contribute to 
sustainable growth and an increase in employment on a permanent basis. Within this scope, 
it is essential that: 
 
 
 
 
Flexibility of the labor market should be increased, 
Competition within the private sector is promoted, 
Pay-roll taxes are reduced, and 
Necessary policies for establishing an educated and qualified labor force, which will 
accommodate private sector requirements, are followed. 
I would like to lay special emphasis on the importance of education reforms for the future of 
our country. The necessary balance should be established between the need for a qualified 
labor force in the Turkish economy  and the human resources provided by our educational 
system.  Within  this  context,  I  believe  that  the  Specialized  Vocational  Centers  Project, 
implemented with the collaboration of The Union of Chambers and Commodity Exchanges of 
Turkey and the relevant ministries, will accommodate a very important need in Turkey and I 
would like to congratulate everyone who has been involved in this project. Such projects will 
equip hundreds of thousands of young population with the qualifications required by the labor 
market,  and  will  not  only  contribute  to  the increase  of  employment  but  also  raise Turkey’s 
growth rate on a sustainable basis. 
One of the major concerns of the labor force market is the informal economy. The rate of 
informal employment in Turkey is 43 percent. Such illegal practices lead to unfair competition 
and reduce the productivity of the Turkish economy. One of the major causes of the informal 
economy is the high level of labor costs in Turkey. Of course, the risk of the employment loss 
that may emerge in the short-term as a result of the reduction of informal employment should 
be minimized. At this point, we consider the implementation of arrangements regarding the 
reduction of labor costs to be crucial. 
In  the  forthcoming  period,  parallel  to  the  fading  effects  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  the 
employment creation capability of economies will be determined by structural features of the 
labor markets. The long-term unemployment of individuals who had lost their jobs due to the 
crisis or those who had recently joined the labor force but could not find jobs also poses the 
risk  of  permanent  unemployment  for  such  people.  In  this  respect,  the  implementation  of 
structural  reforms  to  improve  the  labor  market  will  prevent  a  permanent  rise  in  long  term 
BIS Review 104/2010 
 3
unemployment during the global crisis and underpin the increase in the potential growth rate 
of the economy. 
Productivity 
4. 
After  sharing  my  views  on  the  labor  market,  I  would  like  to  move  on  to  total  factor 
productivity, the third factor that influences the potential growth rate. 
Total  factor  productivity  in  an  economy  arises  from  the  interaction  and  combination  of  a 
number  of  elements.  The  leading  one  is  the  establishment  of  macroeconomic  stability  by 
alleviating  the  uncertainties  that  economic  agents  are  confronted  with.  The  prerequisite  of 
macroeconomic stability is fiscal discipline and price stability. 
Public balances that have improved thanks to prudent monetary and fiscal policies coupled 
with the inflationary gains following the deep economic crisis in 2001 are noteworthy steps on 
the road to establishing macroeconomic stability. Economic welfare only increases along with 
sustainable growth. Sustainable growth implies price stability. The growth rate we attained 
with the high inflation in the 1980’s did not last long and had been replaced by higher inflation 
rates and economic recession. Meanwhile, between 2002 and 2007, high growth rates were 
attained while a remarkable decline was recorded in inflation. 
In  this  scope,  we  are  of  the  opinion  that  the  monetary  policy  implemented  by  the  Central 
Bank of Turkey, which is consistent with the main objective of price stability, has supported 
the establishment of price stability in Turkey and contributed to the permanent increase of 
the competitive power of the whole economy and the exports sector. 
I would like to emphasize that the quality of fiscal adjustment is crucial for both the struggle 
with  inflation  and  the  permanence  of  the  high growth  rates.  The  fiscal  rule,  which  is  to  be 
enforced in the near future will enhance predictability and create confidence for the future. 
Fiscal  rules  play  a  critical  role  in  the  establishment  of  fiscal  policies  consistent  with 
sustainable  debt  dynamics  and  foster  a  more  prudent  and  permanent  implementation  of 
fiscal discipline. However, in the light of country experiences, in order that fiscal rules can 
function  as  expected,  these  rules  should  be  implemented  in  a  transparent  way  as  per  the 
required institutional and legal framework to be established. 
Exchange rate 
5. 
As you may have noticed, in my speech regarding how to increase the potential growth rate 
of Turkey, I have not mentioned the issue of foreign exchange rates. 
Economic literature besides country experiences has shown that the value of the currency of 
a  country  is  the  result  of  all  other  economic  variables.  Putting  interest  and  exchange  rate 
policies in the forefront leads structural reforms, the prerequisites for sustainable and high 
growth rates, to remain in the background. 
The  level  of  foreign  exchange  rates  is  of  course  a  noteworthy  and  influential  factor  on 
economic variables. In the short run, the foreign exchange rate is determined by monetary 
and  fiscal  policies,  international  capital  movements,  expectations  and  even  political 
developments and current issues. However, in the medium to long term, the most important 
factor determining the value of a local currency is the economic performance of that country. 
The  foremost  factor  influencing  this  performance  is  productivity  increase.  Productivity 
increase,  at  the  same  time,  is  the  only  variable  to  ensure  the  permanent  increase  in  the 
welfare of a society. 
The  monthly  real  exchange  rate  index,  which  is  released by  the  Central  Bank, shows  that 
compared to 2003, the Turkish Lira appreciated in real terms compared to the currencies of 
developed  countries,  while  no  significant  change  occurred  against  the  currencies  of 
developing ones. 
4 
 BIS Review 104/2010
This  is  not  surprising.  The  increase  in  the  real  exchange  rate  index  against  developed 
countries  is  a  natural  consequence  of  the  high  productivity  increases  in  our  economy 
compared  to  these  countries.  For  example,  OECD  data  suggest  that  in  the  2003–2008 
period, the productivity increase per employee in Turkey is approximately 6 times higher than 
that in Europe. 
Our currency did not mark a notable change against emerging market economies competing 
with  Turkey  in  the  exports  markets.  In  this  respect,  the  relatively  stable  course  of  the  real 
exchange  rate  index  compared  to  developing  countries  underpinned  the  maintenance  of 
Turkey’s competitive power in foreign trade. 
As  is  the  case  across  the  world,  the  Central  Bank’s  decisions  on  monetary  and  exchange 
rate  policy  also  affects  the  economy  as  a  whole  in  Turkey.  Under  a  fixed  exchange  rate 
regime, it is possible to control the nominal level of the foreign exchange rate. Nevertheless, 
under free market conditions, whatever the exchange rate regime and exchange rate policy 
are, it is impossible to control the real exchange rate level. The real exchange rate level will 
ultimately move towards the long-term balance level according to the structural features of 
the  economy.  In  an  environment  of  pressurized  nominal  foreign  exchange  rate,  this 
movement will emerge by the changes in the prices of goods and services; i.e. inflation. In 
countries like Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania, Bulgaria, where a fixed exchange rate regime was 
implemented,  this  was  experienced  before  the  global  crisis  and  these  countries  faced  the 
problem of high inflation. 
We  foresee  that  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  countries  will  come  to  the  fore  in  the 
upcoming period and currencies of those countries with lower risk, stronger economic and 
financial  fundamentals  and  high  growth  potential  are  expected  to  perform  better.  Should 
macroeconomic stability be maintained and structural reforms be put into effect, Turkey will 
also have a place among these countries. This will support the increase in social welfare in 
the medium and long term and place our country among developed countries. 
loan 
Conclusion 
investment  and 
lira-denominated 
6. 
In conclusion, the high growth rate we witnessed in the 2002–2007 period is evidence of the 
importance of the implementation of policies based on price stability and fiscal discipline. 
The high dollarization phenomenon that had adverse effects on our economy in the 1990’s 
has been alleviated in recent tears. Our currency has regained the confidence of economic 
agents  and  Turkish 
instruments  have  been 
increasingly  preferred  over  FX-denominated  ones  by  institutions  and  citizens.  All  these 
improvements  are  the  favorable  consequences  of  the  policies  pursued  in  the  post-2001 
period. Disappearance of dollarization is a precious legacy entrusted to future generations. 
Likewise, as you may recall, real interest rates reached 20–25 percent from time to time and 
entrenched  in  the  minds  of  economic  decision-makers  as  “normal”  in  the  1990’s.  This 
expectation of high real interest rates has recently been replaced by more reasonable levels. 
We note this normalization in real interest rates as a remarkable improvement. We assess 
that if fiscal discipline is not compromised and structural reforms go into effect, in the Turkish 
economy,  equilibrium  real  interest  rate  will  continue  to  remain  at  low  single  digits  in  the 
upcoming period as well. 
Lastly,  I  would  once  again  like  to  underline  the  fact  that  long-term  productivity  gains 
necessitate radical economic reforms. The enforcement of the said reforms is a challenging 
and  time-consuming  task.  Moreover,  the  effects  of  these  reforms  will  emerge  slowly  and 
gradually. However, this is the only way to ensure permanent economic welfare. Monetary 
policy does not have a lasting effect on the long-term growth performance of the economy 
other  than  the  benefits  of  establishing  and  sustaining  price  stability.  The  Central  Bank  will 
continue  to  make  a  concerted  effort  to  achieve  price  stability  as  per  the  duties  and 
responsibilities entrusted by its Law. 
BIS Review 104/2010 
 5
I would like to end my remarks by extending my regards to all participating academicians and 
policy-makers  for  their  valuable  contributions  to  the  “World  Business  Congress  of  the 
International Management Development Association”. 
Also, I would like to thank, once more, the members of Karatay University their contributions 
to the conference. 
6 
 BIS Review 104/2010
