Christian Noyer: Sovereign crisis, risk contagion and the response of the 
central bank 
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and  Chairman  of  the  
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Global Interdependence 
Centre (GIC) Conferences, Paris, 17 June 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very much honored to open this second session of conferences in Paris and I would like 
to thank the Global Interdependence Centre for having Banque de France as a partner of this 
full week conference. 
I will give the point of view of a central banker on the recent events on sovereign markets, 
the major implied risks and challenges for financial stability and the recovery process. Finally, 
I will briefly touch on the latest actions of central banks and public authorities to contain those 
renewed tensions.  
I am confident that this opening address will give rise to valuable discussions in the panels 
where distinguished speakers will express views from different perspectives: central banks, 
rating agencies, investors and academia. 
Sovereign crisis: origins and dynamics 
The sovereign debt turmoil is the most recent episode of a crisis that started more than two 
years ago yet. Some European States are the latest actors of a protracted debt crisis after 
i) US subprime mortgage borrowers, ii) financial institutions with weak funding situation and 
iii) non financial companies and households unable to finance their capital needs. It reminds 
us, if need be, that crisis management is always a difficult and potentially long lasting task. 
Time is a key dimension for fixing the economic and financial systems, which in turn 
creates the conditions for self sustained recoveries. 
In a couple of weeks, Greece has been at the epicenter of the phenomenon when doubts 
about  the  ability  of  its  government  to  honor  billions  of  debts  maturing  in  2010  became 
widespread.  The  lack  of  market  confidence  translated  into  spectacular  increases  in 
government  bond  yields.  While  this  extreme  situation  was  largely  limited  to  one  Member 
State, the magnitude of these price movements and signs of contagion to other sovereigns 
led market participants to fully reassess global sovereign risks. In this global reassessment 
process  even  less  vulnerable  countries  were  broadly  and  suddenly  impacted  with  spreads 
widening very rapidly and reaching sometimes unprecedented levels. The issue at stake is 
certainly  not  to  refute  weaknesses  of  certain  fiscal  positions.  In  fact  I,  and  many  ECB 
Governing  Council  members  alike  have  regularly  called  on  policy  makers  to  pay  due 
attention to debt dynamics. What was very peculiar was the intensity of contagion between 
member  states  and  between  segments  of  the  financial  markets.  Some  observers  have 
voiced  concerns 
the  potential 
destabilizing  role  of  speculation  and  called  for  decisive  policy  actions  to  curb  its 
consequences. I will come back to this issue later on.  
Looking at the roots of these countries weaknesses, the financial crisis has played a pivotal 
role. Of course, the structural fiscal deficit of certain countries were already sizeable before 
the  crisis  occurred  but  the  crisis  has  triggered  a  huge  deterioration  of  public  finance 
situations: first via the mechanism of automatic stabilizers that resulted in rapidly declining 
fiscal receipts due to the global and synchronized recession; second the imbalances of public 
accounts have been aggravated by greater public spending via unprecedented fiscal stimuli 
that  specific  mechanisms  were  at  play,  highlighting 
BIS Review 84/2010 
 1
plans but also large public financial commitments, in particular via capital injection into the 
banking  sector  and  debt  guarantees  schemes.  Public  interventions  have  been  massive  to 
contain the scale of the turmoil but in return have implied a cost and led to a transfer of risk 
out of the banking sector onto the public sector balance sheet. For instance, interventions 
from European governments amounted to about 1800 billion EUR or 14% of the European 
GDP.  
The potential contagion channels of the April-May European crisis 
What  are  the  reasons  behind  the  strong  and  unambiguous  public  authorities’ 
responses  to  the  April-May  crisis?  As  already  shown  in  the  previous  stages  of  the 
financial  crisis,  strong  and  prompt  public  actions  are  needed  to  prevent  contagion  and 
undesirable second round effects. In that respect, properly handling this sovereign debt crisis 
is  absolutely  necessary,  lest  the  shocks  on  the  sovereign  debt  markets  profoundly  affect 
financial markets, banking systems and thus, the real economy. Let me elaborate on these 
contagion channels.  
1) 
Considered theoretically as risk-free securities, government bonds are usually 
considered as floor rates and constitute the benchmark for pricing almost all 
other  securities.  Thus,  rising  sovereign  yields  mechanically  shift  funding  costs 
upwards for all private agents. Interest rates on government bonds usually include 
small  premia  to  compensate  for  liquidity  and  credit  risk.  For  a  proper  monetary 
policy transmission, these risk premia should not reach such level and volatility that 
the signal from the key policy rates is no longer perceivable and no longer reaches 
the real economy. In recent months, the tensions rapidly spread to other markets to 
a  point  that  jeopardized  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy,  as  European 
government bond markets became largely dysfunctional. 
The second contagion mechanism goes through the banking system.  
On the liability side, banks are already suffering from increasing government debt 
issuance which has a crowding out effect and contribute to steepen the yield curve; 
it is a real issue as banks debts maturing in the next three years are significant while 
government  support  and  central  banks  facilities  are  expected  to  be  gradually 
removed. In that tense context, the sovereign debt crisis trigger increasing funding 
tensions  for  European  banks  owing  to  the  contagion  of  sovereign  to  banks 
spreads. It reflects the traditional belief that domestic financial institutions cannot be 
less  risky  than  the  sovereign  which  are  supposed  to  back  them  in  case  of  need. 
Over the past seven months, this fact has been confirmed by the increasingly strong 
correlation of bank CDS with those of the country where they are located. It is an 
area of concerns for banks especially in the case of a rapid and abrupt evolution. A 
surge  in  the  cost  of  funding  will  be  therefore  damaging  for  banks  profitability  and 
their ability to grant credits. Short-term funding may also cause some concerns for 
banks  as  multiple  sovereign  downgrades  can  lower,  either  through  a  decrease  in 
market prices or through an increase in haircuts, the value of government securities 
used to collateralize refinancing.  
On the asset side, banks are exposed to an abrupt drop in sovereign debt prices 
through mark-to-market losses on sometimes large trading portfolios of government 
bonds  detained  as  a  liquidity  buffer.  In  addition,  banks  active  on  CDS  as  net 
protection sellers are also exposed to mark-to-market losses and real losses in case 
of a debt restructuration which constitutes a credit event triggering the CDS. These 
losses could erode the capital base of the banks at a time when the risk weighting of 
assets, based on credit rating levels, increases. The two factors push down capital 
ratios and reduce the potential for lending to the economy.  
It brings us to our third contagion channel. 
2) 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2010
3) 
Lastly,  the  economic  channel  is  likely  to  play  a  significant  role  via  the  fiscal 
adjustments  necessary  to  repair  public  finances  and  restore  the  credibility  of  the 
countries on financial markets. The increase in public investment and spending had 
mainly  contributed  to  the  economic  growth  of  the  last  semesters;  their  drop  could 
weigh on the recovery even if the calibration and the path of fiscal adjustment 
are  supposed  to  be  fine-tuned  to  allow  a  sustainable  fiscal  consolidation 
without challenging a long-lasting economic recovery.  
Strong and unambiguous responses from European governments and the Eurosystem  
In  such  a  context,  the  role  of  central  banks  and  public  authorities  was  crucial  to  restore 
confidence  and  ensure  a  proper  functioning  of  financial  markets.  Drawing  on  the  lessons 
learnt from the financial crisis in 2008–09, European governments and the Eurosystem have 
therefore  rapidly  resorted  to  strong,  unprecedented  and  sizeable  actions  to  contain  those 
tensions  and  prevent  their  spill  over  to  the  real  economy.  We  could  briefly  mention  the 
actions of the Heads of States and the central banks. 
2) 
Government actions helped contain the pressures 
1) 
I first welcome the commitments from many European countries to strengthen their 
fiscal position which is a necessary step to restore the credibility of governments 
and  the  normalization  of  sovereign  bond  markets.  As  recently  pointed  out  by  the 
G20 Finance Ministers and central bank governors, recent events have highlighted 
the  importance  of  sustainable  public  finances  :  those  countries  with  serious  fiscal 
challenges need to accelerate the pace of fiscal consolidation; 
Secondly,  the  announcement  of  a  EUR  110  billion  financial  aid  package  for 
Greece, agreed between the European Commission and the IMF conditioned to a 
package  of  substantial  fiscal  consolidation  measures  by  Greece  contributed  to 
alleviate concerns in the markets. 
Thirdly,  to  restore  confidence  in  the  whole  euro  area  and  to  contain  contagion,  a 
plan with a broader scope has been adopted at the euro area level, the European 
Financial  Stabilization  Facility,  for  a  global  amount  of  750  billion  euro  with  the 
financial participation of the IMF. One of the key features of this Facility will be the 
possibility to be used on short notice without involving further national Parliaments.  
Finally, let me focus on the other recent actions of the European central bank which have 
been essential in response to these challenging circumstances.  
3) 
Central banks complemented these actions by specific and innovated measures  
1) 
After careful consideration of all implications of this option and based on its positive 
assessment  of  the  Greek  consolidation  package  ,  the  Eurosystem  decided  to 
suspend  the  reference  to  credit  rating  and  current  market  prices  in  the 
collateral requirements for marketable debt instruments issued or guaranteed by 
the  Greek  government.  This  decision  proved  once  again  the  flexibility  of  our 
operational  framework  and  contributed  to  maintain  a  normal  functioning  of  the 
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanisms  and  to  mitigate  strains  on  interbank 
markets.  It  allowed  avoiding  strong  and  potentially  pro-cyclical  threshold 
effects of credit rating agency unilateral decisions. 
Then, the launch of the Securities Markets Programme (SMP) on the 10th of May 
marked  a  new  step  of  the  Eurosystem’s  response  to  the  financial  crisis.  This 
measure  consists  in  intervening  in  the  euro  area’s  public  and  private  securities 
secondary markets to ensure depth and liquidity in markets that have been affected 
by severe disruptions. The objective of this program is to address the malfunctioning 
2) 
BIS Review 84/2010 
 3
3) 
of  securities  markets  and  to  restore  an  appropriate  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism.  These  interventions  were  sterilized  as  liquidity  injected  was  exactly 
drained, thus fully neutralizing the effects in the banking system. This historical and 
exceptional  type  of  intervention  has  stemmed  from  the  spillover  of  increased 
financial market volatility, liquidity risks and market dislocations.  
Additionally,  the  ECB  reactivated,  in  coordination  with  other  central  banks,  the 
temporary  liquidity  swap  lines  with  the  Fed  and  resumed  US  dollar  liquidity 
providing operations in order to alleviate pressures on funding in dollar. The 
reactivation  of  this  measure  followed  the  revival  of  strains  on  foreign  exchange 
markets and highlights the central role that cooperation between central banks has 
taken  in  recent  years  in  order  to  preserve  cross-border  operations  and  financial 
stability at the global level.  
However  while  such  measures  have  removed  near-term  uncertainty,  they  could  prove 
insufficient to provide a lasting change in the negative sentiment of investors on the medium-
term  if  budget  deficits  and  debt  situation  are  not  considerably  improved.  In  this  context, 
European authorities have to show their strong level of cooperation and commitments 
to  global  and  common  solutions.  Any  unilateral  and  uncoordinated  decision  may 
notably prove to be less efficient and may amplify markets volatility.  
Finally,  the  removal  of  vulnerabilities  in  the  banking  sector  is  desirable  to  alleviate 
uncertainties.  Effective  risk  management,  transparency  and  robust  business  models  are 
essential to strengthen banks’ resilience to shocks and to ensure adequate funding of real 
economy that underpins sustainable growth and financial stability. The effective and timely 
implementation  of  the  G20  policy  orientations  is  necessary  to  build  the  new 
international system on a solid and stable ground. This is notably the case for the G 20 
provisions on the CDS market and on credit rating agencies. 
One  cannot  deny  that  certain  OTC  derivatives  (CDS  for  instance)  or  certain  types  of 
transactions (short sales) are likely to exacerbate price movements or create instability that 
are  detrimental  to  both  issuers  and  investors.  One  may  thus  find  it  tempting  to  ban  or 
drastically  limit  this  type  of  operations  and  we  indeed  have  observed  national  proposals 
going  in  that  direction,  including  the  bank  of  naked  CDS,  naked  short  sales  or  mandatory 
shorter time horizon for settling transactions. I am of the view that such measures may not be 
efficient and, worse, may be counterproductive.  
They  may  not  be  efficient  since  security  prices  are  not  formed  in  national  contexts  but  on 
global  markets.  What  would  not  be  possible  in  Paris  or  Frankfurt  could  still  be  allowed  in 
London  or  New  York  for  instance.  They  may  also  be  counterproductive  since  they  could 
deter  activities  away  from  our  market  onto  others  and  they  could  significantly  alter  the 
liquidity of securities aimed by the restriction since foreign investors may shy away from them 
and turn to other opportunities.  
Let me be clear, though, this does not mean that nothing should be done. On the contrary, I 
believe  that  instead  of  banning  and  creating  incentives  to  relocate  certain  activities 
elsewhere or circumvent those rules, it is preferable to attract and better supervise. This can 
be done: 
- 
First  by 
regulated  and  supervised  market 
infrastructures such as trading platforms, trade repositories and CCPs. In the case 
of sovereign CDS this will mean that all CDS written on euro area sovereigns should 
be compensated in a CCP located in the euro area. Incidentally, that requires a fair 
amount of standardization of these single name CDS. 
Second,  by  enhancing  transparency,  both  ex  ante  and  ex  post  to  improve  our 
understanding of the price discovery  mechanism and our  knowledge of actual net 
positions of financial institutions.  
integrating  OTC  markets 
into 
BIS Review 84/2010
 4 
  Finally,  by  improving  risk  management  by  agents  active  in  these  markets  and 
ensuring  that  these  practices  are  compatible  with  their  risk  profile.  In  the  case  of 
sovereign CDS, the issue is not necessarily with buyers who ultimately carry limited 
risks  but  with  sellers.  In  fact  we  probably  need  a  specific  supervision  of  credit 
protection sellers. 
Regarding credit rating agencies, the agreement on strengthening the regulatory oversight is 
becoming  a  reality  with  the  implementation  of  the  agreed  European  framework,  which  will 
give a pivotal role to the European Securities Market Authority. At the same time there is a 
need  to  reduce  the  dependency  on  credit  rating  agencies  for  regulatory  purposes,  both  in 
prudential regulation and as eligibility criteria for central bank refinancing. 
 Let  me  now  conclude  briefly.  We  are  still  going  through  very  challenging  times.  The 
European  banking  system  seemed  to  have  recovered  partly  thanks  to  central  banks  and 
governments  policies  supporting  the  banking  sector.  This  return  to  profitability  should  be 
used to comfort capital positions in those firms, in views of the various risks I have rapidly 
discussed.  Recent  renewed  strains  on  financial  markets  especially  sovereign  markets  and 
the subsequent impact on the banking sector show us that the crisis is not fully behind us 
and those central banks actions are more than necessary to accompany the redefinition of 
the  banking  sector,  the  well-functioning  of  markets  and  the  return  to  a  self-sustainable 
recovery.  So  far,  the  measures  taken  by  the  Eurosystem  to  stabilize  markets  and  restore 
their functioning, as well as the establishment of the European Financial Stabilization Facility, 
have lowered tail and contagion risks. But the seeds of recent events have to be addressed 
to preserve financial stability in the long run. Indeed, sizeable fiscal imbalances remain and 
governments  have  to  accelerate  fiscal  consolidation  to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  public 
finances  and  to  meet  conditions  conducive  to  durable  economic  growth.  In  parallel, 
vulnerable financial institutions that remain over-reliant on enhanced credit and government 
support will have to be tackled decisively.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 84/2010 
 5
