Duvvuri Subbarao: Book release “Perspectives on central banking – 
governors speak” 
Remarks by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the release of 
the  book:  “Perspectives  on  Central  Banking:  Governors  Speak”  by  Dr  Manmohan  Singh, 
Prime Minister, Mumbai, 15 January 2010. 
 The  compendium  of  key  speeches  of  RBI  Governors,  entitled  “Perspectives  on  Central 
Banking: Governors Speak” is the Reserve Bank of India’s Platinum Jubilee tribute to its past 
leaders.  All  of  us  in  the  Reserve  Bank  attach  immense  value  to  the  fact  that  this  book  is 
being released today by the Hon’ble Prime Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh, who was himself 
Governor of the Reserve Bank from 1982 to 1985. We are delighted that besides the Prime 
Minister, three former Governors are also present here today. This book, therefore, is special 
not only for its content but also for the very special get together that marks its release. 
2. 
Seventy-five  years  is  a  relatively  short  span  for  an  institution.  Even  so,  the  journey 
since its establishment in 1935 has been eventful for the Reserve Bank, shaping not only its 
intellectual evolution but also securing its preeminent position in the economic policy space 
of the country. During this time, there have been momentous changes – a paradigm shift in 
economic ideology, ever new perspectives on economic development, growing aspirations of 
people, path-breaking financial innovations and game changing technological breakthroughs. 
All these are changes which have influenced the Reserve Bank, and changes to which the 
Bank has had to respond in its own unique way.  
3. 
The  Reserve  Bank’s  75  year  journey  has  been  marked  by  a  host  of  historic 
developments  both  at  home  and  abroad.  Internationally,  there  were  the  aftermath  of  the 
Great  Depression  of the  1930s;  the  Second World  War and  the  consequent  challenges  of 
war financing; the establishment of the Bretton Woods system in 1944; the unravelling of the 
gold standard and the oil price shocks of the 1970s; the Third World debt crisis of the 1980s; 
the Asian crisis of the mid-1990s; and most recently the global financial turmoil.  
4. 
There  were  historic  developments  on  the  home  front  too,  and  they  were  varied  – 
starting  with  the  launching  of  five-year  plans;  and  the  challenges  emanating  from  one  of 
history’s most ambitious and gigantic experiments in economic development, the after-effects 
of the two wars in the 1960s, the devaluation of the rupee in 1966, bank nationalisation in 
1969,  the  balance  of  payments  crisis  of  the  early  1990s  and  the  follow  on  path-breaking 
economic reforms that marked a paradigm shift in our economic policy. The Reserve Bank is 
proud of the role it has played in addressing these developments, responding to them with 
sensitivity, professionalism and integrity. 
5. 
The high esteem in which the Reserve Bank is held today owes much to the intellectual 
leadership  and  vision  of  successive  Governors.  The  speeches  in  this  compendium  are  a 
testimony to that. The speeches also mark a journey through time and provide a glimpse into 
the ideas, issues and concerns that engaged the Reserve Bank over the years. 
6. 
The wide-ranging themes covered by the speeches – monetary policy, external sector 
management,  issues  in  the  financial  sector  and  the  real  economy,  economic  development 
and poverty reduction, regulation of banks and financial markets and challenges of managing 
economic policy in a globalizing environment – are a reflection of the broad mandate of the 
Reserve Bank and its enduring concern for the larger public good. 
7. 
For a public policy institution like the Reserve Bank, there is no final destination; the 
goal posts keep moving with new challenges and tasks replacing current ones. The learning 
too never stops. From each development and crisis, lessons are drawn and applied to policy 
and institutional reform. 
BIS Review 3/2010 
 1
This compendium of speeches is a reminder to us in the Reserve Bank of the need to 
8. 
be constantly pushing the envelope to remain useful and relevant. In this pursuit, the Bank 
needs to be at the frontiers of domain knowledge while also remaining sensitive to the core 
concerns of an emerging market economy, one which is still home to hundreds of millions of 
poor people. 
9.  We hope this book will provide an appreciation of the Reserve Bank’s eventful history 
and its contribution to nation building. 
In conclusion, our very warm thanks to the Prime Minister and all the former Governors 
10. 
for  making  this  book  release  a  flagship  event  in  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Platinum  Jubilee 
celebrations. 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2010
