Guy Quaden: Modernising IMF surveillance 
Intervention  by  Mr  Guy  Quaden,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium,  at  the 
International  Monetary  Fund–Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  (IMF–MAS)  Conference  
“The  IMF  and  the  international  financial  system:  the  post  crisis  agenda”,  Singapore, 
24 September 2010. 
 First of all, I would like to thank the Monetary Authority of Singapore and the IMF for inviting 
me to contribute to this high-level conference.  
The  world  economy  has  changed  in  important  ways.  Capital  flows  now  dwarf  trade  flows. 
Many  economies  are  now  integrated  into  world  capital  markets.  Financial  sectors  have 
become more interconnected and a channel for rapid transmission of crises across regions 
and  at  a  global  level.  This  requires  Fund  surveillance  (in  other  words  its  crisis  prevention 
role) to adapt both in substance (what surveillance should do) and modalities (how to do it). 
I would like to focus on three major topics: 
1. 
the  analysis  of  financial  sector  stability  must  be  strengthened  both  at  global  and 
country level; 
bilateral surveillance must be complemented with multilateral surveillance; 
the so-called traction of Fund surveillance – the ability and willingness of countries 
to heed Fund advise – must be improved. 
2. 
3. 
Let me elaborate. 
Financial sector stability issues 
The  international  community  has  drawn  many  important  lessons  from  the  recent  financial 
crisis. Implementing the needed changes has only just begun. 
The Basel III Agreement, reached only recently, is a major step to make the banking sector 
more  stable  and  better  equipped  to  absorb  losses.  It  is  only  a  first  step.  Improving  capital 
adequacy primarily focuses on the stability of individual banks. It is foremost an instrument of 
micro-prudential regulation. Compliance of individual banks with prudential regulations does 
not assure the stability of the system as a whole. Macro-financial stability concerns must be 
kept under constant review and addressed by national institutions – the central banks – with 
a  clear  mandate.  In  the  European  Union,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  will  be 
established  next  year  and  assume  an  important  role  at  EU-wide-level.  However,  the 
implementation  of  its  recommendations  will  remain  largely  the  responsibility  of  national 
authorities. I see an evident parallelism and potential for synergy between the surveillance 
mandate of the ESRB and IMF surveillance, the latter remaining broader in scope. 
After  a  series  of  national  and  regional  crises  (Mexico,  Asia,  Russia,  ...)  the  IMF  Board 
adopted  in  2000  a  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program.  The  Fund  would  at  regular 
intervals (of 3 to 5 years) conduct an in depth evaluation of the vulnerabilities of a country’s 
financial  sector  and  the  adequacy  of  prudential  regulation  and  surveillance.  However,  the 
membership could not agree, in a straightforward manner, that financial sector stability was 
an  integral  part  of  Fund  surveillance,  and  therefore  mandatory.  The  technical  assistance 
nature  of  FSAPs  was  used  by  some  countries  to  argue  that  the  Fund  should  prioritise  its 
resources  to  countries  less  equipped  to  conduct  sound  financial  sector  policies.  As  a 
consequence,  some  major  systemically  important  financial  sectors  that  proved  very 
vulnerable did not undergo a timely and sufficiently in-depth scrutiny. 
BIS Review 122/2010 
 1
Last  Tuesday,  the  IMF  Board  decided  that  the  25  countries  with  a  systemically  important 
financial sector will undergo at least every 5 years an in-depth assessment of their financial 
sector.  Moreover,  the  Board  has  stressed  that  financial  sector  policies  are  important  in  all 
cases of bilateral surveillance. This is a significant progress.  
Multilateral surveillance 
Bilateral surveillance, understandably, focuses on how national policies must be conducted 
in the country’s best interest. The premise is simple: if each country achieves internal stability 
and  a  sustainable  external  position  without  manipulating  exchange  rates,  the  system  as  a 
whole  will  function  satisfactorily.  While  this  remains  largely  valid,  trade  and  financial 
integration and economic interdependence are now so far advanced that national economic 
interests  must  be  pursued  in  a  shared  framework  of  collective  stability.  National  policies 
pursued in the country’s own best (short term) interest might not be collectively consistent. 
The problem of the persistent global imbalances is an important example. To complement 
bilateral surveillance, the Fund must formulate policy-oriented advice on how to improve the 
coherence  of  national  policies  toward  improved  collective  stability  and  sustainable  global 
growth.  
A promising proposal that has been floated recently is the production of spillover reports. It is 
to be welcomed that the Fund plans to prepare, on a trial basis over the next year, at least 
three  spillover  reports  for  the  US,  the  euro  area  and  China.  These  reports  will  focus  on 
outward spillovers of domestic policies of these economies and would involve not only the 
authorities of these economies (akin to the contact for the regular Article IV consultations) but 
also the authorities of the economies affected by the policies.  
The launch of the first Mutual Assessment Process (MAP) by the G20, in collaboration with 
the IMF, is a new attempt at multilateral cooperation and coordination. Given the  potential 
benefits, this objective should be pursued with determination. However, the effectiveness of 
the  G20  process  still  needs  to  be  demonstrated  going  forward.  Moreover,  many  special 
topics affecting groups of countries that may include non-G20 members or only a few of the 
G20 members will remain uncovered in that G20 process. The IMFC could provide a forum 
for addressing these issues. 
Prioritization and collaboration 
The improvement of surveillance will require adequate resources and Fund members should 
not withhold them. But it is obvious that choices will have to be made among a very wide 
range of ideas; and priorities will have to be set. This should happen taking into account in 
particular  the  effectiveness  and  cost  of  each  proposal  and  the  work  done  by  other 
international institutions. 
When  considering  the  creation  of  IMF  surveillance  products,  sufficient  attention  should  be 
devoted  to  the  integration  of  these  products  in  the  overall  IMF  surveillance  framework  in 
order to maximise the effectiveness of and the synergy among all these products. The Fund 
has  indeed  already  a  large  array  of  surveillance  instruments  (at  bilateral,  regional  and 
multilateral  level:  Article IV,  FSAPs,  WEO,  GFSR,  REO,  EWE,  Vulnerability  Exercises  in 
EMs, Multilateral Consultations ...) which are the result of its efforts to keep its relevance in a 
changing world. 
At the same time, close cooperation with other international institutions and fora is essential, 
taking  due  account  of  comparative  advantages  and  expertise,  and  avoiding  duplication  of 
efforts.  Regarding,  for  instance,  financial  stability  surveillance,  the  IMF  and  the  FSB  work 
together on the Early Warning Exercise and on systemically important financial institutions. 
Nevertheless,  there  remains  probably  room  to  improve  further  the  coordination  of  their 
activities. In retrospect, we have to admit that the record of both the FSF and the IMF was 
less than perfect. The Fund has also to collaborate efficiently with the Basel institutions: with 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2010
the BIS, that produces high-quality macrofinancial research, and with the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision, given that it has much responsibility for micro-financial issues. 
Another proposal which is gaining attention is to tailor further the content and frequency of 
the  surveillance  process  according  to  the  specific  circumstances  of  each  member  country, 
and thus also according to the systemic importance of the country concerned. While I can 
certainly see merit in this proposal, it should be kept in mind that surveillance is important for 
all countries and that all members have the right to receive adequate policy advice during 
regular Article IV consultations. Tailoring consultations to specific circumstances should not 
lead to diverging surveillance quality for different categories of members. 
Traction of Fund surveillance 
I come to my last topic: the so-called traction of Fund surveillance. 
With  highly  competent  economic  analysts  in  central  banks  and  governments  in  most 
countries, some have questioned the usefulness of Fund surveillance. Such is not my view. 
The  added  value  of  Fund  surveillance  rests  on  the  political  independence  of  the  Fund 
opinion. Like independent central banks, Fund experts put longer term considerations above 
short term political calculus. In doing so, the Fund steers policy makers toward more honesty 
and boosts the government’s ability to implement often politically difficult reforms. 
There is a debate about how transparency can help improve traction of Fund surveillance. 
Prior to the Mexican crisis in 1994, IMF surveillance reports were highly confidential. Today, 
all  Article  IV  reports,  with  a  few  exceptions,  are  available  on  the  Fund’s  website.  For  the 
Fund, the challenge in this context, is to be perceived as an impartial advisor and monitor, 
not too tied by its structure to the official view in which problems are downplayed1. 
Let’s be frank. The IMF must indeed avoid public clashes about short term emergencies. On 
this, candid analysis is only acceptable if treated with the needed degree of confidentiality. 
Full  and  unfettered  transparency  could  on  the  contrary  induce  complacency  and  a  loss  of 
credibility for the Fund. However, at the same time, the IMF must become more pro-active in 
persuading public opinion, social partners, and NGOs of the long-term costs of unadjusted 
policies  and  of  the  long-term  gains  that  will  outweigh  short-term  pain.  Explanation  by  a 
credible  international  institution  that  promotes  a  global  common  good,  might  find  more 
support from the public for long-term objectives than politicians believe there is.2  
Much  has  been  said  and  written  on  improving  the  governance  of  the  IMF  and  enhance 
ministerial  involvement.  Many  observers  conclude  that  nothing  really  happens  at  the 
international  meetings  of  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank.  This  perception  is  not  entirely 
unfounded. As I see it, the central task of ministers and governors meeting in the IMF is to 
seriously discuss policy-oriented multilateral surveillance reports. This is a task that the IMF 
Executive Board can only prepare. In the end, it is up to the policymakers at the highest level 
to agree on how consistency among their policies can be promoted, and policy coordination 
improved.  Pursuing these objectives will elevate the level of ambition of Fund surveillance 
and  the  cooperation  of  its  members  to  a  higher  level  than  that  exists  now.  Today’s 
conference should advance our ambition. 
                                                 
1   Cfr. for instance the interview of Professor Reinhart published for the attention of the IMF staff in November 
2009. 
2   Cfr. for instance Raghuram Rajan, Fault lines, page 215. 
BIS Review 122/2010 
 3
