Jean-Claude Trichet: An anchor of stability and confidence 
Contribution  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  to 
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, Frankfurt am Main, 26 March 2010. 
 The  public  at  large  generally  takes  notice  of  central  bank  activities  mostly  when  there  are 
special circumstances. The financial crisis and the extraordinary measures taken by central 
banks across the globe in response to it are an example of such special circumstances. In 
normal periods, central bank actions in pursuit of price stability are less noticed. This holds 
all  the  more  true  when  periods  of  inflation  are  long  past  and  memories  of  the  negative 
consequences of instable currencies have faded away. 
Since  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  the  phenomena  of  price  instability  have  not  been 
something that citizens of the euro area have really needed to concern themselves with in 
their everyday lives. This is to the credit of the European Central Bank (ECB), its Governing 
Council  and  the  “monetary  team”  including  all  national  central  banks  belonging  to  the 
Eurosystem. The ECB has kept the promise of the euro’s founding fathers to keep the value 
of money stable. The average annual rate of inflation for the first 12 years of the euro up to 
the end of 2010 is expected to be about 1.95%. This is exactly in line with our quantitative 
objective for price stability, which aims for medium-term growth in the Harmonised Index of 
Consumer  Prices  for  the  euro  area  to  be  close  to,  but  below,  2%.  By  comparison,  the 
average rate of inflation in Germany in the 1990s, i.e. prior to the introduction of the euro, 
was 2.2%, after 2.9% in the 1980s and 4.9% in the 1970s. In other words, the euro holds its 
own in the area of stability when compared with the Deutsche Mark. As promised, the euro is 
at least as strong as the most stable currencies that preceded it, especially it is “mindestens 
so stark wie die D-Mark”. I could even underline that the German national inflation rate with 
the euro has been significantly lower than the average in the euro area and, therefore, much 
lower than at the time of the D-Mark: 1.5% per year, on average from 1999 to 2009. 
Given  the  significant  challenges  faced  by  the  euro  area  over  recent  years,  this  is  a  great 
achievement – especially for a young central bank responsible for a new currency in a newly 
created single currency area comprising 16 countries and 330 million citizens. In addition, the 
ECB has been successful with its reliable policies in anchoring future inflation expectations in 
line  with  the  definition  of  price  stability.  This  is  another  of  its  achievements.  Citizens  and 
financial  market  agents  consider  the  ECB’s  stability  target  to  be  a  credible  one,  and 
continued to do so even during the difficult conditions of the financial crisis. 
Fixing a quantitative definition of price stability was a key factor that contributed to the solid 
anchoring  of  inflation  expectations.  The  definition  was  useful  both  in  times  of  increased 
inflationary pressure – not least in the first half of 2008 when oil prices were high – and in 
times  when  risks  of  deflationary  developments  were  being  discussed  by  the  markets  –  as 
occurred during the peak of the financial crisis in autumn 2008. 
The current financial crisis represents a break not experienced in the world economy since 
World War II. The challenges posed by the crisis are immense, and in many areas we are 
still at the beginning of implementing the unavoidable and necessary changes. It is now clear 
to  all  actors  that,  in  a  globalised  world,  mistakes  at  the  individual  level  –  for  example, 
unsustainable  business  models  of  certain  large  banks  –  can  very  quickly  amplify  into 
developments  at  the  aggregate  level  that  lead  to  dangerous  imbalances  across  the  entire 
system. This holds all the more if there are already marked imbalances within the system at 
the outset, such as in the current accounts of important economies. It was thanks only to the 
extremely  speedy,  comprehensive  and  well-coordinated  monetary  and 
fiscal  policy 
interventions  that,  in  autumn  2008,  panic  on  the  markets  was  held  at  bay  and  that  a 
widespread  stabilisation  was  subsequently  achieved.  In  Europe,  in  particular,  the  crisis 
BIS Review 39/2010 
 1
management  proved  to  be  effective.  This  should  not  be  forgotten  when  drawing  all  the 
necessary lessons from the crisis, not only globally, but also at the European level and within 
the individual Member States of the euro area. 
At  the  international  level  –  within  the  G20  and  supported,  in  particular,  by  the  Financial 
Stability  Board  –  there  is  agreement  that  the  global  financial  system  must  be  made  much 
more  resilient  and  less  susceptible  to  risk.  In  the  EU,  cooperation  between  national 
supervisory  authorities  will  be  improved  through  the  creation  of  a  European  system  for 
financial  supervision.  In  addition,  a  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  is  being 
established, which will issue early warnings and recommendations in order to prevent risks 
from  arising  that  threaten  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  The  ECB  will  provide  the 
Secretariat to the ESRB and give analytical and organisational support. 
The crisis is forcing us to undertake careful analysis to identify where mistakes were made, 
and to correct them, even in the face of resistance from the political domain. At the same 
time, however, we should also identify what has proved itself to be of worth and what should 
be maintained as is. At the macroeconomic level, as I have already said at another occasion, 
there is one conclusion that should certainly not be drawn from the financial crisis, namely 
that  higher  rates  of  inflation  should  be  targeted  in  future.  There  are  no  discernible 
macroeconomic benefits that would compensate for the obvious costs of increased inflation – 
higher  risk  premia  and  higher  long-term  interest  rates,  to  name  just  two.  And  we  should 
never  forget  that  low  inflation  preserves  the  purchasing  power  of  our  most  vulnerable  and 
poorer  fellow  citizens.  The  financial  crisis  has  not  brought  about  any  change  in  this 
fundamental  assessment:  contrary  to  the  fears  of  some  critics,  the  non-conventional 
monetary  policy  measures  taken  by  the  ECB  had  exactly  the  desired  effect,  even  in  an 
environment  of  temporarily  negative  inflation  rates,  so  that  they  can  now  –  given  the 
normalisation of the outlook for inflation and the prospect of a general market recovery – be 
phased-out, step by step. The ECB will uphold its definition of price stability. 
One characteristic of the ECB and the national central banks of the Eurosystem is that their 
activities are oriented towards the long term. In an environment generally characterised by 
short-term horizons, the ECB’s long-term approach differentiates it from what occurs in both 
general politics and the private financial sector. 
It is not surprising that political behaviour in democracies is strongly dependent on election 
cycles.  In  the  field  of  fiscal  policy  in  particular,  this  might  encourage  short-term  action 
focused on election dates, resulting in a tendency to engage in deficit spending and growing 
government debt. As emphasised in the political economy literature, this short-term approach 
is,  in  fact,  built  into  the  political  process  itself,  which  demands  that  political  actors  are 
re-legitimised  by  means  of  elections  at  regular  intervals.  However,  short-termism  can  and 
should  be  corrected  through  fiscal  rules  that  work  towards  the  sustainability  of  public 
finances.  Examples  of  this  include  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  the  recently  agreed, 
and much to be welcomed, “debt brake” built into German law. 
Activity  in  the  private  sector  is  often  governed  by  the  quest  for  short-term  profits.  Seeking 
profits  is  legitimate  and  an  important  motivation  in  a  market  economy,  but  an  excessive 
gearing towards the short-term is problematic. Too strong a focus on the short term was one 
of the major errors made by the financial sector. It was intensified by, among other things, 
reward  systems  that  created  false  incentives.  The  reforms  currently  being  discussed  are 
therefore rightly aimed at combating excessive short-termism in the financial sector, as well 
as  other  false  incentives.  Goethe’s  statement  to  Eckermann  in  1830  has  again  become 
particularly meaningful: “The most important issue is to learn self-restraint. If I wanted to let 
myself go without any restraint, I could well destroy myself and my environment”. We have 
strongly  admonished  actors  in  the  financial  sector  to  exercise  their  responsibility  to 
demonstrate self-restraint. Profits should not be used to pay disproportionate bonuses, but 
rather to strengthen balance sheets, in order to safeguard the supply of credit. 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2010
The activities of the ECB and the national central banks of the Eurosystem are not subject to 
any  election  cycle.  In  fact,  the  opposite  is  true:  the  long-term  focus  of  their  activities  is 
explicitly  safeguarded  by  a  wide-ranging  institutional  arrangement  that  ensures  the  full 
independence of the ECB and the national central banks of the Eurosystem from political and 
any other influence, at both the European and the national level. 
Central bank independence is the result of a long learning process as old as paper money 
itself.  On  account  of  particularly  difficult  experiences  in  its  past,  the  Federal  Republic  of 
Germany was one of the very first European countries to have an independent central bank. I 
myself was the first governor of the fully independent French central bank more than sixteen 
years ago. The model of an independent central bank, which proved to be a successful one, 
was then “Europeanised” and became the norm for the ECB and the Eurosystem. 
Today, it is a well-documented viewpoint in economics that independent central banks are in 
a  better  position  to  guarantee  low  and  stable  inflation  rates  than  central  banks  that  are 
subject to political influence. Empirical evidence for this dates back, in particular, to the works 
of  Cukierman  (1992),  and  Alesina  and  Summers  (1993).  Although  this  finding  may  not 
surprise many monetary policy-makers, it is, in fact, only through the modern analysis of the 
time  inconsistency  problem  of  monetary  policy  that  it  has  been  clearly  underpinned  in 
economic theory. Fundamental theoretical papers on this topic include those of Kydland and 
Prescott (1977) and of Barro and Gordon (1983). These studies argue that, in the short term, 
there is the temptation for monetary policy to exploit a seemingly existing trade-off between 
employment and inflation through expansionary policy measures. In the long run, however, 
there  is  no  such  trade-off  because,  given  the  adjustment  of  inflation  expectations,  these 
measures  would  be  systematically  anticipated  and  would  thus  be  rendered  completely 
ineffective. The outcome would simply be higher inflation without any benefits to employment 
or growth. 
The  ECB’s  mandate  and  its  independent  status  are  laid  down  in  the  European  treaties. 
These treaties were ratified by democratically elected parliaments in all Member States and, 
in some countries, by referenda. The core elements of the Monetary Union – namely price 
stability as the primary objective of monetary policy and an independent central bank – have 
remained  unchanged  in  each  of  the  treaty  revisions  since  first  laid  down  in  the  Maastricht 
Treaty in 1992. Accordingly, they were reconfirmed and re-legitimised through the ratification 
of the Lisbon Treaty by now 27  EU Member States. The members of the ECB’s decision-
making bodies are appointed by democratically elected politicians. In addition, provisions are 
in place in order to ensure the personal independence of individual monetary policy-makers. 
For example, the term of office for members of the Executive Board of the ECB is limited to 
eight  years,  and  is  non-renewable.  Together,  the  treaty-enshrined  foundations  of  the 
Monetary Union combine the ECB’s independence with clear, democratic legitimation. 
Price  stability  is  in  the  acknowledged,  very  best  long-term  interests  of  the  people.  Stable 
prices  benefit  society  as  a  whole,  rather  than  serving  individual  interests.  Price  stability 
guarantees the purchasing power of income and the value of savings. It prevents arbitrary 
redistribution and fosters employment and growth. Only when prices are stable is the price 
mechanism  –  the  key  tool  for  managing  supply  and  demand  in  a  market  economy  – 
transparent  and  efficient.  These  findings  also  have  a  strong  tradition  within  German 
economic  science.  Walter  Eucken  (1952),  one  of  the  spiritual  fathers  of  what  is  known  as 
“Ordnungspolitik” and the social market economy, rightly described price stability – as he put 
it at the time, the “primacy of foreign exchange policy” – as one of the constitutive principles 
of a competitive order. He envisioned a “monetary constitution with a stabiliser for monetary 
value” that would avoid both inflation and deflation, and would function “as automatically as 
possible”. 
The EU’s monetary constitution reflects a consensus on stability among economists that has 
developed in Europe over many decades. With its constitutionally guaranteed independence, 
the  ECB  acts  as  a  stabiliser  of  the  value  of  money.  There  is  no  completely  automatic 
BIS Review 39/2010 
 3
guarantee of a stable value of money, but the clear commitment to the primary objective of 
maintaining price stability acts as a compass in all decisions relating to European monetary 
policy. 
In democracies, certain tensions between independent central banks on the one hand and 
governments as well as economic and financial pressure groups on the other hand, do arise 
from time to time. Given agents’ varying time horizons, these tensions are part of the nature 
of the issue at hand. The Deutsche Bundesbank and its predecessor, the Bank deutscher 
Länder,  were  repeatedly  subject  to  criticism.  An  early  example  thereof  is  the  well-known 
speech by Adenauer in 1956, when he branded an increase in interest rates as a “guillotine 
for the man of the street”. The ECB itself cannot claim to have been lacking advice from the 
political sphere. It joins a long tradition of independent central banks in this respect. Several 
euro area governments criticised the ECB when it decided not to decrease interest rates in 
2004  and  to  raise  them  at  end  of  2005.  With  the  benefit  of  hindsight  nobody  would  now 
question that the decisions of the time were appropriate. The exemplary nature of the cases 
cited is also revealed by the fact that criticism almost always arises in response to restrictive 
monetary  policy  measures.  Expansionary  measures,  by  contrast,  are  virtually  never 
criticised. This, too, reflects the differences in the time horizons envisaged by independent 
central banks, on the one hand, and executive branches as well as pressure groups on the 
other. 
Looking  ahead,  the  financial  crisis  has  created  considerable  challenges  for  monetary  and 
fiscal policy. From the very outset, the monetary policy measures taken by the Eurosystem 
during the financial crisis were specifically designed in such a way that they could be phased 
out relatively easily and gradually once the environment improved. The goal of maintaining 
price stability never changed, and meanwhile the unwinding of these measures has started. 
The  situation  in  the  field  of  fiscal  policy  is  more  complicated.  Budget  deficits  in  many 
countries  across  the  globe  have  grown  substantially  on  account  of  the crisis,  although  the 
euro area (in terms of the average deficit across Member States) did not by any means take 
the lead in this regard. Growing debt levels not only bring with them a potential for greater 
conflict  between  fiscal  and  monetary  policy,  but  first  and  foremost,  place  a  burden  on  the 
sustainability of public finances in the affected countries. It is, therefore, in the interests of 
each and every country to return to sound public finances as quickly as possible. 
In the current circumstances, where Europe faces pivotal decisions, it is more important than 
ever  to  recognise  that  a  prosperous  union  requires  determined  action  by  all.  Regarding  all 
further decisions on the way ahead, the most important issue is that Europe’s policy-makers 
take and live up to their responsibility. This should hold not only for the European institutions – 
the European Parliament, the Commission and the ECB. It is also absolutely crucial that the 
governments themselves exert all their responsibilities of control and surveillance of the peers 
within the Eurogroup and the Council. I am confident that Europe will find a way to achieve 
this. Over the past 60 years, Europe has time and again succeeded in emerging from crises 
stronger  than  before.  As  I  emphasised  yesterday  in  the  plenary  session  of  the  European 
Parliament, monetary union in Europe is far more than a monetary arrangement. It is a union 
of shared destiny. In order to surmount the consequences of the financial crisis, all public and 
private decision-makers must live up to their responsibility in their respective fields. For the 
ECB,  this  means  continuing  to  fulfil  its  mandate  –  of  maintaining  price  stability  –  in  a  fully 
independent and inflexible manner, for the future as it has done in the past. It will remain a 
bastion  of  stability  and  confidence,  and  is,  therefore,  on  the  side  of  the  citizens.  And,  by 
guaranteeing price stability, it will do its clearly defined part to protect the long-term interests 
and future prospects of us all. 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2010
