Loi M Bakani: The benefits of electronic payments and mobile banking 
products 
Welcome speech by Mr Loi M Bakani, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, at the 
Mobile Money Workshop, Port Moresby, 10 August 2010. 
 Acknowledgements 
Mr. Tilman Bruett, Regional Advisor, Pacific Financial Inclusion Program (PFIP), 
Mr Micheal Tarazi, Senior Policy Advisor, Consultative Group to Assist the Poor, 
Mr Waameek Noor, Alliance for Financial Inclusion, 
Representatives from the ADB, UNDP and World Bank, 
Ladies and gentlemen. 
Introduction 
It gives me great pleasure to host this Mobile Money Workshop at the Bank of Papua New 
Guinea.  This  workshop  is  a  follow  up  of  the  workshops  in  Vanuatu,  Philippines  and  Fiji  in 
which  three  Bank  of  PNG  representatives  together  with  our  colleagues  from  other  Pacific 
Islands  central  banks  attended  to  learn  about  regulatory  processes  and  operating 
environments as well as benefits of electronic payments and mobile banking products. The 
convening  of  this  workshop  is  part  of  the  programs  on  “Financial  Inclusion”  agreed  to  by 
central  banks  and  Finance  Ministers  in  the  Pacific,  and  is  also  consistent  with  the 
Government’s  increased  focus  on  extending  financial  services  to  the  rural  areas  of  Papua 
New  Guinea.  This  program  was  supported  by  the  Forum  Economic  Ministers  Meeting  in 
Raratonga, Cook Islands in October 2009, which stressed that measures should be taken by 
respective  governments  to  strengthen  advances  in  financial  inclusion  in  their  respective 
countries  to  reduce  poverty.  Before  discussing  the  benefits  of  mobile  phone  banking  in 
Papua New Guinea, I wish to outline briefly the geographical and economic setting, financial 
sector innovations, and the challenges in Papua New Guinea. 
Geographical and economic setting 
Papua New Guinea is characterized by rugged geographical terrain with many parts of the 
country inaccessible by road and fragmented markets which are separated by oceans and 
jungles.  As  a  consequence,  the  provision  of  Government  services  in  the  rural  areas  is 
scarce, if not it is non existent, and this has led to an absence of some basis services in the 
rural areas. Some of the Government services either absent or in very poor and deteriorating 
conditions in the rural areas include: 
 
 
 
These core inadequacies have led to: 
 
Inadequate infrastructure; 
Inadequate health services; and 
Inadequate educational services. 
High infant mortality, pregnancy deaths, and deaths from curable diseases such as 
malaria; 
Low literacy and high unemployment levels; 
Poor accessibility to markets; and 
 BIS Review 109/2010 
 1
Poor accessibility to banking and other financial services. 
 
Whilst the Government has addressed and continues to focus on the structural issues in the 
previous medium term development plan and now in the Vision 2050, capacity constraints 
have slowed the pace of implementation. Addressing these constraints continues to be the 
major  challenge  for  the  Government’s  development  agenda  and  considerable  efforts  are 
required to advance in these areas. 
Institutions  Act  (2000), 
the  Banks  and  Financial 
Financial sector innovations 
The Government’s reform of the financial sector which commenced in 2000, with the Central 
Banking  Act  2000  (CBA), 
the 
Superannuation Act and the Life Insurance Act (2000) became a catalyst for private sector 
development. This is obvious from the rapid pace of private sector credit growth of between 
20–40 percent per annum since 2003, which has led to an increase in economic growth of  
4–7 percent per annum in the same period. The developments in the financial sector have 
set the foundation for a robust financial system and to date, Papua New Guinea’s banking 
system remains well capitalized, highly liquid, and profitable and is well placed to take on the 
challenges of funding private sector credit from deposits. Technological advances in financial 
services have also gained momentum with increased ATMs, EFPTOS, internet banking, and 
telephone banking over the last decade. This is encouraging and the Bank has allowed these 
products  in  the  market  as  they  were  issued  by  regulated  financial  institutions  to  enhance 
banking services to their customers. 
The liberalization of the telecommunication industry made way for an additional entrant into 
the telecommunication industry. While this has led to an increase in competition and market 
penetration for mobile phones, it also created an impetus for the introduction of mobile phone 
banking  and  other  means  of  payment  services  by  the  regulated  and  non  regulated 
institutions. The Central Bank is particularly aware of the following products: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Bank of PNG welcomes such innovative products to be introduced and wants to work 
with  development  partners  in  the  promotion  of  these  products  to  offer  consumers  with  an 
alternative  means  of  banking  or  payment  service  in  a  cost  effective,  low  risk  and  efficient 
manner. 
Certainly the benefits to the economy are overwhelming because these products target the 
niche  market.  Where  conventional  banking  has  limitation,  electronic  payments  and  mobile 
banking  products  should  fill  the  gap.  It  is  highly  relevant  for  an  economy  like  Papua  New 
Guinea because of its rugged geographical terrain and sparsely distributed provinces which 
stand  to  benefit  considerably  from  the  use  of  electronic  and  mobile  phone  banking.  The 
greatest challenge is to extend these services to the “unbanked” segment of the population 
who are mostly in the rural areas. In this respect a trade store in the remote part of Papua 
New Guinea could be an agent of this service and this could solve the everyday problem of a 
farmer who has to travel long distances and incurs high costs to get the required financial 
services in urban towns. 
SMS banking by BSP; 
Mobile phone top-up using a bank account with BSP; 
A pilot project by DataNets on mobile phone or electronic wallet (M-Powa); 
Cross crediting of mobile phone credits by Digicel; 
Payment of electricity bills using mobile phone credits; and 
Checking superfund contributions by Nasfund. 
2 
 BIS Review 109/2010
Role of bank of PNG 
Section 7 (c) of the Central Banking Act 2000 specifies that Bank of PNG has to promote an 
efficient national and international system. In this regard, the Bank welcomes the introduction 
of  electronic  payments  and  mobile  banking  products,  which  can  assist  in  reducing 
transaction  cost  and  contribute  to  the  expansion  of  financial  services  in  the  country, 
particularly in the rural areas. Whilst the Bank seeks to encourage the introduction of new 
innovative instruments for payments, it also needs to ensure that high levels of standards are 
maintained for safety, security and cost effectiveness with adequate levels of protection for 
consumers’ interests. 
In  other  words,  the  Bank  wishes  to  ensure  that  electronic  payments  and  mobile  banking 
instruments are appropriately regulated to mitigate any potential incidences that might give 
rise  to  systemic  risk  on  the  entire  financial  system.  It  is  also  important  that  the  other 
legislations  such  as  the  Proceeds  of  Crime  Act  (PCA),  Information,  Communication  and 
Technology Act (ICTA) and Independent Consumer, Competition, Commission Act are also 
adhered  to  provide  the  necessary  safety  net  for  financial  transactions.  In  this  regard,  the 
Bank of PNG introduced its Statement of Intent on electronic payments and mobile banking 
in  May  2010.  It  outlines  the  current  views  and  approach  of  the  Central  Bank  towards 
electronic and mobile payment services and sets out the measures which the Bank intends 
to adopt in the future. 
This  forum  demonstrates  the  Bank’s  intention  to  work  with  our  development  partners  in 
achieving  the  Governments  objectives  of  promoting  financial  inclusion,  access  to  finance, 
and reduce the cost of banking that will lead to sustained economic growth. In this regard, 
the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea  has  been  actively  involved  with  the  development  of 
microfinance industry, the mobile phone banking and payment services, and is now finalizing 
a project with donor partners to undertake a financial literacy survey and linkage program for 
the unbanked. These programs will see the introduction of a Financial Inclusion and Literacy 
Policy  which  will  be  submitted  to  the  Government  for  adoption,  and  development  of  a 
Microfinance Regulation. 
Going forward 
Going forward, much still needs to be done. The telecommunication liberalization has led to 
the  creation  of  an  enabling  environment  for  the  introduction  of  electronic  payments  and 
mobile banking products never witnessed before in Papua New Guinea. We have only seen 
the start of it but the rest is yet to come and it is here to stay and grow. 
However,  the  challenge  of  all  the  regulatory  institutions  are  to  ensure  that  transactions 
conducted are cost effective, efficient, and poses a low risk on the consumers. This requires 
close coordination in the area of regulation especially monitoring and licensing, provision of 
technological infrastructure and ensuring maximum benefit for consumers. 
The Bank has commenced a major review of the payments system in Papua New Guinea in 
2009.  Review  of  the  payments  system  is  necessary  for  promoting  a  sound  and  efficient 
system that will reduce costs to both businesses and consumers and also improve monetary 
policy  transmission.  As  the  electronic  or  mobile  phone  banking  products  are  means  of 
payments,  the  payments  legislation  will  cover  its  regulatory  aspects  and  where  necessary 
specific guidelines will be introduced for the electronic payments products. 
Conclusion 
I trust that this workshop will help us understand the various issues relating to mobile phone 
or mobile money systems and products, and also appreciate major developments and pilot 
programs  already  taking  place  in  Papua  New  Guinea.  This  workshop  is  meant  to  create 
awareness on the mobile phone technology that is already in the market place which can be 
BIS Review 109/2010 
 3
adopted to connect the unbanked segment of our population to financial services so they can 
be empowered to improve their livelihood. 
Thank you all for accepting our invitation to attend this workshop and I look forward to your 
productive participation today. 
Thank you ladies and gentlemen for listening. 
4 
 BIS Review 109/2010
