Usha Thorat: Setting new paradigm in regulation 
Keynote address by Ms Usha Thorat, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Federation  of  Indian  Chambers  of  Commerce  &  Industry-Indian  Banks’  Association 
(FICCI-IBA)  Conference  on  “Global  Banking:  Paradigm  Shift”,  panel  session,  Mumbai, 
8 September 2010. 
 1. 
The global financial crisis was predominantly a first world phenomenon. The fall out 
in  the  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  was  mostly  through  contagion.  The  level  of 
financial  sector  development,  complexity  of  financial  markets,  extent  of  deregulation  and 
global  integration,  the  degree  of  leverage  of  households  and  financial  intermediaries,  the 
nature of business model and quality of supervision determined the impact of the crisis on 
any institution or jurisdiction. The impact of the global financial crisis and consequently the 
corrective actions required in the regulatory regime vary across different countries. According 
to  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  upfront  government  support  to  the  financial  sector 
averaged  5.8  per  cent  of  GDP  in  developed  countries  and  0.3  per  cent  in  developing 
countries.  It  is  important  to  note  that  many  of  the  EMEs  had  their  own  crises  in  the  past 
requiring varying degrees of public intervention (Latin American crisis, Asian Crisis, Russian 
crisis etc.).  
2.  
While the global fora are working out regulatory reforms to ensure that similar crises 
do not recur, the members of such fora like BCBS and FSB including India have supported 
such  initiatives  as  it  is  realized  that  there  is  a  need  for  a  consistent  minimum  regulatory 
framework across countries. For example, we have realized that though all countries had a 
minimum  capital  adequacy  norm  of  8  per  cent  –  the  components  of  such  capital  were  so 
varying as to result in capital adequacy ratio ranging from 2 to 8 per cent across countries if 
the  new  proposals  are  implemented!!  India  is  at  the  top  end  of  this  range.  In  his  talk 
yesterday, the Governor has elaborated on the new regulatory paradigm under the Basel III 
initiatives. I will, therefore, not revisit these aspects, but instead focus on the challenges that 
the regulator in an emerging market economy like India faces in ensuring development of the 
financial  sector  for  facilitating  rapid  and  inclusive  growth,  while  at  the  same  time  ensuring 
soundness of financial institutions and financial stability.  
Role of financial penetration  
3.  
One of the drivers of growth in India has been the high level of savings. Savings rate 
is  32.5  per  cent  of  GDP  today  (2008–09)  compared  to  22.3  per  cent  ten  years  ago  
(1998–99). The contribution of the household sector to savings is 70.0 per cent. While the 
overall  savings  ratio  has  increased  significantly,  financial  savings  has  remained  at  around 
50 per  cent  of  household  savings.  Within  financial  savings,  share  of  bank  deposits  has 
increased from 33 per cent in 2000–01 to 55 per cent in 2008–09. In March 2004, there were 
59 savings and current accounts per 100 adult population – in March 2009, the number has 
risen to 96. The number of borrowal accounts per 100 adult population rose from 12 to 20 in 
the same period. State-wise coverage shows improvement in all States (Annex). This reflects 
the  impact  of  increasing  banking  penetration  although  there  is  a  long  way  to  go  in  many 
regions. Achieving higher rates of growth would call for higher financial savings and this in 
turn  implies  much  greater  penetration  of  banks  and  other  financial  intermediaries  like 
insurance  companies,  mutual  funds  and  pension  funds.  Achieving  higher  level  of  financial 
savings also requires a benign inflationary environment. The freeing up of branch licensing in 
Tier 3 to 6 centres and the liberalization of the Business Correspondent model are steps for 
achieving  greater  penetration.  The  linking  of  branch  licensing  in  Tier  1  and  2  centres  to 
performance of banks in opening branches/ banking presence in underbanked areas is an 
element of banking policy intended to incentivize banks to establish presence in such areas 
BIS Review 114/2010 
 1
for  facilitating  greater  financial  inclusion  and  inclusive  growth.  Distribution  of  NREGA 
payments through bank accounts with job cards serving as document of identity provides an 
enormous window of opportunity to achieve higher banking coverage. The speed with which 
UIDs are provided to residents will further facilitate such penetration as these will serve to 
meet the KYC norms for account holders with small value transactions.  
Role of Payments System  
4.  
I  believe  that  an  important  task  in  our  national  efforts  towards  achieving  inclusive 
growth  is  to  bring  a  significant  portion  of  the  payment  transactions  across  the  length  and 
breadth of the country into the formal channels. Technology adoption by the financial sector 
offers a unique opportunity in achieving this objective. The National Payments Corporation of 
India is currently engaged in a project that will roll out in a few months. This project will result 
in a beneficiary of a remittance being able to use any BC outlet anywhere, even if he/she has 
no bank account, to receive in cash a remittance up to Rs.5000 irrespective of the bank from 
where the remittance has emanated. It will also allow seamless transfers across banks using 
the  new  payment  products  driven  by  technology.  Whenever  the  issue  of  technology  led 
financial  inclusion  is  flagged,  a  debate  often  ensues  as  to  whether  the model  for  inclusive 
development should look beyond the formal banking channels insofar as it relates to money 
transfers/payments. We have studied the experience of Philippines and Kenya in this regard. 
We believe that providing payments services alone is not financial inclusion as there is need 
for  other  products  as  well.  Given  that  India  is  still  far  from  being  a  cash-less  society,  the 
cash-in/cash-out  arrangements  in  these  models  play  an  important  part  in  scaling  up.  It  is 
important to note that the high level Inter-Ministerial Group anchored by the Department of 
Information  Technology,  Government  of  India  that  went  into  the  issue,  after  extensive 
discussions on the various issues involved, has reached more or less the same conclusion 
i.e. to proceed with a bank led model. It is, therefore, essential that banks and mobile /card 
operators work together as partners in achieving the objective of a ubiquitous and efficient 
payments system.  
Savings bank interest rate – case for deregulation?  
5.  
Given  the  level  of  interest  rates  on  bank  deposits,  common  persons  are  lured  by 
higher  interest  provided  by  alternate  channels  especially  in  the  informal  markets.  The 
deregulation of savings bank interest that is currently set at 3.5 per cent by RBI is an issue 
which  is  on  our  radar.  A  Working  Group  is  being  set  up  to  debate  the  issues  and  draw 
conclusions. On one hand, the low cost savings accounts provide banks with low cost funds 
of an enduring nature which facilitate ALM and help lower lending rates. On the other hand, 
the costs not currently recovered in handling such accounts have to be considered as well. 
Totally freeing rates could, in situations where there is virtual monopoly of banking, lead to 
lowering rates in some areas while leading to increase in other areas – it would need to be 
ensured  that  there  is  no  discrimination  between  different  customers  of  the  same  bank. 
Transparency in cost recovery could facilitate deregulation – this would also need to be non-
discriminatory across locations. An important consideration should be whether deregulation 
of savings rates would draw more population into the fold of formal banking system. All these 
issues will be gone into in detail by the Working Group.  
Capital needs of banks to support inclusive growth  
6.  
A major factor that will determine banks ability to facilitate high growth will be their 
ability to garner capital. Over the last 5 years, banks have been able to increase their Tier 1 
capital by an annual average of nearly 30 per cent while their risk weighted assets increased 
over this period by more than 26 per cent, of which about one fourth has been from internal 
generation,  small  amount  from  government  and  most  of  it  from  the  capital  markets. 
2 
 BIS Review 114/2010
Assuming the same growth in risk weight assets going forward, and given the average return 
on capital for the Indian banks, raising capital from the markets may not be a problem. Given 
the requirement of Basel III to have common equity as the dominant part of Tier I capital, and 
Tier I to be the major part of regulatory capital, and given that Indian banks are already well 
placed in this respect, it would be advisable to retain the advantage even though the new 
norms will kick in only in a phased manner.  
Forward looking provisioning  
7.  
In a growing economy facing global and domestic shocks, it is likely that NPAs will 
increase  and  the  NPA  ratio  could  go  up  and  down.  The  issue,  however,  is  whether  the 
margins on earning assets are sufficient to make adequate provisions for expected losses, 
apart from generating internal accruals to support growth in the risk weighted assets. In this 
context,  making  forward  looking  provisions  as  is  being  considered  at  the  Basel  level  is 
extremely important for a country like India. While we have asked banks to achieve at least a 
PCR  of  70  per  cent  for  NPAs,  we  are  also  working  on  a  scheme  based  on  the  Spanish 
dynamic  provisioning  model  for  evolving  norms  for  provisioning  for  standard  assets  in 
different  sectors  based  on  time  series  and  cross  sectional  data.  Such  provisions  envisage 
setting  aside  profits  in  good  times  which  can  be  used  in  down  turn  and  provide  greater 
comfort from financial stability perspective when the economy is pushing forward for higher 
growth.  
Lending to Infrastructure  
8.  
Aspiration  for  higher  growth  implies  much  more  investment  in  infrastructure. 
Needless  to  say,  the  headroom  available  in  government  finances  either  at  the  State  or 
Central level for funding or for guarantees (explicit or implicit) is limited. This calls for funding 
from both financial institutions and capital markets, both domestic and external. The single 
borrower and group borrower exposure limits of banks have already been relaxed to allow for 
more funding for infrastructure by Indian banks. Taking into account the concentration risk 
and  asset-liability  mismatches,  any  further  relaxation  would  be  imprudent.  From  regulatory 
point of view, interest rate derivatives – both OTC and exchange traded – have been allowed 
and these provide the opportunity to hedge the interest rate risk. Liquidity requirements on a 
broad  SLR  basis  as  also  on  a  more  granular  basis  are  in  place  and  banks’  positions  are 
constantly  monitored  to  ensure  that  mismatches  are  controlled.  To  provide  liquidity  to 
corporate  bonds,  repos  have  been  allowed.  The  final  guidelines  on  single  name  Credit 
Default  Swap,  once  issued  will  facilitate  dispersal  of  risk  and  help  mitigate  the  exposure 
related problem to a large extent. Securitization can contribute significantly to redistribute the 
credit risk across a wide range of investors outside the banking system thereby freeing the 
credit lines of larger borrowers with the banks. However, securitization should develop in an 
orderly manner without creating systemic risk. The revised securitization guidelines including 
introduction  of  minimum  retention  requirement  and  minimum  holding  period  with  a  view  to 
aligning the interest of the originator and the investor are almost ready as also the guidelines 
on capital treatment in case of take-out facility. The overarching principle that we follow in 
tweaking these regulations is to see that the needs of the growing economy are met by the 
financial  system,  while  taking  care  that  prudential  principles  are  not  compromised,  nor  is 
financial  stability  threatened.  We  study  the  global  practices  and  modify  them  to  meet  our 
unique requirements and this has been the hallmark of the Indian regulatory approach. I can 
assure  you  that  no  other  sector  has  posed  as  much  challenge  for  the  regulators  as  the 
infrastructure sector.  
Given its unique position, India Infrastructure Finance Company Ltd. (IIFCL) as a specialized 
government  owned  institution  for  infrastructure  funding  is  well  placed  to  leverage  its 
parentage and capital in offering more credit enhancement products and risk mitigants which 
will help investors such as banks, insurance and pension funds in managing their credit and 
BIS Review 114/2010 
 3
market risks risk. The real issue remains of incentivising long term savers through insurance 
and pension schemes with a view to increasing the pool of long term savings in the system 
for funding infrastructure.  
Para banking activities  
9.  
Of late, banks are also getting involved in investing in or setting up infrastructure 
funds or venture capital funds or even in private equity funds. Where such investments 
(including  the  leverage)  is  below  a  threshold  and  do  not  constitute  a  significant  share 
(less  than  20  per  cent  of  the  fund)  or  where  the  bank  has  not  lent  its  name  or  is  not 
involved in the management, no specific regulatory requirement is being envisaged other 
than  such  investment  remaining  within  the  overall  capital  market  exposure  limit  and 
maintenance  of  appropriate  capital.  However,  where  a  bank  lends  it  name  directly  or 
indirectly  or  floats  /  manages  large  private  pools  of  capital,  there  is  a  need  to  have 
additional capital requirements to take care of reputation, concentration and other risks 
not  captured  in  the  traditional  framework.  This  is  the  reason  why  we  are  looking  at 
bringing out guidance on banks managing large private pools of capital.  
Derivatives – risks in leveraged and complex structures  
10.   One of the important needs of a growing and increasingly globalizing economy is for 
businesses to be able to focus on their main business and have efficient ways of hedging 
forex  and  interest  rate  risks.  Over  more  than  a  decade,  new  products  in  the  derivatives 
market  have  been  gradually  introduced,  to  begin  with  mostly  in  OTC  markets  and  more 
recently  on  the  exchanges.  While  many  corporates  and  businesses  have  used  these 
products for hedging, the aggressive marketing of these, especially leveraged products, and 
their use by businesses to ostensibly lower the cost of funding or cost of hedging have led to 
grief to many – banks and businesses alike. The lessons from this experience underline the 
need for both banks and customers to understand such products and the associated risks 
especially in those with leveraged and complex structures, having proper risk management 
policies, accounting standards and disclosures with adequate guidance to users and auditors 
alike for appropriate valuation and MTM practices.  
Lending to the millions  
11.  
A  major  challenge  of  the  next  decade  is  going  to  be  financing  the  millions  in  the 
unorganized  sector,  self-employed  in  the  micro  and  small  business  sector,  the  small  and 
marginal  farmers  as  also  oral  share-croppers  in  the  agricultural  sector;  other  challenges 
include financing affordable housing and education needs of low income households. These 
households  and  businesses  do  not  maintain  proper  books  of  account,  have  irregular  cash 
flows and hardly any documents of property or other collateral. Drawing these households 
into the formal banking system through opening of bank accounts is only one and albeit a 
very first step. The number of borrowers who had borrowed Rs.25,000 and below from the 
banking  system  rose  from  36.8  million  2004  to  39.2  million  in  2009  –  an  increase  of  just 
2.4 million  over  five  years.  The  number  of  borrowers  who  borrowed  less  than  Rs.2,00,000 
increased from 61.9 million in 2004 to 95.8 million in 2009 – although there is an increase of 
nearly 34 million, a vast majority of the population still remain unserved. If the coverage of 
those borrowing less than Rs.2,00,000 has to increase to at least 50 per cent of the adult 
population  in  the  next  three  years,  the  number  of  borrowal  accounts  will  have  to  increase 
annually by at least 41.3 per cent. How are banks going to deal with this scale? Standard 
products like GCC / ODs against savings products at affordable rates will have to be offered 
based on the track record in savings and recovery, as there is no likelihood of offer of any 
security.  Risk  mitigant  products  will  need  to  be  offered  by  the  development  financial 
institutions. Already, SIDBI offers today a credit guarantee product for loans to MSE where 
4 
 BIS Review 114/2010
there is no collateral – the scheme has recently been made more user-friendly. Similar credit 
risk mitigation products will need to be evolved by NABARD for small farmers, who cannot 
offer any document of proof of possession of land farmed by them, as also for the landless 
engaged  in  non  farm  and  allied  activities.  Suitable  credit  guarantees  are  also  required  for 
loans  affected  by  widespread  distress  in  the  event  of  successive  and  repeated  natural 
calamities. NHB will need to evolve similar products for minimizing documentation risk, credit 
risk  and  other  risks  involved  in  financing  low  income  housing.  Enhanced  and  well 
documented  property  rights  would  also  improve  the  collateral  that  households  and  small 
businesses  can  offer  to  lenders  that  could  lead  to  reduction  in  the  pricing  of  such  loans. 
Finally,  banks  will  have  to  partner  with  non-banking  financial  companies,  microfinance 
institutions  and  financial  cooperatives  to  increase  outreach  as  the  latter  have  been  quite 
innovative addressing the last mile issue. In doing so, banks’ attention will have to shift to 
oversight of such portfolios – assigned or securitized – to ensure asset quality, reasonable 
rates of interest and fair treatment to ultimate borrowers.  
Risk measurement for SMEs  
12.  
In applying a uniform set of regulatory norms across sectors, it is possible that the 
nature of risk is not properly differentiated or there is a tendency for regulating the mean. It is 
necessary that the specific nature of certain sectors be kept in focus. First, in retail lending 
the  activity  specific  cash  flow  patterns  and  portfolio  level  risk  profile  will  need  to  be 
recognized. The concept of retail lending was brought into Basel II with a specific focus on 
SMEs.  The  diversification  benefit  resulting  in  lowering  of  risk  was  recognized;  under 
advanced approaches, models that factor in default behavior over business cycles provide a 
more realistic measure of risk. The challenge lies in enhancing capabilities amongst banks 
and  supervisors  to  move  to  advanced  approaches  where  the  credit  risk  in  development 
finance can be properly captured. Second, the ratings based approach for risk weighting may 
need  a  relook.  SMEs  that  do  not  qualify  as  retail  credit  are  subject  to  an  external  rating 
based risk weight under the standardized approach. EMEs face significant challenges in this 
regard. First, the rating agencies in these countries may not have adequate credit history to 
model the default rate. Second, the volumes are huge and difficult to cope with. Third, the 
ratings could increase the cost of credit. Fourth, even with a good rating the availability and 
pricing  of  credit  depends  on  other  factors.  Finally,  the  SME  borrowers  may  not  able  to 
present well audited accounts and facts about markets and business dynamics that can be 
relied upon by credit rating agencies. As already indicated above, credit guarantee under the 
SIDBI  scheme  takes  care  of  borrowers  that  have  no  collateral  to  offer.  For  other  SME 
borrowers credit enhancement schemes would be useful in enhancing flow of credit to this 
critical segment of the economy.  
Role of credit information agencies  
13.  
The  role  of  credit  information  companies  in  this  context  is  worth  mentioning. 
Ensuring  a  healthy  credit  culture  requires  building  up  comprehensive  and  accurate  credit 
records that can provide information to prospective lenders/ creditors. It can also help build 
up  risk  profile  in  different  sectors  and  regions  and  other  granulated  data  that  can  assist 
lending institutions in meeting the challenges of dealing with large numbers. This, however, 
needs  the  full  cooperation  of  credit  providers  in  populating  such  data  bases  quickly  and 
accurately. It is hoped that the four credit information companies recently licensed will fulfill 
the role expected of them.  
Multiple borrowing and end use issues  
14.  
While  the  needs  of  growing  economies  are  manifold,  currently,  it  is  observed  that 
sources of funding of business from non-banks have been equal to, if not more than, from 
BIS Review 114/2010 
 5
banks.  Multiple  borrowing,  competitive  pressures  and  so called  balance  sheet  funding  has 
further aggravated the problem of ensuring end use. Excess borrowing beyond the needs of 
production and investment can lead to potential bubbles and possible deterioration in credit 
quality. The role of credit rating agencies in this regard is critical as they provide the link to 
capital  market  funding  as  also  play  a  role  in  the  capital  requirement  under  standardized 
approach  for  non-retail  borrowers.  While  banks  should  be  moving  towards  advanced 
approaches with less reliance on rating agencies, the rating agencies in turn have to take a 
holistic  approach  while  awarding  ratings  having  regard  to  end  use,  asset  bubbles  and 
financial stability. The system of exchange of information that has been put in place by RBI 
should  be  made  use  of  effectively  by  banks.  Also  when  borrowers  with  multiple  banking 
arrangements  start  showing  signs  of  stress,  banks  should  come  together  and  look  at  the 
holistic viability of the entity rather than adopt ad hoc “go it alone” solutions – this will avert 
larger sacrifices at later stage.  
Conclusion  
15.  
The magnitude of the global financial crisis and consequent corrective actions have 
necessitated  changes  in  the  regulatory  regime.  The  changes  however,  may  vary  across 
different  countries  depending  upon  the  nature  and  level  of  sophistication  of  the  respective 
financial markets. The new global standards are expected to enhance the resilience of the 
banking sector as a whole, while promoting financial stability in both developed and EMEs. 
However, in EMEs such as India, the challenges of rapid and inclusive growth require the 
regulator  to  focus  on  facilitating  financial  sector  development  that  is  conducive  to  such 
growth while not compromising on prudential principles and financial stability. This has also 
implied evolving the regulatory framework to meet the needs of the productive sectors and in 
particular, paying specific attention to key areas such as infrastructure financing, agriculture, 
MSE, education and low income housing.  
Thank you. 
 
6 
 BIS Review 114/2010
 BIS Review 114/2010 
  7
 8 
  BIS Review 114/2010
