Duvvuri Subbarao: Financial crises and the impact of the latest one on 
India 
Welcome remarks by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Fourteenth C D Deshmukh Memorial Lecture, Mumbai, 15 February 2010. 
 1.  On behalf of Reserve Bank of India, I have great pleasure in welcoming Lord Turner, 
Chairman  of  the  Financial  Services  Authority  of  the  UK,  who  will  shortly  be  delivering  the 
C.D. Deshmukh Memorial Lecture. I also want to specially acknowledge the family members 
of late Sir C.D. Deshmukh – Smt. and Shri Atul Deshmukh, Shri Ashish Deshmukh and Smt. 
and Shri Chitnis – who are here with us today. Thank you very much to all of you for rejoining 
the RBI family today. And, of course, a hearty welcome to all our invitees. 
2. 
Sir Chintaman D. Deshmukh has a special place in the history of the Reserve Bank of 
India. He was the first Indian Governor of the Reserve Bank, and served here from August 
1943 to June 1949. He presided over the transformation of the Reserve Bank from a private 
shareholders’  bank  to  a  nationalised  institution  and  was  the  intellectual  force  behind  the 
enactment  of  a  comprehensive  legislation  for  the  regulation  of  banking  companies. 
Shri Deshmukh participated actively in the establishment of the Bretton Woods institutions in 
1945  and  played  a  critical  role  in  managing  the  nascent  economy  as  we  confronted  the 
challenges of war financing following the Second World War. After leaving the Reserve Bank, 
Shri Deshmukh went on to become the Finance Minister of India, a career graph repeated by 
our  current  Prime  Minister,  Dr.  Manmohan  Singh  nearly  forty  years  later.  Shri  Deshmukh 
brought  to  the  office  of  the  Finance  Minister  a  passion  for  newly  independent  India’s 
development and a humane and inclusive vision for nation building.  
3. 
The Reserve Bank instituted the C.D. Deshmukh Memorial Lecture in 1984 to honour 
the memory of this illustrious Governor of the Bank and a great citizen of India. This year’s 
lecture,  to  be  delivered  by  Lord  Turner,  is  of  special  significance  as  it  forms  part  of  our 
Platinum Jubilee celebrations. 
4. 
Lord Turner, who has been Chairman of FSA since September 2008, is a familiar, and 
also  a  famous,  name  in  financial  circles.  He  has  had  a  multi-faceted  career  background 
straddling business, public policy and academia. He became a cross-bench member of the 
House of Lords in 2005, and has been the Chairman of the Climate Change Committee since 
January 2008. He is a Visiting Professor at the London School of Economics and the Cass 
Business School of the City University. Prior to that, he held prominent positions, such as the 
Chairman  of  the  Pensions  Commission  and  the  Low  Pay  Commission.  Outside  of  the 
Government, Lord Turner was associated with the Standard Chartered Bank, Merrill Lynch 
Europe, Confederation of British Industry, and McKinsey and Company. Lord Turner’s 2001 
book – “Just Capital – The Liberal Economy” has been acclaimed for its insights and lateral 
thinking. 
5. 
There  is  a  deluge  of  analysis  and  writing  on  what  caused  the  crisis  and  on  how  to 
prevent a recurrence. It is not possible for anyone to keep track of all that. But if you want 
one  source  from  which  you  can  get  the  diagnosis  and  prescription  for  regulatory  reforms 
following the crisis, I suggest you read the Turner Review conducted under the intellectual 
leadership  of  Lord  Turner.  Spread  over  four  chapters,  the  Review  describes  what  went 
wrong, and the extent to which the crisis challenges past intellectual assumptions about the 
self-correcting nature of financial markets. The Review sets out the actions required to create 
an  effective  banking  system,  better  able  to  serve  the  needs  of  the  businesses  and 
households and less likely to be susceptible to financial instability. 
BIS Review 17/2010 
 1
I want to spend a couple of minutes giving Lord Turner a brief synopsis of the crisis and 
6. 
the aftermath in India. 
7. 
The  crisis  that  erupted  with  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008 
spread rapidly thereafter – sector by sector and economy by economy. Almost every country 
in the world has been impacted, although to a different extent. India was no exception. 
8. 
Largely  driven  by  the  then  intellectually  fashionable  decoupling  theory,  there  was 
dismay in India that we were hit by the crisis. This dismay arose from two factors. First, there 
was  surprise  that  we  were  hit  by  a  crisis  with  origins  in  the  banking  system  even  as  our 
banks,  and  indeed  our  entire  financial  system,  had  minimal  exposure  to  tainted  assets. 
Second, there was also concern that we were hit by global recession even though our export 
sector, at 15% of GDP, was relatively small.  
9. 
The answer to both these points is that India was hit by the crisis because we are more 
globally integrated than we tend to acknowledge. We were impacted through all channels – 
the  financial  channel,  the  real  sector  channel  and  the  confidence  channel.  The  impact  of 
crisis  on  India  was,  however,  relatively  muted.  India’s  financial  sector  remained  safe  and 
sound,  and  our  financial  markets  continued  to  function  normally  highlighting  the  stability 
enhancing features of our policy and regulatory framework.  
10.  Just to highlight a few features of our approach to safeguarding financial stability. On 
financial globalization, our stance has been gradualist. We view capital account liberalisation 
as a process and not an event. The extent of opening is contingent upon progress in other 
sectors.  Our  policy  framework  encourages  equity  flows,  especially  direct  investment  flows. 
But debt flows are subject to restrictions, and these are reviewed and fine-tuned periodically. 
The exchange rate is largely market-determined and we intervene in the foreign exchange 
market in times of excessive volatility. Our approach to financial sector regulation has been 
informed by the fact that our system is dominated by commercial banks. Thus, as early as 
mid-1990s,  the  Reserve  Bank  instituted  the  prudential  framework  governing  banks, 
especially commercial banks, as a part of the overall structural reforms. As of April 2009, all 
our commercial banks are Basel II compliant. 
11.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  been  proactive  in  adopting  a  counter-cyclical  approach  to 
financial  regulations.  Notably,  in  the  years  before  the  crisis,  we  increased  the  risk weights 
and  provisioning  norms  on  a  selective  basis.  The  intent  was  to  limit  the  exposure  of  the 
banking system to sensitive sectors of the economy posting high credit growth and thereby 
prevent  mispricing  of  risk.  Again,  in  another  counter  cyclical  measure,  as  part  of  crisis 
management,  we  reversed  the  earlier  tightening  and  normalized  the  risk  weights  and 
provisioning norms to facilitate credit flow to these sectors. 
12. 
India’s  banking  system  has  remained  remarkably  well  capitalized  with  capital  to  risk 
weighted asset ratio (CRAR) much above the minimum prescribed under Basel II. The asset 
quality post-crisis also remained sound though there has been a slight deterioration in recent 
months. In recognition of the fact that banks should build up provisioning and capital buffers 
in good times which can be used for absorbing losses in a downturn, recently, banks have 
been advised to ensure that the provisioning coverage ratio, i.e., the ratio of provisioning to 
gross NPA, is not less than 70 per cent. In view of the heightened concerns with regard to 
financial stability during the recent years, the Reserve Bank is retooling itself to safeguard 
financial stability. We have also set up a Financial Stability Unit which will make regular and 
systematic assessment of the stability of the Indian financial system.  
13.  Lord Turner will be speaking to us today on “After the crises: Assessing the costs and 
Benefits of Financial Liberalization”, a topic of great obvious relevance.  
14.  A study of financial crises shows that almost every crisis is preceded by, if I may use 
what is by now a cliché, “irrational exuberance” of the financial sector with the growth of the 
financial sector outstripping the growth of the real sector engendering a belief, bordering on 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2010
hubris,  that  real  value  can  be  created  by  sheer  financial  engineering.  Take  this  crisis  for 
example. 
15. 
In  the  world  that  existed  before  the  crisis  –  a  benign  global  environment  of  easy 
liquidity, stable growth and low inflation – profits kept coming, and everyone got lulled into a 
false sense of security in the firm belief that profits will keep rolling in forever. Herb Stein, an 
economist, pointed out the truism that, “if something cannot go on for ever, it will eventually 
stop.” But no one paid attention. The magic of the financial sector gave it such a larger than 
life profile that we began to believe that for every real life problem, no matter how complex, 
there  is  a  financial  sector  solution.  Now,  of  course,  we  know  better  –  for  every  real  life 
problem, no matter how complex, there is a financial sector solution, which is wrong. 
16.  Take the case of the United States. Over the last 50 years, the share of value added 
from manufacturing in GDP shrank by more than half from 25 per cent to 11 per cent while 
the share of financial sector more than doubled from 3.6 per cent to 7.5 per cent. The job 
share of the manufacturing sector declined by more than half from 29 per cent to 11 per cent 
while  the  job  share  of  the  financial  sector  increased  by  over  a  third  from  3.5  per  cent  to 
4.6 per cent. The same trend is reflected in profits too. Over the last 50 years, the share of 
manufacturing sector profits in total profits declined by  more than half from 49 per cent to 
21 per cent while the share of profits of the financial sector increased by more than half from 
17 per cent to 27 per cent. Clearly, the excessive risk-taking behaviour of the financial sector 
raised  the  value-added of  the sector  beyond  a sustainable level  making  the  melt down,  in 
retrospect, inevitable.  
17.  Forgotten in the euphoria of financial alchemy is the basic tenet that the financial sector 
has no standing of its own; it derives its strength and resilience from the real economy. It is 
the real sector that should drive the financial sector, not the other way round.  
18.  Financial crises are not uncommon. Then how come we don’t learn? I can do no better 
than quote Reinhart and Rogoff. In their recent seminal book – This Time is Different: Eight 
centuries of Financial Folly, they say, [I quote]: 
“Finance professionals and, all too often, government leaders explain that we are 
doing things better than before, we are smarter, and we have learned from past 
mistakes.  Each  time,  society  convinces  itself  that  the  current  boom,  unlike  the 
many booms that preceded catastrophic collapses in the past, is built on sound 
fundamentals,  structural  reforms,  technological  innovation,  and  good  policy”. 
[unquote] 
It is important therefore to take a balanced view. Who better then than a person with 
19.  Having said that, we must remember that not all financial liberalization is bad; the world 
has benefitted from financial innovation and liberalization. True, the damage inflicted by the 
crisis has been colossal, but the world enjoyed the benefits of the Great Moderation – over 
15 years of unprecedented growth, price stability and low unemployment.  
20. 
the scholarship and stature of Lord Turner to approach that balanced view. 
21.  Lord Turner incidentally is the second Chairman of FSA to deliver the C.D. Deshmukh 
Memorial Lecture. Mr. Howard Davies, the then Chairman of FSA, had delivered the tenth 
C.D. Deshmukh Memorial Lecture in February 2000 on the subject of “International Financial 
Regulation: The Quiet Revolution”. In his concluding statement, Mr. Davies had said, “I wish 
you  a  volatile,  but  not  too  volatile,  future”.  In  many  ways,  Mr.  Davies  prediction has  come 
true. We had our share of volatility, and I believe it has been good for us, giving us as it did, 
an opportunity for us to work on Schumpeterian “creative destruction”.  
22.  Lord Turner has two important responsibilities. Apart from being the Chairman of FSA, 
he is also the Chairman of the Committee on Climate Change (CCC). I believe that is a fair 
balance.  As  Chairman  of  FSA,  his  job  is  to  save  capitalism  from  well,  the  onslaught  of 
capitalists.  As  Chairman  of  CCC,  his  job  is  to  save  the  planet  from  the  onslaught  of 
BIS Review 17/2010 
 3
capitalism. In short, Lord Turner handles recessions with one hand and emissions with the 
other. 
23.  Lord Turner, once again, I want to say, we are delighted that you have accepted our 
invitation.  I  now  have  great  pleasure  in  inviting  you  to  deliver  the  14th  C.  D.  Deshmukh 
lecture.  
4 
 BIS Review 17/2010
