Philip Lowe: Some challenges for the future 
Speech  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Assistant  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  at  the 
Urban Development Institute of Australia (UDIA) 2010 National Congress, Sydney, 10 March 
2010. 
 As is now well known, the Australian economy has come through the worst global downturn 
since  at  least  World  War  II  better  than  expected,  and  in  sounder  shape  than  most  other 
advanced economies. As a result, many of the economic challenges that we are likely to face 
over  the  next  few  years  look  to  be  quite  different  from  those  facing  most  of  the  other 
advanced economies. 
This  morning,  I  would  first  like  to  talk  about  how  we  found  ourselves  in  this  relatively 
favourable position, and in particular about the importance of flexibility. I would then like to 
touch on three of the broad challenges that are likely to lie ahead. The first of these is the 
need  to  expand  the  supply  side  of  the  economy.  The  second  is  the  need  to  increase  the 
supply of housing for a growing population. And the third is the need to ensure that inflation 
remains low and stable.  
factors 
that  have  contributed 
The importance of flexibility 
Before I look to the future though, it is useful to understand how we got to where we are now. 
The  various 
to  Australia’s  relatively  good  economic 
performance are now well understood. They include: the substantial and early easing of both 
monetary  and  fiscal  policy;  the  healthy  state  of  our  banking  system;  the  rapid  rebound  in 
Asia,  and  in  particular  China;  the  depreciation  of  the  Australian  dollar  in  2008;  and  the 
relatively high rate of population growth. 
Collectively,  these  factors  helped  us  get  through  an  extremely  difficult  period  in  the  world 
economy. We should not lose sight, though, of the fact that they didn’t insulate us completely 
from  the  global  recession;  the  clearest  example  of  this  is  the  fall  in  GDP  of  almost  a  full 
percentage point in the final quarter of 2008. But overall, it is fair to say that we have come 
through this downturn in much better shape than was widely expected. The latest evidence 
of  this  was  in  the  GDP  figures  last  week,  which  showed  that  the  economy  expanded  by 
2¾ per cent over 2009.  
There are various lessons that one can draw from the experience of the past 18 months, but 
the  one  that  I  want  to  highlight  today  is  the  importance  of  flexibility.  Here,  there  are  two 
aspects  that  are  important:  the  first  is  the  general  flexibility  of  the  economy  to  adjust  to 
changes in the external environment; and the second is the flexibility that economic policy 
had  to  respond  to  changes  in  this  environment.  Without  both  of  these  aspects,  the  recent 
economic history of Australia would have been quite different. 
This  flexibility,  though,  did  not  just  materialise  out  of  thin  air.  Instead,  it  was  the  result  of 
many  years  of  policy  reform  and  hard  work  by  governments  and  business.  What we  have 
seen recently is the dividend of that hard work, with the economic outcomes over the past 
year or so reflecting not just the decisions made since late 2008, but also the decisions made 
in the two to three decades before that.  
I would like to touch on a few aspects of this flexibility.  
The first is the flexibility of the exchange rate. 
This  has  been  one  of  the  great  success  stories  of  economic  policy  making  in  Australia. 
Without it, we would have seen bigger booms and busts and more variable and, probably, 
BIS Review 27/2010 
 1
higher  inflation.  As  Ric  Battellino,  the  RBA’s  Deputy  Governor,  discussed  in  a  speech  a 
couple  of  weeks  ago,  the  floating  exchange  rate  has  helped  the  economy  adjust  more 
smoothly  to  the  current  boom  in  the  resources  sector  than  was  the  case  in  previous 
resources booms, which always ended in high inflation. It also helped the economy in 2008 
when global risk aversion was at its peak, and during both the Asian financial crisis in the mid 
to late 1990s and the bursting of the tech bubble in the United States a decade ago. 
The second area is labour market flexibility. 
Over  the  past  year,  the  unemployment  rate  rose  by  considerably  less  than  was  expected. 
While this was partly the result of the surprising strength in the economy, it also highlighted 
the increased flexibility of the labour market. When demand weakened, many firms and their 
employees agreed to reduce working hours as a way of preserving jobs. And in other cases, 
wage rises were reduced or delayed as a way of avoiding lay offs. These responses helped 
limit the rise in the unemployment rate. In turn, this helped support incomes and the general 
level of confidence in the community, and ultimately the level of economic activity.  
The third area is the flexibility in macroeconomic policy.  
When the world economy took a sharp turn for the worse, fiscal policy in Australia responded 
quickly and on a significant scale. It was able to do this without raising the fiscal sustainability 
concerns that have come to the fore in a number of other countries. While there will always 
be differences of opinion about the merits of specific measures, there is little disagreement 
with the idea that Australia’s history of sound fiscal policy provided the government with the 
scope to act quickly, and on a significant scale, when the outlook deteriorated. One of the 
obvious benefits of keeping your house in order over a long period of time is that you can 
more easily respond to changing circumstances if you judge that to be the correct thing to do. 
Right now, there are a number of other countries that would clearly value that flexibility, but 
that do not have it because of decisions on fiscal policy running back over the past couple of 
decades. 
Monetary policy was also able to respond rapidly when the outlook turned for the worse, with 
the  cash  rate  being  reduced  by  4¼  percentage  points  over  a  seven  month  period. 
Importantly,  we  were  able  to  do  this  without  causing  inflation  expectations  and  long-term 
interest  rates  to  rise.  The  main  reason  for  this  is  that  the  monetary  policy  framework  in 
Australia is seen as credible in ensuring that the inflation rate averages between 2 and 3 per 
cent over time. But again, the credibility of the framework did not rise out of thin air. Instead, 
it is the result of nearly two decades of having delivered low and stable inflation. 
So in each of these areas – the exchange rate, the labour market, fiscal policy and monetary 
policy – the decisions that were made over a long period of time helped us get through the 
global downturn. Looking forward, it is important that we do not lose sight of this. 
As the Bank has set out a number of times recently, our central scenario for the Australian 
economy is a reasonably favourable one. In this central scenario, we are likely to face a two-
speed global economy for some time. While most of the advanced economies are expected 
to experience only a subdued recovery, weighed down by balance-sheet problems, Asia is 
expected to grow solidly, with domestic demand in the region playing a greater role than in 
the past. If this is indeed how things play out, Australia should be well placed, particularly 
given its strong trade links with Asia and the generally bright outlook for the resources sector.  
But it is important to remember that this is only the central scenario. As we know, the global 
economy has a habit of throwing us surprises and there are clearly risks in both directions. 
Over  recent  months,  the  economic  data  for  a  number  of  countries  have  been  better  than 
expected and it is possible that this could continue. On the other hand, it is also possible that 
financial  events  in  the  advanced  economies  could  again  derail  the  global  economy,  and 
growth in Asia could disappoint.  
2 
 BIS Review 27/2010
We clearly cannot control global outcomes, but what we can do is preserve the flexibility that 
the economy has, and enhance that flexibility wherever we can. Ultimately, this is the best 
insurance that we can take out against the uncertain world in which we live. 
I would now like to turn to the three issues that I mentioned at the start: expanding the supply 
side of the economy, housing, and inflation. In each of these areas, the situation in Australia 
is different from that in most of the other developed economies.  
Expanding the supply side 
Australia  starts  the  current  expansion  with  considerably  less  spare  capacity  than  earlier 
thought likely, and with less than at the starting points of previous expansions. This is clear 
from  surveys  of  capacity  utilisation  by  businesses.  It  is  also  clear  from  the  labour  market 
data,  with  the  unemployment  rate  peaking  at  around  5¾  per  cent,  which  was  around  the 
trough in the previous two cycles (Graph 1). 
 These  outcomes  put  Australia  in  quite  a  different  spot  from  that  of  most  other  advanced 
economies. In both the United States and Europe the unemployment rate is around 10 per 
cent,  and  both  economies  are  estimated  to  be  operating  at  around  5  per  cent  below  their 
potential. 
The  issues  we  face  are  therefore  quite  different  from  those  confronting  most  of  the  other 
advanced  economies.  Elsewhere,  the  challenge  is  to  get  private  demand  to  grow  on  a 
sustainable  basis  so  that  it  can  catch  up  with  the  supply  potential  of  the  economy.  In 
contrast,  for  Australia,  the  main  task  is  to  expand  the  supply  side  of  the  economy  so  that 
demand  can  grow  solidly  without  causing  inflation  to  rise.  This  is  unambiguously  a  better 
position to be in, but it does pose some challenges.  
The  obvious  keys  to  improving  the  supply  side  of  the  economy  are  investment  and 
productivity growth. 
In terms of investment we are doing well, with Australia having become a high investment 
country over recent times. Currently, business investment is equivalent to around 16 per cent 
of GDP – not far below its peak level in the past four decades – and is expected to rise a little 
further over the next couple of years (Graph 2). Investment in the resources sector has been 
particularly strong, and this is now starting to bear fruit, with resource exports rising recently 
following a number of years where there was little growth (Graph 3). Over the years ahead, 
further significant increases in resource exports are expected. 
BIS Review 27/2010 
 3
  The high overall rate of investment means that the capital stock is increasing at a faster pace 
than over recent decades, and this should underpin continued growth in the supply potential 
of the Australian economy. In contrast, in a number of other advanced economies, including 
the United States, there is currently little net growth in the capital stock, with the investment 
that is taking place barely enough to offset depreciation. The fact that investment is high in 
Australia  reflects  the  high  expected  return  on  capital,  particularly  in  the  resources  sector. 
Given that countries with relatively high returns on capital typically have relatively high real 
interest rates, it should not be surprising that interest rates in Australia are above those in 
other countries where the return on capital is currently much lower. 
In  terms  of  productivity,  the  story  is  not  as  positive,  although,  as  always,  measurement 
issues cloud the picture. According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) data, since 
the mid 2000s, almost all the increase in output in Australia has been accounted for by a rise 
in hours worked and an increase in the capital stock. Or put another way, there has been 
very little underlying productivity growth over this period (Graph 4). 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2010
 The  reasons  for  this  are  not  particularly  clear.  Some  slowing  in  productivity  growth  might 
have  been  expected  in  the  mature  stage  of  the  business  cycle,  as  the  economy  was 
operating  against  its  capacity  limits  and  skill  shortages  emerged.  A  second  possibility, 
relating to the mining sector, is that high commodity prices allowed lower grade resources to 
be  mined.  The  lag  between  the  construction  and  production  phases  of  large  resource 
projects may also have lowered measured productivity growth, at least until these projects 
come on line. 
More  generally  though,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  one  of  the  least  productive  things 
that a society can do is to leave large numbers of people sitting at home who actually want to 
work. From this perspective, the productivity performance over the past decade looks to be 
quite a lot better. The Australian economy has done well at bringing in to paid employment 
those who actually want to work and the unemployment rate has fallen significantly. While 
one  side  effect  of  this  may  have  been  to  contain  productivity  growth  as  conventionally 
measured, from a broader perspective it represents a considerable success. 
As we go forward, if we are to grow strongly on a sustainable basis we will need to ensure 
that both our capital and our workforce are used as efficiently as possible. Returning to my 
earlier  theme,  maintaining  flexibility  in  the  economy  is  important  here.  Under  the  central 
scenario  that  I  sketched  earlier,  the  economy  is  likely  to  undergo  considerable  structural 
change, particularly as the resources sector expands. How well we deal with this change will 
have a significant impact on how the overall economy performs. 
Housing 
Now to the second issue, that of housing. 
Here again Australia finds itself in quite a different position from that of many of the other 
advanced economies, both in terms of the construction cycle and prices.  
One challenge we face is to satisfy the increase in the demand for housing from a growing 
population, particularly given that we start the current upswing in the economy with a tight 
housing  market.  Unlike a  number  of  other  countries  –  most  notably  the  United  States  and 
Spain – Australia did not have an unsustainable surge in dwelling investment in the middle 
years  of  the  2000s  that  resulted  in  over-supply  of  housing  (Graph  5).  Indeed,  over  recent 
years,  the  rate  of  increase  in the  number  of  dwellings  has  been  below  the  average  of  the 
past 50 years (Graph 6). In contrast, the rate of increase in the population has been around 
the fastest in 50 years.  
BIS Review 27/2010 
 5
  Consistent  with  this,  rental  vacancy  rates  in  Australia  are  low  by  historical  standards, 
although they have increased a little over the past year. There has also been a reversal of 
the decades-long trend of fewer people living in each dwelling. While demographic factors 
have been important here, including a rise in the birth rate and the increase in the number of 
students undertaking post-secondary education, the increase in the cost of housing has also 
played a role. With population growth above average, and growth in the housing stock below 
average, it is not surprising that there has been upward pressure on housing costs as part of 
the process of balancing supply and demand, with the higher housing costs leading to people 
economising  on  housing  services.  Obvious  examples  of  this  are  the  trend  towards  young 
adults  staying  in  the  parental  home  longer,  and  a  rise  in  the  number  of  people  sharing 
accommodation. 
Interestingly, the relatively slow growth in the number of dwellings does not reflect historically 
low levels of dwelling investment. In fact, the share of GDP devoted to the construction of 
6 
 BIS Review 27/2010
dwellings  over  recent  years  is  above  the  average  of  the  past  five  decades  (Graph  7). 
However,  within  total  dwelling  investment,  renovation  activity  now  accounts  for  a  higher 
share than was the case historically, and the average size and quality of new dwellings has 
also  increased  substantially.  The  result  of  these  developments  is  that for  a  given share  of 
GDP devoted to housing investment, there is a smaller increase in the number of dwellings 
than was the case previously. In a sense, as a society there has been a trade-off between 
quality  and  quantity;  in  particular,  we  have  implicitly  chosen  to  build  bigger  and  better-
appointed dwellings, rather than more dwellings. 
 Looking forward, if population growth were to remain strong for an extended period, and we 
do not change the mix of housing that is being constructed, it is likely that we will need to 
devote a higher share of GDP to housing than has been the case historically. If this does not 
happen, further adjustment in housing prices and rents is likely to occur to balance supply 
and demand. 
This raises two important issues that we need to think about. The first is the constraints that 
exist  on  increasing  the  supply  of  dwellings.  If  we  are  to  build  more  dwellings,  we  need  to 
ensure that planning guidelines and infrastructure provision can accommodate this. This will 
pose  challenges  for  all  levels  of  government.  And  the  second  issue  is  the  capacity  of  the 
economy  to  deal  with  an  increase  in  dwelling  construction  at  a  time  when  investment 
elsewhere  in  the  economy  is  also  very  high.  If  housing  construction  is  very  strong  at  the 
same  time  that  the  resources  sector  is  expanding,  there  will  be  competing  demands  for  a 
range of skilled workers and specialised services. Managing these competing demands and 
ensuring the adequate supply of workers with appropriate skills will be a challenge.  
Inflation 
The third issue is inflation. 
In all of the advanced economies, inflation – in both headline and core terms – has fallen 
and, in most cases, is currently below the relevant target or medium-term average. Given the 
considerable  excess  capacity  that  currently  exists,  most  of  these  countries  are  likely  to 
continue  experiencing  disinflationary  pressures  for  some  time  yet,  and  have  inflation  rates 
that are below target. 
BIS Review 27/2010 
 7
In Australia, inflation has also fallen, but unlike for most of the other advanced economies, it 
is not expected to be below target for an extended period of time. In the December quarter, 
underlying inflation was running at an annualised rate of around 2½ per cent – right at the 
mid  point  of  the  target  range.  In  annual  terms,  underlying  inflation  was  higher  than  this, 
reflecting the higher quarterly outcomes in the early part of 2009. Looking forward, we expect 
broadly similar outcomes over the next year or so to that recorded in the December quarter, 
as the lagged effects of the slowdown in wage growth last year and the appreciation of the 
exchange rate work their way through. As set out in our latest Statement on Monetary Policy, 
we expect inflation in both headline and underlying terms to be around 2½ per cent in 2010, 
and just a little higher in 2011. 
Recently,  there  has  been  some  discussion,  prompted  by  senior  staff  at  the  International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), that central banks might aim for high inflation – say 4 per cent – as a 
way of giving them more scope to reduce official interest rates in future downturns. This idea 
does  not  seem  particularly  sensible.  As  history  has  taught  us,  inflation  distorts  decision-
making  in  the  economy,  discourages  saving,  and  increases  uncertainty  about  the  future. 
None of this is helpful for expanding the supply side of the economy, and ultimately higher 
inflation means higher nominal interest rates. 
Equally  importantly,  a  global  shift  to  allow  higher  inflation  would  run  the  very  real  risk  of 
undermining trust in central banks and their commitment to price stability. The public might 
rightly  wonder  whether  inflation  targets  might  shift  up  again  at  some  future  point  as  other 
problems  arose.  If  this  loss  of  trust  were  to  occur,  we  would  have  given  up  the  hard-won 
credibility of the monetary policy frameworks that has been built up over the past couple of 
decades. 
Conclusion 
The central scenario for the Australian economy is a positive one, with growth over the next 
couple  of  years  at,  or  above,  average,  a  relatively  strong  labour  market,  and  inflation 
consistent  with  the  medium-term  target.  There  are,  however,  risks  around  this  central 
scenario  that  we  will  need  to  watch  carefully.  Recent  experience  has  reminded  us  of  the 
importance of flexibility of both the economy and macroeconomic policy in managing these 
risks. 
As we look forward, if something like the central scenario were to eventuate, we will need to 
keep a strong focus on improving the supply side of the economy so that demand can grow 
solidly without putting upward pressure on inflation. We also face the significant challenge of 
increasing the supply of housing at a time when business investment is also very high. While 
meeting these challenges will require hard work by both governments and businesses, they 
are surely better ones to face than those being confronted by other advanced economies. 
8 
 BIS Review 27/2010
