Anna Maria Tarantola: Financial literacy 
Concluding Remarks by Ms Anna Maria Tarantola, Deputy Director General of the Bank of 
Italy,  at  the  OECD-Bank  of  Italy  Symposium  On  Financial  Literacy,  Rome,  9  June  2010, 
Session: 17:30–18:00. 
 Today more than ever, citizens need to be financially aware, to know the characteristics and 
risks of financial products, to choose correctly. It is a matter of equity, it is a need for stability, 
a  help  for  competition.  However,  the  surveys  conducted  worldwide  to  measure  population 
financial literacy are discouraging; this is also true for Italy.  
In Italy a quarter of the population ignores basic financial notions, 50% is not familiar with 
diversification, about 30% cannot tell the difference between stocks and bonds. There is little 
awareness of the importance of supplementary pension schemes.  
As surveys show, people are not aware of their financial illiteracy and poor skills. Seminars 
like the present one are very useful to find out the dimension and the heterogeneity of the 
problem, the actions that have to be taken.  
Banking  and  financial  customers  protection  is  necessary  but  not  sufficient.  That’s  why  we 
need to launch specific initiative to promote financial education in all countries in a proper, 
coordinated manner. As emerged in the discussion, many actors can play a significant role 
depending on their institutional mission: Governments, Supervisory authorities, as the OECD 
has recommended since 2005, private stakeholders.  
Governments  and  even  private  stakeholders  should  provide  resources;  the  amount  of 
resources  is  a  critical  requirement  for  success.  Supervisory  authorities  could  play  a 
significant role in implementing the actions undertaken. Bank of Italy, in coordination with the 
Ministry of Education, is developing a project to introduce financial education in the school 
curricula in a systematic way.  
The  plurality  of  players  requires  collaboration  and  coordination  to  develop  a  common 
strategy, avoid duplications and ensure that all issues are properly dealt with consistently.  
Actions have to be evidence based: Panel I dealt with this issue. Financial education should 
be  tailored  to  citizens’  specific  needs.  Needless  to  say,  young  people  and  retired  people 
have very different financial decisions to take.  
A key step in delivering financial education is the evaluation of its impact and effectiveness. It 
is not a simple exercise; it requires the assessment of the changes of individuals’ behaviour. 
But  the  causal  connection  that  binds  knowledge,  skills  and  behaviour  cannot  be  taken  for 
granted, despite their correlation.  
As Panel II speakers told us, some information on that issue can be provided by behavioural 
economics. Individuals do not act as rational agents: they recall information selectively, make 
little  use  of  statistical  analysis,  have  unstable  preferences,  have  cognitive  and  emotional 
limitations,  are  vulnerable 
testable 
implications  on  decision-making  and  choice,  and  should  be  taken  into  account  when 
programs are aimed at changing people’s behaviour.  
1 2  
Over-reliance  on  information  alone  must  be  prevented.  It  is  necessary  to  balance  the 
possible  approaches,  provide  clear  and  accessible  information,  provide  also  cognitive 
instruments to correctly process information and make the appropriate decisions, encourage 
familiarity with financial issues. Knowledge, behaviour and attitudes are the three pillars of 
any sound programme.  
to  social  pressures.  These  circumstances  have 
We have to avoid that financial education increases confidence without increasing skills: the 
risk is overconfidence that contributes to sub-optimal decisions.  
Good  communication  is  also  essential  for  successful  programmes.  The  language  must  be 
consistent  with  the  target  group  and  the  goals  of  the  programme.  Especially  when 
programmes  are  addressed  to  the  most  vulnerable  and  least  educated  groups  of  the 
population, the language must be clear and easily understandable.  
Panel  III  was  dedicated  to  one  of  the  areas  where  the  need  for  financial  education 
programmes is most compelling: pension schemes. In the face of demographic trends people 
need 
the  proper, 
counterbalancing actions. In this field, there seems to be a link between general knowledge 
of  financial  matters,  familiarity  with  the  public  pension  system  and  participation  in 
supplementary  pension  schemes.  For  this  reason  we  are  confident  that  education  can 
promote virtuous behaviours.  
Speakers have pointed out some strategies to promote pension literacy:  
– 
– 
provide clear and understandable information on pension schemes;  
deliver financial education at school in order to increase youth awareness that rainy 
days can come.  
in  retiring  age  and 
the  risk  of  poverty 
to  understand 
take 
to 
Financial education may benefit individual citizens and the system as a whole; it promotes a 
more competitive market of financial products and services; it empowers customers vis-à-vis 
the financial industry.  
As I have already mentioned, Bank of Italy has launched some initiatives, but this is just the 
beginning.  I  am  glad  to  announce  that  Italian  supervisory  authorities  have  decided  to 
combine their efforts, enhance their mutual cooperation mechanisms and coordinate future 
financial education programmes.  
Today  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  on  mutual  cooperation  in  the  field  of  financial 
education  has  been  signed.  In  the  framework  of  this  agreement,  and  in  line  with  the 
experience  of  other  Countries,  the  supervisory  authorities  are  developing  a  common  web 
portal as a clearinghouse of the existing information materials.  
I wish to close this Symposium by thanking all participants for their very valuable contribution 
in promoting financial education. I particularly wish to thank Mr Boucher, it is a great honour, 
Richard, to have you here at the Bank of Italy. Thank you, for letting us host this important 
symposium. 
2 
 BIS Review 80/2010
