Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Increasing information sharing through 
MOUs 
Remarks by Prof Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the 
Uganda  Law  Society-Financial  Sector  Consultative  Meeting  for  Increasing  Information 
Sharing through MOUs (Memorandums of Understanding), Kampala, 22 March 2010.  
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen  
Good morning  
I am greatly honoured to deliver the opening remarks at this consultative meeting. I would 
like to thank all of you for responding positively to the invitation to this consultative meeting 
whose  main  objective  is  to  promote  institutional  networking  and  information  sharing  with 
strategic partners to improve market efficiency.  
The presence of the various financial sector experts in this consultative forum is testimony 
that you are committed to finding durable solutions to the impediments that still exist in the 
financial markets. More specifically, this meeting is intended to identify the gaps that exist in 
the  current  arrangements  for  cooperation,  to  explore  the  scope  of  services  and  any  other 
information  that  stakeholders  need  to  share,  and  to  generate  proposals  on  the  best  legal 
frameworks  for  information  sharing.  Some  institutions  may  already  be  having  adhoc 
arrangements for information sharing and cooperation but these arrangements may not be 
optimal  and  this  forum  should  provide  avenues  for  formalizing  and  strengthening  existing 
arrangements.  
At the Bank of Uganda  (BOU), we  consider information sharing as a key ingredient in the 
process of financial markets development. In this regard, the BOU duly supports institutional 
efforts to formalize information sharing through MOUs. I am happy to note that at national 
level,  all  the  financial  markets  regulators  namely,  Capital  Markets  Authority,  Uganda 
Insurance  Commission  and  the  Bank  of  Uganda  have  an  MOU  for  sharing  information  on 
regulatory matters.  
In  the  design  of  the  Financial  Markets  Development  Plan  (FMDP),  specific  initiatives  were 
included on information sharing and networking using a top down approach from regulators 
to  the  regulated  entities.  This  will  not  only  ensure  integration  of  service  delivery  in  the 
financial  sector  but  will  also  result  into  a  majority  of  the  population  accessing  financial 
services and products. The more we increase financial integration, the more we shall reach a 
greater population and the more we shall promote the development of financial markets. It is 
important  for  us  to  move  in  this  direction  in  order  to  adequately  to  prepare  ourselves  to 
participate in the greater regional market and remain competitive. Our expectation is that we 
should see more integration of the financial sector, enhanced networking, stronger linkages, 
higher  level  transparency  and  enhanced  cooperation.  All  this  should  ultimately  result  in 
increased efficiency and reduction in costs of doing business. 
I am aware of the legal and regulatory weaknesses that exist in the various business laws in 
Uganda.  I  am  glad  that  you  are  now  establishing  a  framework  for  identifying  these 
impediments  through  this  consultative  process  and  to  make  specific  recommendations  on 
how to overcome them. Delays in passing key legislations in the financial sector such as the 
Anti Money Laundering Bill (AML) is indeed a major impediment in improving the business 
environment  in  Uganda.  We  should  all  relentlessly  campaign  for  the  passage  of  this 
legislation.  
I wish to thank the Uganda Law Society, the organizers of this meeting, for bringing together 
a group of the most distinguished and experienced practitioners in the financial sector. This 
meeting should be another step to further institutional collaboration in terms of information 
BIS Review 45/2010 
 1
sharing and promotion of best practices. I wish to pledge BOU’s continued support through 
the 5-year FMDP to such initiatives that promote collaboration amongst the regulators and 
the other players.  
With  those  few  remarks,  it  is  now  my  pleasure  and  privilege  to  declare  this  consultative 
meeting officially opened.  
I thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 45/2010
