 Guy Debelle: The financial situation three years on 
Speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, at the Westpac Macro Strategy Forum, Sydney, 9 September 2010. 
 Thanks to Patrick D’Arcy, Megan Garner, Crystal Ossolinski and Andrew Zurawski for their help. 
It is now a little over three years since the onset of the financial crisis in August 2007. Since 
that  time,  financial  markets  have  varied  substantially  in  terms  of  pricing,  volumes  and 
functioning. Conditions in global markets now are markedly improved from their dire position 
in  the  last  quarter  of  2008.  Markets  have  not  returned  to  their  pre-2007  state,  but  that  is 
generally a good thing as those conditions were not sustainable (as indeed they proved not 
to be).  
Notwithstanding this, conditions in some markets remain somewhat fragile, reflected in still 
elevated volatility. In part, I think this is because the events of 2008 are a recent memory and 
practitioners now know how to retreat rapidly, instead of this process taking over a year as 
occurred between August 2007 and September 2008. We saw some evidence of this back in 
May this year. 
What  I  intend  to  do  today  is  talk  about  the  state  of  play  in  financial  markets,  focussing 
primarily  on  the  foreign  exchange  market  and  the  domestic  bond  market.  I  will  focus  on 
structure  and  functioning  and  how  these  have  changed  over  the  past  three  years. 
Throughout  the  period,  Australian  financial  markets  have  generally  operated  with  less 
dislocation than those in other parts of the world and that remains true today.  
Foreign exchange 
The foreign exchange market has been amongst the most resilient of markets throughout the 
financial crisis. Indeed, its resilience and the increasing attractiveness of foreign exchange as 
an asset class have seen many financial institutions expand their staffing in this area, even 
while they have been shrinking elsewhere. 
The most recent data published by the foreign exchange committees in the major markets 
confirm this view. Turnover in these markets has increased by 30 per cent from the lows of 
early 2009, to be above its pre-crisis levels (Graph 1). The same picture can be gleaned from 
the just-released BIS Triennial Survey which shows global turnover averaged US$4 trillion a 
day in April 2010, 20 per cent higher than in April 2007.  
By  market,  this  growth  has  been  broad-based.  The  UK,  which  is  the  largest  market, 
experienced  slightly  above-average  growth  while  market  share  declined  in  the  rest  of 
Europe. The Australian market’s relative position was little changed, remaining the seventh 
largest market. 
There  was  more  variation  in  growth  rates  by  currency.  Among  the  major  currencies,  the 
Canadian  dollar  and  the  Australian  dollar  experienced  the  fastest  growth,  with  turnover 
increasing  50 per cent  and  40 per cent  respectively.  The  Australian  dollar  became  the  fifth 
most  traded  currency,  overtaking  the  Swiss  franc  in  which  growth  was  subdued.  The 
AUD/USD  remains  the  fourth  most  traded  currency  pair.  Turnover  involving  the  US  dollar 
grew  slightly  less  than  the  average.  However,  it  still  maintains  its  dominant  role  in  foreign 
exchange markets, being involved in 85 per cent of all transactions. 
BIS Review 115/2010 
 1
 Graph 1 
While  turnover  in  all  instruments  has  grown  over  the  past  year,  growth  has  been  faster  in 
spot  and  forward  instruments  than  foreign  exchange  swaps  (Graph 2).  Spot  and  forwards 
turnover has rebounded by 40 per cent since early 2009 and volumes are now above those 
seen in 2007. In contrast, turnover in swaps has grown by around 20 per cent over the past 
year and remains about 10 per cent below its peak. 
 Graph 2 
This  difference  reflects  the  varied  uses  of  these  instruments.  There  is  a  strong  correlation 
between  growth  in  spot  and  forwards  turnover  and  international  trade.  In  these  markets, 
trade  has  increased  by  more  than  30 per cent  since  its  trough  in  March 2009,  driving  the 
rebound in spot and forwards turnover (Graph 3). 
 2 
 BIS Review 115/2010
 Graph 3 
 The  recovery  in  cross-border  capital  flows  has  also  contributed  to  the  pick-up  in  spot  and 
forwards turnover. Foreign banking flows, foreign direct investment and portfolio investment 
all contracted earlier and faster than international trade during the crisis. These capital flows 
have  recovered  of  late,  supporting  spot  and  forwards  turnover  in  2010.  However,  the 
recovery in cross-border capital flows has been more muted than that in trade; capital flows 
in G3 countries remain at much lower levels than seen prior to the crisis. These lower flows 
are likely to be part of the explanation for the  slower growth in swaps turnover, which are 
more dependent on financial activity than are spot and forwards. 
Along  with  the  rebound  in  turnover,  liquidity  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  has  also 
improved. As I noted when I last addressed this forum,1 liquidity and turnover, while related, 
are not necessarily the same thing. The bid-ask spread is one potential measure of liquidity 
and  it  shows  the  steady  improvement  in  market  conditions  (Graph 4).  The  bid-ask  spread 
widened  appreciably  in  May  of  this  year  but  the  deterioration  in  conditions  was  short-lived 
and significantly less than in late 2008. 
Graph 4 
                                                 
1   See “The Australian Foreign Exchange Market in the Recovery”, address to Westpac Forum, 10 December 2009. 
BIS Review 115/2010 
 3
  While turnover has recovered, the pricing of foreign exchange swaps has been affected by 
the events of the financial crisis in a more long-lasting way. Historically, the implicit cost of 
borrowing  US  dollars  through  the  swap  market  was  the  same  as  borrowing  directly  in  the 
US dollar  money  market,  that  is,  US  dollar  LIBOR.  Covered  interest  parity  held  and  there 
was no implicit basis in the foreign exchange swap market. However, during the crisis the 
basis  in  the  swap  market  widened  considerably  implying  a  large  premium  for  borrowing 
US dollars under swap (Graph 5): the pricing indicated it was considerably cheaper to borrow 
US dollars  directly  in  the  interbank  market  than  under  swap.  This  basis  has  narrowed 
significantly from its peak in late 2008, but remains positive at around 50 basis points. 
Graph 5 
 The  origin  of  this  positive  basis  is  the  dislocation  in  money  markets  that  emerged  through 
2007 and 2008.2 Prior to the crisis, banks outside the United States – mostly in Europe – 
built up large US dollar asset positions which were funded in part by rolling short-term US 
dollar borrowing. There was a large maturity mismatch between their short-term funding and 
their long-term asset positions. In the second half of 2007, the supply of US dollars in the 
money  markets  tightened  considerably  and  these  banks  found  it  increasingly  difficult  to 
borrow the US dollars they needed directly. Nor could they sell the assets because of their 
illiquidity. 
Following the collapse of Lehman Brothers the situation worsened as general counterparty 
concerns saw the supply of US dollars in the unsecured money market largely disappear. In 
response, non-US banks increasingly sought to obtain US dollars via the foreign exchange 
swap market, but supply of US dollars here was also tight. This saw the basis spike sharply 
higher in October 2008. 
Under  normal  conditions,  market  forces  would  ensure  any  price  discrepancy  would  be 
arbitraged away. However, there were a number of constraints on the ability to arbitrage over 
this  period.  Increased  risk  aversion,  counterparty  concerns  and  balance  sheet  losses 
restricted  potential  arbitrage  activity.  Further,  US  institutions  with  access  to  US  dollar 
borrowing  tended  to  hold  additional  precautionary  balances  to  ensure  their  own  liquidity 
rather than lending in the market. 
                                                 
2   For more analysis of this, see CGFS (Committee on the Global Financial System) (2010), “The Functioning 
and Resilience of Cross-border Funding Markets”, CGFS Publication No. 37. 
4 
 BIS Review 115/2010
 Counterparty concerns generated significant credit tiering in the market for US dollars. In late 
2008 and early 2009, few banks were actually able to access unsecured funding at LIBOR. 
The eurodollar rate, which is a broader measure of US dollar borrowing costs, indicates that 
for  many  banks,  funding  costs  were  considerably  higher  than  US  dollar  LIBOR.  When  we 
account  for  credit  tiering  by  calculating  the  basis  using  the  eurodollar  rate,  the  apparent 
deviation from covered interest parity through 2008 is smaller.3  
Action by policymakers, in particular the central bank swap lines set up with the US Federal 
Reserve,  acted  to  ease  supply  constraints  in  the  market.  However,  the  basis  has  not 
returned to zero and remains sensitive to counterparty concerns. This was highlighted earlier 
this  year  in  May,  when  concerns  about  European  sovereign  debt  saw  the  basis  increase 
again.  Unlike  the  earlier  episode,  it  appears  that  credit  tiering  in  May  was  isolated  to  a 
smaller group of European banks. While the swap lines were reactivated by the major central 
banks, their usage has been extremely small this time around. 
Turning to the Australian foreign exchange market, turnover has rebounded from its lows of 
early 2009 by 60 per cent (Graph 6), a much greater increase than in other major markets. 
Somewhat in contrast to other markets, swaps turnover in Australia has outpaced growth in 
other instruments and turnover is now higher than prior to the crisis, while spot and forwards 
turnover was unchanged from October 2009. 
Graph 6 
 The  growth  in  foreign  exchange  swaps  is  likely  to  be  related  to  the  improvement  in  risk 
appetite  and  appreciation  of  the  Australian  dollar  over  the  past  year.  As  in  the  pre-crisis 
period, market yields remain high in Australia relative to the rest of the world and as markets 
have stabilised there has been renewed interest in the Australian dollar carry trade. One way 
for the investor to generate a carry return is to hold an open forward position in the Australian 
dollar. These positions are typically short-term and rolled frequently using foreign exchange 
swaps. Data on CME investors’ and Japanese retail investors’ net positions show high levels 
of net long Australian dollar positions (Graph 7). In fact, Japanese retail investors’ net long 
positions are even larger than prior to the crisis. The pick-up in options turnover seen in the 
previous graph would also be consistent with a pick up in carry trade activity, as options are 
used to limit the potential losses on the trade. 
                                                 
3   For more detail, see Ossolinski C and A Zurawski (2010), “The Financial Crisis through the Lens of Foreign 
Exchange Swap Markets”, RBA Bulletin, June. 
BIS Review 115/2010 
 5
 Graph 7 
I  talked  about  the  improvement  in  liquidity  in  the  local  foreign  exchange  market  earlier. 
Volatility in the Australian dollar has also declined significantly from its peak in October 2008 
but remains well above its pre-crisis level (Graph 8). The spike in volatility in May is evident. 
 Graph 8 
 The  Australian  cross-currency  swap  market  has  also  experienced  strong  growth  with 
turnover now close to its previous peak. The market is particularly important in Australia as 
Australian  banks  make  use  of  cross-currency  swaps  to  hedge  the  exchange  rate  risk 
associated  with  their  foreign  currency  bond  issuance.  Australia  has  a  large  share  of  the 
cross-currency  swap  market  and  this  share  has  grown  over  the  past  three  years,  from 
5 per cent  in  2007  to  11 per cent  in  2010.  The  increasing  share  reflects  the  fact  that 
Australian institutions accounted for a larger share of global foreign currency bond issuance 
in 2009. The increased share resulted as much from the very low issuance globally as it from 
the fact that the Australian banks maintained their access to bond markets due to their strong 
balance sheets, high credit rating and, for a period, the government guarantee (see below).  
6 
 BIS Review 115/2010
 The premium to obtain Australian dollars under swap has risen compared to the pre-crisis 
period. Historically, Australian institutions paid a small premium to swap foreign currency into 
Australian  dollars.  The  premium  arises  because  domestic  issuers  tend  to  issue  a  greater 
value of foreign currency bonds than foreigners issue of Kangaroo and other Australian dollar 
bonds. The crisis saw this balance shift even further toward Australian issuers as Kangaroo 
issuance slowed to a halt, resulting in a higher basis (Graph 9). Kangaroo issuers have since 
begun  responding  to  the  favourable  pricing,  with  $8 billion  of  Kangaroo  issuance  over  the 
past three months. As a result, the basis has moderated from its peak but remains higher 
than in the pre-crisis period. 
Graph 9 
 The Australian non-government bond market4 
Turning  to  the  local  bond  market,  one  important  point  to  emphasise  is  that  holders  of 
Australian  bonds  have  seen  relatively  little  deterioration  in  asset  quality.  Nevertheless, 
heightened  global  risk  aversion  significantly  affected  pricing,  and  while  spreads  have 
narrowed  over  the  past  year,  relative  pricing  has  changed,  and  consequently  so  has  the 
structure of the market. 
Graph 10 
                                                 
4   This is discussed in detail in Black S, A Brassil and M Hack (2010), “The Impact of the Financial Crisis on the 
Bond Market”, RBA Bulletin, June. 
 BIS Review 115/2010 
 7
 The Australian non-government bond market had grown significantly over the decade prior to 
2007, as unsecured issuance by financials and corporates expanded (Graph 10). There was 
particularly  rapid  growth  in  asset-backed  issuance  in  the  form  of  RMBS  such  that  by  mid-
2007,  RMBS  accounted  for  around  40 per cent  of  issuance  in  the  non-government  bond 
market.  
The  onset  of  the  financial  crisis  in  mid  2007  altered  these  issuance  patterns  (Graph 11). 
There was large selling of existing RMBS by foreign investors, particularly SIVs. The selling 
occurred because the SIVs were forced to liquidate portfolios, not because of any issue with 
the  security  itself.  The  resultant  overhang  of  supply  in  the  secondary  market  generated  a 
large increase in RMBS spreads such that issuance was not economic for most lenders. As a 
result, issuance in 2008 and 2009 was only a fraction of the issuance prior to the crisis.  
Graph 11 
 At the same time, the rise in risk aversion also saw many corporates turn to the banks for 
funding.  The  reintermediation  on  both  the  housing  and  business  side  saw  banks’  balance 
sheets grow. The banks retained access to the bond market and, supported by their strong 
balance sheets (reflected in the major banks retaining their AA ratings) and, for a time, the 
Government  Guarantee  Scheme,  were  able  to  issue  significantly  more  in  2009  than  in 
previous years. While the pace of new issuance by banks in 2010 has slowed compared with 
last  year,  issuance  this  year  has  been  almost  entirely  in  their  own  name,  with  the  banks 
making very little use of the guarantee in the run up to the termination of the scheme in 
April. 
Despite  all  these  classes  continuing  to  perform  well  from  a  credit  perspective,  spreads 
widened during the financial crisis to historical highs and, as noted above, most dramatically 
for  RMBS  (Graph 12).  As  investor  risk  aversion  has  eased,  spreads  have  narrowed  from 
these  highs,  but  still  remain  well  above  pre-crisis  levels.  Perhaps  more  importantly  for  the 
structure of the market, relative pricing has changed significantly compared with early 2007: 
the relative cost of bond market funding has declined for the higher rated banks compared 
with RMBS issuers and corporates.  
8 
 BIS Review 115/2010
 Graph 12 
 In the RMBS market, primary and secondary market spreads have broadly converged, with 
AOFM supporting new issuance at tighter spreads. Although RMBS spreads remain high by 
historical standards, recent issues, including those without AOFM support, have been cost 
effective for the issuers. Nevertheless, the shift in relative pricing noted earlier suggests that 
the asset-backed segment is, and is likely to remain, a smaller share of the market than it 
was prior to the crisis. The decline in AAA asset-backed issuance has only had a modest 
effect  on  the  credit  composition  of  the  market,  being  offset  by  strong  AAA  Kangaroo 
issuance.  
Conclusion 
Conditions  in  financial  markets  have  fluctuated  through  a  wide  range  over  the  past  three 
years. Recently, conditions have been somewhat fragile but considerably improved from late 
2008  and  early  2009.  The  foreign  exchange  market  has  been  one  of  the  most  resilient 
markets  and  has  expanded  rapidly  over  the  past  year.  In  that  market,  unlike  a  number  of 
others,  conditions  have  generally  returned  to  those  before  2007.  In  other  markets,  it  is 
unlikely that the pre-crisis conditions will prevail again anytime soon. 
Throughout the past three years, Australian financial markets have been less affected than 
other markets. However, there has been a marked effect on the structure and pricing of the 
Australian bond market. An increase in paper issued by financial institutions has offset the 
decline in asset-backed issuance. Risk margins across all asset classes have tightened over 
the past year but remain noticeably higher than in 2007. 
BIS Review 115/2010 
 9
