Ewart S Williams: Impact of financial crises on the Caribbean 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago,  at  the  Caribbean  Centre  for  Money  &  Finance  (CCMF)/Caribbean  Community 
(CARICOM)  Secretariat  and  Caribbean  Regional  Technical  Assistance  Centre  (CARTAC) 
Workshop on Regional Financial Stability, Port-of-Spain, 3 March 2010. 
 its enormous size; and 
its regional character. 
Salutations/Welcome 
Congratulate CARTAC/Caricom Secretariat/CCMF for organizing the workshop… It is timely 
and perhaps long overdue. 
Our region has had its fair share of financial turmoil over the years. Here in Trinidad and 
Tobago  during  the  1980’s  for  example,  we  experienced  the  collapse  of  several  finance 
houses; this was followed by problems with three indigenous banks which led eventually to a 
merger in 1993 of the three domestic banks. The 1980’s and 1990’s also saw the demise of 
several  indigenous  banks  and  other  non-bank  financial  institutions  in  the  wider  Caribbean 
region. 
All of them paled in comparison to the financial crisis that hit Jamaica in the later 1990’s. If 
my memory serves me right the resolution of this crisis is estimated to have cost around 30% 
of GDP. 
There  are  two  things  that  make  the  current  financial  crisis  involving  CL  Financial  and  its 
subsidiaries different: 
(i) 
(ii) 
In effect, the crisis has involved not only Trinidad and Tobago (with Clico, British American, 
Clico  Investment  Bank  and  CMMB),  but  it  has  also  touched  Barbados,  Guyana  and 
Suriname (that have Clico subsidiaries) as well as the OECS and the Bahamas which house 
BAICO insurance companies, all CLF subsidiaries. 
Of  course  in  addition  to  its  scope,  the  regional  crisis  has  also  attracted  intense  attention 
because  it  comes  on  the  heels  of  the  collapse  of  the  Stanford  Empire  which  had  regional 
repercussions  and  in  the  midst  of  an  international  financial  crisis  which  has  been 
characterized as the worst for almost a century. 
While  the  region,  perhaps  initially,  ignored  the  incidence  of  financial  stress  suffered  by 
individual territories and while we faced only limited contagion from the international financial 
crisis, it is clear that the current regional financial crisis is an important wake-up call; one that 
we cannot ignore: one that carries powerful lessons that we need to address immediately. 
Experience tells us several things about financial crises viz: 
(i) 
(ii) 
that the world being what it is, they are going to occur from time to time; and 
that they could be very costly – they always lead to a loss of output and private 
savings, they carry heavy fiscal costs associated with public bailouts, and they could 
lead  to  a  systemic  loss  of  confidence  in  the  financial  system  which  is  difficult  to 
rebuild. 
Examples  covering  both  advanced  and  developing  countries  suggest  that  while  financial 
crises  differ  as  to  their  details,  they  always  reflect  the  confluence  of  some  underlying 
economic vulnerabilities and a specific crisis trigger. 
The underlying vulnerabilities could be any of a number of things: poor risk management by 
financial  institutions;  mis-matches  between  assets  and  liabilities;  excessive  leveraging  of 
BIS Review 25/2010 
 1
financial institutions, poor liquidity management or inadequate capital. The trigger could be 
anything,  depending  on  the  country  –  terms  of  trade  shocks,  the  collapse  of  an  asset 
(housing) bubble, or macro-economic setbacks resulting from exogenous shocks. 
Sometimes  the  specific  event  that  can  trigger  a  crisis  is  unpredictable  and  crises 
themselves are also unpredictable. In fact, many triggers are exogenous and we can do 
very little about them. In these circumstances, our focus therefore should be on identifying 
and addressing underlying vulnerabilities early so as to reduce their incidence. 
Recognition  of  this  reality  –  the  need  to  detect  emerging  problems  has  led  to  the 
development  of  early  warning  signals  and  more  recently  to  the  preparation  of  financial 
stability reports by Central Banks. Some international financial institutions, have compiled a 
set of macro-prudential indicators to serve as barometers of the health and stability of the 
financial system and to provide early warning of potential problems. 
Our monitoring system in the Caribbean has been rudimentary at best, on non-existent and 
fragmented,  in  many  of  our  regional  jurisdictions.  This  is  unfortunate  since  any  robust 
analysis  would  have  shown  up  a  whole  range  of  vulnerabilities  in  all  of  the  financial 
institutions of the CLF conglomerate. Some of the more glaring vulnerabilities were: 
(i) 
a  mis-match  between  assets  and  liabilities,  with  mostly  short  term  liabilities 
paying above market interest rates, matched by long term assets; 
excessive leveraging of balance sheet assets, reducing their net value; 
a preponderance of inter-group transactions; 
the total absence of a risk management framework; and 
inadequate capital. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
Of course, these vulnerabilities were compounded by: 
(i) 
a  weak  legislative  and  regulatory  infrastructure,  in  which  CLF,  the  parent  holding 
company was not subject to formal regulation; 
poor internal governance; and 
insufficient regional regulatory collaboration. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
This  was  a  potentially  lethal  combination,  and  when  energy  and  real  estate  prices  fell, 
triggering  depositors’  and  policyholders’  concerns  about  the  state  of  the  Group’s  finances, 
the inevitable happened. 
What started in Clico had widespread contagion effects in the region, in particular among the 
BAICO subsidiaries located in the OECS. 
The message from this regional crisis is clear and it is that we must urgently address our 
weakness  to  strengthen  regional  financial  stability  (so  that  we  could  better  deal  with 
financial shocks). 
I see the main lessons from the regional crisis as follows: 
√ 
the  urgent  need  for  all  regional  jurisdictions  to  strengthen  national  financial 
legislation  and  regulatory  practices.  Moreover,  it  is  important  that  jurisdictions  co-
ordinate their efforts so as to reduce the risk of regulatory arbitrage; 
a  second  imperative  is  the  establishment  of  a  framework  to  facilitate  close 
collaboration among regional regulators in the regulation of cross-border institutions. 
There is a proposal for a “College of Regulators”. It is important that this be up and 
running as quickly as possible; and 
the third imperative is the establishment of a national crisis management plan which 
details  how  regulatory  authorities  would  react  in  the  event  of  a  systemic  financial 
crisis. Admittedly, the development of such a plan raises complex issues, not least 
  2 
 BIS Review 25/2010
of which is the vexing question of whether there should be institutions that are “too 
big to fail”. 
An  examination  of  the  workshop’s  programme  suggests  that  most  of  these  issues  will  be 
covered in the next two and a half days. It is also very gratifying to see the very impressive 
list of presenters and participants. This should provide for stimulating discussion such that at 
the end of this workshop we should be able to benefit from new insights for assuring regional 
financial stability. 
I would like to again thank the CCMF, CARTAC and the CARICOM Secretariat for organizing 
this  workshop.  Participants  I  welcome  you  all  to  Trinidad  and  Tobago  and  wish  you  all  a 
stimulating two and a half days. 
BIS Review 25/2010 
 3
