Andrew G Haldane: Fair value in foul weather 
Remarks by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, 
based  on  a  previous  speech  to  the  Royal  Institution  of  Chartered  Surveyors,  London,  in 
November 2009 on 10 March 2010. 
 Based on a speech given at the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, 10 November 2009. I am grateful to 
Dele  Adeleye,  Alan  Ball,  Paul  Doran,  Kemal  Ercevik,  Andrew  Hauser,  Florence  Hubert,  Salina  Ladha,  Vas 
Madouros, Colin Miles, Alastair Morley, Paul Tucker and Nick Vause for comments and contributions. 
Shakespeare’s Macbeth opens amid a thunderstorm, with the three witches cackling: 
“Fair is foul, and foul is fair 
Hover through the fog and filthy air” 
Macbeth [Act 1.1.11–12] 
Recently,  the  global  financial  system  has  experienced  its  own  dramatic  thunderstorm. 
Financial  markets  have  been  thick  with  fog  and  filthy  air.  At  times,  lightening  strikes  have 
threatened seizure in some financial markets and institutions. Two years on, the rumbles of 
thunder are still discernable. 
The debate on the causes and consequences of this perfect storm will swirl around for many 
years to come. At the centre of this storm is, on the face of it, a rather basic question: how 
should  the  instruments that  make  up  the  financial  system  be  valued?  So  basic  a  question 
ought not to be a matter of life and death. But for a great many financial institutions during 
this crisis, it would have been precisely that. 
The fundamental concept on which this debate hinges is fair value. Like beauty, its meaning 
lies  in  the  eyes  of  the  beholder.  For  some,  “fair  is  foul”  –  the  application  of  fair  value 
principles risks exposing financial firms to the vagaries of markets, fog, filthy air and all. For 
others, ignoring the signals from financial market is itself foul and risks creating a financial 
landscape that is foggy and anything but fair. 
The  fair  value  debate  is  generating  electricity  in  the  usually  static-free  professions  of 
accountancy and regulation. Bankers fulminate at the mere mention. Among Heads of State 
in  some  of  the  biggest  countries  in  the  world,  accounting  standards  for  derivatives  have 
generated  levels  of  fear  and  consternation  usually  reserved  for  non-financial  weapons  of 
mass destruction. 
Against that backdrop, this paper attempts to shed a little light on this heated debate.  
Three phases of fair value 
So  what  lies  at  the  heart  of  this  debate?  It  is  well-captured  by  Preston  Delano,  US 
Comptroller of the Currency: 
“…the  soundness  of  the  banking  system  depends  upon  the  soundness  of  the 
country’s business and industrial enterprises, and should not be measured by the 
precarious yardstick of current market quotations which often reflect speculative 
and not true appraisals of intrinsic worth”.1 
                                                 
1   Revision in Bank Examination Procedure and in the Investment Securities Regulation of the Comptroller of the 
Currency, Federal Reserve Bulletin, July, 1938, pages 563–564. 
BIS Review 28/2010 
 1
Delano was US Comptroller of the Currency in 1938. This provides a clue to the fact that the 
fair value debate is not a new one. To understand this debate, its origins and undulations, it 
is worth starting at the very beginning. 
Although book-keeping has far earlier antecedents, modern accountancy is believed to have 
begun  in  the  Italian  cities  of  Genoa,  Venice  and  Florence  in  the  14th  century.  It  is  no 
coincidence that modern banking emerged at precisely the same time in precisely the same 
cities. Banks emerged to service rapidly expanding commercial companies. And double-entry 
book-keeping  became  an  essential  means  of  recording  and  tracking  who  owed  what  to 
whom, oiling the wheels of finance. 
It is no coincidence, too, that the first-known description of accountancy was provided by an 
Italian,  Luca  Pacioli,  in  the  late  15th  century.2  Pacioli  was  not  your  typical  accountant.  A 
wandering  Franciscan  monk,  tutor  and  mathematician,  he  was  friend  and  sometime 
collaborator of Leonardo de Vinci. Although comfortably the less famous of the two, Pacioli is 
still known today as the father of modern accounting. 
From those beginnings, double-entry began to spread north within Europe during the Middle 
Ages: to Germany in the 15th century, Spain and England in the 16th century and Scotland 
in  the  17th  century.  By  the  late  18th  century,  Goethe  had  called  double-entry  “among  the 
finest inventions of the human mind”.3 Some people are easily impressed. Despite that, the 
progress of double-entry was surprisingly slow. At the start of the 19th century, there were 
only eleven Londoners who listed their occupation as “accomptants”. Imagine. 
The 19th century marked a turning point. In the UK, joint stock companies began to spring 
up. The Bankruptcy Act of 1831 gave accountants a role in winding-up enterprises and the 
Companies Acts of 1844 and 1862 established a legal requirement for companies to register 
and file accounts. By the end of the century, audit practices were becoming established. The 
accountant’s role was to provide a true and fair view of a company’s assets and income, as 
protection for the state (to whom it paid taxes) and investors (to whom it paid dividends). 
It  was  these  concerns  that  led  to  the  gradual  emergence  during  the  second  half  of  the 
19th century  of  fair-value  based  accounting  conventions  in  the  US.  From  the  late 
19th century,  banks’  securities  were  carried  at  market  values  and  their  fixed  assets  at 
“appraised values”. In other words, by the early 20th century fair value principles were widely 
applied to companies in general and to banks in particular. In many respects, this period may 
have been the high-water mark for fair value principles. 
In  the  US,  this  first  wave  of  the  fair  value  debate  ended  in  1938.4  The  backdrop  was 
inauspicious.  The  first  phase  of  the  Great  Depression,  between  1929  and  1933,  saw  the 
failure of a large number of US banks. Between 1933 and 1937, the US economy recovered 
somewhat.  But  by  1938  there  were  fears  of  a  double  dip.  At  the  Fed’s  prompting, 
Franklin D Roosevelt called a convention comprising the US Treasury, the Federal Reserve 
Board,  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency  and  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation 
(FDIC).  Its  purpose  was  to  determine  what  should  be  done  with  prudential  standards  to 
safeguard recovery. 
This  was  no  ordinary  regulatory  convention.  Marriner  S  Eccles,  Chairman  of  the  Federal 
Reserve, called it “guerrilla warfare”. In one corner were the regulators, the Comptroller of the 
Currency and FDIC. Scarred by their regulatory experience, and fearing further bank failures, 
the Comptroller and FDIC pushed for high prudential standards, including preservation of fair 
values for banks’ assets. In the other corner was the Fed. Scarred by their monetary policy 
                                                 
2   Pacioli (1494). 
3   Goethe (1796). 
4   Simonsen and Hempel (1993) provide a fascinating account of this episode. 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2010
experience,  and  fearing  a  further  collapse  in  lending,  the  Fed  argued  for  laxer  prudential 
standards and the abandonment of fair values. Battle commenced. 
The tussle lasted two months, often played out in public through the New York Times. In the 
end, the Fed prevailed. On 26 June 1938, Franklin D Roosevelt announced (without so much 
as  a  hint  of  irony)  the  Uniform  Agreement  on  Bank  Supervisory  Procedures.  Banks’ 
investment grade assets were to be valued not at market values but at amortised cost. And 
banks’  sub-investment  grade  assets  were  to  be  valued  at  a  long-run  average  of  market 
prices. In the teeth of crisis, and in the interests of macroeconomic stability, the first phase of 
fair value had ended. 
This pattern was to be repeated half a century later – the second wave of fair value. Historic 
cost accounting remained in the ascendancy in the US from the 1940s right though to the 
early  1970s.  But  from  the  mid-1970s  onwards,  accounting  standard-setters  began  to 
embrace fair value measurement, first in the context of banks’ portfolios of equities and other 
marketable securities.5 By the late 1980s, there was widespread recognition that traditional 
accounting approaches were obscuring the real value of securities and derivatives. 
US experience during the Savings and Loan crisis in the mid-1980s provided further impetus. 
Forbearance, including about the valuation of assets and liabilities, was widely believed to 
have been a cause of the build-up of problems among the thrifts.6 In 1989, Congress passed 
the  Financial  Institutions  Recovery,  Reform  and  Enforcement  Act  (FIRREA),  tightening 
valuation standards among banks and bringing them closer to fair values. In the same year, 
the International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC) commenced a project to assess 
the  measurement  and  disclosure  of  financial  instruments.  These  too  were  to  suffer  a 
set-back. 
By 1990, recession had taken hold in the US, with lending contracting sharply. As in 1938, 
the US economy was suffering “financial headwinds”. As in 1938, the Fed were quick to call 
for a relaxation of prudential and valuation standards to head-off pressures on banks.7 And 
as in 1938, the upshot was a concerted move by the then-President, George Bush, relaxing 
examination and valuation standards.8 For the second time, fair value had been returned to 
its box. 
And  so  to  the  present  day  –  the  third  phase.  By  2008,  the  ranks  of  “accomptants”  had 
swelled, with numbers of recognised accountants in the UK totalling over 275,000. Yet the 
issues  today  have  loud  echoes  of  1938.  Through  the  1990s,  the  main  international 
accounting standard-setters extended the boundaries of fair value. In the US, this was given 
impetus by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA) in 1991. 
Widespread  use  of  mark  to  market  was  a  key  ingredient  of  the  prompt  corrective  action 
approach embodied in FDICIA. 
From 1992, it became a requirement among US companies to disclose the fair value of all 
financial instruments in the notes to their accounts. Towards the end of the 1990s, this move 
was  formalised  with  financial  instruments  (derivatives,  equity  and  debt)  being  included 
explicitly  in  the  accounts  at  fair  value.  In  the  US,  this  followed  adoption  of  Statement  of 
                                                 
5   United States Securities and Exchange Commission (2008). 
6   FDIC (1997). 
7  
In a letter to Richard Breeden, Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, which refers back to 
the  1930s  experience,  then-Chairman  Alan  Greenspan  notes  “that  market  value  accounting  raises  a 
substantial  number  of  significant  issues  that  need  to  be  resolved  before  considering  the  implementation  of 
such an approach in whole or in part for banking organizations”. Alan Greenspan, “Letter to Hon. Richard C. 
Breeden,” Federal Reserve, November 1, 1990. 
8   Simonsen and Hempel (op. cit.). 
BIS Review 28/2010 
 3
Financial  Accounting  Standard  133  (SFAS  133)  in  June  1998.  Elsewhere,  it  followed 
adoption of the IASC’s International Accounting Standard 39 (IAS 39) in January 2001. 
The banking crisis of the past two years has brought that evolution to a halt. As pressures on 
banks’  balance  sheets  have  intensified,  subdued  lending  growth  has  raised  concerns  that 
recovery may be retarded. A debate has begun internationally on rolling back fair value to 
arrest this downward trajectory. Once again, central bank governors, politicians, regulators 
and countries have been prominent in their criticism of fair value. Some fear that fair value is 
poised to enter the third dip on its rollercoaster journey. 
interests  of  accountants, 
Fair values and market prices 
What have been the underlying forces leading fair value to be at first lauded, then questioned 
and  periodically  abandoned?  At  the  heart  of  this  is  the  vexed  question  of  whether  market 
prices are a true and fair assessment of value. 
In theory, market prices ought to be a full and fair reflection of the present value of future 
cashflows on an asset. This is the fulcrum of the Efficient Markets Hypothesis (EMH). Market 
prices, if not perfect, are at least efficient aggregators of information – a one-stop shop for 
appraising  value.  This  simplicity  makes  EMH  powerful  theory.  But  its  real  power  is  its 
widespread application in practice. EMH has not just monopolised the finance textbooks; it 
has also dominated the dealing rooms. 
If  the  EMH  were  to  hold  strictly,  the  fair  value  debate  would  be  uncontentious.  Marking  of 
assets to market would be proper recognition of their economic value. In that financial utopia, 
the 
investors  and  regulators  would  be  perfectly  aligned. 
Accountants would have a verifiable valuation yardstick; investors a true and fair view of their 
true worth; and regulators an objective means of evaluating solvency. Fair value would serve 
treble duty. 
In practice, the fair value debate is contentious and has been for at least a century. Through 
history,  accountants,  investors  and  regulators  have  not  always  sung  in  tune.  Today, 
accountants are singing opera Pacioli-style, regulators are rapping at 300 words a minute, 
while investors are left to whistle. In part this discord has been blamed on failures of EMH, 
“the precarious yardstick of current market quotations”. 
It should come as no surprise that fair value principles have faced their stiffest tests at times 
of crisis – the Great Depression during the previous century, the Great Recession during this. 
For  it  is  at  crisis  time  that  EMH  itself  faces  its  stiffest  test,  perhaps  none  greater  than 
recently.  The  heterodox  British  economist  George  Shackle  observed:  “Valuation  is 
expectation and expectation is imagination”.9 Imagination, and thus valuation, is apt to run 
wild at the peak of the boom and trough of the bust. 
These episodes of over-active imagination, or deviations from EMH, can be grouped roughly 
three  ways.  Each  has  an  important  potential  bearing  on  financial  stability  and  on  the  fair 
value debate: 
 
“Excess volatility”: Some of the earliest evidence against EMH focussed on the 
tendency of asset prices to fluctuate more than could be justified by movements in 
fundamentals  –  so-called  excess  volatility.  While  early  evidence  focussed  on  the 
behaviour of equity prices, the same tests have now been applied to a wide range of 
asset  markets,  including  corporate  bonds,  asset-backed  securities  and  exchange 
                                                 
9   Shackle (1972) quoted in Bronk (2009). 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2010
  rates.10  There  is  overwhelming  empirical  evidence  of  excess  volatility  in  asset 
prices. 
“Medium-term  misalignment”:  Excess  volatility,  while  inconvenient,  need  not  by 
itself severely distort the functioning of capital markets. Asset prices’ signals might 
be  noisy,  but  correct  on  average.  But  there  is  emerging  evidence  of  asset  prices 
becoming  persistently  misaligned  from  fundamentals  in  a  variety  of  markets 
including equity, residential and commercial property and corporate bonds.11 
“Apparent arbitrage”: A third aspect of the failure of EMH is evidence of seemingly 
pure  arbitrage  opportunities  being  sustained  by  market  participants  for  lengthy 
periods.  Unlike  excess  volatility  and  misalignme
from 
fundamentals  represent  riskless  opportunities  to  make  profits.  They  have  been 
evident in past, and in particular in the present, crisis. 
these  deviations 
nt, 
Ultimately, the importance of these three features is an empirical question. Charts 1 and 2 
plot the long-run behaviour of the equity market, in the UK from the 1920s and in the US from 
the 1860s. These long sweeps of history are revealing about patterns of misalignment and 
excess  volatility.  In  each  case,  some  metric  of  f n
u damentals  is  needed.  A  model-based 
measure  of  fundamentals  is  used,  based  on  long-run  average  values  of  dividend  growth 
discounted at a long-run average real interest rate.12 
For the US and UK, Charts 1 and 2 present persuasive evidence of both excess volatility and 
misalignment. On average over the sample, equity prices in the UK and US are around twice 
as volatile as fundamentals. The average absolute deviation of UK and US equity prices from 
0% respectively. If anything, there is evidence 
fundamentals has been over 20% and over 3
of misalignments having increased. Average absolute misalignments have averaged almost 
30% and 70% in the UK and US since 1980. 
These deviations from EMH are no less striking moving from financial to real assets. Since 
e as  typical  measures  of 
 
1930,  real  property  prices  have  been  more  than  twice  as  volatil
fundamentals.  And  real  property  prices  have,  in  different  countries,  at  times  deviated 
significantly from measures of fundamentals over the same period.13 
EMH predicts essentially a zero correlation in prices across time, as they follow the random 
walk of the homeward-bound drunk. This evidence paints a picture of excess volatility (in the 
short-run) and slow mean-reversion (in th
e long-run). In other words, there is both positive (at 
short  horizons)  and  negative  (at  longer  horizons)  serial  correlation  in  market  prices.  This 
leaves EMH run-over in both directions. 
With  a  steely  nerve  and  deep  pockets,  investors  could  make  profits  from  exploiting  these 
trends. But as Keynes remarked, the market can often remain irrational for longer than even 
a strong-willed investor can remain solvent. In oth
er words, these are risky bets. The crisis 
has also revealed, however, examples of bets which were, on the face of it, essentially risk-
less deviations from EMH or “apparent arbitrage”. 
Chart  3  considers  the  price  of  two  on  the  face  of  it  identical  portfolios  –  an  index  of  CDS 
contracts and an individually-constructed portfolio of the same CDS contracts. On average, 
they ought to trade as one and the same. But for around a year from October 2008 onwards, 
the  spreads  on  these  two  portfolios  differed  by  as  much  as  60  basis  points.  Even  once 
transactions  costs  are  taken  into  account,  there  were  persistent  and  significant  riskless 
 
                                                
10   Shiller (1981). 
11   Shiller (2005), Smithers (2009). 
12   Alternative  metrics  for  fundamentals,  such  as  cyclically  adjusted  price-earnings  ratios  or  q,  yield  a  broadly 
similar conclusion (Shiller (2005), Smithers (2009)). 
13   Shiller (2005). 
BIS Review 28/2010 
 5
profits  on  the  table.  Chart  4  looks  at  the  difference  between  two,  again  on  the  face  of  it, 
identical money market bets – forward rate agreement spreads and forward rates implied by 
the LIBOR spreads, both of the same maturity. Over the exact same period, these differed by 
as much as 250 basis points. 
So why were the bets not placed and the arbitrage opportunities exploited? First, money is 
needed to place even a riskless bet. That was the scarcest of commodities after the failure of 
Lehman  Brothers  in  October  2008.  Second,  placing  a  bet  also  requires  a  trustworthy 
e  midst  of  crisis.  In  their  absence, 
bookmaker.  They  too  were  thin  on  the  ground  in  th
arbitrage  may  be  more  “apparent”  than  real.  Market  prices  are  likely  to  deviate  from 
fundamentals due to liquidity and counterparty premia. 
By way of illustration, Chart 5 provides a decomposition of the yield on sub-investment grade 
corporate securities in the UK. By mid-2007 at the peak of the boom, the liquidity premium on 
en eliminated. By the end of 2008, this liquidity premium had 
these assets had pretty much be
risen by almost 2500 basis points. As capital markets moved from flood to drought, market 
prices turned from rich to poor. 
“Protecting shareholders” 
Fair value and financial stability 
Against this backdrop, what are the potential financial stability implications of using market 
 valuation yardstick? In roughly chronological order, three main arguments have 
prices as a
been used in defence of marking to m
arket. Broadly, these mirror the three historic phases of 
fair value: 
 
During  the  19th  and  early  20th  centuries,  as  joint  stock  companies  sprang  up,  the  key 
purpose of company accounts was to protect shareholders’ interests. Like truth in the face of 
the war, in the face of crisis the financial accounts appear to have been the first casualty. 
During  the  19th  century,  the  published  accounts  of  Spanish  banks  became  less  frequent 
during  episodes  of  crisis.  Mussolini’s  Italian  government 
of  1931  went  one  step  further, 
suspending publication of accounts by the banks to forestall panic.14 It is unlikely Goethe and 
Mussolini would have agreed on the merits of double-entry. 
While less extreme, there is compelling evidence of British banks having massaged balance 
sheets  from  the  late  19th  century  right  up  until  the  early  1970s,  especially  during  crisis. 
Typically, this involved the systematic under-valuation of assets to allow hidden reserves to 
be carried on the balance sheet. The experience of UK banks in 1952 was typical. As the 
asis for valuation by banks was shifted from 
prices of government securities fell sharply, the b
“at  or  below  market  value”  to  “at  or  under  cost”.  This  mirrored  the  Roosevelt  and  Bush 
forbearance announcements of 1938 and 1990. 
The motives for hidden reserves among UK banks were purportedly prudential, as protection 
against  the  “excessive  dividend  expectations”  of  shareholders  and  as  a  cushion  against 
losses in crisis.15 Although the Companies Act of 1947 prohibited the use of hidden reserves, 
the banks were exempt from its provisions. But the writing was on the wall. Non-disclosure by 
banks  came  under  repeated  fire  during  the  1960s.  Sensing  the  inevitable,  British  banks 
“voluntarily”  d
ecided  to  pursue  full  disclosure  in  1969,  in  the  interests  of  shareholder 
transparency and protection, though there is evidence of hidden reserves persisting right up 
to the 1980s. 
                                                
 
14   James (1992). 
15   Billings and Capie (2009). 
6 
 BIS Review 28/2010
“Gambling for resurrection” 
Those considerations remain relevant today. Shareholders in global banks have lost 40% of 
their net worth since the start of the crisis. The implied volatility of global banks’ equities is 
f  the  crisis.  At  its  peak,  it  was  seven  times  higher. 
around  50%  higher  than  at  the  start  o
has  been  shaken  to  the  core.  It  is  unlikely  to  be 
Confidence  in  banks’  balance  sheets 
restored by a return to murky valuation and hidden reserves. 
 
One  special  case  of  shareholder  protection  arises  when  management  increase  their  risk-
taking incentives as the probability of failure rises. Such incentives are in-built in a world of 
to  engage  in  such  gambling  for  redemption  depends 
limited  liability.  But  the  ability 
importantly  on  the  degree  of  information  asymmetry  between  the  shareholders  and  the 
manager. The lower the transparency of the accounts, the greater the incentives and ability 
of management to bet the ranch. 
This type of behaviour is if anything more likely among banks, given the intrinsically greater 
opacity of their assets. And examples are legion. For example, in the run-up to the Savings 
and Loan crisis in the US, many thrifts financed long-term fixed rate assets with variable rate 
deposits, thereby running significant interest rate risk. This was a big gamble. But because it 
guised  in  the  accounts,  neither  regulators  nor  the  thrifts  themselves  felt  obliged  to 
was  dis
, the gamble failed causing many thrifts to collapse. In 
manage this risk. As interest rates rose
ion required fair values to be reported from the early 
response, the Office of Thrift Supervis
1990s. 
 
lues arises from its role as 
Perhaps the most recent of the arguments used to support fair va
a risk management device. Market prices, while noisy, offer timely signals. They are likely to 
prompt  early  recognition  and  management  of  emerging  risks  and  mistakes,  by  both 
regulators and the regulated. Sunlight is an effective disinfectant. 
In this regard, it is telling that more widespread marking to market accompanied regulatory 
efforts  to  improve  prompt  corrective  action  measures  –  for  example,  in  the  US  through 
FDICIA. Among market participants, the use of fair values and fleet-of-foot risk management 
techniques is widely felt to have contributed to the relative success of some firms during the 
ertainly appears to think so.16 
course of the crisis. Lloyd Blankfein, CEO of Goldman Sachs, c
For  the  prosecution,  the  ma
in  arguments  also  appear  to  be  threefold.  Essentially,  these 
follow from the three commonly attributed failures of the EMH. 
 
If market prices exhibit greater volatility than warranted by fundamentals, this will be mirrored 
in the balance sheet footin
gs and profits of entities marking their positions to market. This is 
far from a new phenomenon. Robert E Healy, the SEC’s first Chief Accountant back in the 
early  1930s,  lamented  that  firms  “can  capitalise  practically  everything  except  the  furnace 
ashes in the basement”.17 
The impact of fair values on profits may have been even greater over recent decades. Banks’ 
tile over the past few decades, with the standard 
profits have become significantly more vola
deviation of banks’ return on equity trebling comparing the forty-year periods either side of 
“Timely risk management” 
“Excess volatility” 
                                                 
16  
“At Goldman Sachs, we calculate the fair value of our positions every day, because we would not know how to 
assess or manage risk if market prices were not reflected on our books. This approach provides an essential 
early  warning  syst
em  that  is  critical  for  risk  managers  and  regulators”,  Lloyd  Blankfein,  Financial  Times, 
October 13 2009. 
17   Quoted in Seli
gman (2003). 
BIS Review 28/2010 
 7
“Fundamental misalignment” 
1970. There is also evidence of banks’ equity prices having exhibited higher correlation as 
fair value principles have been extended.18 
Consider  a  hypothetical  experiment.  Imagine  banks  in  the  UK  had  been  required  to  mark 
their banking books to market over the period 1999 to 2008, in addition to their trading book. 
Market  prices  are  used  to  proxy  different  categories  of  loan.  For  example,  Residential 
Mortgage Backed Securities (RMBS) and covered bond prices are used to proxy mortgage 
loans.  As  with  banks’  trading  books,  all  gains  and  losses  arising  on  the  banking  book  are 
assumed to flow directly to profits. 
Chart  6  plots  the  path  of  UK  banks’  profits,  both  actual  and  simulated  under  the  mark  to 
market  assumption.  Simulated  profits  are  around  eight  times  more  volatile.  Between  2001 
and  2006,  UK  banks’  cumulative  profits  would  have  been  around  £100  billion  higher  th
an 
recorded profits, as the expected future returns to risky projects were brought forward. This 
would have been the 21st century equivalent of capitalising the ashes in the blast furnace. 
For  what  goes  around  comes  around.  Hypothetical  losses  during  2008  would  then  have 
totalled in excess of £300 billion, as the risk from these projects was realised. The ashes in 
the furnace truly turned to dust. Had shareholders not already torn it out, thi
s rollercoaster 
ride in profits would have been hair-raisin
g. In this admittedly extreme case, it is questionable 
how much shareholder protection fair values would have delivered in practice. 
 
A  related  but  distinct  issue  arises  when  market  prices  deviate  from  their  true  values  for  a 
protracted period. Marking to market then runs the risk not just of unwarranted volatility but 
unjustifiable bankruptcy. T
ake a bank whose liabilities are perfectly maturity matched with its 
10-year assets. So there is no necessity for the bank to liquidate its assets to make good its 
liabilities as they fall due. 
But the market price of the banks’ assets might well embody a premium for instant liquidity – 
a  liquidity  premium.  As  Chart  5,  at  times  of  stress,  these premia  are  large  and  overshoot, 
lowering asset prices below economic value. In this
 situation, a marked to market balance 
sheet may give a misleading impression of banks’ worth. And if these distortions are large 
enough, fair values could even generate insolvency. 
During  this  crisis,  the  precipitate  rise  in  liquidity  premia  and  fall  in  asset  prices  may  have 
called into question the viability of many banks had their assets been fair-valued. Consider 
again the banking book of UK banks on a mark to market basis. Chart 7 shows the loss of 
value on this book, which would have peaked at over £400 billion during the early months of 
2009. The total capital resources of UK banks at that time were around £280 billion. In other 
words, the UK banking system in aggregate would have been technically insolvent on a 
mark 
to market basis. The recent recovery
 in asset prices has been almost as remarkable as the 
preceding fall. It has meant UK banks were back in the black within a matter of months. 
 
The act of marking to market may itself have a bearing on asset price dynamics. This arises 
because of its potential effects on banks’ behaviour. If swings in perceived solvency cause 
banks to sell assets, these fire-sales may themselves add to downward pressures on asset 
prices. Under mark to market, these pressures are felt by all institutions, not just the seller. In 
effect,  fire-sal
es  by  one  firm  have  negative  externalities  for  all  others. And  as  other  banks 
adjust  their  own  balance  sheets  in  response,  there  is  a  risk  the  downward  dynamic  is 
perpetuated. 
“Liquidity and fire-sales” 
                                                 
18  
Khan (2009). 
8 
 BIS Review 28/2010
By acting in this way, marking to market has the potential to serve as an amplifier of stress in 
the financial system.19 Other things equal, it could result in sharper and more severe asset 
price falls than in the past, accompanied by greater institutional stress. It could exaggerate 
excess  volatility  and  misalignment.  Marking  to  market  may  not  just  be  a  casualty  of  the 
failure of EMH; it may also be a cause. 
Hyun  Shin  has  likened  the  destabilising  dynamics  of  mark  to  market  to  the  unstable 
oscillations of London’s Millennium Bridge at the time it opened. In finance, these adverse 
dynamics  have  a  much  longer  historical  pedigree.  In  their  classic  monetary  history  of  the 
United States, Friedman and Schwartz assigned mark to market a key role in propagating 
banking  f
  The  evidence  of  such  dynamics  during  this 
crisis is more mixed. Some studies have claimed this effect was limited to banks with large 
trading portfolios;21 others that it has been significant and wide-ranging across the financial 
sector.22 
Perhaps the truth lies somewhere in between, with some market and institutions affected and 
others immune. Chart 8 plots commercial property values in the UK since 1920. There are 
five discernible boom and bust cycles in commercial property, signified by the dotted lines. 
Chart 9 looks at the cumulative falls in value during the bu
st. In four of the cases, the bust 
was similarly timed and sized. The exception is the bust of 2007–08, where the fall in value 
has been both greater and faster. It is plausible that fire-sales, aggravated in part by marking 
to market, may have con
ailure  during  the  Great  Depression.
tributed to this dynamic. 
20
The fair value agenda 
So how do these considerations relate to the debate on international accounting standards? 
ugh  the  Financial  Accounting 
At  present,  these  stand  at  a  crossroads.  In  the  US  (thro
Standards  Board  (FASB))  and 
the 
International  Accounting 
internationally  (through 
Standards  Board  (IASB)),  standard-setters  are  reviewing  their  treatment  of  financial 
instruments. Substantive decisions are planned during 2010. 
Within the IASB, a review of IAS39 is underway, with consultation on a new standard, IFRS9. 
n, 
The fair value debate is at the heart of the new proposals. One key dimension is valuatio
where IFRS9 proposes a combination of amortised cost and fair values, with clear criteria to 
determine the suitability of assets for each category. In the US, FASB is expected to issue 
consultation proposals that would tend to reinforce the use of fair value among US banks. 
A second dimension is provisioning. The concern here is that the use of provisions based on 
re  recognised  too  late,  thereby  contributing  to 
incurred  losses  means  that  impairments  a
pro-cyclicality  of  loan  supply.23  In  response,  the  IASB  has  issued  a  consultation  paper 
proposing that provisions be set on an expected loss basis. These proposals are currently 
being explored by regulators internationally. 
 
                                                
19   For example, see Plantin, Sapra and Shin (2008) and Allen and Carletti (2007) for a theoretical exposition of 
these dynamics. 
20   “Under  such  circumstances,  any  runs  on  banks  for  whatever  reason  became  to  some  extent  self-justifying, 
whatever the quality of assets held by banks. Banks had to dump their assets on the market, which inevitably 
caused  a  decline  in  the  market  value  of  those  assets  and  hence  of  the  remaining  assets  they  held.  The 
impairment  in  the  market  value  of  assets  held  by  banks,  specifically  their  bond  portfolios,  was  the  most 
important source of impairment of capital leading to bank suspensions, rather than the default of specific loans 
or specific bond issues.” (Friedman and Schwartz (1963)). 
21   For example, Laux and Leuz (2009). 
22   For example, Wallison (2008). 
23   For example, Turner (2010). 
BIS Review 28/2010 
 9
The importance of a common measuring rod 
A failure of efficient markets is not of itself a failure of fair value 
Underlying  both  of  these  debates  is  a  perceived  tension  between  the  needs  of  different 
stakeholders,  in  particular  investors  and  regulators.  So  what  broad  principles  might  frame 
accounting  standards  if  the  demands  of  these  stakeholders  are  to  be  met?  Using  the 
framework outlined earlier, these principles might include: 
 
The  G20  have  committed  FASB  and  the  IASB  to  convergence  of  international  accounting 
standards by June 2011. This is an ambitious timetable, for it is not just a meeting of two 
minds. There are perhaps more than 30 different accounting standards operating worldwide. 
Many minds need to meet if a truly international standard is to emerge. 
It  could  be  argued  that  differences  in  accounting  standards  do  little  harm.  Like  foreign 
languages, we may learn to live, pe
rhaps even love, them. Attempts to compel a common 
language  might  risk  creating  the  accountancy  equivalent  of  Esperanto.  Unfortunately,  the 
analogy  is  inexact.  Banks  are,  by  their  nature,  international.  So  too  are  investors  in,  and 
regulators of, banks. If all parties speak different languages at the same time, the result is 
likely to be noise rather than signal. 
For banks, the noise to signal ratio has been particularly high during this crisis. Differences in 
accounting standards have contributed
 to this noise. In 2008, UK banks’ assets would have 
been  £2  trillion,  or  around  30%,  larger  under  European  IFRS  than
  under  US  GAAP 
international  comparisons  of  such 
standards.  These  differences  make  problematic 
rudimentary concepts as bank leverage. This in turn hinders investors’ risk assessments and 
regulators’ supervisory assessments. 
 
It  is  commonly  h
eard  that  the  failure  of  EMH  argues  against  fair  value  in  favour  of  some 
alternative, such as amortised cost. The truth is more subtle than that. Deviation from EMH 
will cause both accounting measures to deliver distorted signals of value. Depending on the 
precise  circumstances,  either  measure  might  deliver  a  more  accurate  measure  of  true 
economic value. 
To see this, consider four scenarios. Consider first a bank making a single loan. In the first 
period, amortised cost and fair valuations of this loan will be equal. Expected cashflows will 
in  both  cases  be  discounted  at  the  preva
iling  market  discount  rate.  To  the  extent  EMH  is 
violated  –  for  example,  because  the  market  discount  rate  is  too  low  –  both  accounting 
concepts will result in asset over-valuation. Both concepts will be equally imprudent. In other 
words,  credit  cycles  that  cause  failures  of  EMH  contaminate  bank  asset  valuations 
irrespective of the accounting convention. 
Consider  next  a  bank  with  a  portfolio  of  two  loans,  one  initiated  when  assets  prices
  were 
priced correctly, the other when they were over-valued. In this situation, amortised cost and 
fair values will value the asset portfolio differently. Because market prices are applied to the 
whole  asset  stock,  fair  value  will  tend  to  result  in  greater  recorded  overvaluation.  In  other 
words, marking to market is more susceptible to valuation cycles than amortised cost. 
Third, consider a situation where, having been over-valued, the market price of the second 
loan corrects back to equilibrium. Fair values now deliver the correct valuation o
f the entire 
asset  portfolio.  Amortised  cost  measures,  meanwhile,  will  continue  to  give  a  misleadingly 
bullish account of the second loan’s valuation, since this will be discounted at the artificially-
low discount rate used at initiation. In other words, in this set of circumstances the tables are 
turned, with fair values giving a more accurate and prudent measure of valuation. 
Finally,  if  instead  of  correcting  to  equilibrium,  assume  market  prices  over-correct  –  say, 
because of an overshoot in illiquidity premia of the type witnessed during crisis. It is then no 
longer clear which valuation metric is preferable. Both will be inaccurate to some degree but 
in  opposite  directions  –  the  amortised
  cost  measure  suggesting  valuations  which  are  “too 
high”,  while  fair  value  will  suggest  valuations  which  are  “too  low”.  The  greater  the  initial 
10 
 BIS Review 28/2010
Better accounting for expected losses 
misalignment  in  asset  prices,  and  the  smaller  their  subsequent  overshoot,  the  greater  the 
likelihood  of  fair  values  being  preferred  over  amortised  cost  and  vice-versa.  Ultimately, 
however, this is an empirical question. 
In general terms, however, the point is clear: efficient markets are not necessary but may be 
sufficient to justify the use of fair value principles. 
 
s is that there is a potential trade-off in the use of amortised 
What is clear from these example
cost  versus  fair  value  measures  when  market  prices  deviate  from  EMH.  Both  might  give 
misleading signals, but in opposite directions. Recognising the problems with either, is there 
a way of doing better than both? 
Perhaps the simplest way of doing so would be to use both valuation metrics. There have 
already  been  suggestions  that  “dual”  accounts  could  be  drawn  up.24  The  upside  of  this 
approach is that it would give regulators and investors more information on which to base 
assessments. It releases sta
keholders from the need to pick a winner. The downside is that 
both valuations may be inaccurate, with a lack of clarity about which ought to be used, for 
example,  to  judge  bank  solvency.  Or  in  the  words  of  Macbeth’s  three  witches,  “double, 
double, toil and trouble”. 
A more ambitious alternative would be to seek a more systemic and standardised valuation 
methodology  in  the  first  place,  against  which  different  approaches  can  be  cross-checked. 
 expected loss, less susceptible 
The key here would be to establish an objective measure of
to  the  excess  volatility  of  market  prices  but  adept  at  picking  up  its  timely  signals.  In  the 
language of George Shackle, stricter valuation standards would help place some bounds on 
the expectations and imaginations of bankers. 
This is a role which neither accountants nor regulators are best placed to carry out. It would 
require a body with both expertise in valuation and objectivity. It would seek consistency and, 
as far as possible, accuracy in valuations across asset classes, institutions and countries. An 
it  standards  have  only  been 
International  Valuation  Standards  Board  already  exists.  But 
  and  regulation  already  have  fora  to 
adopted  in  around  half  a  dozen  countries.  Accounting
support consistency of standards. During this crisis, valuation practices have been every bit 
as important. Perhaps they too need international recognition. 
 
Accounting  standards  already  reflect  characteristics  on  the  assets  side  of  banks’  balance 
sheet. For example, IASB standards require consideration of the cashflow characteristics of 
assets (for example, specified cashflows of interest and principa
l) and the intentions of the 
holder (for example, to collect the contractual cashflows). But for banks the characteristics of 
their  liabilities  may  be  every  bit  as  important  as  their  assets.  Indeed,  at  times  of  stress  in 
funding markets, liability characteristics may be more important. 
Consider, for example, a 10-year loan with regular interest payments which is intended to be 
held to maturity by a bank. These characteristics would justify the bank carrying the asset at 
amortised 
cost. But imagine this loan is funded with overnight loans. Whatever the intention, 
this liability structure would require early liquidation of the asset if funding were to dry up. In 
other  words,  the  ability  of  a  bank  to  hold  assets  to  maturity  may  be  as  important  as  the 
intention. 
The  greater  the  maturity  mismatch,  the  greater  the  likelihood  of  liability  characteristics 
dominating asset intentions. In other words, the case for using fair values is greater when 
balance sheets are maturity mismatch
ed. Or, put differently, precisely because market prices 
Business models matter, especially for banks 
 
                                                
24   For example, FASB (2009). 
BIS Review 28/2010 
 11
embody a liquidity premium, they could give a better view of the true asset position of a firm 
facing liquidity constraints. For institutions facing funding pressure, liquidity premia may be a 
legitimate measure of fundamentals. 
And which companies’ balance sheets are most subject to such maturity mismatch? Banks. It 
has been argued that banks ought to be protected from the vicissitudes of market prices. But, 
given their maturity transformation role, the case may actually be stronger for banks than for 
other  types  of  both  financial  (such  as  insurance  companies  and  pension  funds)  and  non-
financial firms. For some banks, this may be the accounting convention that best aligns the 
economic characteristics of both assets and liabilities. 
It  is  interesting  that  there  was  evidence  of  financial  markets  making  their  own  switch  in 
valuation  convention  during  the  course  of  the  crisis.  As  funding  maturities  shortened,  the 
g 
probability of asset liquidation rose. It became rational, then, for investors to begin valuin
even banking book assets at market prices, as in Chart 7. For a time, this process appeared 
to  generate  its  own  downward  dynamic,  with  shortening  maturities  and  falling  asset  prices 
eroding the impliedly mark-to-market solvency position of banks in a liquidity/solvency loop. 
Some  have  argued  this  downward  dynamic  itself  justifies  switching-off  fair  values.  But  the 
perils  of  doing  so  are  clear.  Persisting  with  an  inappropriate  valuation  metric  may  give  an 
lso  reduce  banks’  incentives  to 
inaccurate  picture  of  banks’  true  solvency  position.  It  will  a
adjust  funding  structures  to  guard  against  such  a  dynamic.  It  is  precisely  such  risk 
incentives that appear to explain the relative success of some firms, including 
management 
hs, during this crisis. Therein may lie a lesson. 
Goldman Sac
Conclusion 
The fortunes of fair value have waxed and waned historically, particularly at crisis time. So it 
is no surprise that fair value is under attack today. We may be at yet another pivot point. 
With financial markets still thick with fog and filthy air, now would be an unfortunate time to 
d by fair values. Blocking out the sun or, worse 
starve balance sheets of the sunlight provide
still, claiming it revolves around the earth will not serve banks or regulators well in the longer 
run. Restoring traditional accounting principles sounds desirable, provided the (Italian) values 
we import are Pacioli rather than Mussolini. 
At the same time, it needs to be recognised that too much sunlight can scorch. That means 
to  fair  values,  screening  out  their  harmful  rays.  Rethinking 
applying  appropriate  filters 
valuation  practices  across  firms,  asset  classes  and  countries,  better  to  capture  expected 
losses, is one important such filter. Recognising the liability as well as asset characteristics of 
institutions may be another. 
de fair value principles, as that would result in 
We need to ensure these changes do not ero
the  baby  being  thrown  out  with  the  bathwater.  Making  fair  values  less  foul  ought  to 
th  investors  and  regulators.  It  would  protect  fair  value  from  lightening  strikes 
advantage  bo
t financial thunderstorm breaks. 
when the nex
References 
Allen, F and Carletti (2007), “Market-to-Ma
Financial Institutions Centre Working Paper 06–15. 
Billings, M and F Capie (2009), “Transparency and Financial Reporting in mid-20th Century 
British Banking”, Accounting Forum, 38–53. 
Bronk, R (2009), The Romantic Economist
rket Accounting and Liquidity Pricing”, Wharton 
, Cambridge University Press.  
12 
 BIS Review 28/2010
rontiers  during  the  Interwar  Depression”, 
 H S Shin (2008), “Fair Value Accounting and Financial Stability”, 
Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (2009),  “Financial  Instrument:  Improvements  to 
Recognition and Measurement”, Financial Statement Presentation of Financial Instruments, 
13 August 2009 (Board meeting handout). 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (1997), History of the Eighties – Lessons for the 
Future. 
Friedman,  M  and  A  J  Schwartz  (1963),  A  Monetary  History  of  the  United  States,  
1867–1960, Princeton University Press. 
Goethe, J W (1796), Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre. 
James,  H  (1992),  “Financial  Flows  Across  F
Economic History Review, 594–613. 
Laux, C and C Leuz (2009), “Did Fair-Value Accounting Contribute to the Financial Crisis?”, 
University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Working Paper No. 41. 
Khan, O (2009),  “Does  Fair  Value  Accounting Contribute  to  Systemic  Risk  in  the Banking 
Industry?”, SSRN Working Paper No. 1327596. 
Pacioli, L (1494), Summa de Arithmetica, Geometria, Proportioni et Proportionalita. 
Plantin, G, Sapra, H and
University of Chicago Graduate School of Business Research Paper 08–15. 
Seligman,  J  (2003),  The  Transformation  of  Wall  Street:  A
Exchange Commission and Modern Corporate Finance, 3rd Edition, Aspen Publish
Shackle,  G  (1972),  Epistemics  and  Economics  –  A  Critique  of  Economic  Critiques, 
Transactions Publishers. 
Shiller, R (1981), “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by Subsequent Changes 
in Dividends?”, American Economic Review, 71(3), 421–36. 
Shiller, R (2005), Irrational Exuberance, Princeton University Press. 
Simonson,  D  G  and  G  H  Hempel  (1993),  “Banking  Lessons  from  the  Past: 
Regulatory Agreement Interpreted”, Journal of Financial Services Research, 249–267. 
Smithers,  A  (2009),  Wall  Street  Revalued:  Imperfect  Markets  and  Inept  Central  Bankers, 
John Wiley & Sons. 
Turner, A (2010), Banks Are Different: Should Accounting Reflect that Fact?, speech given 
to the Institute of Charter
(2008),  Report  and 
United  States  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission 
Recommendations Pursuant to Section 133 of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 
2008: Study on Mark-To-Market Accounting. 
Wallison, P J (2008), “Fair Value Accounting: A Critique”, American Enterprise Institute for 
Pubic Policy Research. 
ed Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW), London. 
  History  of  the  Securities  and 
The  1938 
ers. 
BIS Review 28/2010 
 13
Annex 
14 
  BIS Review 28/2010
BIS Review 28/2010 
  15
 16 
 BIS Review 28/2010
