Njuguna Ndung’u: Investing differently in women 
Speech  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the  African 
Women’s Economic Summit, Nairobi, 18–20 March 2010. 
 The Right Hon. Raila Odinga, Prime Minister of the Republic of Kenya; 
Hon. Uhuru Kenyatta, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance of the Republic 
of Kenya; 
Mrs. Graca Machel, Founder, New Faces, New Voices Network; 
Dr. Donald Kaberuka, President, African Development Bank; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
First, Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, may I take this opportunity to thank you most sincerely for 
finding time from your busy schedule to grace this important Forum whose theme is Investing 
Differently  in  Women.  Your  presence  demonstrates  the  seriousness  with  which  the 
Government  of  Kenya  embraces  the  role  of  women  and  participation  in  the  development 
process and more importantly their role in the financial sector. 
May  I  also  heartily  thank  the  New  Faces,  New  Voices  Network  (NFNV),  the  Founder 
Madame  Graca  Machel  and  the  African  Development  Bank  (AfDB)  represented  by  the 
President,  Dr.  Donald  Kaberuka  for  choosing  to  host  the  inaugural  African  Women’s 
Economic Summit (AWES) in Nairobi. This is a great honour to us in Kenya. I also warmly 
welcome all international delegates represented here including fellow central bankers from 
the region. 
The Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, the Central Bank of Kenya is delighted to partner with AfDB 
and NFVN in this Summit especially when the Central Bank and indeed the Government of 
Kenya is in the process of promoting more inclusive financial policies. 
In  the  recent  past,  the  Government  has  introduced  new  institutions  to  support,  shape  and 
deepen the financial sector. Examples include: 
 
 
Licensing and supervision of Deposit Taking Microfinance Institutions; 
Savings  and  Credit  Co-operatives  (SACCOs)  and  the  SACCOs  Regulatory 
Authority; 
Amendment of the Banking Act to allow Shariah-compliant banking products; 
Licensing of Credit Reference Bureaus to facilitate credit information sharing; 
Agent Banking for cost effective financial outreach. 
 
 
 
Since  we  have  seen  commercial  bank  branch  expansion  by  over  100  branches  in  three 
years,  deposits  have  increased  from  KSh.800  billion  on  to  KSh.1.01  trillion  and  accounts 
from 2.4m to 8.4m in the same period. 
The Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, as we commence deliberations at this important Summit, it is 
prudent  to  identify  the  issues  that  limit  women’s  access  to  financial  products  and  services 
and explore innovations to expand the access to affordable financial services to women at all 
income levels. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  ultimately  this  Summit  offers  us  the  opportunity  to  identify  and 
propagate key actions that financial sector market players and policy makers need to take to 
invest differently in women and towards building stronger financial sectors and competitive 
economies in Africa that are inclusive. We should therefore identify the policy drive expected 
in this regard and be the agents of the change required towards this end. 
BIS Review 43/2010 
 1
The  Rt.  Hon.  Prime  Minister,  with  these  few  remarks,  it  is  now  my  pleasure  and  duty  to 
welcome your Rt. Hon. Raila Odinga of the Republic of Kenya to make a few remarks and to 
welcome you to address this Forum. 
Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, you have the floor. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2010
