Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: The Corporate Governance Code of the 
Kingdom of Bahrain 
Welcome address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central 
Bank of Bahrain, at the launch of the proposed new Corporate Governance Code, Manama, 
16 March 2010. 
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:  
It gives me great pleasure to be with you here today and to take part in the launch of the 
proposed  new  Corporate  Governance  Code  for  all  public  companies  in  the  Kingdom  of 
Bahrain. Although this initiative has been led by the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, the 
Central Bank has been involved at all stages in the development of the new Code and we 
are strong supporters of it. We will be working with the financial sector and listed companies 
on the implementation of both the spirit and letter of the new Code. 
Although  high  standards  of  corporate  governance  are  essential  for  all  publicly  listed 
companies, they are especially important for firms in the financial sector. If I may refer back 
to the speech that I gave at the World Islamic Banking Conference in December of last year, 
financial  institutions  –  and  banks  in  particular  –  are  not  like  other  corporations  where 
directors  need  to  consider  only  the  interests  of  shareholders.  Financial  institutions  have  a 
special position of trust in that they are charged with looking after other people’s money. This 
means  that  the  interests  of  creditors,  depositors,  policy  holders,  and  clients  need  to  have 
equal weight with those of shareholders and the decisions taken by the Board of Directors. 
Recognition  of  the  directors’  fiduciary  responsibilities  is,  therefore,  an  essential  element  of 
corporate governance for banks and other financial institutions. 
Unfortunately,  the  global  financial  crisis  has  provided  many  illustrations  of  failures  of 
corporate  governance.  There  is  common  pattern  behind  many  of  the  failed  financial 
institutions of the last 18 months. In many cases, the Chief Executive was a dominant figure 
who  made  sure  that  he  alone  took  all  important  decisions.  There  was  no  culture  of  open 
debate and discussion within the senior management of these institutions, with the result that 
other members of the Board of Directors did not feel able to challenge the Chief Executive’s 
decisions. Many bank Boards lacked banking experts. Individuals were recruited to the Board 
of  banks  for  their  connections  rather  than  for  their  knowledge  of  the  banking  industry  and 
their ability to ask the right questions. 
In the case of many failed banks the standards of corporate governance fell far short of what 
should have been expected. It was the Board of Directors that should have challenged the 
aggressive  growth  strategies  pursued  by  some  Chief  Executives.  It  was  the  Board  of 
Directors that should have ensured there were proper risk management and control systems 
within  each  bank.  It  was  the  Board  of  Directors  that  should  have  ensured  that  the  senior 
management  of  the  bank  had  properly  taken  into  account  the  possibility  of  experiencing 
extreme stress scenarios. Finally, it was the Board of Directors that should have ensured the 
remuneration structures were in line with the long-run interest of the bank itself rather than 
rewarding short-term risk-taking. 
The need for high standards of corporate governance is, therefore, one of the main lessons 
to be drawn from the global financial crisis. It is in this context that the CBB views the new 
Code as a significant development in strengthening Bahrain’s reputation as a well regulated 
financial centre. 
The  new  Code  builds  on  current  international  best  practice  for  corporate  governance.  For 
example, it reflects the corporate governance principles developed by the Organisation for 
BIS Review 32/2010 
 1
for 
the  benchmark 
Economic  Cooperation  and  Development  which  have  become 
international standards in the field. 
Of course, the special responsibilities of the Board of Directors of a financial institution which 
I  mentioned  earlier  means  that  the  CBB  will  need  to  continue  to  apply  its  own  corporate 
governance requirements on such matters as internal high level controls, the avoidance of 
conflicts  of  interest,  and  various  public  disclosure  and  reporting  requirements.  These  will 
need  to  remain  more  detailed  than  those  in  the  new  Code,  for  example  setting  the  public 
disclosure  requirements  for  financial  institutions.  The  CBB’s  detailed  requirements  on 
corporate governance will therefore continue to exist in parallel to the new Code. 
It is important that public companies in Bahrain, both financial and non-financial, enter fully 
into  the  spirit  of  the  new  Code.  It  should  not  be  seen  as  a  matter  of  complying  with  just 
another  set of  regulations,  but  as something  that  should  influence  the corporate  culture  of 
companies in Bahrain. Greater transparency and more effective governance structures will in 
the long-run only serve to increase the attractiveness of Bahrain for foreign investors seeking 
to establish or expand operations in the MENA region. 
In conclusion I would like to take this opportunity to thanks Dr. Hassan Fakhro, Minister of 
Industry  and  Commerce,  for  his  support  and  cooperation  in  the  introduction  of  the  new 
Corporate  Governance  Code,  and  to  the  Steering  Committee  for  the  excellent  work  it  has 
achieved. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2010
