Ben S Bernanke: Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress 
Testimony  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 21 July 2010. 
 Chairman Dodd, Senator Shelby, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to present 
the Federal Reserve’s semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress.  
Economic and financial developments 
The economic expansion that began in the middle of last year is proceeding at a moderate 
pace,  supported  by  stimulative  monetary  and  fiscal  policies.  Although  fiscal  policy  and 
inventory restocking will likely be providing less impetus to the recovery than they  have in 
recent quarters, rising demand from households and businesses should help sustain growth. 
In particular, real consumer spending appears to have expanded at about a 2–1/2 percent 
annual rate in the first half of this year, with purchases of durable goods increasing especially 
rapidly.  However,  the  housing  market  remains  weak,  with  the  overhang  of  vacant  or 
foreclosed houses weighing on home prices and construction.  
An important drag on household spending is the slow recovery in the labor market and the 
attendant  uncertainty  about  job  prospects.  After  two  years  of  job  losses,  private  payrolls 
expanded at an average of about 100,000 per month during the first half of this year, a pace 
insufficient to reduce the unemployment rate materially. In all likelihood, a significant amount 
of time will be required to restore the nearly 8–1/2 million jobs that were lost over 2008 and 
2009. Moreover, nearly half of the unemployed have been out of work for longer than six months. 
Long-term unemployment not only imposes exceptional near-term hardships on workers and 
their families, it also erodes skills and may have long-lasting effects on workers’ employment 
and earnings prospects.  
In  the  business  sector,  investment  in  equipment  and  software  appears  to  have  increased 
rapidly in the first half of the year, in part reflecting capital outlays that had been deferred 
during  the  downturn  and  the  need  of  many  businesses  to  replace  aging  equipment.  In 
contrast, spending on nonresidential structures – weighed down by high vacancy rates and 
tight  credit  –  has  continued  to  contract,  though  some  indicators  suggest  that  the  rate  of 
decline may be slowing. Both U.S. exports and U.S. imports have been expanding, reflecting 
growth in the global economy and the recovery of world trade. Stronger exports have in turn 
helped foster growth in the U.S. manufacturing sector.  
Inflation has remained low. The price index for personal consumption expenditures appears 
to have risen at an annual rate of less than 1 percent in the first half of the year. Although 
overall  inflation  has  fluctuated,  partly  reflecting  changes  in  energy  prices,  by  a  number  of 
measures underlying inflation has trended down over the past two years. The slack in labor 
and  product  markets  has  damped  wage  and  price  pressures,  and  rapid  increases  in 
productivity have further reduced producers’ unit labor costs.  
My  colleagues  on  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  and  I  expect  continued 
moderate growth, a gradual decline in the unemployment rate, and subdued inflation over the 
next several years. In conjunction with the June FOMC meeting, Board members and Reserve 
Bank presidents prepared forecasts of economic growth, unemployment, and inflation for the 
years  2010  through  2012  and  over  the  longer  run.  The  forecasts  are  qualitatively  similar  to 
those we released in February and May, although progress in reducing unemployment is 
now expected to be somewhat slower than we previously projected, and near-term inflation 
now looks likely to be a little lower. Most FOMC participants expect real GDP growth of 3 to 
BIS Review 99/2010 
 1
3–1/2 percent  in  2010,  and  roughly  3–1/2  to  4–1/2  percent  in  2011  and  2012.  The 
unemployment rate is expected to decline to between 7 and 7–1/2 percent by the end of 2012. 
Most  participants  viewed  uncertainty  about  the  outlook  for  growth  and  unemployment  as 
greater than normal, and the majority saw the risks to growth as weighted to the downside. 
Most participants projected that inflation will average only about 1 percent in 2010 and that it 
will remain low during 2011 and 2012, with the risks to the inflation outlook roughly balanced.  
One factor underlying the Committee’s somewhat weaker outlook is that financial conditions 
–  though  much  improved  since  the  depth  of  the  financial  crisis  –  have  become  less 
supportive  of  economic  growth  in  recent  months.  Notably,  concerns  about  the  ability  of 
Greece and a number of other euro-area countries to manage their sizable budget deficits 
and  high  levels  of  public  debt  spurred  a  broad-based  withdrawal  from  risk-taking  in  global 
financial markets in the spring, resulting in lower stock prices and wider risk spreads in the 
United States. In response to these fiscal pressures, European leaders put in place a number 
of strong measures, including an assistance package for Greece and €500 billion of funding 
to  backstop  the  near-term  financing  needs  of  euro-area  countries.  To  help  ease  strains  in 
U.S.  dollar  funding  markets,  the  Federal  Reserve  reestablished  temporary  dollar  liquidity 
swap lines with the ECB and several other major central banks. To date, drawings under the 
swap lines have been limited, but we believe that the existence of these lines has increased 
confidence  in  dollar  funding  markets,  helping  to  maintain  credit  availability  in  our  own 
financial system.  
Like financial conditions generally, the state of the U.S. banking system has also improved 
significantly  since  the  worst  of  the  crisis.  Loss  rates  on  most  types  of  loans  seem  to  be 
peaking, and, in the aggregate, bank capital ratios have risen to new highs. However, many 
banks continue to have a large volume of troubled loans on their books, and bank lending 
standards  remain  tight.  With  credit  demand  weak  and  with  banks  writing  down  problem 
credits, bank loans outstanding have continued to contract. Small businesses, which depend 
importantly on bank credit, have been particularly hard hit. At the Federal Reserve, we have 
been working to facilitate the flow of funds to creditworthy small businesses. Along with the 
other supervisory agencies, we issued guidance to banks and examiners emphasizing that 
lenders should do all they can to meet the needs of creditworthy borrowers, including small 
businesses.1 We also have conducted extensive training programs for our bank examiners, 
with  the  message  that  lending  to  viable  small  businesses  is  good  for  the  safety  and 
soundness of our banking system as well as for our economy. We continue to seek feedback 
from both banks and potential borrowers about credit conditions. For example, over the past 
six months we have convened more than 40 meetings around the country of lenders, small 
business  representatives,  bank  examiners,  government  officials,  and  other  stakeholders  to 
exchange  ideas  about  the  challenges  faced  by  small  businesses,  particularly  in  obtaining 
credit. A capstone conference on addressing the credit needs of small businesses was held 
at the Board of Governors in Washington last week.2 This testimony includes an addendum 
that summarizes the findings of this effort and possible next steps.  
Federal Reserve policy 
The  Federal  Reserve’s  response  to  the  financial  crisis  and  the  recession  has  involved 
several components. First, in response to the periods of intense illiquidity and dysfunction in 
                                                 
1   See  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation,  National 
Credit  Union  Administration,  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  Office  of  Thrift  Supervision,  and 
Conference of State Bank Supervisors (2010), “Regulators Issue Statement on Lending to Creditworthy Small 
Businesses,” joint press release, February 5. 
2   For  more  information,  see  Ben  S.  Bernanke  (2010),  “Restoring  the  Flow  of  Credit  to  Small  Businesses,” 
speech  delivered  at  “Addressing  the  Financing  Needs  of  Small  Businesses,”  a  forum  sponsored  by  the 
Federal Reserve Board, Washington, July 12. 
2 
 BIS Review 99/2010
financial  markets  that  characterized  the  crisis,  the  Federal  Reserve  undertook  a  range  of 
measures  and  set  up  emergency  programs  designed  to  provide  liquidity  to  financial 
institutions  and  markets  in  the  form  of  fully  secured,  mostly  short-term  loans.  Over  time, 
these programs helped to stem the panic and to restore normal functioning in a number of 
key  financial  markets,  supporting  the  flow  of  credit  to  the  economy.  As  financial  markets 
stabilized, the Federal Reserve shut down most of these programs during the first half of this 
year and took steps to normalize the terms on which it lends to depository institutions. The 
only  such  programs  currently  open  to  provide  new  liquidity  are  the  recently  reestablished 
dollar liquidity swap lines with major central banks that I noted earlier. Importantly, our broad-
based programs achieved their intended purposes with no loss to taxpayers. All of the loans 
extended through the multiborrower facilities that have come due have been repaid in full, 
with interest. In addition, the Board does not expect the Federal Reserve to incur a net loss 
on any of the secured loans provided during the crisis to help prevent the disorderly failure of 
systemically significant financial institutions.  
A  second  major  component  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  response  to  the  financial  crisis  and 
recession has involved both standard and less conventional forms of monetary policy. Over 
the course of the crisis, the FOMC aggressively reduced its target for the federal funds rate 
to a range of 0 to 1/4 percent, which has been maintained since the end of 2008. And, as 
indicated in the statement released after the June meeting, the FOMC continues to anticipate 
that  economic  conditions  –  including  low  rates  of  resource  utilization,  subdued  inflation 
trends, and stable inflation expectations – are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the 
federal funds rate for an extended period.3  
In  addition  to  the  very  low  federal  funds  rate,  the  FOMC  has  provided  monetary  policy 
stimulus through large-scale purchases of longer-term Treasury debt, federal agency debt, 
and  agency  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS).  A  range  of  evidence  suggests  that  these 
purchases helped improve conditions in mortgage markets and other private credit markets 
and put downward pressure on longer-term private borrowing rates and spreads.  
Compared with the period just before the financial crisis, the System’s portfolio of domestic 
securities has increased from about $800 billion to $2 trillion and has shifted from consisting 
of 100 percent Treasury securities to having almost two-thirds of its investments in agency-
related securities. In addition, the average maturity of the Treasury portfolio nearly doubled, 
from  three  and  one-half  years  to  almost  seven  years.  The  FOMC  plans  to  return  the 
System’s  portfolio  to  a  more  normal  size  and  composition  over  the  longer  term,  and  the 
Committee has been discussing alternative approaches to accomplish that objective.  
One approach is for the Committee to adjust its reinvestment policy – that is, its policy for 
handling repayments of principal on the securities – to gradually normalize the portfolio over 
time. Currently, repayments of principal from agency debt and MBS are not being reinvested, 
allowing  the  holdings  of  those  securities  to  run  off  as  the  repayments  are  received.  By 
contrast, the proceeds from maturing Treasury securities are being reinvested in new issues 
of Treasury securities with similar maturities. At some point, the Committee may want to shift 
its reinvestment of the proceeds from maturing Treasury securities to shorter-term issues, so 
as to gradually reduce the average maturity of our Treasury holdings toward pre-crisis levels, 
while leaving the aggregate value of those holdings unchanged. At this juncture, however, no 
decision to change reinvestment policy has been made.  
A  second  way  to  normalize  the  size  and  composition  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  securities 
portfolio would be to sell some holdings of agency debt and MBS. Selling agency securities, 
rather  than  simply  letting  them  run  off,  would  shrink  the  portfolio  and  return  it  to  a 
composition  of  all  Treasury  securities  more  quickly.  FOMC  participants  broadly  agree  that 
sales  of  agency-related  securities  should  eventually  be  used  as  part  of  the  strategy  to 
                                                 
3   See Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2010), “FOMC Statement,” press release, June 23. 
BIS Review 99/2010 
 3
normalize  the  portfolio.  Such  sales  will  be  implemented  in  accordance  with  a  framework 
communicated well in advance and will be conducted at a gradual pace. Because changes in 
the  size  and  composition  of  the  portfolio  could  affect  financial  conditions,  however,  any 
decisions regarding the commencement or pace of asset sales will be made in light of the 
Committee’s evaluation of the outlook for employment and inflation.  
As I noted earlier, the FOMC continues to anticipate that economic conditions are likely to 
warrant  exceptionally  low  levels  of the  federal funds  rate for  an  extended  period. At  some 
point, however, the Committee will need to begin to remove monetary policy accommodation 
to prevent the buildup of inflationary pressures. When that time comes, the Federal Reserve 
will  act  to  increase  short-term  interest  rates  by  raising  the  interest  rate  it  pays  on  reserve 
balances that depository institutions hold at Federal Reserve Banks. To tighten the linkage 
between  the  interest  rate  paid  on  reserves  and  other  short-term  market  interest  rates,  the 
Federal Reserve may also drain reserves from the banking system. Two tools for draining 
reserves from the system are being developed and tested and will be ready when needed. 
First,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  putting  in  place  the  capacity  to  conduct  large  reverse 
repurchase  agreements  with  an  expanded  set  of  counterparties.  Second,  the  Federal 
Reserve has tested a term deposit facility, under which instruments similar to the certificates 
of deposit that banks offer their customers will be auctioned to depository institutions.  
Of  course,  even  as  the  Federal  Reserve  continues  prudent  planning  for  the  ultimate 
withdrawal  of  extraordinary  monetary  policy  accommodation,  we  also  recognize  that  the 
economic outlook remains unusually uncertain. We will continue to carefully assess ongoing 
financial and economic developments, and we remain prepared to take further policy actions 
as needed to foster a return to full utilization of our nation’s productive potential in a context 
of price stability.  
Financial reform legislation 
Last  week,  the  Congress  passed  landmark  legislation  to  reform  the  financial  system  and 
financial regulation, and the President signed the bill into law this morning. That legislation 
represents significant progress toward reducing the likelihood of future financial crises and 
strengthening  the  capacity  of  financial  regulators  to  respond  to  risks  that  may  emerge. 
Importantly,  the  legislation  encourages  an  approach  to  supervision  designed  to  foster  the 
stability of the financial system as a whole as well as the safety and soundness of individual 
institutions.  Within  the  Federal  Reserve,  we  have  already  taken  steps  to  strengthen  our 
analysis and supervision of the financial system and systemically important financial firms in 
ways  consistent  with  the  new  legislation.  In  particular,  making  full  use  of  the  Federal 
Reserve’s  broad  expertise  in  economics,  financial  markets,  payment  systems,  and  bank 
supervision,  we  have  significantly  changed  our  supervisory  framework  to  improve  our 
consolidated supervision of large, complex bank holding companies, and we are enhancing 
the  tools  we  use  to  monitor  the  financial  sector  and  to  identify  potential  systemic  risks.  In 
addition,  the  briefings  prepared  for  meetings  of  the  FOMC  are  now  providing  increased 
coverage and analysis of potential risks to the financial system, thus supporting the Federal 
Reserve’s ability to make effective monetary policy and to enhance financial stability.  
Much  work  remains  to  be  done,  both  to  implement  through  regulation  the  extensive 
provisions of the new legislation and to develop the macroprudential approach called for by 
the  Congress.  However,  I  believe  that  the  legislation,  together  with  stronger  regulatory 
standards for bank capital and liquidity now being developed, will place our financial system 
on a sounder foundation and minimize the risk of a repetition of the devastating events of the 
past three years.  
Thank you. I would be pleased to respond to your questions.  
4 
 BIS Review 99/2010
Addressing the financing needs of small businesses 
Addendum: 
Summary of key themes for the Federal Reserve System’s small business meeting series 
Introduction  
The Federal Reserve System’s Community Affairs Offices hosted more than 40 meetings in 
2010 as part of an initiative titled “Addressing the Financing Needs of Small Businesses.”4 
The goal was to gather information and perspectives to help the Federal Reserve and other 
stakeholders address the immediate and intermediate credit needs of small businesses.  
Some  of  the  meetings  took  the  form  of  small  focus  groups  or  listening  sessions.  Other 
meetings were on a larger scale, with more formal agendas focusing on a particular aspect of 
small  business  financing,  such  as  minority  entrepreneurship,  the  role  of  Community 
Development  Financial  Institutions  (CDFIs),  or  federal  guarantee  loan  programs.  Several 
meetings focused on a specific industry, such as auto suppliers.  
Whether small or large, all of the meetings brought together small business owners, small 
business  trade  groups,  financial  institutions  and  other  private  lenders,  bank  supervision 
officials,  CDFIs,  and  other  small  business  support  service  providers  to  discuss  ways  to 
improve credit flow to viable small businesses. Through this initiative, the Federal Reserve 
sought to deepen its understanding of the dynamics of the supply of and demand for small 
business  credit,  to  identify  specific  credit  gaps,  and  to  learn  of  promising  practices  and 
suggestions for improvement.  
This  summary  aims  to  capture  the  key  issues  that  emerged  from  the  meetings  and  offer 
examples of how those issues were reflected in different parts of the country and in different 
industries. It is not intended to be a comprehensive compilation of all the ideas and views 
that were expressed. We have grouped the comments under the categories of credit supply, 
credit  demand,  and  credit  gaps.  In  addition,  we  have  included  key  recommendations  for 
potential next steps that were identified by participants at the July 12 capstone event at the 
Board of Governors as well as throughout the System’s series of meetings.  
Factors impacting the supply of small business credit 
Small businesses and banks generally reported that lending contracted significantly during 
the recession for a variety of reasons. These comments are consistent with data indicating 
that  outstanding  loans  to  small  businesses  dropped  from  more  than  $710  billion  in  the 
second  quarter  of  2008  to  less  than  $670  billion  in  the  first  quarter  of  2010.5  In  addition, 
some  banks  noted  that  some  of  the  contraction  in  lending  is  related  to  broader  concerns 
about  capital  adequacy.  Comments  related  to  the  supply  of  credit  to  small  businesses  fell 
into four broad categories: 1) tighter bank underwriting standards; 2) resource constraints on 
lending; 3) impact of regulatory guidance; and 4) utilization of alternative funding sources.  
                                                 
4   A list of meeting locations, dates, and topics can be found in Attachment A. 
5   Data  are  from  the  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination  Council  (FFIEC)  Consolidated  Reports  of 
Condition  and  Income  (Call  Report),  where  loans  to  small  businesses,  as  reported  in  the  reporting  forms 
FFIEC 031 and 041, schedule RC-C, part II, are defined as loans with original amounts of $1 million or less 
that are secured by nonfarm nonresidential properties or are commercial and industrial loans, plus loans with 
original balances of $500,000 or less that are secured by farmland or are for agricultural production. 
BIS Review 99/2010 
 5
Underwriting  standards  –  At  most  meetings,  both  small  businesses  and  banks 
acknowledged that underwriting standards had tightened. Some small businesses reported 
that  underwriting  changes  made  access  to  credit  more  difficult,  but  not  impossible,  while 
others  found  the  changes  to  be  a  significant  hurdle  to  obtaining  credit.  Many  banks 
acknowledged  that  lending  standards  had  become  more  flexible  prior  to  the  economic 
downturn and that they since have returned to more traditional underwriting practices.  
Recurring issues related to underwriting standards included the following:  
 
Additional collateral requirements – For existing loans, small businesses reported 
that routine collateral re-evaluations of assets that directly or indirectly secure loans 
– including personal residences, commercial property, and equipment – often result 
in additional collateral requirements because of a significant drop in asset values. In 
addition,  in  some  markets,  banks  noted  they  were  no  longer  readily  taking  real 
estate  as  collateral,  especially  if  there  was  another  outstanding  lien  against  the 
property.  Many  banks  have  also  reduced  their  loan-to-value  (LTV)  thresholds, 
increasing the amount of equity businesses need for new and refinance loans.  
–  At  a  meeting  in  Cincinnati,  small  business  owners  said  they  were  required  to 
make cash payments when reassessments of LTV ratios resulted in insufficient 
collateral.  If  the  payment  was  not made,  the  loan  could  be  subject  to  default. 
For new loans, small businesses cited heavy collateral requirements, including 
personal guarantees, which made them reluctant to secure the loan.  
In  Detroit,  auto  suppliers  emphasized  their  concern  about  the  values  that 
lenders are placing on their collateral, particularly equipment. An official with an 
auto  supplier  trade  group  confirmed  that  many  of  his  group’s  members  have 
reported  issues  relating  to  banks’  current  lower  valuation  of  assets  that  back 
existing loans or that are being assessed for new loans.  
   6 
 Greater  focus  on  cash  flow  –  Some  banks  acknowledged  that  prior  to  the 
economic  crisis,  credit  scores  or  collateral  values,  often  inflated,  were  sometimes 
more  important  than  cash  flow  in  underwriting  a  small  business  loan.  Banks  and 
small  businesses  both  concurred  that  strong  cash  flow  is  now  one  of  the  chief 
underwriting criteria.  
– 
At  the  Baltimore  meeting,  several  bankers  said  that  they  understand  the 
frustration  of  small  businesses  that  may  be  experiencing  reduced  cash  flow 
during  the  recession  but  that  had  a  solid  track  record  before  the  downturn. 
They  noted,  however,  that  generally  they  cannot  extend  credit  if  there  is  no 
recent  history  of  positive  cash  flow.  According  to  one  banker,  even  if  a 
business  has  strong  collateral,  banks  do  not  want  to  be  in  the  business  of 
taking collateral to recoup loan principal.  
In Dayton, a small business owner stated: “If you have the money you need 
[i.e., good cash flow and collateral], then they’ll loan to you.”  
 Higher  personal  credit  thresholds,  including  credit  score  –  Small  businesses 
commented that, in response to concerns about declining collateral values and cash 
flow, the recent trend has been to require more personal resources and guarantees. 
For many larger banks, automated underwriting driven primarily by credit scores is 
the  only  way  to  profitably  offer  loans  below  a  certain  dollar  threshold  (e.g.,  below 
$200,000). Many small businesses reported being denied credit because either the 
owner’s personal credit score had declined or the score no longer satisfied lenders’ 
heightened standards.  
– 
In  Boston  and  Cleveland,  small  business  owners  reported  that  their  credit 
scores declined after credit-limit reductions led to higher debt ratios, despite 
the  fact  they  were  always  current  with  payments.  In  some  cases,  the  credit 
BIS Review 99/2010
 score  downgrades  made  it  extremely  difficult  to  borrow  and  resulted  in 
businesses’ closure or bankruptcy.  
In Miami, business owners and intermediaries expressed concern that lenders 
are  placing  greater  emphasis  on  business  owners’  personal  credit  to 
determine creditworthiness and denying credit to small businesses where the 
owner has a good business plan but impaired credit.  
Resource  constraints  –  In  addition  to  capital  challenges,  banks  pointed  to  a  number  of 
other constraints on their lending resources, such as the following:  
 
Asset  management  challenges  –  Banks  reported  that  higher-than-average 
delinquency  and  loss  rates  have  taxed  their  workout  units,  forcing  them  to  shift 
seasoned  staff,  including  loan  officers,  to  assist  with  the  increased  number  of 
problem  loans.  Some  banks,  particularly  smaller  banks,  described  a  temporary 
suspension  of  all  lending  activities  while  they  assess  portfolios,  manage  workouts 
and distressed loans, and reevaluate collateral.  
Regulatory burden – Smaller banks pointed out the difficulties involved in staying 
abreast  of  new  regulations  and  guidance,  understanding  them  thoroughly,  and 
determining how to best implement them.  
– 
Because  of  the  complexity  associated  with  administering  new  or  revised 
regulations,  some  community  banks  said  that  they  often  must  assign  senior 
loan  officers  to  handle  the  new  rules,  leaving  more  junior  lenders  to  handle 
new loans. Some small businesses commented that they are then left working 
with junior loan officers who they believe do not understand their businesses, 
are dismissive, or adhere mechanically to underwriting guidelines.  
Programmatic  changes  –  Bank  lenders  described  how  enhancements  to  Small 
Business Administration (SBA) lending programs, including the increase in guarantee 
authority and fee waivers, helped them to make loans they might not otherwise have 
made.  Credit  unions  also  reported  good  success  in  using  the  7(a)  loan  program, 
which  was  in  high  demand.  Suggestions  for  program  improvements  included  an 
SBA guarantee for loan modifications, more streamlined and faster loan processing, 
and packaging assistance for the 7(a) program, similar to what is available for the 
504 program.  
– 
In meetings in Nashville and Tampa, several participants expressed the view 
that uncertainty about the duration, availability, and conditions of SBA program 
enhancements has made banks reluctant to invest the time to adapt to new 
program requirements.  
Impact on underwriting time – Banks frequently said that they do not have enough 
time  to  handle  applications  with  insufficient  documentation,  such  as  sparse  tax 
returns,  inadequate  income  statements,  or  unreliable  interim  financial  statements. 
Participants noted that some banks significantly reduced or eliminated loans below a 
certain threshold, typically $200,000, as a way to limit time-consuming applications 
from  smaller  and  less  sophisticated  businesses.  Banks  also  cited  the  imbalance 
between  time  commitment  and  returns  as  a  reason  for  not  participating  in  certain 
SBA loan products, such as the America’s Recovery Capital or 7(a) loan programs.  
– 
In  Miami,  bankers  noted  that  they  were  spending  much  more  time  on  due 
diligence  than  ever  before.  The  bankers  and  technical  assistance  providers 
agreed this is necessary in a market where fraud is prevalent. However, the 
extended  time  it  may  now  take  to  get  a  loan  approved  can  hurt  small 
businesses.  
   BIS Review 99/2010 
 7
 Impact of bank closures – Small businesses raised the issue of credit availability 
in areas that have experienced bank failures. If a financial institution is closed and 
not replaced, the impact is particularly acute. Small businesses in rural areas and in 
regions with few banks raised this issue most frequently.  
– 
In St. Louis, participants described the challenge of “orphaned” loans, when a 
bank  that  acquires  a  failed  financial  institution  chooses  not  to  continue  the 
relationship with the borrower, making future extensions of credit unlikely.  
Regulatory environment – Some banks cited examination-related concerns as an important 
factor in credit availability for small businesses. In addition to general statements attributing 
tightened  credit  to  increased  regulatory  scrutiny  in  light  of  recent  economic  conditions, 
concerns  were  raised  about  examiner  assessments  and  the  uncertainty  surrounding 
classification of assets.  
 
Restrictions on lending – Some bank participants noted that because of declining 
asset values of their balance sheets, more banks have been required to raise capital 
to cover potential losses. Among other strategies, banks can respond by taking on 
fewer  loans  in  order  to  meet  the  capital  requirements  or  raising  capital  under 
adverse economic conditions.  
– 
In  St.  Louis,  participants  stated  they  were  unsure  whether  examiners  are 
requiring  a  5  percent  tier-1  capital  ratio  standard  or  whether  a  stricter 
7 percent standard is being applied.  
Some banks reported inconsistent treatment of loans by different regulators.  
Several  banks  mentioned  that  they  consider  their  examiner’s  expected 
response  before  making  new  loans.  They  also  expressed  reluctance  to  do 
loan workouts because of concerns that examiners will still regard the loan as 
being impaired.6  
In  New  York,  Atlanta,  and  Miami,  small  businesses  and  other  participants 
expressed  the  view  that  banks  are  citing  increased  examiner  scrutiny  when 
refusing  to  lend  to  certain  industries,  such  as  construction,  real  estate,  and 
retail services.  
Bank regulators stated that banks in South Florida have significant challenges 
in  maintaining  adequate  capital  levels  because  of  the  higher  loan-loss 
reserves related to declining asset values.  
    Conflicting messages – Some bank participants expressed frustration about their 
perception of conflicting messages from different government stakeholders. On the 
one  hand,  the  banks  feel  pressure  to  lend,  but  at  the  same  time  they  are 
encouraged  to  apply  stricter  credit  standards.  The  result  is  a  more  cautious 
approach to lending.  
– 
Several banks expressed concern about lending to small businesses that they 
believe have the potential to grow when the economy begins to expand. Their 
concern  is  that,  although  a  business  may  have  good  prospects,  regulators 
                                                 
6   Relating to this topic, the Federal Reserve and other federal financial institution regulatory agencies issued a 
policy  statement  supporting  prudent  commercial  real  estate  (CRE)  loan  workouts  in  October  2009.  The 
Federal  Reserve  complemented  these  issuances  with  training  programs  for  examiners  and  outreach  to  the 
banking  industry  to  underscore  the  importance  of  sound  lending  practices.  Further,  the  Federal  Reserve 
recently hosted an “Ask the Fed” session in May 2010, which had participation from more than 1,400 bankers 
and  state  bank  commissioners,  to  discuss  CRE-related  issues,  such  as  credit  workouts  and  troubled  debt 
restructurings.  The  Interagency  Guidance  on  Lending  to  Creditworthy  Small  Business  Borrowers  raised  a 
similar  topic,  stating  that  examiners  will  not  criticize  institutions  for  working  in  a  prudent  and  constructive 
manner with small business borrowers. 
8 
 BIS Review 99/2010
may be wary of loans based on future prospects, particularly if the business 
has less-than-perfect credit, a recent history of uneven cash flow, or reduced 
collateral values.7  
Use of alternative funding sources – Meeting participants noted that small businesses that 
are  denied,  or  perceive  they  will  be  denied,  credit  by  banks  have  turned  to  alternative 
sources of financing, which often carry a higher cost.  
 
Increased  use  of  credit  cards  –  At  many  meetings,  small  businesses  described 
turning  to  credit  cards  in  lieu  of  a  bank  loan.  At  the  same  time,  many  small 
businesses  also  described  how  their  credit  limits  were  being  reduced.  After  being 
denied credit, many tapped their personal and business credit cards, particularly for 
working  capital  or  as  a  line  of  credit.  Businesses  described,  and  several  banks 
confirmed, that in some cases banks are recommending the use of credit cards in 
response to requests for smaller loans. Others attributed the increased use of credit 
cards to the relative ease of applying for and using a credit card as compared to the 
time and effort required to secure a bank loan.  
– 
Some businesses reported incurring additional costs in relying on credit cards. 
A  business  owner  in  Cleveland  reported  that  her  bank  line  of  credit,  which 
carried a 7 percent interest rate, was cut. She then turned to a credit card to 
finance  business  transactions  and  subsequently  saw  the  rate  on  the  card 
substantially increase above her line of credit rate.  
 Greater  reliance  on  personal  resources  –  Small  business  owners  frequently 
mentioned the need to use personal financial resources to replace business credit. 
Personal  credit  cards,  in  particular,  are  often  used  because  they  are  easily 
accessed.  Some  small  businesses  said  they  also  relied  on  home  equity  lines  on 
their  personal  residence  or  on  retirement  savings.  Family  and  friends  are  another 
source  often  mentioned  for  small  business  financing,  particularly  for  start-ups. 
Current  economic  challenges,  however,  have  restricted  the  availability  of  these 
sources.  
– 
In  Annapolis,  a  small  business  owner  described  being  denied  for  a  line  of 
credit  because  her  revenues  were  down  in  the  prior  two  years.  When  she 
looked into refinancing an investment property to tap its equity, lenders said 
they were not refinancing investment property. As a result, she relied on credit 
cards and borrowed against her 401(k) savings for working capital.  
In Los Angeles, meeting participants indicated that Asian Pacific Islander (API) 
small businesses rely heavily on personal real estate for their financing, and 
the significant decline in residential property values has led to a reduction in 
credit and rising delinquencies for API small business loans.  
Participants  in  several  meetings  expressed  the  view  that  minority-owned 
businesses  are  generally 
to  have  an  established  banking 
relationship and thus are less likely to receive bank loans. They often turn to 
friends and family for financing, particularly in the start-up phase.  
  likely 
less 
 Adjustment  of  payment  terms  –  Small  businesses  reported  adjusting  payment 
terms in order to preserve cash whenever possible – e.g., shortening payment terms 
for customers and extending payment terms with suppliers. Small businesses stated 
                                                 
7   To address this issue and others relating to small business lending, the Federal Reserve and other federal 
financial institution regulatory agencies issued a policy statement supporting prudent lending to small business 
borrowers in February 2010. The guidance states that lenders should understand the long-term viability of the 
borrower’s  business,  focus  on  the  strength  of  a  borrower’s  business  plan,  and  analyze  a  borrower’s 
performance over a reasonable range of future conditions, rather than overly optimistic or pessimistic cases. 
BIS Review 99/2010 
 9
 that their options were limited when their customers or suppliers, who may also be 
cash-strapped, are larger firms or the government and thus have more leverage.  
– 
In  Milwaukee,  a  small  business  owner  summarized  the  phenomenon: 
“Receivables  have  gone  up  and  we  have  passed  that  on  by  stretching  our 
payables. Some customers pay in 70 days, while others pay in 180. My first 
recommendation: pass a law that says pay in 30 days or pay interest.”  
  Alternative  financial  institutions  –  Many  Community  Development  Financial 
Institutions  (CDFIs)  and  credit  union  participants  noted  an  increase  in  small 
business loan demand over the last two years. They expressed the view that this 
may be the result of a tighter supply of credit by larger financial institutions. They 
noted that their ability to meet increased demand is limited by capital constraints and 
underwriting  capacity.  Credit  unions  also  noted  the  statutory  limitation  on  the 
percentage of small business loans they may make (12.25 percent of total assets).  
At  several  meetings,  participants  noted  that  some  small  businesses  are 
– 
turning toward non-mainstream finance sources such as factoring companies 
and pay-day loans, which carry higher fees and interest rates, due to the lack 
of conventional credit sources.  
In Detroit, credit union service organizations are working to provide scale for 
making small business loans by centralizing some aspects of the underwriting 
process.  
On the other hand, in New York, some credit unions indicated that outsourcing 
underwriting is not always an effective solution to capacity constraints, stating 
that they lose control over quality in outsourcing.  
A credit union in Tampa expressed the view that credit unions that are new to 
small business lending do not have an established infrastructure to compete 
with the bigger banks, particularly in areas such as SBA programs.  
In  Nashville,  it  was  noted  that  some  CDFIs  are  receiving  loan  applications 
from  businesses  that  they  would  not  expect  to  hear  from,  such  as  more-
established  businesses  whose  financial  conditions  are  better  than  those  of 
clients they served several years ago.  
In  Chicago,  the  Chicago  Urban  League,  which  offers  bridge  loans  to 
companies that have gone through its entrepreneurship training and coaching 
programs, reported making such loans to businesses that could not get credit 
from banks. A banker indicated that several banks participating in the meeting 
were founding investors in the League’s loan fund.  
At several meetings, CDFI participants described the challenges in becoming 
authorized to provide loans under the SBA’s 7(a) program.  
    Factors impacting the demand for small business credit 
Small businesses and bank participants noted that the economic downturn has diminished 
sales  for  many  small  businesses,  weakening  balance  sheets  and  asset  values  and  thus 
dampening small business loan demand. Some financial institutions reported weaker quality 
in  loan  applications  from  small  businesses.  Comments  related  to  credit  demand  by  small 
businesses  included  issues  of  reduced  credit  quality,  reduced  confidence,  a  need  for 
additional technical assistance, and interest in government contracting and entrepreneurship.  
Reduced credit quality – Banks generally attributed the decrease in overall lending 
 
to  small  businesses  to  their  declining  sales  and  asset  valuations.  They  reported 
lower  overall  demand  for  credit  from  creditworthy  businesses.  Some  financial 
institutions  also  noted  that  applications  for  small  business  credit  generally  have 
10 
 BIS Review 99/2010
   become weaker as the challenging economic environment continues. Still, as noted 
previously,  many  credit  unions  and  CDFIs  cited  an  increase  in  demand  for  small 
business loans from viable small businesses.  
Reduced confidence – A number of small businesses reported that declining sales 
made them more cautious about seeking credit. Some commented that the danger 
in waiting too long was that, by the time they sought a loan, their financial position 
had  deteriorated  to  a  point  that  raised  underwriting  concerns.  Many  small 
businesses  expressed  uncertainty  about  business  prospects  in  the  near  future, 
affecting  current  credit  and  business  decisions.  Some  owners  reported  making 
decisions  based  on  the  perception  of  tight  credit  without  having  explored  credit 
options.  
– 
In Annapolis, a former small business owner reported selling her health-care 
business  because  of  concerns  that  her  line  of  credit  would  be  cut  while 
addressing challenges associated with the extension of payment terms by her 
clients. Her core business was fine, but she was concerned about liquidity and 
the ability to meet obligations, such as payroll, in a timely way.  
Increased  demand  for  technical  assistance  –  Small  businesses  described  the 
challenges associated with operating under distressed economic conditions. Many 
described  working  with  reduced  staff  and  the  impact  of  labor  reductions  on  the 
resources necessary to manage the credit process. Several bankers indicated that 
small  businesses  need  help  locating  suitable  lenders  and  technical  assistance  to 
prepare  business  plans  and  loan  applications.  Technical  assistance  providers 
indicated that a growing portion of their clients are existing businesses and the long-
time unemployed who hope to start a business. Meeting participants also noted the 
need  for  technical  assistance  among  minority-owned  businesses,  which  face 
particular challenges in accessing credit.  
– 
In  St.  Louis,  a  participant  stated  that  demand  for  technical  assistance  is  up 
150 percent at Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs). Some of this 
demand  stems  from  increased  interest  in  entrepreneurship  among  recently 
unemployed or underemployed individuals.  
At  several  meetings,  participants  mentioned  that  minority  business  owners 
often do not have strong networks, limiting their access to financial resources, 
technical assistance, or mentoring.  
In  Miami,  several  meeting  participants  noted  that  Hispanic  businesses  face 
unique challenges due to the lack of tools and training in Spanish. They stated 
that  Hispanic  business  owners  may  not  be  aware  of  the  programs  and 
resources available to assist small businesses or the types of documentation 
and information that banks require for credit decisions.  
In  Omaha,  nonprofit  leaders  expressed  the  view  that  improving  the  financial 
management skills of minority business owners is a critical step in enhancing 
their creditworthiness.  
   Interest in government contracting – Participants at several meetings mentioned 
that  government  contracting  is  an  opportunity  for  minority-owned  businesses,  yet 
they need access to credit to fulfill the contracts. Minority-owned businesses often 
do  not  have  the  working  capital  needed  to  make  up-front  purchases or  to  sustain 
operations during the significant payment lag with government contracts.  
– 
In  Omaha  and  Nashville,  government  officials  said  that  they  have  seen 
increasing interest among small businesses in becoming a certified minority-
owned business for government contracting purposes.  
BIS Review 99/2010 
 11
  In Birmingham, an SBDC representative said that government contracting is a 
great  opportunity  for  minority-owned  businesses,  but  the  payment  lag  is  a 
significant challenge.  
Interest in entrepreneurship – The high-unemployment environment is generating 
demand as more individuals who are jobless seek to start their own business.  
– 
Participants in the Morgantown meeting noted that start-ups are being created 
by  retirees,  people  seeking  a  second  career,  and  people  looking  for  first  or 
second jobs.  
At  the  Phoenix  meeting,  a  number  of  CDFIs  and  microlenders  reported 
increased interest in their loan products – one said demand had quadrupled – 
from people who lost their jobs and are seeking to start a small business.  
 Identified credit gaps 
A combination of disruptions on the supply and demand sides of the small business credit 
market, as discussed above, has resulted in notable credit gaps.  
 
Lines of credit and working capital – Small businesses reported that existing lines 
of credit had been reduced, hampering their ability to offset lower cash flows that 
stem from slower sales or slower customer payments. As a result, small businesses 
reported  that  they  had  to  scramble  to  meet  intermediate  financing  needs  and 
change their business models to adapt to less credit availability. Banks, on the other 
hand,  reported  reassessing  outstanding  lines  of  credit  in  order  to  reduce  their 
exposure  to  losses  and  minimize  their  capital  needs.  Banks  also  noted  that  small 
businesses had changed how they used their lines in the economic downturn, using 
them  for  major  purchases  and  salaries  rather  than  as  short-term  revolving  credit. 
Some banks noted that, in such situations, they have converted lines of credit into 
term loans, which have higher finance costs.  
– 
In  Detroit,  the  CEO  of  one  auto  supplier  noted  that  while  most  of  the 
manufacturers  in  the  auto  industry  have  restructured  so  that  they  are 
profitable,  the  companies  toward  the  bottom  of  the  supply  chain  are  still 
struggling to obtain working capital and to finance their equipment purchases. 
Other auto suppliers at the meeting noted that many lines of credit were frozen 
in  2009  and  that  banks  that  had  historically  provided  credit  to  the  industry 
have  continued  to  limit  their  lending,  such  as  by  reducing  lines  of  credit, 
pricing them higher, or renewing them for more limited periods of time.  
  12 
 Refinancing  credit  –  Small  businesses  expressed  concern  about  their  ability  to 
refinance loans, particularly those related to commercial real estate. In some cases, 
business  owners  faced  an  immediate  need  for  cash  to  repay  the  balance  of  their 
maturing  balloon  loans,  even  where  the  firm  still  had  an  ability  to  repay  the  loan, 
because of reduced collateral values or tightened underwriting standards. To address 
their immediate needs for credit, many small businesses reported using credit cards 
and personal credit resources, such as 401(k)s and home equity lines of credit. As a 
result, many small businesses noted the need for loans to refinance these credits at 
lower rates.  
Small-dollar loans – Several small business participants cited the need for smaller 
dollar loans, particularly in amounts under $200,000. Microlenders in some markets 
were  able  to  help  address  the  need  for  loans  under  $35,000.  Larger  bank 
participants  acknowledged  that  they  reduced  or  curtailed  small  dollar  loans 
altogether  because  of  the  expense  in  time  and  resources  required  to  make  these 
loans.  
BIS Review 99/2010
     In  Des  Moines  and  St.  Louis,  larger  banks  indicated  that  they  reduced  or 
stopped providing loans under $200,000 because such loans require as many 
resources  as  larger  loan  amounts  but  do  not  provide  the  needed  income  to 
offset these costs.  
In Tampa, several technical assistance providers reported that very few banks 
would offer loans under $100,000, leaving a significant credit gap. The SBA 
Community Express loan was cited as an option (although some considered it 
too expensive), but there were no local lenders who offered this product.  
Commercial  real  estate  –  Banks  reported  that  they  suffered  significant  losses  in 
their commercial real estate portfolios. One bank stated that 50% to 60% vacancy 
rates were not uncommon in his area. Many banks reported that they have tightened 
underwriting standards in this segment, including requirements for higher borrower 
equity,  stronger  debt  coverage  ratios,  lower  vacancy  rates,  as  well  as  stronger 
personal guarantees. Small businesses confirmed these tighter loan standards and 
noted that, for existing loans, they were required to pledge additional cash or other 
assets to make up gaps created by commercial real estate that appraised at lower 
market values.  
Patient capital – Both  banks and small businesses cited the need for sources of 
patient  capital  to  assist  small  businesses  in  financing  equipment  and  other  large 
purchases. For  capital-intensive  businesses,  such  as  manufacturing, a  larger  loan 
for  equipment  or  materials  needs  a  longer  repayment  period  to  provide  sufficient 
time for sales to pick up and generate cash flow for repayment of the loan.  
– 
In Annapolis, service businesses, such as small law firms, discussed the need 
to hire staff to meet an expected increase in clients or contracts. They cited a 
lag  between  the  hiring  and  the  receipt  of  revenues  from  services  provided. 
Small business participants indicated that banks are not willing to finance this 
particular need.  
In Detroit, a meeting participant pointed out that sustained advancements in 
technology in the auto supply sector depend on the availability of longer-term 
financing for the same small businesses that are finding it difficult to finance 
working capital and the long-overdue replacement of basic equipment.  
 Loans  to  distressed  industries  –  Banks  reported  that  they  are  reducing  their 
exposure to certain industries with high loss rates.  
– 
In  New  York,  bankers  noted  that  certain  sectors,  such  as  construction,  real 
estate, and services were particularly hard-hit by the recession, making new 
loans within these sectors more difficult to finance.  
In Cleveland, bankers reported similar constraints on lending in the residential 
construction, commercial real estate, and automobile sectors. Small businesses 
affected by the reduction in credit within these industries expressed frustration 
over  their  inability  to  secure  loans  regardless  of  the  quality  of  their  financial 
condition.  
In Detroit, an automotive supplier industry official noted that credit availability 
for the tooling required to support new vehicle launches is constrained, given 
the continued level of industry, customer, and supplier risk. He expressed the 
view,  however,  that  it  is  precisely  such  innovations  that  will  improve  the 
industry’s risk/return ratios and investment attractiveness.  
   Start-up capital – Small businesses and bankers agreed that start-up businesses 
have always had difficulty obtaining financing, and that now it is almost impossible to 
secure bank credit. At several meetings, participants noted an increased demand for 
BIS Review 99/2010 
 13
this type of financing, particularly given the number of unemployed workers who are 
now looking to start businesses.  
– 
In  Memphis,  start-up  capital  was  identified  as  a  significant  need,  yet  some 
financial  institutions  indicated  that  they  lend  only  to  firms  with  five  years  of 
operating experience.  
A Cleveland meeting that focused on venture capital highlighted the downward 
trend in the availability of venture capital equity. Participants noted that until 
financial  returns  improve,  this  avenue  for  funding  new  and  innovative 
businesses will likely remain suppressed.  
 Identified recommendations 
The  following  are  key  recommendations  for  potential  next  steps  that  were  identified  by 
participants at the July 12 capstone event at the Board of Governors as well as throughout 
the  System’s  series  of  meetings.  In  addition,  the  Reserve  Banks  are  planning  a  variety  of 
efforts for the remainder of 2010 to follow up on the information and recommendations from 
the previous meetings or to hold further meetings in other locations. Attachment B contains a 
list of some of these activities.  
Regulatory and legislative environment  
 
Participants  expressed  the  need  for  continued  and  consistent  dialogue  between 
financial  institutions  and  examination  staff  and  greater  clarity  of  supervisory 
expectations  from  regulators.  They  recommended  continued  use  of  guidance  that 
includes real-world examples. Another suggestion focused on establishing a means 
through  which  institutions  can  report  concerns  about  or  appeal  an  examiner’s 
decision  to  the  regulatory  agency  through  a  neutral  intermediary  such  as  an 
ombudsman.  
Some participants emphasized the need for greater Community Reinvestment Act 
(CRA)  consideration  for  community  development  loans  and  investments  such  as 
Equity  Equivalent  Investments  (EQ2s)  or  program-related  investments.  They  also 
noted  that  banks  should  receive  greater  consideration  for  investments  and  grants 
that  increase  access  to  lending  capital,  loan-loss  reserves,  loan  packaging,  and 
technical  assistance.  Such  favorable  consideration  could  encourage  banks  to 
engage in activities such as purchasing SBA loans or a participating interest in notes 
or portfolios; extending lines of credit for the warehousing of SBA loans prior to sale; 
or  providing  operating  grants 
in  obtaining  or  maintaining 
authorization required by the SBA or other licensing bodies.  
There was a recommendation to make the New Markets Tax Credit program more 
supportive  of  small  business  lending  by  establishing  a  safe-harbor  provision  or 
taking  other  steps  that  could  encourage  investors  to  make  equity  investments  in 
community development entities that lend or invest in small businesses.  
There  was  support  expressed  for  the  Administration’s  proposal  for  a  $30  billion 
small  business  lending  fund,  including:  $2  billion  to  support  innovative  state 
programs that seek to stimulate and leverage additional private funds, $1 billion for 
equity financing for start-ups, and $300 million for CDFI loan funds.  
to  assist  CDFIs 
   SBA-related issues  
 
Participants,  particularly  banks,  expressed  strong  support 
the  SBA 
enhancements  that  extend  fee  waivers  and  increase  the  guarantee  limits  for  the 
for 
14 
 BIS Review 99/2010
     504 and  7(a)  programs.  They  also  emphasized  the  need  for  certainty  and  clear 
expectations  regarding  the  duration  and  terms  of  the  enhancements,  noting  the 
challenges of adapting to periodic and temporary changes in the programs.  
Participants recommended improving access for CDFI loan funds to participate as 
guaranteed lenders in the SBA 7(a) program in order to increase the availability of 
credit to the underserved markets that CDFIs serve.  
There  was  general  support  for  more  simplification  and  consistency  in  SBA 
regulations,  guidelines,  and  processes  to  reduce  confusion  for  both  lenders  and 
borrowers. One suggestion focused on the possibility of using additional technology, 
such  as  a  web-based  system,  to  streamline  the  loan  application  and  notification 
process.  
Participants commented on the need for more education about SBA  programs for 
financial institution examiners. For example, the Federal Reserve recently partnered 
with the SBA to conduct this type of training, and similar trainings could be arranged 
with the other financial institution regulators. Additionally, it was suggested that local 
and  regional  SBA  field  examiners  could  provide  more  frequent  instruction  and 
guidance to lenders.  
Other  recommendations  regarding  SBA  loan  programs  included  setting  higher 
ceilings  for  loan  amounts,  such  as  increasing  the  microloan  limit  from  $35,000  to 
$50,000,  and  expanding  the  Community  Express  Pilot  program  to  encompass 
participation  by  CDFIs  and  other  mission-driven  lenders  with  sufficient  capacity. 
There  was  also  support  for  allowing  the  504 program  to  be  used  for  refinancing 
owner-occupied commercial real estate.  
Some  participants  recommended  the  issuance  of  regulatory  guidance  related  to 
SBA 504 first mortgages, including suspending the requirements for extra reserves 
for classified loans and allowing the refinancing of owner-occupied businesses, even 
when the loan-to-value ratio has increased.  
Lender-related issues  
 
Participants  noted  the  success  of  financial  institutions’  use  of  “second  look”  or 
similar programs to help ensure that viable applicants are not overlooked and that 
decisions such  as  credit-line  reductions  are  warranted.  Participants  recommended 
broader use of such programs by financial institutions. A lender recommended that, 
as part of a second-look review, financial institutions consider a borrower’s interim 
financial statements for the most recent six-month period in cases where a borrower 
has experienced recent improvement and the denial was due to a weaker condition 
of the borrower as reflected in annual financial statements.  
Lenders  emphasized  the  need  to  receive  complete  and  accurate  documentation 
from small business loan applicants so that loan decisions can be made in a timely 
manner. Items such as reliable financial statements and accurate tax identification 
numbers were highlighted as examples.  
Participants  noted  the  use  of  innovative  credit  programs  to  encourage  small 
business borrowing, such as a “loan-for-hire” program that reduces the interest rate 
for an existing small business borrower if the business commits to hiring employees.  
Participants also encouraged lenders to demonstrate a greater commitment to and 
process 
technical  assistance 
providers,  and  counselors  for  appropriate  technical  assistance  and  financing 
solutions.  
for  referring  borrowers 
to  alternative 
lenders, 
   BIS Review 99/2010 
 15
CDFI-related issues  
 
There was support expressed for more low-cost, longer-term capital for CDFIs. Such 
capital, for example, would allow CDFIs to add a risk premium and still be able to 
make small business loans to meet demand from viable small businesses that may 
not qualify under conventional bank standards and products. In addition, increased 
grants  or  other  operational  subsidies  would  help  CDFIs  to  cover  the  costs  of 
providing  technical  assistance  and  advisory  services  to  small  business  clients  as 
well as to boost their loan-loss reserves.  
One participant recommended that policymakers consider capital models for CDFIs 
that further leverage private dollars and create innovative incentives for the private 
sector  to  partner  with  experienced  CDFI  fund  managers  with  strong  risk-
management capacity. For example, the potential allocation of $300 million to CDFI 
loan funds as part of the proposed $30 billion small business lending fund could be 
efficiently distributed through the CDFI Fund by a competitive process giving more 
points  to  proposals  that  combine  experienced  CDFI  fund  managers  with  private-
sector capital sources and that put the private debt in a first-loss position relative to 
the public-sector debt capital.  
Participants  recommended  that  banks  and  CDFIs  set  up  more  effective  and 
consistent  processes  for  banks  to  refer  small  business  applicants  whose  credit 
needs they cannot meet to CDFIs.  
One participant noted that while CDFIs have demonstrated the ability to successfully 
underwrite  the  risks  inherent  in  small  business  loans,  this  success  has  been 
achieved at relatively small volume levels in comparison to the need. He stated that 
efforts to significantly increase CDFI small business lending capacity must recognize 
the critical need for scalability in areas such as the receipt and review of applications 
and  the  underwriting,  servicing,  and  collections  of  small  business  loans.  He 
recommended  that  CDFIs  consider  outsourcing  some  of  their  operations  to 
providers with more cost-effective approaches, systems, and technologies, including 
other CDFIs or mainstream financial institutions.  
Participants  urged  greater  use  by  financial  institutions  and  investors  of  existing 
evaluation and ratings systems for assessing CDFI performance and impact, such 
as  the  CDFI  Assessment  and  Ratings  System  (CARS)  administered  by  the 
Opportunity Finance Network.  
Other  suggestions  included  expanding  the  access  of  CDFIs  to  government  small 
business  lending  programs  such  as  the  Department  of  Agriculture’s  Rural 
Development  Program  and  CDFI  Fund  financial  assistance.  One  CDFI  participant 
urged modifications to provide improved access for CDFIs to become members of 
the Federal Home Loan Bank System as well as greater access to Federal Home 
Loan Bank affordable capital.  
Some participants expressed the need for limited regulation and oversight of CDFIs 
to help them improve their performance and access to capital. Comments cautioned 
against applying the same framework to CDFIs that currently applies to traditional 
financial  institutions  in  order  to  ensure  that  CDFIs  continue  to  have  flexibility  in 
underwriting and can focus on their mission-driven activities.  
      Small business support services  
 
Participants  emphasized  the  importance  of  both  pre-  and  post-financing  technical 
assistance  and  the  critical  need  for  a  dedicated  source  of  funding  to  adequately 
compensate providers of such services. They noted the effectiveness of post-loan 
16 
 BIS Review 99/2010
  technical  assistance  as  a  risk-mitigation  tool,  helping  to  reduce  the  number  of 
business failures, as well as a way to support business expansion.  
Additional  suggestions  focused  on  increased  use  of  the  SBA  Service  Corps  of 
Retired Executives (SCORE) and other similar business counseling program as well 
as  initiatives  that  connect  small  businesses  with  each  other  to  facilitate  peer 
mentoring.  
Participants  noted  the  need  for  advisory  services  to  provide  guidance  to  small 
businesses  on  the  type  of  capital  –  from  equity  to  debt  –  that  best  matches  their 
financial state and funding needs. Some participants noted that the current dialogue 
about small business finance tends to emphasize debt even in cases where other 
forms of capital are more appropriate. Participants also noted that the multitude of 
government,  non-profit,  and  private  sector  efforts  around  small  business  finance 
should include consideration of the entire capital structure.  
Research and data  
 
Participants expressed the need for timely, meaningful, and accurate data related to 
small business lending. Some participants also noted a trade-off between potential 
benefit  of  additional  data  and  the  increased  resources  and  time  needed  to  gather 
such data. Potential data collection issues included:  
– 
– 
More frequent data collection, such as on a quarterly basis;  
Time-series  data,  to  allow  for  a  more  complete  understanding  of  historical 
trends and more effective comparative analysis;  
Greater access to private-sector data;  
Enhanced  segmentation  of  data,  such  as  by  firm  size  (e.g.,  number  of 
employees) and loan amount; and  
Greater  collaboration  and  coordination  of  data  collection  among  federal 
agencies.  
   Some participants noted data gaps and suggested gathering additional information 
related to a variety of categories of small business lending including:  
– 
– 
– 
Loan application and origination information;  
Appraisal and collateral values for commercial and personal real estate;  
Intangible  assets  and  their  valuation,  particularly  for  virtual  or  knowledge-
based businesses;  
Improved CDFI lending and microfinance activities;  
Advisory services and other technical assistance for small businesses;  
Business start-ups and “restarts”, firm size, and firm age; and  
Factors related to small business growth.  
 BIS Review 99/2010 
 17
List of Federal Reserve System small business meetings  
Attachment A: 
Location  
Lexington, KY  
Cincinnati, OH  
Cleveland, OH  
Dayton, OH  
Pittsburgh, PA  
Cleveland, OH  
Omaha, NE  
Denver, CO  
St. Louis, MO  
Little Rock, AR  
Las Cruces, NM  
New York, NY  
New York, NY  
Newark, NJ  
Memphis, TN  
Louisville, KY  
Morgantown, WV  
Minneapolis, MN  
Phoenix, AZ  
Chapel Hill, NC  
Miami, FL  
Pittsburgh, PA  
Milwaukee, WI  
Duluth, MN  
San Francisco, CA  
Davenport, IA  
Toledo, OH  
Indianapolis, IN  
Columbus, OH  
Cincinnati, OH  
Nashville, TN  
Cleveland, OH  
Milwaukee, WI  
Annapolis, MD  
Tampa, FL  
Springfield, MA  
Detroit, MI  
Baton Rouge, LA  
Gulfport, MS  
Chicago, IL  
Baltimore, MD  
Phoenix, AZ  
Shreveport, LA  
Fed District  
Theme/Description  
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Minority entrepreneurship  
SBA guaranteed loan programs  
– 
– 
Cleveland  
Cleveland  
Cleveland  
Cleveland  
Cleveland  
Cleveland  
Kansas City  
Kansas City  
St. Louis  
St. Louis  
Dallas and Kansas City  Minority entrepreneurship  
Small focus group meeting  
New York  
New York  
Small focus group meeting  
Small focus group meeting  
New York  
– 
St. Louis  
– 
St. Louis  
Richmond  
Small focus group meeting  
Bank’s Small Business Council  
Minneapolis  
Listening session – CDFI lending  
San Francisco  
Richmond  
– 
Hispanic-owned businesses  
Atlanta  
– 
Cleveland  
– 
Chicago  
Minneapolis  
– 
Small business task force  
San Francisco  
Hispanic-owned businesses  
Chicago  
– 
Cleveland  
Chicago  
– 
– 
Cleveland  
– 
Cleveland  
Atlanta  
– 
– 
Cleveland  
– 
Chicago  
Small focus group meeting  
Richmond  
Atlanta  
– 
Financial institutions  
Boston  
– 
Chicago  
Atlanta  
Small focus group meeting  
Small focus group meeting  
Atlanta  
– 
Chicago  
– 
Richmond  
San Francisco  
Small focus group meeting  
Small focus group meeting  
Dallas  
BIS Review 99/2010
Date  
2/3/2010  
2/8/2010  
2/9/2010  
2/10/2010  
2/10/2010  
2/11/2010  
2/23/2010  
2/24/2010  
2/25/2010  
3/4/2010  
3/9/2010  
3/11/2010  
3/12/2010  
3/23/2010  
3/26/2010  
3/31/2010  
4/13/2010  
4/14/2010  
4/15/2010  
4/20/2010  
4/21/2010  
5/6/2010  
5/14/2010  
5/18/2010  
5/19/2010  
5/19/2010  
5/19/2010  
5/20/2010  
5/20/2010  
5/24/2010  
5/25/2010  
5/26/2010  
5/27/2010  
6/2/2010  
6/3/2010  
6/3/2010  
6/3/2010  
6/7/2010  
6/8/2010  
6/11/2010  
6/14/2010  
6/30/2010  
6/30/2010  
 
18 
 Attachment B: 
Planned reserve bank community affairs  
activities on small business 
The  information  below  describes  key  activities  that  Community  Affairs  Offices  of  Federal 
Reserve Banks are planning for the remainder of 2010 in response to issues that were raised 
at the Federal Reserve System’s regional small business meetings or as a way to expand 
those  meetings  to  other  locations.  This  does  not  represent  a  comprehensive  list  of  all 
Reserve Bank Community Affairs small business activities in 2010.  
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta  
 
Events  
– 
is 
Research  conference  on  October  26–27  in  partnership  with  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas  and  the  Ewing  Marion  Kauffman  Foundation.  The 
conference 
titled  “Small  Business,  Entrepreneurship,  and  Economic 
Recovery: A Focus on Job Creation and Economic Stabilization.”  
Banker roundtable in Birmingham, Alabama, on July 28 and a forum in Palm 
Beach, Florida, in September.  
August event with the Baton Rouge Area Chamber of Commerce and the LSU 
Small Business Development Center.  
Survey of small businesses owners and intermediaries in the Sixth District, in 
partnership with the Bank’s Research Division.  
Research  on  CDFI  capacity  for  small  business  lending  and  the  state  of 
microenterprise lending in the Sixth District.  
Discussion papers focusing on the effect of social networks on small business 
access to financial resources; small business job creation and destruction in 
the current and previous recessions and recoveries; and small business and 
neighborhood stabilization.  
     Research  
– 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston  
 
Research  
– 
Analysis  of  data  collected  in  a  survey  on  small  business  lending  in 
New England to which more than 125 community banks have responded.  
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago  
 
Events  
– 
 August meeting with SBA District Directors and State Directors to follow up on 
meetings held in Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, and Wisconsin.  
Fall meeting in the Quad Cities area (Davenport, Iowa, and several counties in 
Northwest Illinois) with a special focus on minority-owned and rural business 
issues.  
BIS Review 99/2010 
 19
  Meeting  with  Michigan  bankers  and  the  Michigan  Economic  Development 
Corporation  (MEDC)  to  discuss  MEDC’s  lending  program  for  manufacturers 
that are having trouble obtaining financing for growth.  
First statewide CDFI conference in Wisconsin in the fall.  
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland  
 
Research  
– 
Survey  of  Ohio  bankers,  in  partnership  with  the  Ohio  Bankers  League, 
focusing on small business credit conditions, trends in lending, and the impact 
of  the  regulatory  environment  on  bankers’  decisions  to  lend  to  small 
businesses.  
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas  
 
Interagency Small Business Forum in Houston on July 29.  
Research  conference  on  October  26–27  in  partnership  with  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Atlanta and the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation.  
Events  
– 
– 
Events  
– 
Events  
– 
 Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City  
 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis  
 
Meeting about guaranteed lending programs in New Mexico on August 19 in 
Albuquerque.  
Meeting  on  August  13  in  South  Dakota  that  will  focus  on  microenterprise, 
small business, and workforce development on the state’s reservations.  
Meeting  of  researchers  from  around  the  Federal  Reserve  System  in  late 
August to discuss work in the area  of small business financing and develop 
ideas for future lines of inquiry.  
Federal Reserve Bank of New York  
 
Research  
– 
Survey  of  small  business  owners  and  independent  workers  in  New  York, 
New Jersey, Delaware, and Pennsylvania and report on the findings from the 
560 responses.  
 20 
 Events  
– 
 Briefings  on  survey  findings  for  New  York  civic  and  business  organizations 
and  for  New  Jersey,  Delaware,  and  Pennsylvania  community  partners  in 
conjunction with the Philadelphia Fed.  
Series  of  workshops,  in  partnership  with  New  York  City  small  business 
agencies, focusing on key technical assistance needs.  
BIS Review 99/2010
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia  
 
Events  
– 
Events  
– 
 Briefing  on  the  findings  of  a  survey  conducted  by  the  New  York  Fed  (see 
above) for New Jersey, Delaware, and Pennsylvania community partners.  
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond  
 
Small business forum on July 22 in Charlottesville, Virginia, in partnership with 
Tayloe  Murphy  Center  at  the  University  of  Virginia’s  Darden  School  of 
Business and the Virginia Bankers Association.  
Training session for financial institutions about government lending programs 
in Baltimore on September 29, in partnership with the Maryland Department of 
Business and Economic Development, the Maryland Bankers Association, and 
the Retail Merchants Association.  
 Research  
– 
Small  business  field  study  in  North  Carolina  and  a  small  business  credit 
conditions report for the Fifth District.  
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis  
 
Events  
– 
Meeting with stakeholders on July  19 to discuss the possibility of creating a 
small business loan fund for the St. Louis region.  
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco  
 
Events  
– 
July meeting of the California Small Business Task Force, which was formed 
as a result of the System’s series.  
Four  meetings  in  Washington  state  to  identify  the  credit  needs  of  small 
businesses and education stakeholders: July 14 in Richland; July 15 in Yakima; 
July 20 in Bellingham; and July 22 in Wenatchee.  
Microenterprise  conference  on  October  15,  with  the  Oregon  Microenterprise 
Network.  
  –  Workshops  on  economic  development  in  Indian  Country,  in  partnership  with 
the  CDFI  Fund  and  HUD:  July  28  in  Sacramento;  August  17  in  Seattle; 
August 19 in Anchorage; and September 16 in Albuquerque.  
Business Leadership Summit on October 13, in partnership with the Turlock 
(California)  Chamber  of  Commerce,  focusing  on  small  business  financing 
needs in California’s Central Valley.  
  Research  
– 
Paper on small business lending in low- and moderate-income census tracts 
during the financial crisis. 
BIS Review 99/2010 
 21
