Thomas M Hoenig: Knocking on the central bank’s door 
Speech by Mr Thomas M Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, to 
the  Peterson-Pew  Commission  on  Budget  Reform  Policy  Forum,  Washington  DC, 
16 February 2010. 
 Thank you for the opportunity to join you today, both to attend and to participate in this event 
on a topic of some urgency. 
The United States is moving into an era in which government finance is taking center stage. 
Fiscal measures taken to bring the economy out of recession, mounting longer-term liabilities 
for  Social  Security  and  Medicare,  and  other  growing  demands  placed  on  the  federal 
government  have  invited  a  massive  buildup  of  government  debt  now  and  over  the  next 
several  years.  Congressional  Budget  Office  (CBO)  projections  have  the  federal  debt 
reaching an unsustainable level of two to five times our total national income within the next 
50  years,  which  leads  us  to  an  inescapable  conclusion  –  U.S.  fiscal  policy  must  focus  on 
reducing this debt buildup and its consequences. 
In managing our nation’s debt going forward, it strikes me that we have only three options. 
First, the worst choice for our long-term stability, but perhaps the easiest option in the face of 
short-term  political  pressures:  We  can  knock  on  the  central  bank’s  door  and  request  or 
demand  that  it  “print”  money  to  buy  the  swelling  amounts  of  government  debt.  Second, 
perhaps more tolerable politically, although damaging to our economy: We can do nothing so 
long as domestic and foreign markets are willing to fund our borrowing needs at inevitably 
higher interest rates. Or third, the most difficult and probably the least palatable politically: 
We can act now to implement programs that reduce spending and increase revenues to a 
more sustainable level. 
I recognize that this last option involves hard choices and short-term pain. However, in my 
view  it  is  the  responsible  path  to  sustainable  economic  growth  with  price  stability.  The 
alternative options inevitably lead to financial crisis and greater long-run losses in national 
income and wealth. 
The question of what combination of spending and revenue actions the country might choose 
is  the  purview  of  Congress  and  the  executive  branch.  As  a  central  banker,  it  is  my 
responsibility to anticipate and avoid the consequences that an unchecked expansion of the 
debt may have on monetary policy. It is a fact that the current outlook for fiscal policy poses a 
threat  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  ability  to  achieve  its  dual  objectives  of  price  stability  and 
maximum sustainable long-term growth, and therefore is a threat to its independence as well. 
The founders of the Federal Reserve understood this conflict. They understood that placing 
the  printing  press  with  the  power  to  spend  was  a  formula  for  fiscal  and  financial  disaster. 
Aware of this danger, they designed our central bank to be responsible for stable prices and 
long-term growth, and they gave it a degree of independence so that it could carry out this 
mandate. The goal of policy cannot be to “just get through” the current challenge, but rather 
to rebuild the foundation of a stable and prosperous economy, looking to our nation’s long-
term future. It is in this context that I appreciate this opportunity to address what I see as our 
emerging fiscal challenges. 
Lessons from history 
Throughout  history,  there  are  many  examples  of  severe  fiscal  strains  leading  to  major 
inflation.  It  seems  inevitable  that  a  government  turns  to  its  central  bank  to  bridge  budget 
shortfalls,  with  the  result  being  too-rapid  money  creation  and  eventually,  not  immediately, 
high inflation. Such outcomes require either a cooperative central bank or an infringement on 
BIS Review 22/2010 
 1
its independence. While many, perhaps most, nations assert the importance and benefits of 
an independent central bank, the pressures of the “immediate” over the goals of the long run 
makes this principle all too expedient to forgo when budget pressures mount. 
German hyperinflation is one classic and often-cited example, and with good reason. When I 
was named president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City in 1991, my 85-year old 
neighbor  gave  me  a  500,000  Mark  German  note.  He  had  been  in  Germany  during  its 
hyperinflation  and  told  me  that  in  1921,  the  note  would  have  bought  a  house.  In  1923,  it 
would not even buy a loaf of bread. He said, “I want you to have this note as a reminder. 
Your  duty  is  to  protect  the  value  of  the  currency.”  That  note  is  framed  and  hanging  in  my 
office. 
Someone  recently  wrote  that  I  evoked  “hyperinflation”  for  effect.  Many  say  it  could  never 
happen here in the U.S. To them I ask, “Would anyone have believed three years ago that 
the Federal Reserve would have $1¼ trillion in mortgage back securities on its books today?” 
Not likely. So I ask your indulgence in reminding all that the unthinkable becomes possible 
when the economy is under severe stress. 
If German hyperinflation seems an unrealistic example from the distant past, then let’s come 
forward  in  time.  Many  have  noted  that  in  the  1960s,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  willingness  to 
accommodate  fiscal  demands  and  help  finance  spending  on  the  Great  Society  and  the 
Vietnam War contributed to a period of accelerating price increases. Although the Federal 
Reserve was a reluctant participant, it accepted the view that monetary policy should work in 
the same direction as the Congress and the administration’s goals and help finance at least 
part  of  their  spending  programs.  Monetary  policy  accommodation  during  this  period 
contributed to an increase in inflation from roughly 1½ percent in 1965 to almost 6 percent in 
1970. It also helped set the stage for the Great Inflation of the 1970s as inflation expectations 
gradually became unanchored. 
Last Friday, I read that an economist at the IMF raised a question of whether central banks 
should allow higher rates of inflation during normal times to give them more room to adjust 
for  shocks.  While  this  may  sound  like  a  reasonable  theory  from  a  credible  economist,  my 
concern is that it rationalizes solutions to short-term problems that too often take an economy 
down the wrong path. 
The current US fiscal imbalance 
Today, the United States is benefiting from policies that were established in the 1980s to end 
the Great Inflation. Confidence in the long-run stability of the U.S. economy and the Federal 
Reserve’s  commitment  to  price  stability  have  kept  the  demand  for  Treasuries  relatively 
strong, allowing the government to borrow at low interest rates from its citizens and the rest 
of the world. It would be a mistake, however, to take this current ability for granted and to do 
nothing about the mounting debt. 
While the last 30 years have been relatively stable – at least until recently – our longer-term 
history is less reassuring. From World War II to the present, nominal federal debt held by the 
public has increased over 30 fold. And, supported by steady growth in the money supply, the 
price level has increased by a factor of 12. That’s a huge increase in the general price level, 
and  it  represents  a  significant  reduction  in  the  purchasing  power  of  the  dollar  over  time. 
These are matters that demand our attention as we make choices involving both fiscal and 
monetary policy. 
The  immediate  concern  is  the  size of  the  deficit.  The  CBO  projects  the  deficit  was  almost 
12 percent of GDP in fiscal year 2009 and will be almost 8 percent in the current fiscal year – 
extraordinarily high levels by historical standards. In the entire history of the United States, 
the government has run deficits over 10 percent of GDP in only a few instances, and usually 
only during or immediately following a major war. 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2010
As troubling as these deficits appear, even more disconcerting is the longer-term outlook for 
the federal debt caused by the accumulation of these deficits over time. The CBO’s long-term 
debt projections clearly show that current fiscal policies are unsustainable. In one scenario, 
the liftoff point for federal debt – that is, the time when debt starts rising without any sign of 
stabilizing  –  occurs  shortly  after  2020.  By  2035,  federal  debt  held  by  the  public  reaches 
80 percent of GDP – a level only exceeded during and just after World War II. In another, 
more pessimistic scenario, the liftoff in debt has already begun, with federal debt held by the 
public reaching 181 percent of GDP in 2035, easily exceeding the peak debt to GDP ratio of 
113 percent that occurred at the end of World War II. 
A  key  part  of  the  problem  stems  from  rapid  growth  in  entitlement  spending,  including 
spending  on  Social  Security  and,  especially,  Medicare.  Over  the  next  30  years,  the 
Government  Accountability  Office  (GAO)  estimates  that  the  present  value  of  future 
expenditures on all social insurance programs exceeds future revenue by over $50 trillion. 
That is nearly four times the size of GDP and clearly unsustainable. 
Adding  to  my  concerns  for  the  nation’s  economic  prospects  is  the  current  level  of  private 
indebtedness. As with government debt in the United States, private nonfinancial debt has 
grown steadily over the post-World War II period, from 40 percent of GDP in 1945 to almost 
175 percent in 2009. Every consumer and business that is a net borrower would benefit from 
lower  interest  rates.  And  just  as  noteworthy,  it  should  not  escape  our  notice  that  rising 
inflation would trim the real value of their indebtedness. Thus, high private indebtedness will 
contribute to the political pressure on the Federal Reserve. 
Three paths forward 
Returning to my opening comments, I see just three ways forward in dealing with our current 
and prospective fiscal imbalances. While each involves considerable pain only the third will 
resolve  the  imbalances  without  eventually  causing  inflation  to  accelerate  or  precipitating  a 
financial and economic crisis. 
Monetize. One option for dealing with a fiscal imbalance is for the central bank to succumb 
to political pressure and monetize the debt. As deficits and debt levels within a country rise 
relative to national income, interest rates tend to rise as well. In this instance the central bank 
is  often  pressured  to  keep  rates  low  and  encouraged  or  required  to  assist  the  markets  in 
facilitating the government’s funding needs. If the central bank succumbs to this pressure, its 
balance  sheet  will  expand,  bank  reserves  will  grow,  and  inevitably  the  money  supply  will 
increase. This process often appears benign at first, but if it goes on unchecked, the outcome 
is almost always higher levels of inflation and ultimately a loss of confidence in the value of 
the currency and the economy. Walter Bagehot’s famous dictum about banks holds equally 
true for governments –  once their soundness is questioned, it is too late. At that moment, 
governments and their  citizens are forced to  make sizeable, painful fiscal adjustments. An 
example of both the political pressure that can be exerted on the central bank, as well as the 
inflationary  consequences  of  debt  monetization  is  currently  playing  out  in  Argentina.  The 
president  of  Argentina  recently  forced  out  the  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  because  he 
would not transfer reserves held at the central bank to repay Argentinean debt. Inflation in 
Argentina is currently running near 8 percent and will almost certainly increase. 
Policy Stalemate. The second path forward is a stalemate between the fiscal and monetary 
authorities.  In  such  a  stalemate,  the  fiscal  imbalance  grows  while  an  independent  central 
bank maintains its focus on long-run price stability. Although the U.S. government is currently 
privileged  to  borrow  at  favorable  rates,  the  fiscal  outlook  would  inevitably  undermine  this 
privilege  and  its  risk  premium  on  debt  would  increase.  Also,  as  the  government  competes 
with private borrowers for funds, the potential exists for the fiscal imbalance to drive up the 
real cost of borrowing and capital to the private sector as well. Eventually, this combination of 
large  debt,  and  high  cost  of  borrowing  and  capital  weakens  economic  growth  and 
undermines confidence in the economy’s long run potential. Slowly, but inevitably, if the fiscal 
BIS Review 22/2010 
 3
debt goes unaddressed, the currency weakens, as does access to global financial markets. 
And the cycle worsens, leading ultimately to a financial and economic crisis. 
An  interesting  example  in  this  respect  is  Canada  in  the  first  half  of  the  1990s.  During  this 
period,  Canadian  federal  debt  increased  from  about  55  percent  of  GDP  to  roughly 
70 percent. At the same time, following a joint agreement between the government and the 
Bank of Canada, the Bank targeted a steady downward path for inflation from 3 percent at 
the end of 1992 to 2 percent at the end of 1995. With no monetary accommodation from the 
central  bank,  unsustainable  government  deficits  and  debt  caused  real  interest  rates  in 
Canada to climb. While Canadian inflation was below that of the United States throughout 
this period, Canadians paid a substantial risk premium over U.S. rates to borrow. Moreover, 
the  Canadian  dollar  came  under  persistent  pressure.  Overall  economic  performance 
suffered, with GDP growing very sluggishly in the recovery from the 1990–91 recession and 
unemployment climbing as high as 12 percent. 
These economic conditions contributed to the election of a new government, which made a 
credible commitment to balance the budget. In the following years, the federal budget deficit 
fell  dramatically.  Revenue  increased,  and  government  expenditures  were  cut  sharply.  By 
1996,  Canadian  interest  rates  had  fallen  below  comparable  U.S.  rates.  Inflation  remained 
subdued, real GDP growth picked up, and unemployment fell. 
Equitable Fiscal Discipline. The Canadian experience in the second half of the 1990s is 
suggestive  of  the  third  –  and  the  only  responsible  –  way  to  resolve  our  growing  fiscal 
imbalance: By addressing its source in an environment of price stability. All seem to agree 
this is the way we would prefer to go, but of course the devil is in the details. At the outset, it 
requires an institutional framework committed to having an independent central bank. This 
discourages  the  fiscal  authority  from  turning  to  its  central  bank  and  should  it  do  so, 
strengthens the bank’s ability to say “no.” 
In  the  United  States,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  policies  in  the  early  1980s  provide  a  vivid 
example of the benefits that arise from the exercise of central bank independence. During 
this time, high interest rate policies designed to lower inflation were deeply unpopular both 
among elected leaders and the broad public. But the Federal Reserve was able to exercise 
its  independence  and  pursue  long-term  goals  which  systematically  reduced  inflation  and 
changed the psychology of the nation regarding its expectation about inflation’s path. As a 
result, the United States has had nearly three decades of low inflation. 
Knowing inflation is not an acceptable alternative to strong fiscal management, a government 
faced  with  rising  debt  levels  must  provide  a  credible  long-term  plan  to  reestablish  fiscal 
balance. The plan must be clear, have the force of law and its progress measureable so as 
to reassure markets and the public that the country has the will and ability to repay its debts 
in a stable currency. 
To be broadly accepted, the plan must be seen as fair, in which there is a sense of shared 
sacrifice  across  all  segments  of  the  economy.  Without  being  specific,  these  requirements 
suggest  an  approach  in  which  we  are  willing  to  disappoint  a  host  of  special  interests.  It 
means, for example, controlling budget earmarks, trimming subsidies to numerous economic 
sectors, and resolving our banking problems and the perception that Wall Street is favored 
over Main Street, all of which would otherwise foster mistrust and cynicism among the public. 
Leaving these issues unaddressed will undermine the essential popular support required for 
the tough decisions needed to bring our federal budget into balance. 
Finally, there are no short-cuts. We currently must adjust from a misallocation of resources. 
There is no way to avoid some short-term pain in fixing the fundamentals in our economy. It 
is inconvenient for the election cycle, and it is undeniably terrible to have at least 10 percent 
of the labor force out of work. But short cuts now mean people out of work again in only a 
few years because we again try and avoid difficult adjustments. Outlining a credible course 
for  managing  our  debt  for  the  future  will  accelerate  the  restoration  of  confidence  in  our 
economy and contribute importantly to sustainable capital investment and job growth.  
4 
 BIS Review 22/2010
Conclusion 
As I mentioned in the beginning, the fiscal projections for the United States are so stunning 
that, one way or another, reform will occur. Fiscal policy is on an unsustainable course. The 
U.S. government must make adjustments in its spending and tax programs. It is that simple. 
If  pre-emptive  corrective  action  is  not  taken  regarding  the  fiscal  outlook,  then  the  United 
States risks precipitating its own next crisis. 
Eventually, government budgets that are severely out of balance are inevitably reformed – 
either  by  force  of  the  markets  or,  preferably,  by  choice.  Unfortunately,  nations  often  must 
experience a profound crisis to focus the government’s attention on taking corrective action. 
Usually  it  is  at  this  point  that  governments  reestablish  fiscal  discipline  and  renew  their 
commitment  to  an  independent  central  bank.  Ironically,  however,  these  generally  are 
precisely the reforms that would have prevented a crisis in the first place. The only difference 
between countries that experience a fiscal crisis and those that don’t is the foresight to take 
corrective  action  before  circumstance  and  markets  harshly  impose  it  upon  them.  In  time, 
significant and permanent fiscal reforms must occur in the United States. I much prefer this 
be done well before anyone feels an irresistible impulse to knock on this central bank’s door. 
BIS Review 22/2010 
 5
