Mohammad bin Ibrahim: Islamic finance and Malaysia’s role 
Luncheon address by Mr Mohammad bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia, at the 21st Conference of Presidents of Law Associations in Asia: “Islamic Finance 
and Malaysia’s Role”, Kuala Lumpur, 27 July 2010. 
 financial  environment  prompts  a  reminder 
Allow me to express my thanks to the organizers for inviting me to this 21st Conference of 
the  Presidents  of  Law  Associations  in  Asia.  It  is  my  pleasure  to  speak  before  such  a 
distinguished  gathering  of  legal  practitioners  from  all  over  Asia  on  the  topic  of  Islamic 
finance. The support provided by the legal fraternity has been important in the advancement 
and significant growth of the Islamic finance industry. The existence of appropriate laws and 
well-developed  related  institutional  framework  has  been  fundamental  to  the  orderly  and 
sound development of Islamic finance in Malaysia. And our legal community has been at the 
forefront  of  advancing  the  expertise  in  Islamic  finance,  enabling  and  contributing  to  the 
dynamism  of  our  Islamic  financial  services  industry.  The  contribution  of  the  legal  fraternity 
has been significant given that Islamic financial transactions are driven to some extent of the 
lawyers’ ability to structure legal documentation to conform and consistent with the principles 
advocated by the Shariah.  
It  has  now  been  more  than  three  years  since  the  world’s  financial  systems  were  engulfed 
with  a  crisis  of  an  unprecedented  magnitude  in  modern  history.  Yet  its  far-reaching 
repercussions continue to reverberate around the world today. Whilst we in Asia, backed by 
the  strong  fundamentals  of  Asian  economies  and  swift  stimulus  measures,  were  able  to 
rebound quickly and lead the world into recovery thus far, recent developments surrounding 
the  ongoing  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  several  advanced  economies  have  sparked  fresh 
concerns  which  could  imperil  global  growth,  derailing  the  road  to  a  more  robust  global 
economic  recovery.  This  unsettling 
that 
fundamental changes are gravely needed in the global financial sector.  
Much effort in making these changes are still taking place at various international fora, with 
most  have  largely  centered  on  reforming  financial  regulation  and  supervision.  Beyond 
regulatory  and  supervisory  reforms,  there  is  an  increased  global  emphasis  for  effective, 
efficient  and  responsible  financial  intermediation  that  promotes  economically,  socially  and 
environmentally sustainable development and long-term growth. It is now generally accepted 
that  the  overriding  objective  of  global  development  must  be  founded  on  genuine  and 
productive arrangements, leading to the path of sustainable growth and shared prosperity. 
Islamic  finance  is  well  positioned  to  meet  this  objective.  Malaysia’s  long  and  experienced 
journey  in  Islamic  finance  and  the  various  measures  that  were  put  in  placed  attest  to  our 
commitment in pursuing well-rounded growth and development for the nation. Today, Islamic 
finance  forms  part  of  the  overall  financial  services  industry  that  has  proven  to  be  an 
instrumental engine for driving economic growth for our economy.  
Let me now briefly recap the evolution of Islamic finance in Malaysia. Our journey officially 
began with the establishment of the first Islamic bank in 1983 and in the year that followed, 
the first Takaful operator. We have never looked back since then to evolve a comprehensive 
domestic  Islamic  financial  system  operating  alongside  the  conventional  financial  system, 
comprising  the  Islamic  banking  institutions,  the  takaful  industry,  the  Islamic  money  and 
capital markets. These respective components have been progressively liberalized over the 
years,  allowing  for  more  foreign  presence  in  the  market  to  become  internationally  more 
integrated. This has led to diversity in market players, and the increased competitive forces 
now provide the impetus for increased innovation in the market. The dynamism in the market 
has  been  supported  by  a  robust  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework,  reinforced  by  the 
legal and Shariah framework, the payment and settlement systems. Our Shariah framework 
in  particular  is  distinctively  robust,  through  the  consultative  role  of  the  Shariah  Advisory 
BIS Review 102/2010 
 1
Council of Bank Negara Malaysia and Securities Commission, complemented by the Shariah 
board of individual Islamic financial institutions. This strategy has served us well, as it had 
nurtured innovation whilst ensuring stability in the marketplace.  
Collectively, the strategies that we had adopted have brought about significant progress on 
several fronts, in the areas of institutional structure, diversity of players, operational efficiency 
and the wide range of products and services. Several global players have chosen Malaysia 
as their regional base for Islamic finance. Our sukuk market in particular has come a long 
way since the issuance of the first global sovereign sukuk by Malaysian Government in 2002. 
Today, it has evolved into the world’s largest Islamic bond market, accounting for more than 
fifty  percent  of  global  sukuk  issuances  in  the  first  half  of  2010.  It  has  attracted  the 
participation  of  various  foreign  corporations,  multinational  corporations  and  multilateral 
agencies  in  raising  funds  and  investing  in  issuances  out  of  Malaysia.  In  the  latest 
development, Japan’s biggest brokerage house has recently listed its first US Dollar sukuk 
on Bursa Malaysia. The strength and competitiveness of our sukuk market in bridging and 
strengthening  financial  linkages  thus  best  encapsulates  Malaysia’s  evolving  role  as  an 
important  international  gateway  in  Islamic  finance,  particularly  in  linking  the  two  most 
dynamic growth regions of South East Asia and the Middle East. Malaysia is committed to, 
and extensively engaged in, strengthening linkages across borders through Islamic finance. 
This  emerging  role  is  a  natural  progression  of  Malaysia’s  leadership  evolution  in  driving 
growth and innovation in the industry.  
Benefiting from our domestic experience, where we have come to recognize the strength and 
benefit  of  Islamic  finance  early  on,  Malaysia  has  taken  a  proactive  role  in  supporting  and 
contributing  to  the  development  of  Islamic  finance  on  the  global  front.  We  offer  a  well-
developed and complete platform for the global financial community to participate in Islamic 
finance  through  the  development  of  Malaysia  as  an  international  Islamic  financial  centre 
(MIFC).  We  also  recognize  the  fact  that  the  global  business  community  of  Islamic  finance 
needs to grow in order for the broader global community to benefit from its value proposition, 
as only then can its growth potential be fully harnessed. With this in mind, Malaysia actively 
engages the global community to develop Islamic finance together by sharing our experience 
and providing the technical know-how on the industry. Deriving strength from our progress 
and achievement on the domestic front, Malaysia offers a workable model of development 
which can be deployed not only in other traditional Muslim countries, but also in other centres 
seeking  to  work  together  in  developing  a  specific  segment  of  the  market.  Indeed  Islamic 
finance has now entered a new phase of development, where participants and businesses 
have become more internationalized. 
Another priority in facilitating global integration of the Islamic financial system which is high 
on our agenda is in ensuring Malaysia’s continued active and meaningful role in contributing 
to  the  development  of  supporting  international  Islamic  financial  infrastructure.  Since 
Malaysia’s involvement in the pioneering group of countries that led to the formation of the 
Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB),  the  international  prudential  standard-setting  body 
which Malaysia has the honour of hosting, we have continued to support the important work 
of  the  IFSB  including  through  our  active  participation  in  its  various  projects.  Our  support 
continues  through  the  work  of  the  Taskforce  on  Islamic  Finance  and  Global  Financial 
Stability, jointly formed by the IFSB and the Islamic Development Bank (IDB), whose recently 
completed work has led to the establishment of the Islamic Financial Stability Forum (IFSF), 
which is yet another important international platform for the regulators around the world to 
deliberate and collaborate on initiatives towards maintaining financial stability in the Islamic 
financial system.  
And  last  but  not  least,  Malaysia  has  been  at  the  forefront  to  support  global  growth  and 
development  of  Islamic finance  through  capacity  building  endeavours,  focusing  on  the  two 
key  areas  of  human  capital  development  and  catalysing  greater  harmonisation  of  Shariah 
interpretations.  The  availability  of  talents  who  are  skilled  in  both  the  financial  and  Shariah 
fields  have  been  essential  in  invigorating  innovation  and  dynamism  of  Islamic  finance  in 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2010
Malaysia.  This  is  reflective  of  our  long-held  conviction  that  sustainable  growth  of  Islamic 
finance could not be achieved without adequate attention to the development of intellectual 
resources. It is out of this conviction that Malaysia has committed resources to support the 
broadening horizon of growth in country and beyond, through the deepening of knowledge 
and competence among financial practitioners and Shariah scholars within the industry. For 
this  purpose,  Malaysia  has  established  the  International  Centre  of  Education  in  Islamic 
finance (INCEIF) to support advanced education in Islamic finance, while, the International 
Shariah  Research  Academy  (ISRA)  was  founded  to  promote  research  and  rigorous 
intellectual dialogue among Shariah scholars and practitioners on Islamic finance. 
Let me now turn to the development of our legal framework, which has been one of the key 
factors  contributing  to  the  competitiveness  of  Islamic  finance  in  Malaysia.  Our  legal 
infrastructure  consists  of  effective  regulatory  and  substantive  laws,  as  well  as  dedicated 
adjudicative  platforms  to  undertake  legal  redresses  arising  from  disputes  revolving  around 
Islamic financial transactions. The legal infrastructure in Malaysia evolved in different phases 
over  the  years.  Our  initial  focus  was  to  establish  dedicated  enabling  substantive  laws  for 
Islamic finance, such as the Islamic Banking Act 1983 and Takaful Act 1984. The enactment 
of these laws provided the platform for separate regulatory framework for the industry and 
importantly,  established  the  foundation  of  the  Shariah  governance  framework  through  two 
key provisions. These are the requirements imposed on Islamic banks and takaful operators 
to  ensure  that  their  business  aims  and  operations  are  Shariah-compliant  and  the  need  to 
form separate Shariah board within their respective institutions. Our experience has shown 
that dedicated laws governing institutions authorised to conduct Islamic finance are critical 
elements in instilling and maintaining public confidence in the system.  
After  establishing  the  necessary  legislative  measures  to  establish  a  more  conducive 
environment for Islamic finance to thrive, the next phase was aimed at creating the critical 
mass which was essential to develop Islamic finance in Malaysia. Amendments were made 
to the Banking and Financial Institutions Act 1989 to allow the conventional banks to operate 
Islamic windows which brought about new players in the industry. At this stage we also saw 
the establishment of the National Shariah Advisory Council (SAC), the highest authority on 
Shariah matters related to Islamic Finance. A tax neutrality policy was introduced for Islamic 
financial instruments and transactions which has benefited our players, consumers and the 
development of Islamic finance as a whole. The policy, which was later emulated by many 
countries  around  the  world,  ensures  neutrality  to  tax  treatment  between  Islamic  and 
conventional financial products and services, a move which enhances the attractiveness of 
Islamic financial products as competitive alternative to conventional banking. 
The most recent development of Malaysia’s legal infrastructure for Islamic Finance was the 
enactment  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  Act  2009.  Our  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  Act 
accords  formal  recognition  to  the  dual  financial  system  practised  in  Malaysia  and  our 
mandate  to  develop  Malaysia  as  an  international  financial  centre.  The  Act  formally 
recognizes  the  SAC  as  being  the  highest  authority  on  Shariah  issues  related  to  Islamic 
finance  transactions,  and  the  role  of  the  SAC  as  a  consultative  body  to  the  Malaysian 
judiciary system. Most critically, SAC’s rulings are binding on the courts and arbitrators. This 
referral  system  preserves  the  sanctity  of  Shariah  rulings  and  the  consistency  in  the 
interpretation  and  application  of  Shariah  principles  for  Islamic  finance  transactions  in 
Malaysia. 
For adjudication purposes, a dedicated judge in the commercial division of the High Court 
has  been  assigned  to  preside  over  litigated  cases  on  matters  relating  to  Islamic  finance. 
Specific arbitration rules for Islamic banking and financial services have also been enacted to 
compliment the court system and enable disputes relating to Islamic finance to be dealt by 
the Kuala Lumpur Regional Centre for Arbitration. This infrastructure is unique to Malaysia 
and  reflects  the  support  and  cooperation  from  the  legal  fraternity  to  keep  up  with  the 
development  of  Islamic  finance.  Importantly,  a  supportive  judicial  system  helps  create  an 
BIS Review 102/2010 
 3
environment  where  players  and  consumers  are  able  to  execute  financial  transactions 
efficiently, with sufficient certainty and enforceability.  
In  recent  times,  we  have  witnessed  a  number  of  legal  disputes  involving  Islamic  Financial 
transactions that have been brought to the common law courts for settlement. These recent 
cases tried in the English courts have highlighted the hesitancy on the part of the common 
law  judges  to  deliberate  on  issues  concerning  Shariah  principles  in  Islamic  finance 
transactions. This is quite understandable given the lack of expertise on the matter. While 
evidence on Shariah matters can be admitted from subject matter experts but such evidence 
or  advice  is  not  binding.  The  scenario  in  Malaysia  is  different.  We  have  a  dedicated  High 
Court for Islamic finance related cases and our judges shall refer to the SAC for questions or 
rulings relating to the Shariah and these rulings are binding. Malaysian courts, therefore are 
well  equipped  to  uphold  the  sanctity  of  the  Islamic  financial  contracts  as  they  have  the 
avenue to make references. They have the capability to preside over such cases and give 
firm, consistent decisions with the backing of SAC rulings. 
As part of our collaborative effort to expand human capital development initiative, measures 
are being made to ensure that players within the industry including judges and lawyers are 
trained in Islamic finance. Moving forward, with the existence of a dedicated court, competent 
human  capital  and  consistent  legal  precedents,  our  courts  and  arbitration  centre  are  well 
qualified to serve as a platform for adjudication and dispute settlement.  
The development of the requisite facilitative legal infrastructure is continuing. It is an ongoing 
and dynamic process. In the early phases of development, Malaysia had looked into the legal 
impediments that might hinder Islamic finance. What lies ahead is to harmonise existing laws 
such  that  it  accommodates  and  facilitates  Islamic  finance  in  the  most  legally  efficient  way 
possible.  These  laws  are  not  confined  to  those  under  financial  services  acts  but  to  all 
Malaysian laws. As the future of Islamic finance depends on its agility and innovativeness in 
developing new products, our laws have to be facilitative and contemporary. Countries that 
intend to promote Islamic finance must also have laws that are clear and easily enforceable. 
In this respect, having common laws, or a reference point for laws on Islamic finance, would 
serve to benefit the industry worldwide.  
To this end, we are pleased to announce the formation of a Law Harmonisation Committee. 
This  committee  comprised  members  from  among  key  government  stakeholders,  including 
the  Attorney  General’s  Chambers  as  well  as  industry  players  and  experienced  Islamic 
finance legal practitioners. We are also pleased to announce the appointment of Tun Abdul 
Hamid bin Mohamad, the former Chief Justice who is also a member of our Shariah Advisory 
Council, to chair this committee. We will be engaging with the industry and general public for 
feedback on the laws which require harmonisation. Further details will be announced in due 
course. The underlying objective in having this Law Harmonisation Committee is to position 
and strengthen existing laws as the laws of choice for Islamic financial transactions. It is also 
consistent  with  our  objectives  to  create  an  enabling  environment  that  facilitates  and 
accommodates the development of the industry, a clear and efficient system that preserves 
that  enforceability  of  Islamic  financial  contracts  and  a  credible  and  reliable  forum  for 
settlement of legal disputes arising from Islamic financial transactions.  
The support provided by the legal fraternity to Islamic finance has been instrumental to the 
progress  of  the  industry.  Crafting  legislation  to  facilitate  the  growth  and  development  of 
Islamic finance requires dedication and skill, and the ties that have since developed between 
lawyers, regulators, Shariah scholars and industry practitioners, have inevitably blossomed 
into  a  strong  relationship  based  on  mutual  understanding  and  close  co-operation.  Going 
forward,  it  remains  crucial  for  this  close  collaboration  to  continue  so  that  more  pioneering 
progress  can  be  achieved  in  paving  the  way  towards  greater  international  integration  and 
expansion  of  the  Islamic  finance  industry.  Towards  this  end,  the  legal  practitioners  should 
work together to create a network to foster its development. This might involve the setting up 
4 
 BIS Review 102/2010
of  a  specific  association  of  international  groupings  of  Islamic  finance  legal  practitioners 
working together towards harmonisation of practices at the international level.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 102/2010 
 5
