Njuguna Ndung’u: East African integration as a solution to economic 
growth and employment generation 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, on the occasion 
of a public lecture, Kenyatta University, Nairobi, 16 March 2010. 
 The Chairman of Council; 
The Vice-Chancellor; 
Deputy Vice-Chancellors; 
Members of the entire University Community; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It is a pleasure and honour for me to address this distinguished audience on a very topical 
and  timely  issue  of  EAC  integration  as  a  solution  to  economic  growth  and  employment 
generation for Kenya and the EAC region. I wish to focus my talk on domestic and regional 
policy initiatives and how they impact on growth, and more specifically on the employment 
situation in Kenya. 
May  I  start  by  pointing  out  that  unemployment  reflects  the  inability  of  economic  activity  to 
absorb labour or human resource at different levels. When we talk of economic activity, we 
mean  growth.  It  allows  economic  opportunities  to  emerge.  The  most  important  one; 
investment opportunities that increase the demand for human capital. So employment is a 
derived demand, from the demands on economic activity and increased investment. 
But how does regional integration improve economic activity (growth) for member countries 
and so increase labour absorption – employment? This is the question we need to focus our 
attention on. Let me try some quick avenues: 
1. 
EAC will provide a wider market – this will induce firms’ production expansion in size 
and product lines – to satisfy a wider market. 
A larger market requires a larger investment outlay. 
A larger market diversifies the sources of income flows. 
Financial  services  to  cover  the  region  will  have  to  adjust  to  a  higher  platform:  for 
instance, Kenyan banks are currently expanding to the region in a significant way. 
The same applies to a number of other sectors such as retail services as evident 
with the expansion of Nakumatt and Uchumi retail shops to the region. 
Larger demands for regional infrastructure to facilitate trade and production. 
5. 
The  list  can  be  long  and  depends  on  where  one  starts,  but  at  the  end,  labour  demand  is 
derived demand from all of these economic activities. 
To develop this topic on Kenya, I wish to develop three arguments on Kenya’s case: 
First,  the  policy  solutions,  their  evolution  and  shocks;  It  is  often  good  to  start  from  a 
perspective  that  policies,  once  implemented,  will  work  and  even  when  shocks  hit  the 
economy, the economy will return to its potential. How long it takes to return to its potential is 
determined by how pervasive and persistent shocks were. Having said that, the blue print of 
growth  and  employment  creation  was  laid  out  by  the  NARC  Government  –  “Economic 
Recovery  Strategy  for  Wealth  and  Employment  Creation”  which  covered  the  period  
2003–2007.  This  bore  fruit  and  the  economy  picked  up  from  a  low  of  0.5  percent  annual 
growth in 2002 to 6.3 percent in 2006 to 7.1 percent in 2007. This saw the number of new 
2. 
3. 
4. 
BIS Review 37/2010 
 1
jobs created reaching 506.5 thousand, 488.4 thousand, 485.5 thousand, 467.3 thousand in 
2004, 2005, 2006 and 2007 respectively. 
The  results  of  this  blue  print  of  policy  paradigm  show  that  success  will  always  generate 
success. Once policies are followed to the paper, they will generate the desired results. 
But  then  external  and  internal  shocks  hit  the  economy  in  2008  stepped  in.  However,  the 
economy is on the recovery path and it was expected to grow by about 2.1 percent in 2009 
and at between 3 and 4.5 percent in 2010 and by over 5 percent in subsequent years. It is 
important perhaps to explain why in times of shocks, growth, investment and even economic 
decisions are affected and even affect other outcomes like consumption and employment. 
Three examples include: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
These are short-run and should not condemn us to a low equilibrium trap. 
Second, the EAC Common Market and its potential for employment. 
 
At the individual level optimizing welfare under uncertainty. 
Irreversibility of fixed investment decisions. 
Informal sector expansion as a disequilibrium queuing model of employment. 
In  general,  most  countries  in  Africa  are  forming  regional  economic  integration 
arrangements in order to; secure access to larger markets and enhance trade flows 
and in the process attract the much needed foreign direct investments; lower trade 
costs among neighbours; leverage or lock in domestic reforms; create a framework 
for regional cooperation and resource pooling; increase their bargaining power and 
political cohesion. 
Economic  integration  has  the  potential  for  economic  growth;  to  create  wealth; 
improve  labour  and  social  conditions  and  result  in  a  better  division  of  labour 
between countries based on comparative advantage. Exploiting relative comparative 
advantage of each integrating member country enhances the region’s efficiency in 
production,  increasing  output  and  boosting  economic  growth  of  each  member 
country. 
Regional integration, uniformity of policy and common goals will act as an agency of 
restraint and cushion the external shocks in some cases. 
The  EAC  brings  together  nationals  of  five  countries  namely,  Kenya,  Tanzania, 
Uganda,  Rwanda  and  Burundi.  In  2008,  the  five  countries  had  a  combined 
population of 126.6 million people and a nominal GDP of USD73 billion (based on 
EAC  Facts  and  Figures  Report,  2009).  In  the  same  year,  Kenya’s  GDP  stood  at 
USD26.9 billion, that is 37 percent of the EAC total. It is the dominant economy in 
the  bloc.  This  enlarged  market  means  potential  for  increased  free  trade  among 
members.  Free  trade  is  expected  to  lead  to  rapid  expansion  of  trade  and  output, 
which in turn is expected to lead to demand for further investment, employment and 
GDP  growth.  These  gains  result  from  the  dynamic  effects  of  a  Common  Market, 
which  have  been  shown  to  overshadow  the  static  effects,  that  is,  trade  creation, 
trade  diversion  and  terms  of  trade  effects.  The  dynamic  effects,  which  are 
cumulative  in  nature  lead  to  growth.  Indeed,  the  dynamic  effects  of  a  Common 
Market are often described as the long-run consequences for the economic growth 
of member countries as a consequence of increased market size and exploitation of 
economies  of  scale,  increased  competition,  learning  by  doing  and  increased 
investment. Also, the stronger the potential economies of scale are, and the more 
rapid  the  autonomous  productivity  advantages,  the  more  likely  the  economic 
integration will lead to growth. Thus, the contribution of the EAC Common Market to 
economic  growth  and  employment  will  be  greater  if  the  economies  of  scale  are 
possible by increased market size, takes place pari passu with learning by doing. 
   2 
 BIS Review 37/2010
     However, higher levels of economic integration that would ensure such benefits are 
realized require heavy infrastructural investments in the region. With this realization, 
the  EAC  Development  Strategy  sets  out  the  priority  programmes  for  the  region 
focusing  on  among  others,  cooperation  in  infrastructure  development.  An  efficient 
infrastructure  development  mainly  for  EAC  in  terms  of  roads  and  railway 
interconnectivity has the potential to increase from 3.7 million tonnes in 2007 to over 
16 million tonnes by 2030, at an annual rate of growth of 6.7 percent, according to a 
study  on  the  EAC  Railways  Master  Plan.  Current  EAC  efforts  to  develop  regional 
infrastructures are complemented at the continental level by such initiatives as the 
Infrastructure  Consortium  for  Africa  (ICA),  established  in  2005  and  mandated  to 
support  and  promote  increased  investment  in  infrastructure  in  Africa  from  both 
public and private sources. In addition, with the implementation of the EAC Common 
Market Protocol, regional infrastructural projects will be well defined. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is worth noting that the overriding rationale for regional 
integration  is  development,  with  all  the  benefits  that  come  with  it.  Theoretically, 
integration fosters growth through different channels such as increasing innovation 
through economies of scale and through technological spillovers and elimination of 
replication in research and development. Empirically, integration gives access to a 
larger  market,  more  stock  of  technology  and  knowledge  and  therefore,  more 
innovations and growth. Furthermore, expanded markets and increased productivity 
following  integration,  triggers  increasing  returns  in  the  research  and  development 
sectors  due  to  the  implied  scale  effects.  All  these  channels  have  important 
implications  on  employment  generation  and  economic  growth  for  the  integrating 
economies. 
The  overriding  objective  of  the  EAC  Common  Market  is  to  widen  and  deepen 
cooperation among partner states in both economic and social fields for the benefit 
of the citizens of the member states. This is beyond what literature terms as “beg thy 
neighbour” effects. The Common Market Protocol provides for the free movement of 
goods, persons, labour, services and capital within the region as well as the right of 
establishment and the right of residence. 
The Common Market will unlock many other benefits among East African citizens. 
Currently,  efforts  are  underway  to  move  to  the  next  level  of  economic  integration, 
after the completion of  a Study by  the European Central Bank consultants on the 
East African Monetary Union (EAMU). The study has explored among other things 
the  current  preparedness  for  a  Monetary  Union,  institutional  frameworks  and 
structure  for  an  EAMU,  design  of  a  protocol  on  the  EAMU  to  be  negotiated  by 
partner  states,  and  proposals  for  monitoring  and  enforcing  macroeconomic 
convergence in the region. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  all  these  integration  endeavours  will  create  employment 
opportunities. I will emphasize on employment opportunities because it is a dynamic 
concept that focuses on gainful employment and space to utilize your own relative 
comparative advantage. It is upon you to position yourselves to take advantage of 
these new opportunities. Our higher institutions of learning have the responsibility of 
training  an  internationally  competitive  labour  force  to  enable  Kenya  take  full 
advantage of these regional initiatives. The investment opportunities that come with 
it will allow the appropriate signals of skill requirement. 
Finally, the Vision 2030 and unemployment in Kenya: The Vision 2030 aims at transforming 
Kenya  into  a  newly-industrialised,  middle  income  country:  what  does  it  mean  to  solve  the 
unemployment problem of Kenya? 
To solve unemployment, we need a long-run vision for growth and investment supported by 
short-run  policies  like  macroeconomic  policies,  specifically:  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  and 
also trade policies. 
BIS Review 37/2010 
 3
Fiscal policy and fiscal stimulus 
a) 
The economy is just emerging from the devastating consequence of drought and the global 
financial  crisis.  The  pervasiveness  and  persistence  of  these  shocks  required  that  the 
government  develops  a  fiscal  stimulus.  It  is  important  to  understand  how  fiscal  stimulus 
works in an economy like ours: 
1. 
Recognizes  support  and  protection  for  the  wage  good  through  targeted  public 
investment and public works – Kazi Kwa Vijana. 
A shilling spent in rural Kenya has a higher multiplier effect in the economy. 
Support  local  industries  –  via  government  expenditure  and  higher  domestic 
consumption – preserve jobs – prevent layoffs. 
Increase public investments that are complementary to private investments – in that 
they enhance profitability of private investments. 
Finally, in this way the government crowds-in private sector but not crowd-out. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
  Monetary policy 
b) 
But perhaps one may ask how has the monetary policy reacted to the crisis and how does it 
work  to  support  economic  activity?  Monetary  policy  works  to  control  the  level  of  money 
supply consistent with economic activity. 
Several instruments: 
 
Central Bank Rate (CBR) – as a signalling rate of the stance of monetary policy. It 
has  been  progressively  reduced  from  a  high  of  9  percent  in  August  2008  to  the 
current level of 7 percent. Lowering of the CBR signalled the intention of the Central 
Bank  for  a  low  interest  rate  regime  to  encourage  credit  extension  to  the  private 
sector and so investment to support growth. 
Cash Ratio Requirement (CRR)  –  in  order  to avail  liquidity  to  commercial  banks 
and release more resources for financial intermediation, the Bank has lowered the 
CRR from 6 percent to 5 percent in December 2008 and further to 4.5 percent in 
June 2009. 
Liquidity  management  tools:  To  further  enhance  liquidity  management  in  the 
banking  system,  the  Bank  has  instituted  several  reforms  to  introduce  new 
instruments like horizontal repo, vertical repo with fixed tenors. 
Financial development: In general an efficient and developed financial system is 
important to collect and collate savings from micro-savers to investors. Second, an 
effective monetary policy will depend on an efficient and developed financial system. 
In  concluding  my  remarks,  let  me  emphasize  that  employment  is  a  function  of  economic 
activity.  Sustained  economic  growth  is  good  for  employment.  One  major  solution  for 
sustained  growth  is  a  wider  market  for  trade  and  investment.  EAC  provides  just  that.  But 
public  investment  infusion  required  to  support  the  private  sector  investment  is  immense. 
Public  investment  especially  in  infrastructure  will  reduce  transaction  costs  for  the  private 
sector and allow profitable regional trade. To date 43% of the total Kenyan exports of goods 
and services go to the EAC region. These exports are mostly manufactured exports. There is 
scope for more within the EAC and locational advantages. This is what we want to strive for 
in  EAC  and  these are  the  positive  development  agenda  EAC  presents  to  Kenya and  East 
African countries. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 4 
 BIS Review 37/2010
