Brian Wynter: Financial literacy for Jamaica 
Opening remarks by Mr Brian Wynter, Governor of the Bank of Jamaica, at the stakeholders’ 
forum  on  financial  literacy  for  Jamaica,  Financial  Services  Commission  in  association  with 
Caribbean Regional Technical Assistance Centre (CARTAC), Kingston, 18 August 2010. 
 Honourable Audley Shaw, Minister of Finance and the Public Service; 
Senator Basil Waite, Opposition Spokesman on Education; 
Honourable Emil George, Chairman of the FSC; 
Mr Rohan Barnett, Executive Director of the FSC; 
Keynote Speaker Dr Adele Atkinson, Policy Analyst, OECD Financial Affairs Division; 
Panellists from Canada, the Eastern Caribbean, Trinidad & Tobago, the United Kingdom and 
Jamaica; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  participate  this  morning  in  the  opening  of  the  stakeholders’ 
forum on Financial Literacy for Jamaica organized by the Financial Services Commission 
and the Caribbean Regional Technical Assistance Centre. The Bank of Jamaica partnered 
with  CARTAC  and  the  FSC  in  January  this  year  to  launch  CARTAC’s  Regional  Financial 
Literacy Programme Website and Public Education Programme at the Jamaica Conference 
Centre. We are indeed pleased that today the process has moved one step further and we 
have gathered here to examine a proposal for a national financial literacy programme. 
This programme, aimed at formalising and coordinating an approach to achieving financial 
literacy throughout the length and breadth of the country, is timely. In fact, it may even be 
overdue.  We  have  seen  the  successful  implementation  of  a  national  financial  literacy 
programme  in Trinidad & Tobago and the maintenance of a similar 27-year programme in 
New Zealand. 
Inflation has been trending down, the exchange rate has been stable in recent months and 
interest rates in general are declining. As the global economic recovery begins to take shape, 
Jamaica must seek to expedite her own recovery through savings and investments ultimately 
to achieve strong growth and sustainable development. It is a financially literate people who 
can, in partnership with established and new institutions, enhance the social and economic 
development of a country. 
The  proliferation  of  local  Ponzi  schemes  a  few  years  ago  is  a  recent  reminder  that  in 
Jamaica,  like  everywhere,  people  have  an  appetite  for  high  returns  on  their  investments. 
Unless  allied  with  prudence  and  caution,  however,  the  appetite  can  lead  to  personal  and 
social catastrophe. But prudence and caution are themselves easily overwhelmed except in 
the  presence  of  knowledge  and  understanding.  So,  for  example,  an  informed  populace  is 
less likely to make impulsive decisions on financial matters. 
Through its website, its money museum, its many publications, media advertisements, press 
briefings, public appearances and other channels, the Bank provides an enormous volume of 
information and explanations relating to the economy and  also virtually every aspect of its 
operations.  We  will  continue  to  work  on  improving  our  accessibility  in  this  regard.  But 
receiving  information  is  not  the  same  as  being  able  to  understand  what  it  is,  whether  it  is 
important and how it may be relevant to your own circumstances. Achieving this is, in part, 
the purpose of improving financial literacy. 
The Bank of Jamaica has been doing its part in financial literacy over the years, for example 
with its long-running schools programme. But we recognise that there is a lot of work to be 
BIS Review 110/2010 
 1
done in training persons right across all ages and strata of society to manage their money 
well and to establish a lifelong financial plan to achieve this. In the words of my colleague 
Governor Ewart Williams of the Central Bank of Trinidad & Tobago, “teaching people how to 
save,  spend,  borrow  and  manage  their  finances  wisely,  improves  an  individual’s  financial 
well-being and quality of life.” We know that financially strong families build financially strong 
communities and, by extension, wealthy nations. It is against this background that the Bank 
of Jamaica welcomes this initiative today to establish a formal financial literacy programme 
for Jamaica and we pledge our continued support to this necessary and worthy effort. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 110/2010
