Caleb M Fundanga: Exploring and creating financial opportunities in 
Zambia 
Remarks by Mr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official opening 
of Venture Capital Workshop, Lusaka, 26 January 2010. 
 The Managing Director, Slyvettan Investment Limited, Mr Robert Masiye  
Distinguished Resource Persons, Dr Peter Njang and Mr Kenny Rice  
Distinguished Participants  
Members of the Press  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
I am greatly honoured to officiate at this important workshop which is aimed at exploring and 
creating  financial  opportunities  in  Zambia.  I  wish  to  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  all 
participants  and  resource  persons,  particularly  those  who  have  travelled  from  outside  the 
country.  
Mr  Chairman,  I  would  like  to  commend  Slyvettan  Investment  Limited  for  organising  this 
important workshop. This workshop which is aimed at increasing access to capital by local 
entrepreneurs  through  venture  capital  is  indeed  more  than  timely  as  the  country  strives 
towards  financial  deepening,  wealth  creation  and  reducing  the  levels  of  unemployment.  In 
order  to  achieve  this,  affordable  financial  services  should  be  available  to  the  majority  of 
businesses. It is also gratifying to note that, potential investors will present their projects for 
possible funding at this workshop.  
Let me begin by giving a brief perspective of the enormous investment potential this country 
possesses. Zambia is a country with abundant natural resources and human capital. It is a 
centrally  located  country  with  eight  neighboring  countries  and  close  proximity  to  the  large 
market  of  South  Africa.  It  also  boasts  of  a  suitable  climate  and  peace.  The  country 
possesses  all  the  necessary  attributes  for  sustainable  economic  growth  and  development. 
Competitive  production  costs,  incentives,  and  reforms  have  also  enhanced  the  attractive 
investment climate for both local and foreign investors. Numerous investment opportunities 
exist in the agriculture, manufacturing, tourism and mining sectors across various regions of 
the  country.  Almost  all  provinces  in  Zambia  remain  potential  areas  of  investment  whose 
resources remain largely untapped. Its active participation in the SADC Trade protocol and 
the COMESA/FTA offers preferential tariff access to a market of nearly 380 million people.  
A  key  challenge  in  developing  this  economic  potential  and  enhancing  the  wealth  creation 
capability  of  Zambians  to  drive  growth  and  development  is  the  ability  to  access  long  term 
investment  capital  especially  for  economically  viable  projects  at  start-up  level.  Financial 
institutions  are  critical  in  this  process  of  mobilising  and  channeling  these  investment 
resources. To do so successfully, the industry must identify the constraints to the provision of 
finance and credit and provide innovative solutions to address them. Such innovations may 
include venture capital funds, structured finance products, equity and other innovations that 
allow a more efficient management of risks during the initial stages of the business cycle.  
On  its  part,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  needs  to  ensure  that  there  is  sustainable  stable 
macroeconomic  environment  first.  But  we  also  need  to  have  a  good  understanding  of  the 
financial innovations that may be needed to attract and disburse investment capital. This is 
important  if  we  are  to  ensure  that  monetary  and  supervisory  policy  frameworks  are  fully 
supportive of the ability of the financial sector to finance growth and development. Zambia 
today  has  a  large  portfolio  of  large  scale  industrial  and  energy  projects  such  as  the  Multi 
Facility Economic Zones (MFEZ) and several large and small hydro-power projects. These 
require innovative financial solutions as well as varied sources of finance and expertise, both 
domestic and foreign.  
BIS Review 9/2010 
 
1
Ladies and Gentlemen, as you may be aware, the banking sector in Zambia has over the 
last few years, witnessed significant growth in lending. The credit expansion has no doubt 
brought significant benefits to the economy as resources are channeled through to the lower 
end  of  the  market.  However,  most  of  the  credit  extended  by  banks  and  microfinance 
institutions  is  targeted  at  already  established  enterprises  and  individuals  in  formal 
employment.  Only  an  insignificant  amount  is  extended  to  start-up  initiatives  or  businesses 
with potential for growth.  
In order to bridge this financing gap, it is pertinent to establish financing arrangements such 
as  Venture  Capital  Funds.  Venture  Capital  Funds  are  essentially  collective  investment 
schemes where investors place their money into a Fund with the aim of achieving greater 
impact  and  security  than  could  be  realised  individually.  Venture  Capital  Funds  seek  to 
provide finance to enable businesses to start-up, expand or restructure through the use of 
equity and quasi-equity instruments such as preference shares, convertible debentures, and 
shareholders loans that reflect the risk and reward in investing in such businesses.  
Furthermore,  given  the  relatively  high  interest  rates  prevailing,  debt  financing  is  not  easily 
available  to  start-up  and  other  emerging  enterprises  because  they  generally  lack  the 
collateral, track record, or earnings required to get loans. To this effect, venture capital funds 
can be essential to these enterprises as they are a combination of equity and professional 
know-how. To be attractive investment vehicles, venture capital firms must be able to deliver 
a  rate  of  return  that  is  more  attractive  than  those  available  in  markets  for  publicly  traded 
stocks and other securities.  
Mr  Chairman,  in  line  with  the  workshop  theme,  “exploring  and  creating  financial 
opportunities”, it should be noted that the financial sector in Zambia is considered relatively 
under-developed and has had limited reach to all sectors of the economy. A 2005 study by 
Finmark  Trust  revealed  that  only  33%  of  the  total  population  in  Zambia  had  access  to 
financial  services.  The  survey  also  revealed  that  most  Zambians  prefer  to  invest  in  non-
financial instruments such as a businesses, livestock, land or agricultural equipment.  
In recognition of the strategic importance of the financial sector to the country’s development 
and  poverty  reduction  efforts,  the  Zambian  Government  launched  the  Financial  Sector 
Development  Plan  (FSDP)  in  2004  to  address  weaknesses  that  had been  identified  in  the 
financial sector. The FSDP is a comprehensive strategy that is aimed at achieving a financial 
system  that  is  sound,  stable  and  market-based,  that  would  support  efficient  resource 
mobilization necessary for economic diversification and sustainable growth. The weaknesses 
noted in the financial sector are addressed through a public and private sector partnership.  
A  number  of  activities  have  already  been  undertaken  under  the  FSDP  such  as  the 
establishment of a Credit Reference Bureau. Similarly policies and the legal and regulatory 
frameworks  have  been  developed  to  take  into  account  the  fast  changing  financial 
environment. These developments have resulted in a considerable increase in the number of 
banks and other financial service providers in the country.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  this  workshop  is  therefore  timely  as  it  tries  to  bring  together 
Zambian financial sector players and international financial players who have an interest to 
see  that  Zambia  takes  its  rightful  place  in  the  world  economy.  Apart  from  being  a 
sensitisation platform to the general public, this workshop should diligently explore ways on 
how  entrepreneurs  can  access  venture  capital  funds  in  Zambia.  Although  venture  capital 
organizations in Zambia are not many and evident to the general populace, our expectation 
is  that  after  this  workshop,  we  shall  see  the  emergence  of  an  interactive  and  symbiotic 
alliance between International and Zambia financial institutions. This alliance is expected to 
provide  venture  capital  funds  and  financial  services  that  should  uplift  the  well-being  of  the 
Zambian people at large. This sounds like a difficult task to achieve but it is my conviction 
that it is better to begin a step towards this direction rather than waiting for it to happen in 
future.  
2 
 
BIS Review 9/2010
Mr  Chairman,  as  I  conclude,  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  guide  the  participants  that 
discipline  is  key  in  accessing  venture  capital  funds.  It  is  common  practice  in  Zambia  for 
entrepreneurs  to  mis-apply  funds  obtained  for  capital  purposes.  Instead  of  growing 
businesses, we tend to use funds obtained as loans, for luxurious goods such as latest cars, 
suits  etc.  This  results  in  business  failures  and  thus  non-performing  loans  for  banks  and 
thereby higher interest rates. It is also important to realise that not all projects can access 
venture capital funds. Only innovative, high quality and highly profitable projects may qualify 
for these funds. Therefore applicants of these funds should think outside the box and provide 
well  researched  project  plans  that  meet  international  standards.  In  this  regard  it  is  key  for 
project promoters to collaborate and pool resources as a team instead of the usual norm of 
going it alone.  
In  addition,  as  we  are  all  aware,  small  and  medium  sized  enterprises  form  the  engine  of 
economic and social development  as they generate employment, and  are an ingredient to 
growth and international competitiveness. It is therefore imperative that this key sector rises 
to  the  challenge  and  creates  wealth  through  innovative  entrepreneurship.  A  disciplined, 
innovative and successful SME sector will no doubt make Zambia an attractive destination 
for more venture capital. To this effect, this workshop on venture capital should explore ways 
to support efficient resource mobilization for SMEs.  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, with these few remarks, I now declare this workshop 
officially opened.  
I thank you for your attention and God bless your deliberations. 
BIS Review 9/2010 
 
3
