Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Global financial architecture – challenges 
for Islamic finance 
Keynote address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central 
Bank of Bahrain, at the 7th Islamic Financial Services Board Summit 2010, Manama, 4 May 
2010. 
 Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  is  a  great  honour  for  the  Central  Bank  of  Bahrain  to  be  invited  to  host  the  7th  Islamic 
Financial Services Board Summit. 
On behalf the Central Bank I should like warmly to welcome you to the Kingdom of Bahrain. 
To those of you who are returning to Bahrain, it is a great pleasure to have you with us again. 
To  those  of  you  who  are  visiting  Bahrain  for  the  first  time,  we  hope  your  visit  will  be  a 
pleasant one and that it will be the first of many. 
I would like to congratulate the organisers for their efforts in putting together such a strong 
programme  and  for  ensuring  that  we  will  hear  from  some  extremely  distinguished  and 
knowledgeable speakers over the course of the next two days. I would also like to express 
my appreciation to the sponsors without whose support this Summit would not be possible. 
As one of the founding members of the IFSB the Central Bank of Bahrain has been a strong 
supporter  of  its  work,  as  both  a  standard  setting  organisation  and  as  an  organisation  that 
promotes greater awareness of Islamic finance. It has been particularly pleasing to see the 
IFSB  go  from  strength  to  strength  and  for  its  membership  to  expand  to  now  include 
regulatory and supervisory authorities, international financial institutions, as well as market 
players and professional firms operating in almost 40 jurisdictions. Great credit must go to 
Professor  Rifaat  for  his  role  as  Secretary-General  in  ensuring  the  IFSB’s  continued 
development. This will be Professor Rifaat’s final year in office and I am sure you will all join 
me in acknowledging his enormous contribution to the development of Islamic finance and 
the strong legacy he leaves at the IFSB. Under his leadership it has become established as 
the leading forum for the Islamic financial industry. 
The theme of the 7th Annual Summit is “Global Financial Architecture: Challenges for Islamic 
Finance”. This theme is particularly timely. As the dust settles after the financial crisis it has 
become increasingly clear that there will be no return to business as usual for the financial 
industry. In the advanced economies there is a determination to make sure that there is no 
risk  of  a  repeat  of  the  crisis  and  an  acceptance  that  in  practice  this  means  financial 
institutions will be smaller and less profitable than in the past. 
Governments, central banks and regulators around the world are now  busy constructing a 
new financial architecture. New institutions and new regulations are being put in place. The 
structure  of  the  financial  industry  itself  is  open  to  review,  with  some  distinguished  people 
questioning whether it is desirable to allow the combination of commercial and investment 
banking.  Some  fundamental  questions  are  being  asked  about  the  type  of  financial  system 
that  can  best  serve  the  economic  needs  of  society.  The  UK’s  Lord  Turner  has  even 
questioned  whether  the  activities  of  some  investment  banks  have  been,  in  his  words, 
“socially useless”. 
The Islamic financial industry cannot stand apart from these developments. The fundamental 
question that the industry now needs to ask is: to what extent has the global financial crisis 
been a game changer for Islamic finance as well as for conventional finance? The issue is 
not  whether  the  Islamic  financial  industry  needs  to  learn  lessons  from  the  crisis,  but  what 
lessons  it  should  learn  and  how  it  needs  to  adapt  in  the  light  of  lessons  learned  from  the 
crisis. 
BIS Review 67/2010 
 1
We are all familiar with the rapid growth of the Islamic financial industry in the years before 
the crisis. In Bahrain we saw the total assets of the Islamic banks jump from US$2 billion in 
the year 2000 to US$26 billion by the end of the decade. The market share of Islamic banks 
increased  from  1.8%  of  total  banking  assets  to  over  11%  in  June  2009.  The  story  of  the 
Sharia  compliant  insurance  and  asset  management  sectors  was  a  similar  one  of  strong 
growth.  This  pattern  was  repeated  other  financial  centres  with  a  significant  presence  of 
Islamic financial institutions.  
In the early days of the crisis there was a widespread assumption that Islamic finance would 
continue this strong growth into the future. The view of many people in the industry was that 
it was not at risk from the crisis. The prohibitions on riba and speculation had kept Islamic 
banks  free  of  the  types  of  structured  financial  instruments  which  soon  became  known  as 
“toxic  assets”.  The  interest  shown  in  Islamic  finance  by  conventional  institutions  that  were 
eager to learn lessons from the crisis added to the feeling that the Sharia-compliant industry 
would emerge stronger as the interest-based industry stumbled. 
I never shared that point of view. I was not convinced that the Islamic financial industry could 
avoid suffering some fallout from the worst financial crisis in several generations. Therefore I 
argued  in  a  number  of  speeches  last  year  that  it  is  important  that  the  Islamic  financial 
industry learns lessons from the crisis and that it amends its business practices accordingly. 
Recent developments have provided more support for this conclusion. 
In the past twelve months we have seen the first defaults by issuers of Sukuk. These defaults 
have raised many complex legal questions about the rights of Sukuk holders, for example 
whether they have the right to take ownership of the underlying assets in the event of the 
issuers’ default. Until these legal questions are resolved there will be a long shadow over the 
Sukuk market, and we have already seen the impact in terms of the volume of new issuance. 
The  further  development  of  this  market  depends  on  finding  legal  certainty  and  developing 
mechanisms to deal with issuer defaults. 
It is now also clear that Islamic financial institutions have not been insulated from the second-
round effects of the crisis. Their customers have been just as badly affected by the economic 
downturn  as  have  been  the  customers  of  conventional  banks.  Recent  events  have  also 
illustrated the risks of concentrating too many assets in specific sectors such as real estate. 
The  principles  of  sound  finance  –  do  not  concentrate  risk,  do  not  rely  on  collateral  with 
unrealistic valuations – apply equally to Islamic institutions as to conventional ones. 
These recent developments are what make the sessions that are planned for the next two 
days so very timely. I hope that the panels will be able to draw lessons from the crisis for 
Islamic finance and that they will be able to assess the impact of the new global architecture 
on  the  industry.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  new  regulatory  policies  on  such  matters  as 
capital adequacy and liquidity will have major implications for the standards that are applied 
to the Islamic financial industry. 
One  of  the  most  important  lessons  of  the  crisis  has  been  the  need  for  good  liquidity  risk 
management by financial institutions. Given the problem of liquidity risk management is one 
that has confronted Islamic financial institutions for a long time, the events of the past two 
years should give a new sense of urgency to our attempts to find a solution. 
Corporate governance is another issue that I believe is very important. Although none of the 
panels at this Summit is specifically devoted to this subject it has been a focus of the IFSB’s 
work in the past, and I am sure it will be a recurring theme during the next two days. 
As I have said in the past, corporate governance is especially important for banks because 
they have a special task – that of looking after other people’s money. This places a heavy 
responsibility  on  their  boards  of  directors  and  senior  management.  In  the  case  of  Islamic 
financial  institutions  the  responsibility  is  greater  still  since  they  must  take  into  account  the 
interests  of  investment  account  holders,  who  bear  many  of  the  risks  of  shareholders,  but 
without  the  same  control  rights  that  a  shareholder  would  enjoy.  This  means  that  ensuring 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2010
high  standards  of  corporate  governance  is  even  more  important  for  Islamic  financial 
institutions  than  for  their  conventional  peers  and  it  is  perhaps  the  single  most  important 
lesson that the crisis has for the Islamic financial industry. 
With  that  thought,  let  me  conclude  by  congratulating  the  organisers  on  having  assembled 
such  a  distinguished  team  of  panelists  and  discussants.  I  am  sure  the  next  two  days  will 
produce many new ideas and a lot of interesting debate and I wish every success to the 7th 
Summit of the Islamic Financial Services Board. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 67/2010 
 3
