Glenn Stevens: Brief history of the Reserve Bank of Australia 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Reserve 
Bank of Australia’s 50th Anniversary Gala Dinner, Sydney, 8 February 2010.  
 Treasurer,  Shadow  Treasurer,  former  Prime  Ministers,  former  Treasurers,  distinguished 
guests, ladies and gentlemen, colleagues and friends, welcome.  
I  welcome  former  Reserve  Bank  Governors  Bob  Johnston,  Bernie  Fraser  and  Ian 
Macfarlane; former Deputy Governors; and current and past members of the Reserve Bank 
Board and the Payments System Board.  
I  welcome  also  the  Governors,  Deputy  Governors  and  other  representatives  of  30  central 
banks from the Asia-Pacific region and around the world; our colleagues from the Bank for 
International Settlements; and past and present friends and colleagues from the public and 
private sectors. It is a very great pleasure indeed to welcome you all to Sydney and to this 
occasion.  
Fifty years ago, the Reserve Bank of Australia commenced operations as Australia’s central 
bank. That occasion, though, was the end of a long journey.  
The history of the RBA actually began much earlier. Not many people realise that the RBA is, 
by a different name, in fact the entity that opened its doors for business in Melbourne on 15 
July  1912,  as  the  Commonwealth  Bank  of  Australia.  Conceived  as  a  publicly  owned 
commercial bank that would compete with the private banks, but act in a more stable fashion, 
the Commonwealth Bank quickly became a significant force in the banking landscape.  
The  story  of  how  central  banking  evolved  in  Australia  in  the  20th  century  is  told  in  the 
monograph  prepared  specially  for  this  occasion  by  Professor  Selwyn  Cornish  of  the 
Australian National University. The early part of the story is bound up with the history of the 
young Federation, itself dating only from 1901. At that time, Australia had no central bank. 
Notes  issued  by  private  banks  circulated,  and  reserve  balances  were  held  in  sterling 
accounts in London.  
The  financial  system  serving  the  Australian  colonies  had  been  notoriously  unstable  during 
the 1890s. After a speculative property boom rivalling anything we have seen in recent times, 
the ensuing collapse saw more than half of the deposit-taking institutions close their doors.  
With Federation, the new Federal Parliament gained constitutional power over currency and 
banking  matters.  The  Australian  Labor  Party’s  platform  included  a  pledge  to  establish  a 
“Commonwealth  Bank”  to  be  “a  bank  of  issue,  deposit,  exchange  and  reserve”.  When  the 
ALP  won  office  in  1910,  the  Government  duly  brought  forward  a  bill  to  establish  the  new 
Bank. Indeed, Prime Minister Andrew Fisher opened the first savings account.  
Initially, the functions were limited to commercial ones. Over many years, the Commonwealth 
Bank slowly acquired central banking functions. As with many central banks, war financing 
brought the Bank to prominence in the 1914–18 conflict. The note issue, initially a function of 
the Treasury, was transferred to the Bank in the 1920s.  
In  the  1920s  and  early  1930s,  further  legislative  attempts  were  made  to  strengthen  the 
Commonwealth’s role as central bank. At least one Federal Treasurer (Theodore) made the 
case for a pure “central reserve bank”.  
But  major  progress  was  not  made  until  an  inquiry  after  the  Great  Depression  outlined  the 
intellectual  foundations  for  the  conduct  of  the  modern  central  bank.  The  1937  Royal 
Commission’s  findings  led  in  due  course  to  major  legislative  change,  culminating  in  the 
Commonwealth Bank being given explicit macroeconomic policy goals in the 1945 Act.  
BIS Review 27/2010 
 1
the stability of the currency of Australia;  
the maintenance of full employment in Australia; and  
the economic prosperity and welfare of the people of Australia.  
The charter given to the Commonwealth Bank in that Act obliged it to conduct policies as to 
best contribute to:  
a. 
b. 
c. 
They are the same words that are set in stone in the foyer at 65 Martin Place today.  
The  same  legislation,  I  might  add,  abolished  the  Bank’s  Board,  in  favour  of  a  system  that 
effectively made the Governor the sole decision-maker. The Board was re-instituted in 1951 
and today’s Board in fact is the continuation of that Board, with the same mix of internal and 
external members.  
Yet  the  Commonwealth  Bank  was  still  also  a  commercial  bank.  Various  arguments  were 
made, including by the Governor of the day, as to why it was acceptable, even desirable, for 
the  central  bank  both  to  regulate,  and  to  compete  with,  the  private  banks.  But  by  the  late 
1950s,  the  opposition  of  the  private  banks  was  intense,  and  our  position  as  poacher  and 
gamekeeper was no longer tenable.  
And so, at least 30 years after the discussion began about the merits of having a separate 
institution dedicated solely to central banking, the Reserve Bank of Australia was established 
to continue the central banking activities, while the commercial functions were placed in the 
Commonwealth Banking Corporation. Interestingly enough, whereas in the 1930s the Labor 
Party  was  inclined  to  move  ahead  with  developing  central  banking  and  the  conservative 
parties had resisted it, in 1959 it was a conservative government that introduced legislation to 
create  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  Labor  opposition  voted  against  it. So,  both  parties  have 
been  on  both  sides  of  this  debate!  And  no-one  could  say  that  Australia  rushed  into  the 
decision.  
The Reserve Bank opened for business on 14 January 1960. It had the same policy charter 
as the Commonwealth Bank had had, and an almost identical Board, including the Governor, 
who  had  been  appointed  to  the  post  in  1949,  and  was  eventually  to  retire  in  1968  after  a 
tenure of almost 19 years – longer even than Alan Greenspan. I confidently predict that this 
record will never be equalled in Australia.  
While  the  early  leaders  of  the  RBA  sought  to  make  it  a  distinctive  institution,  they  also 
stressed  the  continuity  of  the  central  banking  functions  that  had  carried  over  from  the 
Commonwealth  Bank.  One  legacy  of  that  history  is  that  we  not  only  have  some  old  silver 
teapots carrying the CBA inscription, we also hold many of the very valuable archives of the 
early  Commonwealth  Bank.  Some  items  from  those  archives  –  which  date  back  to  the 
convict era – are being shown this year for the first time in a modest display in our Currency 
Museum at head office.  
Over 50 years, the RBA has been present at, and part of, some of the great ups and downs 
of  the  Australian  economy  and  the  financial  system.  It  has  engaged  in  many  arguments 
about public policy within its sphere of responsibility and competence. It won some of those 
arguments, and lost others. It has had its share of critics, and still does. Through all that it 
sought to call things as it saw them, even if it tended to put its views a little obliquely at times.  
It has always had a Board a majority of whose members have been drawn from outside the 
organisation, from commerce, academia and the broader community. A part-time Board with 
the  decision-making  power  over  monetary  policy  is  unusual  among  central  banks  –  I  can 
think of no other major country with that structure. Yet that broader representation has given 
the  Bank  a  degree  of  legitimacy  that  we  might  otherwise  have  struggled  to  achieve  in 
Australian society. And I can say that in the 140 or so meetings of the Board in which I have 
participated, the members have always carefully set aside sectional and personal interest to 
act in the national interest.  
2 
 BIS Review 27/2010
There are still some with us – even some here tonight – who were present at the creation in 
1960. They and others worked hard over the years to establish and nurture a culture and an 
institution. Many others here have had a connection with the Bank in some way – political 
leaders,  professional  colleagues  in  government,  counterparts  in  the  financial  sector,  or 
colleagues from abroad. All of you have played a part in creating an institution.  
Some of you won’t have agreed with things we have said or done at one time or another! But 
you nonetheless sustained support for the Bank as an institution and for the arrangements 
under which we operate. Whatever success we may have had over the years owes a lot to 
the support and trust that the financial sector, the political leadership and our community – 
whom we serve – have been prepared to give us, even on occasions when they didn’t agree 
with us. We have also benefited greatly from the support of our international colleagues.  
Thank you for that support. We shall continue to do our utmost to be worthy of it. Thank you 
all for coming to be part of this celebration. Please enjoy your evening. 
BIS Review 27/2010 
 3
