Jean-Claude Trichet: Inauguration of the “Language of Money” 
exhibition and the Euro Exhibition 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
inauguration of the “Language of Money” exhibition and the Euro Exhibition at the Museum 
für Kommunikation, Frankfurt am Main,10 March 2010. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, distinguished guests,  
It is a great pleasure for me to be here today at the Museum für Kommunikation in Frankfurt 
for the inauguration of two exhibitions. First, it is a particular honour for me, in my capacity as 
patron, to open the “Language of Money” exhibition. And, of course, it also gives me great 
pleasure to open the European Central Bank’s Euro Exhibition. These two complementary 
exhibitions  share  similar  themes,  of  interest  to  me  as  a  central  banker.  They  explore  the 
history, practicalities and overall role that money plays in our lives, and are indeed both very 
enlightening.  
Whatever  language  we  speak,  there  is  no  doubt  that  money  plays  an  important  role  in 
communication, conveying messages directly or indirectly about our society, our status and 
our values. The “Language of Money” exhibition examines the role that money plays in our 
lives.  
Naturally I am very interested in the language of money and, in particular, the language of 
the  euro.  The  euro  should  speak  both  of  Europe’s  diversity  and  its  common  culture,  its 
history and its future. And indeed it does, through the architectural motifs on our banknotes 
and the cultural symbols on the national sides of our coins. 
Take the name “euro”, for instance. When choosing the name, it was purposely decided that 
it  should  not  favour  any  specific  language,  but  speak  rather  of  Europe.  And  so  the  word 
“euro” entered our vocabulary: a new word for a new European currency. Today, of course, 
the word does not seem new at all. The euro has become one of the most tangible elements 
of Europe for the 330 million European citizens who use the euro as their common currency 
on a daily basis.  
Since  the  creation  of  the  euro,  it  has  also  become  clear  how  important  a  role  the  single 
currency can play in the realisation of an ever closer union among the peoples of Europe. 
The number of countries participating in Economic and Monetary Union has grown over the 
years and today the euro is used in 16 Member States of the European Union, covering an 
area that stretches from Cyprus to Ireland and from Portugal to Finland.  
The euro also has a recognised role beyond Europe. Also on the international stage, people 
have confidence in the euro as a currency. And this confidence is crucial. 
You will recall my earlier comment that the euro speaks a language of both common culture 
and diversity. You will see evidence of this in the European Central Bank’s Euro Exhibition, 
which  is  also  on  show  here,  having  just  come  to  the  end  of  a  successful  showing  at  the 
Museum für Kommunikation’s partner museum in Berlin.  
As  you  walk  through  the  Euro  Exhibition,  you  will  without  doubt  recognise  the  images  of 
bridges,  which  feature  on  the  back  of  our  euro  banknotes.  The  bridges  symbolise 
communication  between  the  people  of  Europe,  and  between  Europe  and  the  rest  of  the 
world.  They  also  represent  the  connection  between  past  and  future,  and  symbolise  our 
European future. If you look at the national sides of the euro coins, you will see evidence of 
the diversity that I have spoken of, with national icons and symbols representing the national 
heritage and culture of each Member State of the European Union. 
BIS Review 28/2010 
 1
Overall,  the  Euro  Exhibition  provides  visitors  with  an  opportunity  to  familiarise  themselves 
with  our  currency,  the  euro.  Various  interactive  displays  enable  them  to  explore  subjects 
ranging from the history of money to the production of euro banknotes. You can also learn 
how to check the security features of euro banknotes.  
Lastly, as the euro is the currency of euro area citizens of all ages, the Euro Exhibition also 
takes the younger generation into consideration. In the kids’ corner, children can enjoy the 
educational  computer  games,  learn  more  about  the  features  of  euro  banknotes  from  the 
interactive  displays  or  follow  the  story  of  Anna  and  Alex  as  they  catch  counterfeiters.  For 
those of you here who have children, this is a good opportunity for them to learn about the 
euro in an entertaining way. 
Before I conclude, I would like to offer my sincere thanks to Ms Kugler, Mr Gold and their 
teams  for  their  cooperation  and  for  making  this  evening  a  success.  We  at  the  European 
Central Bank fully support activities aimed at educating the public in financial and economic 
matters, and we are truly grateful for our partners’ contribution to achieving this goal. Many 
thanks to you all. 
Ladies and gentlemen, distinguished guests, it is a pleasure for me to declare the exhibitions 
open. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2010
