Andrew G Haldane: The $100 billion question 
Comments  by  Mr  Andrew  G  Haldane,  Executive  Director,  Financial  Stability,  Bank  of 
England, at the Institute of Regulation & Risk, Hong Kong, 30 March 2010. 
 I  am  grateful  to  Dele  Adeleye,  David  Aikman,  Marnoch  Aston,  Richard  Davies,  Colm  Friel,  Vaiva  Katinaite, 
Sam Knott,  Priya  Kothari,  Salina  Ladha,  Colin  Miles,  Rhiannon  Sowerbutts  and  Aron  Toth  for  comments  and 
contributions. 
The car industry is a pollutant. Exhaust fumes are a noxious by-product. Motoring benefits 
those producing and consuming car travel services – the private benefits of motoring. But it 
also endangers innocent bystanders within the wider community – the social costs of exhaust 
pollution.  
Public policy has increasingly recognised the risks from car pollution. Historically, they have 
been tackled through a combination of taxation and, at times, prohibition. During this century, 
restrictions  have  been  placed  on  poisonous  emissions  from  cars  –  in  others  words, 
prohibition. This is recognition of the social costs of exhaust pollution. Initially, car producers 
were in uproar. 
The  banking  industry  is  also  a  pollutant.  Systemic  risk  is  a  noxious  by-product.  Banking 
benefits  those  producing  and  consuming  financial  services  –  the  private  benefits  for  bank 
employees,  depositors,  borrowers  and  investors.  But  it  also  risks  endangering  innocent 
bystanders within the wider economy – the social costs to the general public from banking 
crises. 
Public policy has long-recognised the costs of systemic risk. They have been tackled through 
a combination of regulation and, at times, prohibition. Recently, a debate has begun on direct 
restrictions on some banking activities – in other words, prohibition. This is recognition of the 
social costs of systemic risk. Bankers are in uproar. 
This paper examines the costs of banking pollution and the role of regulation and restrictions 
in tackling it. In light of the crisis, this is the $100 billion question. The last time such a debate 
was had in earnest followed the Great Depression. Evidence from then, from past crises and 
from other industries helps define the contours  of today’s debate. This debate is still in its 
infancy. While it would be premature to be reaching policy conclusions, it is not too early to 
begin sifting the evidence. What does it suggest? 
Counting the systemic cost 
One  important  dimension  of  the  debate  concerns  the  social  costs  of  systemic  risk. 
Determining the scale of these social costs provides a measure of the task ahead. It helps 
calibrate  the  intervention  necessary  to  tackle  systemic  risk,  whether  through  regulation  or 
restrictions. So how big a pollutant is banking?  
There is a large literature measuring the costs of past financial crises.1 This is typically done 
by evaluating either the fiscal or the foregone output costs of crisis. On either measure, the 
costs  of  past  financial crises  appear  to  be  large  and  long-lived,  often  in  excess of  10%  of 
pre-crisis GDP. What about the present crisis? 
The narrowest fiscal interpretation of the cost of crisis would be given by the wealth transfer 
from the government to the banks as a result of the bailout. Plainly, there is a large degree of 
                                                 
1  For example, Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). 
BIS Review 40/2010 
 1
uncertainty about the eventual loss governments may face. But in the US, this is currently 
estimated to be around $100 billion, or less than 1% of US GDP. For US taxpayers, these 
losses are (almost exactly) a $100 billion question. In the UK, the direct cost may be less 
than £20 billion, or little more than 1% of GDP.  
Assuming a systemic crisis occurs every 20 years, recouping these costs from banks would 
not place an unbearable strain on their finances. The tax charge on US banks would be less 
than  $5  billion  per  year,  on  UK  banks  less  than  £1  billion  per  year.2  Total  pre-tax  profits 
earned  by  US  and  UK  banks  in  2009  alone  were  around  $60  billion  and  £23  billion 
respectively. 
But these direct fiscal costs are almost certainly an underestimate of the damage to the wider 
economy which has resulted from the crisis – the true social costs of crisis. World output in 
2009  is  expected  to  have  been  around  6.5%  lower  than  its  counterfactual  path  in  the 
absence of crisis. In the UK, the equivalent output loss is around 10%. In money terms, that 
translates into output losses of $4 trillion and £140 billion respectively.  
Moreover,  some  of  these  GDP  losses  are  expected  to  persist.  Evidence  from  past  crises 
suggests  that  crisis-induced  output  losses  are  permanent,  or  at  least  persistent,  in  their 
impact on the level of output if not its growth rate.3 If GDP losses are permanent, the present 
value cost of crisis will exceed significantly today’s cost. 
By way of illustration, Table 1 looks at the present value of output losses for the world and 
the UK assuming different fractions of the 2009 loss are permanent – 100%, 50% and 25%. 
It also assumes, somewhat arbitrarily, that future GDP is discounted at a rate of 5% per year 
and that trend GDP growth is 3%.4 Present value losses are shown as a fraction of output in 
2009.  
As Table 1 shows, these losses are multiples of the static costs, lying anywhere between one 
and five times annual GDP. Put in money terms, that is an output loss equivalent to between 
$60 trillion and $200 trillion for the world economy and between £1.8 trillion and £7.4 trillion 
for  the  UK.  As  Nobel-prize  winning  physicist  Richard  Feynman  observed,  to  call  these 
numbers “astronomical” would be to do astronomy a disservice: there are only hundreds of 
billions of stars in the galaxy. “Economical” might be a better description. 
It is clear that banks would not have deep enough pockets to foot this bill. Assuming that a 
crisis occurs every 20 years, the systemic levy needed to recoup these crisis costs would be 
in excess of $1.5 trillion per year. The total market capitalisation of the largest global banks is 
currently only around $1.2 trillion. Fully internalising the output costs of financial crises would 
risk putting banks on the same trajectory as the dinosaurs, with the levy playing the role of 
the meteorite. 
It could plausibly be argued that these output costs are a significant over-statement of the 
damage inflicted on the wider economy by the banks. Others are certainly not blameless for 
the crisis. For every reckless lender there is likely to be a feckless borrower. If a systemic tax 
is to be levied, a more precise measure may be needed of banks’ distinctive contribution to 
systemic risk. 
One such measure is provided by the (often implicit) fiscal subsidy provided to banks by the 
state to safeguard stability. Those implicit subsidies are easier to describe than measure. But 
one particularly simple proxy is provided by the rating agencies, a number of whom provide 
                                                 
2  The levy on US banks announced by the US government in January takes the $100 billion loss and recoups it 
over 10 years rather than 20.  
IMF (2009). 
3 
4  The results are plainly sensitive to the choice of discount rate and trend growth rate. Other things equal, the 
higher the discount rate and the lower the trend growth rate, the smaller the losses. 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2010
both “support” and “standalone” credit ratings for the banks. The difference in these ratings 
encompasses the agencies’ judgement of the expected government support to banks. 
Table 2 looks at this average ratings difference for a sample of banks and building societies 
in the UK, and among a sample of global banks, between 2007 and 2009. Two features are 
striking. First, standalone ratings are materially below support ratings, by between 1.5 and 
4 notches over the sample for UK and global banks. In other words, rating agencies explicitly 
factor in material government support to banks.  
Second, this ratings difference has increased over the sample, averaging over one notch in 
2007 but over three notches by 2009. In other words, actions by government during the crisis 
have  increased  the  value  of  government  support  to  the  banks.  This  should  come  as  no 
surprise, given the scale of intervention. Indeed, there is evidence of an up-only escalator of 
state support to banks dating back over the past century.5 
Table 3 takes the same data and divides the sample of UK banks and building societies into 
“large”  and  “small”  institutions.  Unsurprisingly,  the  average  rating  difference  is  consistently 
higher for large than for small banks. The average ratings difference for large banks is up to 
5  notches,  for  small  banks  up  to  3  notches.  This  is  pretty  tangible  evidence  of  a  second 
recurring phenomenon in the financial system – the “too big to fail” problem. 
It  is  possible  to  go  one  step  further  and  translate  these  average  ratings  differences  into  a 
monetary  measure  of  the  implied  fiscal  subsidy  to  banks.  This  is  done  by  mapping  from 
ratings to the yields paid on banks’ bonds;6 and by then scaling the yield difference by the 
value of each banks’ ratings-sensitive liabilities.7 The resulting money amount is an estimate 
of the reduction in banks’ funding costs which arises from the perceived government subsidy. 
Table 4 shows the estimated value of that subsidy for the same sample of UK and global 
banks, again between 2007 and 2009. For UK banks, the average annual subsidy for the top 
five banks over these years was over £50 billion – roughly equal to UK banks’ annual profits 
prior to the crisis. At the height of the crisis, the subsidy was larger still. For the sample of 
global banks, the average annual subsidy for the top five banks was just less than $60 billion 
per year. These are not small sums. 
Table  4  also  splits  UK  banks  and  building  societies  into  “Big  5”,  “medium”  and  “small” 
buckets.  As  might  be  expected,  the  large  banks  account  for  over  90%  of  the  total  implied 
subsidy. On these metrics, the too-big-to-fail problem results in a real and on-going cost to 
the taxpayer and a real and on-going windfall for the banks. If it were ever possible to mint a 
coin big enough, these would be the two sides of it. 
These  results  are  no  more  than  illustrative  –  for  example,  they  make  no  allowance  for 
subsidies arising on retail deposits. Nonetheless, studies using different methods have found 
similarly-sized subsidies. For example, Baker and McArthur ask whether there is a difference 
in  funding  costs  for  US  banks  either  side  of  the  $100  billion  asset  threshold  –  another 
$100 billion question.8 They find a significant wedge in costs, which has widened during the 
crisis. They calculate an annual subsidy for the 18 largest US banks of over $34 billion per 
year. Applying the same method in the UK would give an annual subsidy for the five largest 
banks of around £30 billion. 
This evidence can provide only a rough guide to systemic scale and cost. But the qualitative 
picture it paints is clear and consistent. First, measures of the costs of crisis, or the implicit 
                                                 
5  Haldane (2009a). 
6  Using the end-year yield on the financial corporates bond index across the ratings spectrum. 
7  For example, banks’ retail deposits are excluded but unsecured wholesale borrowing is included. 
8  Baker and McArthur (2009). 
BIS Review 40/2010 
 3
subsidy from the state, suggest banking pollution is a real and large social problem. Second, 
those entities perceived to be “too big to fail” appear to account for the lion’s share of this risk 
pollution. The public policy question, then, is how best to tackle these twin evils. 
Taxation and prohibition 
To date, the public policy response has largely focussed on the role of prudential regulation 
in tackling these problems. Higher buffers of capital and liquid assets are being discussed to 
address the first problem. And add-ons to these capital and liquidity buffers for institutions 
posing the greatest systemic risk are being discussed to address the second.9 In essence, 
this is a taxation solution to the systemic risk pollution problem.10 
There is a second approach. On 21 January 2010, US President Barack Obama proposed 
placing  formal  restrictions  on  the  business  activities  and  scale  of  US  banks.  Others  have 
made  complementary  proposals  for  structural  reform  of  banking.11  Typically,  these  involve 
separation of bank activities, either across business lines or geographies. In essence, this is 
the prohibition solution to the systemic pollution problem.  
This sets the scene for a great debate. It is not a new one. The taxation versus prohibition 
question crops up repeatedly in public choice economics. For centuries it has been central to 
the international trade debate on the use of quotas versus subsidies. During this century, it 
has become central to the debate on appropriate policies to curtail carbon emissions.12  
In making these choices, economists have often drawn on Martin Weitzman’s classic public 
goods  framework  from  the  early  1970s.13  Under  this  framework,  the  optimal  amount  of 
pollution control is found by equating the marginal social benefits of pollution-control and the 
marginal  private  costs  of  this  control.  With  no  uncertainty  about  either  costs  or  benefits,  a 
policymaker  would  be  indifferent  between  taxation  and  restrictions  when  striking  this 
cost/benefit balance. 
In the real world, there is considerable uncertainty about both costs and benefits. Weitzman’s 
framework tells us how to choose between pollution-control instruments in this setting. If the 
marginal social benefits foregone of the wrong choice are large, relative to the private costs 
incurred, then quantitative restrictions are optimal. Why? Because fixing quantities to achieve 
pollution  control,  while  letting  prices  vary,  does  not  have  large  private  costs.  When  the 
marginal  social  benefit  curve  is  steeper  than  the  marginal  private  cost  curve,  restrictions 
dominate.  
The results flip when the marginal cost/benefit trade-offs are reversed. If the private costs of 
the wrong choice are high, relative to the social benefits foregone, fixing these costs through 
taxation  is  likely  to  deliver  the  better  welfare  outcome.  When  the  marginal  social  benefit 
curve  is  flatter  than  the  marginal  private  cost  curve,  taxation  dominates.  So  the  choice  of 
taxation versus prohibition in controlling pollution is ultimately an empirical issue.  
To illustrate the framework, consider the path of financial regulation in the US over the past 
century. The US announcements in January are in many respects redolent of US financial 
reforms enacted during the late 1920s and early 1930s. Then, restrictions were imposed on 
both bank size and scope, in the form of the McFadden (1927) and Glass-Steagall (1933) 
Acts. The history of both, viewed through Weitzman’s lens, is illuminating for today’s debate. 
                                                 
9  Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2009). 
10  For example, Brunnermeier et al (2009), NYU Stern School of Business (2009). 
11  For example, Kay (2009), Kotlikoff (2010). 
12  Stern (2006). 
13   Weitzman (1974). 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2010
The  McFadden  Act  (1927)  in  the  US  gave  nationally-chartered  banks  broadly  the  same 
branching rights as state banks within the state. But it also confirmed the effective prohibition 
on national banks opening new branches across state lines that had previously been implicit 
in  the  US  National  Banking  Act  (1864).  It  covered  a  wide  range  of  banking  functions, 
including deposit-taking and brokerage.  
The motivation behind the Act appears to have been in part political, reflecting lobbying by 
small  unit  banks  under  threat  from  larger  competitors.  But  it  also  had  an  economic 
dimension, as a check on the dangers of “excessive concentration of financial power”.14 The 
same  too-big-to-fail  arguments  are  of  course  heard  today,  though  the  concerns  then  were 
competition  rather  than  crisis-related  ones.  Weitzman’s  marginal  social  benefit  curve  was 
perceived to be steep, made so by state-level competition concerns. 
McFadden appeared to be fairly effective in limiting the size of US banks from the 1930s right 
through to the mid-1970s. Over this period, the average asset size of US banks in relation to 
nominal GDP was roughly flat (Chart 1). As recently as the early 1980s, it was still at around 
its level at the time of the Great Depression.  
The  1980s  marked  a  watershed,  with  interstate  branching  restrictions  progressively  lifted. 
States  began  to  open  their  borders  to  out-of-state  Bank  Holding  Companies  (BHCs).  The 
1982 Garn-St Germain Act allowed any BHC to acquire failed banks and thrifts, regardless of 
the state law. Finally, the Riegle-Neal Act of 1994, which took effect in 1997, largely lifted 
restrictions on interstate branching for both domestic BHCs and foreign banks.  
The  rationale  for  this  change  of  heart  was  a  mirror-image  of  the  1920s.  Large  banks 
convinced politicians of the high private costs of restrictions, which inhibited the efficiency of 
their offering to the public. In Weitzman’s framework, private costs trumped social benefits. 
The effects of the removal of interstate restrictions were dramatic. The average size of US 
banks, relative to GDP, has risen roughly threefold over the past 20 years (Chart 1). Too-big-
to-fail was reborn in a new guise. 
The US Banking Act (1933) was co-sponsored by Senator Carter Glass and Representative 
Henry  Steagall  –  hence  “Glass-Steagall”.  It  prevented  commercial  banks  from  conducting 
most  types  of  securities  business,  including  principal  trading,  underwriting  and  securities 
lending.  It  also  banned  investment  banks  from  taking  deposits.  The  key  functions  of 
commercial and investment banking were effectively prised apart. 
The Act was motivated by stability concerns in the light of the Great Depression. The stock 
market  boom  of  the  1920s  had  been  fuelled  by  cheap  credit  from  the  banks.  The  stock 
market crash of 1929 brought that, and a great many US banks, to a shuddering halt. Among 
many  banks,  net  losses  on  securities  were  as  great  as  losses  on  loans.  These  losses 
transmitted to the real economy through a collapse in lending, whose stock halved between 
1929 and 1933.  
Against this economic backdrop, and amid heated banker-bashing, it is easy to see how the 
social benefits of segregation were perceived as far outweighing the private costs at the time. 
Kennedy (1973) describes how “Stock dealings which had made bankers rich and respected 
in the era of affluence now glared as scarlet sins in the age of depression. Disillusionment 
with  speculators  and  securities  merchants  carried  over  from  investment  bankers  to 
commercial bankers; the two were often the same, and an embittered public did not care to 
make fine distinctions”. Glass and Steagall made just such a distinction. They underpinned it 
with legislation, signed by President Roosevelt in June 1933.  
As with McFadden, Glass-Steagall appears to have been effective from the 1930s right up 
until  the  latter  part  of  the  1980s.  Measures  of  concentration  in  the  US  banking  system 
                                                 
14  Chapman and Westerfield (1942). 
BIS Review 40/2010 
 5
remained  broadly  flat  between  the  1930s  and  the  late  1980s  (Chart  2).  But  competitive 
pressures  were  building  from  the  late  1970s  onwards.  Strains  on  US  commercial  banks 
intensified  from  alternative  lending  vehicles  (such  as  mutual  funds  and  commercial  paper 
markets) and from overseas banks. The private costs of restrictions were rising.  
Legislators responded. After 1988, securities affiliates within BHCs were permitted, though 
were still subject to strict limits. In 1999, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act revoked the restrictions 
of Glass-Steagall, allowing co-mingling of investment and commercial banking. This came as 
a specific response to the perceived high private costs of restrictions relative to the perceived 
social benefits – again, in a reversal of the Weitzman calculus from the early 1930s.  
As  with  size,  the  effects  of  liberalisation  on  banking  concentration  were  immediate  and 
dramatic. The share of the top three largest US banks in total assets rose fourfold, from 10% 
to 40% between 1990 and 2007 (Chart 2). A similar trend is discernible internationally: the 
share of the top five largest global banks in the assets of the largest 1000 banks has risen 
from around 8% in 1998 to double that in 2009.  
This degree of concentration, combined with the large size of the banking industry relative to 
GDP, has produced a pattern which is not mirrored in other industries. The largest banking 
firms  are  far  larger,  and  have  grown  far  faster,  than  the  largest  firms  in  other  industries 
(Chart 3).  With  the  repeal  of  the  McFadden  and  Glass-Steagall  Acts,  the  too-big-to-fail 
problem has not just returned but flourished. 
In  the  light  of  the  Great  Recession,  and  the  large  apparent  costs  of  too-big-to-fail,  does 
Weitzman’s cost-benefit calculus suggest there is a case for winding back the clock to the 
reforms of the Great Depression? Determining that requires an assessment of the benefits 
and costs of restrictions. 
The benefits of prohibition 
The potential benefits of restricting activity in any complex adaptive system, whether financial 
or non-financial, can roughly be grouped under three headings: modularity, robustness and 
incentives. Each has a potentially important bearing on systemic resilience and hence on the 
social benefits of restrictions. 
Modularity 
(a) 
In 1973, Nobel-prizing winning economist Robert Merton showed that the value of a portfolio 
of options is at least as great as the value of an option on the portfolio.15 On the face of it, 
this  seems  to  fly  in  the  face  of  modern  portfolio  theory,  of  which  Merton  himself  was  of 
course  one  of  the  key  architects.  Whatever  happened  to  the  benefits  of  portfolio 
diversification?  
The  answer  can  be  found  in  an  unlikely  source  –  Al’Qaeda.  Although  the  precise 
organisational form of Al’Qaeda is not known with certainty, two structural characteristics are 
clear.  First,  it  operates  not  as  a  centralised,  integrated  organisation  but  rather  as  a  highly 
decentralised  and  loose  network  of  small  terrorist  cells.  Second,  as  events  have  shown, 
Al’Qaeda  has  exhibited  considerable  systemic  resilience  in  the  face  of  repeated  and 
on-going attempts to bring about its collapse.  
These  two  characteristics  are  closely  connected.  A  series  of  decentralised  cells,  loosely 
bonded, make infiltration of the entire Al’Qaeda network extremely unlikely. If any one cell is 
incapacitated,  the  likelihood  of  this  undermining  the  operations  of  other  cells  is  severely 
reduced.  That,  of  course,  is  precisely  why  Al’Qaeda  has  chosen  this  organisational  form. 
                                                 
15  Merton (1973). 
6 
 BIS Review 40/2010
Al’Qaeda  is  a  prime  example  of  modularity  and  its  effects  in  strengthening  systemic 
resilience. 
There are many examples from other industries where modularity in organisational structure 
has  been  deployed  to  enhance  systemic  resilience.  Computer  manufacture  is  one.  During 
the late 1960s, computers were highly integrated systems. Gradually, they evolved into the 
quintessential  modular  system  of  today,  with  distinct  modules  (CPU,  hard  disk,  keyboard) 
which were replaceable if they failed without endangering the functioning of the system as a 
whole. This improved resilience and reliability. 
In the computing industry, modularity appears to have had an influence on industry structure. 
Since  the  1970s,  the  computer  hardware  industry  has  moved  from  a  highly  concentrated 
structure to a much more fragmented one. In 1969, IBM had a market share of over 70%. By 
this  century,  the  market  share  of  the  largest  hardware  firm  was  around  a  third  of  that. 
Modularity  has  meant  the  computer  industry  has  become  less  prone  to  “too-big-to-fail” 
problems. 
Other examples of modularity in organisational structures include:  
 
The  management  of  forest  fires,  which  typically  involves  the  introduction  of 
firebreaks to control the spread of fire;16 
The  management  of  utility  services,  such  as  water,  gas  and  electricity,  where  the 
network often has built-in latencies and restrictions to avoid overload and contagion; 
The  management  of  infectious  diseases  which  these  days  often  involves  placing 
restrictions  on  travel,  either  within  a  country  (as  in  the  case  of  foot-and-mouth 
disease in the UK) or outside of it (as in the case of H5N1);17 
The  control  of  computer  viruses  across  the  world  wide  web,  which  is  typically 
achieved by constructing firewalls which restrict access to local domains; 
Attempts on the world domino toppling record, which involve arranging the dominos 
in discrete blocks to minimise the risk of premature cascades. 
    These  are  all  examples  where  modular  structures  have  been  introduced  to  strengthen 
system resilience. In all of these cases, policy intervention was required to affect this change 
in structure. The case for doing so was particularly strong when the risk of viral spread was 
acute. In some cases, intervention followed specific instances of systemic collapse.  
The North American electricity outage in August 2003 affected 55 million people in the US 
and  Canada.  It  had  numerous  adverse  knock-on  effects,  including  to  the  sewage  system, 
telephone and transport network and fuel supplies. A number of people are believed to have 
died  as  a  consequence.  This  event  led  to  a  rethinking  of  the  configuration  of  the  North 
American electricity grid, with built-in latencies and stricter controls on power circulation. 
In  the  mid-1980s,  an  attempt  on  the  world  domino-toppling  record  –  at  that  time, 
8000 dominos – had to be abandoned when the pen from one of the TV film crew caused the 
majority of the dominos to cascade prematurely. Twenty years later a sparrow disturbed an 
attempt on the world domino-toppling record. Although the sparrow toppled 23,000 dominos, 
750 built-in gaps averted systemic disaster and a new world record of over 4 million dominos 
was still set. No-one died, except the poor sparrow which (poetically if controversially) was 
shot by bow and arrow. 
So  to  banking.  It  has  many  of  the  same  basic  ingredients  as  other  network  industries,  in 
particular  the  potential  for  viral  spread  and  periodic  systemic  collapse.  For  financial  firms 
                                                 
16  Carlson and Doyle (1999).  
17  Kelling et al (2003). 
BIS Review 40/2010 
 7
holding asset portfolios, however, there is an additional dimension. This can be seen in the 
relationship  between  diversification  on  the  one  hand  and  diversity  on  the  other.18  The  two 
have quite different implications for resilience. 
In  principle,  size  and  scope  increase  the  diversification  benefits.  Larger  portfolios  ought  to 
make  banks  less  prone  to  idiosyncratic  risk  to  their  asset  portfolio.  In  the  limit,  banks  can 
completely  eradicate  idiosyncratic  risk  by  holding  the  market  portfolio.  The  “only”  risk  they 
would face is aggregate or systematic risk. 
But if all banks are fully diversified and hold the market portfolio, that means they are all, in 
effect, holding the same portfolio. All are subject to the same systematic risk factors. In other 
words,  the  system  as  a  whole  lacks  diversity.  Other  things  equal,  it  is  then  prone  to 
generalised,  systemic  collapse.  Homogeneity  breeds  fragility.  In  Merton’s  framework,  the 
option to default selectively through modular holdings, rather than comprehensively through 
the market portfolio, has value to investors.  
The precise balance between diversification and diversity depends on banks’ balance sheet 
configuration. What does this suggest? Charts 4 and 5 plot the income variability of a set of 
24  global  banks  against  their  asset  size  and  a  measure  of  the  diversity  of  their  business 
model.19 There is no strong relationship between either size or diversity and income volatility. 
If  anything  the  relationship  is  positively  sloped,  with  size  and  diversity  increasing  income 
variability, not smoothing it.  
Charts  6  and  7  look  at  banks’  experience  during  the  crisis.  Size  and  diversity  are  plotted 
against  banks’  write-downs  (per  unit  of  assets).  Again,  if  anything,  these  relationships  are 
positively sloped, with larger, more diversified banks suffering proportionally greater losses. 
This is consistent with evidence from econometric studies of banking conglomerates which 
has found that larger banks, if anything, exhibit greater risk due to higher volatility assets and 
activities.20  
This evidence is no more than illustrative. But it suggests that, in the arm wrestle between 
diversification  and  diversity,  the  latter  appears  to  have  held  the  upper  hand.  Bigger  and 
broader banking does not obviously appear to have been better, at least in a risk sense. In 
banking, as on many things, Merton may have had it right. 
Robustness 
(b) 
The Merton result holds in a world in which investors form judgements based on knowledge 
of  the  distribution  of  risk.  But  in  complex  dynamic  systems,  the  distribution  of  risk  may  be 
lumpy  and  non-linear,  subject  to  tipping  points  and  discontinuities.21  Faced  with  this,  the 
distribution of outcomes for the financial system as a whole may well be incalculable. The 
financial system  may  operate  in  an environment  of  uncertainty,  in  the  Knightian  sense,  as 
distinct from risk. 
There  is  a  literature  on  how  best  to  regulate  systems  in  the  face  of  such  Knightian 
uncertainty.22 It suggests some guideposts for regulation of financial systems. First, keep it 
simple. Complex control of a complex system is a recipe for confusion at best, catastrophe at 
                                                 
18  Beale et al (2009). 
19  A  Herfindahl-Hirschman  index  of  revenue  concentration  is  constructed  to  measure  diversification,  with  a 
measure  of  zero  meaning  that  the  HHI  =  1,  i.e.  revenue  is  concentrated  solely  on  one  activity.  Revenue 
concentration is calculated across three buckets for the last pre crisis year (2006) – Retail and commercial 
banking; Corporate and investment banking; Asset and wealth management. 
20  De Nicolo (2000). 
21  Haldane (2009b). 
22  See, for example, Aikman et al (2010). 
8 
 BIS Review 40/2010
worst. Complex control adds, not subtracts, from the Knightian uncertainty problem. The US 
constitution is four pages long. The recently-tabled Dodd Bill on US financial sector reform is 
1,336 pages long. Which do you imagine will have the more lasting impact on behaviour. 
Second, faced with uncertainty, the best approach is often to choose a strategy which avoids 
the extreme tails of the distribution. Technically, economists call this a “minimax” strategy – 
minimising  the  likelihood  of  the  worst  outcome.  Paranoia  can  sometimes  be  an  optimal 
strategy. This is a principle which engineers took to heart a generation ago. It is especially 
evident  in  the  aeronautical  industry  where  air  and  space  disasters  acted  as  beacons  for 
minimax redesign of aircraft and spaceships.  
Third,  simple,  loss-minimising  strategies  are  often  best  achieved  through  what  economists 
call “mechanism design” and what non-economists call “structural reform”. In essence, this 
means acting on the underlying organisational form of the system, rather than through the 
participants  operating  within  it.  In  the  words  of  economist  John  Kay,  it  is  about  regulating 
structure not behaviour.23  
Taken  together,  these  three  features  define  a  “robust”  regulatory  regime  –  robust  to 
uncertainties  from  within  and  outside  the  system.  Using  these  robustness  criteria,  it  is 
possible  to  assess  whether  restrictions  might  be  preferable  to  taxation  in  tackling  banking 
pollution. To illustrate this, contrast the regulatory experience of Glass-Steagall (a restrictions 
approach) and Basel II (a taxation approach).  
Glass-Steagall was simple in its objectives and execution. The Act itself was only 17 pages 
long.  Its  aims  were  shaped  by  an  extreme  tail  event  (the  Great  Depression)  and  were 
explicitly minimax (to avoid a repetition). It sought to achieve this by acting directly on the 
structure  of  the  financial  system,  quarantining  commercial  bank  and  brokering  activities 
through  red-line  regulation.  In  other  words,  Glass-Steagall  satisfied  all  three  robustness 
criteria. And so it proved, lasting well over half a century without a significant systemic event 
in the US.  
The  contrast  with  Basel  II  is  striking.  This  was  anything  but  simple,  comprising  many 
thousands of pages and taking 15 years to deliver. It was calibrated largely to data drawn 
from  the  Great  Moderation,  a  period  characterised  by  an  absence  of  tail  events  –  more 
minimin than minimax. Basel II was underpinned by a complex menu of capital risk weights. 
This was fine-line, not red-line, regulation. In short, Basel II satisfied few of the robustness 
criteria.  And  so  it  proved,  overwhelmed  by  the  recent  crisis  scarcely  after  it  had  been 
introduced.  
Incentives 
(c) 
Tail risk within some systems is determined by God – in economist-speak, it is exogenous. 
Natural  disasters,  like  earthquakes  and  floods,  are  examples  of  such  tail  risk.  Although 
exogenous,  even  these  events  have  been  shown  to  occur  more  frequently  than  a  normal 
distribution would imply.24 God’s distribution has fat tails. 
Tail risk within financial systems is not determined by God but by man; it is not exogenous 
but endogenous. This has important implications for regulatory control. Finance theory tells 
us  that  risk  brings  return.  So  there  are  natural  incentives  within  the  financial  system  to 
generate tail risk and to avoid regulatory control. In the run-up to this crisis, examples of such 
risk-hunting  and  regulatory  arbitrage  were  legion.  They  included  escalating  leverage, 
increased trading portfolios and the design of tail-heavy financial instruments.25 
                                                 
23  Kay (2009). 
24  Korup and Clague (2009).  
25  Haldane (2009a) discusses some of these strategies in greater detail and the payoffs they generate. 
BIS Review 40/2010 
 9
The endogeneity of tail risk in banking poses a dilemma for regulation. Putting uncertainties 
to  one  side,  assume  the  policymaker  could  calibrate  perfectly  tail  risk in  the  system  today 
and the capital necessary to insure against it. In an echo of the 1979 Madness song, banks 
would then have incentives to position themselves “One Step Beyond” the regulatory buffer 
to  harvest  the  higher  returns  that  come  from  assuming  tail  risk.  They  do  so  safe  in  the 
knowledge  that  the  state  will  assume  some  of  this  risk  if  it  materialises.  Tail  risk  would 
expand to exhaust available resources. Countless crises have testified to this dynamic. 
This dynamic means it is hazardous to believe there is a magic number for regulatory ratios 
sufficient to insure against tail risk in all states of the world. Because tail risk is created not 
endowed, calibrating a capital ratio for all seasons is likely to be, quite literally, pointless – 
whatever today’s optimal regulatory point, risk incentives mean that tomorrow’s is sure to be 
different.  
In response, some economists have proposed corner solutions to the systemic risk problem – 
in  effect,  radical  structural  redesign.  Starting  with  Irving  Fisher  in  the  1930s,  some  have 
proposed narrow banks with a 100% liquid asset ratio to protect the liquidity services banks 
provide.26  Others  have  proposed  mutual  fund  banks  with  a  100%  equity  ratio  to  safeguard 
banks’ solvency.27 These limiting solutions are proof to risk incentives. The one guaranteed 
safe hiding place for the risk-fearing policymaker is the corner. 
One criticism of these proposals is that they might raise materially the cost of capital to banks 
and hence to the real economy. For example, 100% capital ratios could cause the economy-
wide cost of capital to sky-rocket given the premium charged for equity over debt finance. 
This same argument is frequently heard in debates about more modest rises in banks’ capital 
ratios. But there are good counter-arguments that need also to be weighed.  
By lowering risk, higher levels of equity ought to lower banks’ cost of debt finance. Indeed, in 
a frictionless world Modigliani and Miller famously showed that this effect would fully offset 
the higher cost of equity, thereby leaving the total cost of capital for banks unchanged.28 In 
other words, the cost of capital for a bank may be unaffected by its capital structure, at least 
when distortions in the economy are small. Even when they large, some offset in debt costs 
is likely. 
It is possible to go one step further and argue that higher bank capital ratios could potentially 
lower  banks’  cost  of  capital.  The  size  of  the  premium  demanded  by  holders  of  equity  is  a 
long-standing puzzle in finance – the equity premium puzzle.29 Robert Barro has suggested 
this puzzle can be explained by fears of extreme tail events.30 And what historically has been 
the single biggest cause of those tail events? Banking crises. Boosting banks’ capital would 
lessen  the  incidence  of  crises.  If  this  lowered  the  equity  premium,  as  Barro  suggests,  the 
cost of capital in the economy could actually fall.  
The costs of prohibition 
Turning to the other side of the equation, what does existing evidence tell us about the costs 
to  banks  of  restrictions,  whether  on  the  scale  or  scope  of  their  activities?  In  Weitzman’s 
framework,  how  significant  are  the  private  costs  of  restrictions?  Fortunately,  there  is  a 
reasonably rich empirical literature on economies of scale and scope in banking.  
                                                 
26  Kay (op.cit.). 
27  Kotlikoff (2010). 
28  Modigliani and Miller (1958). See also Miles (2009). 
29  Mehra and Prescott (1985). 
30  Barro (2006). 
10 
 BIS Review 40/2010
Economies of scale 
(a) 
On economies of scale, the literature tends either to look at the cross-sectional efficiency of 
banks of different sizes, or the time-series efficiency of banks either side of a merger. As it 
turns  out,  both  roads  reach  the  same  destination.  Economies  of  scale  appear  to  operate 
among  banks  with  assets  less,  perhaps  much  less,  than  $100  billion.  But  above  that 
threshold there is evidence, if anything, of  diseconomies of scale. The Weitzman marginal 
private cost curve is U-shaped.31  
Experience  in  the  US  following  the  McFadden  Act  suggests  size  in  banking  can  bring 
benefits.  Over  9,000  US  banks  failed  during  the  Great  Depression,  the  majority  of  which 
were unit banks. Friedman and Schwarz (1963) blame the absence of bank branching for the 
high failure rate among US banks. The costs of limited branching were also felt well after the 
Great  Depression  in  higher-cost  provision  of  banking  services,  in  particular  for  larger 
companies using lending syndicates to finance large-scale investment.32 
US experience after McFadden chimes with cross-country evidence drawn, in particular, from 
developing  countries.  For  example,  using  a  dataset  of  107  countries,  Barth  et  al  (2004) 
assess the effects of restrictions on the efficiency and stability of the financial system. They 
find  evidence  that  restrictions  are  damaging  to  both,  in  particular  barriers  to  foreign  bank 
entry.  
Do  those  arguments  resonate  within  advanced  country  banking  systems  today?  Two 
comprehensive  studies  in  the  mid-1990s  found  that  economies  of  scale  in  banking  are 
exhausted  at  relatively  modest  levels  of  assets,  perhaps  between  $5–10  billion.33  A  more 
recent 2004 survey of studies in both the US and Europe finds evidence of a similar asset 
threshold.34  Even  once  allowance  is  made  for  subsequent  balance  sheet  inflation,  this 
evidence implies that economies of scale in banking may cease at double-digit dollar billions 
of assets.  
Evidence  from  banking  mergers  offers  little  more  encouragement.  There  is  no  strong 
evidence  of  increased  bank  efficiency  after  a  merger  or  acquisition.35  And  there  is  little  to 
suggest cross-activity mergers create economic value.36 That rather chimes with recent crisis 
experience.  Of  the  bank  mergers  and  acquisitions  which  have  taken  place  recently,  the 
majority  have  resulted  in  the  merged  firm  under-performing  the  market  in  the  subsequent 
period. Of course, all econometric studies have their limitations so these results do not close 
the case. Nonetheless, the uniformity of the evidence is striking.  
Economies of scope 
(b) 
Turning from economies of scale to economies of scope, the picture painted is little different. 
Evidence from US bank holding companies suggests that diversification gains from multiple 
business  lines  may  be  more  than  counter-balanced  by  heightened  exposures  to  volatile 
income-generating activities, such as trading.37 This mirrors the evidence from Charts 4 and 
5  and  from  the  Great  Depression.  Internationally,  a  recent  study  of  over  800  banks  in 
                                                 
31  Santomero and Eckles (2000). 
32  For example, Calomiris and Hubbard (1995). 
33  Saunders (1996), Berger and Mester (1997). 
34  Amel et al (2004).  
35  For example, Berger and Humphrey (1997) based on a survey of over 100 studies. 
36  For example, De Long (2001). 
37  Stiroh and Rumble (2006). 
BIS Review 40/2010 
 11
43 countries  found  a  conglomerate  “discount”  in  their  equity  prices.38  In  other  words,  the 
market  assigned  a  lower  value  to  the  conglomerate  than  the  sum  of  its  parts,  echoing 
Merton’s 1973 insight. This is evidence of diseconomies of scope in banking.  
On the face of it, these findings are a puzzle. The most likely cause was articulated by Austin 
Robinson  back  in  the  1930s  –  “Man’s  mind  and  man’s  memory  is  essentially  a  limited 
factor…Every  increase  in  size  beyond  a  point  must  involve  a  lengthening  of  the  chain  of 
authority…at  some  point  the  increasing  costs  of  co-ordination  must  exceed  the  declining 
economies”.39  Oliver  Williamson’s  “span  of  control”  theory  of  organisations  made  rigorous 
this intuition thirty years later.  
The essence of these arguments is that limits on the optimal size and scope of firms may be 
as  much  neurological  as  technological.  Numbers  of  synapses  may  matter  more  than 
numbers of servers. The history of military units provides a good illustration. In Roman times, 
the  optimal  size  of  a  military  unit  was  100  –  hence  the  Roman  centurion.  This  was  the 
maximum number of men a general felt able to know well enough to lead and control. The 
constraint was neurological.  
Two  millennia  have  passed.  Extraordinary  advances  have  been  made 
in  military 
telecommunications  technology.  And  the  optimal  size  of  the  military  unit  in  the  US  army 
today?  Just  under  100  people.40  The  number  of  relationships  humans  are  felt  able  to 
maintain is believed to lie below 150 – so-called Dunbar’s Law.41 For most of us, it is single-
digits. That number has been roughly the same since the dawn of time, despite the extra-
ordinary  recent  advance  of  technology  and  social  networks.  As  Nicholas  Christakis  has 
observed, Facebook “friends” are not really your friends. 
With hindsight, this crisis has provided many examples of failures rooted in an exaggerated 
sense  of  knowledge  and  control.  Risks  and  counterparty  relationships  outstripped  banks’ 
ability to manage them. Servers outpaced synapses. Large banks grew to comprise several 
thousand distinct legal entities. When Lehman Brothers failed, it had almost one million open 
derivatives contracts – the financial equivalent of Facebook friends. Whatever the technology 
budget,  it  is  questionable  whether  any  man’s  mind  or  memory  could  cope  with  such 
complexity. 
To sum up, the maximum efficient scale of banking could be relatively modest. Perhaps it lies 
below  $100  billion.  Experience  suggests  there  is  at  least  a  possibility  of  diseconomies  of 
scale lying in wait beyond that point. Conglomerate banking, while good on paper, appears to 
be  more  mixed  in  practice.  If  these  are  not  inconvenient  truths,  they  are  at  least  sobering 
conjectures. They also sit awkwardly with the current configuration of banking.  
In  2008,  145  banks  globally  had  assets  above  $100  billion,  most  of  them  universal  banks 
combining  multiple  business  activities.  Together,  these  institutions  account  for  85%  of  the 
assets of the world’s top 1000 banks ranked by Tier 1 capital. If these institutions could be 
resolved  easily,  so  that  the  systemic  consequences  of  their  failure  were  limited,  efficiency 
considerations  could  perhaps  be  set  to  one  side.  Or,  put  in  Weitzman’s  terms,  the  social 
benefits of cutting banks down to size would be low.  
But crisis experience has demonstrated that the apparatus does not currently exist to resolve 
safely  these  institutions.  There  are  no  examples  during  this  crisis  of  financial  institutions 
                                                 
38  Laeven and Levine (2007); see also Schmid and Walter (2009) for recent US evidence. 
39  Robinson (1934). 
40  Christakis and Fowler (2009). 
41  Dunbar (1993). 
12 
 BIS Review 40/2010
beyond  $100  billion  being  resolved  without  serious  systemic  spillovers.42  Instead,  those  in 
trouble have been bailed-out. The same 145 institutions account for over 90% of the support 
offered by governments during the course of the crisis. 
In  the  light  of  the  crisis,  and  in  the  language  of  Weitzman,  the  marginal  social  benefits  of 
restrictions could be greater than the marginal private costs. The maximum efficient scale of 
banking  may  lie  below  the  maximum  resolvable  scale.  A  large  part  of  the  effort  of  the 
international  community  over  the  past  few  years  has  been  directed  at  increasing  the 
maximum resolvable scale of banks – for example, through improved resolution regimes and 
living  wills.43  If  successful,  that  effort  would  shift  the  balance  of  the  Weitzman  cost/benefit 
calculus in the direction of bigger banks; it could help achieve the modularity, robustness and 
better aligned incentives which restrictions otherwise deliver.  
But if this effort is unsuccessful, past evidence and present experience pose a big question 
about existing banking structures. Against that backdrop, it is understandable that restrictions 
on  scale  and  activity  are  part  of  today’s  debate  about  solutions  to  the  systemic  pollution 
problem. $100 billion may not just be the question; it may also be part of the answer.  
Conclusion 
We are at the start of a great debate on the future structure of finance, not the end. Some 
fear that momentum for radical financial reform will be lost. But financial crises leave a scar. 
This time’s sovereign scar should act as a lasting reminder of the criticality of reform. Today’s 
crisis has stretched some state’s sinews to the limit. Both literally and metaphorically, global 
finance cannot afford another.  
The history of banking is that risk expands to exhaust available resources. Tail risk is bigger 
in banking because it is created, not endowed. For that reason, it is possible that no amount 
of  capital  or  liquidity  may  ever  be  quite  enough.  Profit  incentives  may  place  risk  one  step 
beyond regulation. That means banking reform may need to look beyond regulation to the 
underlying structure of finance if we are not to risk another sparrow toppling the dominos. 
Today’s  financial  structure  is  dense  and  complex,  like  a  tropical  rainforest.  Like  the 
rainforests, when it works well it is a source of richness. Yet it is, as events have shown, at 
the same time fragile. Simpler financial eco-systems offer the promise of greater robustness, 
at some cost in richness. In the light of a costly financial crisis, both eco-systems should be 
explored in seeking answers to the $100 billion question. 
                                                 
42  Washington Mutual, with assets of around $300bn, was resolved by FDIC, but was perceived by many to have 
caused systemic spillovers.  
43  For example, Tucker (2010). 
BIS Review 40/2010 
 13
References 
Aikman, D, Barrett, P, Kapadia, S, King, M, Proudman, J, Taylor, T, de Weymarn, I, and 
T Yates (2010), Uncertainty in Macroeconomic Policy Making: Art or Science?, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech432.pdf  
Amel, D, Barnes, C, Panetta, F and C Salleo (2004), “Consolidation and Efficiency in the 
Financial  Sector:  A  Review  of  the  International  Evidence”,  Journal  of  Banking  &  Finance, 
vol. 28(10). 
Baker,  D  and  T  McArthur  (2009),  “The  Value  of  the  ‘Too  Big  to  Fail’  Big  bank  Subsidy”, 
Centre for Economic and Policy Research. 
Barro, R J (2006), “Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century”, Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, vol. 121(3), p.823–866. 
Barth,  J  R,  Caprio  Jr.,  and  R  Levine  (2004),  “Bank  Supervision  and  Regulation:  What 
Works Best?”, Journal of Financial Intermediation, vol. 13(2), p.205–248. 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2009), Consultative Document: Strengthening 
the Resilience of the Banking Sector. 
Beale, N, Rand, D, Arinaminpathy, N and R M May (2009), Conflicts Between Individual 
and Systemic Risk in Banking and Other Systems, forthcoming. 
Berger, A and D Humphrey (1997), “Efficiency of financial institutions: international survey 
and  directions  for  future  research”,  European  Journal  of  Operational  Research,  vol.  98, 
p.175–212. 
Berger, A N and L J Mester (1997), “Inside the Black Box: What Explains Differences in the 
Efficiencies of Financial Institutions?”, Journal of Banking & Finance, vol. 21(7), p.895–947.  
Brunnermeier,  M,  Crockett,  A,  Goodhart,  C,  Persaud,  A  and  H  Shin  (2009),  “The 
Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation”, ICMB-CEPR Geneva Report on the World 
Economy 11.  
Calomiris,  C  and  G  Hubbard  (1995),  “Tax  Policy,  Internal  Finance,  and  Investment: 
Evidence  from  the  Undistributed  Profits  Tax  of  1936–1937”,  Journal  of  Business,  vol.  68, 
p.443–482.  
Carlson,  J  M  and  J  Doyle  (1999),  “Highly  Optimized  Tolerance:  A  Mechanism  for  Power 
Laws in Designed Systems”, Physical Review E, vol. 60(2), p.1412–1427. 
Chapman, J M and R B Westerfield (1942), Branch Banking, Harper & Brothers. 
Christakis,  N A and J  H Fowler (2009),  Connected:  The  Surprising  Power  of  Our  Social 
Networks and How They Shape Our Lives, Little Brown and Company. 
DeLong, G L (2001), “Stockholder Gains From Focusing Versus Diversifying Bank Mergers”, 
Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 59, p. 221–252. 
De  Nicolo,  G  (2000),  “Size,  Charter  Value  and  Risk  in  Banking:  An  International 
Perspective”,  International  Finance  Discussion  Papers  No.689,  Board  of  Governors  of  the 
Federal Reserve System. 
Dunbar,  R  I  M  (1993),  “Coevolution  of  Neocortical  Size,  Group  Size  and  Language  in 
Humans”, Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol. 16(4), p.681–694. 
Freidman,  M  and  A  J  Schwartz  (1963),  A  Monetary  History  of  the  United  States,  
1867–1960, Princeton University Press. 
Haldane, A G (2009a), Banking on the State, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech409.pdf 
14 
 BIS Review 40/2010
Haldane, A G (2009b), Rethinking the Financial Network, available at  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech386.pdf  
IMF (2009), World Economic Outlook: Crisis and Recovery, available at  
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2009/01/pdf/text.pdf  
Kay, J (2009), Narrow Banking: The Reform of Banking Regulation, Centre for the Study of 
Financial Innovation. 
Kelling,  M  J,  Woolhouse,  M  E  J,  May,  R  M  and  B  T  Grenfell  (2003),  “Modelling 
Vaccination Strategies Against Foot-and-mouth Disease”, Nature, vol. 421, p.136–142. 
Kennedy, S E (1973), The Banking Crisis of 1933, University Press of Kentucky. 
Korup,  O  and  J  J  Clague  (2009),  “Natural  Hazards,  Extreme  Events,  and  Mountain 
Topography”, Quaternary Science Reviews, vol. 28(11–12), p.977–990.  
Kotlikoff, L J (2010), Jimmy Stewart is Dead: Ending the World’s Ongoing Financial Plague 
with Limited Purpose Banking, John Wiley and Sons. 
Laeven,  L  and  R  Levine  (2007),  “Is  There  are  Diversification  Discount  in  Financial 
Conglomerates?”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 85(2), p.331–367. 
Mehra, R and E C Prescott (1985), “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle”, Journal of Monetary 
Economics, vol. 15, p.145–161.  
Merton,  R  C  (1973),  “Theory  of  Rational  Option  Pricing”,  Bell  Journal  of  Economics  and 
Management Science, vol. 4(1), p.141–183. 
Miles, D (2009), The Future Financial Landscape, available at  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech418.pdf  
Modigliani,  F  and  M  Miller  (1958),  “The  Cost  of  Capital,  Corporation  Finance  and  the 
Theory of Investment”, American Economic Review, vol. 48(3).  
NYU  Stern  School  of  Business  (2009),  Restoring  Financial  Stability:  How  to  Repair  a 
Failed System, John Wiley & Sons.  
Reinhart,  C  M  and  K  Rogoff  (2009),  This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial 
Folly, Princeton University Press. 
Robinson, A (1934), “The Problem of Management and the Size of Firms”, The Economic 
Journal, vol. 44(174), p/242–257.  
Santomero,  A  M  and  D  L  Eckles  (2000),  “The  Determinants  of  Success  in  the  New 
Financial Services Environment: Now That Firms Can Do Everything, What Should They Do 
and Why Should Regulators Care?”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy 
Review (October), vol. 6(4), p.11–23.  
Saunders,  A  (1996),  Financial  Institutions  Management:  A  Modern  Perspective,  Irwin 
Professional Publishing.  
Schmid,  M  M  and  I  Walter  (2009),  “Do  Financial  Conglomerates  Create  or  Destroy 
Economic Value?”, Journal of Financial Intermediation, vol. 18(2), p.193–216.  
Stern,  N  (2006),  Stern  Review  on  the  Economics  of  Climate  Change,  Cabinet  Office-HM 
Treasury, available at http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/sternreview_index.htm  
Stiroh, K and A Rumble (2006), “The Dark Side of Diversification: the Case of US Financial 
Holding Companies”, Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol.80, p.2131–2161. 
Tucker, P (2010), Resolution of Large and Complex Financial Institutions: The Big Issues, 
available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2010/speech431.pdf  
Weitzman,  M  L  (1974),  “Prices  vs.  Quantities”,  Review  of  Economic  Studies,  vol.  41,  
p.477–91. 
BIS Review 40/2010 
 15
Annex 
Table 1 
Present value of output losses (% of 2009 GDP) 
Fraction of initial output loss which is permanent 
25% 
130 
90 
50% 
260 
170 
100% 
520 
350 
 UK  
World  
Source: Bank calculations 
Average ratings difference for a sample of banks and building societies 
Table 2 
2007 
1.56 
1.68 
1.63 
 
UK 
Global 
Average 
1.   All figures are year-end 
2.  The UK sample contains 16 banks and building societies in 2007 and 2008 and 13 in 2009. The global 
sample contains a sample of 26 banks across a range of sizes and countries for 2007 and 28 banks in 
2008 and 2009. 
Average (2007–09)  
2008 
1.94 
2.36 
2.21 
2009 
4.00 
2.89 
3.24 
2.50 
2.31 
2.36 
Source: Moody’s and Bank calculations. 
Average ratings difference for UK banks and building societies(a) 
Table 3 
Category 
2007 
Large banks 
Small banks 
2008 
Large banks 
Small banks 
2009 
Large banks 
Small banks 
Average (2007–2009) 
Large banks 
Small banks 
Mean 
Max difference in 
sample 
Min difference in 
sample 
 2.67 
0.14 
 2.78 
0.86 
 4.67 
3.43 
 3.37 
1.48 
 
12 
1 
 
10 
2 
 
7 
6 
 
10 
3 
 
1 
0 
 
1 
0 
 
3 
0 
 
2 
0 
(a)  The  “Large”  category  includes  HSBC,  Barclays,  RBS,  Lloyds  TSB,  Alliance  &  Leicester  and 
Bradford &  Bingley  (up  to  2008),  and  Nationwide.  The  “Small”  category  includes  building  societies: 
Chelsea,  Coventry,  Leeds,  Principality,  Skipton,  West  Bromwich  and  Yorkshire.  The  ratings  are 
year-end.  
Source: Moody’s and Bank calculations. 
16 
 BIS Review 40/2010
Table 4 
Estimated subsidy for UK banks and building societies (£bn)  
and global banks ($bn) 
Average assets relative to GDP of US commercial banks(a)  
Chart 1 
 17
 BIS Review 40/2010 
 Chart 2 
Concentration of the US banking system(b) 
Largest UK company’s assets in each sector relative to GDP 
Chart 3 
 18 
  BIS Review 40/2010
  19
BIS Review 40/2010 
 