Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: The real economy and the financial system – 
the importance of reforms 
Speech by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the meeting on 
the  reform  of  the  Spanish  financial  system,  organised  by  Expansión  and  KPMG,  Madrid, 
23 February 2010. 
 Firstly, I should like to thank Expansión for their kind invitation to speak today in this forum, 
where matters of great importance for the future of the Spanish economy and financial sector 
will be discussed. 
The  latest  available  figures  suggest  we  are  leaving  the  worst  of  the  crisis  behind.  On  the 
international  front,  despite  some  isolated  bouts  of  tension,  financial  market  behaviour 
continues  to  improve,  the  main  developed  economic  areas  have  resumed  positive  growth 
and  the  pace  of  expansion  in  the  emerging  economies  has  stepped  up.  Against  this 
background, and although doubts remain over the consistency of the recovery, the growth 
projections of the main analysts and international agencies have been revised upwards. 
In  Spain,  too,  the  latest  indicators  suggest  the  sharpest  phase  of  the  decline  in  output  is 
behind us. And, while with some delay compared with most of the developed economies, the 
outlook  is  for  the  start  of  a  gradual  growth  phase  during  this  year,  based  on  a  continuing 
positive contribution by external demand. 
As I have said on previous occasions, the greatest cause for concern at present should not 
be  predicting  exactly  when  positive  quarter-on-quarter  growth  will  resume,  but  rather 
determining  to  what  extent  the  Spanish  economy  is  ready  –  or  not  –  to  move  into  a  long 
phase of robust growth.  
During the last upturn, the Spanish economy built up some significant imbalances, such as 
the  excessive  weight  of  real  estate  activities,  a  swollen  external  deficit,  a  relative  loss  of 
competitiveness, and high corporate and household debt. Over the course of the crisis, some 
of these imbalances have begun to be corrected, but others are still significantly holding back 
a pickup in growth. 
With  the  crisis,  these  pre-existing  structural  problems  have  been  compounded  by  an 
increase in unemployment to levels far higher than those of any other developed countries 
and by the sharp deterioration in public finances. These are now undoubtedly the two main 
problems affecting our economy. 
To  embark  on  a  sustainable  economic  recovery,  the  imbalances  built  up  by  the  Spanish 
economy before and during the crisis must be reversed. Job destruction must be halted and 
unemployment absorbed. And, further, an ambitious plan must be devised and set in place to 
cut the budget deficit, to redress the financial position of the private sector and, in sum, to 
mitigate  all  those  structural  shortcomings  that  are  currently  weighing  on  the  recovery  and 
contributing  to  reducing  the  growth  potential  with  which  our  economy  will  face  the  new 
expansionary cycle.  
To  achieve  these  objectives,  there  has  been  insistence  both  in  the  Banco  de  España’s 
reports  and  in  my  regular  appearances  before  Parliament  on  the  need  to  undertake  wide-
ranging  reforms.  The  list  is  an  extensive  one  and  includes  areas  such  as  education,  the 
knowledge  economy,  the  liberalisation  of  goods  and  services  markets,  the  boosting  of 
competition  in  the  network  industries  and  the  introduction  of  further  improvements  in  the 
house rental market.  
However, I would like to stress two reforms which I consider most pressing and necessary: 
budgetary  consolidation  policy  and  labour  reform.  The  government  has  in  recent  weeks 
BIS Review 27/2010 
 1
tabled some proposals for reform which, in my view, are in the right direction. In respect of 
public  finances,  a  cut  of  €50  billion  in  overall  general  government  spending  has  been 
announced in the period up to 2013 and, within the framework of the so-called Toledo Pact, 
an increase in the retirement age has been proposed that would contribute significantly to the 
financial balance of the public pensions system. 
The budgetary measures proposed are a significant public commitment by the government to 
fiscal consolidation. For that very reason, it is now essential that these commitments should 
be  actually  met,  since  otherwise  Spain’s  credibility  might  be  most  adversely  affected.  As 
regards  the  labour  market,  the  social  agents  have  reached  a  wage  agreement  and  the 
government  has  set  out  proposals  for  labour  reform.  Advantage  should  be  taken  of  these 
initiatives to adopt specific and ambitious measures that entail deep-seated changes in the 
functioning of our labour market.  
We stand at a pivotal juncture for our future, a point at which it is vital to radically change 
certain things so that Spain may continue to converge on the core European countries. Some 
of these reforms may require sacrifices, and it would therefore be best to have as broad a 
consensus as possible. The effective adoption of these reforms is crucial for the economy in 
general, but particularly so for the financial system. And if anything has been highlighted by 
the  current  global  crisis,  it  is  the  close  relationship  between  economic  growth  and  the 
strength of the banking system. Two years on from the onset of the turmoil in summer 2007, 
most  Spanish  credit institutions  continue  to  show  considerable  soundness.  Unlike  in  many 
other countries, this has meant that practically no public aid has had to be used to bail out 
banks,  which  has  prevented  adding  a  further  burden  to  the  problems  stemming  from  the 
recession. But the relationship between the economy and the financial system also works in 
the opposite direction and, evidently, if the necessary measures for reactivating employment 
growth within a reasonable time frame are not adopted, bad debts will continue to mount and 
there will be more financial institutions facing difficulty in providing the financing needed for 
economic recovery. 
That  our  banking  system  has  proven  reasonably  resilient  during  the  international  financial 
crisis is due to various factors. These include prudent regulation, more intensive supervision 
than that of other countries, a business model geared essentially to retail banking and sound 
management at most banks. But let me also stress – as it seems to me an example of what 
could be done now with the labour reform – that the government and the opposition, which 
has supported it in Parliament, have expeditiously agreed on a series of high-quality financial 
system  reform  measures  that  have  proven  most  effective  in  preventing  credit  institutions’ 
problems from bringing the country’s economy to its knees. 
We should not forget that if, for instance, the legislation on the funds for the acquisition of 
financial  assets  and  on  guarantees  for  bank  and  savings-bank  bond  issues  had  not  been 
approved, we would no doubt have witnessed a shut-down of wholesale funding on global 
markets and an abrupt contraction in credit that would have led to a deep recessionary spiral. 
Fortunately, this did not occur. 
That does not mean that credit standards are the same now as before the crisis. One of the 
most  notable  consequences  has  been  the  increase  in  risk  aversion,  which  stood  in  the 
previous upturn at very low levels. This increased risk aversion translates into much stricter 
lending policies. As a result many companies, particularly small and medium-sized ones (for 
various reasons, such as the fact that they are not audited and are generally less capitalised 
than  large  companies),  have  seen  their  ability  to  obtain  funding  restricted,  occasionally 
beyond  what  may  be  considered  reasonable.  The  Official  Credit  Institute’s  programmes, 
aimed at smoothing small and medium-sized companies’ access to credit, have attempted to 
correct  this  market  failing.  Further  work  along  these  lines  should  be  pursued,  improving 
where possible the workings of these programmes and increasing their volume if necessary. 
Yet  I  must  urge  credit  institutions  to  be  responsible,  as  I  have  on  previous  occasions. 
Evidently, at a time such as the present, they must be particularly careful and, naturally, not 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2010
extend credit to companies that are not solvent; but nor must they forget that should they fail 
to  lend  but  a  single  euro  to  companies  that  are  solvent,  they  will  only  be  making  things 
difficult for themselves.  
Another example of progress in financial reform backed by broad Parliamentary consensus 
has been the approval of legislation whose aim is to restructure the financial system at the 
least  cost  to  taxpayers  and  in  the  shortest  time  possible,  observing  the  constitutional 
distribution of powers, so that all institutions in the system are in a position to provide credit 
to households and firms when the recovery arrives. 
So that ailing institutions may urgently embark on restructuring and integration processes or 
so that control may promptly be taken of institutions that are non-viable, Parliament – once 
again with the agreement of the party in government and of the main opposition party – has 
provided  the  Banco  de  España  with  the  necessary  instruments,  namely  the  Fund  for  the 
Orderly Restructuring of Banks (FROB), for these processes to proceed normally and without 
risks to the stability of the system. 
According to the law regulating it, the FROB may engage in two types of actions. The first 
involves  pushing  through  and  facilitating  the  restructuring  of  those  banks  that  evidence 
pressing viability problems. In this type of situation, FROB regulations stipulate taking control 
of the institution and replacing its directors, by the FROB itself. The new directors shall draw 
up a report on the institution’s situation, submitting a restructuring plan for the approval of the 
Banco de España. This plan shall include merger measures, spin-offs or, where appropriate, 
the  winding-up  of  the  institution,  adhering  to  competition  law  and  seeking  at  all  times  to 
minimise  the  potential  cost  of  the  measures  for  the  public  coffers.  So  far,  this  exceptional 
decision  to  take  control  and  replace  directors  has  only  been  unavoidable  in  one  instance, 
prior to the approval of the FROB. If at any point it were necessary to adopt this decision at 
any other institution, rest assured that the Banco de España, thanks to the creation of the 
FROB, will act with all due diligence.  
The FROB legislation not only provides the Banco de España with the necessary tools to act 
when there are serious problems of viability, but also provides for a second course of action, 
of  a  preemptive  nature,  geared  to  preventing  these  problems  from  materialising.  With  the 
approval  of  the  FROB,  institutions  and  their  managers  were  urged  to  assess  their  own 
situation  and  to  adopt  the  decisions  needed  to  ensure  their  viability,  preventing  the  more 
traumatic effects that might stem from supervisory intervention, both for the institution itself 
and for economic activity in the regions in which it pursues its business. 
This second means by which the FROB may act involves supporting integration processes 
between  institutions  which,  without  being  in  serious  danger,  are  seeking  to  improve  their 
efficiency,  streamline  their  management  and  re-scale  their  productive  capacity.  When  the 
FROB  undertakes  such  “pre-emptive”  action,  the  Banco  de  España  is  entrusted  with 
ensuring  that  the  operations  approved  have  a  sound  business  plan  that  contributes  to 
strengthening our financial system and that is accompanied by measures aimed at a realistic 
adjustment  of  bank  resources  to  the  new  market  conditions,  using  in  this  connection  the 
smallest volume of public funds possible.  
Unlike cases in which institutions are taken under control and their directors replaced, and 
where  decision-making  is  entirely  the  prerogative  of  the  Banco  de  España,  authority  to 
pursue this second course of action lies with credit institutions and, in the case of savings 
banks, authorisation by the regional government is also required. 
In  this  pre-emptive  phase,  it  is  not  the  role  of  the  Banco  de  España  to  decide  which 
integration processes should go ahead, but to examine rigorously the proposals received. In 
its capacity as the supervisor of banking system solvency, the Banco de España has been 
entrusted by the legislature with evaluating, on the basis of strictly professional criteria and 
irrespective of any other personal or collective interests, whether the plans submitted offer 
sufficient guarantees of soundness and viability. 
BIS Review 27/2010 
 3
Allow me to convey to you my assessment of how the integration processes under way are 
progressing under the application of the “pre-emptive” measures of the FROB. First, I view 
most favourably the fact that, shortly after the approval of the FROB, a sizeable number of 
savings banks set about working to seek solutions based on mergers and restructuring. But it 
is also clear that some of these processes are being delayed longer than would be desirable. 
I  must  therefore  call  once  again  for  responsibility  on  the  part  of  those  banks  that  have 
incurred  the  biggest  delays:  they  should  examine  their  situation  realistically  and  consider 
forthwith  viability  strategies  in  the  search  for  solutions  conducive  to  creating  stronger 
institutions  that  are  better  able  to  provide  households  and  firms  with  the  credit  flows  they 
demand.  I  likewise  call  on  the  sense  of  responsibility  of  certain  regional  governments  and 
urge  them  to  ensure  there  are  no  further  delays  or  obstacles  to  processes  that  may 
strengthen the institutions operating in their regions.  
The  progress  brought  about  by  this  series  of  reforms  approved  with  broad  Parliamentary 
consensus  does  not  mean  that  our  financial  sector  does  not  face  significant  challenges 
ahead. During the last upturn households and firms rapidly incurred debt, a process matched 
by exceptionally high credit growth rates. This setting was conducive to an increase in the 
size of the banking sector, to the point of reaching a dimension which now, with a much less 
favourable outlook, will hardly be sustainable. 
The lower growth in demand compared with the previous stage, combined with the process 
of corporate and household deleveraging, will entail a fall in the volume of activity. To this 
can be added various factors which in the near future will act to squeeze unit margins, such 
as  low  interest  rates,  increased  bad  debts,  higher  capital  requirements  for  both  regulatory 
and market-related reasons, tighter financing conditions (risk premia are higher than before 
the crisis) and the increased importance of doubtful asset management. 
The management of doubtful assets in the real estate sector will be particularly important. In 
this  respect,  allow  me  some  brief  thoughts  on  the  supervisory  activity  of  the  Banco  de 
España. In the last few weeks some opinions have been aired on the lack of transparency of 
the  Spanish  banking  system,  as  a  consequence  of  a  failure  to  duly  record  the  excessive 
concentration  of  risk  in  the  real  estate  sector,  particularly  that  in  property  development 
companies. 
Obviously both the banking sector and the Spanish economy have to digest the excesses of 
the  real  estate  cycle,  which  has  proved  to  be  unsustainable.  However,  in  assessing  the 
position of the banking sector, the exposure to a sector and the complexities associated with 
the  crisis  in  that  sector  should  not  be  confused  with  potential  losses  for  banks.  For  an 
exposure to become a loss involves there being a default and, insofar as the exposures to 
this sector are secured by collateral, the ineffectiveness of that collateral in compensating for 
the default and the non-recovery of the loans in question. 
Furthermore, unlike what generally happens in other countries where the loss estimates used 
to calculate provisions are made by auditors, here the Banco de España has established an 
objective system for calculating provisions which reduces downside discretionality. Also, the 
Banco de España has obliged banks to adopt pre-emptive measures in the form of a larger 
pool of provisions. These can be used to cope with possible impairment of their real estate 
assets by, for example, raising the provisions to be made from 10% to 20% of the value of 
the properties held on their balance sheet when these assets remain in their ownership for 
more than 12 months, as a precaution against sale at a lower-than-expected value. 
In  any  event,  we  face  an  extremely  complex  scenario  and  it  is  essential  that  all  Spanish 
credit institutions, particularly those that have taken most risk, prepare themselves and adopt 
the  measures  needed  to  ensure  their  profitability.  For  this  purpose,  they  will  have  to 
undertake  the  downsizing  of  the  sector  and,  at  the  same  time,  push  through  measures  to 
raise  efficiency  through  cost  containment  and  through  the  introduction  of  improvements  in 
their  risk  control  and  management  mechanisms  and  of  ongoing  innovation  in  product 
marketing and in the implementation of technological and organisational improvements. And 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2010
the government could crown the significant financial reforms made so far with one directed at 
savings banks. I am thinking of the reform needed so they can raise high-quality equity funds 
that  enable  them  to  grow  and  continue  serving  Spanish  society  while  complying  with  the 
requirements to which they will be subject in the new international regulatory environment in 
the coming years.  
The financial system reforms adopted to date might suffice for the Spanish banking system 
to  get  through  the  crisis  and  be  in  a  position  to  extend  credit  to  those  needing  it  in  the 
recovery phase. But this will only happen if the reactivation of the Spanish economy comes 
in a form that substantially reduces the number of unemployed, improves its competitiveness 
and increases productivity. If this does not happen, obviously the restructuring task that we 
would  have  would  be  much  greater  than  that  facing  us  at  present.  Thanks  to  the  reforms 
adopted, the Spanish banking system has not been an additional problem during the crisis. 
But if the economy does not improve substantially due to the lack of sufficient consensus to 
undertake structural reforms, credit institutions will end up being damaged and will be unable 
to help in the recovery.  
For this reason I wish to devote the last part of my address to the economy and, in particular, 
to  the  other  major  reform  required  before  we  can  start  a  new  phase  of  sustained  growth: 
labour reform. This reform is necessary not only for the obvious reason: the need to reduce 
substantially  the  disproportionate  unemployment  figures  beleaguering  the  economy  and 
Spanish society. It is also necessary, as I have said earlier, so that the rising bad debts and 
wholesale funding difficulties do not oblige the banking system to reduce credit more than it 
will already be cut by the cyclical downturn. The labour reform is also essential so that the 
ambitious budget consolidation programme proposed by the government can be successfully 
carried out. If there is no labour reform and the bloated unemployment figures persist, public 
finances will suffer in two ways: not only regarding expenditure, which has already reached 
enormous  proportions,  but  also  on  the  revenue  side,  because  the  millions  of  people  who 
remain jobless barely contribute to public revenue. 
The labour reform is also vital for GDP growth, for two reasons. First, because flexibility in 
agreeing  wages  and  other  aspects  of  firms’  internal  organisation  is  indispensable  for 
improving competitiveness in a monetary union where devaluation is no longer an option. If, 
on  a  firm-by-firm  basis,  workers  and  managers  decide  to  adjust  their  conditions  to  the 
changes  in  demand,  the  highest  possible  number  of  firms  and  jobs  can  be  preserved. 
Furthermore,  by  improving  productivity  in  those  firms  which  will  perceive  the  favourable 
change in the economic environment, the labour reform would enable workers’ wages to be 
improved and thus increase domestic demand without impairing the competitiveness of the 
economy. 
The list of necessary reforms in Spanish labour institutions is very long. But two of them are 
vital  in  order  to  judge  the  extent  of  the  reform  finally  undertaken.  The  one  to  which  most 
media attention is devoted is the issue of a permanent employment contract that does not 
deter those businesses which wish to create jobs. Although hiring is important, at this point in 
time  I  feel  that  it  is  particularly  urgent  to  address  the  change  which  has  to  be  made  in 
collective bargaining. At this juncture it is of paramount importance that the trade unions and 
employers’  associations  –  which  in  complicated  situations  in  the  past  have  made  telling 
contributions  to  the  Spanish  economy  –  should  now  let  the  workers  and  entrepreneurs  of 
Spanish firms decide how they can best save their businesses, preserve their jobs and even 
expand  their  workforce.  Quite  another  thing  is  that  they  may  give  guidelines  or  advice  to 
firms in the negotiation of wages and other working conditions. But it is vital that, at least in 
the next two or three years, firms and workers are given the freedom and the opportunity to, 
in  some  cases,  save  their  business,  and,  in  others,  to  achieve  the  increases  in 
competitiveness and productivity which current collective bargaining arrangements preclude. 
This  reform  is  particularly  important  in  a  setting  where  there  is  a  need  to  change  our 
country’s pattern of production. The so-called productive model is ultimately the result of the 
BIS Review 27/2010 
 5
structural  and  institutional  features  of  each  economy.  Spain  has  a  model  which  is 
inseparable from its current institutions and, if we wish to move towards a situation in which 
the  most  productive  sectors  play  a  leading  role,  we  have  to  change  the  current  labour 
framework  to  provide  for  and  promote  the  reallocation  of  economic  and  human  resources 
towards the sectors best endowed to add the most value. The required sectoral redistribution 
of  labour  is  unlikely  to  take  place  if  region-  and  industry-wide  collective  bargaining 
agreements  continue  to  prevent  each  firm’s  wages  from  being  linked  more  closely  to 
productivity. 
With the labour reform, Spaniards should adopt the same attitude shown by other countries 
in the reform of their financial system. Those countries which had serious problems with their 
banks have acknowledged their failure and have set to work to reform regulations that failed. 
They  are  thus  examining  what  has  been  done  in  other  countries,  including  Spain,  so  that 
those  banking  problems  do  not  return.  Together  with  the  Secretary  of  State  for  Economic 
Affairs, I am participating in Financial Security Board (FSB) discussions to radically reform 
the  financial  systems  of  all  countries.  Both  of  us  have  had  the  privilege  to  witness  how 
Spanish  banking  regulation  and  supervision  is  being  carefully  appraised  and,  insofar  as  is 
possible, it is intended to take advantage of the good work done in the past in Spain. 
We in Spain should take this same attitude to learning. We should recognise that we have 
failed  in  labour  regulation  since,  for  the  third  time  in  recent  decades,  unemployment  has 
approached  the  unacceptable  figure  of  20%.  We  should  therefore  find  out  what  other 
countries are doing with their labour institutions and try to incorporate into Spanish legislation 
whatever  seems  most  reasonable  to  achieve  their  low  unemployment  rates  and  their  high 
labour productivity levels.  
Unfortunately,  we  are  at  a  historic  crossroads.  If  we  do  not  undertake  ambitious  labour 
reform, the Spanish economy will enter a tough and complicated period, in which not only will 
growth be lower than it would be with extensive reform, but, moreover, its impact on public 
finances  will  be  extremely  negative,  making  it  difficult  to  achieve  the  targets  set  in  the 
Stability Plan. The same can be said of the banking system, since if we undertake sufficiently 
extensive reform, we will be able to reasonably negotiate the current crisis; otherwise, banks 
would  have  to  ultimately  focus  on  the  battle  against  bad  debts  and  on  the  difficulties  in 
obtaining external funding, and the authorities would have to focus on restructuring the banks 
that have deteriorated to the point of being clearly inviable. 
However,  if  we  take  advantage  of  this  historic  moment  and  carry  out  far-reaching  labour 
reform,  we  will  face  a  more  positive  scenario  in  which  Spanish  firms  could  promptly  raise 
their competitiveness in the difficult (for these purposes) environment of a monetary union. 
Spain  would  enter  a  scenario  in  which  increased  productivity  would  provide  a  significant 
boost to its best firms. This would be particularly positive for SMEs, which find it most difficult 
to take advantage of the flexibility mechanisms offered by the current institutional framework, 
and they would benefit enormously from the implementation of a more flexible and simpler 
system.  Meanwhile,  budgetary  consolidation  could  be  achieved  without  swingeing  cuts  in 
expenditure and the banking system would be in a position to support this new growth phase. 
It would thus be a mistake to opt for small-scale labour reform, as if we could even afford to 
tackle  this  reform  slowly,  in  various  phases  over  various  years.  This  would  have  been 
possible 5 or 10 or 15 years ago, when the last expansion phase started and the need for 
labour reform was not pressing. Indeed, there was so little urgency that, unfortunately, in the 
last 15 years there has not been a single labour reform capable of preventing our rigid labour 
markets from suffering, for the third time, an adjustment along the old familiar lines of leaving 
millions of Spanish workers jobless.  
Voices are sometimes heard casting doubt on whether labour reform is urgent, arguing that 
the labour market is not at the root of this crisis. This is quite true, but it is an argument which 
does not constitute grounds for ignoring the prime importance of this reform. If you allow me 
the metaphor, our labour market has shown itself to be a fragile ship which, each time there 
6 
 BIS Review 27/2010
is a storm, springs leaks which are enormously costly to seal. Obviously the storm is not the 
fault of the ship’s captain, but he can make repairs before it is sunk by the storm. But, what is 
more,  our  labour  ship  also  functions  poorly  when  there  are  no  storms.  In  the  periods  of 
highest growth of the world economy, we continue to have the highest unemployment rate 
and our labour productivity growth is mediocre, limiting the scope for wage increases. The 
ship does not sink but it sails – in terms of productivity and of reducing unemployment – at a 
poor speed in comparison with the rest.  
Lastly, it is true that, even if a reform is approved which assimilates our labour institutions to 
those in the more developed countries, this does not ensure the immediate resolution of our 
problems of growth, public finances or banking system health. More measures have to be 
adopted and, among them, as I have said, budgetary consolidation is key. But let there be no 
mistake:  while  labour  reform  is  not  a  sufficient  condition,  it  is  nevertheless  an  absolutely 
necessary and essential one without which the other measures or reforms adopted will have 
a much diminished effect on the competitiveness of our economy. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 27/2010 
 7
